Father MALEBRANCHE HIS TREATISE Concerning the SEARCH after TRUTH.

The Whole WORK Complete.

To which is Added The AUTHOR's TREATISE OF Nature and Grace: BEING A
Consequence of the PRINCIPLES contained in the SEARCH.

Together with His ANSWER to the ANIMADVERSIONS upon the First Volume: His
DEFENSE against the ACCUSATIONS of Monsieur De la Ville, etc. Relating to the
same Subject.

All TRANSLATED by T. TAILOR, M. A. Late of Magdalen College in OXFORD.

The SECOND EDITION, Corrected with great Exactness.

With the ADDITION, of A Short Discourse upon LIGHT and COLORS, By the same
AUTHOR.

Communicated in Manuscript to a Person of Quality in ENGLAND: And never before
Printed in any Language.

LONDON, Printed by W. Bowyer, for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon, and T. Leigh
and W. Midwinter at the Rose and Crown, in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

THE PREFACE.
THE Mind of Man is, as it were, by its Nature situated between its Creator and
Corporeal Creatures; nothing, according to Nihil est potentius illa cre^tura,
quae m^^s dici^ur rationalis. nihil est (...): Quicquid (...) illam est jam
creator est. Tr. 23. in Joan. Quod rationali anima melius est, omnibus
conscentientibus, Deus est. Aug.
St. Austin, being above it but GOD, nor beneath it but Body. But as the great
Elevation it obtains above all Material Beings, is no hindrance to its uniting
with them, and even to its Depending, after a sort, upon a Piece of Matter; so,
notwithstanding the infinite distance between the Sovereign Being and the
Humane Mind, the latter is immediately and most intimately united with the
former. This last Union exalts the Mind above all things; it is this which gives
it Life and Light, and all its Happiness: And of this Union it is St. Austin
speaks in very many Places of his Works, as of that which is most Natural and
Essential to it: On the contrary, the Union it has with the Body extremely
debases it, and is at this Day the Principal Cause of all its Errors and its
Miseries.

I do not wonder that the vulgar part of Men, or that the Heathen Philosophers
should only consider in the Soul its Relation and Union with the Body, without
acknowledging any Union or Relation that it has to GOD: But I admire that the
Christian Philosophers, who ought to prefer the Spirit of GOD to the Mind of
Man, Moses to Aristotle, St. Austin to any wretched Commentatour upon an
Heathen Philosopher, should regard the Soul rather as the Form of the Body,
than as made in and for the Ad ipsam similitudinem non omnia facta sunt, sed
sola substantia rationalis: quare omnia per ipsam, sed ad ipsam non, nisi anima
rationalis. Itaque substantia rationalis and per ipsam facta est, and ad ipsam:
non est enim ulla natura interposita. Lib. Imp. de Genesis ad Litt. Rectissime
dicitur factus ad Imaginem and Similitudinem Dei, non enim aliter
incommutabilem veritatem posset mente conspicere. De ver. Rel.
Image of GOD; that is, according to St. Austin, for Truth; to which alone She
is immediately united. It Is true, the Soul is united to the Body, and is
naturally the Form of it; but it is likewise true, that she is united to GOD in
a much stricter and more essential manner. The Relation she has to her Body
might have not been: But her Relation to GOD is so essential, that it is
impossible to conceive GOD should create a Spirit without it.

It is evident that GOD can have no other End of acting than Himself; that He
cannot create Spirits but to know and love Him; that he can neither give them
any Knowledge, nor impress upon them any Love, but what is for, and tends to
Himself; but He might have refused to unite to Bodies those Spirits which He
has united. Therefore the Relation of our Minds to GOD is Natural, Necessary,
and absolutely Indispensible: But their Relation to our Bodies, though Natural,
is not of absolute Necessity, nor of indispensible Obligation.

This is not a proper place to allege all the Authorities and Arguments which
might induce us to believe, That it is more essential to the Mind to be united
to GOD than to a Body. That would carry us out too far. To expose this Truth in
its just Light, it would be necessary to overthrow the principal Foundations of
Pagan Philosophy; to explain the Corruptions of Sin; to encounter what is
falsely named Experience; and to argue against the Prejudices and Delusions of
the Senses. So that to give the common sort of Men a perfect Knowledge of it,
is not so easy a Task as may be undertaken in a Preface.

However, it is not difficult to make it out to Attentive Persons, and such as
are skilled in True Philosophy: For they need only be put in Mind, That since
the Will of GOD Regulates the Nature of all things, it is more congenial to the
Nature of the Soul to be united to GOD by the Knowledge of Truth, and by the
Love of Good, than to be united to the Body; since it is certain, as is
abovesaid, that GOD created Spirits more for the Knowledge and Love of Him than
for the Informing Bodies. This Argument is instantly able to startle Minds any
whit enlightened* to render them attentive, and afterward to convince them. But
it is morally impossible for Minds immersed in Flesh and Blood, whose Knowledge
goes no farther than their Senses, to be ever convinced with such kind of
Reasonings. No Proofs will serve these People, but such as may be even felt and
handled, since every thing seems Chimerical, that makes not some Impression on
their Senses.

Men's quod non sentit, nisi cum purissima and beatissima est, nulli cohaeret,
nisi ipsi veritati, quae similitudo and imago patris, and sapientia dicitur.
August. lib. imp. de Genesis ad (...)*
The First Man's Sin has so weakened the Union of our Mind with GOD, that none
but those whose Heart is purified, and Mind enlightened, can perceive it: For
it is an imaginary Union in their Opinions, who blindly follow the Judgments of
the Senses and Motions of the Passions.

On the contrary, it has so strengthened the Soul's Union with the Body, as to
make us think these two parts of our selves but one single Substance; or
rather, has so enslaved us to our Senses and Passions, as to persuade us our
Body is the Principal of the Two Parts whereof we are composed.

If we consider the different Occupations of Men, we shall have all the Reason
in the World to believe they have this so mean and gross a Notion of
themselves. For whereas they all love Felicity, and the Perfection of their
Being; and are constantly laboring to grow happier, or more perfect; could it
be supposed they set not a greater value on the Body, and the Goods of it, than
on the Mind, and the Goods of that, when we find them almost always employed
about things relating to the former, and seldom or never thinking on those that
are absolutely necessary to the perfection of the latter?

The greatest part of Mankind lay themselves out with so much Industry and
Pains, merely for the Support of a wretched Life, and to leave their Children
some necessary Sustenance for the Preservation of their Bodies.

Such as by their good Fortune, or Chance of Birth, are freed from that
Necessity, do no better manifest by their Business and Employments, that they
look upon the Soul as the Nobler p^ri of their Being: Hunting, Dancing, Gaming,
Feasting, are their ordinary Occupations. Their Soul, grown the Slave of their
Body, esteems and cherishes all these Divertisements, though wholly unworthy of
Her. But because their Body is related to all things sensible, the Soul is not
only the Slave of their Body, but through its means, and for its sake, of all
things sensible likewise: For it is by the Body that they are united to their
Relations, their Friends, their City, their Office, and all sensible Goods; the
Preservation of which seems as necessary and valuable as that of their own
Being. Thus the Care of their Fortunes, and the Desire of increasing them,
their Passion for Glory and Grandeur, busies and imploys them infinitely more
than the Perfection of their Soul.

Even Men of Learning, and Dealers in Wit, spend more than one half of their
Life in Actions purely Animal, or such as give us Reason to think their Health,
their Estates, and Reputations, are of dearer Concern than the Perfection of
their Minds.

They study more to acquire a Chimerical Grandeur in the Imagination of others,
than to give their Mind greater Force and Comprehension. They make a kind of
Wardrobe of their Brain, wherein they huddle, without Order or Distinction,
whatever bears a certain Character of Learning; I mean, whatever can appear but
Rare and Extraordinary, and provoke others to admire them. Their Ambition lies
in resembling those Cabinets filled with Relics and Curiosities, which have
nothing truly Rich or Valuable, but derive their Worth from Fancy, Passion, or
Chance; and they rarely labor to make their Mind accurate, and to regulate the
Motions of their Heart.

Non exigua hominis portio, sed totius humanae universitatis substantia est.
Ambr. 6. Hexam. 7.
Yet it should not be thought from hence, that Men are entirely ignorant that
they have a Soul, and that this their Soul is the Principal part of their
Being. They have too been again and again convinced, both by Reason and
Experience, that it is no so considerable an Advantage to live in Reputation,
Affluence, and Health, the space of a few Years; and in general, that all
Corporeal Goods, all that are possessed by Means, and for the sake of the Body,
are Imaginary and Corruptible Goods. They know it is better to be Just than
Rich, to be Reasonable than Learned; to have a Lively and Penetrating Mind,
than to have a Brisk and Active Body. These are Truths indelibly imprinted on
the Mind, and infallibly discovered whenever Men please to attend to them.
Homer, for Instance, who extols his Hero for his Swiftness, might have
perceived, if he would, that 'twas an Elogy fitter for a Race-Horse, or a
Greyhound. Alexander, so celebrated in History for his Illustrious Robberies,
heard sometimes from his most Retired Reason the same Reproaches as Villains
and Thieves, in spite of the confused Noise of a surrounding Crowd of
Flatterers. and Caesar, when he passed the Rubicon, could not help manifesting
how these inward Lashes terrified him, when at last he had resolved to
sacrifice the Liberty of his Country to his Ambition.

Ubique veritas praesides omnibus consulentibus te, simulque respondes omnibus
etiam diversa consulentibus. Liquide tu respondes, sed non liquide omnes
audiunt. Omnes unde volunt consulun^, sed non semper quod volunt audiunt. Conf.
S. Aug. lib. 10. cap. 26.
The Soul however united very strictly to the Body, is nevertheless united to
GOD; and at that very time of her receiving by her Body the lively and confused
Sensations her Passions inspite into her, she receives from the Eternal Truth,
presiding over her Understanding, the Knowledge of her Duty and Irregularities.
When her treacherous Body deceives her, GOD undeceives her. When it indulges,
He wounds her. When it gives her Incense and Applauses, He strikes her inward
with smarting Remorses, and condemns her by the Manifestation of a more Pure
and Holy Law than that of the Flesh, which she has obeyed.

V. Quint. Curt. lib. 7. cap. 8. Int^s in domicilio cogitationis, nec Hebraea,
nec Graca, nec Latina, nec Barbara veritas, sine oris and linguae organis, sine
strepi^^ syllabarum. Confess. S. Aug. l. 11. c. 3.
Alexander needed not that the Scythians should have come to teach him his Duty
in a strange Language: He knew from Him who teaches the Scythians, and the most
Barbarous Nations, the Rules of Justice which he ought to follow. The Light of
Truth, which enlightens the World, enlightened him also; and the Voice of
Nature, which speaks neither in Greek nor Scythian, nor Barbarian Dialect,
spoke to him, as to the rest of the World, in a most clear and most
intelligible Language. In vain did the Scythians upbraid him with his Conduct;
their Words struck no deeper than his Ears: And GOD not speaking home to his
Heart; or rather, GOD speaking to his Heart, whilst he heard only the
Scythians, who but provoked his Passions, and so led him out of himself, he
heard not the Voice of Truth, though loud as Thunder, nor saw its Light, though
it pierced him through and through.

It Is true, our Union with GOD diminishes and weakens proportionably, as our
other with things sensible strengthens and increases; but it is impossible the
former Union should be absolutely lost without the destruction of our Being:
For however those who are immersed in Vice, and drenched in Pleasures, are
insensible to Truth, they are notwithstanding united to it, Videtur quasi ipse
a te occidere, cum tu ab ipso occidas. Aug. in Psalm. 25. Nam etiam sol iste and
videntis faciem illustrat and caeci; ambobus sol praesens est, sed praesente
sole unus absens est. Sic and Sapientia Dei Dominus J. C. ubique praesens est,
quia ubique est veritas, ubique sapientia. Aug. in Joan. Tract. 35.
It never deserts them, it is they that desert it: Its Light shines in Darkness,
but does not always dispell it; as the Light of the Sun surrounds the Blind,
and those that wink, though it enlightens neither.

The case is the same with the Union of our Mind with the Body. That Union
decreases as fast as the other we have with God increases; but it is never
quite dissolved, but by our Death: What I here say of the Unions of the Mind
with GOD, and with the Body, ought to be understood according to our ordinary
way of Conception: For indeed our Mind can be immediately united to GOD only;
that is, can truly depend on none but GOD. And if it be united to, or depend on
the Body, it is because the Will of GOD makes that Union or Dependence
efficacious. Which will easily be conceived in the Sequel of this Work.
For though we were as enlightened, and as disengaged from all things sensible,
as the Apostles themselves, yet Adam's Fall would necessitate us to a
Dependence on the Body; and we should feel a Law of our Flesh constantly
opposing and warring against the Law of our Mind.

Proportionably as the Mind increases its Union with GOD, it grows purer, and
more luminous, stronger, and more capacious; since it is from this Union it
derives all its Perfection. On the other side, it becomes corrupt, blind, weak,
and contracted, by the same degrees, Quis enim been se inspiciens non expertus
est, tanto se aliquid intellexisse sincerius, quanto removere atque subducere
intentionem mentis a corporis sensibus potuit. Aug. de Immort. Anim. c. 10.
as its Union with its Body corroborates and increases; because this is the
Source of all its Imperfection. Thus a Man, who judges of all things by his
Senses; who on all accounts pursues the Motions of his Passions; who has no
other than Sensible Perceptions, and loves only Flattering Gratifications, is
in the most wretched State of Mind imaginable; as being infinitely remote from
Truth and from his Good. But when a Man judges of things but by the pure Ideas
of the Mind, carefully avoids the confused Noise of the Creatures, and retiring
into himself, hears his Sovereign Teacher in the calm Silence of the Senses and
Passions, he cannot possibly fall into Error.

GOD never deceives those who interrogate Him by a serious Application, and an
entire Conversion of Mind toward Him; though He does not always make them hear
His Answers. But when the Mind, by its Aversion from GOD, diffuses it self
abroad; when it consults only its Body, to be instructed in the Truth, and only
listens to its Senses, Imaginations, and Passions, which talk to it
everlastingly, it must inevitably be engaged in Error. Wisdom, Truth,
Perfection, and Happiness, are not Goods to be hoped for from the Body. There
is none, except ONE that is above us, and from whom we receive our Being, who
can make it perfect.

This is what we are taught by these admirable Words of St. Austin: Eternal
Wisdom, says he, Principium creaturae intellectualis est aeterna sapientia quod
principium manens in se incommutabiliter, nullo modo cessat occulta
inspiratione vocationis loqui ei creaturae, cui principium est, ut convertatur
ad id ex quo est, quod aliter formata ac perfecta esse non possit. Lib. 1. de
Genesis ad Litter. Chapter 50.
is the Principle of all Intellectual Creatures, which persisting immutably the
same, never ceases to speak to the most secret and inward Reason of his
Creatures, to convert them toward their Principle: Because nothing but the
Intuition of Eternal Wisdom, which gives Being to Spirits, can give them, as we
may say, the Accomplishing Stroke, and the utmost Perfection they are capable
of.

When we see GOD as He is, we shall be like Him, says the Apostle St. John.
Scimus quoniam cum apparuerit, similes ei erimus, quoniam videbimus eum sicuti
est. Joh. Ep. 1. chapter 3. v. 2.
By that Intuition of Eternal Truth, we shall be raised to that degree of
Grandeur to which all Spiritual Creatures tend by the Necessity of their
Nature. But whilst we live on Earth, the Corpus quod corrumpitur, aggravat
animam. Sap. 9.10. Terrena inhabitatio deprimit sensum multa cogitantem, and
difficile aestimamus quae in terra sunt, and quae in prospectu sunt invenimus
cum labor. Sap. 9.15.
Weight of the Body drags down the Mind, withdraws it continually from the
Presence of GOD, or that Internal Light which illuminates it, makes perpetual
Essays to fortify its Union with Sensible Objects; and compells it to
represent things, not as they are in themselves, but according to the Relation
they bear to the Preservation of Life.

The Body, according to the Wise Man, fills the Mind with such a multitude of
Sensations, that it becomes unable to discover the most obvious things; the
Sight of the Body dazles and dissipates that of the Mind; so that the Eye of
the Soul has great Difficulty distinctly to perceive any Truth, whilst the Eye
of the Body is employed in the Discovery; which evidences, that all Truths are
found out, and all Sciences learned merely by the Attention of the Mind. This
being indeed its Return and Conversion unto GOD, who is our only Tutour, who
only can instruct us with all Truth, by the Manifestation of His own Substance,
as St. Austin Deus intelligibilis lux, in quo, and a quo, and per quem
intelligibiliter lucent omnia. 1. Sol. Insinuavit nobis [ Christus] animam
humanam non vegetari, non illuminari, non beatificari, nisi ab ipsa substantia
Dei. August. in Joh.
speaks.

From all which it is manifest, that it is our Duty constantly to withstand the
Opposition the Body makes against the Mind; and to accustom our selves by
degrees to disbelieve the Reports our Senses make concerning all circumambient
Bodies, which they always represent, as worthy of our Application and Esteem,
because we must never make Sensible things the Object of our Thoughts, or the
Subject of our Employment* It Is one of the Truths which the Eternal Wisdom
seems willing to teach us by His Incarnation. Illa autoritas divina dicenda
est, quae non solum in sensibilibus signis transcendit omnem humanam
facultatem, sed and ipsum hominem agens ostendit ei quousque se propter ipsum
depresserit, and non teneri sensibus, quibus videntur illa miranda; sed ad
intellectum jubet evolare, simul demonstrans, and quanta hic possit, and cur
haec faciat, and quam parvi pendat. Aug. 2. de Ord. 9.
For, after having exalted a Sensible Body to the highest Dignity possible to
be conceived, He gave us to understand, by the Ignominy He reduced this same
Body to, that is, by the Ignominy of the Noblest of all Sensible things, what
Contempt we ought to have for all Sensible Objects. It Is possibly for the same
Reason that St. Paul said He knew not JESUS CHRIST after the Flesh. For it is
not the Flesh of CHRIST we must consider, but the Spirit veiled under the
Flesh. Caro vas fuit, quod habebat attend, non quod erat, says St. Austin
Tract. in Joan. 27. Et si cognovimus secundum carnem Christum, jam non secundum
carnem novimus. 2 ad Cor.
. Whatever is a Visible and Sensible Nature in our LORD, merits not our
Adoration; but because of the Union with the WORD, which can only be the Object
of the Mind.

It is absolutely necessary for those who desire to become Wise and Happy, to
be wholly convinced, and as it were pierced with what I have said. It Is not
enough that they believe me on my Word, or that they be contented by the
glimpse of a transitory Light; it is necessary they should know it by a thousand
Experiences, and as many undeniable Demonstrations. These are Things to be
engraven indelibly on their Mind, to be made present to their Thoughts in all
their Studies, and in all the Business and Employs of Life.

Such as will take the Pains to read the Work I here offer to the Public with
any Application of Thought, will, if I mistake not, enter into such a Frame and
Temper of Mind: For we have several ways demonstrated, that our Senses,
Imagination, and Passions, are absolutely useless to the Discovery of Truth and
Happiness; that on the contrary, they dazzle and seduce us on all occasions; and
in general, that all the Notices the Mind receives through the Body, or by
Means of some Motions excited in the Body, are all false and confused, with
reference to the Objects represented by them; though they are extremely useful
to the Preservation of the Body, and the Goods that are related to it.

In this Work we encounter several Errors, especially such as have been of
longest Growth, of universal Reception, and have caused the greatest Disorder
in the Mind; and we show that they almost all proceed from the Mind's Union
with the Body. We offer in diverse places to make the Mind sensible of its
Slavery and Dependence on all Sensible things, in order to awaken it from its
Lethargy, and to put it upon attempting its Deliverance.

Nor do we rest satisfied with a bare Exposition of our Ramblings; but moreover
explain the Nature of the Mind. We don't, for Instance, insist upon a long
Enumeration of all the particular Errors of our Senses and Imagination; but
chiefly dwell upon the Causes of these Errors. And in the Explication of these
Faculties, and the General Errors we fall into, we expose all at one View an
infinite Number of particular Errors whereunto we are obnoxious: So that the
Subject of this Treatise is the Whole Mind of Man. We consider it in it self,
with its Relation to the Body, and with its Relation to GOD. We examine the
Nature of all its Faculties; we point out the Uses to be made of them for the
avoiding Error. In fine, we explain most of the things we thought necessary to
our advancing in the Knowledge of MAN.

The finest, the most delightful, and most necessary Knowledge, is undoubtedly
that of Our Selves. Of all Humane Sciences, that concerning Man is the most
worthy of Man; and yet this is none of the most improved and most finished
Science that we have. The Vulgar part of Men neglect it wholly: Among the
Pretenders to Science there are very few which apply to it, and much fewer
whose Application is successful. The generality even of those who go for Men of
Parts, have but a confused Perception of the Essential Difference between the
Soul and Body. St. Austin himself, who has so admirably distinguished these two
Beings, confesses it was long before he could discover it. And though it must
be acknowledged he has better explained the Properties of the Soul and Body,
than all that went before him, or have come after him, to our present Age; yet
it were to be wished he had not attributed to the Bodies that are about us, all
the Sensible Qualities we perceive by means of them: For, in brief, they are
not clearly contained in the Idea which he had of Matter. Insomuch that we may
pretty confidently say, The Difference between the Mind and Body, till of late
Years, was never sufficiently and clearly known.

Some there are who fancy to themselves they very well know the Nature of the
Mind. Many others are persuaded, it is impossible to know any thing of it.
Lastly, the greatest Number of all see not of what use that Knowledge could be,
and therefore despise it. But all these so common Opinions are rather the
Effects of the Imagination and Inclination of Men, than the Consequences of a
Clear and Distinct View of their Mind; and proceed from their feeling an
Uneasiness and Regret to retire into themselves, there to discover their
Weaknesses and Infirmities; and their being pleased with Curious Enquiries and
gayer sort of Sciences. Being always Abroad, they are insensible of the
Disorders that happen at Home within themselves. They think all is right,
because there is a Stupor on their Soul, and find fault with those who knowing
their Distemper, betake to Remedies, saying, they make themselves sick, because
they try for Cure.

But these Great Genius's, who pierce into the most Mysterious Secrets of
Nature, who lift themselves in Opinion as high as Heaven, and descend to the
bottom of the Abyss, ought to remember what they are. These great Objects, it
may be, do but dazzle them. The Mind must needs depart out of it self, to
compass so many things; and this it cannot do without scattering its Force.

Men came not into the World to be Astronomers, or Chemists, to spend their
whole Life at the end of a Telescope; or laboring at a Furnace, to deduce
trifling Consequences from their painful Observations. Grant that an Astronomer
made the first Discoveries of Continent, and Sea, and Mountains in the Moon;
that he first observed the Spots that circuit upon the Sun, and that he had
exactly calculated their Motions: Suppose that a Chemist had found out, at
length, the Secret of fixing Mercury, or of making the Alkaest, wherewith
Van-helmont boasted to dissolve all Bodies: What are they the wiser or happier
for all this? It, perhaps, has set them up in Reputation with the World; but if
they would reflect upon it, they would find that Reputation did but increase
their Bondage.

Astronomy, Chemistry, and most of the other Sciences, may be looked on as
proper Divertisements for a Gentleman. But Men should never be enamored with
their Gayety, not prefer them before the Science of Humane Nature: For though
the Imagination fixes a certain Idea of Greatness to Astronomy, by reason of
its considering Great and Glorious Objects, and seated infinitely above all
other things, the Mind is not blindly to prostrate it self to that Idea, but
sit its Master, and its Judge, and strip it of that Sensible Pomp which amazes
Reason. The Mind must pronounce of all things, according to its Internal Light,
without hearkening to the false and confused Verdict of its Senses and
Imagination; and whilst it examines all Humane Sciences by the Pure Light of
Truth, which enlightens it, we doubt not to affirm it will disesteem most of
them, and set a greater Price on that which teaches us to know our selves, than
on all the other put together.

Therefore we choose rather to advise such as wish well to Truth, to judge of
the Subject of this Treatise by the Responses they shall receive from the
Sovereign Instructor of all Men, after having interrogated him by some Serious
Reflections, than to forestall them with a long anticipating Discourse, which
perhaps they might look on as Commonplace Matter, or the Vain Ornaments of a
Preface. If they are persuaded this is a Subject worthy their Study and
Application, we desire them once more not to judge of the Things contained in
it, by the good or ill Manner they are expressed in, but still to retire into
themselves, and there to hear the Decisions they are to follow, and to judge by.

Being thus fully persuaded, that Men cannot teach one another; Nolite putare
quenquam hominem aliquid discere ab homine.

Admonere possumus per strepitum vocis nostrae, si non sit intus qui doceat,
inanis fit strepitus noster. Aug. in Joan. Auditus per me factus, intellectus
per quem? Dixit aliquis and ad cor vestrum, sed non eum videtis. Si
intellexistis, fratres, dictum est and cordi vestro. Munus Dei est
intelligentia. August. Johan. Tract. 40.


and that those who hear us learn not the Truths we speak to their Ears, unless
at the same time, He who taught them us, manifest them likewise to their Mind:
We think our selves farther obliged to advertise the Readers, that would profit
by this, not to credit us on our Word, out of any Inclination, and Good-liking,
nor withstand our Sentiments out of Prejudice or Aversion. For though we think
nothing be therein advanced, but what we learned at the Expense of Meditation,
we should however be very sorry that others should be contented with the
Remembrance and Belief, without the Knowledge of our Notions; and fall into
Error, for want of Understanding us, or because we have Erred before them.

That presumptuous Pride of some of the Learned, who demand our Belief upon
their Word, seems intolerable: They are angry with us for Interrogating GOD,
when once they have spoke to us, because they Interrogate Him not themselves.
They grow warm upon every Opposition to their Opinions, requiring an absolute
Preference should be given to the Mists and Darkness of their Imagination,
before the Pure Light of Truth, which illuminates the Mind.

We are, Thanks to GOD, very remote from this way of proceeding, though it be
often charged upon us. We demand indeed a Resignation to Matters of Fact, and
the Experiments we produce, because there are things not learned by the
Applying the Mind to Sovereign and Universal Reason. But as to Truths
discoverable in the True Ideas of things, which the Eternal Wisdom suggests to
us in our most inward and secret Reason; Noli putare te ipsam esse lucem. Aug.
in Psalm.
herein we expressly caution against resting upon what we have thought of them,
as judging it no small Crime thus to equalize our selves with GOD, by usurping
a Power over the Minds of Men.

The chief Reason why we are so earnestly desirous, that those who read this
Work bring all possible Application along with them, is, that we are willing to
be reprehended for the Faults we have been guilty of: For we pretend not to be
Infallible. We have so strict an Union with, and so strong a Dependence on our
Body, that we are justly apprehensive, lest we have sometimes mistaken the
confused Noise wherewith it fills the Imagination, for the Pure Voice of Truth,
which speaks to the Understanding.

Were it GOD only who spoke, and did we judge only according to what we heard,
we might perhaps say in the words of our LORD, Sicut audio sic judico, and
judicium meum justum est: quia non quaero voluntatem meam. Johan. cap. 5.30.
As I hear I judge, and my Judgment is just. But we have a Body that speaks
louder than GOD Himself, but never speaks the Truth. We have Self-love, which
corrupts the Words of GOD, which are all Truth: and we have Pride, which
emboldens us to judge without staying for the Words of Truth, which ought to be
the Rule of all our Judgments. For the principal Cause of our Errors, is, that
our Judgments reach farther than our Pure Intellectual Perceptions. Wherefore I
entreat those to whom GOD shall discover my Wanderings, to put me in the Right
Way; that so this Treatise, which I offer as an Essay, whose Subject is well
worthy the Application of Men, may by degrees arrive to its Perfection.

This Undertaking was at first ettempted only with design of instructing my
self: But some Persons being of Opinion it might be of use, if published, I the
willinger submitted to their Reasons; because one of the principal so well
suited with the desire I had of advantaging my self. The best means, said they,
of being informed in any Matter, is to communicate our Opinions about it to the
Learned. This quickens our own Attention, as well as provokes theirs. Sometimes
they have different Prospects, and make other Discoveries of Truths; sometimes
they push on certain Enquiries, which we out of Laziness have neglected, or for
want of Strength and Courage have deserted.

And upon this Prospect of Benefiting my self, and some others, I run the
hazard of being an Author. But that my Hopes may not prove abortive, I throw in
this Precaution, That a Man should not be presently discouraged, though he meet
with things that run counter to Common Opinions; which he has all his Life long
believed, and found generally approved by all Men in all Ages of the World. For
they are These Universal Errors I more especially strive to extirpate. Were
Men thoroughly enlightened, Universal Approbation would be an Argument: but the
case is quite contrary. Let him therefore be once for all re-minded, that
nothing but Reason ought to preside over the Judgments we pass on all Humane
Opinions; which have no relation to Faith: of which GOD alone informs us in a
quite different way, from that of our discovering Natural things. Let him
Retire into himself, and press near to that Light, which perpetually shines
Within, to the end his Reason may be more and more enlightened. Let him
industriously avoid all those too lively Sensations, and all the Commotions of
the Soul, which fill the Capacity of the Mind. For the least Noise, or
Glimmering of Light sometimes disturbs the View of the Mind: And therefore it is
good to avoid all these things, though not absolutely necessary. And if after
all the struggles he can make, he finds himself unable to withstand the
continual Impressions that his Body, and the Prejudices of Childhood, make upon
his Imagination: recourse to Prayer is needful, that GOD may afford those
Supplies, wherewith his own Strength cannot furnish him; Never failing still to
resist his Senses. For that ought to be the perpetual Employment of those, who
in imitation of St. Austin, Qui hoc videre non potest, oret and agat ut posse
mereatur, nec ad hominem disputatorem pulset, ut quod not legit legate, sed ad
Deum Salvatorem, ut quod non valet valeat. Epist. 112. cap. 12. Supplexque illi
qui lumen mentis accendit, attendat ut intelligat. Conf. Ep. Fund. cap. 33.
Nullo modo resistitur Corporis sensibus; quae nobis sacratissima disciplina
est; si per eos inflictis plagis vulneribusque blandimur. Ep. 72.
have a great love for Truth,

The CONTENTS of the First Volume.
CHAP. I. 1. OF the Nature and Properties of the Understanding. 2. Of the
Nature and Properties of the Will, and wherein its Liberty consists. Page 1
CHAP. II. 1. Of our Judgments and Reasonings. 2. That they depend upon the
Will. 3. The Use which should be made of its Liberty on their account. 4. Two
General Rules for the avoiding Error and Sin. 5. Some Necessary Reflections on
those Rules 4 CHAP. III. 1. The Answers to some Objections. 2. Observations
upon what has been said concerning the Necessity of Evidence 7 CHAP. IV. 1. Of
the Occasional Causes of Error, whereof there are five Principal. 2. The
General Design of the whole Work. 3. The Particular Design of the First Book 9
CHAP. V. Of the Senses. 1. Two ways of Explaining how they were corrupted by
Sin. 2. That it is our Liberty, and not our Senses, which is the true Cause of
our Errors. 3. A Rule for avoiding Error in the use of our Senses 10 CHAP. VI.
1. Of the Errors of Sight in respect of Extension absolutely considered. 2. A
Continuation of these Errors about Invisible Objects. 3. Of the Errors of Sight
touching Extension relatively considered 13 CHAP. VII. 1. Of the Errors of
Sight about Figures. 2. We have no Knowledge of the least of them. 3. The
Knowledge we have of the Greater is not exact. 4. An Explication of some
Natural Judgments which prevent our Deception. 5. That these very Judgments
deceive us in some particular Junctures 18 CHAP. VIII. 1. That our Eyes are
incapable of informing us of the Quantity or Swiftness of Motion considered in
it self. 2. That Duration which is necessary to our Knowledge of the Quantity
of Motion is unknown to us. 3. An Instance of the Errors of Sight about Motion
and Rest 19 CHAP. IX. A Continuation of the same Subject. 1. A General
Demonstration of the Errors of our Sight concerning Motion. 2. That the
Distance of Objects is necessary to be known, in order to judge of the Quantity
of their Motion. 3. The Mediums whereby we know the Distances of Objects are
examined 21 CHAP. X. Of our Errors about Sensible Qualities. 1. The Distinction
of the Soul and Body. 2. An Explication of the Organs of the Senses. 3. To what
part of the Body the Soul is immediately united. 4. An Instance to explain the
Effect which Objects have upon our Bodies. 5. What it is they produce in the
Soul, and the Reasons why the Soul perceives not the Motions of the Fibers of
the Body. 6. Four things which are generally confounded in every Sensation 25
CHAP. XI. 1. The Error we fall into concerning the Action of Objects against
the external Fibers of our Senses. 2. The Cause of this Error. 3. An Objection
and Answer 28 CHAP. XII. 1. Of our Errors concerning the Motions of the Fibers
of our Senses. 2. That we have no Perception of these Motions, or that we
confound them with our Sensations. 3. An Experiment that proves it. 4. Three
kinds of Sensations. 5. The Errors that accompany them Ibid. CHAP. XIII. 1. Of
the Nature of Sensations. 2. That a Man knows them better than he thinks he
does. 3. An Objection and Answer. 4. Why a Man imagines he has no Knowledge of
his own Sensations. 5. That it is an Error to think all Men have the same
Sensations of the same Objects. 6. An Objection and Answer 31 CHAP. XIV. 1. Of
the false Judgments that accompany our Sensations, and which we confound with
them. 2. The Reasons of these false Judgments. 3. That Error is not in our
Sensations, but only in these Judgments 35 CHAP. XV. An Explication of the
particular Errors of the Sight, which may serve as an Exemplar of the general
Errors of our Senses 37 CHAP. XVI. 1. That the Errors of our Senses serve us
instead of General and very Fruitful Principles, from whence to draw false
Conclusions; and these Conclusions again become other Principles in their turn.
2. The Origin of Essential Differences. 3. Concerning Substantial Forms. 4. Of
some other Errors of the School-Philosophy 38 CHAP. XVII. 1. Another Instance
taken from Morality, which shows that our Senses offer us nothing but false
Goods* 2. That God alone is our true and proper Good. 3. The Origin of the
Error of the Epicureans and Stoics* 39 CHAP. XVIII. 1. That our Senses make us
liable to Error, even in things which are not sensible. 2. An Example taken
from the Conversation of Men. 3. That Sensible Manners are not to be regarded
41 CHAP. XIX. Two other Examples. 1. The first concerning our Errors about the
Nature of Bodies. 2. The second concerning those which respect the Qualities of
the same Bodies 42 CHAP. XX. The Conclusion of the First Book. 1. That our
Senses are given us only for the Preservation of our Body. 2. That we ought to
doubt of the Reports they make. 3. That it is no little thing to doubt as we
ought to do. 44
Book the Second.
CHAP. I. 1. A General Idea of the Imagination. 2. That it includes two
Faculties, an Active and a Passive. 3. A general Cause of the Changes which
happen in the Imagination of Men; and the Foundation of the Second Book 45
CHAP. II. 1 Of the Animal Spirits, and the Changes they are s^^ject to in
general. 2. That the Chyle entering the Heart, occasions a Change in the
Spirits. 3. That Wine does the same thing* 47 CHAP. III. That the Air employed
in Respiration causes some change in the Animal Spirits 48 CHAP. IV. 1. Of the
Change of the Spirits caused by the Nerves, which go to the Heart and Lungs. 2.
Of that which is caused by the Nerves, which go to the Liver, to the Spleen and
Viscera. 3. That all that is performed without the Concurrence of our Will, but
yet it cannot be done without a Providence 49 CHAP. V. 1. Of Memory. 2. Of
Habits 51 CHAP. VI. 1. That the Fibers of the Brain are not subject to so
sudden Changes as the Spirits. 2. Three different Changes incident to the three
different Ages 53 CHAP. VII. 1. Of the Communication there is between the Brain
of a Mother, and that of her Infant. 2. Of the Communication that is between
our Brain and the other Parts of our Body, which inclines us to Imitation, and
to Compassion. 3. An Explication of the Generation of Monstrous Children, and
the Propagation of the Species. 4. An Explication of some Irregularities of the
Understanding, and of some Inclinations of the Will. 5. Concerning
Concupiscence and Original Sin. 6. Objections and Answers 54 CHAP. VIII. 1. The
Changes which happen in the Imagination of an Infant, after his Birth, by his
accompanying with his Mother, his Nurse, and other Persons. 2. Some
Instructions for their good Education 61
The Second Part.
CHAP. I. 1. Of the Imagination of Women. 2. Of the Imagination of Men. 3. Of
the Imagination of old Men 64 CHAP. II. That the Animal Spirits generally run
in the Tracks of Ideas that are most familiar to us, which is the Reason of our
preposterous Judgments 66 CHAP. III. Of the mutual Connection between the Ideas,
and the Traces of the Brain; and of the mutual Connection there is between
Traces and Traces, Ideas and Ideas 68 CHAP. IV. 1. That Men of Learning are the
most subject to Error. 2. The Causes why Men had rather be guided by Authority,
than make use of their own Reason 71 CHAP. V. Two pernicious Effects Reading
has upon the Imagination 72 CHAP. VI. That Men of Learning generally are so
opinionated with an Author, that their principal Drift is the knowing what he
held, without caring to know what ought to be held 74 CHAP. VII. Of the
Prepossession of Commentators 76 CHAP. VIII. 1. Of the Inventors of new
Systems. 2. The last Error of Men of Learning 79 CHAP. IX. 1. Of Effeminate
Minds. 2. Of Superficial Minds. 3. Of Men of Authority. 4. Of the Experimental
Philosophers 81
The Third Part.
CHAP I. Of the Disposition we have to imitate others in all things, which is
the Original of the Communication of those Errors that depend on the Power of
Imagination. 2. Two things that more especially increase this Disposition. 3.
What that strong Imagination is. 4. That there are several kinds of it. Of
Fools, and of those that have a strong Imagination, in the Sense it is here
taken. 5. Two considerable Imperfections of Men of a strong Imagination. 6. Of
the Power they have to persuade and impose on others 84 CHAP. II. General
Instances of the Strength of Imagination 87 CHAP. III. 1. Of the Force of some
Authors Imagination. 2. Of Tertullian 90 CHAP. IV. Of the Imagination of Seneca
91 CHAP. V. Of Montagne's Book 95 CHAP. VI. 1. Of Witches in Imagination, and
of Wolf-men. 2. The Conclusion of the two First Books 99
Book the Third.
CHAP. I. 1. Thought is only essential to the Mind. Sensation and Imagination
are only the Modifications of it. 2. We know not all the Modifications our Soul
is capable of. 3. They are different from our Knowledge and our Love, nor are
they always Consequences of them 101 CHAP. II. 1. The Mind being limited,
cannot comprehend any thing of an Infinite Nature. 2. Its Limitation is the
Origin of a great many Errors. 3. And especially of Heresies. 4. The Mind must
be submitted unto Faith 105 CHAP. III. 1. The Philosophers dissipate or
dissolve the Force of the Mind, by applying it to the Subjects, including too
many Relations, and depending on too many things; and by observing no Method in
their Studies. 2. An Instance taken from Aristotle. 3. That Geometricians on
the contrary take a good Method in the Search of Truth: Especially those who
make use of Algebra and Analyticks. 4. That their Method increases the Strength
of the Mind, and that Aristotle's Logic lessens it. 5. Another Fault of
Learned Men 107 CHAP. IV. 1. The Mind cannot dwell long upon Objects that have
no relation to it, or that include not something of Infinity in them. 2. The
Inconstancy of the Will, is the Cause of that want of Application, and
consequently of Error. 3. Our Sensations take us up more than the pure Ideas of
the Mind. 4. Which is the Source of the Corruption of our Morals. 5. And of the
Ignorance of the Vulgar sort of Men 109
Second Part concerning pure Understanding.
CHAP. I. 1. What is meant by Ideas. That they really exist, and are necessary
to our perceiving all material Objects. 2. A Particularization of all the ways
possible for us to perceive external Objects 112 CHAP. II. That material
Objects emit not Species which resemble them 114 CHAP. III. That the Soul has
no power to produce Ideas. The cause of the Error Men are guilty of upon this
Subject 115 CHAP. IV. That we perceive not Objects by means of Ideas created
with us. That God does not produce them in us every moment we have need of them
117 CHAP. V. That the Mind perceives neither the Essence nor the Existence of
Objects, by considering its own Perfections. That none but God sees them in
that manner 118 CHAP. VI. That we see all things in God 119 CHAP. VII. 1. Four
different manners of Perception. 2. How it is that we know God. 3. How we know
Bodies. 4. How we know our own Souls. 5. How we know the Souls of other Men,
and pure Spirits 122 CHAP. VIII. 1. The intimate Presence of the indefinite
Idea of Being in general, is the cause of all the disorderly abstractions of
the Mind; and the most part of the Chimeras of the vulgar Philosophy, which
hinder many Philosophers from acknowledging the solidity of true Principles of
Physics. 2. An Instance concerning the Essence of Matter. 124 CHAP. IX. 1. The
last general Cause of our Errors. 2. That the Ideas of things are not always
present to the Mind when we would have them. 3. That every finite Mind is
subject to Error, and why. 4. That we ought not to judge that there is nothing
but Body and Spirit: nor that God is a Spirit, according to our conception of
Spirits. 128 CHAP. X. Some Instances of Errors in Physics, wherein Men are
engaged, by supposing that the things which differ in their Nature, their
Qualities, Extension, Duration and Proportion, are alike in all these things
130 CHAP. XI. Instances of some Errors of Morality, which depend on the same
Principle 133 The Conclusion of the Three first Books 134
Book the Fourth.
CHAP. I. 1. Inclinations are as necessary to Spirits, as Motions to Bodies. 2.
God gives no Motion to Spirits, but what tends toward himself. 3. The tendency
Spirits have to particular Goods, proceeds but from their Motion toward Good
in general. 4. The Original of our chiefest natural Inclinations, which will
make up the division of this Fourth Book 137 CHAP II. 1. The Inclination for
Good in general, is the Principle of the Restlesness of the Will: 2. And
consequently of our Inadvertency and Ignorance. 3. The First Instance (showing
that) Morals are but little known by the generality of Men. 4. The Second
Instance (showing that) the Immortality of the Soul is controverted by some
People. 5. That we are in extreme Ignorance in point of abstract things; and
which have but little reference to us. 139 CHAP. III. 1. Curiosity is natural,
and necessary. 2. Three Rules to moderate it. 3. An Explication of the first of
these Rules. 143 CHAP. IV. A Continuation of the same Subject. 1. An
Explication of the second Rule concerning Curiosity. 2. An Explication of the
Third 146 CHAP. V. 1. Of the second natural Inclination, or of Self-love. 2.
The Division of it into love of Being, and of Well-being; or of Greatness, and
Pleasure 147 CHAP. VI. 1. Of the Inclination we have for whatever elevates us
above others. 2. Of the false Judgments of some Religious Persons. 3. Of the
false Judgments of the Superstitious, and Hypocrites. 4. Of Voetius, Mr. Des
Cartes's Enemy. 148 CHAP. VII. Of the Desire of Science, and of the Judgments
of the falsely Learned. 151 CHAP. VIII. 1. Of the Desire of seeming Learned. 2.
Of the conversation of the falsely Learned. 3. Of their Works 153 CHAP. IX. How
the Inclination for Honors and Riches conduces to Error. 155 CHAP. X. Of the
Love of Pleasure, with regard to Morality. 1. That Pleasure is to be shunned,
though it make us happy. 2. It ought not to carry us to the loving sensible
Goods 156 CHAP. XI. Of the love of Pleasure, with reference to Speculative
Sciences. 1. How it disables us from discovering Truth. 2. Some Instances 159
CHAP. XII. Of the Effects which the Thoughts of Future Happiness and Misery are
capable of producing in the Mind 163 CHAP. XIII. 1. Of the third Natural
Inclination: viz. The Friendship we have for other Men. 2. It makes us approve
the Thoughts of our Friends, and deceive them by undue Praises. 165
Tome II. Book V.
CHAP. I. OF the Nature and Original of Passions in general Page 1 CHAP II. Of
the Union of the Mind with sensible Things; or of the Force and Extent of the
Passions in general 3 CHAP. III. A particular Explanation of all the Changes,
happening either to the Body or Soul in every Passion 6 CHAP. IV. That the
Pleasure and Motion of the Passions engage us in Errors, and false Judgments
about Good; that we ought continually to resist them. How to impugn Libertinism
10 CHAP. V. That the Perfection of the Mind consists in its Union with God, by
the knowledge of Truth, and the love of Virtue; and contrariwise, That its
Imperfection proceeds only from its dependency on the Body, caused by the
Disorder of the Senses and Passions 13 CHAP. VI. Of the more general Errors of
the Passions, with some particular Instances 16 CHAP. VII. Of Passions in
particular, and first of Admiration and its ill Effects 18 CHAP. VIII. A
Continuation of the same Subject: What good use can be made of Admiration and
other Passions 24 CHAP. IX. Of Love and Aversion, and their principal Species
26 CHAP. X. Of Passions in particular, and in general of the way to explain
them, and to know the Errors they cause 29 CHAP. XI. That all the Passions
justify themselves. What Judgments they cause us to make in their Vindication
31 CHAP. XII. That such Passions as have Evil for their Object, are the most
dangerous and unjust; and that those that have the least mixture of Knowledge
are the most lively and sensible 34
Book the Sixth.
CHAP. I. The Design of this Book: Two general ways to keep to Evidence in the
Search of Truth, which shall be the Subject of this Tract 36 CHAP. II. That
attention is necessary to preserve Evidence in our Knowledge; that the
modifications of the Soul make her attentive, but share and take up too much
her Capacity of perceiving 37 CHAP. III. Of the use that can be made of the
Passions and Senses, to preserve the attention of the Mind 39 CHAP. IV. Of the
use of Imagination to make the Mind attentive, and especially of the usefulness
of Geometry 41 CHAP. V. Of the means to improve the extent and capacity of the
Mind: That Arithmetic and Algebra are of absolute necessity to it 46
Book the Sixth. Part II.
CHAP. I. Of the Rules that are to be observed in the Search after Truth 50
CHAP. II. Of the general Rule that concerns the subject of our Studies: That
School Philosophers observe it not, which is the cause of several Errors in
their Physics 51 CHAP. III. Of the most dangerous Error in the Philosophy of
the Ancients 54 CHAP. IV. An Explication of the second part of the general
Rule: That the Philosophers observe it not, but that Des Carts has exactly
followed it 57 CHAP. V. An Explication of the Principles of the Peripatetick
Philosophy, in which is shown, that Aristotle never observed the second part of
the general Rule, and his four Elements, with the Elementary Qualities are
examined 64 CHAP. VI. General and necessary Advices to proceed orderly in the
Search after Truth, and in the choice of the Sciences 70 CHAP. VII. Of the use
of the first Rule concerning particular Questions 74 CHAP. VIII. An Application
of the other Rules to particular Questions 79 CHAP. IX. The last instance to
show the usefulness of this Treatise, wherein the cause of the Union of parts
in Bodies, and withal the Rules of the Communication of Motion are examined 85
The Conclusion of the Three last Books 96 Illustrations upon the foregoing
Books 98 F. Malbranche's Defense against the Accusation of Monsieur De la Ville
183 Of Light and Colors 193
The End of the Contents.
F. MALEBRANCHE'S TREATISE, CONCERNING The Search after Truth. BOOK the FIRST.
Concerning The ERRORS of the SENSES.
CHAP. I.
I. Of the Nature and Properties of the UNDERSTANDING. II. Of the Nature and
Properties of the WILL, and wherein the Liberty of the SOUL consists.

ERROR is the Universal Cause of the Misery of Mankind; it is the corrupt
Principle that has Produced Evil in the World: It Is this which breeds and
cherishes in our Soul, all the Evils that afflict us; and we must never hope to
establish a solid and real Happiness, but by seriously laboring to avoid it.

We are taught by the Holy Scriptures, that Men are only miserable, because
they are Sinners, and Criminals; and they would neither be Sinners, nor
Criminals, did they not make themselves Slaves to Sin, by taking part with
Error.

If it be true then, That Error is the Source of all the Miseries of Men, it is
very reasonable that Men should endeavor to free themselves from it; and
certainly their Endeavor would not be altogether unprofitable, and unrewarded,
though it met not with all the Success that they could wish. If Men should not
hereby become Infallible, yet they would be much less subject to be Deceived;
and though they obtained not an absolute Deliverance from their Evils, they
would however avoid a great part of them. An entire Felicity ought not to be
expected in this Life, since in this Mortal State there can be no Pretensions
to Infallibility; but the Endeavor against Error should be earnest and
continual, because the Desire to being freed from Misery is incessant. In a
word, as we fervently desire perfect Happiness, without the hopes of it; so we
should ever industriously tend toward Infallibility, without pretending to it.

It should not be imagined there is much Difficulty to be undergone in the
Search of Truth; It Is but opening the Eyes, becoming Attentive, and exactly
observing some Rules we shall give in the Sea the 6 th. Book.
following Discourse. An exactness of Thought has scarce any thing painful in
it; it is not a slavery, as the Imagination represents it, and though we meet
with some Difficulty at first, yet we find Satisfaction enough to recompense
our Pains; for at last, it is this only which enlightens us, and guides us into
Truth.

But not to spend time in preparing the Mind of the Reader, whom it is much more
just to believe, sufficiently, of himself, disposed to the Search of Truth; let
us examine the Causes and Nature of our Errors; and since the Method of
examining things by considering them in their Birth, and Origin, is the most
regular and perspicuous, and serves better than others to give us a thorough
Knowledge of them, let us try to put it here in Practice.

The Mind of Man, being neither Material nor Extended, is undoubtedly a simple
Substance, Of the Nature and Properties of the Understanding.
indivisible, and without any Composition of Parts; Notwithstanding it has been
the Custom to distinguish in it two Faculties, namely, the Understanding and
the Will, which it is necessary in the first place to explain. For it seems
that the Notions or Idea's Men have of these two Faculties, are not so clear or
distinct as they ought to be.

But because these Idea's are very Abstract, and fall not under the
Imagination, it seems not amiss to express them by the Resemblance they bear to
the Properties belonging to Matter, which being easy to be Imagined, will
render the Notions which may conveniently be applied to these two Words
Understanding and Will, more distinct, and also more familiar to Us; only this
Caution must be observed, that these Resemblances betwixt the Mind and Matter,
are not perfectly just; And that these two kinds of Beings are only compared in
order to make the Mind more Attentive, and to make others, as it were, sensible
of our meaning.

Matter, or Extension, contains in it two Properties or Faculties; the first
Faculty is that of receiving different Figures, and the second is its capacity
of being moved: In like manner the Mind of Man includes two Faculties; the
first, which is the Understanding, is that of receiving many Idea's, that is,
of perceiving many things; the second, which is the Will, is the Faculty of
receiving many Inclinations, or of Willing different things. We will begin with
an explication of the Resemblances the first of the Faculties belonging to
Matter, has to the first of the two Faculties appertaining to the Mind.

Extension is capable of admitting two kinds of Figures, The one is only
External, as the Roundness of a piece of Wax, the other is Internal, and is
peculiar to all the little parts the Wax is composed of; for it is most certain
that all the little parts which go to the Composition of a piece of Wax, are of
a Figure very different from those, which constitute a piece of Iron. Therefore
I call that which is external, barely Figure, and I term the internal Figure,
Configuration; which is peculiarly necessary to the Wax to make it what it is.

So likewise it may be said that the Idea's of the Soul are of two sorts,
taking the name of Idea in general for whatever the Mind immediately perceives.
The first give Us a Representation of something without Us, as of a Square, or
an House, etc. The second represent to Us only what we find within Us, as our
Sensations, Pain, Pleasure, or the the like. For we shall make it plain
hereafter, that these last Idea's are only a manner of the Mind's existing; and
for that reason I call them the Modifications of the Mind.

Thus also the Inclinations of the Soul might be called Modifications of the
same Soul: For it being manifest that the Inclination of the Will is a manner
of existing of the Soul, it might be termed a Modification of the Soul; just as
Motion in Bodies, being a manner of existing of those Bodies, might be said to
be a Modification of Matter: Notwithstanding I do not term the Inclinations of
the Will, or the Motions of Matter, Modifications, for as much as both those
Inclinations, and those Motions have commonly a reference to something that is
external; for the Inclinations stand related unto Good, and the Motions have a
reference to some separate Body. But the Figures and Configurations of Bodies,
and the Sensations of the Soul have no necessary relation to any thing without.
For as a Figure is round when all the external parts of a Body are equally
distant from one of its parts, which we call the Center, without relation to
any thing external; so all the Sensasations we are capable of, might have their
subsistence, though there were no outward object in the World: Their being
includes not any necessary relation to the Bodies which seem to cause them, as
we shall elsewhere prove; and they are nothing but the very Soul, modified in
such, or such a manner; so that they are properly Modifications of the Soul.
Let me then take leave to name them so, in order to explain my self.

The first, and principal Agreement, or Resemblance, that is found betwixt the
Faculty which Matter has of receiving different Figures, and different
Configurations; and that which the Soul has of receiving different Idea's, and
different Modifications is this, That as the Faculty of receiving different
Figures, and different Configurations in Bodies, is entirely passive, and
contains nothing at all of Action, so the Faculty of receiving different
Idea's, and different Modifications in the Mind, is altogether passive and
includes no Action at all. I call that Faculty or Capacity, the Soul has of
receiving all these things, the UNDERSTANDING.

Whence we ought to conclude, That it is the Understanding which perceives;
since it is only its business to receive the Idea's of Objects: For, for the
Soul to perceive an Object, and to receive the Idea which represents it, is one
and the same thing: It Is also the Understanding which perceives the
Modifications of the Soul, since I mean by this word Understanding, that
passive Faculty of the Soul, by means of which it receives all the different
Modifications it is capable of. For it is the same thing for the Soul to
receive a mode of existence, which we call pain, as to perceive Pain, since it
has no other way of receiving Pain, than by the Perception of it; whence it may
be inferred, that it is the Understanding that imagines the Objects that are
absent, and is sensible of those that are present; and that the Senses and
Imagination, are nothing but the Understanding, perceiving Obj^cts by the
Organs of the Body, as shall be explained hereafter.

But because in the Sensation of Pain, or any thing else, Men generally
perceive it by the mediation of the Organs of Sense; they customarily say they
are the Senses which perceive it, without knowing distinctly what it is they
mean by the word Sense: They fancy there is some Faculty distinct from the
Soul, which renders It, or the Body capable of Sensation, as believing the
Organs of Sense do really participate of our Perceptions. They imagine the Body
is so assistant to the Mind, in its Sensations, that if the Mind was separate
from the Body, it could have no Sensation at all. But these thoughts are the
effects of Prejudice; and because in the State we are in, we are sensible of
nothing but through the use of the Instruments of Sense, as shall be shown
elsewhere more at large. It Is by way of accommodating my self to the ordinary
way of Speaking that I say, in the Process of my Discourse, the Senses
perceive; but by the word Sense I mean nothing but that passive Faculty of the
Soul beforementioned, that is, the Understanding perceiving any thing, on
occasion of what happens in the Organs of her Body, according to the
Institutions of Nature, as shall be explained in another place.

The other Resemblance between the passive Faculty of the Soul, and that of
Matter, is this, That as Matter receives no real alteration by the change which
happens in its Figure; I mean, for instance, that as Wax receives no
considerable change by becoming Round or Square; so the Mind receives no change
by the diversity of Idea's it contains; I would say, the Mind receives no
considerable change though it receives the Idea of a Square, or a Circle, in
perceiving a Square, or a Circle.

Again, As it may be said that Matter receives considerable Changes, when it
loses the Configuration, peculiar to the parts of Wax, to take that which is
proper to those of Fire and Smoke, when the Wax is changed into Fire and Smoke;
so it may be said that the Soul undergoes very considerable Changes, when it
alters its Modifications, and suffers Pain after it has felt Pleasure. Whence
we ought to conclude, That Idea's are to the Soul, in a manner what Figures are
to Matter, and that Configurations are to Matter, almost what Sensations are to
the Soul.

There are still other Corrsepondencies betwixt the Figures and Configurations
of Matter, and the Idea's and Modifications of the Mind; for Matter seems to be
an Image, or Representative of the Mind, I mean only that there are Properties
in Matter which have some mutual Respects between them, not unlike those which
we find between the Properties belonging to the Mind; though the Nature of the
Mind is very different from that of Matter, as we shall clearly see in that
which follows.

From what I have said I would have it well remembered, That by Understanding I
mean that passive Faculty the Soul has of Perceiving, that is of receiving not
only different Idea's, bat also an abundance of different Sensations, as Matter
has a capacity of receiving all sorts of external Figures, and internal
Configurations.

The other Faculty of Matter is that of its being capable of receiving many
Motions, and the other Faculty of the Soul is that Power it has of receiving
many Inclinations. II. Of the Nature and Properties of the Will, and of its
Liberty.
Let us make the Comparison between them.

As the Author of Nature is the Universal Cause of all those Motions which we
find in Matter, so also he is the general Cause of all those natural
Inclinations which are found in the Mind: And as all Motions proceed in a right
line, unless otherwise determined by the Rencounter, of some foreign and
particular Causes, which by their Opposition, put them into a Circular course;
so all the Inclinations we receive from God, have a direct tendency, and could
only aim at the possession of Good and Truth, were there not some extraneous
cause, which biased that natural Impression toward corrupt and mischievous
Ends: Now it is that foreign Cause which is the cause of all our Evils, and
depraves all our Inclinations.

To understand this rightly, we must know, there is a very considerable
difference, between the Impression or Motion the Author of Nature produces in
Matter, and the Impression or Motion toward Good in general, wherewith the
same Author of Nature continually influences our Soul: For Matter is wholly
inactive; it has no power of retarding, or stopping its Motion, or determining
and turning it one way rather than another. Its Motion, as I have said,
proceeds always in a right line, and if at any time it is hindered, from
continuing it in that manner, it describes the greatest circular Line it can,
and consequently that which comes nearest to a right, because it is God that
impresses its Motion, and rules its Determination. But it is not so with the
Will, which may in one sense be said See the Illustrations.
to be Active, and to have a Power in it self of giving a different
Determination to the Inclination, or Impression it receives from God; for
though it cannot stop this Impression, it may in one sense cause a Deviation to
what side it pleases, and thereby produce all those Disorders, which happen in
its Inclinations, and all the Miseries which are the certain and necessary
Consequents of Sin.

So that by the Word WILL, I would be conceived to design, That natural Motion
or Impression which carries us toward Good universal, and undetermined. And by
that of LIBERTY, I mean nothing more than The Power the Mind has of turning
that Impression toward agreeable Objects; and terminating our natural
Inclinations upon some particular Object, which before were loose and
undetermined, except toward general or universal Good; that is to say, toward
God, who is alone universal Good, since it is he alone who comprehends in
himself all Goods.

Whence it is easy to discover, That though our natural Inclinations are
Voluntary, yet they are not Free with that Freedom of Indifference I am
speaking ^f; which contains a Power of willing or not willing, or rather of
willing the contrary to what our natural Inclinations carry us. For though it
is Voluntarily and Freely that a Man loves Good in general; since there is no
Love but proceeds from the Will, and it is a contradiction, for the Will to
suffer violence or constraint: However it is impossible to Love it with that
Freedom I have just explained, since it is not in the Power of the Will not to
wish to be Happy.

But it must be observed, that the Mind considered under so strong a bent
toward Good in general, cannot determine its Motion toward a particular Good,
unless the same Mind, considered as susceptible of Idea's, has knowledge of
that particular Good; I would say, to make use of the ordinary terms, that the
Will is a blind Power, that can make no advances to things but what are
represented to it by the Understanding; so that the Will can not diversely
determine its Propensity to Good, or overruled the direct Bent of his natural
Inclinations, but by See the Illustrations.
commanding the Understanding to represent it to some particular Object. The
power then that the Will has of determining its Inclinations, necessarily
contains an ability of applying the Uderstanding to the Objects which it likes.

That what I have said concerning the Will, and Liberty may be better
understood, I will make it familiar by an Instance: A Man represents to himself
an Honor or Preferment under the Notion of a Good, which he may hope for, and
immediately his Will wills this Good; that is, the Impression which is
continually carrying the Soul toward Universal and undetermined Good, inclines
it toward this Honor; But whereas this Honor is not the Universal Good, nor
is considered by a clear and distinct view of the Mind, as Universal Good, (for
the Mind can never see clearly That which is not) the Impression we have
toward Universal Good is not stopped by this particular Good: The Mind has a
tendency to go farther; it is not necessarily and invincibly in Love with this
Honor, but is entirely at its Choice and Liberty in this respect. Now its
Liberty consists in this, that being not fully convinced that this Honor
comprehends all the Good it is capable of Loving, it may suspend both its
Judgment and its Love; and thereupon, as shall be shown in the Third Book, may,
through the Union it has with the Universal Being, or that Being which contains
all Good, think of other things, and consequently Love other Goods: Finally, it
may compare all Goods together, and love them according to that order, in the
Proportion they are lovely, and refer them all to that one which contains all,
and which alone is fit to fix bounds to our Love, as being the only one, that
is capable of filling all the Capacity we have of Loving.

Almost the same thing may be said of the Knowledge of Truth, as of the Love of
Good. We Love the Knowledge of Truth, as the Enjoyment of Good, through a
natural Impression; and that Impression is no more invincible, than that which
carries us toward Good; that which makes it so, is only Evidence, or a perfect
and entire Knowledge of the Object. And we have equal Liberty in our false
Judgments as in our inordinate Affections, as shall be made to appear in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. II.
I. Of our Judgments, and Reasonings. II. That they depend upon the Will. III.
The Use which should be made of its Liberty on their account. IV. Two general
Rules for the avoiding Error and Sin. V. Some general Reflections upon those
Rules.

IT might be readily inferred from what has been said in the precedent Chapter,
that the Understanding never judges, I. Of our Judgments and Reasonings.
since it goes no farther than Perception; or that the Judgments and Reasonings
which the Understanding makes, are nothing but pure Perceptions: That it is the
Will alone which really judges, by acquiescing in, and voluntarily resting
upon, what the Understanding represents: And thus it is the Will alone which
leads us into Error: But this requires a larger Explication.

I say then, there is no other difference on the part of the Understanding,
between a simple Perception, a Judgment, and a Reasoning, than that the
Understanding perceives a simple thing, without relation to any thing
whatsoever, by a simple Perception; that it perceives the Relations between two
things or more, in its Judgments: And lastly, that it perceives the Relations,
which are betwixt the Relations of things, in its Reasonings; wherefore all the
Operations of the Understanding, are nothing but pure Perceptions.

In Perceiving, for Example, twice 2, or 4, there is only a simple Perception.
In Judging that twice 2 are 4, or that twice 2 make not 5, the Understanding
only perceives the Relation of Equality found between twice 2 and 4; or the
Relation of Inequality between twice 2 and 5. Thus the Judgment, in point of
the Understanding, is only the Preception of the Relation which is found
between two things or more. But Reasoning is the Perception, not of the
Relation which is found between two things or more, for that would be a
Judgment; but, of the Relation which is found between two or more Relations of
two or more Things. Thus when I infer that 4 being less than 6, twice 2 being
equal to 4, are consequently less than 6, I not only Perceive the Relation of
Inequality between 2 and 2, and 6, for that would be only a Judgment; but the
Relation of Inequality which is between the Relation of twice 2 and 4, and that
Relation between 4 and 6, which is a Reasoning: The Understanding then does
only perceive, and it is the Will alone which judges and reasons by voluntary
resting upon what the Understanding represents to it; as has been already said.

II. That Judgments and Reasonings depend upon the Will.
Notwithstanding, when things which come under our Consideration, are palpably
Evident, our Consent seems to be no longer Voluntary, whence we are ready to
believe that it is not our Will but our Understanding that judges thereof.

But that we may be sensible of our Error, we must know that the things we
consider never appear with that Convincing Evidence, till the Understanding has
thoroughly examined all their Parts and Relations necessary to form a Judgment
of them; whereupon it happens that the Will, which can will nothing without
knowledge, can act no longer on the Understanding; that is, cannot desire the
Understanding to represent something new in its Object, since it has already
considered all the parts of it any ways relating to the question to be decided,
it is therefore obliged to rest upon what has been already represented, and
cease from its Agitation and Casting about; it is this Acquiescence of the Will
which is properly a Judgment or Reasoning. Thus because this Acquiescence or
Judgment is not left Free, when things strike us with that Evident Conviction,
we fancy likewise that it is not Voluntary.

But as long as there is any Obscurity in the Subject we consider, and we are
not perfectly assured, we have discovered all that is necessary to the
Resolution of the Question, as it most commonly happens in those which are
abstruse and difficult, and include many Relations; we are free to deny our
Consent, and the Will may still command the Understanding, to apply it self to
something new: Which makes us not so averse to believe that the Judgments we
form on such kind of Subjects are Voluntary.

Howbeit, the generality of Philosophers suppose that even the Judgments we
form upon things obscure, are no ways Voluntary, and will have the Consent to
Truth in general, to be an Action of the Understanding, which they call
Assensus, to distinguish it from the Consent to Good, which they attribute to
the Will, and term Consensus; but see the cause of their Distinction and
Mistake.

Which is, That in this state of Life, we often evidently perceive some Truths,
without any reason to Doubt of them; and so the Will remains not indifferent in
the Consent it gives to Truths so manifest, as has been just explained: But
it is not so in point of Good, there being no Particular Good we know, but we
have reason to doubt, whether we ought to Love it. Our Passions and
Inclinations, which we naturally have for Sensible Pleasures, are, though
confused, yet, through the Corruption of our Nature, very strong Reasons, which
render us cold and indifferent even in the Love of God himself: And so we are
manifestly sensible of our Indifference, and are inwardly convinced, we make
use of our Liberty in our Loving GOD.

But we do not in like manner apprehend that we employ our Liberty in
Consenting to Truth, especially when accompanied with full Evidence and
Conviction; which induces us to believe our Consent to Truth is not Voluntary:
As if it was necessary our Actions should be indifferent to become Voluntary,
and that the Blessed did not love God most Willingly, without being diverted
from it by something or other; in like manner as we Consent to that evident
Proposition that twice 2 are 4, without being diverted from the Belief of it by
any show of a contrary Reason.

But to the end we may distinctly discover, what the difference is between the
Consent of the Will to Truth, and its Consent to Goodnes^, it is requisite to
know the difference which is found between Truth and Goodness, taken in the
ordinary acceptance, and with reference to us. That difference consists in
this, That we have an Interest and Concern in Goodness, but Truth does not at
all affect us: For Truth consists only in the Relation which two things or more
ha^^ between them, but Goodness consists in the Relation of agreement which
things have with our selves; Geometricians love not Truth, but only the
Knowledge of Truth, though it be otherwise said.
which is the reason that the Will has but One Action in respect of Truth,
which is its Acquiescence in, or Consent to, the Representation of the Relation
which is betwixt things; and that it has two in respect of Goodness, namely,
its Acquiescence in, or Consent to, the Relation of agreement the thing has
with our selves, and its Love or Tendency toward that thing, which actions are
extremely different, though they are usually confounded: For there is a great
deal of difference betwixt simply Acquiescing, and being carried to love the
thing which the Mind represents, since we often Acquiesce in things we could
gladly wish were not, and which we have an aversion to.

Now upon a due consideration of things, it will visibly appear; That it is ever
the Will which Acquiesces, not only in things if they be agreeable to it, but
the Representation of things; and that the reason of the Will's Acquiescing
always in the Representation of things of the clearest Evidence, is, as we have
already said, because there is no farther Relation in them necessary to be
considered, which the Understanding has not already thoroughly discussed:
Insomuch that it is, as it were, necessary for the Will to leave off disquieting
and tireing it self in vain, and to rest satisfied in a full assurance, that it
is not deceived, since there is nothing left, to put the Understanding upon a
fresh Inquiry.

This is especially to be observed, that in the Circumstances we are under, we
have but a very imperfect Knowledge of things, and consequently there is an
absolute necessity we should have this Liberty of Indifference whereby we are
empowered to withold our selves from giving our Consent.

For the better discovering this Necessity, it must be considered, that we are
carried by our Natural Inclinations to the embracing Truth and Goodness; so
that the Will, never reaching after things, but what the Mind has some notice
and apprehension of, must needs pursue that which has the Face and Appearance
of Truth and Goodness. But because all that has the look of Truth and Good, is
not always what it appears to be; it is plain that if the Will had not this
Liberty, but must infallibly and necessarily have embraced every thing that
came clothed with an Appearance of Truth and Goodness, it would have almost
ever been Deceived. Whence probably it might be concluded, That the Author of
its Being, was the Author of its Errors and Seducements. III. What use should
be made of our Liberty that we never may be deceived*


We have therefore a Liberty given us by God, that we might avoid falling into
Error, and all the Evils consequent upon Errors, by not resting with a full
Assurance upon Probabilities, but only upon Truth; that is, by commanding the
Mind, with an indefatigable Application, to examine every thing till it has
fully enlightened and unravelled all that comes under its Examinations. For
Truth generally comes attended with Evidence, and Evidence consists in a clear
and distinct View of all the Parts and Relations of the Object which are
necessary to give a certain and well-grounded Judgment.

The use then we should make of our Liberty is to EMPLOY IT AS FAR AS IT WILL
GO. That is, never to consent to any thing whatever until we are, as it were,
forced to it, by the secret Reproaches of our Reason.

To submit our selves to the false Appearance of Truth, is to inslave our
selves contrary to the Will of God; but honestly to yield to the inward
Reproaches of our Reason, which accompany the Denial of our Submission unto
Evidence, is to obey the Voice of Eternal Truth, which speaks within us. Here
then are Two Rules founded upon what I have been saying, which are the most
necessary of all others, both for Speculative Sciences and Morality, and which
may be looked on as the Foundation of all Humane Sciences.

IV. General Rules for the avoiding Error and Sin.
The First which respects the Sciences is this: A Man should never give an
entire Consent, but only to Propositions which appear so evidently true, that
he cannot deny it them without feeling an internal Pain, and the secret
Vpbraidings of his Reason: that is, without being plainly convinced, he would
make an ill use of his Liberty, in case he should refuse to give his Consent,
or would extend its Power over things where it has no Right, or Jurisdiction.

The Second relating to Morality is this: A Man ought never to fix his Love
absolutely on any Good, if he can without Remorse refuse to Love it. From
whence it follows, That nothing but God ought to be Loved absolutely, and
independently. For He alone it is, that we cannot forbear Loving in that Nature
without an inward Remorse, that is, without evident Conviction of doing Ill,
upon Supposition we have arrived to the Knowledge of Him, through the means of
Reason or of Faith.

A necessary Reflection on the two Rules.
But it must here be observed, That when things which we perceive come
recommended with strong Probability, we are extremely ready to Believe them. We
feel our selves in Pain, when we will not suffer Persuasion to Break in upon
us; insomuch that were we not very cautious, we should be in danger of
Consenting to them, consequently of being Deceived; for it is a great Chance,
whether Truth be found entirely to agree with the Probability. And for this
Reason, I have expressly put in the two Rules; That nothing should be consented
to, without palpable Conviction, that Evil use would be made of a Man's Liberty
in not Consenting.

But though we find our selves most readily inclined to Consent to a
Probability, or a likelihood, yet if we would be at the pains of making
Reflection, whether we perceive our selves evidently obliged to consent to it,
we should doubtless find we were not. For if this likelihood be founded upon
the Impressions of our Senses, (a likelihood by the way that very ill deserves
the Name) a Man finds himself readily disposed to yield consent to it. But no
other Cause can be assigned for this, but some Passion or general Affection he
has for that which affects or concerns the Senses, as shall be sufficiently
shown in the following Discourse.

But if the likelihood proceeds from some Conformity with Truth, as ordinarily
Probable Notices are True, taken in a certain Sense; then if a Man examines his
own Breast, he will find himself inclined to do two things; The one is to
Believe, and the other to make farther Inquiry still: But he will never find
himself so fully persuaded, as to think he does evidently ill, if he does not
Consent at all.

Now these two Inclinations, a Man has in respect of Things Probable, are very
Good. For He may and ought to give his Consent to Things Probable or
Verisimilar taken in a Sense which denotes the Image of Truth; but he ought not
however to yield an entire Consent, as we have precaution'd in the Rule; and he
must examine all the latent sides, and faces yet undiscovered; so as to enter
fully into the Nature of the thing, and to distinguish what is True from what
is False, and then to give an entire Consent if the Evidence oblige him to it.

He must then be well accustomed to distinguish Truth from Probability, by
examining himself inwardly, as I have been Explaining: For it is for want of
this Care of Examining a Man's self in this Nature, that he perceives himself
Touched and Affected almost in the same manner, by two different things; For,
in fine, it is of the greatest Consequence to make a good use of this Liberty by
perpetually bridling in our Consent, and Affection to things, till we find our
selves, as it were, forced to let them go, by the Commanding Voice of the
Author of Nature, which I called before the Reproaches of our Reason, and the
Remorse of our Consciences.

All the Duties of Spiritual Beings, as well Angels as Men, consist principally
in the good use of this Liberty; and we may say, without any scruple, That if
they carefully Employ their Liberty, and not preposterously render themselves
slaves to Lies and Vanity, they are in the ready way to the greatest Perfection
they are naturally capable of; Provided, in the mean time, their Understanding
stands not idle, and that they are careful continually to excite it to new
Discoveries, and that they render themselves disposed for the Reception of
greater Truths, by perpetually Meditating on Subjects worthy of their Attention.

For that the Mind may advance to its Perfection, it will not suffice a Man
constantly to make use of its Liberty, by Consenting to nothing at all; like
those Men who take Pride in knowing nothing, in doubting and boggling at every
thing in Nature: Nor on the other hand must he Consent to all things like many
Others, who fear nothing so much as to be Ignorant of any thing, and pretend to
Universal Knowledge. But he must make so good use of his Understanding, by
continual Meditations, as to find himself in a Capacity of being able to
Consent to what it represents, without Fear or Danger of being Deceived.

CHAP. III.
I. The Answers to some Objections. II. Observations upon what has been said
concerning the Necessity of Evidence.

IT IS no hard thing to foresee that the Practice of the First Rule, which I
have been treating of in the foregoing Chapter, will not go very well down with
a great part of Mankind; But especially with those Imaginary Philosophers, who
pretend to the Knowledge of every thing, but really know nothing at all: Who
please themselves in talking Positively upon the most difficult Subjects, and
yet are certainly at the same time Ignorant of the more Ordinary and Easy.

I question not but they would be ready to say with Aristotle, That Absolute
Certainty is no where to be sought for, but in the Mathematics; I. The Answer
to some Objections.
That Physics and Moral Philosophy are such Sciences as take up with mere
Probability. That Descartes was very much out in his Design of handling
Physics like Geometry; and that for that Reason he had no better Success. That
it is not possible for Men to arrive to the Knowledge of Nature, that her Secret
Springs and Movements lie too deep to be pierced by an Humane Mind; with a
great deal more of such fine Things as these, which they put off with Pomp and
Ostentation, and which they support with the Authority of a vast Flight of
Authors, whose Names they can repeat, and out of which they can quote a Passage
on Occasion; and this is sufficient for them to plume themselves and look big
upon.

I would heartily beg of these Gentlemen, they would leave off talking of those
things which they themselves acknowledge they do not Understand; and would put
a stop to the ridiculous Motives of their Vanity, by ceasing to compose large
Volumes on those Subjects which, by their own Confession, they Know nothing of

But I would have those Men seriously examine, whether one of these two Things
is not absolutely Necessary, either to fall into Error, or never to give an
entire Consent, except to things entirely Evident; Whether the Reason that
Geometry is ever attended with Truth, may not be ascribed to the Geometricians
Observation of that Rule: And whether the Errors some have fallen into touching
the Quadrature of the Circle, the Duplication of the Cube, and some other very
difficult Problems, have not proceeded from an heady and conceited rashness
which has possessed them with Likelihoods, and made them pass for Truths.

Let them consider likewise on another hand, whether the Cause of Error and
Confusion's reigning so much in the Ordinary Philosophy, may not be imputed to
the Philosophers contenting themselves with Probability, very easy and obvious
to be met with, and highly advantageous to their Vain Humor and their
Interests? Do not we almost every where find an infinite Diversity of Opinions
upon the same Subjects, and consequently infinite Errors? Notwithstanding a
prodigious number of Disciples give way to their own Seducements, and submit
themselves blindfold to the Authority of these Philosophers, without so much
as Understanding what their Opinions are.

It is true there are some of them that after twenty or thirty Years time lost,
confess they have learnt nothing by their Reading; but yet this their
Confession is not so Ingenuous as it should be. They think it requisite first
to prove after their fashion, that nothing can be known; and after that they
will make Confession of their Ignorance, as Believing then they have the
Privilege of doing it without being laughed at for their Pains.

Yet were a Man disposed to entertain himself, he would not want a proper
Subject for his Laughter and Diversion, should he handsomely Interrogate them,
concerning the Progress of their Learned Acquisitions: and were they in Humor
to declare in particular all the Fatigues they have undergone in the Study and
Purchase of Nothing.

But though this their Learned and Profound Ignorance deserves to be well
rallied, yet it seems not amiss to spare them at present, and to commiserate
those who have spent so many Years in Learning nothing but that false
Proposition, the irreconcilable Enemy to all Science and to all Truth, That
nothing can be known.

Since then the Rule I have established is so necessary as has been seen, in
the Search after Truth, let no Man Cavil at the proposing it. And let not
those, who will not be at the pains of observing it themselves, be forward to
condemn so celebrated an Author as Descartes for following it, or according to
their Notion, for endeavoring so zealously to follow it.

They would not be so peremptory to condemn him, did they know the Man on whom
they pass so rash and unadvised a Sentence, and did they not read his Works as
they do Fables and Romances, which they take up to entertain their idle
Minutes, but never to Study or be Instructed in. Would they Meditate with that
Author, they might probably still find in themselves some Notions and Scattered
Seeds of Truth, which he teaches, that would grow up, and unfold themselves in
spite of so disadvantagious a Load of mistaken Learning which oppresses them.

The Master that speaks and teaches us within, challenges our Submission to him
rather than to the Authority of the greatest Philosophers: He takes pleasure in
instructing us, provided we apply our Minds to what he says. It Is by Meditation
and a very exact Attention we Inquire of him; and it is by a certain internal
Conviction and the secret Lashes and Reproaches felt upon our Non-submission
that he answers us.

We ought in such wise to read the Works of Men, as not to expect to receive
Instruction from Men: We must consult Him who Enlightens the World, that with
the Rest of the World he may Enlighten us. And if he fails to Enlighten us,
after we have consulted him, it is doubtless, because we have ill consulted him.

Whether then we read Aristotle or whether we read Descartes, we must not
instantly believe either Aristotle or Descartes: But we should only Meditate
as they have done, or as they ought to have done, with all the Earnestness and
Attention we are capable of, and thereupon Obey the Voice of our common Master,
and honestly yield up our Consent to that Internal Conviction, and those
Motions we find in us upon our Meditation.

This being done, it may be allowed a Man to pass a Judgment for or against an
Author. But he must first have digested the Principles of Descartes and
Aristotle's Philosophy before he can reject the one, and approve the other;
before he can maintain concerning the Latter, that no one Phenomenon of Nature
can ever be explained by the Principles peculiar to him, as they have been of
no use for this two thousand Years, though his Philosophy has been the Study
of the most Ingenious Men in most parts of the World: And on the contrary,
before he can boldly pronounce of the Other, that he has penetrated those
recesses of Nature that lay deepest concealed from the Eyes of Men, and has
opened to them a most certain and infall^ble way of Discovering all the Truths
it is possible for a limited understanding to Comprehend.

But not to dwell upon the Notion we may conceive of these two Philosophers,
and of all others; let us ever look upon them as Men: And let not those of
Aristotle's Party take it ill, if after they have traveled so many Ages in the
Dark without finding themselves one step farther advanced than at their setting
out; there are some at last that have a Mind to see clearly what they do: And
if after the former have suffered themselves to be led like the blind, there
are those who remember they have Eyes with which they will attempt to conduct
themselves.

Let us then be fully persuaded that this Rule, viz. That an entire Consent
should never be given, but to things evidently perceived, is the most necessary
of all others in the Search after Truth; and let not our Mind embrace any thing
as True, which is not accompanied with all the Evidence it demands. It Is
requisite we should be persuaded of this to disburthen us of our Prejudices:
And it is absolutely necessary we should entirely quit our Prejudices, to enter
into the Knowledge of Truth, for as much as there is an absolute Necessity that
our Mind be purified before it be enlightened. Sapientia prima Stultitia
caruisse.

II. Observations on what has been said concerning the necessity of Evidence.
But Before I conclude this Chapter, it is necessary to observe three Things. The
First is, That I speak not here of things of Faith, which have no Evidence
attending them, as have Natural Sciences: The Reason of which seems to be this,
That we can have no Perception of Things but from the Idea's we have of them.
Now the Idea's we have, are only given us by God, according to our Exigencies
and the need we have of them to conduct us in the Natural Order of Things,
according to which he has Created us. So that the Mysteries of Faith being of a
Supernatural Order, we need not wonder if we want that Evidence, since we want
the Idea's of them; because our Souls were Created by virtue of a General
Decree, through which we have all the Notions that are necessary for us, See
the Illustrations.
but the Mysteries of Faith have received their Establishment only from an
Order of Grace; which, in our ordinary way of Conception, is a Decree
posteriour to this Order of Nature.

Mysteries then of Faith must be distinguished from things of Nature: We ought
equally to submit to Faith and to Evidence; but in the concernments of Faith,
we must not look for Evidence; as in those of Nature, we ought not to take up
with Faith: That is, with the Authority of Philosophers. In a word, to be a
Believer, it is required to Assent blindly, but to be a Philosopher, it is
necessary to See plainly.

It Is not however to be denied but there are some Truths besides those of
Faith, for which it would be unreasonable to demand indisputable
Demonstrations, as are those which relate to Matter of Fact in History, and
other things which have their dependence on the Will of Men. For there are two
kinds of Truth; the one Necessary, the other Contingent. I call Necessary
Truths those which are immutable by their Nature, and those which have been
fixed and determined by the Will of God, which is not subject to Change. All
other sorts of Truth are Contingent* Mathematics, Physics, Metaphysics, as
also a great part of Morality contain Necessary Truths: History, Grammar,
Private Right, or Customs, and such other things as depend on the changeable
Will of Man, contain only Contingent Truths.

We demand therefore an exact Observation of the Rule we have been
establishing, in the Search of Necessary Truths, the Knowledge of which may be
called Science; and we must be content with the greatest Probability in
History, which includes the Knowledge of things Contingent. For under the
general Name of History may be concluded the Knowledge of Languages, Customs,
as also of the different Opinions of Philosophers; when Men have only learnt
them by Memory, without having either Evidence or Certainty concerning them.

The Second thing to be Observed, is that in Morality, Politics and Medicine,
and in all Practical Sciences, we are obliged to be content with Probability;
Not Universally, but upon occasion; not because it satisfies the Mind, but
because the Instance is pressing: And if a Man should always delay Acting, till
he had perfect Assurance of Success, the Opportunity would be often lost. But
though it falls out that a Man must inevitably act, yet he should in acting
doubt of the Success of what he does: And he should endeavor to make such
Advances in Sciences, as to be able on Emergencies to act with greater
Certainty; For this should be the constant end of all Men's Study and
Employment, who make any use of Thought.

The Third and last thing is this, That we should not absolutely despise
Probabilities, since it often happens that many of them in Conjunction, have as
convincing a force, as most evident Demonstrations. Of which Nature there are
infinite Examples to be found in Physics and Morality: So that it is often
expedient to amass together a sufficient number of them in subjects not
otherwise Demonstrable, in order to come to the Knowledge of Truth, impossible
to be found out any other way.

And now I must needs confess that the Law I impose is very Rigorous and
Severe; That there are abundance of Those who had rather renounce Reasoning at
all, than Reason on such Conditions; That it is impossible to run so fast, with
such retarding Circumspections. However, it must be granted me, that a Man
shall walk with greater Security in observing it, and that hitherto those who
have marched so hastily, have been obliged to return upon the same Ground:
Besides, there are a great number of Men who will agree with me in this, That
since Monsieur Descartes has discovered more Truths in Thirty Years, than all
the Philosophers that preceded him, merely for his Submission to that Law; if
many others would study Philosophy as he has done, we should in time be
acquainted with the greatest part of those things which are necessary to make
Life as happy as is possible, upon an Earth which God has Cursed.

CHAP. IV.
I. Of the Occasional Causes of Error, whereof there are Five Principal. II.
The general Design of the whole Work. III. The particular Design of the First
Book.

WE have seen from what has been said, that a Man falls not into Error, but for
want of making a due use of his Liberty; that it is for want of curbing that
eagerness of the Will, and moderating its Passion for the bare appearances of
Truth, that he is deceived: And that Error consists only in the Consent of the
Will, which has a greater Latitude than the Perception of the Understanding,
since we should never err if we only simply judged according as we perceived.

But though, to speak properly, there is no other cause of Error, I. Of the
Occasional Causes of our Errors, and that there are five principal.
than the ill use of our Liberty, it may notwithstanding be said, we have
several Faculties that are the Causes of our Errors; not Real Causes, but such
as may be termed Occasional: All the ways of our Perceiving are so many
occasions of Deceiving us. For since our false Judgments include two things,
namely the Consent of the Will, and the Perception of the Understanding, it is
manifest that all the ways of our Perception, may afford us some occasion or
other of falling into Error, forasmuch as they may incline us to rash and
precipitate Consents.

But because it is necessary first to make the Soul sensible of her Weaknesses
and Wanderings, in order to possess Her with just Desires of a Deliverance from
them, and that she may with greater ease shake off her Prejudices; We will
endeavor to make an exact Division of her Manners of Perception; which may
serve as so many Heads, to one or other of which, may be referred as we
proceed, the different Errors whereunto we are obnoxious.

The Soul has three several ways of Perception: By Pure Intellect, by
Imagination, and by the Senses.

By Pure Intellect, she perceives things Spiritual, Universals, Common Notions,
The Idea of Perfection, that of a Being infinitely perfect, and in general all
her own thoughts, when she knows them by a Reflection made upon her self: It Is
likewise by Pure Intellect she perceives Material things, Extension with its
Properties. For it is the pure Understanding only which is capable of Perceiving
a Circle, and a perfect Square, a Figure of a thousand sides, and such like
things. Such sort of Perceptions bear the name of Pure Intellections or Pure
Perceptions, since there is no necessity of the Mind's forming Corporeal Images
in the Brain to represent them by.

By Imagination, the Soul only perceives things Material, when being Absent she
makes them present to her, by forming the Images of them in the Brain. This is
the way whereby a Man Imagines all sorts of Figures, a Circle, a Triangle, a
Face, an Horse, Towns and Fields, whether he has already seen them or not. This
sort of Perceptions, we may call Imaginations, because the Soul represents to
her self these things, by framing Images of them in the Brain. And for as much
as Spiritual things cannot be represented by any Image, it follows, the Soul
cannot imagine them; which is a thing worthy to be remembered.

Lastly, By Sense, the Soul perceives only Sensible, gross, and ruder Objects,
when being present they cause an Impression on the external Organs of her Body.
Thus it is the Soul sees things plain and rugged present to her Eyes; thus she
knows the Hardness of the Iron, the point of a Sword, and the like; and this
kind of Perceptions one may call Sentiments or Sensations.

The Soul then has no more than these three ways of Perceiving; which will
easily be granted, if we consider that the things we perceive are either
Spiritual or Material. If they be Spiritual, they are perceptable only by the
Pure Understanding: If they be Material, they are either Present or Absent. If
they be Absent, the ordinary way of the Soul's representing them is by the
Imagination: But if they be Present, the Soul can perceive them by the
Impressions they make upon her Senses. And thus Our Souls are not capable of
more than a threefold Perception, by Pure Intellect, by Imagination, and by
Sense.

These three Faculties therefore may be looked upon as so many certain Heads, to
which we may reduce the Errors of Men, and the Causes of their Errors, and so
avoid the confusion into which the multitude of them would infallibly cast us,
should we talk of them without Order or Method.

But moreover, our Inclinations and our Passions act very strongly upon us:
They dazzle our Mind with their false Lights, and overcast and fill it with
Clouds and Darkness. Thus Our Inclinations and our Passions engage us in an
infinite number of Errors, when we suffer our selves to be guided by that false
Light, and abusive Glare which they produce within us. We must then, together
with the three Faculties of the Mind, consider them as the Sources of our
Deviations and Delinquencies, and add to the Errors of Sense, Imagination, and
Pure Intellect, those which may be charged upon the Passions and Natural
Inclinations. And so all the Errors of Men and the Causes of them, may be
reduced to five Heads, and we shall treat of them according to that Order.

II. The General Design of the whole Work.
First, We shall speak of the Errors of the Senses; Secondly, Of the Errors of
Imagination; Thirdly, Of the Errors of the Pure Intellect; Fourthly, Of the
Errors of our Inclinations; and Fifthly, Of the Errors of the Passions. And
thus, having made an Essay to rid the Soul of the Errors which she is subject
to, we shall, Lastly, lay down a General Method to Conduct her in the Search of
Truth.

III. The particular Design of the first Book.
We will begin with an Explication of the Errors of our Senses, or rather, of
the Errors into which we fall for want of making the due use, we should do of
our Senses: And here we shall not so much descend to our Particular Errors,
which are almost infinite, as fix upon the general Causes of these Errors, and
such things as seem most necessary to inform us of the Nature of the Humane
Mind.

CHAP. V.
Of the SENSES. I. Two ways of explaining how they were corrupted by Sin. II.
That it is our Liberty, and not our Senses, which is the true Cause of our
Errors. III. A Rule for avoiding Error in the use of our Senses.

UPON an attentive Consideration of the Senses and Passions of Man, we find
them so well proportioned to the End for which they were given us, that we can
by no means agree with those who say, they are to all intents and purposes
debauched and spoiled by Original Sin. But that it may appear it is not without
Reason we are of a different Opinion, it is necessary to Explain, in what
manner we may conceive the Order and Regularity which was to be seen in the
Faculties and Passions of our First Parent in his State of Righteousness, and
the Changes, and Disorders that were consequent to his Fall. Now there are Two
ways of Conceiving these things; of which this is the First.

I. Two ways of explaining how our Senses were corrupted by Sin.
That it seems to be a common Notion, That it is necessary to the right ordering
of Affairs, that the Soul should perceive lesser or greater Pleasures,
according to the proportion of the Littleness or Greatness of the Goods which
she enjoys. Pleasure is an Instinct of Nature, or to speak clearer, it is an
Impression of God himself, who inclines us toward some Good; which Impression
should be so much stronger, by how much that Good is greater. According to
which Principle, it seems not to be contested that our first Parent before his
Sin, coming fresh out of the Hands of his Maker, found greater Pleasures in the
most solid Goods, than in those that were not so. Wherefore since he was
created in order to Love God who created him, and that God was his true Good;
it may be said, God gave him a Taste and Relish of himself; That he inclined
him to the Love of the Divine Perfection, by a Sense of Pleasure, and that he
possessed him with those Internal Satisfactions in his Duty that
counter-balanc'd the greatest Pleasures of the Senses, whereof since the State
of Sin, Man is altogether insensible, without a Supernatural Assistance and
particular gift of Grace.

Notwithstanding, since he had a Body which God designed he should take care
of, and look upon as a Part of himself, he gave him to Perceive by the
Mediation of his Senses, Pleasures like those we our selves are sensible of, in
the use of things which are proper for, and adapted to the Preservation of our
Life and Being.

We presume not here to determine whether the First Man before his Fall, had a
Power to hinder agreeable or disagreeable Sensations, in the instant that the
principal part of his Brain was agitated by the Actual Impression of Sensible
Objects: Possibly he had that Sovereignty over himself, because of his
Subjection to the Will of God, though the contrary Opinion seems more probable.
For though Adam might stop the Commotions of the Blood and Spirits, and the
Vibrations of the Fibers of his Brain, which Objects excited in it, because
being in a Regular State, his Body must needs submit to his Mind; yet it is not
probable, he was able to prevent the Sensations of Objects at the time he had
not stopped the Motions they produced in that part of his Body, to which his Soul
was immediately united. For the Union of the Soul and Body consisting
principally in the mutual Relation there is betwixt Sensations, and the Motions
of the Organs, this Union would rather seem Arbitrary than Natural, if Adam had
been capable of hindering Sensation, when the Principal Part of his Body
received an Impression from those round about it. However I declare for neither
of the two Opinions.

The First Man therefore felt Pleasure in that which was Perfective of his
Body, as he felt it in that which was Perfective of his Soul; And because he
was constituted in a Perfect State, he found that of the Soul far greater than
that of the Body. Thus it was infinitely easier for him to preserve his
Righteousness, than for Us without the Grace of JESUS CHRIST; since without
this we have no Delight or Satisfaction in our Duty. Albeit, he misfortunately
suffered himself to be seduced: He lost that Uprightness by his Disobedience;
and the Principal Change he underwent, and which was the cause of all the
Confusion of his Senses and his Passions was, that GOD, S. Gregor. Homil. 39.
upon the Gospels.
by way of punitive Justice, withdrew himself from him, and would no longer be
his Good; or rather Ceased to make him sensible of that Pleasure, which pointed
out GOD, as his Sovereign Good. So that Sensible Pleasures, which only carried
him to the Enjoyment of the Goods of the Body, being left alone and no longer
counterpois'd by those, which drew him before to his True and Proper Good; the
close Union that he had with GOD was wonderfully loosened, and that which he
had with his Body, as much strengthened or increased. Sensible Pleasure, having
got the Dominion, debauched his Fr. Son ^^ur.
Moral Powers, by fastening them upon all Sensible Objects; and this Corruption
of his Morals darkened his Fr. Son Esprit.
Intellectual Parts,- by turning him from that Light which Enlightened him, and
inducing him to form his Judgments on things, only from the Relation or Analogy
they could have to his Body.

But as to the Nature of the thing it self, it cannot be said, That the Change
which happened on Part of the Senses was very considerable. For as when two
Weights are placed in Equilibrium in a Balance, if you take away one of them,
the opposite Scale will be weighed down by the other, without any alteration on
part of the former weight, since that still remains the same: So after Sin, the
Pleasures of Sense bowed and weighed down the Soul toward Sensible Objects,
for want of those Internal Delectations which, before Sin, counterpois'd that
Inclination unto Sensible Good; but without any so Substantial a Change in
point of the Senses, as is generally Imagined.

I come now to the Second Way of accounting for the Disorders introduced by
Sin, which is certainly more Reasonable than that we have been explaining. It
is very different from it, because it is founded on a different Principle; yet
both these ways are very consistent and agreeable, as to what respects the
Senses.

Being we are made up of a Body and a Mind, there are two sorts of Goods to
employ our Researches about; the Goods of the Body, and the Goods of the Mind.
We have likewise two means of Discovering whether a thing be good or ill for
us, either by using the Mind alone, or by the use of the Mind in Conjunction
with the Body. We can discover our Good by a clear and evident Knowledge; we
can discover it likewise by a dark and confused Sensation. Reason teaches me
that Righteousness is Amiable; My Taste informs me that such a Fruit is Good.
The Beauty of Righteousness is not Sensible, nor the Goodness of a Fruit
Intelligible. The Goods of the Body deserve not the application of the Mind,
which GOD has created only for himself: It must needs be then, That the Mind
discovers such kind of Goods without Examination, and by the short and
incontroverted Proof of Sensation. Stones are not fit for Nourishment, the
Trial is a convincing Argument, and the Taste alone has made all Mankind agree
to it.

Pleasure then and Pain are the Natural and undoubted Characters of Good and
Evil; I confess it: But it is only so in respect of those things, which, having
no Power of being Good and Evil in themselves, cannot be known for such by a
Knowledge clear and evident; it is so in regard of those things only, which,
being inferior to the Mind, can neither Punish nor Reward it. In fine, it is
only so in point of such things and Objects as are undeserving of the Soul's
Applicacation, and concern about them; such things as GOD, not willing we
should be taken up with, inclines us to only by Instinct, that is, by Agreeable
or Disagreeable Sensations.

But as for GOD, who is the True and only Good of the Mind, who is alone above
it, who alone can Reward it in a thousand different ways; who is only worthy of
its Application, and who is under no Fear of not being found Amiable by those
that know him; he is not content to be beloved by a blind and Instinctive Love,
he will be loved by a Rational Love, and a Love of Choice.

If the Mind saw only in Bodies what was really in them, without being sensible
of what was not therein, it could not possibly Love them, nor make use of them
without great Pain and Reluctance; so that it is as it were necessary they
should appear Agreeable, by producing Sensations, of which themselves are
Destitute. But it is far from being so with GOD. It Is sufficient to see him such
as he is, to be inclined to love him as we ought: Nor is there any Necessity he
should employ that Instinct of Pleasure as a kind of Bait and Artifice to
allure our Love, without deserving it. The Pleasure which the Blessed enjoy in
the Possession of GOD, is not so much an Instinct which inclines them to the
Love of Him, as the Recompense of their Love. For it is not for the sake of
that Pleasure that they Love GOD, but because they manifestly know Him to be
their True, their Only Good.

See the Illustrations.
This being the Case, it ought to be concluded, That Adam was not invited to the
Love of GOD and the rest of his Duty by a Preventing Pleasure; forasmuch as the
Knowledge which he had of GOD, as of his Good, and the Joy he was continually
possessed with, necessarily consequent to the View of his Felicity, in his
Uniting himself with GOD, were sufficient Motives to recommend his Duty to him,
and to make his Actions more Meritorious, than if he had been, as it were,
determined by a Preventing Pleasure: In this manner he was in perfect Liberty.
And it is possibly in this Capacity the Scripture means to represent Him to us
in these words, -- He himself made Man from the beginning, and left him in the
hand of his Counsel, to keep the Commandments, Deus ab initio constituit
hominem, and reliquit illum in manu Consilii sui, adjecit mandata and praecepta
sua, etc. Ec. 15.14.
etc. Eccles. 15.14. That is, kept him closely united to Himself, only through
the clear View he gave him of his Happiness and his Duty, without alluring him
to it by any Taste of a Preventing Pleasure. But Experience has convinced us,
to the Eternal Reproach of Free Will, and the Glory of GOD alone, of the
Frailty Adam was obnoxious to, even in a State of such Perfect Order and
Sublime Happiness, as was that, he was possessed of, before his Disobedience.

But it cannot be said Adam was inclined to the Searching out, and Using of
Sensible things, through a nice and exact Knowledge of the Relation and
Correspondence they might bear to his Body. For, indeed, if it had been
necessary for him to have examined the Configurations of the parts of any
Fruit, those likewise of all the parts of his Body, and the Agreement and
Disagreement resulting to each other from their respective Constitution, before
he could judge whether as to the present Temperature of his Blood, and a
thousand other Dispositions of his Body, that Fruit was good for his
Nourishment; it is plain that the whole Capacity of his Mind had been entirely
filled up, with things altogether unworthy of its Application; and that too to
very little Purpose, since we see he was not able to preserve himself long,
though we suppose him so accomplished.

Upon Consideration then that the Mind of Adam was not Infinite, it should not
be taken ill, that we say he was not acquainted with all the Properties of
Bodies that encompassed him; since it is certain those Properties are Infinite.
And if it be granted, which no Man of any Attention can deny, that his Mind was
not made to examine the Motions and Configurations of Matter, but to be
continually Intent on GOD; we need incur no Blame, in Maintaining, it had been
a Disorder and Irregularity, at a time when all things should have been
perfectly adjusted, if he had been obliged to call off his Mind from the View
of the Perfections of his Sovereign Good, to contemplate the Nature of a Fruit,
and Examine whether it was fit to Nourish him.

Adam then was furnished with Senses like to ours, by which he was admonished,
without being taken off from the Contemplation of GOD, of what was necessary
for him to do for the Preservation of his Body: He was sensible of Pleasures as
we are, and also of preventing and indeliberate Pains and Dislikes. But those
Pleasures, and those Pains were incapable of inslaving him, and rendering him
Unhappy as they do us; forasmuch as being absolute Master of all the Motions
excited in his Body, he could quiet them in the same instant (if he desired it)
that he was aware of them: And doubtless he always desired it in respect of
Pain. Happy had we been, if he had done the same thing in respect of Pleasure
too, and had he not Voluntarily divorced himself from the Union and Presence of
his GOD, by suffering the Capacity of his Mind to be filled with the Beauty,
and the expected Sweets of a forbidden Fruit, or possibly with a presumptuous
Joy kindled in his Soul, upon Reflection on his own Natural Perfections.

But after he had Sinned, those Pleasures which before only respectfully
cautioned him; and those Pains, which, not disturbing his Felicity, only gave
him to understand he was capable of losing it, and becoming Miserable,
preserved no longer that Deference and Submission. His Senses and his Passions
obeyed not his Orders, rebelled against him, and enslaved him as they do us to
all kinds of Sensible Objects.

Thus the Senses and the Passions in no wise owed their Birth to Sin, but only
their Power of Tyrannizing over Sinners: And that Power was not so much a
Disorder on part of the Senses, as it was of the Mind or the Will of Man, which
having loosened the strict Union which they had with GOD, received no longer
that Light and that Strength, by means whereof they preserved their Liberty and
their Happiness.

Upon concluding these two Ways of Explaining the Disorders Sin has been the
Cause of, we ought to infer that there are two things necessary to Re-instate
us in the Order of Nature.

A Remedy for the Disorder which Original Sin has caused in the World, and the
Foundation of Christian Morality.
The first is this, That we should take off, from that weight which sinks us
down, and bends us toward sensible Goods, by a continual defalcation of our
Pleasures, and by mortifying the sensibility of our Senses by Repentance and
Circumcision of heart.

The second is this, That we ought to implore of GOD the poize of his Grace,
and that Preventing Delight, which See the Illustrations.
JESUS CHRIST has particularly merited for us, without which, let us lighten
the former Scale as much as we can, it will constantly be lowermost; and
(though never so little heavier) will infallibly sink us into Sin and Disorder.

These two things are absolutely necessary to restore us to, and continue us in
our Duty. Reason, as we see, agrees entirely with the Gospel, by both which we
are taught, that the Privation, Denegation, and Diminution of the Weight of
Sin, are necessary Preparatives for the Weight of Grace to re-establish us and
unite us unto GOD.

But though in this State of Ours, we are under a Perpetual Obligation of
warring with our Senses, yet we should not conclude from thence, they are
absolutely corrupted, or disordered. For if it be considered, that they were
given us for the Preservation of our Body, we shall find them acquit themselves
of their Duty so excellently well, and conduct us in that just and faithful
manner to their End, that they seem to be injuriously charged with Corruptness
and Irregularity: They so readily advertise the Soul by Pleasure and Pain, by
agreeable and disagreeable Tastes and other Sensations, of what she ought to do,
or not to do, for the preservation of Life, that it cannot but be unreasonably
said, that this Order and this Exactness are the consequents of Sin.

Our Senses therefore are not so Corrupted as is imagined, II. That our
Liberty, not our Senses is the true cause of our Errors.
but it is that which is more Inward to the Soul, it is our Liberty which is
corrupted. They are not our Senses that deceive us, but the Will, by its rash
and precipitate Judgments, leads us into Error. When, for instance, we see
Light, it is most certain that we see Light; when a Man feels Heat, he is not
mistaken in believing that he feels it, whether before or after the first Sin.
But thus we deceive our selves in judging that the Heat which is felt, is out
of the Soul which feels it, as we shall explain hereafter.

The Senses then would in no wise cast us into Error, did we not employ our
Liberty amiss, and judge of things upon their Report, without sufficient
Caution and Advertency. But because it is very difficult to help this, and we
are, as it were, forced to it, on the account of the strict Union of our Soul
and Body, see in what manner we ought to behave our selves in using them, that
we may avoid falling into Error.

We ought exactly to observe this Rule; III. A Rule for avoiding Error in the
use of our Senses.
Never to judge by the Senses what things are in themselves, but only of the
Relation they have to one another: Because, indeed, the Senses were not given
us for the knowing the Truth of things as they are in their own Nature, but
only for the Preservation of our Body.

But that we may be altogether delivered from that Facility and Inclination we
have to follow the Guidance of the Senses in the Search after Truth, we shall
in the succeeding Chapters, give a Summary of the most Principal and General
Errors into which they throw us, whereby the Truth of what we have been
advancing will be manifest and acknowledged.

CHAP. VI.
I. Of the Errors of Sight in respect of Extension absolutely considered. II. A
Continuation of these Errors about invisible Objects. III. Of the Errors of
Sight touching Extension relatively considered.

THE Sight is the First, the most Noble and Comprehensive of all the Senses,
insomuch that had it been given us for the Discovery of Truth, it alone had had
more to do than all the Other; wherefore if we can overthrow the Authority the
Eyes obtain over our Reason, it will be sufficient to undeceive us; and to
possess us with a general distrust of all the other Senses.

Our business therefore is to make it appear, That we ought in no wise to rely
on the Testimony of our Sight, in our Judgment of the Truth of things, as they
are in their own Nature, but only in discovering the Relation they have to the
welfare and preservation of our Body. That our Eyes generally deceive us in all
the Representations they make of things, in the Magnitude, in the Figures, and
Motions of Bodies, in Light and Colors, which are the only things we see: That
none of these things are really what they seem to be, that all Mankind is
mistaken in them, and that hereby we fall into other Errors numberless and
infinite.

We begin with Extension. Lo! I. Of the Errors of sight in respect of Extension
absolutely considered.
then the Reasons that induce us to believe that our Eyes never represent it to
us such as it is in it self. With Glasses we discover as often as we please,
Animals much less than a grain of Sand, which is almost invisible: See the
Journal of the Learned. Nov. 12. 1668.
Nay, there have been seen a thousand times less than they. These animated
Atoms walk and move no less than other Animals: Therefore they must have Legs
and Feet, Bones in their Legs to support them, Muscles to move them, Tendons
and infinite Fibers in every Muscle; lastly, Blood or animal Spirits extremely
subtle and refined, either to fill or make these Muscles move successively.
Without this it is impossible to conceive they live, are nourished, or
translate their little Bodies into different places, according to the different
Impressions of Objects; or rather it is impossible for those Men themselves have
spent all their Life in Anatomy, and in disclosing Nature, to imagine the
number, the diversity, the delicacy, of all the parts these little Bodies are
necessarily compounded of, whereby they live and perform all those things we
see them do.

The Imagination is lost and confounded at so incredible a littleness; it
cannot catch the vanishing parts, nor take hold of them, as being too little to
be grasped by it: And though Reason justifies our Assertion, the Senses and
Imagination withstand the Conviction, and bring us back to Doubt and
Uncertainty.

Our Sight is extremely short and limited; but it ought not to prescribe limits
to its Object: The Idea it gives us of Extension has very narrow bounds, but it
does not from thence follow the bounds of Extension are so. It is doubtless
infinite in a certain Sense; and that diminutive part of Matter which is hidden
from our Eyes is capable of containing a World, in which may be hid as many
things, though less proportionably, as appear in this great World in which we
live.

These little Creatures, which we have been speaking of, may possibly have
other little Animals to prey upon them, and which are imperceptible to them by
reason of their unspeakable smallness, as the others are imperceptible to us.
What an Hand-worm is in comparison to us, That those little Animals are in
respect of an Hand-worm; and perhaps there may be in Nature less, and less
still to infinity, proceeding in that prodigious proportion of a Man to an
Hand-worm.

We have Evident and Mathematical Demonstrations of the Divisibility of Matter
in infinitum, and that is enough to persuade us there may be Animals, still less
and less than others in infinitum; though our Imagination is frighted and
starts at such a conception. GOD made Matter only to frame his wonderful Works
out of it; wherefore since we are certain that there are no parts of it, the
Minuteness whereof is capable of giving Limits to his power, in the formation
of these little Animals, why should we unreasonably confine and lessen the Idea
of an Infinite Artist by measuring the Greatness and Depth of his Power and
Wisdom, by our finite and shallow Imagination?

We have been in part undeceived by Experiment, which has discovered to us
such Animals as are a thousand times less than an Hand-worm, why should we
suppose that they are the Last and the Least of all? For my part, I see no
reason to imagine: It Is much more reasonable to be believed, there are far less
than those already discovered: For, in fine, little Animals are never wanting
for the Microscopes, but we want Microscopes for them.

If one examines in the midst of Winter the Cicatricle of a Tulip-roop, with a
plain Magnifying or a Unequal Glass, Fr. Le germe.
or even with the bare Eye, one may easily discover it in the Leaves which are
become green: Those which are to make the Flower or the Tulip, the little
triangular part which contains the Seed, and the six little Columns that
incompass it at the bottom of the Tulip. Thus it cannot be doubted but the
Cicatricle of a Tulip-root contains in it a Tulip all entire.

It Is reasonable to believe the same thing of the Cicatricle of a grain of
Mustard, of that of the kernel of an Apple, and generally of all sorts of Trees
and Plants, though it cannot be discerned with the Eye, nor yet with a
Microscope; and we may with some sort of certainty affirm, That all Trees lie
in Miniature in the Cicatricle of their Seed.

Nor does it appear unreasonable to think that there are infinite Trees
concealed in a single Cicatricle; since it not only contains the future Tree
whereof it is the Seed, but also abundance of other Seeds, which may all
include in them new Trees still, and new Seeds of Trees: Which new Seeds
possibly may be big with other Trees, and other Seeds of Trees as fruitful as
the former, in an incomprehensible littleness, and thus in Infinitum. So that,
according to this Notion (which will not be thought impertinent or whimsical,
except by those who measure the Wonders of the Infinite Power of GOD, by the
Idea's of their Senses and Imagination) it may be said, that in the single
kernel of an Apple, may be involved Apple Trees, Apples and Seeds of
Apple Trees, for infinite or almost infinite Ages, in that proportion of a
perfect Apple Tree to an Apple Tree in its Seeds. And, That Nature does only
open and unfold these little Trees, by giving a sensible growth to that which
is out of its Seed; and insensible, but most real increases, to those which we
conceive to be in their Seeds, in proportion to their Bigness. For it cannot be
doubted but there are Bodies little enough to insinuate themselves between the
Fibers of those Trees, which we conceive in their Seeds, and to be serviceable
to their Nourishment.

What has been said of Plants and their Cicatricles, we have liberty to
conceive of Animals, and of the Cicatricles of which they are produced. We see
in the Cicatricle of a Tulip-root an entire Tulip. The Cicatricle or the Sperm
of the Egg is a little white spot upon the Yolk. See Malpigh. de Formatione
Pulli in Ova.
We see in the Cicatricle of a new-laid Egg, and which had never been brooded,
a Chicken, which is possibly completely formed. We see See Swammerdam 's
Miraculum naturae.
Frogs in the Eggs of Frogs, and we shall see other Animals still in their
Cicatricles when we have Art and Experience enough to discover them. But it is
not for the Mind to stand still, when the Eyes can go no farther: For the view
of the Soul is of a greater compass than the sight of the Body. Besides this
therefore, we ought to think, That all the Bodies of Men and of Beasts, which
should be born or produced till the End of the World, were possibly created
from the Beginning of it: I would say, That the Females of the Original
Creatures were, for ought we know, created together, with all those of the same
Species which have been, or shall be, begotten or procreated whilst the World
stands.

We might push this Thought much farther yet, and it may be with a great deal
of Reason and Truth: But we have just cause to fear, lest we should be too
desirous of penetrating too far into the Works of GOD: We see nothing but
Infinities round about us: And not only our Senses and our Imagination are too
limited to comprehend them; but the Mind it self, however pure and disengaged
from Matter, is too gross as well as too feeble to pierce into the least of the
Works of the Almighty. It Is lost, it is dissipated, it is dazzled and amazed at
the view of that, which, according to the Language of the Senses, is called an
Atom. Notwithstanding, the Pure Intellect has this advantage above the
Imagination of the Senses, that it acknowledges its own Weakness, and the
Almightiness of GOD: Whereas our Imagination and our Senses bring down the
works of GOD, and audaciously set themselves above them, and so throw us
headlong and blindfold into Error. For our Eyes furnish us not with the Idea's
of any of those things we discover by Microscopes and our Reason. We perceive
not by our Sight any less Body than an Hand-worm, or a Mite. The half of a
Hand-worm is nothing if we rely on the Report of our Eyes. A Mite is a
Mathematical point in their account, which you cannot divide, but you must
annihilate. Our Sight then does not represent Extension to us, as it is in it
self, but as it is in Relation to our Body: And because the half of a Mite has
no considerable relation to our Body, and has no influence either toward the
Preservation or Destruction of it; therefore our Eyes entirely conceal it from
Us.

But if we had Eyes made after the manner of Microscopes, or rather, if we were
as little as Hand-worms and Mites, we should judge of the Magnitude of Bodies
in a far different manner. For, without doubt, these little Animals have their
Eyes so disposed as to see the Bodies that surround them and their own Bodies,
far greater than we see them* for otherwise they could not receive such
impressions as were necessary to the Preservation of Life, and so the Eyes they
have would be altogether useless.

But that we may thoroughly explain these things, we must consider, that our
Eyes are in effect only Natural Spectacles; that their humors have the same
way of Operating as the Glasses in the Spectacles, and that according to the
figure of the Crystalline, and its distance from the Retina, we see Objects
very differently; insomuch that we cannot be assured there are two Men in the
World that see Bodies of the self-same bigness, since we cannot be assured
there are two Men's Eyes altogether made alike.

It Is a Proposition that ought to be embraced by all those who concern
themselves with Optics, That Objects which appear equally distant are seen so
much bigger, as the figure which is delineated in the fund of the Eye is
bigger. Now it is certain that in the Eyes of those Persons whose Crystalline
is more unequal, the Images are painted lesser, in proportion to the convexity.
Those then who are short-sighted having their Crystalline more unequal see the
Objects lesser than those whose Crystalline is of the common standard, or than
old People, who want Spectacles to read with, but see perfectly well at a
distance; since those whose Sight is short must necessarily have the
Crystalline more unequal, on supposition their Eyes, as to the other parts, are
equal.

'Twere the easiest thing in Nature to demonstrate all these things
Geometrically; and were they not of the number of those which are very well
known, I would insist longer upon them to make them evident. But because
several have already handled this Subject, I desire such as are willing to be
instructed therein, to turn to them and consult them.

Since it is not manifest that there are two Men in the World who see Objects
in the same bulk and magnitude, and generally the same Man sees them bigger
with his left Eye than his right, according to the Observations which have been
made, and are related in the Journal of the Learned from Rome, in January 1669,
it is plain we ought not to build upon the Testimony of our Eyes, so as to pass
our judgment from it. It is much better to attend to Reason, which proves to
us, That we are unable to determine what is the absolute Magnitude of Bodies
which encompass us, or what Idea we ought to have of the Extension of a
Foot-square, or of that of our own Body; so as that Idea may represent it to us
as it is. For we learn from Reason, that the least of all Bodies would be no
longer little, if it were alone, since it is compounded of an infinite number
of parts out of each of which GOD could frame an Earth, which yet would be but
a single Point in comparison of the rest in conjunction. Thus the Mind of Man
is incapable of forming an Idea great enough to comprehend and embrace the
least Extension in the World, since the Mind has bounds, but that Idea should
be infinite.

It is true, The Mind may come very near the Knowledge of the Relations these
infinites have to one another, which constitute the World; it may know, for
instance, one of them to be double to another, and that a Fathom is the measure
of six Foot. Yet for all this it cannot form an Idea to it self that can
represent these things as they are in their own Nature.

Well, but let it be supposed that the Mind is capable of Idea's, which equal
or which measure the Extension of Bodies, which we see; for it would be a
difficult undertaking to convince Men of the contrary: Let us see what may be
concluded from the Supposition. Doubtless this will be the Conclusion, That GOD
does not deceive us: That he has not given us Eyes like Glasses, to magnify or
diminish the Object, and therefore we ought to believe that our Eyes represent
things as really they are.

It Is true, GOD never deceives us, but we often deceive our selves, by judging
of things with an unwarrantable rashness. For we often judge that the Objects
whereof we have Idea's exist, and likewise that they altogether resemble their
Idea's; when yet it often falls out that the Objects are neither like their
Idea's, nor do they exist at all.

The Existence of a thing does no ways follow from our having an Idea of it,
much less does it follow that the thing is perfectly like the Idea which we
have thereof. It cannot be concluded from GOD's giving us such a sensible Idea
of Magnitude upon the presentation of a six Foot-rule to our Eyes, that this
Rule has the same Extension, as it is represented to us by that Idea? For
first, All Men have not the same sensible Idea of this same measure, since all
Men have not their Eyes disposed in the same manner. Again, The same Person has
not the same sensible Idea of a six Foot-rule, when he beholds it with his left
Eye, as when he views it with his right, as has been already said. Finally, It
often happens that the self-same Person, entertains quite different Idea's of
the same Objects at different times, according as they are supposed nearer or
farther off, as shall be explained in its proper place.

It is then nothing but prejudice grounded upon no good reason to think we see
Bodies according to their real Magnitude; for our Eyes being not given us for
any other purpose than the security of our Body, they discharge their Duty
admirable well, in giving us such Idea's of Objects as are proportioned to its
magnitude.

But the better to conceive what ought to be our judgments concerning the
Extension of Bodies, from the Report of our Eyes, let us imagine GOD to have
created in Epitomie, out of a portion of matter of the bigness of a small
Globe, an Heaven and Earth, and Men upon this Earth, with all other things, the
same proportion being observed, as in this Grand World. These little Men would
see each other, and the parts of their Bodies, as likewise the little Animals
which were capable of incommoding them. Otherwise their Eyes would be useless
to their preservation. It is manifest then from this Supposition, these little
Men would have Idea's of the magnitude of Bodies quite different from ours;
since they would look upon their little World, which would be but a Ball in our
account, as stretched out into infinite spaces, just as we do in respect of the
World in which we are.

Or if this is not so easy to be conceived, let us suppose GOD had created an
Earth infinitely vaster than this which we inhabit, so that this new Earth
should be to ours, what ours would be to that we have spoken of in the
foregoing Supposition. Let us moreover conceive GOD Almighty to have observed
in all the parts which went to the Composition of this New World, the very same
proportion he has done in those which make up Ours. It is plain, that the
Inhabitants of this latter World would be Taller, than the space betwixt our
Earth and the most distant Stars we can discover: And this being so, it is
manifest that if they had the same Idea's of Extension of Bodies as our selves,
they would be able to discern some of the parts of their own Bodies, and and
would see others of a prodigious unweildiness; so that it is ridiculous to think
they would see things in the same Bigness as they are seen by us.

It is apparent in these two Suppositions we have made, that the Men, whether
of the Great or Little World, would have Idea's of the Magnitude of Bodies very
different from ours, supposing their Eyes to furnish them with Idea's of the
Objects round about them, proportioned to the Magnitude of their own Bodies.
Now if these Men should confidently affirm upon the Testimony of their Eyes,
that Bodies were of the very same bigness whereof they saw them, it is not to
be doubted but they would be deceived; and I suppose no Man will make a
question of it: And yet it is certain that these Men would have as Good Reason
to justify their Opinion, as we have to defend our Own. Let us acknowledge
then, from their Example, That we are very uncertain of the Magnitude of
Bodies, which we see, and that all which can be known by us concerning them
from the Testimony of Sight, is only the mutual Relation there is between Them
and Us. In a word, that our Eyes were never given us whereby to judge of the
Truth of things, but only to give us notice of such as might either molest or
profit us in something or other.

But it is not thought sufficient for Men to credit their Eyes only, in order to
judge of Visible Objects: II. A Continuation of these Errors about Invisible
Objects
They think they are to be trusted farther, even to judge of those which are
Invisible. Because there are some things which they cannot see, they conclude
they do not exist, attributing to their Sight a Penetration in a manner
Infinite. This is an Impediment which prevents their discovering the real
Causes of abundance of Natural Effects: For that they ascribe them to Imaginary
Faculties and Qualities, is often merely for want of discerning the True, which
consist in the different Configurations of these Bodies.

They see not, for Instance, the little parts of Air or Flame, much less those
of Light, or of a matter still more fine and subtle: And upon this score they
are ready to believe, they are not in being, at least, conclude them void of
force and action. They betake themselves to Occult Qualities, or Imaginary
Faculties to explain all the Effects, whereof those Imperceptible parts are The
True and Natural Cause.

They had rather have recourse to the horror of a Vacuum to Explain the
Elevation of water in the Pump, than impute it to the Gravitation of the Air.
They choose to ascribe the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, to the Qualities of the
Moon, rather than to the pressure of the Atmosphere, that is, to the Air which
surrounds the Earth; and the Elevation of Vapors to the Attractive Faculties
of the Sun, than to the simple Motion of Impulse, caused by the parts of the
Subtle Matter, which it continually diffuses abroad.

They look upon those as Men of trifling and impertinent Thought, who have
recourse only to the Flesh and Blood, in accounting for all the Motions of
Animals: Likewise for the habits, and the Corporeal Memory of Men: And this
partly proceeds from the Conception they have of the littleness of the Brain,
and its incapacity thereupon to preserve the Traces of an almost infinite
number of things, lodged in it. They had rather admit, though they cannot
conceive how, a Soul in Beasts, which is neither Body nor Spirit; Qualities and
Intentional Species, for the Habits and Memory of Men; or such like things,
notwithstanding they have no particular Notion of them in their Mind.

I should be too tedious should I stand to reckon up all the Errors we fall
into through this Prejudice. There are very few in Natural Philosophy, to which
it has not given some occasion; and if a Man should make a considerate
Reflection thereupon, he would possibly be astonished at it.

But though I am not willing to dwell too long upon these things, yet I cannot
so easily pass by the contempt Men generally have for Insects, and other little
Animals which are produced out of a Matter, called by them Corrupted. It Is a
very unjust contempt, founded only on the Ignorance of the thing despised, and
the forementioned Prejudice. There is nothing despicable in Nature, and all
the Works of GOD are worthy of our Respect and Admiration; especially if we
attend to the wonderful ways he takes both in making, and perserving them. The
least of Flies are as complete, as Animals of an excessive bulk or stature: The
proportions of their Limbs are as just as those of the other: And it seems
moreover that GOD has designed them greater Ornaments to recompense them for
the Littleness of their Bodies. They have Coronets and Plumes, and other Attire
upon their Heads, which outshine all that the Luxury of Men can invent. And I
dare venture to say, that all those who have never made use of any thing but
their Eyes, have never seen any thing so splendid, so exact, or so magnificent
in the Palaces of the greatest Princes, as may be seen with Glasses on the Head
of an ordinary Fly.

It Is true, these things are exceedingly Little, but it is still more
surprising to find such a Collection of Beauties in so little Room; and though
they are very common, yet that is no Diminution to their Value; nor are those
Animals thereby less perfect in themselves; but on the contrary, the Power and
Wisdom of GOD appear more wonderful, who with such Profusion and Magnificence
has shown an almost infinite number of Miracles in their Production.

And yet our Sight conceals all these Beauties from us: It makes us despise all
these Works of GOD so worthy of our Admiration: And because these Animals are
little in Relation to our Body, it causes us to consider them as little
absolutely, and consequently as despicable by reason of their Littleness; as if
Bodies could be little in themselves.

Let us strive then to forbear following the Impressions of our Senses, in the
judgment which we pass on the Magnitude of Bodies: And when we say, for
Instance, That a Bird is little, let it not be absolutely understood: For
nothing is Great or Little in it self: Even a Bird is great, in comparison of a
Fly; and if it be little in respect of our Body, it does not follow it is
absolutely so; since our Body is not the most perfect Rule by which we ought to
measure others. It is it self very little in reference to the Earth, as is the
Earth it self in respect of the Circumference which the Sun or Earth describe
round each other: And so is that Circumference in relation to the space
contained betwixt us and the six'd Stars; and so continuing the progression on.
For we may still imagine spaces greater and greater ad infinitum.

But it must not be imagined that our Senses exactly inform us of the Relation
other Bodies have to our own: For Exactness and Justness are no ways essential
to sensible Notices, III. Of the Errors of sight touching Extension relatively
considered.
which should only be Instrumental to the Preservation of Life. It is true we
know exactly enough the Relation Bodies, which are near us, have with our own.
But in proportion to the distance these Bodies are removed from us, we know
less of them, because then they have less relation to our Body. The Idea or
Sensation of Magnitude, which we have upon sight of a Body, lessens in
proportion to the Body's being in a less capacity of hurting us: And that Idea
or Sensation increases proportionably as the Body approaches nearer, or rather,
as the Relation it has to our Body, is augmented. Finally, If this Relation
altogether ceases; that is, if any Body is so little or so distant from us, as
to be incapable of hurting us, we forthwith lose the Sensation of it. So that
by our Sight we may sometimes judge pretty nearly of the Relation other Bodies
have to ours: And of that which they have to one another: But we ought never to
think they are of the same Magnitude they appear to us.

Our Eyes, for Example, represent the Sun and Moon of one or two Feet diameter,
but we should not imagine with Epicurus and Lucretius, that they are really of
that dimension. This same Moon seems to us upon sight far greater than the
greatest Stars, yet no Man doubts but it is incomparably less: Thus we see
daily on the Earth two things or more, of whose magnitude we can have no exact
assurance; because to make a judgment of this Nature, it is necessary to know
the precise distance of these Bodies, which is very difficult to be known.

We are even hard put to it to judge with any kind of certainty of the Relation
there is betwixt two Bodies though never so near us. We are forced to take them
in our hands, and hold them one against the other to compare them; and after
all, we often hesitate without being able justly to determine any thing. This
is visibly acknowledged as often as a Man would examine which are biggest of
some pieces of Coin that are almost equal; for he is then obliged to put them
one upon another, to discover by a surer Method than by Sight whether they
correspond in bigness. Our Eyes therefore not only deceive us in the Magnitude
of Bodies absolutely considered, but even in the Relation those Bodies have
betwixt themselves.

CHAP. VII.
I. Of the Errors of Sight about Figures. II. We have no Knowledge of the least
of them. III. The Knowledge we have of the greater, is not exact. IV. An
Explication of some Natural Judgments which prevent our Deception. V. That
these very Judgments deceive us in some particular junctures.

I. Of the Errors of sight about Figures.
OUR Sight is less liable to deceive us in the Representation of Figures, than
in the Representation of any other thing; because Figure is not a thing of an
absolute kind, but its Nature consists in the Relation which is between the
parts which terminate some space, and a certain point, which we conceive in
that space, and which we may call, as in a Circle, the Center of the Figure.
Notwithstanding, we are mistaken a thousand ways in Figures, and the Knowledge
we receive from our Senses, is not exceedingly exact concerning any one of them.

II. We have no knowledge of the least of them.
We have already proved that our Sight discovers not to us all sorts of
Extension, but only that which is in some considerable proportion to our Body;
and that for this reason we see not all the parts of the minutest Animals, nor
those that constitute all hard and liquid Bodies. Thus, not being able to
perceive these parts by reason of their Littleness, it follows we are as unable
to perceive their Figures; since the figure of Bodies is nothing but the Term
that bounds them. See here what an infinite number of invisible figures present
themselves in an instant, which are far more numerous than those our Eyes
acquaint us withal: which yet induce the Mind, that trusts too much to their
reach and capacity, and stands not to examine things to the bottom, to believe
these Figures don't exist.

III. The knowledge we have of the greater, is not exact.
As for Bodies proportioned to our Sight, (the number whereof is very
inconsiderable in comparison of the other) we discover their figure tolerably
well, but never know it exactly by our Senses. Nay, we cannot so much as be
assured from our Sight if a Circle or a Square, which are two of the most
simple figures that are, be not an Ellipsis and a Parallelogramme, though these
figures be both in our Hands, and very near our Eyes.

I add farther, that we cannot exactly discern whether a Line be Right or not,
especially if it be somewhat long. We must then have a Rule for it: But to what
purpose? we know not whether the Rule it self be such as we suppose it ought to
be; nor can we be fully satisfied concerning it. And yet without the knowledge
of this Line, we can never know any figure, as is evident to all the World.

This is what may be said in general of Figures, which we have before our Eyes,
and in our Hands. But if we suppose them at a distance from us, how many
changes do we find in the projection they make in the fund of our Eyes. I will
not stand to describe them here; they may easily be learned in any Book of
Optics, or by examining the Figures which we see in Pictures. For since the
Painter is obliged to change them almost all, to the end they may appear in
their Natural site, and to paint, for instance, Circles like Ellipses: It Is an
infallible sign of the Errors of our Sight, in Objects that are not Painted;
But these Errors are corrected by fresh Sensations, which possibly may be looked
upon as a sort of Natural Judgments, and may be termed the Judgments of the
Senses.

IV. An Explication of some Natural judgments which prevent our deception.
In beholding a Cube, for Example, it is certain that all the sides we see of it
never cause a Projection, or an Image of an equal dimension in the fund of our
Eyes; since the Image of all these sides, when painted in the Retina or the
Optic Nerve, nearly resembles a Cube pictured in Perspective; and consequently
the Sensation we have of it, ought to represent the faces of a Cube unequal;
because they are so in Perspective. This notwithstanding, we see them all
equal, nor are we in an Error.

Now it might be said, That this is occasioned by a kind of Judgment, which we
are naturally inclined to make; namely, That the Faces of the Cube which are
farthest from us, ought not to cast on the fund of our Eyes so large Images as
the Faces which are nearer; but whereas Sensation, is only peculiar to the
Senses, and Judgment, in propriety of Speech cannot be ascribed to them; it is
certain this Judgment is only a Compound-sensation, which consequently may be
sometimes false.

However, since that which is only Sensation in us, may in Relation to the
Author of Nature, who excites it, be considered as a kind of Judgment, I speak
sometimes of Sensations as of Natural Judgments; because this form of Speaking
is expedient in giving an account of things; as may be seen toward the End of
the Ninth Chapter, and in several other places.

V. That these very judgments deceive us in some particular junctures.
Though the Judgments I speak of, are serviceable in correcting our Senses, a
thousand different Ways, and without them we should hardly ever be in the
Right, nevertheless they fail not to be sometimes the occasion of our Error. If
it happens, for instance, that we see the Spire of a Steeple behind a great
Wall, or beyond a Mountain, it will appear to us to be both little and at no
great distance: But if we should see it at the same distance, but with many
Fields and Houses lying betwixt us and it, it would undoubtedly appear both
much bigger and more remote; although in both cases the projection of the Rays
of the Steeple or the ^mage of the Steeple, which is pictured in the fund of
our Eye, is altogether the same. Now it may be said that the reason why we see
it greater, is the judgment we naturally make, viz. That because so many Fields
lie betwixt us and the Steeple, it must needs be more remote, and consequently
greater.

But if on the other hand, we saw no interjacent Lands betwixt our Eyes and the
Steeple, though at the same time we knew there were many, and that it was a great
way off, which is very observable, it would notwithstanding seem to us to be
very little and very near, as I have said before: which we may farther suppose
to happen from a kind of judgment natural to our Soul, whereby she sees the
Steeple in this manner, because she judges it to be at five or six hundred
paces distance. For generally our Imagination represents no greater space
betwixt the objects and our selves, unless assisted by a sensible view of other
intervening objects; and beyond which, it has still liberty to imagine
something more.

It Is for this reason that the Moon at the Rising or Setting, is seen much
bigger, See the 9. Chapter toward the end.
than when elevated a good height above the Horizon: For this elevation removes
our view from off the objects lying betwixt us and her, the dimensions whereof
we know; so that we cannot judge of that of the Moon by forming the comparison
between them. But when she is just risen, or about to set, we see a great many
Fields, betwixt her and us, of whose extension we have a tolerable knowledge;
and thus it is that we judge her more remote, and upon that reason see her so
large as we do.

And it must be observed, That when she is elevated above our heads, though our
Reason most infallibly assures us, she is vastly distant, yet we cannot avoid
seeing her very near, and very little; because indeed these Natural Judgments
of the Sight, are founded only on the Perceptions of the same Sight, and Reason
is unable to correct them: So that they frequently lead us into Error, by
making us form voluntary judgments, that go hand in hand along with them. For
when we judge according to our Sensations, we are always deceived, though we
never err in judging according to our Conceptions: because the Body is no
farther instructive, than is conducing to the Body, and it is only GOD who
always teaches us the Truth, as shall be shown hereafter.

These false Judgments not only deceive us in the Distance and Magnitude of
Bodies, which are not the Subject of this Chapter, but in representing their
Figure otherwise than it is. We see, for Instance, the Sun and Moon, and other
very remote Spherical Bodies as if they were flat, and only circular: Because
at that great distance we are unable to discern whether the part opposite to
us, is nearer us than the others; and on that account, we judge it is equally
distant from us: And thus upon the same grounds we conclude the Stars with the
Azure which appears in the Heaven, are ranged in the same just distance, in a
vault perfectly unequal, since our Mind ever supposes Equality, where it
discovers no Inequality; which yet it ought not positively to admit, unless
there be evident conviction for it.

I shall not here insist longer on the Errors of our Sight, in respect of the
Figures of Bodies, since a Man may be sufficiently instructed in any Book of
Optics. That Science in effect does only instruct us how to put fallacies on
our Eyes; and its whole drift and artifice consists merely in finding means of
making us form those Natural Judgments, I have been speaking of, at a time when
they are most impertinent and unseasonable. And this cheat may be acted in so
many different ways, that, of all the Figures that are in the World, there is
not any single one, but may be painted in a thousand different fashions; so
that the Sight must unavoidably be deceived. But, this is not the proper place
of explaining these things more thoroughly. What I have said is sufficient, to
let us see we should not give overmuch credit to the Testimony of our Eyes,
even in their Representations of the Figures of Bodies, though in point of
Figures, their reports are much more faithful than in any other occasion.

CHAP. VIII.
I. That our Eyes are incapable of informing us of the Quantity or Swiftness of
Motion considered in it self. II. That Duration, which is necessary to our
Knowledge of the Quantity of Motion, is unknown to us. III. An Instance of the
Errors of Sight about Motion and Rest.

HAVING already discovered the most Fundamental and General Errors of our Sight
touching Extension and its Figures, I come now to correct those in which this
same Sight ingages us, about the Motion of Matter. And this has no great
difficulty in it, after what I have already said of Extension. For there is so
necessary a relation and dependence betwixt these two things, that if we are
deceived in the Magnitude of Bodies, we must as certainly be deceived in their
Motion too.

But, that I may advance nothing but what is clear and distinct, it is
necessary to take off whatever is equivocal from the word Motion. For this Term
has generally two significations. The first denotes a certain Power or Force,
which we imagine in the Body moved, and which we suppose the cause of its
Motion: The second is the Translation or continued Conveyance of a Body, either
in its removal from, or approaching to another, which we consider as at rest.

When I say, for Instance, That a Boul has communicated its Motion to another,
the word Motion is to be understood in its first signification: But if I say
simply, that I see a Boul in a great Motion, it is to be taken in the second.
In a word, the Term Motion signifies at once both Cause and Effect, which are
yet two things altogether different.

I am persuaded that Men are under most palpaple and most dangerous mistakes,
concerning the Force that gives this Motion, and Translation to the Bodies
moved. Those fine Terms, Nature and Impressed Qualities, are good for nothing
but to shelter the Ignorance of the Falsely Learned, and the Impieties of the
Libertine; as I could easily demonstrate. But this is not a place proper to
discourse of the Power that moves Bodies, See the 3 d. Chapter of the 2 d. Part of
the 6* Book.
since that is not of a visible Nature; and I am only speaking here of the
Errors of our Eyes. I defer it till a time when it will be more ^easonable.

Motion taken in the second sense, that is, for the Translation of a Body in
its removal from another, is something of a visible kind, and the Subject of
this Chapter.

I. That our Eyes are incapable of informing us of the Quantity or Swiftness of
Motion considered in it self.
I have, I think, sufficiently demonstrated in the sixth Chapter, that our Sight
does not acquaint us with the Quantity or Magnitude of Bodies, in themselves;
but only with the mutual relation they stand in, to each other, and especially
to our own. From whence I infer, that we are incapable of knowing the true and
absolute Magnitude of their Motion, that is, of their swiftness or slowness,
but only the relation these Motions have to one another, and more especially to
the Motion ordinarily incident to our own Body. Which I thus prove.

It is certain that we know not how to judge how great the Motion of a Body is,
but by the Length of the Space the Body has ran over. Thus our Eyes not
informing us of the true Length of the Space described by the Motion, it
follows that it is impossible for us to know the true Quantity of the Motion.

This Argument is only a Corollary of that which I have said of Extension, and
all the force it has proceeds from its being a necessary Conclusion of what I
have there Demonstrated: I shall now give one which depends on no Supposition.
I say then, that supposing we were able clearly to discover the true Quantity
of the Space described, it would no way follow, that we could know the Quantity
of Motion also.

The Greatness or the Swiftness of Motion includes two things. The first is the
Translation or Conveyance of a Body from one place to another, as from Paris to
St. Germains: The second is the Time that necessarily goes to the making this
Conveyance. Now it is not enough to know exactly how far Paris is distant from
St. Germains, to know whether a Man has gone it with a Quick or a Slow Motion:
But it must moreover be known how much time he has employed in his Journey:
Granting then that the Length of the Journey may be truly known; I utterly deny
we can have an exact knowledge by our Sight, or indeed any other way whatever,
of the Time that is spent in the passage, and of the true Quantity of Duration.

This is sufficiently evident, in that at certain times one Hour seems to us as
long as four; and on the contrary at other times, II. That Duration which is
necessary to our knowledge of the Quantity of Motion, is unknown to us.
four Hours slip insensibly away: When, for Instance, a Man's Mind is filled
with Joy, Hours seem no longer than a Moment; because then the time passes away
without thinking of it. But when a Man is dejected with Grief, and lies under
some sensible Pain or Affliction, every day is thought an entire Year. The
reason of which difference is, That in this case the Mind is weary of its
Duration, because it is Painful. The more it applies it self to the thought of
it, the more it discovers it, and thereby finds it longer than in the season of
Mirth and Joy, or some diverting Employment, which as it were carries the Soul
out of it self, to fix her closer to the Object of her Joy, or her Diversion.
For as a Man finds a piece of Painting so much larger, by how much he stands to
consider all the little things represented in it, with greater attention; or as
he finds the head of a Fly considerably great, when he discerns all the parts
of it with a Microscope; so the Mind finds its duration so much longer, as it
considers it with greater Attention and is sensible of all the parts of it.

Insomuch that I don't at all doubt, but that GOD could so apply our Mind to the
parts of its Duration, by giving us abundance of Sensations in a very little
time, as to make one Hour appear as long as many Ages. For as there are no
Indivisible Points in Bodies, so there are no Indivisible Instants in Duration.
But as the least parts of Matter may be divided to Infinity, so the parts of
Duration may be assigned less and less to Infinity, as is easy to demonstrate.
If then the Mind were made Attentive to the minutest parts of its Duration, by
its Sensations which should leave some Traces in the Brain, whereby to remember
them, it would undoubtedly seem much longer to it than it does.

But finally, the use of Watches is a convincing proof, that there can be no
exact knowledge of Duration, and I desire no more. For since the knowledge of
the absolute Greatness or Intenseness of Motion depends on a preceding
knowledge of the Length of Duration, as we have shown it does; it thence
follows, that on Supposition we can never exactly know the absolute Quantity of
Duration, we shall never be able to know exactly the absolute Quantity of
Motion.

But because some Relations, which Duration, or one time has to another may be
known, some Relations likewise which Motions have to one another may be equally
understood: For as we can certainly know that the Solary Year is longer than
the Lunary; so we can certainly know that a Cannon Bullet has greater Motion
than a Tortoise. So that though our Eyes will not let us see the absolute
Quantity of Motion, yet they fail not to assist us in discovering, nearly
enough, the Relative Intenseness of it; I mean the Relation or Proportion of
one Motion to another: And we have no need of any farther knowledge thereof for
the Preservation of our Bodies.

There are many Instances to be given, III. An Instance of the Errors of Sight
in respect of Motion and Rest.
which manifestly show that our Sight deludes us touching the Motion of Bodies;
it very often happens, that the things which seem to us in Motion, are
perfectly at Rest; and on the contrary those which seem to us at Rest,
notwithstanding, are in Motion. As when a Man, for instance, sits on shipboard
whilst the Vessel is under sail in a swift and steady Motion, he seems to see
the Lands and Towns fly from him; they seem to be in motion, and the Vessel to
stand still.

So if a Man were placed upon the Planet Mars, he would conclude upon sight
that the Sun, the Earth, and the rest of the Planets together with all the
Fixed Stars performed their circumvolution in about 24 or 25 hours; which is
the space of time that Mars imploys in turning round his own Axis. And yet the
Earth, the Sun, and the Stars never circuit round that Planet. So that this Man
would see things in Motion which were at Rest, and would think himself at Rest,
though he were in Motion all the time.

I stand not here to explain, how it comes to pass that the Man on shipboard
would easily correct the mistake of his Eyes, but the Man supposed on the
Planet Mars would obstinately defend his Error. The Reason of it is easy to be
known: and we shall more readily find it by reflecting on what would happen to
a Man that were asleep in a Vessel, who starting on a sudden, saw nothing when
he waked, besides the top of a Mast of some Vessel that made toward him. For
in case he saw not the Sails swelled with the Wind, nor the Mariners at work,
nor felt any Agitation or concussion of the Ship, or the like, he would
absolutely be at a loss and in doubt, without knowing which of the two Vessels
was in Motion; and neither his Eyes nor his Reason could give him any
Information.

CHAP. IX.
A Continuation of the same Subject. I. A general Demonstration of the Errors
of our Sight concerning Motion. II. That the Distance of Objects is necessary
to be known, in order to judge of the Quantity of their Motion. III. The
Mediums, whereby we know the Distances of Objects, are Examined.

I COME now to give a General Demonstration of all the Errors, I. A general
Demonstration of the Errors of our Sight concerning Motion.
into which our Sight leads us, in respect of the Motion of Bodies.

Let A be the Eye of the Spectator; C the Object, which I suppose at a
convenient distance from A. I say, that though the Object remains fixed in C,
it may be thought to be removed as far as D, or to approach as near as B. And
though the Object recedes toward D, it may be believed immovable in C, and
even to approach toward B; and on the contrary, though it approaches toward
B, it may be thought to be immovable in C, or even to recede toward D. That
though the Object be advanced from C as far as E or H, or to G or K, it may be
thought to have moved no farther than from C to F or I. And again on the other
hand, that though the Object be moved from C unto F or I, a Man may think it
moved to E or H, or else unto G or K. That if the Object be moved in a line
equally distant from the Spectator, that is, in a circumference whereof the
Spectator is the Center; though that Object be moved from C to P, it may be
thought to be moved only from B to O: and on the contrary, though it be moved
only from B to O, it may be thought moved from C to P.

If beyond the Object C there happens to be another Object, suppose M; which is
thought at rest, and which notwithstanding is in motion toward N: Though the
Object C remains unmoved, or is moved with a more gentle motion toward F, than
M is moved toward N, it will yet seem to be oppositely moved toward Y; and on
the contrary, if etc.

II. That the Distance of Objects is necessary to be known in order, to judge
of the Quantity of their Motion.
It is plain that the proof of all these Propositions except the last, in which
there is no difficulty, depends on one Supposition only, namely this, that we
cannot with any assurance determine concerning the Distance of Objects. For if
it be true that we cannot judge thereof with any certainty, it follows that we
cannot be assured whether C is advanced on toward D, or has approached toward
B, and so of the other Propositions.

Now to know whether the judgments we form of the Distance of Objects are
infallible, we have no more to do than to examine the means we make use of to
judge concerning it. If these means are uncertain, it is not possible the
Judgment's depending on them should be more infallible. There are many of them,
which it is necessary to explain.

III. The Mediums whereby we know the Distances of Objects, are examined.
The first, the most universal, and sometimes the safest way we have, whereby to
judge of the distance of Objects, is the Angle made by the Rays of our Eyes,
whereof the Object is the Vertical Point, that is, the Object is the Point,
where the two Rays meet. When this Angle is very large, the Object appears near
at hand, on the contrary when it is very acute, we see the Object a great way
off. And the change which happens in the situation of our Eyes, according to
the changes of this Angle, is the means the Soul imploys to judge concerning
the Distance or Nighness of Objects. For just as a Blind Man having two strait
Sticks in his hands, the length whereof he did not know, may by a kind of
Natural Geometry give a tolerable conjecture concerning the distance of any
Body, in touching it with the end of his two Sticks, by reason of the
Disposition and Distance he finds his hands in, The Soul does not make all
those judgments I a^tribute to her; these Natural judgments are nothing but
Sensations, and I only speak thus, the better to explain things.
with respect to one another; so it may be said that the Soul judges of the
Distance of an Object by the Disposition of her Eyes, which is different
according as the Angle, whereby she sees, is great or little, that is, as the
Object is nearer or farther off.

A Man would easily be convinced of what I say, if he would be at the trouble
of making a very easy Experiment: As, let him hang a Ring at the end of a
thread, so placed that the hoop being turned directly toward him, the aperture
of it may not appear; or if he please let him drive a Stick in the ground, and
take another in his hand, that is curv'd at the end; let him retreat three or
four steps from the Ring or the Stick, and shutting one Eye with one hand, let
him try to hit the aperture of the Ring, or with the bent end of the Stick in
his hand to touch the other across, at an height that is much upon a level with
the Eye; and he will be surpised to find himself incapable of doing it at an
hundred trials, though nothing in the world seems easier: Nay, though he should
lay aside the Stick* and only endeavor to direct his finger cross-ways into
the concavity of the Ring, he would find it difficult enough to be done, though
he stood very near it.

But it ought to be well observed that I have said, A Man should endeavor to
hit the aperture of the Ring, or to touch the Stick cross-wise, and not by way
of a Right Line from our Eye to the Ring; for so indeed there would be no
difficulty at all: so far from it, that it would be much easier to effect it,
with one Eye shut, than with both of them open, since that would be a Rule to
direct him.

Now it may be said, that the Difficulty, which is found, when a Man tries to
direct the end of the Stick through the Ring cross-wise, with only one
Eye^open, proceeds from this, namely, that one Eye being shut, the Angle I have
mentioned is unknown. For to know the Magnitude of an Angle, it is not enough
to know the length of its Base, and the Bigness of the Angle made by one of its
Sides upon the Base; for this is known in the foregoing Experiment: But it is
yet farther necessary to know the other Angle, which is made by the other Side
upon the Base, or the length of one of the Sides. Which cannot be exactly known
without opening the other Eye. And thus the Soul cannot make use of her Natural
Geometry to judge of the Distance of the Ring.

The Disposition then of the Eyes, which accompanies the Angle made of the
Visual Rays which cut each other and center in the Object, is one of the best
and most universal means the Soul imploys whereby to judge of the Distance of
things. If then that Angle receives no sensible Alteration, upon a little
removal of the Object, whether it approaches nearer us, or recedes from us, it
will thence follow, that it is a fallacious means, and unserviceable to the
Soul whereby to judge of the true distance of that Object.

Now it is plain that this Angle is notably changed, when an Object at about a
foot distance from our Sight is translated four foot off: but if it be only
translated from four to eight, the Alteration is much less discernible; if from
eight to twelve, less yet: if from a thousand to an hundred thousand, hardly at
all: Lastly, in carrying the Object farther on, even to the imaginary spaces,
the change of the Angle grows imperceptible, and is quite lost. So that were
there a considerable space betwixt A and C, the Soul could not by that means
know whether the Object were near B or D.

This is the Reason why we see the Sun and Moon, as if they were involved in
Clouds, though they are vastly distant from them; and that we naturally think all
the Stars ranged in an equal distance from us; that we imagine the Comets are
fixed, and almost motionless, at the end of their course. We imagine too that
Comets are entirely dissipated in some Months time, because they recede from us
in almost a right Line, or a Line direct from our Eyes; and are going to lose
themselves in the vast spaces, from whence they return not till after many
Years, or even many Ages.

The second Medium the Soul imploys to judge concerning the Distance of
Objects, The second Medium whereby to judge of the Distance of Objctes.
consists in a Disposition of the Eyes, different from that I have been
speaking of. In order to explain it, we must know it is absolutely necessary
that the figure of the Eye be different, according to the different Distance of
Objects which we see: For when a Man sees an Object near him, there is a
necessity of his Eyes being longer, than if the Object were farther off:
Because to the end the Rays of this Object may be collected in the Optic
Nerve, which is necessary to its being seen, the distance between this Nerve
and the Crystalline ought to be greater.

It is true, If the Crystalline became more unequal when the Object were near,
that would effect the same thing as the Elongation of the Eye. But it is not
credible that the Crystalline can easily change its convexity; and on the other
side, we have a most evident Experiment for the Elongation of the Eye: For
Anatomy informs us, there are Muscles that surround the middle of the Eye; and
we are sensible of the Effort these Muscles make to compress it, and lengthen
it, when we have a mind to see any thing very near.

But it is not at all necessary, we should know here, by what way this is done;
it is enough that there happens a Change in the Eye, whether it proceeds from
the Pressure of the Muscles, that surround it; or whether the little Nerves,
which answer to the Ciliary Ligaments which hold the Crystalline, suspended
betwixt the other Humors of the Eye, become relaxed, to augment the convexity
of the Crystalline; or intense, to diminish it.

For this Change which happens, whatever it be, is only to collect and unite
the Rays of Objects, with an exact justness, upon the Optic Nerve. But it is
certain that when the Object is five hundred Paces, or ten thousand Leagues
distant, we behold it with the same Disposition of Eyes, without any sensible
Change in the Muscles which surround the Eye, or in the Nerves which answer to
the Ciliary Ligaments of the Crystalline: And the Rays of Objects are very
exactly collected upon the Retina, or the Optic Nerve. Thus the Soul judges,
that Objects at ten thousand or an hundred thousand Leagues distance, are no
more than five or six hundred Paces off; when she judges of their Distance,
only by the Disposition of the Eyes, which I have been speaking of.

However, it is certain this Medium is of use to the Soul, when the Object is
nigh at hand. If, for instance, an Object is only at half a foot Distance, we
discern its Distance well enough, through the Disposition of the Muscles which
constringe our Eyes, in order to make them somewhat longer: And this
Disposition is moreover painful. If the Object be removed two foot, we can
still discern the Distance, because the Disposition of the Muscles is somewhat
sensible still, although no longer painful. But if the Object be removed still
some feet farther, this Disposition of our Muscles, grows so imperceptible,
that it is altogether useless to us in judging of the Distance of the Object.

These then are two Means the Soul makes use of, to judge of the Distance of
the Object, which are altogether useless, when the Object is remote to five or
six hundred Paces, and which are never infallible, though the Object be much
nearer.

The third Medium consists in the Greatness of the Image painted on the fund of
the Eye, The third Medium whereby to judge of the Distance of Objects.
and that makes the Representation of the Objects which we see. It Is confessed
that this Image grows less in proportion as the Object is removed to a greater
Distance, but this Diminution grows so much less discernable, as the Object
which changes its Distance is more remote. For when an Object is at a
considerable Distance, as of five or s^ix hundred Paces, under or over in
Proportion to its Bigness, there happens very considerable Changes in its
remoteness, without any considerable Changes occasioned in the Image which
represents it, as is easy to be demonstrated. Thus the third Medium has the
same defect as the other two, of which we have been speaking.

It is farther to be observed, That the Soul does not judge those Objects the
remotest, that have the least Images painted on the Retina. When I see, for
instance, a Man and a Tree at an hundred Paces distance, or suppose many Stars
in the Heaven, I do not judge the Man to be more remote than the Tree, and the
Little Stars farther distant than the Greater; though the Images of the Man,
and the little Stars, that are pictured on the Retina, are less than the Images
of the Tree and the Greater Stars. Besides it is necessary to know the
greatness of an Object, to be able to judge nearly of its Distance, and because
I know an House is bigger than a Man, though the Image of the House be bigger
than that of a Man, I do not however judge the House nearest upon that account.
And so it is in respect of the Stars; Our Eyes represent them to us equally
remote, though it is very reasonable to believe some of them at a far greater
distance than others. Thus there are infinite Objects, the Distance whereof we
cannot know, since there are infinite Objects with whose Magnitude we are
unacquainted.

We judge farther of the remoteness of an Object by the Force wherewith it acts
upon our Eyes, because a remote Object acts more languishing and weakly than
another; and again, The fourt^ and fifth Mediums.
by the Distinctness and Clearness of the Image, which is formed in the Eye;
because when an Object is remote, the Pupil of the Eye must needs be more open
and Capacious* and Consequently the Rays must be collected somewhat confusedly.
It Is for this reason that obscurer Objects, and such as we see confusedly,
appear remote; and on the contrary, that luminous Bodies, and such as we see
distinctly, seem near. It is plain enough, that these last Means are too
fallible whereby to judge with any kind of Certainty concerning the distance of
Objects: and I shall not any longer insist upon them, but come to the last of
all, as being that which helps the Imagination most, and inclines the Soul more
easily to judge that Objects are very remote.

The sixth Medium whereby to judge of the Distance of Objects
The sixth then and the Principal Medium of all, consists in this, viz. that the
Eye exhibits not to the Soul a single Object separate from others, but gives
her View at once of all those which lie, betwixt us and the Principal Object of
our actual Consideration.

When for instance, we behold a Steeple at a considerable Distance, we usually
see a great many interjacent Lands and Houses at the same time: and because we
judge of the Remoteness of these Lands, and Houses, and in the mean time see
the Steeple beyond them, we judge likewise, that it is not only more remote,
but a great deal larger and taller, than if we saw it all alone:
Notwithstanding the Image which is projected in the Fund of the Eye, is always
of an equal Bigness, whether there are Lands and Houses lying betwixt us and
it, or whether there are none, provided we see it from a place equally Distant,
which is supposed. Thus we judge of the Bigness of Objects, according as we
believe them remote from us; and the Bodies which we see betwixt us and the
Objects, assist the Imagination mightily in judging of their Remoteness: just
as we judge of the Extent of our Duration, or of the time that has passed since
we have done any Action by the confused Remembrance of the things we have done,
or of the Thoughts we have had successively since that Action. For they are all
these Thoughts and Actions that have succeeded one another, which are assistant
to the Mind in judging of the length of any Time, or of any part of our
Duration: Or rather the confused Remembrance of all these successive Thoughts,
is the same thing as the judgment of our Duration; as the confused View of
Lands betwixt us and a Steeple, is the same thing as the judgment concerning
the Remoteness of the Steeple.

Hence it is easy to assign the true Reason of the Moon's appearing larger at
her Rising, than when considerably elevated above the Horizon. For at her
Rising she appears many Leagues distant, and even beyond the sensible Horizon,
or the Lands which terminate our Sight. Whereas we judge her but at half a
Leagues Distance, or seven or eight times higher than our Houses when she is
ascended above our Horizon. Thus we judge her far greater when she is near the
Horizon, than when at a great distance from it; because we judge her to be far
more remote from us, when she rises, than when mounted very high above our
Horizon.

I confess a great part of the Philosophers attribute what I have been saying
to the Vapors arising from the Earth. I agree with them in this, that the Rays
of Objects being refracted by the Vapors, are a reason of the Objects seeming
larger. I know there are more Vapors betwixt us and the Moon when rising, than
when she is elevated a good height; and consequently she ought to appear
somewhat larger than she would seem, if she were always equally remote. But yet
it cannot be said, that this Refraction of the Lunary Rays is the cause of
those apparent Changes of her Magnitude: For that Refraction is no Impediment
why the Image delineated in the Fund of the Eyes when we see the Moon rising,
may not be less than that which she projects, when she has been a long time
risen.

The Astronomers who measure the Diameters of the Planets, observe that the
Diameter of the Moon is magnified in proportion to her Distance from the
Horizon, and consequently in Proportion to her Appearing lesser to us: thus the
Diameter of the Image which is painted in the Fund of our Eyes, it at that time
least when we see the Moon biggest: Indeed, the Moon when she rises, is remoter
from us by a Semidiameter of the Earth, than when she is perpendicularly over
our Heads, and it is upon that account her Diameter grows greater in her Ascent
above the Horizon, because then she is approaching nearest us.

The reason then that we see her Greater when she rises, is not the Refraction
of her Rays meeting with the Vapors which proceed from the Earth, since the
Image which is at that time formed from those Rays, is lesser; but it is the
Natural Judgment we make of her Remoteness, occasioned by her appearing beyond
those Lands which we see at a vast Distance from us, as has been before
explained; and I am amazed to find Philosophers asserting that the reason of
this Appearance, and Delusion of our Senses, is harder to be discovered than
the greatest Aequations of Algebra.

This Medium whereby we judge of the Remoteness of any Object, by knowing the
Distance of the things betwixt us and it, is often of considerable use, when
the other means I have spoke of, are wholly insignificant: for by this last
Medium, we can judge that certain objects are many Leagues distant which we
cannot do by any of the other. And yet if we strictly survey it, it will be
found in several things deficient,

For, first, we can only make use of it, about things upon the Earth, since it
can be but very rarely, and then very unprofitably employed upon those in the
Air, or in the Heavens. Secondly, it cannot be made use of on the Earth, but
about things a few Leagues distant. In the third place, we ought to be certain
that there are neither Mountains, nor Valleys, nor any thing of the like nature
betwixt us and the Object, that hinders us from applying the aforesaid Medium.
Lastly, I am persuaded there is no body but has made sufficient Trials upon the
Subject, to be convinced, that it is a thing extremely difficult to judge with
any certainty of the Remoteness of Objects by a sensible View of the things
lying betwixt us and them: and we perhaps have dwelt two long upon it.

These then are all the Means we have to judge of the Distance of Objects; in
which, since we have found considerable Imperfections we cannot but conclude,
that the Judgments that are grounded upon them, must needs be very Precarious
and Uncertain.

Hence it is easy to manifest the truth of the Propositions I have advanced.
The Object C was supposed considerably remote from A: Therefore in many
Instances it may be advanced on toward D, or may have approached toward B,
and no one can discover it, because there is no infallible Means whereby to
judge of its Distance. Nay, it may recede toward D when it is thought to
approach toward B; because the Image of the Object is sometimes augmented, and
enlarged upon the Retina; whether it be because the Air betwixt the Object and
the Eye occasions a greater Refraction at one time than at another; whether it
proceeds from some little Tremlings, which happen in the Optic Nerve; or
lastly, that the Impression, which is caused by an unexact Union of the Rays
upon the Retina, is diffused and communicated to the parts, which ought to
receive no Agitation from it; which may proceed from any different causes. Thus
the Image of the same Objects, being larger on these occasions, gives the Soul
reason to believe the Object approaches nearer. The like may be said of the
other Propositions.

Before I conclude this Chapter, I would have it observed, That it is of great
concern to us, in order to the Preservation of our Life, to have a nicer
Knowledge of the Motion or Rest of Bodies, in Proportion to their Nighness to
us: and that it is a thing useless and insignificant, to know exactly the truth
of these things, when happening in places very remote. For this evidently shows
that what I have generally advanced concerning all the Senses, how they never
Discover things to us as they are absolutely, and in their own Nature; but only
in Relation to the Preservation of our Body, is found exactly True in this
particular: since we know the Motion or Rests of Objects proportionably better,
as they approach nearer to us, and are incapable of judging of them by the
Senses, when they are so remote as to seem to have no Relation at all, or very
little to our Body: as, for instance, when they are five or six hundred Paces
distant, if they be of a Moderate Bigness; or even Nearer than this, when they
are Lesser; or somewhat farther off, when they are proportionably Greater.

CHAP. X.
Of our Errors about sensible Qualities. I. The Distinction of the Soul and
Body. II. An Explication of the Organs of the Senses. III. To what part of the
Body the Soul is immediately united. IV. An Instance to explain the Effect
which Objects have upon our Bodies. V. What it is they produce in the Soul, and
the Reasons why the Soul perceives not the Motions of the Fibers of the Body.
VI. Four things which are generally confounded in every Sensation.

WE have seen in the foregoing Chapters that the Judgments we form upon the
Testimony of our Eyes, concerning Extension, Figure, and Motion, are never
exactly true. And yet it must not be allowed that they are altogether false;
they contain so much Truth at least as this amounts to, that there are
Extension, Figures, and Motions, whatever they be, which are extrinsical, or
without our selves.

I confess we often see things that have no Existence, nor ever had, and it
ought not to be concluded that a thing is Actually without us, from our Seeing
it without us. There is no necessary Connection between the Presence of an Idea
to the Mind of a Man, and the Existence of the Thing represented by the Idea.
Which is manifest enough from the Consideration of what happens to Men in a
Dream or a Delirium: And yet we may safely affirm, that ordinarily, Extension,
Figures, and Motions, are without us when we see them so. Seethe Illustrations.
These things are not in the Imagination only, but are Real. And we are not
deceived in believing them to have a Real Existence, and wholly independent on
our Mind; though it be a very hard thing to prove it.

It is certain then that the Judgments we form concerning the Extension, the
Figures, and Motions of Bodies, contain some Truth: But it is another case in
point of those Judgments we make concerning Light, Colors, Tastes, Smells, and
all other Sensible Qualities: For Truth has nothing to do with them, as shall
be made manifest, in the remainder of this First Book.

We make not here any Distinction between Light and Colors, because we suppose
them to have no great Difference; and that they cannot be separately Explained.
We shall likewise be obliged to speak of other Sensible Qualities in general,
at the same time we shall treat of these Two in particular, because they may be
accounted for upon the same Principles. The things which follow demand the
greatest Attention imaginable, as being of the highest Importance, and very
different, as to their Usefulness, from those of the foregoing Discourse.

We instantly suppose a Man to have made some Reflections upon two I call by
the Name of Idea here whatever is the Immediate Object of the Mind.
Idea's which he finds in his Soul: one that represents the Body, and the other
which represents the Mind; I. The Distinction of the Soul and Body.
and that he is able easily to distinguish them by the positive Attributes they
contain: In a word, that he is very well satisfied, that Extension is a
different thing from Thought. Or we will suppose he has read and meditated on
some places of St. Austin, as the 10th Chapter of the 10th Book, Concerning the
Trinity, the 4th and 14th Chapters of his Book concerning The Quantity of the
Soul, at least Mr. Des-Cartes's Meditations, especially that Part which treats
of the Distinction of the Soul and Body: or lastly Mr. Cordemoy's sixth
Dissertation, concerning the Difference of the Soul and Body.

II. An Explication of the Organs of the Senses.
We suppose farther, that he is acquainted with the Anatomy of the Organs of the
Senses; and knows that they consist of little Threads or Fibers, which derive
their Origin from the middle of the Brain: that they are dispersed through all
the Members wherein there is Sensation, and being continued without any
Interruption, are terminated upon the External parts of the Body; that whilst a
Man is awake and in health, one of the Extremities cannot be moved but the
other will be moved in the same time, because they are always somewhat Intense
and upon the stretch: the same thing which happens to a Cord that is intense,
one part whereof cannot be moved, but the other must receive some Vibration.

It Is farther necessary to know that these little Threads or Fibers may be
moved by two several ways, either by that end that is external to the Brain, or
by the end which terminates in the Brain. If these Fibers are externally
agitated by Objects acting on them, and this Agitation be not communicated so
far as the Brain, as it happens in Sleep, the Soul receives no fresh Sensation
from them at that time: But if these Fibers are moved in the Brain by the
course of the Animal Spirits, or by any other cause, the Soul has a Perception
of something: though the Parts of these Fibers which are without the Brain, and
are dispersed throughout all the Parts of the Body, are quiet and undisturbed;
as it happens when a Man's asleep.

III. The Soul is immediately united to that part of the Brain where the Fibers
of the Organs of the Senses center.
It will not be amiss to observe here, by the way, that Experience certifies us,
it is not impossible to feel Pain in those parts of our Body, which have been
entirely cut off: Because the Fibers of the Brain, which correspond to them,
being Vibrated in the same manner, as if those Parts were actually wounded, the
Soul feels in those Imaginary Parts, a most real Pain. For all these things are
a palpable Demonstration, that the Soul immediately resides in that Part of the
Brain in which all the Organs of the Senses terminate and center: I mean that
in this Part she receives the Sensation of all the Changes, that there occur,
in reference to the Objects that have caused them, or have used to cause them:
and she has no Perception of any thing happening in any other Part, but by the
Intervention of the Fibers which terminate therein. This being laid down and
well understood, it will be no hard thing to discover how Sensation is
effected, which is necessary to be explained by some particular Instance.

IV. An Instance to explain the effect which Objects have upon our Bodies.
When a Man thrusts the Point of a Needle into his hand, this Point moves and
separates the Fibers of the Flesh. These Fibers are extended from that Place to
the Brain and whilst he is awake, they are so Intense, that they can receive no
Concussion or Vibration, but it is Communicated to those in the Brain: It
follows then that the Extremities of the Fibers in the Brain must be in like
manner moved. If the motion of the Fibers of the Hand is Moderate, that of the
Fibers of the Brain will be so too: and if this Motion is violent enough to
break something in the Hand, it will be more forcible and violent in the Brain.

Thus if a Man holds his Hand to the Fire, the little parts of the Wood,
whereof it continually throws out innumerable quantities with great violence
(as Reason, upon the defect of our Sight, demonstrates) beat against the
Fibers, and communicate a Part of their Agitation to them. If that Agitation be
but moderate, that of the Extremities of the Fibers in the Brain which answer
to the Hand will be moderate also. And if this Motion be violent enough in the
Hand, to separate some Parts of it, as it happens when it is Burnt; the Motion
of the Internal Fibers of the Brain will be proportionably stronger and more
violent. This then is what occurs in our Body when Objects strike upon us: we
must now see what happens to our Soul.

V. What it is that Objects produce in the Soul, and the Reasons why the Soul
perceives not the Motions of the Fi^res of the Body.
She is principally Resident, if we may be permitted so to speak, in that Part
of the Brain, where all the Fibers of our Nerves are centred. She is seated
there in order to cherish and preserve all the Parts of our Body: and
consequently it is necessary she should have notice of all the Changes that
occur therein, and that she be able to distinguish those which are adapted and
agreeable to the Constitution of her Body, from the contrary; since it would be
to no use or purpose for her to know them absolutely and without Relation to
the Body. Thus though all the Changes of our Fibers do, in true speaking,
consist merely in the Motions of them, which are generally no farther
different, than according to the Degrees of more or less; yet it is necessary
for the Soul to look upon these Changes as Essentially different: For though
they differ very little in themselves, they ought however to be considered as
Essentially different, in reference to the Preservation of the Body.

The Motion for instance, that produces Pain, has rarely any considerable
difference from that which causes Titillation: This confused Reasoning or this
Natural Judgment is only a Compound Sensation. See what I have said before of
Natural Judgments, and the first Chapter of the 3 d. Book.
There is no necessity there should be any Essential Difference betwixt these
two Motions, but it is necessary there should be an Essential Difference
betwixt the Titillation and the Pain, which these two Motions cause in the
Soul. For the Vibration of the Fibers which accompanies Titillation, certifies
the Soul of the good Constitution of her Body, and assures her it has Strength
enough to resist the Impression of the Object, and that she need not be under
any Apprehensions of its being injured by it: But the Motion which accompanies
Pain, being somewhat more violent, is capable of breaking some Fiber of the
Body, and the Soul ought to be advised of it by some Disagreeable Sensation; so
as to be aware of it for the future. Thus though the Motions, which are
occasioned in the Body, are no farther different in themselves than according
to the Degrees of more or less; yet being considered with Relation to the
Welfare and Preservation of our Life, they may be said to differ Essentially.

It Is upon this account our Soul has no Perception of the Vibrations, which are
excited by Objects, in the Fibers of our Flesh: It would be of very little use
for her to know them; nor could she from thence receive sufficient Light to
judge, whether the things about us were capable of Destroying or Maintaining
the economy of our Body. But she feels her self touched with Sensations
essentially different, which showing precisely the Qualities of Objects, as
they are related to her Body, make her most exactly sensible in what capacity
these Objects are in to hurt it.

We may farther consider, That in case the Soul had no Perception, but of that
which happened in her Hand, when it were burnt, if she saw nothing there but
the Motion and Separation of some Fibers, she would not much concern her self
about it: Nay, she might probably sometimes out of an Humor or a Frolic, take
some satisfaction in doing it, like those Freakish kind of Men, who divert
themselves in their Passions or Debauches, in breaking all things they light
upon.

Or as a Prisoner would not be much concerned, to see the Walls battered down
about him, that confined him, but rather would be glad of it, upon the hopes of
a Deliverance: So if we had no other Perception than of the Separation of the
Parts of our Body, when we were burnt or hurt in any manner, we should soon be
persuaded that our Happiness was not confined to a Body which prevented our
Enjoying those things, which ought to make us Happy; and so should be glad of
seeing it destroyed.

Hence it is apparent that the Author of the Union of our Soul and Body, has
with greatest Wisdom ordained, That we should be sensible of Pain, whenever any
Change happened to our Body, capable of incommoding it; as when a Needle
pierced the Flesh, or the Fire separated some parts of it; and that we should
be sensible of a Titillation, or an agreeable Heat, when these Motions were
moderate, without perceiving the Truth of that which occurred in our Body or the
Motions of the Fibers, we have been speaking of.

First, because in the Sensation of Pleasure and Pain, which are things far
more different than in Degree, we distinguish with greater Ease the Objects
which occasion them. Secondly, because this way of Informing us, whether the
Uniting our selves with the Bodies that encompass us, or the Separating from
them be most convenient, is the shortest and the speediest, and takes up the
capacity of the Mind the least; which is only made for GOD himself.

Lastly, because Pleasure and Pain are Modifications of our Soul, which she
feels with Relation to her Body, and which more nearly affect her than would
the Knowledge of the Motion of some Fibers belonging to it; this obliges her to
be more sollicitous about them: And this is a Reason of the most strict Union
betwixt the two Constituent Parts of Man. From all which it is manifest that
the Senses are given us, for the Preservation of our Body only, and not for the
Discovery of the Truth.

What has been said concerning Titillation and Pain, ought universally to be
understood of all other Sensations, as we shall see hereafter. I chose to begin
with these two Sensations rather than others, because they are more Strong, and
Lively, and Proper to make my Meaning more Sensibly conceived.

It is at present a very easy thing to show, That we fall into infinite
Errors, concerning Light and Colors, and generally concerning all Sensible
Qualities; as Cold, Heat, Smells, Tastes, Sound, Pain, and Titillation; and if I
would stand to make a particular Enquiry into all those we fall into about all
the Objects of our Senses, whole Years would not suffice to make a Deduction of
them; because they are in a manner Infinite. It will be sufficient therefore to
speak of them in general.

In almost all Sensations there are four different things which Men confound
with one another, because they happen altogether, and as it were in the same
Instant: And this is the Principle of all the Errors of our Senses.

The first is the Action of the Object, that is in Heat, for instance, VI. Four
things which are generally confounded in every Sensation.
the Impulsion or Motion of the little parts of the Wood against the Fibers of
the Hand.

The Second is the Passion of the Organ of Sense, that is to say, the Agitation
of the Fibers of the Hand caused by that of the little Parts of Fire, which
Agitation is communicated to the Brain, because otherwise the Soul would have
no Sensation of it.

The Third is the Passion, the Sensation or Perception of the Soul, that is,
What every one Feels in himself when he is near the Fire.

The Fourth is the Judgment the Soul makes, that what she feels is both in her
Hand, and in the Fire: Now this Judgment is Natural, or rather is only a
Compound Sensation. But this Sensation or this Natural Judgment, is for the
most part attended with another Free or Voluntary Judgment, which is so
customary for the Soul to make, that she is almost incapable of preventing it.
Here then are four things of a very different Nature, as may be seen, which Men
are not nice enough to distinguish, but are apt to confound, because of the
strict Union of the Soul and Body, which hinders them from making an exact
distribution of the Properties of Matter, and of the Mind.

It Is notwithstanding easy to discover, That of these four things, which occur
within us, in the Sensation of an Object; the two first belong to the Body, and
the two last appertain to the Soul only, provided a Man has any whit meditated
on the Nature of the Soul and Body, as he ought to have done, as I before
supposed him. But these things demand a particular Explication.

CHAP. XI.
I. The Error we fall into concerning the Action of Objects against the
External Fibers of our Senses. II. The Cause of this Error. III. An Objection
and Answer.

IN this and the three succeeding Chapters, I shall treat of these four things
abovementioned, which I said used to be confounded, and taken for a simple
Sensation: and I shall only give a general Explication of the Errors we fall
into, because if I would descend to Particulars, there would never be an end of
them: But I hope however to put the Mind of those, who will seriously consider
what I am about to say, in a condition of discovering with a great deal of
Ease, all the Errors our Senses can make us Subject to; But in order to this it
is demanded, That they would attentively Meditate as well upon the following
Chapters, as upon that they have last been Reading. I. Of the Error we fall
into concerning the Action of Objects against the External Fibers of our Senses.


The first of the things we confound, in each of our Sensations, is the Action
of Objects upon the External Fibers of our Body. It is certain a Man makes
hardly any Difference betwixt the Sensation of the Soul, and that Action of
Objects; which is so plain as not to need any farther Proof. The generality of
Men imagine that the Heat, for instance, which they Feel, is in the Fire which
causes it; that Light is in the Air, and Colors are upon colored Objects.
They have no Thought of any Motions of Imperceptible Bodies which are the Cause
of these Sensations.

It is true they do not judge that Pain is in the Needle which pricks them, in
like manner as they judge that Heat is in the Fire: But the reason of it is,
That the Needle and its Action are visible, III. The Cause of this Error.
but the little parts of the Wood that proceed from the Fire, and their Motion
against our Hands are altogether invisible. Thus, seeing nothing that strikes
upon our Hands when we warm our selves, and yet feeling Heat in them, we
Naturally judge this Heat to be in the Fire, for want of discovering any thing
in it besides.

So that it is generally true, that we attribute our Sensations to the Objects
themselves, when we are Ignorant of the Causes of these Sensations: And because
Pain and Titillation are produced by Sensible Bodies, as by a Needle or a
Feather, which we both see and touch, we for this Reason do not conclude, that
there is any thing in these Objects like the Sensations which they cause in us.

III. An Objection and Answer.
And yet I confess that we do not fail to judge Combustion is not in the Fire,
but only in the Hand, though it proceed from the same cause, i. e. the Action
of the little parts of the Wood, as well as Heat, which yet we attribute to the
Fire. But the Reason of this is, That Combustion is a Species of Pain: For
having often judged that Pain is not in the external Body which produces it, we
are induced to form the same Judgment of Combustion.

That which is another Reason of our Judging in this manner, is, that Pain or
Combustion, most strenuously applys our Soul to the consideration of the parts
of her Body; and this Intension of the Soul turns off her thoughts from any
other thing: Thus the Mind attributes the Sensation of Combustion to the Object
that is most present and nigh her self. And because we find presently after,
that the Combustion has left some visible marks in the part in which we felt
the Pain, this is a Confirmation of the Judgment we have made, that Combustion
is in the Hand. But this is no Impediment, why we should not embrace this
general Rule, That we are accustomed to attribute our Sensations to Objects,
whenever they act upon us by the Motion of some Invisible Parts. And upon this
ground it is, that we usually believe Colors, Light, Smells, Tastes, Sounds,
and some other Sensations, to be in the Air, or in the External Objects which
produce them: for as much as all these Sensations are produced in us by the
Motions of some Imperceptible Bodies.

CHAP. XII.
I. Of our Errors concerning the Motions of the Fibers of our Senses. II. That
we have no Perception* of these Motions, or that we confound them with our
Sensations. III. An Experiment that proves it. IV. Three kinds of Sensations.
V. The Errors that accompany them.

I. Of our Errors concerning the Motions or Vibrations of the Fibers of our
Senses.
THE second thing that occurs in every Sensation is the Vibration of the Fibers
of our Nerves, which is communicated to the Brain: And we err in confounding
always this Vibration with the Sensation of the Soul, and in judging there is
no such Vibration at all, when we have no Perception of it through the Senses.

We confound, for instance, the Vibration excited by the Fire in the Fibers of
our Hand, II. That we confound them with the Sensations of our Soul, and
sometimes have no Perception of them.
with the Sensation of Heat: And we say the Heat is in the Hand: But because we
are insensible of any Vibration caused by Visible Objects in the Optic Nerve,
which is in the Fund of the Eye, we think this Nerve is not vibrated at all,
nor covered with the Colors that we see. On the contrary, we judge these
Colors are spread only on the surface of the External Objects. Yet it is
manifest by the following Experiment, that the Colors are as strongly and
lively expressed on the Fund of the Optic Nerve as in visible Objects.

For, take but the Eye of an Ox just killed, and strip off the Coats that are
opposite to the Pupil, and situate near the Optic Nerve, putting a piece of
very transparent Paper in their room: This done, place the Eye in the hole of a
Window, so as the Pupil may be toward the Air, III. An Experiment that proves
it.
and the hind-part of the Eye in the Chamber; which should be close* shut up
and darkened all over: And upon this the Colors of Objects that are out of the
Chamber will appear to be spread upon the Fund of the Eye, but painted
topsy-turvy. If it fortunes that the Colors are not lively enough, on the
account of the too little distance of the Objects represented in the Fund of
the Eye, the Eye must be lengthened by constringing the sides of it, or
shortened if the Objects are too remote.

We see by this Experiment, that we ought to judge or perceive that Colors are
in the Fund of the Eye; in like manner as we judge that Heat is in our Hands,
if our Senses were given us for the Discovery of Truth, and if Reason conducted
us in the Judgments we make upon the Objects of our Senses.

But in accounting for this inconsistent Variety of our Judgments about
Sensible Qualities, it it must be considered, That the Soul is so intimately
united to her Body, and moreover, has contracted so much Carnality since the
Fall, that she attributes a great many things to the Body, which are only
peculiar to her Self; and can hardly any longer distinguish her self from it.
Insomuch that she does not only attribute to it all the Sensations we are at
present speaking of, but also the Force of Imagination; and even sometimes the
Power of Reasoning: For there have been a multitude of Philosophers, stupid and
senseless enough to believe, the Soul was nothing else but the more refined and
subtle part of the Body.

A Man that shall read Tertullian considerately, will be but too sensibly
convinced of what I say: since he subscribes to this Opinion, after a great
number of Authors whose Authority he alleges: This is so true, that he
endeavors to prove in his Book, Concerning the Soul, that we are obliged by
Faith, Scripture, and particular Revelations, to believe the Soul a Corporeal
Being. I design not a Refutation of his Notions, because I have supposed a Man
to have read some of St. Austin's or Mr. Des-Cartes's Works, which will
sufficiently discover the Extravagance of these Thoughts, and confirm and
corroborate the Mind in the Distinction of Extension and Thought, of the Soul
and Body.

The Soul then is so blind, as not to know her self, IV. An Explication of
three sorts of Sensations of the Soul.
nor discern that her own Sensations do belong to her. But to explain this, it
is necessary to distinguish in the Soul three kinds of Sensations, some
Vigorous and Lively, others Faint and Languishing; and lastly, a Middle sort
between these two.

The Vigorous and Lively Sensations, are such as surprise and quicken the Mind
with a sort of Violence: as being either very grateful or disagreeable to it:
Such as are Pain, or Titillation great Cold, or vehement Heat; and, in general,
all such as are not only attended with Traces in the Brain, but moreover with
some Motion of the Animal Spirits toward the Internal Parts of the Body; such
a Motion as is proper to excite the Passions, as shall be explained in another
place.

The faint and languishing Sensations are such as affect the Soul very little;
and are neither very Pleasant, nor very Disagreeable to her; as moderate Light,
all Colors, weak and ordidinary Sounds, etc.

Lastly, The Middle kind, betwixt the Vigorous and Faint, I call such sorts of
Sensations, as moderately affect the Soul; as a great and glaring Light, a loud
and mighty Sound, etc. But it is observable, that a Weak and Languid Sensation
may become a Middle one, and proceed to be a Vigorous and Lively one. The
Sensation, for instance, a Man has of Light is faint, when the Light of a
Flambeau is but glimmering or remote; but this Sensation may become a Middle
one upon the approaching of the Flambeau nearer us: It may, lastly, grow most
strong and lively, by holding the Flambeau so close to the Eyes as to dazzle
them; or suppose a Man beholds the Sun: Thus the Sensation of Light may be
Vigorous or Faint, or neither, but Moderate, according to its different Degrees.

Let us see then the Judgments the Soul passes upon these three sorts of
Sensations: V. The Errors that accompany the Sensations.
wherein we may observe that she almost ever blindly and implicitly follows the
sensible Impressions, or the Natural Judgments of the Senses; and that she is
delighted, if I may so term it, to diffuse her self upon the Objects she
considers, by dismantling her own Being, to cloth and adorn External Objects.

The first of these Sensations are so Vigorous and Powerful, that the Soul
must, whether she will or not, acknowledge they do, in some measure, belong to
her: So that she not only judges them to be in the Objects, but believes them
also to be in the Members of her Body, which she considers as a Part of her
Self. Thus she judges that Heat and Cold are not only in the Fire and Ice, but
in her own Hands also.

As to the Languid Sensations, they so little concern the Soul, that she
concludes they do not belong to her; that they are neither in her self, nor in
her Body, but in Objects only. And for this Reason it is we divest our own
Soul, and our own Eyes, of Light and Colors to cloth and beautify the
Objects that are without us, though Reason teaches us that the Idea we have of
Matter does not include them in it. And Experience visibly manifests, that we
ought equally to judge them in our Eyes as on the Objects; since we see them no
less upon the one than the other, as I have experimentally proved by the Eye of
an Ox placed in the hole of a Window.

Now the Reason why Men do not so readily perceive Colors, Smells, Tastes, and
all other Sensations, to be the Modifications of their Soul, is, because we
have not any distinct Idea of the Soul. For when we know a thing by the Idea
that represents it, we know clearly the Modifications it is capable of. All Men
whatever agree that Rotundity, for instance, is a Modification of Extension;
because all Men know what Extension is by a clear Idea that represents it.
Thus, because we know not the Soul by its Idea, as I shall explain hereafter,
but only by an Internal Sensation that we have of it, we cannot understand by a
simple View, but by the force of Reasoning only, whether Whiteness, Light,
Colors, Sounds, and other faint and languishing Sensations are the
Modifications of our Soul, or not. But as to the lively Sensations, as Pain and
Pleasure, we easily judge that they are within us; because we feel them
sensibly affect us; and there is no need of our knowing them by their Ideas, to
understand that they belong to us.

As for the Middle Sensations, the Soul seems dubious and at a Fault about
them. For on one hand she is willing to follow the Natural Judgments of the
Senses, and thereupon she removes as far from her as possible this kind of
Sensations, to bestow them upon the Objects: But, on the other hand, it is
Impossible but she must feel within her self, and be conscious, that they
belong to her; especially when these Sensations come up near to those, which I
have named the Strong and Lively; whereupon let us see how she behaves her self
in respect of the Judgments she makes concerning them: If she is smartly
touched with the Sensation, she judges it to be in her own Body, as well as in
the Object: If the Sensation affects her but a very little, she judges it only
in the Object: If the Sensation be of a Middle sort, betwixt those we call the
Strong, and the Weak, the Soul then knows not what to think of it, whilst she
judges only by the Senses.

For instance, If a Man sees a Candle at a good competent distance, the Soul
judges the Light to be only in the Object; if he puts it very near his Eyes,
the Soul judges the Light to be not only in the Candle, but likewise in the
Eyes; but if he withdraws about a foot from it, the Soul is at a pause without
determining whether or not the Light be in the Object only. But she is never so
wise as to think as she ought to do, that Light neither is, nor can be any
Property or Modification of Matter; and that it is only within her self;
because she never thinks of employing her Reason in discovering the Truth of
the Matter, but only her Senses, which never can discover it, nor indeed were
given us for any other use than the Preservation of the Body

Now the cause why the Soul makes no more use of her Reason, that is, of her
pure Intellection, in considering an Object which may be perceived by the
Senses, is this, that the Soul is not at all moved or concerned on the account
of those things she perceives by pure Intellection, but on the contrary, is
most nearly touched by things Sensible: For the Soul applies her self intensely
to that which affects her most; but is too careless to apply her self to things
that work in her no Concernment. Thus she almost universally suites her Free
Judgments to the Natural Judgment of her Senses.

To judge aright then of Light and Colors, as of all other sensible Qualities,
we must carefully distinguish between the Sensation of Color, and the Motion
of the Optic Nerve; and we must find out by our Reason, that Motions and
Impulsions, are Properties of Bodies, and therefore may possibly be found both
in Objects, and in the Organs of our Senses, but that Light and Colors which
we see, are Modifications of our Soul, very different from the other, and of
which we have quite different Idea's.

For it is evident that a Peasant, for instance, sees Colors very well, and
can distinguish them from all things else that are not Color. It is evident
too that he perceives nothing of Motion either in the colored Objects, or in
the Fund of his Eyes; therefore Color is not Motion: In like manner, a Peasant
is very sensible of Heat, and he has knowledge clear enough to distinguish it
from all thing else, which are not Heat. Yet he never so much as thinks of the
Fibers of his Hand's being moved. Heat then which he feels is not Motion, since
the Idea's of Heat and Motion are different, and one may be had without the
other. For we have no other Reason to affirm a Square is not a Circle, but
because the Idea of a Square is different from that of a Circle, and we can
think of one without thinking of the other.

There needs but a little Attention to discover, that it is not necessary the
cause which occasions a Sensation of such or such a Thing in us, should contain
that thing in it self. For, as there is no necessity there should be Light in
my Hand, when I see a flash, upon giving my Eye a blow; so there is no need
that Heat should be in the Fire, to make me sensible of it, upon the approach
of my Hand toward it; nor indeed that any other sensible Qualities, should be
in the Objects that produce them. It Is enough that they cause a Vibration in
the Fibers of my Flesh, to the end my Soul which is united to it, may be
modified by some Sensation. There is no Analogy, I confess, between Motions and
Sensations: Nor is there any betwixt Body and Spirit. But since Nature, or the
Will of the Creator, associates these two Substances, though essentially
different, we need not wonder if their Modifications are Reciprocal. It is
necessary it should be so, that both of them might constitute but one entire
Being.

It should be well observed, that our Senses being given us only for the
Preservation of our Body, it is most conveniently ordered that they should
induce us to judge of sensible Qualities just as we do. It is abundantly more
for our advantage to receive the Sensation of Pain and Heat as being in our own
Body, than to judge they were only in the Objects that occasioned them: Because
Pain and Heat being capable of injuring the Members of the Body, it is most
requisite we should be warned of them whenever they attacqu'd us, to prevent
our Body's being endammag'd by them.

But in point of Colors it is another case; for the generality, they are unable
to hurt the Fund of the Eye, where they are collected, and it is an useless
thing to us to know they are painted on it. These Colors are only necessary to
us, as far as they are conducible to a more distinct Discovery of Objects; and
upon that account our Senses induce us to attribute them to Objects only. Thus
the Judgments which the Impression of our Senses incline us to make, are most
exact, if considered only in Relation to the Preservation of our Body. But yet
they are altogether Fantastical, and very remote from the Truth, as we have
already seen in part, and shall be more abundantly manifest in that which
follows.

CHAP. XIII.
I. Of the Nature of Sensations. II. That a Man knows them better than he
thinks he does. III. An Objection and Answer. IV. Why a Man imagines he has no
knowledge of his own Sensations. V. That it is an Error to think all Men have
the same Sensations of the same Objects. VI. An Objection and Answer.

THE third thing which is found in each of our Sensations, or that which we
Feel, for instance, when we are near the Fire, is a Modification of our Soul,
I. The Definition of the Sensations.
in Relation or Correspondence to that which occurs in the Body, to which she
is united. This Modification is grateful or agreeable when that which occurs in
the Body, is proper to promote the Circulation of the Blood and other Vital
Functions: And this is named in an Equivocal Term, Heat: But this Modification
is painful, and quite different from the other, when that which occurs in the
Body, is capable of incommoding or burning it; that is to say, when the Motions
which are in the Body are capable of breaking some of it Fibers, and this
generally goes by the Name of Pain or Combustion; and so it is with the other
Sensations: But now let us see what are the Thoughts Men usually have upon this
Subject.

The first Error is this, II. That a Man knows his own Sensations better than
he thinks he does.
that a Man unreasonably imagines he has no Knowledge of his Sensations. We
daily find a great number of such Men as are much concerned, and very
sollicitous to know what Pain and Pleasure, and the other Sensations are:
Neither will they grant that they are only in the Soul, and the Modifications
of it: I confess these are a strange sort of Men, who would needs be taught
what they cannot be ignorant of: For it is impossible a Man should be absolutely
ignorant what Pain is, when he is under the sense of it.

A Man, for example, that burns his Hand, does very well distinguish the Pain
he feels from Light, Color, Sounds, Tastes, Smells, Pleasure, and from every
other Pain besides that he feels. He distinguishes it very well from
Admiration, Desire, and Love. He distinguishes it from a Square, a Circle, and
a Motion; in a word, he finds it is very different from every thing which is not
the Pain he feels. Now if he has no Knowledge of Pain, I would fain be
satisfied, how he can tell with any certainty of evidence, that what he feels
is none of all these things.

We know then in some measure what we are immediately sensible of; as when we
see Colors or have any other Sensation: And if it were not for this Knowledge,
it is certain we could know nothing of any sensible Object. For it is manifest,
for example, that we would be unable to distinguish Wine from Water, did we not
know that the Sensations we have of the one were different from those we have
of the other; and so it is with all other things which we know by our Senses.

It Is true, should a Man be importunate in desiring me to explain what is Pain,
Pleasure, Color, or the like, I should not be able to define it in words as it
ought to be. But it does not follow from thence, that if I see a Color, or
burn my self, I have no manner of Knowledge of that whereof I have an Actual
Sensation.

Now the reason why our Sensations cannot be explained by words, as well as all
other things, is, because it depends on the Arbitrary Will of Men, III. An
Objection and Answer.
to join the Idea's of things to what Names they please. They may call the
Heavens Ouranos, Shamajim, as the Greeks and Hebrews: But the same Men have not
an equal Liberty of affixing their Sensations to words, nor indeed to any thing
else. They see no Colors, unless they open their Eyes, discourse to them what
you will about them. They have no Relish of Tastes, unless some change happens
in the disposition of the Fibers of their Tongue and Brain: In short, the
Sensations have no manner of Dependence upon the Will of Men: And it is only he
that created Men, that still preserves them in that mutual correspondence of
the Modifications of their Soul to those of their Body. So that if a Man would
have me represent to him Heat, or Color, I cannot make use of words to do it:
But I must impress in the Organs of his Senses, such Motions as Nature has
affixt these Sensations to. I must bring him to the Fire, and show him a piece
of Painting.

And this is the reason why it is impossible to give Men that are born Blind the
least Knowledge of that which we understand by Red, Green, Yellow, or the like.
For since it is impossible for a Man to make another understand him, when he
that hears, has not the same Idea's as he that speaks; it is manifest that
since Colors are neither conjoined to the sound of words, nor to the Motion of
the Auditory, but to that of the Optic Nerve, we can never represent them to
Men that are Blind, since their Optic Nerve cannot be Vibrated by colored
Objects.

We have therefore some sort of Knowledge of our Sensations. Let us now see how
it comes to pass that we are still casting about to know them, and that we
believe our selves destitute of any Knowledge of them. The reason of it
undoubtedly is this.

IV. From whence it proceeds that a Man imagines he has no knowledge of his
Sensations.
The Soul, since the Original Sin, is now, as it were, Corporeal in her
Inclination; the Love she has for sensible Objects, is perpetually lessening
the Union or the Relation she has with those that are intellectual. She is
disgusted and uneasy in conceiving things that will not enter by the Senses,
and is presently for leaving the Consideration of them. She imploys her utmost
endeavor to produce the Images that represent them in her Brain, and she is so
thoroughly inured to this kind of Conception from our Infancy, that she thinks
that she can have no Knowledge of what she can have no Imagination.
Notwithstanding there are a great many things, which, being not Corporeal,
cannot be represented to the Mind by Corporeal Images; as, to instance, our
Soul with all her Modifications. At what time therefore our Soul would
represent to her self her* own Nature, and her own Sensations, she endeavors
to form a Corporeal Image thereof. She is in search of her self amongst all
Corporeal Beings. One while she takes her self for one Thing, and another while
for Another; sometimes for Air, sometimes for Fire, or for the Harmony of the
parts of her own Body. And being thus desirous of finding her self among the
mass of Bodies, and of imagining her own Modifications, which are her
Sensations, as the Modifications of Bodies, we need not wonder if she is
bewildred in her wanderings, and is misguided out of the Knowledge of her self.

That which induces the Soul to be still more fond of Imagining her Sensations,
is her judging them to be in the Objects: See the Illustrations upon the* 7.
Chapter of the 2 d. Part of the 3 d. Book.
And moreover, that they are the Modifications of them; and consequently that
they are something Corporeal, and fit to be Imagined. She judges then that the
Nature of her Sensations consists only in the motion which produces them, or in
some other Modification of a Body, which is manifestly different from what she
feels; this being nothing Corporeal, nor possible to be represented by
Corporeal Images: This is what confounds her, and makes her believe she is
altogether ignorant of her own Sensations.

As for those who make none of these fruitless Attempts, to represent the Soul
and its Modifications by Corporeal Images, and yet are desirous of having their
Sensations explained to them; they must understand that neither the Soul nor
its Modifications can be known by Idea's, taking the word Idea in its most
proper signification, as I have determined and explained it, in the third Book;
but only by Conscience or Internal Sensation. So that when they ask us to
explain the Soul and her Modifications by any Idea's, they demand what is
impossible for all the Men in the World put together to give them: Because Men
cannot instruct us by giving us Idea's of things, but only by making us
attentive to those we have already.

The second Error whereinto we fall about our Sensations, is the attributing
them to Objects; which has been explained in the XI and XII Chapters.

V. That it is an Error to think all Men have the same Sensations of the same
Objects.
The third is our judging that all Mankind have the same Sensations of the same
Objects. We believe, for example, that all the World sees the Sky Azure, the
Meadows Green, and all visible Objects in the same manner as we see them; and
so likewise all the other sensible Qualities of the other Senses. There are
many who will wonder even that we call in question those things, which they
believe indubitable. However, I can certify them they have not any Reason to
judge of these things as they do. And though I cannot Mathematically
demonstrate they are in an Error, I can nevertheless demonstrate, it is the
greatest chance in the World, if they are not: And I have Arguments strong
enough to convince them they are certainly deceived.

That the Truth of what I here advance may be here acknowledged, we must call
to mind what has been already proved; namely, That there is a vast difference
betwixt our Sensations and the causes of our Sensations. We may conclude from
thence, that absolutely* speaking, it is possible for similar Motions of the
Internal Fibers of the Optic Nerves, to produce in different Persons,
different Sensations, that is to cause them to see different Colors: And it
may so fall out, that a Motion which shall produce in one Person the Sensation
of Blew, shall cause the Sensation of Green or Gray in another, or perhaps a
new Sensation, which never any man had besides.

It is certain, I say, that this is possible, and there is no reason in the
World that can prove the contrary: However, we will grant that it is not
probable it should be so. It is much more reasonable to believe that GOD acts
always uniformly in the Union he has established betwixt our Souls and our
Bodies; and that he has affixt the same Idea's and the same Sensation to
similar Motions of the Internal Fibers of the Brain of different Persons.

Let it be granted then that the same Motions of the Fibers which terminate in
the middle of the Brain, are accompanied with the same Sensations in all Men;
if it fortunes that the same Objects produce not the same Motions in their
Brain, they will not, by consequence excite the same Sensations in their Soul:
Now to me it seems indisputable, that the Organs of the Senses of all Men,
being not disposed in the same manner, cannot receive the same Impressions from
the same Objects.

The blows, for instance, that Porters give one another by way of Complement,
would cripple some sort of People: The same blow produces very different
motions, and consequently excites very different Sensations, in a Man of a
Robust Constitution, and in a Child or a Woman of a tender make: Thus, since we
cannot be ascertained that there are two Persons in the World, who have the
Organs of their Senses exactly matched; we cannot be assured there are two
Persons in the World who have altogether the same Sensations of the same
Objects.

This is the Original cause of the strange Variety which is found in the
Inclinations of Men. Some there are who are extremely pleased with Music,
others find nothing agreeable in it: And even between these who delight in it,
some one sort of Music, some another, according to that almost Infinite
Diversity which is found in the Fibers of the Auditory Nerve, in the Blood, and
the Animal Spirits. How great, for instance, is the difference between the
Music of Italy, of France, of the Chinese, and other People; and consequently
between the Relish these different People have of these different sorts of
Music? It is usual likewise for the same Men at several times to receive
different Impressions from the same Consorts. For if the Imagination be well
warmed by a great plenty of brisk and active Spirits, a Man is much more
pleased with a bolder Hand or a Voluntary, wherein there are many Discords;
than with a softer Music, that is composed with exacter Rules and a
Mathematical Niceness. Experience proves this, and it is easy to give a Reason
for it.

It Is just the same with Smells. He that loves an Orange-flower, possibly
cannot endure a Rose; and so on the contrary.

As for Tastes, there is no less a Diversity in them than in the other
Sensations. Sawces must be made wholly different, equally to please different
Men, or equally to please the same Person at different times: One loves Sweet,
another Sour; One loves the Taste of Wine, another abhors it; the same Person
who thinks it pleasant when he is in Health, finds it bitter in a Fever; and so
it is with the other Senses. And yet all Men are fond of Pleasure; they all
delight in agreeable Sensations: And in this have all the same Inclinations.
They receive not therefore the same Sensations from the same Objects, since
they do not love them equally alike.

Thus, that which makes one Man say, he likes sweet things, is the agreeable
Sensation he has of them; and that which makes another say, he does not love
sweet things, is, indeed, because he has a different Sensation from him that
loves them. And so in saying he loves not sweet things, it is not implied that
he would not have the same Sensation as the other; but only that he has it not.
Wherefore it is an Impropriety of Speech for a Man to say, he loves not what is
Sweet; he should say, he loves not Sugar, or Honey, or the like, which, to
others, seem sweet and agreeable; and that he has not the same Taste as others,
because the Fibers of his Tongue are differently disposed.

But to give a sensible Instance; Let us suppose that among twenty Men there
were some one of them whose Hands were Cold, and that he was unacquainted with
the words they make use of in England to explain the Sensation of Heat and Cold
by; and on the contrary, that the Hands of all the rest were extremely Hot. If
in Winter some Water somewhat frigid should be brought them all to wash in,
those whose Hands were very Hot, washing after each other, might very well say,
This Water is very Cold, I cannot endure it: But when the other, whose Hands
were extremely Cold, came to wash at last, he might say on the contrary, I
cannot imagine, Gentlemen, why ye like not the Cold Water; for my part, I take
pleasure in feeling it Cold and washing in it.

It is manifest in this particular instance, That the last, in saying he loved
the Cold, could mean nothing else but that he loved the Heat, and that he felt
the Water Hot, whilst others felt the contrary.

Thus when a Man says, I love what is bitter, and cannot endure sweets; no more
is meant thereby, than that he has not the same Sensations, as those who say
they love sweets, and have an aversion to what is bitter.

It is certain therefore, that a Sensation which is agreeable to one Man, is so
to all others who have the same; but the same Objects does not cause the same
Sensation in all Men; because of the different disposition of the Organs of the
Senses; which is a thing of greatest consequence to be observed both as to
Natural and Moral Philosophy.

To this only one Objection can be made, and that very easy to be answered;
which is this: It sometimes happens that those very Persons, who love extremely
some sorts of Meat, IV. An Objection and Answer*
at length shall hate them in as great a degree, either because in eating they
met with some uncleanliness in the Dish, which surpised and disgusted them; or
because they surfeited on them by eating to excess, or for several other
reasons: These Men ('it is objected) love not the same Sensations as they loved
before: For still, though they eat the same Meats, yet they find them no longer
pleasant and palatable.

In answering this Objection, it must be observed, that these Men upon eating
those Meats, to which they have so great an abhorrence and loathing, have two
very different Sensations at the same time. They have that of the Meat which
they eat, as it is supposed in the Objection: And they have yet another
Sensation of Distaste or Loathing, which proceeds, for instance, from a strong
imagination of some uncleanliness they have formerly seen mingled with what
they eat. The reason of this is, that when two Motions are occasioned in the
Brain at the same time; one of them is never excited without the other, unless
it be some considerable time after. Thus because the Agreeable is always
accompanied with the Loathsome Sensation; and we usually confound things which
happen at the same time, we imagine with our selves, that this Sensation which
was formerly pleasant and agreeable is no longer so. And yet if it were always
the same, it must necessarily be always agreeable: Wherefore supposing it to be
disagreeable and unpleasant, it is because it is joined and confounded with
another Sensation, which is more distastful than it is it self agreeable.

There is much more difficulty to prove that Colors, and such other
Sensations, which I termed the Faint and Languid, are not the same in all
Mankind. Because all these Sensations affect the Soul so weakly, that a Man
cannot distinguish as he may in Tastes or other more powerful and lively
Sensations, whether one is more agreeable than another; nor discover the
diversity of Men's Sensations by the variety of Pleasure or Distaste, which might
be found in different Persons. Yet Reason which shows that the other Sensations
are not all alike in different Persons, does likewise show there must
necessarily be variety in the Sensations we have of Colors. And, indeed, it
cannot be doubted but there is much diversity in the Organs of Sight of
different Persons, as well as in those of Hearing and Tasting. For, what reason
is there to suppose an exact conformity and resemblance in the disposition of
the Optic Nerve of all Men, since there is such an infinite variety in all the
things of Nature, but especially in those that are Material. There is then
great probability that all Men do not see the same Colors in the same Objects.

This Pagra^h is wanting in some Editions, and is obscure in the French and
therefore has received some alteration, that it might be perspicuous
Nevertheless I am of Opinion that it never happens, at least very rarely, that
any Persons see Black and White of a different Color from what our selves see
them, though they do not see them equally Black or White. But as to middle
Colors, such as Red, Yellow, Blue, and especially those that are compounded of
these three, I am persuaded there are very few Men that have exactly the same
Sensations. For there are Men sometimes to be met with, who see some sort of
Bodies of a yellow Color, for instance, when they view them with one Eye, and
of a Green or Blue when they behold them with the other. And yet supposing
these Men to be born with one Eye only, or with two Eyes so disposed as to see
that of a Red or Yellow Color, which others call Green or Blue, they would
believe they saw Objects of the same Colors as others do, because they would
always have heard the Name Green given to that which they see Yellow, and Blue
to that which to them seems Red.

It might, as a farther proof, be alleged, that all Men see not the same
Objects of the same Color, because, according to the Observations of some Men,
the same Colors are not equally pleasing to all sorts of People; since on
supposition these Sensations were the same, they would be equally agreeable to
all Mankind: But because very strong Objections might be urged against this
Argument founded on the Answer I gave to the former Objection, I thought it not
solid enough to be proposed.

Indeed is is very rarely found that a Man is much more pleased with one Color
than another, as he takes greater pleasure in one Taste than another. The
reason of it is, That the Sensations of Colors, are not given us to judge
whether the Bodies about us are fit to nourish us or not: This is the part of
Pleasure and Pain, to show which are the Natural Characters of Good and Evil.
Objects in point of Colors, are neither good nor bad to eat: If Objects, on
account of their Color, should either seem agreeable or disagreeable, the
Sight of them would constantly be succeeded with the course of the Animal
Spirits, which excite and accompany the Passions; since the Soul cannot be
affected without some Commotion. We should often hate good Things, and be fond
of the bad; so that our Life could not be long preserved. In short, the
Sensations of Color are given us merely to distinguish Bodies from one
another; and this is effected well enough, whether a Man sees Grass green or
red, provided the Person who sees it green or red, sees it always in the same
manner.

But so much for our Sensations: Let us now say something of our Natural
Judgments, and our Voluntary Judgments that attend them. The fourth thing to be
considered which we confound with the three others, whereof we have been
speaking.

CHAP. XIV.
I. Of the False Judgments that accompany our Sensations, and which we confound
with them. II. The Reasons of these False Judgments. III. That Error is not in
our Sensations, but only in these Judgments.

WE instantly foresee, I. Of the false Judgments that accompany our
Sensations, and which we confound with them.
that there are very few Persons who will not be offended at this general
Proposition we lay down, namely, That we have not any Sensation of External
things, but contains one or more Judgments. We know well enough too that the
generality of Men are of opinion that there is not any Judgment True or False
in our Sensations: Insomuch that these Persons, surpised with the Novelty of
this Proposition, will undoubtedly say with themselves; How is this possible? I
do not judge the Wall to be white, I see well enough it is so. I do not judge
that Pain is in my Hand, I feel it most infalliby there. And who can doubt of
things so certain, unless he has a different Sensation of Objects from what I
have my self? In fine, their Inclinations for the Prejudices of Childhood will
carry them much farther. And if they proceed not to Contumely, and to the
Contempt of those whom they believe of a contrary Sentiment to themselves, they
will doubtless deserve to be reckoned amongst the moderate sort of People.

But it is not our business to stand prophesying any longer what ill Reception
and Success our Thoughts shall meet with; it is much more expedient to draw them
out with such convincing Arguments, and to set them in so clear a Light, as to
leave it impossible for a Man to engage them with his Eyes open, or to consider
them attentively, without submitting to them. We are to prove that we have no
Sensation of External things, which does not include some false Judgment or
other. And the Proof is as follows.

To me it seems past Controversy, that our Souls take not up such vast spaces
as are those we see betwixt us and the fixed Stars, though it should be allowed
that they are extended. Thus it is unreasonable to believe our Souls are in the
Heavens, when they see the Stars there: Nor is it more credible that they
depart out of their Bodies a mile, suppose, when they see the Houses at that
distance: The Soul then must necessarily see Stars and Houses where they are
not, since she goes not out of the Body wherein she is, and nevertheless sees
them out of it. Now whereas the Stars which are immediately united to the Soul,
and which are the only Stars the Soul can see, are not in the Heavens, it
follows that all Men who see the Stars in the Heavens, and thereupon
voluntarily judge that they are there, make two false Judgments; the one
Natural, and the other Free and Voluntary. The one is a Judgment of the Senses,
or a Compound Sensation, which ought not to be a measure for us to judge by.
The other is a Free Judgment of the Will, which a Man may avoid making, and
consequently must not make, if he would avoid falling into Error.

But let us see upon what grounds a Man believes those same Stars he
immediately sees, II. The Reason of these false Judgments*
to be out of the Soul, and in the Heavens: The reason is this, That it is not
in the power of the Soul to see them when she pleases: For she can perceive
them only at such times as those Motions are excited in her Brain, to which the
Idea's of these Objects are affixed by Nature. Now because the Soul has no
Perception of the Motions of her Organs, but only of her own Sensations, and is
confident these same Sensations are not of her own producing in her; she is
induced to judge they are without her, and in the Cause that represents them to
her. And she has so often made these kinds of Judgments, at the time of her
perceiving Objects, that it is hardly in her power at last to prevent them.

In order to explain more thoroughly what I have been saying, it would be
necessary to show the unusefulness of those infinite numbers of little Beings,
which we call Species and Idea's, which are, as it were, Nothing, and yet
represent all things; which we Create and Annihilate at our pleasure, and which
our Ignorance has caused our Imagination to invent, that we might account for
those things which we do not understand. We should show too the solidity of
those Men's Opinion, who believe GOD to be the True Father of Light, who alone
enlightens all Men, without whom, the most simple and easy Truths would not be
intelligible, nor the Sun, as bright and glorious as he is, be visible; who
acknowledge no other Nature, than the Will of the Creator; and who, upon these
Considerations, have discovered that Idea's which represent the Creatures to us
are nothing but the Perfections of GOD himself, which are correspondent to the
same Creatures, and which represent them.

Lastly, It would be necessary to treat of the Nature of what we call Idea's;
and afterward we might with greater ease, discourse more distinctly of the
things I have been speaking of: But this would lead us too far; and these
things shall be reserved for the Third Book only, because our method will
require them there. At present let it suffice, that I bring a most sensible and
uncontroverted Instance; wherein we find many Judgments confounded with one and
the same Sensation.

I suppose there is no Man in the World, who, looking on the Moon, does not see
her about a mile's distance from him, and finds her greater at her Rising and
Setting, than in the Meridian, or when a good way Elevated above the Horizon:
And perhaps too he fancies he only sees her larger, without thinking there is
any Judgment in his Sensation. However, it is undoubtedly certain, that if he
had no kind of Judgment included in his Sensation, he would not see her at that
distance she appears to him; and besides, would see her lesser at her Rising,
than when in her Exaltation above the Horizon; since we only see her greater at
her Rising, because we judge her more remote by a Natural Judgment which I have
spoke to in the sixth Chapter.

But besides our Natural Judgments, which may be regarded as Compound
Sensations, there occurs in almost all our Sensations a Free or Voluntary
Judgment. For Men do not only judge by a Natural Judgment, that Pain, for
instance, is in the Hand, they judge it is by a Free and Voluntary Judgment
also, They not only Feel it there, but Believe it there too; and they are so
strongly habituated to form such sort of Judgments, that they find great
difficulty to forbear them when they would.

And yet these Judgments are most false in themselves, though very advantageous
to the Welfare and Preservation of Life. For our Senses do not instruct us but
with reference to the Body: And all our Free Judgments which are conformable
and adapted to the Judgment of the Senses, are very remote from Truth.

But not to leave these things without showing how to discover the Reasons of
them; we must take notice that there are two sorts of Beings: Beings which our
Soul immediately sees, and others which she knows only by the Mediation of the
former. When, for instance, I perceive the Sun arising, I first perceive that
which I immediately see; and because my Perception of the former, is only
occasioned by something without me, which produces certain Motions in my Eyes
and in my Brain, I judge the former Sun which is in my Soul, to be without me,
and to Exist.

It may notwithstanding happen that we may see the first Sun which is
intimately united to our Soul, though the other were not above the Horizon, or
though it did not Exist at all. And thus we may see the first Sun greater when
the other rises, than when elevated high above the Horizon; and though it be
true that the first Sun, which we see immediately, be greater at the other's
Rising, it does not follow that the other is so too. For it is not properly that
which Rises which we see, since that is many Millions of Leagues remote; but
it is the former, which is truly greater, and such exactly as we see it; because
all the things we immediately see, are always such as we see them: And we
should not be Deceived, did we not judge that what we immediately see is to be
found in External Objects, which are the cause or occasion of what we see.

In like manner, when we see Light by beholding the First Sun, which is
immediately united to our Mind, we are not mistaken in believing that we see
it: It Is even impossible to doubt of it. But herein consists our Error, that
without any Reason, and indeed against all Reason, we will have this Light,
which we see immediately, to exist in the Sun, which is without us; and thus it
is with the other Objects of our Senses.

Upon a due Attention to what has been said from the Beginning, and in the
Process of this Work, III. That Error is not in our Sensations, but only in
these Judgments.
it will be easy to see, that amongst all the things which occur in every
Sensation, Error is only to be found in the Judgments we make, that our
Sensations exist in the Objects.

First: It Is an Error not to know that the Action of Objects consists in the
Motion of some of their Parts, and that That motion is communicated to the
Organs of our Senses, which are the two first things observable in every
Sensation: For there is a great deal of difference between not knowing a Thing,
and being in an Error in respect of that thing.

Secondly, We are right as to the third thing, which is properly Sensation.
When we Feel Heat, when we see Light, Colors, or other Objects, it is
certainly true that we see them, though we are Mad or Phrentick, for there is
nothing more infallibly true, than that your Visionary People see what they
think they see; and their Error consists only in the Judgments which they make,
that what they see has a real Existence without them, because they see it
without them.

This is the Judgment that implies a Consent of our Liberty, and which
consequently is liable to Error. And it is our Duty ever to refrain from making
it according to the Rule which was given in the beginning of this Book: That we
should never judge of any thing whatever, when we could avoid it, and were not
obliged to it by the certainty and evidence thereof; as it happens in this
place: For though we feel our selves extremely disposed by a confirmed and
inveterate Habit to judge our Sensations are in the Objects, as that Heat is in
the Fire, and Colors in the Pictures; yet we can see no evident and convincing
Reason, or forcible enough to oblige us to believe it. And thus we voluntarily
subject our selves to Error by the ill use we make of our Liberty, when we
freely form such Judgments as these.

CHAP. XV.
An Explication of the Particular Errors of the Sight, which may serve as an
Exemplar of the general Errors of our Senses.

I Have, if I am not mistaken, given a sufficient inlet to the Discovery of the
Errors of our Senses in respect of sensible Qualities in general, of which I
have spoken, on the account of Light and Colors, which our Method obliged us
to explain. It may now be expected I should descend to Particulars, and examine
the respective Errors into which each of our Senses casts us: But I shall not
insist long upon these things, because after what I have already said, a little
Attention will do the business of those tedious Discourses I should be obliged
to make. I shall only recount the general Errors our Sight occasions us to fall
into, touching Light and Colors; and this Example will, I believe, suffice to
give us an insight into the Errors of all our other Senses.

When we have fixed our Eyes upon the Sun for some moments, this is what occurs
both in our Eyes and in our Soul, and these are the Errors into which we fall.

Those who are acquainted with the First Elements of Dioptricks, and with any
thing of the admirable Contexture of the Eyes, know that the Rays of the Sun
are refracted in the Crystalline, and in the other Humors; and that they are
thence recollected upon the Retina or the Optic Nerve, which clothes all the
Fund of the Eye; in the same manner as the Rays of the Sun passing through a
unequal burning Glass, reunite in the Focus, or in the burning point of the
Glass at three or four Inches distance from it, in proportion to its convexity.
Now we are taught by Experiment, that if we place in the Focus of the Glass a
piece of stuff or brown Paper, Brown Paper presently takes fire; but the Glass
must be larger or more unequal, to burn white Paper.
the Rays of the Sun make so great an Impression on the stuff or on the Paper,
and agitate the little parts thereof so violently, as to break and separate
them from one another; or, in a word, to burn them, and reduce them into smoke
and ashes.

So we ought to conclude from this Experiment, that if the Optic Nerve were
black, and the Pupil or the Aperture of the Wea, through which the Light
enters into the Eyes should widen and enlarge it self, to take in freely the
solary Rays, instead of which it contracts and straitens it self to prevent
their passage, the same thing would happen to the Retina, as to the stuff or
the black or brown Paper, and its Fibers would be so violently agitated as to
be speedily broken, and burned in pieces. And for this reason it is, that the
generality of Men feel great Pain in beholding the Sun for a moment; because
they cannot so closely shut the Aperture of the Pupil, but there will still
pass Rays enough to agitate the Fibers of the Optic Nerve so violently, as to
give us Reason to apprehend their breaking.

The Soul is altogether ignorant of all this we have said; and when she beholds
the Sun, she neither has any Perception of her own Optic Nerve, nor of any
Motion in the Nerve: But this cannot be called an Error, it is purely Ignorance:
The first Error she falls into, is her judging the Pain she feels, to be in the
Eye.

If instantly upon a Man's beholding the Sun, he withdraws into a dark place
with his Eyes open, that Concussion of the Fibers of the Optic Nerve, caused
by the Rays of the Sun, decreases and wears off by little and little; and this
is all the alteration we can conceive in the Eyes. But the Soul perceives
nothing of this in them, but only a whitish or a yellowish Light; and the
second Error is, her judging this Light which she sees, to be in her Eyes, or
in the Neighboring Wall.

Finally, The Agitation of the Fibers of the Retina constantly decreases and
dwindles away by degrees: For after a Body has been vibrated or shaken, we
should consider nothing in it more than the Diminution of its Motion. But this
is not the thing the Soul is sensible of in her Eyes. She sees the whitish
Color metamorphos'd into Orange, after changed into Red, and lastly into Blue.
And the third Error into which we fall, is our judging there are in our Eye, or
on the next Wall, such alterations as differ more than Secundum magis and
minus; because the Colors Blue, Orange, and Red, which we see have a more
considerable difference than according to degrees of more or less.

These are some of the Errors into which we fall in point of Light and Colors;
and these are the occasion of our falling into many others, as we are going to
explain in the following Chapters.

CHAP. XVI.
I. That the Errors of our Senses serve us instead of general and very fruitful
Principles, from whence to draw false Conclusions; and these Conclusions again
become other Principles in their turn. II. The Origin of Essential
Differences. III. Concerning Substantial Forms. IV. Of some other Errors of the
School-Philosophy.

I. That the Errors of our Senses serve us instead of general and very fruitful
Principles, from whence to draw false Conclusions, and these Conclusions again
become other Principles in in their turn.
I HAVE, I think, given a sufficient Explication (to unprejudiced Persons, and
such as are capable of Thinking any thing Attentively) of the Nature of our
Sensations, and of the general Errors that accompany them: It is not amiss to
show at present that these general Errors are made use of, as uncontroverted
Principles, to explain all things by: That infinite false Consequences have
been drawn from them, which in their Turn have served as Principles for a train
of other Consequences: and thus by little and little those imaginary Sciences
void of Body and Reality, have been established, which have such multitudes of
blind Followers; but which like Fantoms leave nothing in their Embraces, but
the Shame and Confusion of suffering themselves to be seduced, or that Brand
and Character of Folly, which makes Men delight to feed on Delusions and
Chimera's. This is what we must show in particular by some Examples.

It has been already said, that we are used to attribute to Objects our own
Sensations, and we judge that Colors, Smells, Tastes, and other sensible
Qualities, are in the Objects which we call Colored, and so of the rest. We
have found this to be an Error. At present it is our Business to show, that we
make use of this Error by way of Principle, to deduce false Consequences from:
which last Consequences afterward we respect as other Principles, upon which
we go on to found our Reasonings. In a word, we shall here manifest what
Progress and Advances an Humane Mind makes in the Search of some Particular
Truths, when once this false Principle has been taken for granted, That Our
Sensations are in Objects.

But in order to render this more sensibly manifest, let us suppose some
Particular Body, whose Nature some Person is in Search of: Let us see what a
Man would do, who has a mind to know what Honey or Salt is. The first thing
this Man would do, would be to examine the Color, the Taste, and Smell, and
the other sensible Qualities of them: What are the Properties of Salt, and what
of Honey: Wherein they agree, and wherein they differ; and the Analogy there
may be betwixt these, and those of other Bodies. Which done, he would doubtless
reason and infer much after this manner, supposing he laid this down as an
uncontroverted Principle, That our Sensations were in the Objects of our Senses.

II. The Original of the Differences attributed to Objects: That these
Differences are in the Soul.
Whatever I have a Sensation of in Tasting, Seeing, and in Handling Salt and
Honey, is in the Salt and in the Honey. But it is certain that what I sensibly
perceive in the Honey essentially differs from what I sensibly perceive in the
Salt: The whiteness of the Salt differs more doubtless than according to the
degrees of more or less, from the Color of the Honey; and the Sweetness of the
Honey from the pungent Taste of the Salt; and consequently there must be an
essential difference betwixt Salt and Honey, since all that I am sensible of
both in the One and the Other, not only differs according to more or less, but
has an essential Difference.

This is the first step this Gentleman would make. For doubtless he could not
judge there was an essential Difference between Salt and Honey, did he not
think the Sensible appearances of the One essentially differed from those of
the Other: that is to say, That the Sensations he has of Honey essentially
differr'd from those he has of Salt; for as much as he only judges of them by
the Impression they make upon the Senses. Hence he looks upon this his
Conclusion as a new Principle from whence he deduces other Conclusions in like
manner.

III. The Original of Substantial Forms.
Seeing then Salt and Honey, and other Natural Bodies differ essentially from
one another, it follows, that those are grossly deceived, who would have us
believe, That all the difference which is found in Bodies, consists only in the
different Configuration of the little parts, that go to their Constitution. For
since Figure is not essential to a figured Body, let the Figure of these little
parts, which they imagine in the Honey, change how they will, the Honey will
still continue Honey, even though the parts of it should take the Figure of the
little parts of Salt. And thus there must of necessity be some substance or
other, which being joined to the first Matter, that is common to all different
Bodies, must cause an essential difference betwixt them.

This then is the second Advance this Gentleman would make, and the happy
Discovery of Substantial Forms: Those fruitful substances which cause every
thing we see in Nature, though they have no subsistence of themselves, except
in the Imagination of our Philosopher. But let us see the Properties which he
goes so liberally to bestow on this Being of his own Creation; for doubtless he
will rob all other Substances of their most essential Properties, to cloth
this Creature of his withal.

Since then there is found in every Natural Body, two Substances which go to
its Composition; IV. The Origin of all the other more general Errors of the
School-Philosophy.
the one which is common to Honey and Salt, and all other Bodies; and the other
which makes Honey to be Honey, and Salt to be Salt, and all other Bodies to be
what they are; it follows that the first of them which is Matter, having no
Contrary, and being indifferent to the Reception of all Forms, must remain
without Force and Action, since it has no occasion to defend it self: But as to
the others, which are the Substantial Forms, they have need always of being
attended with Qualities and Faculties, for their own defense. They must
necessarily be always upon their guard, for fear of being surpised: They must
be laboring continually for their Preservation, and extending their Dominion
over the bordering Matters, and pushing their Conquests as far as possibly they
can; because if they were forceless, or should desist from their Activity, the
other Forms would fall upon them by surprise, and forthwith reduce them to
Nothing. They must then be always fighting, and nourishing these Antipathies
and irreconcilable Hatreds against their Rival Forms, which are continually
seeking to destroy them.

Let it happen that a Form should seize the Matter of another: Let the Form of
a Carcass, for instance, seize the Body of a Dog; it is not enough for this
Form to rest satisfied in the Annihilation of the Form of the Dog, she must
gratify her Hatred and Revenge with the Destruction of all the Qualities which
have sided with her Enemy. The Hair of the Carcass must immediately turn white
with the whiteness of a new Creation; the Blood must be red with the redness,
which was never dreamt of; and the whole Body must be surrounded with Qualities
faithful to their Mistress, whom they must defend according to the small
strength and capacity, which may be supposed in the Qualities of a dead Body,
which in their turn must quickly perish too. But because it is impossible to be
always in Battle, and all Bodies have a place of Rest; the Fire, for instance,
must undoubtedly have its Center, where it ever strives to go by its own
Levity, and Natural Inclination, in order to Rest, to burn no longer, and also
to resign its Heat, which it preserved here below, merely for its own safety
and defense.

These are a small part of the Consequences which are deduced from this last
Principle, that there are Substantial Forms; which Consequences we have brought
in Our Philosopher, somewhat too frankly and airily concluding; for generally
others say the same things, in a more serious strain than he has done here.

There are still infinite other Consequences, which Philosophers daily infer
according as their Humor and Inclination leads them, or according as they are
determined by the Fruitfulness or Barrenness of their Imagination; for this is
all the Difference that is between them.

I shall not stand here to engage these Imaginary Substances, others have
sufficiently examined them. They have made it evidently appear, that there were
never Substantial Forms in Nature; and that they serve for no other use, than
to infer abundance of False, Ridiculous, and even Contradictory Conclusions. I
am satisfied to have discovered their Origin, in the Mind of Man, and to have
shown that they are at present altogether owing to that Prejudice common to all
Men; That Sensations are in the Objects of their Senses. For if what I said
before be considered with any attention, namely, that it is necessary for the
Preservation of our Bodies, we should have Sensations essentially differing,
though the Impressions which Objects make upon our Bodies, differ very little;
it will manifestly appear he his much in the wrong, who imagines such wide
differences in the Objects of our Senses.

But, by the way, I think it not amiss to declare, that no fault is to be found
with these Terms, of Form, and Essential Difference. Honey is doubtless Honey,
by its Form, and thus it is that it differs essentially from Salt; but this
Form or this Essential Difference consists only in the different Configuration
of its Parts. It Is this different Configuration, which makes Honey to be Honey,
and Salt to be Salt: And though it be accidental to Matter in general, to have
the Configuration of the parts of Honey or Salt, and so to have the Form of
Honey or Salt; yet it may be said to be essential to Honey or Salt, that they
may be what they are, to have such or such a Configuration in their parts; just
as the Sensations of Cold, of Heat, of Pleasure, and Pain, are not essential to
the Soul, but only to the Soul which feels them; in as much as by these
Sensations, she is said to feel Heat, Cold, Pleasure, and Pain.

CHAP. XVII.
I. Another Instance taken from Morality, which shows that our Senses offer us
nothing but false Goods. II. That GOD alone is our true and proper Good. III.
The Origin of the Error of the Epicureans and Stoics.

I HAVE, I think, brought sufficient Arguments to prove that this Prejudice,
That our Sensations are in the Objects, is a most fruitful Principle of Errors
in Natural Philosophy. It is my Business at present to bring others drawn from
Morality, wherein the same Prejudice joined with this other, That the Objects
of our Senses are the true and sole Causes of our Sensations, is most highly
dangerous.

I. An Instance taken from Morality, which shows that our senses offer us
nothing but false goods.
There is nothing so common in the World, as to see Men devoted to sensible
Goods; some love Music, some Banqueting, and others have a Passion for other
things. Now this is the way of Reasoning these Men must have taken to persuade
themselves that these Objects are their Goods. All the pleasant Tastes we are
delighted with in Feasting, the Sounds which gratify the Ear, and those other
Pleasures we are sensible of, upon other occasions, are doubtless contained in
sensible Objects; or, at least, these Objects give us the Sensation of them;
or, lastly, are the only means of Conveying them to our Senses. Now it is
impossible to doubt that Pleasure is good, and Pain evil. We receive a
Conviction from within, and consequently the Objects of our Passions, are most
real goods, to which we must cleave, if we will be happy.

I will explain in the last Book, in what sense Objects act upon the Body.
This is the Reasoning we generally fall into almost without being aware of it;
Thus, because we believe that our Sensations are in Objects, or that the
Objects are of themselves capable of giving us the Sensation of them, we
consider these things as our own Goods, though we are infinitely exalted above
them; since they are able to act only upon our Bodies, and to produce some
Motion in their Fibers, but are incapable of acting upon our Souls, or making
us sensible either of Pleasure or Pain.

Certainly if our Soul acts not upon her self, on occasion of what happens in
the Body, II. That GOD only is our Good; and that all sensible Objects cannot
give us any sense of Pleasure.
it is GOD alone who has that Power: And if she be not the Cause of her own
Pleasure and Pain, according to the Diversity of the Vibrations of the Fibers
of her Body, as it is most highly probable she is not, since she feels Pleasure
and Pain without consenting thereunto; I know no other Hand potent enough to
make her sensible thereof, except that of the Author of Nature.

Certainly it is GOD alone who is our true Good: He only is able to fill us
with all the Pleasures we are capable of enjoying; and it is only by the
Knowledge of Him and Love of Him, He has resolved to make us sensible of them.
Such as He has affixt to the Motions which happen in our Body, to make us the
more sollicitous for its Preservation, are very little in themselves, very weak
as to their Capacity, and very short in their Duration. Notwithstanding in the
estate Sin has reduced us to, we are, as it were, become their Vassals. But
those which He shall make His Elect sensible of in Heaven, will be infinitely
greater, since He has Created us that we might know and love Him. For whereas
ORDER requires the Perception of the greatest Pleasures in the Possession of
the greatest Goods, GOD being infinitely above all other things, the Pleasure
of those who shall enjoy Him, will certainly exceed all other Pleasures.

III. The Origin of the Errors of the Epicureans and Stoics.
What we have said of the Cause of our Errors in respect of Good, gives us a
sufficient Knowledge of the falsity of the Opinions the Epicureans and Stoics
embraced, touching the Sovereign Good. The Epicureans placed it in Pleasure;
and because a Man is sensible of this no less in Vice than in Virtue, and more
generally in the former than in the other, it has been commonly thought they
let loose the Reins to all sorts of Sensible Pleasures.

Now the first cause of their Error is this, That judging falsely there is
something pleasant and agreeable in the Objects of their Senses, or that they
were the real Causes of the Pleasures they felt; and being moreover convinced
by an Internal Sensation, which they naturally had, that Pleasure was good for
them, at least for the time wherein they enjoyed it, they let themselves loose
to all sorts of Passions, from which they had no Apprehensions of receiving any
damage in the Consequence. Whereas they ought to have considered, that the
Pleasure they reaped from sensible things, could not exist in those things as
their true Causes, nor any other way, and consequently that sensible Goods
could not be Goods in respect of the Soul, and they should have thought of the
things we have already explained.

The Stoics on the other hand, being persuaded that sensible Pleasures were
only seated in, and fitted for the Body, and that the Soul ought to have a
peculiar Good of her own, placed Felicity in Virtue; see then the Origin of
their Errors, Viz.

They believed that Sensible Pleasure and Pain were not in the Soul, but in the
Body only; and made use of this their false Judgment as a Principle for other
false Conclusions; as that Pain was not an Evil, nor Pleasure a Good: That the
Pleasures of the Senses were not Good in their own Nature, that they were
common to Men and Beasts, etc. Notwithstanding it is easy to see, that though
the Epicureans and Stoics were in the wrong in many things, they were in the
right in some; for the Happiness of the Blessed consists only in a perfect and
accomplished Virtue, that is to say, in their Knowledge and Love of GOD, and in
a most exquisite Pleasure that never fails to accompany them.

Let it then be well remembered, That External Objects contain nothing either
Pleasant or Troublesome in themselves; that they are not the Causes of our
Pleasures; that we have no reason either to fear or love them; but it is GOD
alone, whom it is our duty to fear, and our duty to love; since it is only He
that has Power enough to Punish and Reward us; to make us sensible of Pleasure
and of Pain: Finally, it is only in GOD and from GOD, we ought to hope to
receive the Pleasures, toward which we have so strong, so natural, and so just
an Inclination.

CHAP. XVIII.
I. That our Senses make us liable to Error, even in things which are not
sensible, II. An Example taken from the Conversation of Men. III. That sensible
Manners are not to be regarded.

WE have sufficiently explained the Errors of our Senses, in respect of their
Objects; as of Light, Colors, and other Sensible Qualities. Now let us see how
they misguide us, even in regard to those Objects which are not of their
Jurisdiction, by diverting us from an attentive Consideration of them, and
inclining us to judge of them from their Testimony and Report; a thing that
well deserves to be thoroughly explained.

Attention and Application of the Mind to the clear and distinct Idea's we have
of Objects, I. That our senses make us liable to Error, even in things which
are not sensible
is the most necessary thing in the World, to discover what truly they are: For
as it is impossible to see the Beauty and Excellency of any piece of Art,
without opening the Eyes, and looking fixedly upon it: So the Mind cannot
evidently see the most part of things, with the Relations they bare one to
another, unless it considers them with Attention. But it is certain that
nothing casts us off more from our Attention to clear and distinct Idea's, than
our own Senses, and consequently nothing sets us so remote from Truth, or so
soon throws us into Error.

For our better conceiving these things, it is absolutely necessary to know,
That the three ways the Soul has of perceiving, viz. by the Senses, by the
Imagination, and by Intellect, do not all equally affect her; and consequently,
she does not fix an equal Attention on every thing she perceives by their
means: For she applies her self most to that which touches her nearest, and she
is careless enough of that which affects her but a little.

Now what she perceives by the Senses affects her much, and takes up all her
Application; what she knows by her Imagination, touches her less pathetically:
But that which the Understanding represents to her; I would say, what she of
her self perceives independently on the Senses and Imagination, scarce quickens
or awakens her at all. No body doubts but that the least sensible Pain is more
present to the Mind, and makes it more attentive than the Meditation of a thing
of far greater Importance.

The reason which may be given for this, is, That the Senses represent the
Objects as present, the Imagination represents them as absent. Now the order of
things requires that among many Goods, or many Evils proposed to the Soul,
those which are present should give her more concern or application than others
which are absent; because it is necessary for the Soul suddenly to determine
what ought to be done on this occasion. And thus she is more intent to a simple
prick of a Pin, than to the most exalted Speculations. And the Pleasures and
Evils of this World make a greater Impression on her, than the ineffable Pains
and infinite Pleasures of Eternity.

The Senses then do extremely warp and bend down the Soul to what they
represent to her: But whereas she is of a limited and finite Nature, and so
cannot conceive distinctly many things at once; she cannot have a distinct
Perception of what the Understanding represents to her at the same time her
Senses offer any thing to her consideration. She forsakes then the clear and
distinct Idea's of the Understanding, however proper to discover the truth of
Things in their own Nature, to apply her self entirely to the confused Idea's
of the Senses, which affect her tenderest part, and give her not a
representation of things as they are in their own Nature, but only as they
stand related to her Body.

If a Man, to give an instance, would explain any Truth, II. An Example taken
from the Conversation of Men.
he must necessarily make use of Speech and express his Notions and Internal
Sensations by Motions and Manners sensible. Now the Soul is incapable of
perceiving many things distinctly at the same time; so having always a great
Attention to what comes in to her by way of the Senses, she is scarce at
leisure to consider the Reasons which she hears alleged: But her greatest
Application is confined to the sensible Pleasure she receives from the finely
turned Periods, the Conformity of the Gestures to the Words, from the Genteel
Mein of the Face, from the Air, and the Way and Manner of the Speaker: Yet
after she has heard, she will needs judge, because it is the Custom. And thus
her Judgments must be different, according to the diversity of the Impressions
she has received through the Senses.

If, for example, the Speaker has a voluble Tongue, and easiness of Delivery;
if he observes the numerousness of Words, and a delightful Cadence in his
Periods; if he has the Look of a Gentleman, or of a Man of Parts; if he be a
Person of Quality, or is attended with a great Retinue; if he dictates with
Authority, or speaks in a grave decisive Manner; if others listen to him with
Silence and Respect; if he has some Reputation in the World, or is acquainted
with the great Wits of the Age; In fine, if he has the happiness to please, or
to be esteemed, he will have Reason in every word that he advances; and there
shall be nothing even to his Band and Cuffs, but shall prove something or other.

But if he be so unfortunate as to have the Qualities quite contrary to these,
let him demonstrate as long as he pleases, he shall prove nothing. Let him say
the finest things in the World, no Man shall ever regard them. The Attention of
the Auditors being employed upon that only which strikes their Senses, the
Disgust they conceive at the sight of a Man so uncouth and ill-contriv'd, will
wholly take them up, and hinder the Application they ought to allow to his
Thoughts; A dirty or a rumpled Band is enough to make the Wearer despised, and
all that comes from him; and that way of talking like a Dotard or a mere
Philosopher, will make the most noble and exalted Truths, which are above the
reach of the generality of Mankind, be looked on as Ravings and Extravagances.

Such are the ordinary Judgments of Mankind. Their Eyes and their Ears set up
for Judges of Truth, and not their Reason, even in things that depend only on
Reason; because Men apply themselves merely to the Sensible and Agreeable
Manners of Men, and seldom afford any Attention that is Resolute and Serious,
toward the Discovery of Truth.

Yet what greater Injustice is there, than to judge of things by the Manner of
them, and to despise Truth, III. That Sensible and Agreeable Manners ought not
to be regarded.
because it comes not dressed in those Ornaments that please us and indulge and
flatter our Senses? It should be reckoned a Reproach to Philosophers, and such
as pretend to Sense, to be more inquisitive after these agreeable outside
Manners, than Truth it self; and rather to entertain their Mind with the Noise
and Emptiness of Words, than with the Solidity of Things. It Is for Men of a
Vulgar Stamp, it is for Souls of Flesh and Blood, to suffer themselves to be won
with Rhetorical Periods, and captivated with Figures and Motions that awake and
excite the Passions.

Omnia enim stolidi magis admirantur amantque,
Inversis quae sub verbis latitantia cern^nt:
Veraque constituunt, quae bell^ tangere possunt
Aures, and lepido quae sunt fucata sonore.
But wise Men endeavor to arm themselves against the malignant force, and the
powerful charms of these sensible Manners. The Senses impose on them as well as
on other Men, since they are no more than Men, but they have the Wisdom to
disregard the Reports they make. They imitate that famous Example of the Judges
of the Ar^opagus, who, upon a severe Penalty, forbad their Advocates the use of
any fallacious Words and Figures, and never heard them plead but in the dark;
for fear the Pleasantness of their Words and Insinuating Gestures should
persuade them to any thing prejudicial to Truth and Justice, and to the end
they might apply themselves with less distraction to the Solidity of their
Reasons.

CHAP. XIX.
Two other Examples. I. The first, concerning our Errors about the Nature of
Bodies. II. The second, concerning those which respect the Qualities of the
same Bodies.

WE have been showing that there are a vast multitude of Errors, which are
originally owing to the strong Application of the Soul to that which enters by
the Senses, and that Lukewarmness and Indifference to things represented by the
Understanding. We have given an Instance of very considerable Importance in
Morality, taken from the Conversation of Men; we shall produce some others
drawn from the Commerce we have with the rest of Nature, which are absolutely
necessary to be observed in Natural Philosophy.

One of the Principal Errors we fall into in point of Natural Philosophy, is
our Imagining there is much more Substance in Sensible, I. The Errors
concerning the Nature of Bodies.
than in Imperceptible Bodies. The generallity of Men are of Opinion there is
much more Matter in Gold and Lead, than in Air and Water: And Children who have
made no Observation by their Senses of the Effects of Air, ordinarily imagine
it has nothing of Reality in it.

Gold and Lead are extremely ponderous, very hard, and very sensible; Water and
Air, on the contrary, are scarce perceptible by the Senses. Whence Men conclude
the former are more real than the other. They judge of the Truth of things by
the Sensible Impression, which is ever fallacious; and they neglect the clear
and distinct Idea's of the Intellect which never deceives us; because that
which is sensible affects us, and challenges our Application; but that which is
Intelligible lays us to sleep. These false Judgments respect the Substance of
Bodies; let us now see the others about the Qualities of the same Bodies.

II. Errors concerning the Qualities and Perfection of Bodies.
It Is the way for Men, almost universally, to judge that the Objects which
excite in them the most Pleasant Sensations, are the most Perfect and Pure of
all others; without so much as knowing wherein the Perfection and Purity of
Ma^ter consists, and, indeed, without caring whether they do or not.

They say, for instance, that Mud is Impure, and that the clearest Water is
very pure. But Camels which love Muddy Water, and those Animals which delight
to wallow in Mire, would be of another opinion. They are Beasts, it is true; but
those Men who love the Entrails of a Woodcock, and the Excrements of a
Civit-Cat, do not say they are Impure, though they say so of the Excrements of
all other Animals. Finally, Musk and Amber are in general Esteem with all Men,
though they are supposed to be nothing but Ordure.

It is certain Men judge of the Perfection and Purity of Matter, with Relation
to their own Senses; whence it falls out, that the Senses being different in
all Men, as has been abundantly explained, they must needs judge very
differently of the Purity and Perfection of Matter. So that those Books which
are daily composed upon the Imaginary Perfections attributed to certain Bodies,
must needs be stuffed with Errors, in all the strange and odd variety that can
be; since the Reasonings they contain are founded only on the false, confused
and irregular Idea's of the Senses.

It is not the Part of Philosophers to call Matter Pure or Impure, till they
know what they precisely mean by the Words Pure and Impure. For a Man should
never talk without knowing what he says; that is to say, without having
distinct Idea's, which answer to the Terms he uses. Now if they had fixed clear
and distinct Idea's to each of these Terms, they would see that what they call
Pure would prove often very Impure, and what seems to them Impure would be
found pure in an high degree.

If, for instance, they would have that Matter to be most Pure and Perfect,
whose Parts are most fine and disunited and easiest to be moved; Gold, Silver
and Precious Stones, would be extremely Imperfect Bodies; Air and Fire on the
other hand would be the most perfect, When Flesh began to putrify, and cast a
very noisome stench, it would then be commencing its Perfection, and stinking
Carrion would be a more perfect Body, than sound and common Flesh.

Again, if on the other hand they would have those to be the most perfect
Bodies, the parts whereof are most gross, solid, and difficult to be moved; the
Earth would be perfecter than Gold, and Air and Fire would be more imperfect
Bodies.

But if they are not willing to affix the clear and distinct Idea's I have
mentioned, to the Terms Pure and Perfect, let them substitute others in their
room. But if they pretend to define these words only by sensible Notions, they
will eternally confound things with one another, since the Signification of the
Terms that express them can never be fixed and determined. All Men, as we have
already proved, have very different Sensations of the same Objects: Wherefore a
Man ought not to define these Objects by the Sensations he has of them, unless
he has a mind to be unintelligible, and to put all things in confusion.

But at the bottom, there is no matter to be found, (not that which the Heavens
are framed of) which has more Perfection in it than any other. All that Matter
seems capable of, are Figures and Motions, and it is indifferent to it whether
it has Figures and Motions regular or irregular. Reason does not tell us that
the Sun is more Perfect or more Luminous than Dirt; nor that the Celebrated
Beauties of Romancers and Poets, have any advantage over the most corrupted
Carcasses; they are our false and treacherous Senses thot tell us this. It is
in vain for Men to cry out against what we say; all their Railleries and
Exclamations will appear frigid and ridiculous, to such as shall seriously
examine the Reasons we have alleged.

Those who are used to no other Preception than that of their Senses, believe
the Sun to abound with Light; but those who can be Sensible and Reasonable at
the same time, are of another opinion; provided they have as good a Faculty of
Reasoning, as they have of Sensation. I am very well persuaded, that even those
who pay the greatest Deference to the testimony of their Senses, would close
with our Opinion, had they well considered the things that we have said: But
they are too much in love with the Delusion of their Senses; they have obeyed
their Prejudices too long, and their Soul is too unthoughtful, or forgetful, to
acknowledge or remember that all the Perfections she imagines she sees in
Bodies, belong only to her self.

But it is not to this sort of Men we address our selves, we are very little
concerned for their Approbation and Esteem: They refuse to hearken to us, and
consequently are incompetent Judges; we are satisfied in defending Truth, and
having the Approbation of those who seriously labor to rid themselves of the
Errors of their Senses, and to employ the Light of their Understanding. We only
require of them, that they would seriously Meditate on these Thoughts, with the
greatest Attention they can, and then let them judge of them: Let them condemn
them or acquit them; we submit them to their Judgment, since by their
Meditation they have obtained a Supreme Power and Jurisdiction over them, which
without Injustice cannot be contested with them.

CHAP. XX.
The Conclusion of the First Book. I. That our Senses are given us only for the
Preservation of our Body, II. That we ought to doubt of the Reports they make.
III. That it is no little thing to doubt, as we ought to do.

I HAVE, if I am not mistaken, made a sufficient Discovery of the General
Errors into which our Senses lead us, whether in regard to their own Objects,
or in respect of Things, which can only be perceived by the Understanding: And
I am of an Opinion, that we fall into no Error by their Conduct, the cause
whereof may not be discovered by the things that have been said, in case a Man
will bestow a little Meditation upon them.

We have hitherto seen, that our Senses are most faithful and exact in
instructing us in the Relations, I. That our Senses are given us only for the
Preservation of our Body.
which all the Bodies which surround us have with our own, but are incapable of
teaching us what these Bodies are in their own Nature; that to make the best
use of them, they must only be employed to the Preservation of our Health and
Life; and that they cannot be sufficiently despised, when they pretend to raise
themselves to a Sovereignty above the Understanding. This is the Principal
Thing I would gladly have well remembered in all this First Book, viz. Let a Man
thoroughly consider, that our Senses were only given us for the Preservation of
our Body, let him fortify himself in this Notion; and in order to free himself
from the Ignorance he is under, let him seek out other Succors and Assistances,
than those his Senses furnish him withal.

II. That we ought to doubt of the Reports which our Senses make of Things
But supposing there be some such Men to be found, (as doubtless there be but
too many of them) who will not be persuaded of these last Propositions by what
we have hitherto said, we demand of them still much less than this; we only
desire of them to enter into some Distrust of their Senses, and if they cannot
entirely reject their Testimonies as false and treacherous, let them only
seriously doubt, lest these Reports should not be absolutely true: And
certainly, in my Opinion, enough has been said, to cast at least some Scruple
in the Mind of Reasonable Men, and consequently to excite them to the Employing
their Liberty otherwise than they have hitherto done: for if they could once
begin to doubt, that the Reports of their Senses were not true, they might with
greater Ease withold their Consent, and so prevent their falling into those
Errors, into which they have hitherto fallen especially if they could remember
that Rule we have given at the Beginning of this Discourse, That we ought not
to give an entire Consent, except to Things that appear entirely evident, and
to which we could not forbear consenting, without being certainly convinced, we
should make an ill us^ of our Liberty in not consenting.

III. That it is no little thing to doubt as we ought to do.
For what remains, let not a Man imagine he has made but an inconsiderable
Progress, if he has only learned to Doubt. To know how to Doubt with Judgment
and Reason, is not so small a thing as is supposed. For we must needs say,
there is a great deal of difference betwixt Doubting and Doubting. Some Doubt
out of a Rash Passion, and a Brutish Resolution; others out of Blindness and
Malice, out of Humor and Fancy, and because they will do so; But there are
others likewise, that Doubt out of Prudence and Caution, out of Wisdom and
Penetration of Mind. The Academicks and Atheists Doubt after the former manner;
but true Philosophers Doubt in the latter. The first Doubt is a Doubt of
Darkness, which never conducts us toward the Light, but sets us at a greater
Distance from it. The second Doubt proceeds from Light, and is assistant in
some measure, to the production of it, in its turn.

Those who only Doubt in the former manner, know not what it is to Doubt with
Understanding: They Laugh at Monsieur Des Cartes's teaching us to Doubt, in the
first of his Metaphysical Meditations; because it seems to them, that it is no
other, than a Fantastic Doubting; That it can only be said in general, that
our Nature is Infirm, that our Mind is full of Blindness, that we ought to be
very careful to rid our selves of our Prejudices, and some such things as
these. They suppose that this is enough to prevent being seduced by their
Senses, and not to be deceived at all. But it is not enough to complain, that
the Mind is weak; we must make her sensible of her Weaknesses: It is not enough
to say, She is subject unto Error; we must discover to her wherein her Errors
consist, to which I think we have given an Introduction in this first Book, by
accounting for the Nature and Errors of our Senses; and we will still pursue
the same Design, in explaining the Nature and Errors of our Imagination in the
Second.

F. MALEBRANCHE'S TREATISE, CONCERNING The Search after TRUTH. BOOK the SECOND,
Concerning The IMAGINATION.
THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I.
I. A General Idea of the Imagination. II. That it includes two Faculties, an
Active and a Passive. III. A General Cause of the Changes which happen in the
Imagination of Men; and the Foundation of the Second Book.

IN the foregoing Book I have treated concerning the Senses; I have endeavored
to Explain their Nature, and precisely to determine the Use that ought to be
made of them. I have discovered the Principal and most General Errors, wherein
they engage us: and have attempted such a Limitation of their Power, as to put
Man in a capacity of Hoping much, and Fearing nothing from them; whilst they
keep them within those Boundaries I have prescribed them. In this Second Book I
shall Discourse concerning the Imagination, as the Natural Order of things
obliges me. For there is so near a Relation and Affinity betwixt the
Imagination and the Senses, that they in no wise ought to be separated. We
shall see too in the Sequel of the Discourse, that these two Powers are no
farther Different than according to Degree of more or less.

This then is the Method which I have Observed in this Treatise: It is divided
into three Parts. In the First I Explain the Natural Causes of the Disorder and
Errors of the Imagination: In the Second I make some Application of these
Causes to the more General Errors of the Imagination; and I Discourse of such
as may be termed the Moral Causes of these Errors. In the Third I treat of the
Contagious Communication of Strong Imaginations.

Though the greatest part of the things contained in this Tract may not be so
new, as those I have already delivered in Explaining the Errors of the Senses,
yet their Use and Advantage will be no less considerable. Men of bright and
clarified Understandings can easily discover the Errors, and the Causes of the
Errors I am treating of: But there are few such Men as can make sufficient
Reflection thereupon: I pretend not to give Instructions to all the World, my
design is only to Inform the Ignorant, and to Caution and Remind the rest, or
rather I try to be my own Instructour and Remembrancer.

It has been said in the First Book, that the Organs of our Senses were
composed of little Fibers, which terminate, on one hand, upon the External
parts of the Body, and on the Skin; I. A General Idea of the Imagination,
and on the ^ther, center in the middle of the Brain. But these Fibers may be
moved in a twofold manner; either by commencing their Motion at those
Extremities which terminate in the Brain, or at those which terminate on the
Surface of the Body. Being the Agitation of these Fibers cannot be communicated
to the Brain, but the Soul must have some Perception or other; if the Agitation
be begun by the Impression of Objects, made upon the External Surface of the
Fibers of the Nerves, and be communicated to the Brain; the Soul thereupon
receives a Sensation, and judges By a Natural Judgment, whereof I have spoken
in several places of the preceding Book.
what she has the Sensation of, to be without; that is to say, She perceives an
Object as Present: but if it be only the Internal Fibers that are agitated by
the Course of the Animal Spirits, or in some other manner, the Soul Imagines
and judges what she imagines to be not without, but within the Brain; that is,
she perceives an Object as Absent. And this is the difference there is between
Sensation and Imagination.

But it ought to be observed, That the Fibers of the Brain are more violently
agitated by the Impression of External Objects, than by the Course of the
Animal Spirits; and that for this reason the Soul is more nearly touched by
External Objects, which she judges as present, and, as it were, capable of
making her instantly sensible of Pleasure or Pain, than by the Course of the
Animal Spirits. And yet it happens sometimes in Persons whose Animal Spirits
are put in extreme Commotion, by Fastings, Watchings, a scorching Fever, or a
violent Passion, that these Spirits move the Internal Fibers of the Brain with
as great a force, as External Objects; so that these Persons have the Sensation
of what they should only have the Imagination, and think they See Objects
before their Eyes, which they only Imagine in the Brain. Which evidently shows,
that, in regard of what occurs in the Body, the Senses and Imagination differ
but in Degree of more or less, as I have before declared.

But in Order to give a more distinct and particular Idea of the Imagination,
we must know that as often as any Change happens in that part of the Brain
where the Nerves unite, there happens a Change also in the Soul: That is, as
has been already explained, if there happens any Motion in this part which
alters the Order of its Fibers, there happens, at the same time, a new
Perception in the Soul; and she either Feels or Imagines something afresh: And
that the Soul is incapable of receiving any fresh Sensation or Imagination,
without some Alteration in the Fibers of that part of the Brain.

So that the Faculty of Imagining, or the Imagination, consists only in the
Power the Soul has of framing the Images of Objects, by effecting a Change in
the Fibers of that part of the Brain, which may be called the Principal Part,
as being that which corresponds to all the Parts of our Body; and is the Place
where the Soul keeps her immediate Residence, if I may be so allowed to speak.

This manifestly shows that this Power which the Soul has of Forming these
Images, includes two things; II. Two Faculties in the Imagination, an Active
and a Passive.
one that has its Dependence on the Soul, and the other on the Body. The first
is the Action and the Command of the Will, The second is the ready Obedience
paid to it by the Animal Spirits which delineate those Images, and by the
Fibers of the Brain wherein they must be imprinted, In this Tract, both one and
the other of these two things go indifferently by the Name of Imagination; nor
are they distinguished by the Terms Active and Passive, which might be given
them; because the Sense of the thing spoken of, easily determines which of the
Two is understood, whether the Active Imagination of the Soul, or the Passive
Imagination of the Body.

I shall not here particularly determine which is that Principal Part of the
Brain beforementioned; First, Because it would be but an useless thing to do
it. Secondly, Because it is not perfectly and infallibly known. And lastly,
Since I could not convince others, it being a Matter incapable of Probation in
this place; though I should be infallibly assured which was this Principal
Part, I should think it more advisable to say nothing of it.

Whether then it be according to the Opinion of Dr. Willis, in the two little
Bodies, called by him Corpora Striata, that the common Sense resides; and the
Cells of the Brain preserve the Species of the Memory, and the Corpus Callosum
be the Seat of Imagination. Whether it be according to Fernelius's Opinion, in
the Pia Matter, which involves the Substance of the Brain: Whether it be in the
Pineal Gland, according to the Notion of Descartes; or, lastly, in some other
part hitherto undiscovered, that our Soul exercises her Principal Functions, is
of no great concern to know. It Is enough to be assured that there is a
Principal Part, (and this is moreover absolutely necessary) and that the Basis
of Mr. Des-Cartes's System stands its ground. For it is to be well observed,
that though he should be mistaken in assuring us it is the Pineal Gland, to
which the Soul is immediately united, this could no ways injure the Foundation
of his System, from which may ever be deduced all the profit that could be
expected from the true, to make all necessary advances in the knowledge of Man.

Since then the Imagination consists only in the Power the Soul has of Forming
the Images of Objects, III. A general cause of the Changes, which happen in the
Imagination; and the foundation of the Second Book.
by imprinting them (as I may so say) in the Fibers of the Brain; the greater
and more distinct the Impresses of the Animal Spirits are, which are the
strokes of these Images, the more strongly and distinctly the Soul will imagine
Objects. Now, as the Largeness, and Depth, and Cleaverness of the strokes of
any Sculpture depend upon the Forcible Acting of the Graving Instrument, and
the pliable yielding of the Plate; so the Depth, and the Distinctness of the
Impresses of the Imagination, depend on the Force of the Animal Spirits, and
the Constitution of the Fibers of the Brain: And it is the Variety that is found
in these two things, which is almost the universal Cause of that great
Diversity we observe in the Minds of different Men.

For it is no hard thing to account for all the different Characters to be met
with in the Minds of Men: On the one hand, by the Abundance and Scarcity, by
the Rapidness and Slowness, by the Grossness and the Littleness of the Animal
Spirits; and on the other hand, by the Fineness and Courseness, by the Moisture
and Dryness, by the Facility and Difficulty of the yielding of the Fibers of
the Brain; and lastly, by the Relation the Animal Spirits may possibly have
with these Fibers. And it would be very expedient for every one, forthwith to
try to Imagine to himself all the different Combinations of these things, and
to apply himself seriously to the Consideration of all the Differences we have
observed between the Minds of Men. Because it is ever more Useful, and also
more Pleasant for a Man to employ his own Mind, and to accustom it to the
finding out Truth by its own Industry, than to suffer it to gather Rust by a
careless Laziness, in applying it only to things wholly digested, and explained
to his hands. Besides that, there are some things so delicately nice and fine,
in the different Character of Minds, that a Man may easily sometimes discover
them, and be sensible of them himself, but is unable to represent them, or make
them sensible to others.

But that we may explain, as far as possibly we can, all the Differences that
are found in different Minds, and that every Man may more easily observe in his
own, the Cause of all the Changes, he sensibly perceives in it at different
times; it seems convenient to make a general Enquiry into the Causes of the
Changes, which happen in the Animal Spirits, and in the Fibers of the Brain:
Since this will make way for the Discovery of all those, which happen in the
Imagination.

Man never continues long like himself; all Mankind have sufficient Internal
Convictions of their own Inconstancy. A Man judges one while in one manner, and
another while in another, concerning the same Subject. In a word, the Life of a
Man consists only in the Circulation of the Blood, and in another Circulation
of Thoughts and Desires. And I am of Opinion, a Man cannot employ his Time much
better, than in Searching for the Causes of these Changes we are subject to,
and entering into the Knowledge of our Selves.

CHAP. II.
I. Of the Animal Spirits, and the Changes they are subject to in general. II.
That the Chyle entering the Heart, occasions a Change in the Spirits. III. That
Wine does the same thing.

IT IS confessed by all the World, that the Animal Spirits are nothing, I. Of
the Animal Spirits, and the Changes they are subject to in general*
but the more subtle and agitated parts of the Blood; which Subtilty and
Agitation is principally owing to the Fermentation it receives in the Heart;
and the violent Motion of the Muscles, which constitute that part: That these
Spirits, together with the rest of the Blood, are conducted through the
Arteries to the Brain: And that there they are separated from it, by some parts
appropriated to that purpose; but which they are, it has not been yet agreed
upon.

From whence we ought to conclude, that in case the Blood be very subtle, it
will have abundance of Animal Spirits; but if it be gross, the Animal Spirits
will be few: That if the Blood be composed of parts easy to be inflamed in the
Heart, or very fit for Motion, the Spirits in the Brain will be extremely
heated and agitated: And, on the contrary, if the Blood admits little
Fermentation in the Heart, the Animal Spirits will be languid, unactive, and
without force: And lastly, according to the Solidity, which is found in the
parts of the Blood, the Animal Spirits will have more or less solidity, and
consequently greater or lesser force in their Motion. But these things ought to
be explained more at large, and the Truth of them made more sensibly apparent,
by Examples and uncontroverted Experiments that prove them.

The Authority of the Ancients has not only blinded some Men's Understandings,
but we may say, has sealed up their Eyes. II. That the Chyle entering the Heart
occasions a Change in the Spirits.
For there are still a sort of Men that pay so submissive a deference to
Ancient Opinions, or possibly are so stiff and obstinate, that they will not
see those things which they could not contradict, would they but please to open
once their Eyes. We daily see Men, in good Reputation and Esteem for their
Study, Write and Dispute publicly against the Visible and Sensible Experiments
of the Circulation of the Blood, against that of the Gravitation and Elastick
force of the Air, and others of the like Nature. The Discovery Mr. Packet has
made in our Time, and which we have here occasion for, is of the number of
those that are mis-fortunate, merely for want of being Born Old; and, as a Man
may say, with a Venerable Beard. I shall not, however, omit to make use of it,
and am under no Apprehension of being blamed by Judicious Men for doing so.

According to that Discovery, it is manifest that the Chyle does not
immediately pass from the Viscera to the Liver, through the Mesaraick Veins, as
was believed by the Ancients; but that it passes out of the Bowels into the
Lacteal Veins, and from thence into several Receptacles, where these Veins
coterminate: That from thence it ascends through the Ductus Thoracicus along
the Vertebrae of the Back, and proceeds to mix with the Blood in the Axillary
Vein, which enters into the Superior Trunck of Vena Cava; and thus being
mingled with the Blood, it discharges it self into the Heart.

It ought to be concluded from this Experiment, that the Blood thus mingled
with the Chyle, being very different from that which has already circulated
several times through the Heart, the Animal Spirits, that are only the more
fine and subtle parts of it, ought to be very different in Persons that are
fasting, and others after they have eaten. Again, because in the Meats and
Drinks that are used, there is an infinite Variety, and likewise those that use
them, have Bodies diversely disposed: Two Persons after Dinner, though rising
from the same Table, must sensibly perceive in their Faculty of Imagining, so
great a Variety of Alterations, as is impossible to be described.

I confess those who are in a perfect state of Health, perform Digestion so
easily, that the Chyle flowing into the Heart, neither augments nor diminishes
the Heat of it, and is scarce any Obstruction to the Blood's fermenting in the
very same manner, as if it entered all alone: So that their Animal Spirits, and
consequently their Imaginative Faculty admit hardly any Change thereby. But as
for Old and Infirm People, they find in themselves very sensible Alterations
after a Repast: They generally grow dull and sleepy; at least, their
Imagination flags and languishes, and has no longer any Briskness or Alacrity.
They can conceive nothing distinctly, and are unable to apply themselves to any
thing. In a word, they are quite different and other sort of People from what
they were before.

III. That Win^ effects the same thing.
But that those of a more sound and robust Complexion, may likewise have
sensible proofs of what I have said; they need only make reflection on what
happens to them in Drinking Wine somewhat more freely than ordinary; or on what
would fall out upon their drinking Wine at one Meal, and Water at another. For
it is certain, that unless they be extremely stupid, or that their Body be of a
make very extraordinary, they will suddenly feel in themselves some Briskness,
or little Drousiness, or some such other accidental thing.

Wine is so spirituous, that it is Animal Spirits almost ready made: But
Spirits a little too libertine and unruly, that not easily submit to the orders
of the Will, by reason of their Solidity and excessive Agitation. Thus it
produces even in Men that are of a most strong and vigorous Constitution,
greater Changes in the Imagination, and in all the parts of the Body, than
Meats, and other Liquors. Vinum iuctator dolosus est.
It gives a Man a Foil, in Plautus's Expression; and produces many Effects in
the Mind, less advantageous than those described by Horace in these Lines.

Quid non Ebrietas designat? operta recludit:
Spes jubet esse ratas: in praelia trudit inermem:
Sollicitis animis onus eximit: addocet arts.
Foecundi calices quem non fecere disertum?
Contracta quem non in paupertate solutum?
It would be no hard matter to give a Reason for all the Principal Effects
produced in the Animal Spirits, and thereupon in the Brain, and in the Soul it
self, by this Commixture of the Chyle and Blood; as to explain how Wine
exhilarates, and gives a Man a certain Sprightliness of Mind, when taken with
Moderation; why it Brutifies a Man in process of time, by being drunk to
excess; why a Man is drousie after a good Meal, and a great many others of like
Nature, for which very ridiculous Accounts are usually given. But besides that
I am not writing a Tract of Physics, I must have been necessitated to have
given some Idea of the Anatomy of the Brain, or have made some Supposition, as
Monsieur Descartes has done before me in his Treatise concerning Man, without
which it were impossible to explain ones self. But finally, if a Man shall read
with Attention that Discourse of Monsieur Descartes, he will possibly be
satisfied as to all these particular Inquiries; because that Author explains
all these things; at least, he furnishes us with sufficient Knowledge of them,
to be able of our selves to discover them by Meditation, provided we are any
whit acquainted with his Principles.

CHAP. III.
That the Air employed in Respiration causes some Change in the Animal Spirits.

THE second general Cause of the Changes which happen in the Animal Spirits, is
the Air we breath, For though it does not forthwith make such sensible
Impressions as the Chyle, yet it causes at long run, what the Juices of Meats
do in a much shorter time. This Air passes out of the Branches of the Trachea
into those of the Arteria Venosa: Hence it mingles, and ferments with the rest
of the Blood in the Heart; and, according to its own particular Disposition,
and that of the Blood, it produces very great Changes in the Animal Spirits,
and consequently in the Imaginative Faculty.

I know there are some Persons, who will not be persuaded that the Air mixes
with the Blood in the Lungs and Heart; because they cannot discover with their
Eyes, the Passages in the Branches of the Trachea, and in those of the Arteria
Venosa, through which the Air is communicated. But the Action of the Intellect
ought not to stop, when that of the Senses can go no farther. It can penetrate
that which to them is impenetrable, and lay hold on things which have no handle
for the Senses. It Is not to be questioned, but some parts of the Blood
continually pass through the Branches of the Vena Arteriosa, into those of the
Trachea. The Smell and Moisture of the Breath, sufficiently prove it; and yet
the Passages of that Communication are imperceptible. Why then may not the
subtle parts of Air be allowed to pass through the Branches of the Trachea,
into the Arteria Venosa though the Passages of this Communication be
undiscernible? In fine, a much greater quantity of Humors transpire through
the imperceptible Pores of the Arteries and the Skin, than escape through the
other Avenues of the Body; and even the Pores of the most solid Metals, are not
so close, but there are found Bodies in Nature little enough to find a free
passage through them; since otherwise these Pores would quickly be entirely
stopped.

It is true that the course and ragged parts of the Air cannot penetrate
through the ordinary Pores of Bodies; and that Water it self, though extremely
gross, can glide through those crannies, which will not give admittance to
them. But we speak not here of the course or branched and ragged Parts of Air;
they seem to be of little use to Fermentation: We only speak of the little,
stiff and pungent Parts, and such as have none or very few Branches to impede
their passage, because these are the fittest for the Fermentation of the Blood.

I might notwithstanding affirm upon the Testimony of Silvius, that even the
coursest Air passes from the Trachea to the Heart, who testifies he has seen it
pass thither by the Art and Ingenuity of Mr. de Swammerdam. For it is more
reasonable to believe a Man who says he has seen it, than a thousand others who
talk at random. It is certain then that the most refined and subtle Parts of
Air which we breath, enter into the Heart; and there, together with the Blood
and Chyle, keep up the Fire which gives Life and Motion to our Body; and that
according to their different Qualities, they introduce great Changes in the
Fermentation of the Blood, and in the Animal Spirits.

We daily discover the Truth of this by the various Humors, and the different
Characters of the Minds of Men of different Countries: The Gascons, for
instance, have a more brisk and lively Imagination, than the Normans: Those of
Rhoan, and Dieppe, and Picardie, differ all from one another: And yet farther
from the Low-Normans, though at no great distance from each other. But if we
consider Men that live in Countries more remote, Numquid non ultra est
sapientia in Theman? Jer. c. 49. v. 7.
we shall find much stranger Differences between them: For instance, an
Italian, a Flemming, and a Dutchman. To conclude, there are places celebrated
in all Ages for the Wisdom of their Inhabitants, as Theman and Athens, and
others, as notorious for their Stupidity, as Thebes and Abdera, and some others.

Athenis tenue coelum, ex quo acutiores etiam putantur Attici, crassum Thebis.
Cic. de Fato.
Abderitanae pectora plebis habes. Mart.
Boeotum in crasso jurares aere natum. Hor.
CHAP. IV.
I. Of the Change of the Spirits caused by the Nerves, which go to the Heart
and Lungs. II. Of that which is caused by the Nerves, which go to the Liver, to
the Spleen and Viscera: III. That all that, is performed without the
concurrence of our Will, but yet it cannot be done without a Providence.

THE third cause of the Changes, which happen to the Animal Spirits, is the
most ordinary, and most active of them all, because it is this which produces,
maintains and corroborates all the Passions. For our better understanding this,
we must know that the Nerves of the fifth, sixth, and eighth Conjugation shoot
out the greatest part of their Branches into the Breast and Belly, where they
are most advantagiously employed for the Preservation of the Body, but most
dangerously in regard to the Soul: Because these Nerves in their Action depend
not on the Will of Men, as do these used in moving the Legs and Arms, and other
External Parts of the Body: And they have a greater influence upon the Soul,
than the Soul has upon them.

We must know then, that many of the Branches of the Nerves of the eighth
Conjugation, I. Of the Changes of the Spirits caused by the Nerves which go to
the Heart, and Lungs
fall in among the Fibers of the Principal of all the Muscles, the Heart; that
they encircle its Orifices, its Auricles and its Arteries. That they expatiate
also into the Substance of the Lungs, and thus by their different Motions
produce very considerable Changes in the Blood. For the Nerves which are
dispersed among the Fibers of the Heart, causing it to Dilate and Contract it
self in too hasty and violent a manner, throw, with an unusual force, abundance
of Blood toward the Head, and all other External Parts of the Body. Though
sometimes these same Nerves have a quite contrary Effect. As for the Nerves
which surround the Orifices of the Heart, its Auricles and Arteries, their use
is much the same with that of the Registers, wherewith the Chemists moderate
the Heat of their Furnaces; or of Cocks which are instrumental in Fountains, to
regulate the Course of their Waters. For the use of these Nerves is to contract
and dilate diversely the Orifices of the Heart, and by that manner to hasten,
and retard the Entrance and the Exit of the Blood, and so to augment and
diminish the Heat of it. Lastly, The Nerves which are dispersed over the Lungs,
have the same employment: For the Lungs being made up only of the Branches of
the Trachea, of the Vena Arteriosa, and the Arteria Venosa, interwoven one
among another, it is plain that the Nerves which are dispersed through their
Substance, by their Contraction, must obstruct the Air from passing so freely
out of the Branches of the Trachea, and the Blood out of those of the Vena
Arteriosa, into the Arteria Venosa, to discharge it self into the Heart. Thus
these Nerves according to their different agitation, augment and diminish still
the Heat and Motion of the Blood.

All the Passions furnish us with very sensible Experiments of these different
Degrees of Heat of our Heart; we manifestly feel its Diminution and
Augmentation sometimes on a sudden: And as we falsely judge our Sensations to be
in the Parts of our Body, and by occasion of them to be Excited in our Soul, as
has been explained in the foregoing Book; So the generality of Philosophers
imagine the Heart to be the Principal Seat of the Passions of the Soul, and
it is even at this day the most common and received Opinion.

Now because the Imaginative Faculty receives considerable Changes by the
Changes which happen in the Animal Spirits; and because the Animal Spirits are
very different, according to the different Fermentation of the Blood, performed
in the Heart; it is easy to discover the Reason of Passionate People's
imagining things quite otherwise, than those who considered the same sedately,
and in cold Blood.

The other Cause which exceedingly contributes to the Diminution and
Augmentation of these Extraordinary Fermentations of the Blood, in the Heart,
consists in the Action of many other Branches of the Nerves, whereof we have
been speaking.

II. Of the Change of the Spirit, caused by the Nerves which go to the Liver,
to the Spleen, and other Viscera.
These Branches are dispersed throughout the Liver, which contains the more
subtle part of the Blood, or that which is commonly called the Bile; through
the Spleen, which contains the grosser part, or the Melancholy; through the
Pancreas, which contains an acid Juice, most proper for Fermentation; through
the Stomach, the Guts, and the other parts, which contain the Chyle. Finally,
They are dispersed and spread about all the parts, that can any ways contribute
to the varying the Fermentation of the Blood in the Heart. There is moreover
nothing even to the Arteries and Veins, which has not a Connection with these
Nerves; as Dr. Willis has discovered of the Inferior Trunck of the Great
Artery, which is connected to them near the Heart; of the Axillary Artery on
the right side; of the Emulgent Vein, and several others.

Thus the use of the Nerves being to agitate the parts (to which they are
fastened) diverse ways, it is easy to conceive how, for instance, the Nerve
which surrounds the Liver may, by constringing it, drive a great quantity of
Bile into the Veins, and the Canalis Cysticus, which mingling with the Blood in
the Veins, and with the Chyle, through the Canalis Cysticus, enters the Heart,
and produces a Heat therein much more fervent than ordinary. Thus when a Man is
moved with some kind of Passions, the Blood boyls in the Arteries and in the
Veins, and the Heat is diffused throughout the Body, the Fire flies up into the
Head, which is presently filled with such a prodigious quantity of over-brisk
and rapid Animal Spirits, as by their impetuous Current, hinder the Imagination
from representing other things, than those, whose Images they form in the
Brain; that is, from thinking on other Objects than those of the Predominant
Passion.

It Is so again with the little Nerves which run into the Spleen, or into other
parts which contain a Matter more gross, and course, and less capable of Heat
and Motion; they render the Imagination wholly Languid, Drousy and Unactive, by
pouring into the Channels of the Blood a Matter that is gross and difficult to
be put in Motion.

As for those Nerves which environ the Arteries and Veins, their Use is to put
a stop to the current of the Blood, and, by their Pressure and Constriction of
the Veins and Arteries, oblige it to flow into those places, where it meets
with a passage more free and open. Thus that part of the great Artery, which
furnishes all the parts of the Body, below the Heart, with Blood, being bound
and straightened by these Nerves, the Blood must necessarily enter the Head in
greater quantities, and so produce a Change in the Animal Spirits, and
consequently in the Imagination.

But it ought to be well observed, that all this is performed by mere
Mechanism; I mean, that all the different Movements of these Nerves in all the
different Passions, III. That these things are performed by the order of
Providence, without the concurrence of our Will.
are not affected by the Command of the Will; but on the contrary, are
performed without its orders, and even in contradiction to them: Insomuch that
a Body without a Soul disposed like that of a ^ound Man, would be capable of
all the Movements which accompany our Passions: And thus Beasts themselves
might have such as nearly resembled them, though they were only pure Machines.

This is the thing for which we ought to admire the Incomprehensible Wisdom of
Him, who has so regularly ranged and contrived all these Natural Wheels, and
Movements, as to make it sufficient for an Object, to move the Optic Nerve in
such and such a manner, to produce so many diverse Motions in the Heart, in the
other inward parts of the Body, and on the Face it self. For it has lately been
discovered, that the same Nerve which shoots some of its Branches into the
Heart, and into other Internal parts, communicates also some of its Branches
into the Eye, the Mouth, and other parts of the Face; so that no Passion can
rise or mutiny within, but it must betray presently it self without, because
there can be no Motion in the Branches extended to the Heart, but there must
another happen in those, which are spread over the Face.

The Correspondence and Sympathy, which is found between the Nerves of the
Face, and some others, answering to other places of the Body, not to be named,
is still much more Remarkable; and that which occasions this great Sympathy, is
as in the other Passions, because these little Nerves which climb into the
Face, are only Branches of that which descends lower.

When a Man is overtaken with some violent Passion, if he is careful to make a
Reflection upon what he feels in his Entrails, and in other parts of his Body,
where the Nerves insinuate themselves, as also upon the Changes of Countenance,
which accompany it; and if he considers that all these diverse Agitations of the
Nerves, are altogether involuntary, and that they happen in spite of all the
Resistance that our Will can make to them, he will find it no hard matter to
suffer himself to embrace this simple Exposition, that has been given of all
these Relations and Correspondencies betwixt the Nerves.

But if a Man examines the Reasons and the End of all these things, so much
Order and Wisdom will be found in them, that a little Soberness of Thought and
Attention will be able to convince the most devoted Admirers of Epicurus and
Lucretius, that there is a Providence that governs the World. When I see a
Watch, I have reason to conclude, that there is some Intelligent Being, since
it is Impossible for Chance and Hap-hazard to produce, to range and posture all
its Wheels. How then could it be possible, that Chance, and a confused Jumble
of Atoms, should be capable of ranging in all Men and Animals, such abundance
of different secret Springs and Engines, with that Exactness and Proportion, I
have just Explained: and that Men and Animals should thereby procreate others
exactly like themselves. So ridiculous it is to think or to say with Lucretius,
That all the parts which go to the Composition of Man, were pack't together by
Chance; that his Eyes were not made with any design of Seeing, but that he
afterward thought of Seeing because he found he had Eyes; And thus with the
other parts of the Body. These are his Words.

Lumina ne facias oculorum clara creata,
Prospicere ut possimus: and, ut proferre vidi.
Proceros passus, ideo fastigia posse
Surarum, ac foeminum pedibus fundata plicari:
Brachia tum poro validis ex apta lacertis
Esse, manusque datas utraque a part ministras,
Vt facere ad vitam possimus, quae foret usus.
Caetera de genere hoc inter quaecunque pretantur:
Omnia perversa praepostera sunt ratione.
Nil adeo quoniam natum 'st in corpore, ut uti
Possemus: sed quod natum 'st id procreat usum.
Must not he needs have a strange Aversion to a Providence, who would thus
voluntarily put out his Eyes for fear of seeing it, and endeavor to render
himself insensible to Arguments so strong and convincing, as those Nature
furnishes us withal? I confess, when once Men affect to be thought bold, or
rather Atheistical Wits, as did the Epicureans, they presently find themselves
benighted in darkness, and see only false glimmerings for the future; they
peremptorily deny the most clear and Self-evident Truths, and as haughtily and
Magisterially affirm the falsest and obscurest Things in the World.

The Poet I have just cited, may serve as a Proof of that Blindness of these
venturous Wits; he confidently pronounces, and against all appearance of Truth,
about the most difficult and obscurest Questions: when at the same time it may
well be thought, he has no Preception of Idea's, that are most clear and
evident. If I should stand to transcribe passages of that Author to justify
what I say, I should make too long and tedious a Digression; for though it may
be permitted me to make some Reflections, which stay and fasten the Mind for a
Moment upon essential Truths, yet I should never atone for making Digressions,
which throw off the Mind a considerable time, from its Attention to its
principal Subject, to apply it to things of little or no Importance.

CHAP. V.
I. Of the Memory. II. Of the Habits.

WE have been explaining the general Causes, as well External as Internal,
which effect a Change in the Animal Spirits, and consequently in the
Imaginative Faculty. We have shown that the External are the Meats we feed
upon, and the Air we take in, for Respiration. And that the Internal consist in
the Involuntary Agitation of certain Nerves. We know no other general Causes,
and we are confident there are none. In so much that the Faculty of Imagining,
as to the Body, depends only on two things, namely, the Animal Spirits, and the
Disposition of the Brain, whereon they act. There nothing more remains at
present to to give us a perfect Knowledge of the Imagination, than the
manifestation of the different Changes, that may happen in the Substance of the
Brain.

They shall be examined by us, as soon as we have given some Idea of the Memory
and Habits, that is to say, of that facility we have of thinking upon things
which we have already thought upon, and doing the same things we have already
done: The Methodical Order of our Discourse will have it so.

I. Of the Mewory.
In order to give an Explication of the Memory* it should be called to Mind,
what has been several times already inculcated; that all our different
Preceptions are affixed to the Changes which happen to the Fibers of the
Principal part of the Brain, wherein the Soul more particularly resides.

This one Supposition being laid down, the Nature of the Memory is Explained:
for as the Branches of a Tree, which have continued for some time bent after a
particular manner; preserve a readiness and facility of being bent afresh in
the same manner; so the Fibers of the Brain, having once received certain
Impressions from the current of the Animal Spirits, and from the Action of
Objects upon them, retain for a considerable time, some Facility of receiving
the same Dispositions. Now the Memory consists only in that Promptness or
Facility; since a Man thinks upon the same things, whenever the Brain receives
the same Impressions.

And whereas the Animal Spirits act sometimes more, and sometimes less strongly
upon the Substance of the Brain; and External Objects make far greater
Impressions, than the Imagination singly; it is from hence easy to discover,
why a Man does not equally remember all the things he has formerly perceived;
how, for instance, it comes to pass, that what a Man has often perceived, is
generally represented livelier to the Soul, than what a Man has had but now and
then a Preception of: why he more distinctly remembers the things he has seen,
than those he has only imagined; and so why, for example, a Man shall know
better the distribution of the Veins in the Liver by once seeing the Dissection
of that part, than by often reading it in a Book of Anatomy; and so of other
things of like nature.

But if a Man would make reflection upon what has been formerly said,
concerning the Imagination; and upon the little which has just now been spoken
concerning the Memory; and if he be rid of that prejudice, that our Brain is
too little for the hoarding up and preserving such abundance of Traces and
Impressions, he will take pleasure in discovering the cause of all those
wonderful Effects of the Memory, St. Austin with so much admiration speaks of,
in the Tenth Book of his Confessions. But I shall not explain these things more
at large; as believing it more expedient for every Man to explain them to
himself by some Essay of Thought; for as much as the things that way
discovered, are always more grateful and agreeable, and make greater Impression
on us, than those we learn from other Men.

II. Of the Habits.
It is necessary to the Explication of the Habits, to know the manner whereby
(we have reason to think) the Soul moves the parts of the Body, to which she is
united; and that is this: According to all appearances in the World, there are
always in some places of the Brain, whatever they be, a very great Quantity of
Animal Spirits, very rapidly moved by the Heat of the Heart, from whence they
proceeded; and most readily disposed to glide into those places, where they
find an easy and an open passage. All the Nerves terminate in the Receptacle
of those Spirits, and the Soul has the I explain elsewhere wherein this Power
consists.
Power of determining their Motion, and conducting them through the Nerves,
into all the Muscles of the Body. These Spirits entering therein swell them up,
and consequently contract them: And thus they move the parts to which the
Muscles are affixed.

We shall readily be persuaded, that the Soul moves the Body in the manner thus
explained, if it be observed, that when a Man has been a long time fasting, let
him try, how he will, to give certain motions to his Body, he will be unable to
effect them, and even will be at some pains to stand upon his Legs. But if so
be he find a way of conveying into his Heart something very Spirituous, as Wine
or any like nutriment, he forthwith perceives that his Body obeys his Desires
with far greater facility, and that he is able to move it how he pleases. For
this single Experiment makes it, one would think, sufficiently manifest, that
the Soul is incapable of giving Motion to her Body for want of Animal Spirits;
and that by their means she re-assumes her Sovereignity and Dominion over it.

Now these Inflations of the Muscles are so plain and palpable in the Motions
of our Arms, and other parts of our Body; and it is so reasonable to believe
these Muscles cannot receive any Inflation, without the admission of some body
into them; as a Bladder cannot be blown and extended, without the entrance of
the Air, or something else; that it seems not to be doubted but the Animal
Spirits are driven from the Brain, through the Nerves into the Muscles, to
dilate them, and to produce in them all the Motions we desire. For a Muscles
being full is necessarily shorter than when it is empty; and so attracts and
moves the part to which it is conjoined; as may be seen explained more at large
in Mr. Des Carts Treatise of the Passions, and in that Concerning Man. I do
not however deliver that Explication as perfectly demonstrated in all its
parts: To render it entirely evident, there are many things farther requisite
to be demanded: without which, it is next to impossible to explain ones self.
But the Knowledge of them is not so useful for our Subject; for let the
Explication be true or false, it will not fail to be of equal use to acquaint
us with the Nature of the Habits. Since if the Soul moves not the Body in that
manner, it necessarily moves it in some other, that comes up near enough to it,
to deduce those consequences from it, which we shall infer.

But to the intent we may pursue our Explication, it is necessary to observe,
that the Spirits find not the paths, through which they ought to pass, always
so free and open, as they should be; which is the occasion, for example, of the
Difficulty we meet with in moving the Fingers with that Nimbleness as is
necessary to play on Musical Instruments; or the Muscles employed in
Pronunciation, to pronounce the Words of a strange Language: but that the
Animal Spirits by little and little, so open and plain the Ways by their
continued succession, as to take away in time all manner of Resistance. Now the
Habits consist in that Facility the Animal Spirits have of passing into the
Members of our Body.

It Is the easiest thing imaginable, according to this Explication, to resolve a
multitude of Questions relating to the Habits: As why, for instance, Children
are more capable of acquiring new Habits, than Persons of a more consummate
Age. Why it is a thing of such Difficulty, to lay aside an inveterate Custom.
Why Men by use of Speaking, obtain so great a Dexterity at it, as to pronounce
their Words with an incredible swiftness, and even without considering them; as
is but too often customary with those, who say the Prayers which they have been
used to, several Years together. And yet many things go to the Pronunciation of
one Word; many Muscles must be moved at once, in a certain time, and a definite
Order, as those of the Tongue, the Lips, the Throat, and Diaphragm. But a Man
may with a little Meditation give himself satisfaction upon these Questions, as
upon many others very curious, and no less useful, and it is not necessary to
dwell any longer upon them.

It is manifest from what has been said, that there is a great affinity between
the Memory and Habits; and that in one sense, the Memory may pass for a Species
of Habit. For as the Corporeal Habits consist in the Facility the Spirits have
acquired, of passing into certain places of our Body: So the Memory consists in
the Traces the same Spirits have imprinted in the Brain, which are the cause of
that Facility we have of Recollecting and Remembering things. In so much that
were there no Perceptions affixed to the courses of the Animal Spirits, and the
Traces they leave behind them; there would be no difference between the Memory
and the other Habits. Nor is there greater difficulty to conceive how Beasts,
though void of Soul, and incapable of any Perception, may remember after their
way, the things that have made an Impression in their Brain; See the
Illustra^ions upon the Intellectual Memory and Habits
than to conceive how they are capable of acquiring different Habits; and after
what I have explained concerning the Habits, I see no greater difficulty to
represent to a Man's self, how the Members of their Body procure different
Habits by degrees; than how an Engine newly made, cannot so easily be played,
as after it has been some time made use of.

CHAP. VI.
I. That the Fibers of the Brain are not subject to so sudden Changes, as the
Spirits. II. Three different Changes incident to the three different Ages.

ALL the Parts of Animate Bodies are in a continual Motion, whether they be
Solid, I. That the Fibers of the Brain are not subject to so sudden Changes, as
the Spirits.
or Fluid, the Flesh no less than the Blood: There is only this difference
between the Motion of one and the other, that the Motion of the parts of the
Blood is sensible and visible, and that the Particles of the Fibers of our
Flesh are altogether Imperceptible. There is then this difference between the
Animal Spirits, and the Substance of the Brain; That the Animal Spirits are
very rapidly moved, and very fluid, but the Substance of the Brain has some
Solidity and Consistence. So that the Spirits divide themselves, into little
Parts, and are dispersed in a few Hours, by transpiring through the Pores* of
the Vessels that contain them; and others often succeed in their Place, not
altogether like the former: But the Fibers of the Brain are not so easy to be
dissipated, there seldom happen any considerable Alterations in them; and their
whole Substance cannot be changed, but by the successive tract of many Years.

The most considerable Differences, that are found in the Brain of one and the
same Person, during his whole Life, are in his Infancy, in his Maturity, and in
his Old Age.

The Fibers in the Brain in a Man's Childhood, are soft, flexible and
delicate: II. Three considerable Changes which happen in the Three different
Ages of Man.
A Riper and more consummate Age dries, hardens, and corroborates them; but in
Old Age, they grow altogether inflexible, gross, and intermixed with
superfluous Humors, which the faint and languishing Heat of that Age is no
longer able to disperse. For as we see that the Fibers which compose the Flesh,
harden by Time, and that the Flesh of a young Partridge is without dispute more
tender, than that of an old one; so the Fibers of the Brain of a Child, or a
young Person must be much more soft and delicate, than those of Persons more
advanced in Years.

We shall understand the Ground and the Reason of these Changes, if we consider
that the Fibers are continually agitated by the Animal Spirits; which whirl
about them in many different manners. For as the Winds parch and dry the Earth
by their blowing upon it, so the Animal Spirits by their perpetual Agitation,
render by degrees, the greatest part of the Fibers of Man's Brain, more dry,
more close and solid; so that Persons more stricken in Age, must necessarily
have them almost always more inflexible, than those of a lesser standing. And
as for those who are of the same Age, your Drunkards, which for many Years
together have drank to excess, either Wine or such Intoxicating Liquors, must
needs have them more solid and more inflexible, than those who have abstained
from the use of such kind of Liquors all their Lives.

Now the different Constitutions of the Brain in Children, in Adult Persons,
and in Old People, are very considerable Causes of the Difference observable in
the Imaginative Faculty of these Three Ages, which we are going to speak of in
the following Chapters.

CHAP. VII.
I. Of the Communication there is between the Brain of a Mother, and that of
her Infant. II. Of the Communication that is between our Brain, and the other
Parts of our Body, which inclines us to Imitation, and to Compassion. III. An
Explication of the Generation of Monstrous Children, and the Propagation of the
Species. IV. An Explication of some Irregularities of the Understanding, and of
some Inclinations of the Will. V. Concerning Concupiscence, and Original Sin.
VI. Objections and Answers.

IT is, I think, sufficiently manifest that there is some kind of Tie and
Connection between us, and all the rest of the World; and that we have some
Natural Relations to, or Correspondencies with all things that encompass us:
which Relations are very advantageous, both as to the Preservation, and welfare
of our Lives. But all these Relations are not equally binding; There is a
closer Connection betwixt us and our Native Country, than China; we have a
nearer Relation to the Sun, than to any of the Stars; to our own Houses, than
that of our Neighbors: There are invisible Ties, that fasten us with a
stricter Union unto Men, than Beasts; to our Relations and Friends, than
Strangers; to those on whom we have our Dependence for the Preservation of our
Being, than to such as can neither be the Objects of our Hopes or Fears.

That which is more especially remarkable in this Natural Union, betwixt us and
other Men, is, That it is so much greater, by how much we stand more in need of
their Kindness, or Assistance. Relations and Friends are intimately united to
one another: We may say that their Pains and Miseries are common, as well as
their Pleasures and Happiness; For all the Passions and Sentiments of our
Friends, are communicated to us by the Impression their Mein, and Manner, and
the Air of their Countenance make upon us: But because we may absolutely live
without them, the Natural Union betwixt them and us is not the greatest that is
possible.

I. Of the Communication that is between the Brain of the Mother, and that of
her Infant.
Children in their Mother's Womb, whose Bodies are not yet completely formed,
and who are of themselves in a state of the greatest Weakness, Impotency, and
Want, that can possibly be conceived, ought to be united likewise to their
Mothers in the strictest manner imaginable. And though their Soul be separate
from that of their Mothers, yet since their Body is not loosed, and disengaged
from here is, it ought to be concluded, they have the same Sentiments and the
same Passions; in a word, all the same Thoughts as are excited in the Soul, on
occasion of the Motions which are produced in the Body.

Thus Infants see what their Mothers see, they hear the same Cries, they
receive the same Impressions of Objects, and are agitated with the same
Passions. For since the Air of the Face of a Man in a Passion, pierces those
which look upon him, and Naturally impresses in them a Passion resembling that
with which he is possessed, though the Union of that Man with those that
consider him, be not very great and binding; one would think there were good
Reason, to believe the Mothers capable of imprinting on their Infants all the
same Sentiments they are touched with, and all the same Passions themselves are
acted withal. For, in short, the Body of an Infant in the Womb, is all of a
piece with the Body of the Mother; the Blood and the Spirits are common to them
both; the Sensations and Passions are the Natural Result and Consequents of the
Motions of the Blood and Spirits, and these Motions are necessarily
communicated from the Mother to the Child: Therefore the Passions and
Sensations, and generally all the Thoughts occasioned by the Body, are common
to the Mother and the Child.

These things seem to me beyond exception true, for several Reasons; which yet
I advance not here but as a Supposition, which I think will be sufficiently
demonstrated by what follows: For every Supposition that can stand the shock of
all the Difficulties possible to be raised against it, and repel them; ought to
pass for an indisputable Principle.

The invisible Bonds and Cements wherewith the Author of Nature has united all
his Works, are worthy of the Wisdom of GOD, and the Admiration of Men; there is
nothing in the World at once more surprising and instructing than this; but we
are too inconsiderate to regard it. We leave our selves to be conducted,
without considering who conducts us, or how he does it: Nature is concealed
from our Eyes, II. Of the Communication between our Brain, and the other Parts
of our Body, which incline us to Imitation and Compassion.
as well as its Author; and we feel the Motions that are produced in us,
without considering from what Springs they are: And yet there are few things
more necessary to be known by us; since upon the Knowledge of them it is, that
the Explication of all things relating to Man, depends.

There are certainly in our Brain some secret Springs and Movements, which
naturally incline us to Imitation; for this is necessary to Civil Society. It
is not only necessary for Children to believe their Fathers; for Disciples to
believe their Masters; and Inferiors, their Superiors: It is moreover
necessary, that all Men should be inclinable to take up the like Exterior
Manners, and to do the same Actions, as those with whom they mean to live. For
to the intent that Men should have a Connection and Dependence on each other,
it is necessary they come near to one another in the Characters hoth of Body and
Mind. This is the Fundamental Principle of Abundance of things we shall treat
of in the following Discourse: But as to what we have to say in this Chapter,
it is farther necessary to know, that there are in the Brain some Natural
Dispositions, which incline us to Compassion, as well as to Imitation.

It ought to be known then, That the Animal Spirits do not only Naturally
convey themselves into the Parts of our Body, for the performing the same
Actions, and the same Motions which we see others do; but farther, for the
Receiving, after a manner, their Hurts and Injuries, and participating of their
Miseries, For Experience teaches us, that when we very attentively consider a
Man violently struck, or dangerously wounded, the Spirits impetuously hasten to
the Parts of our Body correspondent to those we see wounded in another,
provided we turn not the current of them another way, by a voluntary and
forcible Titillation of a different Part from that which we see hurt or
wounded: Or that the Natural Course of the Spirits toward the Heart and
Viscerous parts, which is usual in sudden Commotions, changes not the
Determination of the Flux of the Spirits we are speaking of, and hurries them
along with them: Or lastly, unless some extraordinary Connection of the Traces
of the Brain, with the motions of the Spirits, effects the same thing.

This Translation of the Spirits into the Parts of our Body, which are
Analogous to those we see injuriously treated in others, makes a very sensible
Impression on Persons of a fine and delicate Constitution, who have a lively
Imagination, and very soft and tender Flesh. For they feel, for instance, a
kind of shivering or trembling in their Legs, by an attentive beholding any one
that has a Sore there, or actually receives a blow in them.

(For a confirmation of this, take what a Friend of mine wrote to me to the
same purpose. An Old Gentleman that lived with one of my Sisters, being sick, a
Young Maid held the Candle whilst he was Blooded in the Foot: But as she saw
the Surgeon strike in the Lancet, she was seized with such an Apprehension, as
to feel three or four days afterward such a piercing Pain in the same part of
her Foot, as forced her to keep her Bed all that time.)

The Reason whereof is this, That the Spirits impetuously diffuse themselves
into these parts of our Body; that by keeping them more intense, they may
render them more Sensible to the Soul; and may put her upon her guard, and make
her solicitous to avoid those Evils which we behold in others.

This Compassion in Bodies produces another Compassion in Minds: It induces us
to Condole and Comfort others in their Troubles, because in so doing, we
Comfort and Solace our selves: In fine, it gives a check to our Malice and
Cruelty. For the horror of Blood, and the fear of Death, in a word, the
sensible impression of Compassion often prevents those Persons from Butchering
beasts, who are the most convincingly persuaded they are mere Machines: Because
a great many Men are unable to Kill them, without Wounding themselves by a
Repercussive stroke of Compassion.

But that which here is most especially remarkable, is, That the Sensible View
of a Wound received by another, produces in those which behold it, a so much
greater Wound, as their Constitution is more weak and delicate: Because that
sensible View impetuously throwing the Animal Spirits into the Parts of the
Body, which are correspondent to those they see hurt or wounded, they must
needs make a greater Impression in the Fibers of a tender and delicate Body,
than in those of a more strong and robust Complexion.

Thus Men who abound with Strength and Vigor, are not at all hurt with the
sight of a Massacre; nor so much inclined to Compassion, because the sight of
it is an offense to their Body, as because it shocks their Reason: These
Persons have no Pity for a Condemned Criminal, as being both Inflexible and
Inexorable; Whereas Women and Children suffer much Pain by the Hurt and Wounds
they see received by others. They are machinally disposed, to be very Pitiful
and Compassionate to the Miserable. And they are unable to see a Beast beaten,
or hear it cry, without some disturbance of mind.

As for Infants which are still in their Mother's Womb, the delicacy of the
Fibers of their Flesh infinitely exceeding that of Women and Children, the
Course of their Spirits must necessarily produce more considerable Changes in
them, as will be seen in the Sequel of the Discourse.

We will still suffer what we have said to go for a simple Supposition, if Men
will have it so. But they ought to endeavor well to comprehend it, if they
would distinctly conceive the things I presume to explain in this Chapter. For
these two Suppositions I have just made, are the Principles of an infinite
number of things, which are generally believed very difficult and abstruse. And
which indeed seem impossible to be explained and cleared up without them. I
will here give some instances of what I have said.

It was about seven or eight Years ago, that there was seen in the Incurable,
III. An Explication of the Generation of Monstrous Children, and the
Propagation of the Species.
a young Man who was born an^Idiot, and whose Body was broken in the same
places that Malefactors are broken on the Wheel. He lived near twenty Years in
the same condition: many Persons went to see him; and the late Queen Mother
going to visit the Hospital, had the Curiosity to see him, and also to touch
his Legs and Arms, in the places were they were broken.

According to the Principles I have been establishing, the cause of this
Calamitous Accident was, That his Mother hearing a Criminal was to be broken,
went to see the Execution.

According to the first Supposition.
All the blows which were given to the Condemned, struck violently the
Imagination of the Mother; and by a kind of Repercussive blow, the tender and
delicate Brain of her Infant. The Fibers of this Mother's Brain received a
prodigious Concussion, and were possibly broke in some places, by the violent
course of the Spirits, produced at the Sight of so frightful a Spectacle. But
they had Consistency enough to prevent their total Dissolution. The Fibers, on
the contrary, of the Infant's Brain not being able to resist the furious
torrent of these Spirits, were broke and shattered all to pieces. And the
havoc was violent enough to make him lose his Intellect for ever. This is the
Reason why he come into the World deprived of Sense. Now for the other, why he
was broken in the same parts of his Body as the Criminal, whom his Mother had
seen put to Death.

At the Sight of this Execution, so capable of dismaying a timorous Woman, the
violent course of the Animal Spirits of the Mother, made a forcible descent
from her Brain, toward all the Members of her Body, which were Analogous to
those of the Criminal, and According to the second Su^position.
the same thing happened to the Infant. But because the Bones of the Mother
were capable of withstanding the violent Impression of these Spirits, they
received no damage by them; it may be too she felt not the least Pain, nor the
least Trembling in her Arms or Legs, upon the Breaking of the Criminal: But the
rapid course of the Spirits was capable of bursting the soft and tender parts
of the Infant's Bones. For the Bones are the last parts of the Body that are
formed; and they have very little Consistence, whilst Children are yet in their
Mother's Womb. And it ought to be observed, that if this Mother had determined
the Motion of these Spirits, toward some other part of her Body, by some
powerful Titillation, her Infant would have escaped the Fracture of his Bones.
But the part which was correspondent to that, toward which the Mother had
determined these Spirits, would have been severely injured; according to what I
have already said.

The Reasons of this Accident are general enough, to explain how it comes to
pass that Women, who whilst big with Child, see Persons particularly marked in
certain places of their Face, imprint on their Infants the very same Marks, and
in the self-same places of the Body. And it is not without good Reason, that
they are cautioned to rub some latent part of the Body, when they perceive any
thing which surprises them; or are agitated with some violent Passion. For by
this means, the Marks will be delineated rather upon the hidden parts, than the
Faces of their Infants.

We should have frequent Instances of like Nature with this I have here
related, if Infants could live after they had received so great Wounds or
Disruptions; but generally they prove Abortions: For it may be said that rarely
any Child dies in the Womb, if the Mother be not distempered, that has any
other cause of its ill fortune, than some fright or impotent Desire, or other
violent Passion of the Mother. This following is another Instance, very unusual
and particular.

It is no longer than a Year ago, that a Woman, having with too great an
Application of Thought, contemplated the Picture of St. Pius, at the
Celebration of his Feast of Canonization, was delivered of a Child perfectly
featured like the Representation of the Saint. He had the Countenance of an Old
Man, as near as was possible for an Infant that was beardless. His Arms were
folded across upon his Breast; His Eyes bent up toward Heaven, and had very
little Forehead, because the Picture of the Saint, being postur'd as looking up
to Heaven, and elevated toward the Roof of the Church, had scarce any
Forehead to be seen: He had a kind of Mitre reclining backwards on his
Shoulders, with many round prints in the places, where the Mitres are imboss'd
with Precious Stones. In short, this Infant was the very Picture of the
Picture, upon which the Mother had formed it, by the force of her Imagination.
This is a thing that all Paris might have seen as well as I, since it was a
considerable time preserved in Spirit of Wine.

This instance has This remarkable in it, That it was not the Sight of a Man
alive, and acted with some violent Passion, that moved the Spirits and Blood of
the Mother to the Production of so strange an Effect; but only the sight of a
Picture; which yet made a very sensible Impression, and was accompanied with a
mighty Commotion of Spirits, whether by the Fervency and Application of the
Mother; or whether by the Agitation, the noise of the Feast caused in her.

This Mother then beholding the Picture with great Application of Mind, and
Commotion of Spirits, the Infant, according to the first Supposition, saw it
with the like Application, and Commotion. The Mother being sensibly smitten
imitated the Picture, at least in outward posture; according to the second
Supposition: For her Body being completely formed, and the Fibers of her Flesh
hard enough to withstand the torrent of the Spirits, she could not possibly
imitate it, or become perfectly like it in all things: But the Fibers of the
Infant's Flesh, being extremely soft, and consequently capable of being molded
into any Figure, the rapid course of the Spirits produced in his Flesh, all
that was necessary to render him entirely like the Image which he saw: And the
Imitation, to which Children are the most disposed, was almost as perfect as it
possibly could be. But this Imitation having given the Body of the Child a
shape too extraordinary, was the occasion of its Death.

There are many other Instances to be met with in Authors of the Power of the
Mother's Imagination; and there is nothing so odd or extravagant, but they
sometimes miscarry of: For they not only bring forth Deformed and Misshapen
Children, but the Fruits they have longed to Eat, as Apples, Pears, Grapes, and
the like. The Mother strongly imagining, and impatiently longing to Eat Pears,
for instance; the Infant receives the same impatient Longings, and strong
Imaginations; and the current of the Spirits, actuated with the Image of the
desired Fruit, diffusing it self through the little Body, which by reason of it
flexibility and softness, is readily disposed for a change of its Figure; the
poor Infant is fashioned in the shape of the thing it too ardently desires. But
the Mother suffers not in her Body by it, because it is not soft and pliable
enough, to receive the Figure of the thing imagined; and so she cannot imitate,
or make her self entirely like it.

Now it ought to be supposed that this Correspondence I have been explaining,
and which is sometimes the cause of such great Disorders, is an unuseful thing,
and an inconvenient Ordinance in Nature. On the contrary, it seems to be very
advantageous to the Propagation of an Humane Body, and the Formation of the
Foetus; and it is absolutely necessary to the Transmitting several Dispositions
of the Brain, which ought to be different at different Seasons, and in
different Countries. For it is necessary, for instance, that Lambs in
particular Countries, should have their Brain altogether disposed for the
avoiding and flying Wolves; by reason of their abounding in those places, and
being very formidable Creatures to them.

It is true, this Communication between the Mother's and the Infant's Brain, is
sometimes attended with unlucky Consequences; when the Mothers suffer
themselves to be transported with some outrageous Passion. Notwithstanding it
seems to me, that without this Communication, Women and other Creatures could
not easily Propagate their Young Ones in the same Species. For though some
Reason may be given for the Formation of the Foetus in general, as Monsieur
Descartes has happily enough attempted; yet it is most difficult, without this
Communication of the Mother's Brain with that of the Infant, to explain why a
Mare does not produce a Calf, and a Hen an Egg which contains a little
Partridge, or some other Bird of a new Species. And I am of opinion, that those
who have thought much upon the Formation of the Foetus, will agree in the same
Notion.

It Is true, that the most reasonable Opinion, and that which is most agreeable
to Experience, touching that very difficult Question, about the Formation of
the Foetus, is this; That Infants are already wholly formed, even before the
Action whereby they are conceived; and that their Mothers only bestow upon them
the ordinary Growth, in the time of their being big with them. Nevertheless,
this Communication of Animal Spirits, and of the Brain of the Mother, with the
Spirits and Brain of the Infant, seems however to be serviceable in regulating
this Growth, and determining the parts employed in its Nourishment, to the
posturing themselves almost in the same manner, as in the Body of the Mother.
That is, in rendering the Infant like to, or of the same Species. This is
manifest enough by the Accidents which occur, when the Imagination of the
Mother is disordered, and some tempestuous Passion changes the Natural
Disposition of her Brain. For then, as we have just explained, this
Communication alters the Natural Formation of the Infant's Body, and the Mother
proves Abortive sometimes of her Foetus, so much more resembling the Fruits she
longed for, as the Spirits find less Resistance in the Fibers of the Infant's
Body.

We deny not however, but GOD Almighty, without that Communication we have been
mentioning, might have disposed all things necessary to the Propagation of the
Species, for infinite Ages, in so exact and regular a manner, that Mothers
should never have miscarried, but have always born Children of the same Bigness
and Complexion; and perfectly alike in all things. For we ought not to measure
the Power of GOD by our weak Imagination; and we are ignorant of the Reasons,
which might have determined Him in the Construction of his Work.

We daily see, that without the help and assistance of this Communication,
Plants and Trees produce regularly enough their like; and that Birds, and many
other Animals, stand in no need of it for the Breeding and Hatching of their
Young ones; when they brood upon Eggs of a different Species; as when a Hen
sits on the Eggs of a Partridge. For though we have reason to suppose, that the
Seeds and Eggs have originally contained in them the Plants and Birds, which
proceed from them; and that the little Bodies of these Birds may have received
their Conformation, by the Communication beforementioned; and the Plants have
received their's by another Communication, which is equivalent: yet this
perhaps would be but a Conjecture. But though it should be more than
Conjecture, yet we ought in no wise to judge by the things which GOD has made,
what those are which it is possible for Him to make.

Yet if it be considered, that Plants which receive their Growth from the
Action of their Mother-plant, resemble it much more, than those which proceed
from the Seeds; that the Tulips, for instance, which arise from the Root, are
of the same color with their Mother-Tulip; and that those which are derived
from the Seed, are generally very different: It cannot be doubted, but that if
the Communication of the generating Plant with the generated, is not absolutely
necessary to make it of the same Species; it is always necessary to make it of
the same Likeness.

So that, though it were foreseen by GOD, that this Communication of the
Mother's Brain, with the Brain of her Child, would sometimes be the occasion of
the Death of the Foetus, and the Generation of Monsters; by reason of the
disorderly Imagination of the Mother: Yet this Communication is so admirable,
and so necessary, for the Reasons I have alleged, and for several others that
might still be brought, that the foreknowledge of these inconveniences ought
not to have prevented GOD from executing his Design. It may be affirmed in one
Sense, that GOD had never a Design of making Monsters; for it seems evident to
me, that supposing he should make but one Animal, he would never make it
Monstrous: But his Design being to produce an admirably contrived Work, by the
most simple means; and to unite all his Creatures to one another; he foresaw
certain Effects, that would necessarily follow from that Order, and Nature of
Things, and that was not sufficient to make him change his Purpose and Design.
For though, in conclusion, a Monster, considered disjunctively, be an imperfect
Work, yet when conjoined with the rest of the Creation, it renders not the
World imperfect.

We have sufficiently explained, what the Imagination of a Mother is capable of
working, upon the Body of her Child: Let us now examine the influence she has
upon his Mind, and let us try to discover the first and topmost irregularities
of the Understanding and Will of Men in their Original. For this is our main
and principal Design.

IV. An Explication of some Irregularities of the Understanding, and
Inclinations of the Will.
It Is certain that the Traces of the Brain are accompanied with Sensations, and
Idea's of the Soul; and that the Motions of the Animal Spirits are never
excited in the Body, but there are Motions in the Soul correspondent to them.
In a word, it is certain that all the Corporeal Passions and Sensations, are
attended with real Sensations and Passions of the Soul. Now, according to our
first Supposition, Mothers communicate to their Children the Traces of their
Brain, and consequently the Motions of their Animal Spirits. Therefore they
breed in the Mind of their Infants the same Sensations and Passions themselves
are affected with, and consequently corrupt their Moral and Intellectual
Capacity several ways.

If it be so common for Children to bear imprinted in their Faces the Marks, or
Traces of the Idea, that made an impression on their Mother; though the
Cutaneous Fibers make a stronger resistance to the current of the Spirits, than
the soft and tender parts of the Brain, and the Spirits are in a greater
Agitation in the Brain, than toward the Surface of the Body; it cannot be
reasonably doubted, but the Animal Spirits of the Mother produce in the Brain
of their Children many Tracks and Footsteps of their disorderly Motions. Now
the great Traces of the Brain, and the Emotions of the Spirits answering to
them, being a long time preserved, and sometimes for the whole course of a
Man's Life; it is plain, that as there are few Women but have their Weaknesses
and Failings, and are disturbed with some Passion or other during the Season of
their Breeding, there must needs be but few Children, but what bring into the
World with them, a Mind some way or other preposterously framed, and are born
Slaves to some domineering Passion.

We have but too frequent Experience of these things, and all Men know well
enough, that there are whole Families subject to great Weaknesses of
Imagination, which have been hereditarily transmitted from their Ancestors. But
it would be unnecessary here to give particular instances. On the contrary, it
is more expedient for the Consolation of some Persons to affirm, that these
Infirmities of their Forefathers, being not Natural, or essential to the
Nature of Man, the Traces and Impresses of the Brain, which were the cause of
them, may by degrees wear out, and in time be quite effaced.

Yet it will not be amiss to relate here an Instance of James I. King of
England, which is mentioned by Sir Kenelm Digby, in his Book that he published
concerning Sympathetick Powder. He asserts in that Book, that Mary Stuart being
big with King James, some Scotch Lords rushed into her Chamber, and killed her
Secretary, who was an Italian, before her Face, though she interposed her self
between them, to prevent the Assassination; that this Princess received some
slight hurts; and that the Fright she was put into, made such deep impressions
in her Imagination, as were communicated to the Infant she bore in her Womb;
insomuch that King James, her Son, was unable all his Life to behold a naked
Sword: He says he experimentally knew it, at the time he was Knighted. For the
King, when he should have laid the Sword upon his Shoulder, run it directly
against his Face, and had wounded him with it, if some one had not guided it to
the proper place. There are so many Examples of this kind, that it would be
needless to turn over Authors for them: And, I believe, there is no body will
dispute the truth of these things. For, in short, we see very many Persons,
that cannot endure the sight of a Rat, a Mouse, a Cat, or a Frog, and especially
creeping Creatures, as Snakes, and Serpents; and who know no other Reason of
these their extraordinary Aversions, than the Fears their Mothers were put in,
by these several Creatures at the time of their going with Child.

But that which I would above all have observed upon this subject, is, That
there are all appearances imaginable of Men's preserving to this day in their
Brain the Traces and Impressions of their first Parents. V. An Explication of
Concupiscence, and Original Sin.
For, as Animals produce others that are like them, and with the like impresses
in their Brain; which are the Cause that Animals of the same Species have the
same Sympathies and Antipathies, and perform the same Actions, at the same
junctures, and the like occasions: So our First Parents, after their Sin,
received such great Prints and deep Traces in their Brain, through the
impression of sensible Objects, as might easily have been communicated to their
Children. Insomuch that the great Adhe^ion which is found in us from our
Mother's Womb, to sensible Objects, and the great distance betwixt us and GOD,
in this our imperfect state, may, in some measure, be accounted for, by what we
have been saying.

For since there is a necessity, from the established Order of Nature, that the
Thoughts of the Soul should be conformable to the Traces of the Brain; we may
affirm, that from the time of our Formation in our Mother's Belly, we are under
Sin, and stained with the Corruption of our Parents; since we Date from thence
our vehement Application to sensible Pleasures. Having in our Brain the like
Characters and Impresses, with those Persons who gave us Being; we must
necessarily have the same Thoughts and the same Inclinations, with respect to
Sensible Objects.

And thus we must come into the World with Concupiscence about us, and infected
with Original Sin: We must be born with Concupiscence, if Concupiscence be
nothing but a Natural Effort made by the Traces of the Brain upon the Mind, to
unite it to things sensible: And we must be born with Original Sin, if Original
Sin be nothing but the Reign of Concupiscence, Romans Chapter 6.5.12, 14, etc.
and that Effort grown as it were victorious, and Master of the Infant's Heart
and Mind. Now there is great probability, that this Reign or Victory of
Concupiscence is what we call Original Sin in Infants, and Actual Sin in Men
that have liberty of Acting.

It only seems as if one might conclude, from the Principles I have
established, VI. Objections and Answers.
a thing repugnant to Experience; to wit, that the Mother must always
communicate to her Infant Habits and Inclinations like those she has her self,
and the facility of Imagining, and learning the same things she understands;
For all these things depend only as have been said on the Traces and Impresses
of the Brain. And it is certain, that the Traces and Impresses of the Mother's
Brain are communicated to her Children. This has been Experimentally proved by
the Instances that have been related concerning Men; and has been farther
confirmed from the Example of Animals, whose young ones have their Brain filled
with the same Impresses as those they proceeded from. Which is the Reason that
all those of the same Species have the same Voice, the same way of moving their
Limbs, in short, the same Stratagems for seizing their Prey, and of defending
themselves against their Enemies. From hence it must follow, that since all the
Traces of the Mother are engraven and imprinted on the Brain of the Child, the
Child must be born with the same Habits and the other Qualities of the Mother:
And also must preserve them generally through the course of his Life; since the
Habits which have been contracted in our more tender Age, are more lasting than
the other; which notwithstanding contradicts Experience.

In Answer to this Objection, we must understand that there are two kinds of
Traces in the Brain: The one Natural, or peculiar to the Nature of Man; the
other Acquired. The Natural are Extraordinary deep, and it is impossible they
should be quite effaced. The Acquired, on the contrary, may be easily lost;
because ordinarily they are not so deep. Now though the Natural and Acquired
differ only in Degree of more or less, and often the former are less forcible
than the latter, since we daily accustom Animals to the doing those things,
which are quite contrary to those their Natural Traces lead them to: (A Dog,
for instance, has been trained up not to touch the Bread before him; and not to
pursue a Partridge, which he is in scent and sight of) Yet there is this
Difference between these Traces; that the Natural are, as one may say,
connected with imperceptible Ties to the other parts of our Body. For all the
Wheels and Contrivances of our Machine are assistant to each other, to their
continuing in their Natural state. All the parts of our Body mutually
contribute to all things necessary to the Preservation or Restoration of these
Natural Traces; thus they can never be wholly abolished; and they begin to
revive again, when we thought them quite destroyed.

On the contrary, the Acquired Traces, though greater, and deeper, and stronger
than the Natural, are lost, and vanish by degrees; unless care be taken to
preserve them, by a perpetual application of the Causes which produce them:
because the other parts of the Body lend no assistance to their Preservation,
but contrariwise, continually labor to expunge and blot them out. We may
compare these Traces to the ordinary wounds of a Body: they are hurts which our
Brain has received which close up of themselves, as other wounds do, by the
Admirable Construction of the Machine.

As then there is nothing in the whole Body, but what is friendly and
conformable to these Natural Traces; they are delivered down to the Children in
all their force and strength. Thus Parrots breed their young with the same
cries and the same Natural Notes with themselves. But because the Acquired
Traces are only in the Brain, and make no Radiations into the rest of the Body,
or very little, (as suppose, when they are impressed on it by the Motions which
accompany violent Passions) they ought not to be transmitted to their Infants.
Thus a Parrot, who bids his Master Good Morrow and Good Night, produces not a
Young one so expert as himself; nor do Men of Sense and Learning beget Children
answerable to their Fathers.

So that though it be true, that all that happens in the Mother's Brain happens
likewise at the same time in the Brain of her Infant; and that the Mother can
neither see, nor feel, nor imagine, but the Infant must see, and feel, and
imagine the same thing: And lastly, that all the illegitimate Traces of the
Mother, Corrupt the Imagination of the Child; yet these Traces being not
Natural, in the Sense we have just explained it; it is no wonder if they usually
close up as soon as the Child proceeds from the Mother's Womb. For then the
Cause which delineated these Traces, and fed and nourished them, subsists no
longer; the Natural Constitution of the whole Body lends an hand to their
Destruction; and Sensible Objects produce a new Set extraordinary deep and
numerous, which efface the greatest part of those the Child had in its Mother's
Womb. For it daily happening that a great Pain makes us forgetful of those that
have preceded it; it is not imaginable but such lively Sensations, as are those
of Infants, when first the delicate Organs of their Senses receive the
Impressions of External objects, must destroy the greatest part of those
Traces, which they only received before from the same Objects, by a kind of
rebound from their Mother, when they lay as it were sheltred from them by the
enclosing of the Womb.

Notwithstanding, when these Traces are formed upon a strong Passion, and are
accompanied with a most violent Agitation of the Blood and Spirits in the
Mother, they act so forcibly on the Brain of the Child, and the rest of its
Body, as to imprint therein Characters as deep and durable as the Natural
Traces. As in the instance of Sir Kenelm Digby, in that of the Child who was
born an Idiot and a Cripple; in whose Brain and all his Members such ravage was
made, by the Imagination of the Mother; and lastly, in the instance of the
general Corruption of the Nature of Mankind.

And we need not wonder, that the King of England's Children were not subject
to the same Infirmity as their Father: First, Because this sort of Traces
diffuse not their Impression so far into the Body as the Natural. Secondly,
Because the Mother having not the same Infirmity as the Father, by her good
Constitution prevented its descending to her Children. And lastly, Because the
Mother acts infinitely more on the Brain of the Child, than the Father, as is
evident from what has been already said.

But it must be observed, That all these Reasons which show that King James's
Children might escape the Infirmity of their Father, make nothing against the
Explication of Original Sin; or of that predominant Inclination toward things
sensible: nor of that great Alienation from GOD, which we derive from our
Parents: because the Traces which sensible Objects have imprinted on the Brain
of the first Founders of Mankind, were stamped extremely deep; were accompanied
and augmented with violent Passions; were fortified and corroborated by the
continual use of things sensible and necessary to the Preservation of Life; not
only in Adam and Eve; but also, which is very remarkable, in the greatest
Saints; in all Men, and in all Women, from whom we are descended. So that there
is nothing which could put a stop to this Corruption of our Nature. And thus it
is so far from being possible for these Traces of our First Parents to wear out
by Degrees; that on the contrary, they must needs be continually renewing and
increasing; and without the Grace of JESUS CHRIST, which is continually
opposing this unruly tor^ent, it would be absolutely true to say in the words
of an Heathen Poet: Aetas parentum, pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.


For great notice should be taken, that the traces which quicken the most
Devout Mothers with the sentiments of Piety, communicate not any Piety to the
Children in their Womb; and that the Traces, on the other hand, which excite
the Idea's of Sensible things, and which are pursued with Passions, fail not to
communicate to their Children the Sensation, and love of Sensible things. A
Mother, for example, who is stirred up to the love of GOD, by a Motion of
Spirits, accompanying the Traces which the Image of a Venerable Old Man
occasions in her Brain; because this Mother has affixed the Idea of GOD to the
Trace of an Old Man; (for as we shall shortly see in the Chapter concerning the
Connection of Idea's, this may easily be done, though there is no Analogy at
all betwixt the Image of GOD and an Old Man) This Mother, I say, can only
produce in the Brain of her Infant the Trace of an Old Man; and an Inlination
for Old Men; which is not the love of GOD, wherewith she was her self affected.
For, in fine, there are no Traces in the Brain that can naturally excite any
other Idea's, than those of Sensible things: because the Body was not made to
instruct the Mind, and it never speaks to the Soul but in its own favor and
behalf.

Thus a Mother, whose Brain is filled with Traces, which by their own Nature
correspond to Sensible things, and which cannot be extirpated by reason of
Concupiscence abiding in her; and because she has not her Body in subjection,
by an un-avoidable Communication of them to her Infant, she brings forth a
Sinner, though her self be Righteous. This Mother is Righteous, for as much as
loving GOD actually, or having loved him by a Love of Choice, this
Concupiscence makes her not a Criminal, though she may follow the Motions of it
in her sleep. But the Infant she bears, having not loved GOD by a Love of
Choice, and his Heart having never been turned toward GOD, it is plain he is in
disorder, and in a State of Corruption; and that there is nothing in him but
what deserves the Wrath of GOD.

But when Children are Regenerated by Baptism, and Justified by a Disposition
of Heart, much like that which remains in the Righteous, during the Illusions
of the Night: or, it may be, by a Free Act of loving GOD; which act was
performed whilst they were for some Moments delivered from the Dominion of the
Body, by the Virtue of the Sacrament. (For since GOD has made their Loving him,
to be the end of his Creating them, it cannot be conceived how they can be
actually Justified, and in the Divine Order; unless they actually love him, or
have formerly loved him, or at least have such a Disposition of Heart as they
would have if they had actually loved him) Then though they obey Concupiscence
in their Infancy, their Concupiscence is no longer Sin. It renders them not
culpable, nor deserving of the Wrath of GOD: They fail not to be Righteous and
Acceptable to GOD; by the same reason, that a Man falls not from the State of
Grace, though in his sleep he follows the Motions of Concupiscence. For Infants
have a Brain so soft and pliable, and receive so lively and so strong
Impressions from Objects never so weak; that they have not Liberty of Mind
sufficient to resist them.

But I have insisted too long upon things, which do not properly belong to the
Subject of my Discourse. It Is enough, if I can conclude from the Explication I
have given in this Chapter, that all those Spurious Traces which Mothers
imprint in the Brain of their Children, adulterate their Minds, Se the
Illustrations.
and corrupt their Imaginations. And thus the generality of Men are wont to
Imagine things otherwise than they are, by giving some false color, and some
irregular stroke to the Idea's of things which they perceive.

CHAP. VIII.
I. The Changes which happen in the Imagination of an Infant after his Birth,
by his accompanying with his Mother, his Nurse and other Persons. II. Some
Instructions for their good Education.

IN the preceding Chapter we have considered the Brain of an Infant in his
Mother's Womb, let us at present examine what Changes it is subject to after
his Departure from it. At the same time that he quits his darksome Habitation,
and first beholds the Light, the cold of the Exterior Air takes hold of him:
the tenderest Embraces of the Woman that receives him, are offensive to his
nice and delicate Body: All External Objects round about astonish and confound
him: they are all occasions of his fears, since he does not as yet know them,
nor is in a capacity of resisting or avoiding them. His Tears and Cries
wherewith he bemoans himself, are infallible Indications of his Pains and
Fears. For these are in effect the Supplications which Nature makes to the
Assistants for him, that they would deliver him from the Evils that he suffers,
and from those he is apprehensive of.

But the better to conceive what confusion his Mind is under in this condition,
I. The Changes which happen in the Imagination of an Infant after his Birth, by
his accompanying with his Mother, his Nurse and other Persons.
it must be remembered that the Fibers of his Brain are most soft and tender,
and consequently that all External Objects make most profound Impressions on
them. For since the least things are often capable of hurting a weak
Imagination, such a multitude of surprising Objects cannot fail to wound and
embroil that of a new born Child.

But to form a more lively Imagination of the Perturbations and Pains, Children
are exposed to at their Coming into the World, and the wounds their Imagination
must receive; Let us represent to our selves, what astonishment would seize
those Men, who should see at some small distance Giants five or six times as
tall as themselves approaching toward them without knowing any thing of their
Design. Or should they behold some new Species of Animals, that had no Analogy
to any that they had already seen, or if only a Flying Horse, or some other
Chimera of our Poets should, descending from the Clouds on a sudden, light upon
the Earth. What deep strokes would these Prodigies leave in the Mind, and how
would they perplex and confound the Brain, though at a single View?

It daily happens that an unexpected Event, that has any thing terrible in its
circumstances, deprives of their Senses, Men of a Mature Age, whose Brain is
not so susceptible of new Impressions, who are experienced in the World, who
can make a Defense, or at least are capable of taking up some Resolution.
Children at their first Arrival in the World, suffer something from every
Object that strikes upon their Senses, wherewith they are not yet acquainted.
All the Animals they see, are Creatures of a new Species on their Regard, since
nothing of what they see at present was ever seen by them before. They are
destitute of Strength, and void of Experience; the Fibers of their Brain are of
a most fine and flexible temper. How then is it possible their Imagination
should continue whole, when exposed to the Impressions of so many different
Objects?

It Is true the Mothers have somewhat pre-accustomed their Children to the
Impressions of Objects, by having already imprinted them in the Fibers of their
Brain before they left the Womb; and this is the reason they receive much less
damage when they behold with their own Eyes, what they in some manner have
perceived already with their Mother's. It Is farther true that these adulterate
Traces and wounds, their Imagination receives upon the sight of so many
Objects, to them frightful and terrible, close up and heal again in time; for
as much as being unnatural, the whole Body is against them, and all the parts
conspire to their Destruction, as has been seen in the preceding Chapter. And
this is the cause that all Men in general are not Fools from their Cradles. But
this hinders not but that there may be ever some Traces so strong and deep
impressed as can never be effaced, but will remain as long as Life it self.

If Men would make serious Reflections upon what happens in their own Breast,
and contemplate their own Thoughts, they would not want an Experimental Proof
of what I have said. They would generally discover in themselves some secret
Inclinations and Aversions, which are not in others, whereof there seems no
other Reason to be given than these Traces of our Infancy. For since the causes
of these Inclinations and Aversions are peculiar to us, they have no foundation
in the Nature of Men; and since they are unknown to us, they must needs have
acted on us at a time, when our Memory was not yet capable of registring the
circumstances of things, which might have assisted us in calling them again to
Mind; and that time could be only that of our tenderest Age.

Monsieur Descartes has acquainted us in one of his Epistles, that he had
always a particular fancy for all Squint-eyed People; and having diligently
searched into the Cause of it, at length understood this Defect was incident to
a young Maid he loved, when he was a Child; the Affection he retained for her
diffusing it self to all others that any way resembled her.

But it is not these little irregularities of our Inclinations which subject us
most to Error, It Is our having universally, or almost universally, our Mind
adulterate in something or other, and our being generally subject to some kind
of Folly, though perhaps we are not aware of it. Let a Man but examine
carefully the Temper of those People he converses with, and he will easily be
persuaded into this Opinion, and though himself be an Original for others to
Copy after, and be looked upon as such; yet he will find all others to be
Originals too, and all the difference to consist in the Degree of more or less.

Now one of the Causes of the different Characters of Men's Minds, is doubtless
the difference of Impressions received by them in their Mother's Womb, as has
been manifested touching peculiar and unusual Inclinations: because these being
Species of Folly, that are settled and permanent for the most part, they cannot
have their Dependence on the Constitution of the Animal Spirits, which is of a
flux and alterable Nature. And consequently they must needs proceed from the
Base and Spurious Impressions made in the Fibers of the Brain, at such time as
our Memory was incapable of preserving the Remembrance of them, that is in the
beginning of our Lives, Here then is one of the commonest Causes of the Errors
of Mankind; I mean that Subversion of their Brain, caused by the Impression of
External Objects, in making their Entrance into the World; and this Cause does
not so suddenly cease, as may be possibly imagined.

The ordinary Commerce Children are obliged to have with their Nurses, or even
with their Mothers that frequently have had no Education, puts the last hand,
and gives the finishing stroke to the corruption of their Mind. These silly
Women entertain them with nothing but Fooleries, with ridiculous Tales, and
frightful Stories: Their whole Discourse to them is about things sensible; and
they deliver it in a way most proper to confirm them in the false Judgments of
their Senses. In a word, they sow in their Minds the Seeds of all the Follies
and Weaknesses themselves are subject to; as of their extravagant Fears and
Apprehensions, their ridiculous Superstitions, and other the like Feeblesses of
Mind. Which is the Reason, that not being accustomed to search for Truth, nor
to taste and relish it, they at last become incapable of discerning it, and of
making any use of their Reason. Hence they become timorous and low-spirited,
which Temper for a long time sticks by them: For there are many to be seen, who
when fifteen or twenty Years old, retain the Character and Spirit of their
Nurse.

It Is true, Children seem not to be greatly qualified for the Contemplation of
Truth, and for abstract and sublime Sciences: because the Fibers of their Brain
being extremely fine, are most easily agitated by Objects, even the most weak,
and least sensible that can be; and their Soul necessarily admitting Sensations
proportioned to the Agitation of these Fibers, leaves Metaphysical Nations, and
pure Intellection, to apply her self wholly to her Sensations. And thus
Children seem improper for, and incapable of an attentive Application to the
pure Idea's of Truth, being so frequently and so easily drawn off, by the
confused Idea's of their Senses.

Yet in Answer to this it may be said: First, that it is easier for a Child of
seven Years old, to be freed from the Errors his Senses lead him to, than for a
Man at sixty, who all his Life long has been mis-guided by the prejudices of
Childhood: Secondly, that a Child, though incapable of the clear and distinct
Idea's of Truth, is at least capable of being admonished, that his Senses
deceive him upon all occasions: and if he cannot be taught the Truth, he should
not however be encouraged and fortified in his Errors: Lastly, the youngest
Children, though never so taken up with Pleasant and Painful Sensations, yet
learn in little time, what Persons more advanced in Years cannot in much
longer; as the Knowledge of the Order and Relations, which all the things and
words, they see and hear, stand in to one another. For though these things
depend mostly on the Memory, yet it is very evident they make great use of their
Reason, in the manner of their Learning their Language.

But since that Aptness and Facility there is in the Fibers of a Child's Brain,
to receive the Pathetick Impressions of sensible Objects, II. Instructions for
the good Education of Children.
is the cause of our judging them incapable of Speculative Science; it is easy
to be redressed. For it must be acknowledged, that were the Fears, Desires, and
Hopes of Children removed or prevented; were they never caused to suffer Pain,
and removed as far as possible from their little Pleasures, they might be
taught as soon as they could speak, things most difficult and abstract, or at
least sensible Mathematics, Mechanics, and such like Sciences, as are
necessary in the conduct of their Life. But they have but little concern for
applying their Minds to abstract Sciences, whilst they are hurried with
Desires, or molested with Fears: which is worth while to be well considered.

For as a Man of Ambition, who had just lost his Estate or Honor, or was
suddenly raised to an unexpected Preferment, would not be in a Capacity of
resolving Metaphysical Questions, or Aequations of Algebra; but only to do
those things, to which he was influenced by his present Passion: So Children in
whose Brain an Apple or a Sugar-plumb makes as deep an Impression, as a great
Post, a Title, or Preferment, in that of a Man of Forty Years old; are not
qualified to attend to abstracted Truths, that are taught them. So that we may
affirm, there is nothing so opposite to Children's Advancement in Science, as
those continual Diversions we give them as Rewards, and the Pains we constantly
are inflicting, and threatening them withal.

But that which is infinitely more considerable is, that the fears of
Correction, and the desires of sensible Gratifications, which fill the Capacity
of a Child's Mind, utterly alienate him from the sense of Piety and Religion;
Devotion is still more abstract than Science, it has less of the relish of
corrupted Nature in it. The Mind of Man is strongly enough inclined to Study;
but has no Inclination to Piety at all. If then great Agitations will not give
us leave to Study, though we Naturally find Pleasure in it; how is it Possible
for Children, whose Thoughts are continually intent and busied about sensible
Pleasures wherewith they are rewarded, and sensible Pains with which they are
affrighted, to preserve amongst all these Avocations a Liberty of Mind to
relish the things belonging to Religion?

The Capacity of the Mind is very strait and limited, 'twill contain but a
little furniture; and when once it is full, it has no farther room for any Novel
Thoughts, unless it empties it self first of the former to receive them. But
when the Mind is filled with sensible things, it does not evacuate it self at
its Pleasure.

In order to conceive this, it must be considered, that we are all incessantly
carried toward Good by our Natural Inclinations; and that Pleasure being the
Character whereby we distinguish it from Evil, Pleasure must unavoidably be
more our concern and business than all things besides. Pleasure therefore being
conjoined to the use of Sensible things, because they are the Goods of the Body
of Man, there is a kind of necessity these Goods should fill up the whole
extent of our Mind, till GOD diffuses some bitterness upon them, which creates
in us a dislike and aversion, by given us, through his Grace, a Sensation of
those Heavenly Delights, which extinguish all Earthly Enjoyments; Dando menti
Coelestem delectationem, S. August.
qua omnis terrena delectatio superatur.

But because we are as much inclined to fly Evil, as to love Good, and Pain is
the Character which Nature has affixed to Evil; all that has been said of
Pleasure ought, in a contrary sense, to be understood of Pain.

Seeing therefore the things which make us sensible of Pleasure and Pain, fill
the capacity of the Mind; and it is not in our Power to quit them, and to be
unconcerned about them, when we would: It Is plain that we cannot give Children
a relish of Piety (no more than we can any other Men) unless we begin,
according to the Precepts of the Gospel, with a Deprivation of all those things
which affect the Senses) and promote great Desires and Fears. Since all the
Passions obnubilate and extinguish Grace, and that internal Delectation which
GOD makes us sensible of in our Duty.

The least Children are instructed with Reason no less than perfect Men, though
they want Experience. They have too the same Inclinations, though they are
carried by them unto different Objects. They should then be accustomed to
follow the conduct of Reason, since they have it in them; and they ought to be
excited to their Duty by a dexterous management of their good Inclinations.
It Is the way to extinguish their Reason, and to debauch their best
Inclinations, to hold them to their Duty by sensible Impressions. They seem to
be in the performance of their Duty, but they are only so in show and
appearance: Virtue is not at the bottom of their Heart or Mind, their Moral or
their Intellectual Part: They know Virtue very little, but they love it much
less. Their Minds abound with nothing but Fears and Desires, with Aversions and
sensible Fondnesses, which they cannot get rid of, to come to the use of their
Liberty and Exercise of their Reason. Thus Children who are Educated in that
dis-spirited and slavish manner, grow hardened by degrees, and become
insensible to all the Sentiments of an Honest Man and a Christian; which
insensibility cleaves to them all their day. And when they are in hopes of
securing themselves from the Lash, by their Authority, or their management;
they give themselves up to every thing that flatters their Concupiscence and
their Senses; because indeed they know no other Goods than the Goods of the
Senses.

It is true, there are some particular Junctures, in which it is necessary to
instruct Children by their Senses; but this ought never to be done but where
Reason is defective. They ought at first to be persuaded by Reason of what
their Duty is; and if they have not Light enough to discover their Obligations
to it, it seems best to let them alone for some time. For this would not be to
instruct them, to force them upon an External Performance of what they do not
conceive their Duty: Since it is the Mind which ought to be instructed, and not
the Body. But if they refuse to do what Reason tells them they ought to do,
they are no longer to be born with: But rather Severity should be used to some
excess. For in such Conjunctures, Qui parcit virgae, odit filium suum. Prove.
13.24.
He that spares his Son, according to the Wise Man, has a greater degree of
hatred than of love for him.

If Chastisements be not instructive to the Mind, nor conducive to the love for
Virtue; they instruct, at least, the Body in some measure, and prevent their
tasting Vice, and consequently their becoming Slaves to it. But that which is
more especially observable, is, That Pains fill not the Capacities of the Mind
as Pleasures do. We easily cease to think of them, when we no longer suffer
them, and are out of the danger and fear of them. For then they importune not
the Imagination; they excite not the Passions, nor provoke Concupiscence. In
fine, they leave the Mind at liberty to think of what it pleases; and thus we
may discipline Children with them, to keep them in their Duty, or in the
Appearance of it.

But though it be sometimes useful to affright and punish Children with
sensible Corrections; it ought not to be concluded, that they should be allured
by sensible Rewards. There should no means be made use of, that any whit
forcibly affect the Senses, but in a case of extreme necessity: Now there can
be none of bestowing Sensible Rewards upon them, and representing these Rewards
as the End of their Employment. This, on the contrary, would be the means of
vitiating their best Actions; and inclining them rather to Sensuality than
Virtue. The Traces of Pleasures which they have once tasted, remain strongly
imprinted in their Imagination: They continually quicken and awaken the Ideas
of Sensible Goods; they constantly excite importunate Desires, which disturb
the peace of the Mind. Lastly, They provoke Concupiscence on all occasions,
which is the Leaven that corrupts the whole mass. But this is not the place of
explaining these things according to their Desert.

The SECOND PART: Concerning The IMAGINATION.
CHAP. I.
I. Of the Imagination of Women. II. Of the Imagination of Men. III. Of the
Imagination of Old Men.

WE have in the First Part, in some measure, explained the Physical Causes of
the Disorders of Man's Imagination: We shall endeavor in this to make some
Application of these Causes to the more general Errors of Imagination, and
shall treat likewise of the Causes of these Errors, which may be called Moral.

It may be understood from what has been said in the foregoing Chapter, that
the Delicacy of the Fibers of the Brain, is one of the principal Causes that
disables us, from bringing an Application sufficient for the Discovery of
Truths, that lie any whit deep or concealed.

This Delicacy of the Fibers is more usually incident to Women; and this is the
Principle of their so exact acquaintance with all things that strike upon their
Senses. I. Of the Imagination of Women.
It Is the Woman's Province to determine concerning the Fashions, to judge of
Language, to distinguish the genteel Mein, and the fine and courtly Behavior:
They far outdo Men in the Science, Skill, and Dexterity about these things.
All that depends upon the Taste falls under their Jurisdiction; but generally
they are incapable of Penetrating into Truths that have any Difficulty in the
Discovery. All things of an abstracted Nature are Incomprehensible to them.
They cannot employ their Imagination in disentangling compound and perplexed
Questions. Their Consideration terminates on the surface and outside of
things: and their Imagination has neither strength nor reach enough to pierce
to the bottom of them, and to make a Comparison of their parts, without
Distraction. A Trifle or a Feather shall call them off, the smallest outcry
dismay them, and any little Motion gives them Employment: In short, the Mode
and not the Reality of things, is enough to take up the whole Capacity of their
Mind; because the least Objects producing great Motions in the delicate Fibers
of their Brain, by a necessary consequence excite such lively and great
Sensations in their Souls, as wholly possess and take them up.

But though it be certain, that this Delicacy of the Fibers of the Brain is the
principal Cause of all these Effects; yet it is not equally certain, that it is
universally to be found in all Women. Or if it be to be found, yet their Animal
Spirits are sometimes so exactly proportioned to the Fibers of their Brain,
that there are Women to be met with, who have a greater solidity of Mind than
some Men. It Is in a certain Temperature of the Largeness and Agitation of the
Animal Spirits, and Conformity with the Fibers of the Brain, that the strength
of parts consists: And Women have sometimes that just Temperature. There are
Women Strong and Constant, and there are Men that are Weak and Fickle. There
are Women that are Learned, Courageous, and capable of every thing. And on the
contrary, there are Men that are Soft, Effeminate, incapable of any
Penetration, or dispatch of any Business. In fine, when we attribute any
Failures to a certain Sex, Age, or Condition, they are only to be understood of
the generality; it being ever supposed, there is no general Rule without
Exception.

For it ought not to be imagined, that all Men, or all Women of the same Age,
Country, or Family, have their Brain of the same Constitution. It is more
pertinent to believe, that as there are not two Faces in the World, in every
thing resembling one another; so there are not two Imaginations exactly alike:
And that all Men, Women, and Children differ from one another, only more or
less, in the Delicacy of the Fibers of their Brain. For as we ought not too
hastily to suppose an Essential Identity in those things, between which we see
no Difference; so we ought not to make Essential Differences, where we cannot
find perfect Identity. For these are the common Faults Men usually fall into.

That which may be said of the Fibers of the Brain, is, That in Children they
are very soft and extremely tender; that with Age they harden and corroborate:
Yet notwithstanding the generality of Women, and some Men, have them extremely
delicate all their Lives. To determine any thing farther, we dare not. But this
is enough to be said of Women and Children, That as they are not concerned with
searching after Truth and the Instruction of others; so their Errors do not
occasion much Prejudice; since little credit is given to things by them
advanced. Let us speak of Men grown up; of such as have their Mind in its
Strength and Vigor; such as may be thought capable of finding out Truth, and
teaching it to others.

The ordinary Season for the greatest Perfection of the Mind, is, from the Age
of Thirty, II. Of the Imagination of Men in the Perfection of their Age.
to that of Fifty Years. The Fibers of the Brain in that Age have usually
attained a tolerable consistence; the Pleasures and Pains of the Senses make
hardly any more Impression on them. So that a Man has no more to do, than to
ward off violent Passions, which rarely happen; and from which a Man may screen
himself, if he diligently avoid all manner of occasion: And thus the Soul
meeting with no more Diversion from things sensible, may, with greater ease and
leisure, give her self to the Contemplation of Truth.

A Man in this capacity, who had not his Mind filled with the Prejudices of
Childhood; who from his Youth upwards had obtained a Facility for Meditation;
who would only take up with the clear and distinct Notions of Intellect, and
industriously reject all the confused Idea's of Sense; and who had both Time
and Inclination for Study; would doubtless very rarely fall into Error. But
such a Man as this is not the subject of our Discourse; it is Men of the vulgar
stamp, who usually have nothing of this in them.

I say then, that the Solidity and Consistence accruing with Age to the Fibers
of Men's Brains, gives the Solidity and Consistence to their Errors, if I may
so speak. It Is the Seal that seals up their Prejudices, and all their false
Opinions, and locks them from the Attempts and Force of Reason. In fine, by how
much this Constitution of the Fibers of the Brain is advantageous to well
Educated Persons, by so much it is prejudicial to the greatest part of Mankind;
because it confirms each of them in the Notions they have taken up.

But Men are not only confirmed and strengthened in their Errors, when they
have attained to the Age of Forty or Fifty Years. They are still more liable to
fall into new ones every day; for believing themselves competent Judges of
every thing, as indeed they ought to be, they peremptorily determine, yet only
consult their Prejudices to give a decision: For Men reason only upon things
with relation to the Idea's they are most familiar with, and accustomed to.
When a Chemist would reason about any Physical Body, immediately his three
Principles are present to his Mind. A Peripatetick has recourse forthwith in
his Thoughts to his four Elements, and the four Primitive Qualities: And
another Philosopher drives every thing up to other Principles. And so there can
nothing enter into the Mind of a Man, but is instantly tinged with the Error he
is subject to, and augments their number.

This Consistence of the Brain has besides a very mischievous Effect,
especially on more Aged sort of People, which is, to incapacitate them for
Thought and Meditation: They are unable to fasten their Attention upon any
thing they have a Mind to know, and so are incapable of reaching to Truths that
are any thing obscure or intricate, They are utterly insensible to the most
reasonable Opinions, when founded upon Principles that to them seem Novel,
though as to those other concerns, that Age has given them Experience in, they
are very understanding Men. But all that I here affirm is only to be understood
of those, who have spent their younger days without the due Use and Improvement
of their Mind, and applying it as they should do.

To illustrate these things, it is necessary to know, that not any thing
whatever can be learned without Advertency and Attention; and that it is
impossible we should be attentive to any thing, unless we Imagine it, and frame
a lively Representation of it in our Brain. But to the end we may Imagine any
Objects, it is necessary we should inflect some part of our Brain, or impress
some other kind of Motion in it, that we may frame the Traces, whereunto are
consociated the Ideas that represent these Objects to us: So that if the Fibers
of our Brain were any whit hardened, they would be capable of no other
Inflection or Motions, than those they were formerly used to. And thus the Soul
could form no Imagination of, nor consequently be attentive to what she
pleases; but only to such things as are customary and familiar to her.

Hence we ought to conclude, that it is of very great Advantage to use a Man's
self to Meditate upon all sorts of Subjects, in order to acquire an Habitual
Facility of Thinking on what he will. For as we acquire a great Readiness at
moving our Fingers all manner of ways, and with a prodigious Nimbleness, by the
frequent Use we make of them in playing on a Musical Instrument; so the parts
of our Brain, the Motion whereof is necessary to the Imagining what we please,
attain by Use a certain Facility of Plying and Inflecting themselves, which
makes us imagine the things we have a Mind to, with a great deal of Ease,
Readiness, and Distinction.

Now the best means of procuring this Disposition, which causes the Principal
Difference between a Man of Parts, and another; is to accustom a Man's self
from his Youth to the Disquisition of the Truth of things very abstract and
difficult: Because in that Age the Fibers of the Brain are pliable and flexible
all manner of ways.

I suppose not however, that this Facility can be acquired by those we call Men
of Books and Learning; who only apply themselves to Reading, without
Meditation, and without searching out the Resolution of Questions themselves,
before they Read them in Authors. It Is palpable enough, that hereby they only
acquire a Facility of Remembering what they have read. It Is daily observed, that
Men of much Reading, are unable to bring Advertency of Attention to things that
are new to them, and unheard of; and that the Vanity of their Learning,
inclining them to form a Judgment of them, before they conceive them, makes
them fall into gross Errors, to which other Men are not obnoxious.

But though the want of Advertency is the main Cause of their Errors, there is
one still that is peculiar to them; which is, that finding ever in their Memory
abundance of confused Notions, they presently select some one of them, and
consider it as the subject of the Question: And because the things a Man
speaks, are not conformable to it; they ridiculously conclude he is in an
Error. Should you endeavor to represent to them that they are deceived
themselves, and that they understand not so much as the state of the Question;
they fall into a Passion, and not being able to conceive what is said to them,
they persist to embrace that false Notion their Memory has suggested. But
should the falsity of it be made too manifestly apparent, they substitute a
second, and a third in its room, which they defend sometimes against all
appearances of Truth, and even against their own Conscience; as having but
little Respect or Love for Truth, but a great deal of Shame and Confusion in
acknowledging, there are things another knows better than themselves.

All that has been said concerning Men of forty or fifty Years old, ought with
greater allowance to be understood of Aged Men; III. Concerning the Imagination
of Old Men.
because the Fibers of their Brain being still more inflexible, and wanting
Animal Spirits to imprint new Traces in it; their Imagination is altogether
faint and languid.

And whereas generally the Fibers of their Brain are loaded with abundance of
superfluous Humors, they lose by degrees the Memory of things past, and return
to the weaknesses usually incident to Childhood. Thus in this Decrepid Age,
they have the Defects which depend on the Constitution of the Fibers of the
Brain; which are found both in Children and in grown Men. Though it may be said
they have more Prudence than either of them, because they are less subject to
their Passions, which proceed from the Commotion of the Animal Spirits.

I shall not explain these things more at large, because it is easy to judge
of this Age, by the others before treated of; and to conclude that Old Men have
more difficulty than others at conceiving what is said to them; that they are
more zealously devoted to their Prejudices and Ancient Opinions; and
consequently are more confirmed and strengthened in their Errors, in their
corrupt Habits, and other things of like Nature. It Is only to be advertised,
That the state of Old Age is not precisely determined to Sixty or Seventy
Years; that all Old Men are not Dotards; and that those who have passed the
Sixtieth Year, are not always delivered from the Passions of Youth; and that we
ought not to draw too general Consequences from the Principles established.

CHAP. II.
That the Animal Spirits generally run in the Tracks of Idea's that are most
familiar to us, which is the Reason of our preposterous Judgments.

I Have, I think, explained in the foregoing Chapters, the various Changes
happening in the Animal Spirits, and in the Constitution of the Fibers of the
Brain, according to different Ages: Wherefore supposing a Man to have meditated
a little upon what has been said upon that Subject, he must necessarily have a
distinct Knowledge enough of the Imagination, and of the most common Natural
Causes of the differences observable between the Minds of Men; since all the
Changes happening in the Imagination and the Mind, are only the Consequences of
those which are to be found in the Animal Spirits, and the Fibers that compose
the Brain.

But there are many particular, and such as we may call Moral Causes of the
Changes which happen in the Imagination of Men; namely, Their different
Conditions, their various Employments; and, in a word, their several ways of
Living; which deserve to be attentively considered; because these sorts of
Changes are the Causes of a numberless multitude of Errors, every Man judging
of things with reference to his own Condition: We think it not so much our
Business to stand to explain the Effects of some less customary Causes; such as
great Diseases, surprising Misfortunes, and other unexpected Accidents, which
make very violent Impressions in the Brain, and which sometimes totally subvert
it; because these things are of very rare occurrence; and besides, the Error
such sort of Persons fall into, are too gross to be contagious, since they are
palpable and discernible to all Mankind.

But that we may perfectly comprehend all the Changes the different conditions
and states of Life produce in the Imagination; it is absolutely necessary to be
called to mind, that our Imagining Objects is only the framing Images thereof
to our Selves; and that these Images are nothing but the Traces delineated by
the Animal Spirits in the Brain; that we Imagine things so much stronglier as
these Traces are more deep and better cut, and as the Animal Spirits more
frequently and violently pass through them; that these Spirits, by their
frequent course, so plain and open the Passage, as to enter the same Tracks
with greater readiness than any other neighboring parts, through which they
either have not passed, or not so frequently. This is the most ordinary Cause
of the Confusion and Falsity of our Idea's. For the Animal Spirits which were
directed by the Action of External Objects, or even by the orders of the Soul
to the production of certain Traces, frequently produce others, which indeed
have some resemblance with them, but are not altogether the Traces of these
same Objects, nor those the Soul desired to represent; because the Animal
Spirits finding some Resistance in the parts of the Brain through which they
ought to pass, are easily diverted to throng into the deep Traces of Idea's
which are most familiar to us: Here are some very gross and sensible Instances
of these things.

When those who are not extraordinary short-sighted behold the Moon, they see
in her two Eyes, a Nose, and a Mouth; in a word it looks to them as if they saw
a Face, tho there be nothing in her of what they fancy they perceive. Many
Persons see in her quite another thing. And those who believe the Moon to be
such as she appears, would quickly be undeceived, did they but behold her with
Telescopes, though of a moderate size; or did they only consult the
Descriptions Hevelius, Riccioli, and others have made Public. Now the Reason
why a Man usually sees a Face in the Moon, and not those irregular Blotches
that are in her, is because the Traces of a Face, which are imprinted in the
Brain, are very deep, for that we frequently look on Faces, and with great
Attention. So that the Animal Spirits meeting with opposition in the other
parts of the Brain, easily swerve from the Direction the Light of the Moon
impresses on them, when a Man beholds her; to accomodate themselves to the
Traces whereunto Nature has affixed the Idea's of a Face. Besides that the
apparent Magnitude of the Moon differing not much from a common head at a
certain Distance; She by her Impression forms such Traces, as have Connection
with those which represent a Nose, a Mouth, and Eyes; and so she determines the
Spirits to take their course in the Traces of a Face. There are some who
discern in the Moon a Man on Horseback, or something else than a Face, because
their Imagination having been briskly smitten with some particular Objects, the
Traces of these Objects open at any thing that bears the least Analogy to them.

It Is upon the same grounds we Imagine we see Chariots, Men, Lions, and other
Animals in the Clouds, when there is any little resemblance between their
Figures and these Animals: and all Men, especially those who are used to
Designing, see sometimes Heads of Men on Walls, whereon there are many
irregular stains.

It Is for the same Reason still that the Spirits of Wine, entering without any
Direction of the Will into the most familiar Traces, make Men betray their
Secrets of the greatest concernment; and that when a Man sleeps he usually
dreams of Objects he has seen in the Daytime, which have formed very great
Traces in the Brain: because the Soul is ever representing those things,
whereof she has the greatest and deepest Traces. But see other Examples of a
more complex kind.

A Distemper is new: and it makes such havoc and destruction, as amazes all
Men. This imprints Traces so deep in the Brain, that this Disease is never
absent from the Mind. If this Disease be called, for instance, the Scurvy; all
Diseases must presently be called Scurvy: the Scurvy is new, therefore all new
Distempers is the Scurvy: The Scurvy is accompanied with a dozen Symptoms,
whereof many are common to other Distempers, that matters not: If a sick Person
fortunes to have any one of the Symptoms, he must needs be sick of the Scurvy;
and other Distempers are never suspected, or thought of, that have the same
Symptoms. It Is expected that all the Accidents which befall those that have been
sick of the Scurvy, must befall him too: The same Medicines therefore are
prescribed him, and it is matter of amazement, to find they have not the same
Effect, as they have been known to have had in others.

An Author applies himself to one kind of Study; The Traces of the Subject he is
employed about, are so deeply imprinted, and make such lively Radiations
through the Brain, as to confound and efface sometimes the Traces of things of
a quite different kind. There has been a Man, for instance, that has wrote many
bulky Volumes on the Cross; this made him discover a Cross in every thing he
looked upon; and it is with Reason, that Father Morinus handsomely rallies him,
for thinking a Medal represented a Cross, though it represented quite another
thing. 'Twas by such another unlucky turn of Imagination Gilbertus and many
others, after having studied the Lodestone, and admired its properties, must
needs reduce to these Magnetic Qualities abundance of Natural Effects, that
had no Relation to them in the World.

The Instances I have here alleged, suffice to prove that the great facility
of the Imagination's representing Objects that are familiar to it, and the
difficulty it finds in Imagining those that are Novel, is the Reason of Men's
forming almost ever such Idea's as may be styled mixed and impure; and of the
Mind's judging of things only with Relation to it self, and its former
Thoughts. And thus the different Passions of Men, their Inclinations,
Conditions, Employments, Qualities, Studies, finally all their different Ways
and Scopes of Life, putting very considerable Differences in their Idea's,
occasion them to fall into innumerable Errors, which we shall explain in the
following Discourse: Which was the reason of My Lord Bacon's speaking this most
judicious Sentence: Omnes perceptiones tam sensus quam mentis sunt ex analogia
hominis, non ex analogia universi: Estque Intellectus humanus instar speculi
inaequalis, ad radios rerum qui suam Naturam naturae rerum immiscet, eamque
distorquet, and inficit.

CHAP. III.
Of the Mutual Connection between the Idea's, and the Traces of the Brain; and
of the Mutual Connection there is between Traces and Traces, Idea's and Idea's.

AMONG the whole Mass of Material Beings, there is nothing more worthy of the
Contemplation of Men, than the Contexture of their own Body, and the
Correspondence found between the Parts that compose it. And among all things
Spiritual, there is nothing, the Knowledge whereof is more necessary, than that
of their Soul, and of all the Relations she is indispensably under to GOD, and
Naturally to the Body.

It Is not enough to have a confused Knowledge or Sensation, that the Traces of
the Brain are mutually connected to each other, and that they are pursued by
the Motion of the Animal Spirits; that the Traces when excited in the Brain,
excite the Idea's in the Understanding, and that the Motions that arise in the
Animal Spirits, raise the Passions in the Will. We ought, as far as is
possible, to have a distinct Knowledge of the Cause of all these different
Connections; but especially of the Effects they are capable of producing.

We ought to know the Cause thereof, in as much as it is necessary to know our
Guide and Conductor, who alone is capable of acting in us, and of rendering us
happy or miserable; and we ought to know the Effect of them, it being necessary
to know our selves as much as possible, and other Men with whom we are obliged
to live: So should we know the means both of conducting our selves to, and
preserving our selves in, the most happy and perfect state we are capable of
attaining, by the order of Nature, and the Precepts of the Gospel: and so
should we be able to frame our Lives sociably with Men, by exactly knowing the
means of making use of them in our Exigencies, and assisting them in their
Miseries.

I pretend not to Explain in this Chapter a Subject so vast and Comprehensive:
nor have I that Opinion of my self, as to think I should thoroughly do it in
this whole Work. There are many things I am still ignorant of, and despair of
ever knowing well: and there are others which I presume I know, but am unable
to explicate: For there is no mind so little and so narrow, but may by
Meditation discover more Truths, than can be deduced at length by the most
Eloquent Man in the World.

I. Of the Union of the Soul and Body.
We are not to imagine with a great part of the Philosophers, that the Mind
becomes Body when united to the Body, and that the Body becomes Mind when
united to the Mind. The Soul is not expanded through all the parts of the Body,
in order to give Life and Motion to it, as the Imagination represents: nor does
the Body become capable of Sensation by its Union with the Mind, as our
treacherous and abusive Senses would seem to persuade us. Either Substance
preserves its own particular Being, and as the Soul is incapable of Extension
and Motions; so the Body is incapable of Thought and Inclinations. All the
Affinity that we know between the Body and Mind, consists in the Natural and
Mutual correspondence of the Thoughts of the Soul, with the Traces of the
Brain; and of the Emotions of the Soul, with the Motions of the Animal Spirits.

When the Soul receives some new Idea's, some new Traces are imprinted on the
Brain; and when Objects produce new Traces, the Soul receives new Idea's. Which
is not said, as if the Soul considered these Traces, since she has no knowledge
of them; or, as if these Traces included these Idea's, since there is no
Analogy betwixt them: or lastly, as if she received her Idea's from these
Traces; for it is inconceivable, as shall be explained hereafter, how the Mind
should receive any thing from the Body, and become more enlightened than she is,
by turning toward it, as the Philosophers pretend, who would have the Souls
Perception of all things to be caused Per conversionem ad phantasmata, by the
Conversion to the Phantasms, or Traces of the Brain.

Thus when the Soul wills the moving of her Arm, the Arm is moved, though she
not so much as knows what ought to be done to the moving it: and when the
Animal Spirits are agitated, the Soul finds a Commotion in her self, though she
is ignorant whether there be any such thing as Animal Spirits in her Body.

When I come to treat of the Passions, I shall speak of the Connection there is
between the Traces of the Brain, and the Motions of the Spirits; and of that
which is between the Idea's, and the Emotions of the Soul: for all the Passions
have their Dependence thereon. I am to Discourse at present only of the
Connection between Traces and Idea's, and the Connection Traces have with one
another.

Three Causes of the Connection of Traces with Idea's.
There are three very considerable Causes of the Connection of Idea's with the
Traces of the Brain. The first and most general, is the Identity of time: for
our having had certain thoughts at the instant of our having certain new Traces
in the Brain, is oftentimes sufficient for our having a-fresh the same
thoughts, as often as these Traces are re-produc'd in our Brain. If the Idea of
GOD has been offered to my Mind, at the same time my Brain received an
Impression from the sight of these three Letters Jah, or from the sound of the
same word, it is enough that the Traces produced by the sound or sight of these
Characters be reprinted, to cause me to think on GOD; nor can I think of GOD,
but some confused Traces of the Characters or sounds, that the thoughts I had
of GOD were attended with, will be re-produc'd in my Brain: For the Brain being
never empty of Traces, there are constantly such as are somewhat related to
what we think of, though these Traces are frequently very imperfect and
confused.

The second Cause of the Connection between Idea's and Traces, and which ever
supposes the former, is the Will of Men. This Will is necessary to the intent
this Connection of Idea's with the Traces, may be regulated and accommodated to
use. For were not Men naturally inclined to a mutual Agreement about affixing
their Idea's to Sensible Signs; this Connection of Idea's would not be only
absolutely useless to society, but would moreover be very irregular, and
extremely imperfect.

And that, first because Idea's have never any strong Connection with the
Traces, except when the Spirits being agitated and fermented, make the Traces
deep and permanent. So that, since the Spirits are only agitated by the
Passions, had Men no Passion for communicating their own thoughts and
participating those of others, it is plain that the exact Connection of their
Idea's to particular Traces, would be very weak; since they would never use
themselves to those exact and regular Connections, were it not to become
intelligible one to another.

Secondly, the repeated concurrence of the same Idea's with the same Traces,
being necessary to make so strong a Connection, as may be durable and lasting;
(since a first meeting, unless attended with a violent Motion of the Animal
Spirits, cannot confederate them so strongly as is requisite) it is manifest,
that should not Men contrive to agree, it would be the greatest chance in the
World, for the same Traces and the same Idea's to meet a second time. Thus the
Will of Men is necessary to regulate the Connection and Alliance of the same
Traces with the same Idea's; though this Will of Agreeing is not so much the
result of their Choice and Reason, as an Impression of the Author of Nature,
who has disposed and made us all for the Benefit of each other, and given us a
strong Inclination to unite in Mind, as much as we are united in our Bodies.

The third Cause of the Connection of Idea's with the Traces, is the Nature, or
the constant and immutable Will of the Creator. There is, for instance, a
Natural Connection, and independent on our Will, between the Traces produced by
a Tree or a Mountain which we see, and the Idea's of a Tree or a Mountain:
between the Traces produced in our Brain by the cry of a Man or an Animal
suffering Pains, and whose Plaints we hear: by the mein of a Man's Countenance
that threatens or fears us; and the Idea's of Pains, Strength, Weakness; and
also the Sensations of Pity, Fear, and Courage, which are occasioned in our
selves.

These Natural Connections are of all others the strongest; they are generally
alike in all Mankind: and they are absolutely necessary to the Preservation of
Life. And this is the Reason they have no dependence on our Will. For if the
Connection of Idea's with Sounds and certain Characters, is weak and very
different in different Countries; it is because it depends on the weak and
changeable Will of Men. And the Reason why it depends thereon, is because this
Connection is not absolutely necessary to their Living; but only to their
Living as Men; who ought to form themselves into Civil and Rational Societies.

It is here very observable, that the Connection of Idea's, which represent
things Spiritual distinct from us, with the Traces of our Brain, is not
Natural, nor possible to be so: And consequently that it is or may be different
in all Men; since it has no other cause than their own Will, and the Identity
of time; whereof I have spoken before. On the Contrary, the Connection of
Idea's of all things material with certain particular Traces, is Natural; and
consequently there are particular Traces which excite the same Idea in all
Mankind. It cannot be doubted, for instance, but all Men have the Idea of a
Square upon sight of a Square, because that Connection is Natural: but it may
be very well doubted whether all Men have the Idea of a Square, when they hear
the word Square pronounced; because that Connection is altogether arbitrary. We
ought to think the same thing of all those Traces that are connected with the
Idea's of things of a Spiritual kind.

But because the Traces which have a Natural Connection with Idea's, give the
Mind concern and application, and consequently render it attentive; the
generality of Men are very ready at comprehending and retaining sensible and
palpable Truths: that is to say, the Relations, which Bodies have to one
another. And on the other hand, because the Traces, which have no other
Connection with Idea's, than that which the will has effected between them,
strike not vigorously on the Mind; all Men in general find it very difficult to
comprehend, and harder yet to retain abstracted Truths; that is to say the
Relations which are between things which come not within the Verge of
Imagination. But when these Relations are any whit compounded, they seem
absolutely incomprehensible; especially to those who are not used to them;
because they have not strengthened the Connection between these abstract Idea's
and their Traces, by a perpetual Meditation. And though others have perfectly
comprehended them, they forget them again in a little time; because the
Connection is hardly ever so strong, as the Natural.

It Is so true, that all the difficulty Men have to comprehend and retain things
Spiritual and Abstract, proceeds from the difficulty they find to corroborate
the Connection of their Idea's with the Traces of the Brain; that when they
find the means of Explaining by material Relations, those that are between
things Spiritual, they make them easily understood; imprinting them in such
manner on the mind, as not only to be strongly convinced of them, but also to
retain them without any trouble. The general Idea we have given of the Mind in
the first Chapter of this Work, is perhaps a sufficient Proof of what I say.

On the contrary, when the Relations that are between material things are so
expressed, that there is no necessary Connection between the Idea's of these
things, and the Traces of their Expressions; they are difficultly comprehended
and easily forgotten.

Those, for instance, who enter upon the Study of Algebra, or Analyticks, are
incapable of taking Algebraick Demonstrations without a great deal of pains;
and when they have once mastered them, they retain them but a short time;
because Squares, (for example) Parallelograms, Cubes, Solids, and the like,
being expressed by aa, ab, a 3, abc, etc. the Traces whereof have no Natural
Connection with their Idea's; the Mind finds no hold to fasten the Idea's to,
and to examine the Relations of them by.

But those who begin to Study Common Geography, most clearly and readily
conceive the little Demonstrations that are explained to them; provided they
distinctly understand the Terms made use of: Because the Idea's of a Square, a
Circle, or the like, are Naturally Connected with the Traces of the figures
they see described before their Eyes. And it often happens, that the mere
showing of the figure used in the Demonstration, makes them sooner comprehend
it, than the Discourses made to explain it. Because words being Connected to
Idea's by an arbitrary institution only, excite not these Idea's readily and
distinctly enough, to make us easily understand their Relations. For it is
chiefly upon that account, there is so much difficulty found in learning the
Sciences.

By the way, it may be discovered from what I have been saying, that those
Writers who coin abundance of new Words and Figures, to explain their Notions
by; spend much pains to very little purpose. They think to make themselves
intelligible, when indeed they take the way of becoming incomprehensible. We
define, say they, all our Terms, and all our Characters, and others ought to
agree to them. It is true, others agree to them with their Will, but their
Nature is repugnant. They cannot fasten their Idea's to these Novel Terms;
because to that is required custom and long practice. The Authors perhaps have
attained that custom, but the Readers have not: And when a Man endeavors to
instruct the Mind, it is necessary he first know it; since he ought to conform
to Nature, and offer her nothing provoking or offensive.

Yet we ought not to condemn the Industry and Care Mathematicians take in
defining their Terms; for Definition is evidently necessary to take away
Equivocation. But the ordinary and received Terms ought to be employed as far
as possibly they can; or such whose common signification is not very remote
from that which they pretend to introduce; which is a thing not constantly
observed among the Mathematicians.

Nor do we pretend by what has been said, to condemn Algebra; especially such
as Mr. Descartes has restored, and left it to us. For though the Novelty of
some Expressions in that Science, give the Mind some trouble at first; yet
there is so little variety and confusion in these Expressions; and the
Assistances the Mind receives from them so much outweigh the Difficulty found
in them, that I am of Opinion it is impossible for a Man to invent a way of
Reasoning and Expressing his Reasonings, more suited or better accomodated to
the Nature of the Mind, or that can carry it farther in the Discovery of
unknown Truths. The Expressions of that Science do not distract the Capacity of
the Mind; they burden not the Memory; they contract and abridge in a wonderful
manner all our Idea's and our Reasonings, and even render them in some measure
sensible by Practice. In fine, their usefulness is much greater than the
Natural Expressions of the delineated Figures of Triangles, Squares, and others
of like Nature; which are inserviceable to the Disquisition and Unfolding of
Truths any whit intricate and obscure. But so much for the Connection of Idea's
with the Traces of the Brain. It Is seasonable to say something of the
Connection of Traces with one another, and consequently of the Connection
between the Idea's corresponding to these Traces.

II. Of the Mutual Connection of the Traces.
This Connection consists in this, that the Traces of the Brain are so firmly
connected to one another, as it is impossible to excite them again, without the
whole retinue which were imprinted at the same time. If a Man for instance,
happens to be in some public Solemnity, in case he observes all the
Circumstances, and all the Principle Persons that assisted at, the time, the
place, the day, and all other Particularities; the remembrance only of the
Place, or some other less observable Circumstance of the Ceremony, will be
sufficient to bring the Representation of all the other to his Mind. It Is upon
this account that when we cannot recollect the Principal Name of a thing, we
sufficiently specify it by making use of a Name, which signifies some
Circumstance of that thing; as not being able to call to Mind the proper Name
of a Church, we can make use of another Name, signifying a thing that has some
Relation to it, We can say, It Is that Church where there was such a Throng;
where Mr. such a one Preached; where we went on Sunday. And thus not having the
proper Name of a Person ready at hand, or when it is more convenient to denote
him in another manner, we can do it by saying, He whose Face was disfigured by
the Smallpox; the Portly and well-made Gentleman; the little crooked Man,
according as we stand affected toward him; though to express a Man in terms of
contempt, is neither a sign of good Nature nor good Manners.

Now the mutual Connection of these Traces, and consequently of their Idea's
one with another, is not only the foundation of all the Figures of Rhetoric,
but also of infinite other things of greatest concernment in Morality, and
Politics, and in all Sciences in general, which are any ways related to Man;
and consequently of many things we shall treat of in the sequel of our
Discourse.

The cause of the Connection of many Traces together, is the Identity of time,
wherein they were imprinted on the Brain. For it is enough for many Traces to
have been produced at the same time, to cause that they should never afterward
be excited, but in company of one another; because the Animal Spirits, finding
the Channel of these Co-temporary Traces gaping and half open, continue their
courses in them, by reason of their meeting with a more free passage through
them, than through the other parts of the Brain. This is the cause of Memory,
and the Corporeal Habits which are common to us with Beasts.

The Connections of the Traces are not always conjoined with the Emotions of
the Spirits, because all the things we see do not always appear either Good or
Evil: These Connections too may change or break, because being not of perpetual
necessity for the preservation of Life, there is no need they should always be
the same.

But there are certain Traces in our Brain which have a Natural Connection with
one another; as also with certain Commotions of the Spirits; that being
necessary to the Preservation of Life. And this Connection cannot be broken, at
least not easily, because it is convenient it should always be the same. For
instance, the trace of a great Precipice, which a Man sees under him, and from
which there is danger of falling, or the Traces of some bulky Body imminent
over his Head, and ready to fall and crush him, is naturally Connected with
that which represents Death, and with a Commotion of the Spirits, which
disposes him to flight or the desire of flying it. This Connection admits no
alteration, because it is necessary it should always be the same; and it
consists in a disposition of the Fibers of the Brain, which we bring with us
into the World.

All the Connections which are not Natural, may, and ought to break; because
the different Circumstances of times and places ought to change, to the end
they may be useful to the Preservation of Life. It Is convenient the Partridge,
for instance, should fly the Sports-man with his Gun, at the season and the
places of his pursuing the Game. But there is no necessity it should fly him in
other places, or at other times: Thus it is necessary all Animals for their
Preservation should have certain Connections of Traces easily made, and easily
broken; and that they should have others very difficult to be severed; and
lastly, others incapable of Dissolution.

It Is of very great use, to make diligent enquiry into the different Effects
these different Connections are able to produce: For there are Effects, which
as they are very numerous, so they are no less important to the Knowledge of
Man, and all things relating to him. We shall see hereafter, that these things
are the principal Causes of our Errors. But it is time to return to the Subject
we have promised to Discourse on, and to explain the different Changes which
happen to the Imagination of Men, by reason of their different ways and
purposes of Life.

CHAP. IV.
I. That Men of Learning are the most subject to Error. II. The Causes why Men
had rather be guided by Authority, than make use of their own Reason.

THE Differences observable in Men, as to their Ways and Purposes of Life, are
almost infinite. Their different Conditions, different Employments, different
Posts and Offices, and different Communities are innumerable. These Differences
are the Reason of Men's acting upon quite different Designs, and Reasoning upon
different Principles. Even in the same Community, wherein there should be but
one Character of Mind, and all the same Designs; you shall rarely meet with
several Persons, whose Aims and Views are not different. Their various
Employments, and their many Adhesions, necessarily diversifie the Method and
Manner they would take to accomplish those various things wherein they agree.
Whereby it is manifest that it would be an impossible Undertaking, to go about
to explain in particular the Moral Causes of Error; nor would it turn to any
great Account should we do it in this place. I design therefore only to speak
of those Ways of Living, that lead us into great multitudes of Errors, and
Errors of most dangerous Importance. When these shall be explained, we shall
have opened the way for the Mind to proceed farther; and every one may
discover, at a single View, and with the greatest ease imaginable, the most
hidden Causes of many particular Errors, the Explication whereof would cost a
world of Pains and Trouble. When once the Mind sees clearly, it delights to run
to Truth; and it runs to it with an inexpressible swiftness.

The Employment that seems most necessary to be treated of at present, by
Reason of its producing most considerable Changes in the Imagination of Men, I.
M^n of Learning are the most subject to Err^r.
and its conducting them into Errors most, is that of Men of Books and
Learning; who make greater use of their Memory, than Thought. For Experience
has ever manifested, that those who have applied themselves the most fervently
to the Reading of Books, and to the Search of Truth, are the Men that have led
us into a very great part of our Errors.

It Is much the same with those that Study, as with those that Travel. When a
Traveller has unfortunately mistaken his way, the farther he goes, at the
greater distance he is from his Journey's end; and he st^ll deviates so much
more, as he is industrious and in haste to arrive at the place designed. So the
vehement pursuits Men make after Truth cause them to betake themselves to the
Reading of Books, wherein they think to find it; or put them upon framing some
Fantastical System of the things they desire to know; wherewith when their
Heads are full and heated, they try by some fruitless Sallies and Attempts of
Thought to recommend them to the taste of others, with hopes to receive the
Honors that are usually paid to the first Founders of Systems. These two
Imperfections are now to be considered.

It Is not easy to be understood how it comes to pass, that Men of Wit and
Parts choose rather to trust to the Conduct of other Men's Understanding in the
Search of Truth, than to their own, which GOD has given them. There is
doubtless infinitely more Pleasure as well as Honor, to be conducted by a
Man's own Eyes, than those of others. And a Man who has good Eyes in his Head,
will never think of shutting them, or plucking them out, under the hopes of
having a Guide. And yet the use of the Understanding is to the use of the Eyes,
as the Understanding is to the Eyes; and as the Understanding is infinitely
superior to the Eyes, so the use of the Understanding is accompanied with more
solid Satisfactions, and gives another sort of Content, than Light and Colors
give the Sight. Notwithstanding Men employ their Eyes in Guiding and Conducting
themselves, but rarely make use of their Reason in Discovery of Truth.

But there are many Causes which contribute to this overthrow of Reason. First,
Men's Natural Carelessness and Oscitation, II. The Causes why Men had rather be
guided by Authority, than make use of their own Reason.
that will not let them be at the Pains of Thinking.

Secondly, Their Incapacity to Meditate, which they have contracted, for want
of applying themselves to it from their Youth; as has been explained in the
Ninth Chapter.

Thirdly, The inconcernedness and little Love they have for Abstract Truths,
which are the Foundation of all that can be known in this World,

The Fourth Reason is the Satisfaction which accrues from the knowledge of
Probabilities, which are very agreeable, and extremely moving, as being founded
upon sensible Notions.

The Fifth Cause is that ridiculous Vanity, which makes us affect the seeming
Learned. For those go by the Name of Learned, who have read most Books: The
Knowledge of Opinions is of greater use in Conversation, and serves better to
catch the Admiration of the Vulgar, than the Knowledge of True Philosophy,
which is learned by Meditation.

In the sixth place, we may reckon that unreasonable Fancy, which supposes the
Ancients were more enlightened, than we can be; and that there is nothing left
for us but what they have succeeded in.

The Seventh is a Disingenuous Respect mixed with an absurd Curiosity, which
makes Men admire things that are most Remote and Ancient, such as are far
fetched, or come from unknown Countries, as also Books that are most Mysterious
and Obscure. Thus Heraclitus's Repute heretofore was owing to his Obscurity.
Clarus ob obscuram linguam. Lucretius.
Men are very inquisitive after Ancient Medals, though corroded with rust; and
the Shoe or Slipper of one of the Ancients is respectfully preserved, though
eaten up with Worms: Their Antiquity makes them Venerable. There are some Men
who apply themselves to the Reading the Rabbis, because they wrote in an
outlandish, very corrupt, and obscure Language. Ancient Opinions are in greater
esteem, for being more remote from us. And doubtless if Nimrod had written the
History of his Reign, all the most refined Politics, and even all the other
Sciences, had been found contained in it; just as some have been able to
discover in Homer and Virgil, the perfect Knowledge of Nature. Deference, say
they, is due to Antiquity: Veritas filia temporis, non au^toritatis.
How could Aristotle, Plato, Epicurus, those grand Sages be mistaken? They do
not consider, that Aristotle, Plato, Epicurus, were Men like us, and of the
same Species with us; and moreover that the World since their Time, is grown
more than two thousand Years older; that it has gained greater Experience, and
ought to be more enlightened; and that it is the Age and Experience of the World
that makes the Discovery of Truth.

The Eighth Reason is, That when a New Opinion or a modern Author is in Vogue,
our own Glory seems to be obscured, by being too near him: But we are under no
such Apprehensions from the Honor that is given to the Ancients.

The Ninth is, That Truth and Novelty are inconsistent in matters of Faith. For
when Men will not distinguish between Truths which depend on Reason, and those
which rely upon Tradition, they don't consider that they ought to be learned in
a very different manner. They confound Novelty with Error, and Antiquity with
Truth. Luther and Calvin, and others, say they, have Innovated and Erred;
therefore Gallilaeus, Harvey, and Descartes, in what they have advanced as
New, are deceived. Luther's Consubstantiation is Novel, and is False: Therefore
Harvey's Circulation of the Blood is False, because it is New; and for this
Reason they indiscriminately give the odious Title of Innovators, to Heretics
and New Philosophers. The Idea's and Terms of Truth and Antiquity, Falsehood and
Novelty, have been Connected one with another: And this is the Effect of it;
the Vulgar part of Men no longer separate them; and Men of Sense find some
difficulty to separate them, as they should do.

The Tenth is, That we live in an Age wherein the Science of Ancient Opinions
is still in great Repute: And it is only those few who can take the Liberty of
Thinking, that are able, by the force of their Reason, to set themselves above
corrupt and evil Customs. When a Man is in a press and a throng, it is a hard
matter not to follow the torrent.

Lastly, Because Men are acted only by Interest; which is the Reason that those
themselves who find out the Abuse, and discover the Vanity of these sorts of
Studies, stick close to them still: Because Honors, Preferments, and
Benefices, are entailed to them; and those who are Eminent herein, have a
greater share of them, than those that are ignorant of them.

All these Reasons make it, one would think, easy to be conceived, why Men
implicitly follow the Ancient Opinions, as true; and reject the New ones
universally, as false; finally, why they make no use, or very little of their
Reason. Undoubtedly there are abundance of other more particular Reasons, that
contribute to it; but if these we have brought be attentively considered, it
will be no matter of surprise to find some Men obstinately Bigoted to the
Authority of the Ancients.

CHAP. V.
Two pernicious Effects Reading has upon the Imagination.

THAT disingenuous and loose Respect, which Men award the Ancients, is
productive of abundance of very mischievous Effects, which it is worth while to
consider.

The First is, That by accustoming them to a disuse of their Reason, See the
first Article of the preceding Chapter.
it by little and little puts them under an utter Incapacity of using it. For
it ought not to be imagined, that those who grow Gray in the Study of Aristotle
and Plato, make much use of their Understanding: They generally spend so much
time in the Reading of these Books, merely to enter into the Sentiments of
their Authors: And their main Scope and Purpose is, to know truly the Opinions
they held, without troubling themselves much about those of them which ought to
be held, as shall be proved in the succeeding Chapter. Thus the Science and
Philosophy they learn, is properly a Science of Memory, and not a Science of
the Understanding. They know only the History, and the matter of Fact, and not
the evident Truths; and may more justly be called Historians, than true
Philosophers.

The Second Effect produced in the Imagination by the Reading Ancient Authors,
is the strange confusion it makes in the Idea's of most Men that give
themselves to it. There are two different ways of Reading Authors: The one is
very Advantageous and Useful; the other very Useless, and also Dangerous.
Reading is of great use, when one meditates on what one reads: When a Man by an
Essay of Thought endeavors the Resolution of the Questions he sees in the
Contents of the Chapters, before he begins to read them; when he Methodizes and
Collates the Idea's of things with one another; in a word, when he uses his
Reason. On the contrary, Reading is of no account, when he understands not what
it is he is about: But it is of dangerous consequence for a Man to read, and
comprehend what he reads, when he does not strictly search and examine into it,
so as to be able to judge of it; and especially if he has Memory enough to
retain what he conceives, and Imprudence enough to consent to it. The first way
enlightens the Understanding, it corroborates and enlarges it Capacity. The
Second straightens its Capacity, and renders it by degrees weak, obscure, and
confused.

Now the generality of those, who glory in the Knowledge of others Opinions,
study only the second Manner: And so the more Reading they have, the more
feeble, dark, and confused their Understanding grows. The Reason whereof is,
that the Traces of their Brain are confounded with each other; as lying in
great numbers, and being never Postur'd and Methodiz'd by Reason; which is the
thing that hinders the Mind from imagining and representing clearly the things
it has occasion for. When the Mind would open some particular Traces, finding
others that are more familiar to it in the way, it is easily imposed upon. For
the Capacity of the Brain being not infinite, it is hardly possible a great
quantity of Traces, formed without Order and Method, should not entangle and
perplex themselves, and thereby put the Idea's in confusion. It Is upon this
score, that Men of a great Memory are commonly incapable of judging well,
concerning things that demand a great Attention.

But that which is especially remarkable, is, That the Knowledge Men acquire by
Reading, without Meditation, and with design only of retaining the Opinions of
others; in a word, all Science that depends on Memory, is properly the Science
that puffs up, and makes them Arrogant; because this is that which glitters
most to appearance, and makes the possessors vain and conceited, And thus we
generally observe those that are this way Learned, to be proud, haughty, and
presuming; pretending to have a right of judging of all things, though very
little qualified for that purpose; which is the Reason of their falling into
multitudes of Errors.

But this false Science is the Cause of a greater mischief still. For those
Persons fall not into Error along, but draw whole troops of Vulgar Minds along
with them; as also a vast retinue of Young People, who Believe their Decisions,
as Articles of Faith. These falsely Learned, having oppressed and overborn them
by the weight of their profound Literature, and mazed them with the Doctrine of
uncouth and extravagant Opinions, and the Names of Ancient and Unknown Authors,
gain such an irresistible Sway and Authority over their Minds, that they
reverence and admire as Oracles, whatever proceeds from their Mouth; and
blindfold, and implicitly subscribe to all their Sentiments. Nay, Men of far
greater Understanding and Judgment, who had never known them, and who should
not be informed what and who they were, seeing them talk in so Magisterial a
way and Decisive a strain, in so haughty, so imperious, and so grave an Air,
could scarce forbear having a Respect and Esteem for what they say, because
it is an hard matter to be unaffected with the Air, the Carriage, and Sensible
manners of the Speaker. For as it often happens that your Arrogant and
Confident Men are too hard for others of greater Abilities, but that are more
Judicious and reserved: so those Men that maintain things neither true, nor
probable, often silence their Opponents, by talking in an Imperious, Haughty,
or grave strain, that surprises and amuses them.

Now those of whom we speak, have so much Value and Esteem for themselves, and
Contempt for others, as to be confirmed in a certain Fastuous Habit, mixed with
a sort of Gravity, and Fictitious Modesty, which prepossesses and wins the
Hearer's Mind.

For it ought to be observed, that all the different Airs and Behaviors of Men
of different Conditions, are only the Natural Results and Consequences of the
Esteem every Man has for himself, in Relation to others: as is easy to be seen
if a Man considers them a little. Thus an Haughty and a Brutal Air is peculiar
to a Man that highly esteems himself, and disregards the Esteem of other Men:
An Air of Modesty is the Air of a Man that sets little by himself, but has much
Esteem for others. The Grave Air is that of a Man who has a great Esteem for
himself, and desire of being Esteemed by others. The Simple and Downright Air
and Carriage is that of a Man neither solicitous about himself nor others.

Thus all the different Airs, which are almost infinite, are only the Effects
which the different degrees of Esteem every Man has for himself, and for those
with whom he converses, naturally produce in his Face, and in all the External
parts of his Body. We have explained in the Fourth Chapter, that Correspondence
which is between the Nerves which excite the Passions within us, and those that
evidence them outwardly, by the Air they imprint upon the Face.

CHAP. VI.
That Men of Learning generally are so Opinionated with an Author, that their
Principal Drift is the Knowing what he held, without caring to know what ought
to be held.

THERE is still another Defect of very great Importance, that Men of Reading
are ordinarily subject to: which is that they grow conceited with an Author. If
there be any thing true or good in a Book, they are presently extravagant in
extolling it. It Is all true! it is all excellent, and admirable! They please
themselves in admiring what they do not understand, and would fain have all the
World to admire it with them. The Encomiums they bestow on these obscure
Authors, they make redound to their own glory: Since others are hereby
persuaded, that they perfectly understand them; and this administers fuel to
their Vanity. They esteem themselves above the rest of Mankind, upon the
strength of being persuaded they understand some Impertinence of an Ancient
Author, or of a Man perhaps that did not understand himself. What a multitude
have sweat and labored, in the Illustration of the obscure Passages of some of
the Ancient Philosophers and Poets? And what abundance of fine Wits are there
in these Days still, the main Pleasure of whose Life consists in Criticizing on
a Word, or the Opinion of an Author? But 'twill not be amiss at present to
bring some Proof of what I say.

The Question concerning the Immortality of the Soul, is without doubt a
Question of very great Importance. We cannot find fault with the Philosophers,
for laying out themselves so industriously toward the Resolution of it. And
though they heap up mighty Volumes, to prove after a slender fashion, a Truth
that may be Demonstrated in a few Words, or a few Pages; yet they are
excusable. But when they are very solicitous, and concerned about deciding what
Aristotle thought of it; they are as pleasant Gentlemen as one could wish. It
is, in my Mind, of very little use and benefit to those who live at present, to
know whether there was ever such a Man as was called Aristotle: whether this
Man was the Author of those Books which go under his Name: whether he
understood this or that in such a part of his Works. This can neither make a
Man wiser nor happier. But it is very material to know whether what he says be
true or false in it self.

It Is then very useless to know what was Aristotle's Opinion concerning the
Immortality of the Soul; though it be of great Advantage to know the Soul to be
Immortal. Yet I make no scruple to affirm, that there have been many Scholars
more solicitous to know Aristotle's Sentiment on this Subject, than the Truth
of the thing it self. Since there have been those, who have wrote Books
purposely to explain what that Philosopher's Belief was of it; but have not
done so much, to know what ought to be believed concerning it.

But though there have been a multitude of Men, who have harrassed and fatigued
their Mind in resolving what Aristotle's Opinion was; yet their fatigues and
pains have been all in vain: since they cannot yet agree about this ridiculous
Question. Which evidenceth how mis-fortunate the followers of Aristotle are, in
having a Man so dark and obscure to enlighten them; and who even affects
Obscurity, as he declared in a Letter that he wrote to Alexander.

The Opinion then of Aristotle about the Immortality of the Soul, has been a
mighty Question, and very noted amongst the Learned, But that it may not be
imagined that I speak at random, and without foundation, I am obliged to
transcribe a Passage here of La Cerda, somewhat long and tedious: wherein that
Author has amassed together the different Authorities upon that Subject, as
upon a Question of greatest Importance. These are his words upon the Second
Chapter of Tertullian De Resurrectione carnis.

Quaestio haec in scholis utrinque validis suspicionibus agitatur, number animam
immortalem, mortalemve fecerit Aristoteles. Et quidem Philosophi haud ignobiles
asseveraverunt Aristotelem posuisse nostros animos ab interitu alienos. Hi sunt
e Graecis and Latinis interpretibus Ammonius uterque, Olympiodorus, Philoponus,
Simplicius, Avicenna, uti memorat Mirandula* l. 4. De examine vanitatis, Cap.
9. Theodorus, Metochytes, Themistius, S. Thomas 2 Contra gentes Cap 79. and
Phys. Lect. 12. and praeterea 12. Metaph. Lect. 3. and Quodlib. 10. Qu. 5. Art.
1. Albertus Tract. 2. De Anima Cap. 20. and Tract. 3. Cap. 13. Aegidius Lib. 3.
De Anima ad Cap. 4. Durandus in 2 Did. 18. Qu 3. Ferrarius loco citato contra
gentes, and late Eugubinus L. 9. De perenni Philosophia Cap. 18. and quod
pluris est, discipulus Aristotelis Theophrastus, magistri mentem and ore and
calamo novisse penitus qui poterat.

In contrariam factionem abiere nonnulli Patres, nec infirmi Philosophi;
Justinus in sua paraenesi, Origines in (...), and ut fertur Nazianzenus in
Disp. contra Eunom. and Nyssenus Lib. 2. de Anima Cap. 4. Theodoretus de
Curandis Graecorum Affectibus Lib. 3. Galenus in Historia Philosophica,
Pomponatius L. de Immortalitate Animae, Simon Portius L. de Mente Humana,
Cajetanus 3. de Anima Cap. 2. In eum sensum, ut caducum Animum nostrum putaret
Aristoteles, sunt partim adducti ab Alexandro Aphodis de Auditore, qui sic
solitus erat interpretari Aristotelicam mentem; quamvis Eugubinus Cap. 21. and
22* eum excuset. Et quidem unde collegisse videtur Alexander mortalitatem,
nempe ex 12. Metap^ inde S. Thomas, Theodorus Metochytes immortalitatem
collegerunt.

Porro Tertullianum neutram hanc opinionem amplexum credo; sed putasse in hac
part ambiguum Aristotelem. Itaque ita citat illum pro utraque: Nam cum hic
adscribat Aristoteli mortalitatem animae, tamen L. de Anima C. 6. pro contraria
opinione immortalitatis citat. Eadem mente fuit Plutarchus, pro utraque
opinione advocans eundem Philosophum in L. 5. de placitis Philosoph. Nam. Cap.
1. mortalitatem tribuit, and Cap. 25. immortalitatem. Ex Scholasticis etiam,
qui in neutram partem Aristotelem constantem judicant, sed dubium and
ancipitem, sunt Scotus in 4. Did. 43. Qu. 2. Art. 2. Harveus quodlib. 1. Q.
11. and 1. Sent. Did. 1. Q. 1. Niphus in opusculo de Immortalitate Animae Cap.
1. and recentes alii Interpretes: quam mediam existimationem credo veriorem,
sed Scholii lex vetat, ut authoritatum pondere librato illud suadeam.

I deliver all these Quotations as true, upon the integrity of the Commentator;
as thinking it would be loss of time to stand to verify them. Nor have I all
those curious Books by me, from which they were taken. I add no new ones of my
own, as not envying him the Glory of having made a good Collection. And it
would still be a greater loss of time to do it, though a Man should only turn
over the Indices of Aristotle's Commentators.

We see then in this Passage of La Creda, that Men of Books and Study, that
have passed for the Ingenious of their Times, have taken abundant Pains to know
whether Aristotle believed the Immortality of the Soul: and there have been
some of them who are able to write Books peculiarly on the Subject, as
Pomponatius. For that Author's chief Design in his Book is, to show that
Aristotle believed the Soul was Mortal. And possibly there are others, who not
only are solicitous to know what were Aristotle's thoughts upon this Subject;
but who moreover look upon it as a very important Question to know, for
instance, whether Tertullian, Plutarch, or others, believed or not, whether it
was Aristotle's Opinion that the Soul was Mortal. As there is great Reason to
suppose from La Cerda himself, if we reflect only on the latter part of the
Passage we have quoted, Porro Tertullianum, etc.

Though it be an useless thing, to know what Aristotle believed concerning the
Immortality of the Soul, and what were Tertullian's and Plutarch's thoughts
concerning Aristotle's belief; yet the foundation of the Question, The
Immortality of the Soul, is at least a Truth very necessary to be known. But
there are infinite things, the Knowledge whereof is very impertinent and
useless; and consequently more useless still, to know what were the Ancient
thoughts about them: and yet there are Men very anxious and inquisitive in
conjecturing the Opinions of Philosophers on such sort of Subjects. There are
found whole Books full of these ridiculous Inquiries; and it is these nois^e
trifles that have been the occasion of so many Wars among the Learned.

These vain and impertinent Questions, these ridiculous Genealogies of
fruitless Opinions, are the important Subjects for the Criticisms of the
Learned. They think they have the Right and Privilege of dispising those who
despise these Fooleries, and of treating as ignorant Persons such as glory in
being ignorant of them. They imagine they are perfect Masters of the History
and Genealogy of Substantial Forms; and the Age is ungrateful unless it
acknowledge their Merit. These things manifestly discover the weakness and
vanity of the Mind of Man; and that when Reason does not govern his Study, his
Studies are so far from perfecting his Reason, that they darken, corrupt, and
totally pervert it.

It Is worth while here to observe, that in Questions of Faith it is no fault to
search into the Belief of St. Austin (for instance) or any other Father of the
Church; nor even to make Inquiry whether St. Austin's Belief was the same as
his Predecessors. Because matters of Faith are only learned by Tradition, and
Reason is unable to discover them. The most Ancient Faith being the most true;
we must endeavor to know what was the Faith of the Ancients; which cannot be
done but by Examining the Opinion of several Persons who have succeeded one
another in several times. But things which depend on Reason are quite of
another Nature; and we ought not to be solicitous about the Opinion of the
Ancients, to know what we ought to hold concerning them. Yet I know not by what
strange subversion of Reason some Men are angered, if we speak otherwise in
Philosophy, than Aristotle has done; and yet take it very patiently to hear a
Man talk in Divinity contrary to the Gospel, the Fathers, and Councils. I am of
Opinion that those who make the greatest outcry against the Novelties of
Philosophy, which ought to be had in Esteem, are the most obstinate and zealous
Patrons and Defenders of certain Novelties in Divinity; which ought to be had
in abhorrence. For it is not their Terms and Language we disapprove; which (as
unknown as they were to Antiquity) are Authorized by Custom. It Is the Errors
they diffuse and support by the help of this Equivocal and confused Dialect
which we condemn.

In point of Divinity we ought to be fond of Antiquity, because we ought to
love the Truth; which Truth is found in Antiquity. And all Curiosity ought to
cease, when once we have taken hold of Truth. But in point of Philosophy we
ought on the contrary to love Novelty; for the same Reason that we ought always
to love the Truth; that we ought to retrieve it; and ought to have an
Indefatigable Curiosity for it. If Plato and Aristotle were believed
Infallible, a Man should perhaps apply himself to the understanding of them
only: But Reason opposes the Belief of it. Reason, on the contrary, would have
us judge them more ignorant than the New Philosophers; since in the Age we live
in, the World is two thousand Years older, and has learned greater Experience,
than it had in the days of Aristotle and Plato; as we have already said: And
the New Philosophers may know all the Truths the Ancients have left us; and
find out, and add a great many more to them. Yet Reason will not have us
believe these New Philosophers any more than the Old upon their bare Word. It
bids us, on the contrary, examine attentively their Thoughts, and withhold our
consent, till there is no longer room for doubting, without being ridiculously
prepossessed with the Opinion of their vast Knowledge, or the other specious
Qualities of their Mind.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Prepossession of Commentators.

THIS Prepossession is no where apparent in so strange and excessive a degree,
as in the Commentators on an Author; because the Undertakers of this Task,
which seems too low and servile for a Man of Sense, imagine their Authors merit
the Praise and Admiration of all the World. They look upon them as part of
themselves, and fancy they are Body and Soul to one another; and upon this
View, Self-love admirably plays its part. They artfully accumulate Encomiums on
their Authors, they shed Light and Radiations round them, they load them with
Glory, as knowing they shall have it themselves by reflection and rebound. This
great and lofty Idea not only magnifies Aristotle and Plato in the Mind of many
of the Readers, but imprints a respect in them for all that have Commented upon
them; and some of of them had never Deified their Authors, had they not fancied
themselves incircl'd, as it were, in the Rays of the same Glory.

Yet I will not say that all Commentators are so liberal in their Panegyricks
on their Authors, out of hopes of a Return; some of them would start at such an
Apprehension, if they would consider a little: They are sincere and
well-meaning in their Praises, without any Politic design, and without
thinking what they do; but Self-love thinks for them, and without their being
aware of it. Men are insensible of the heat that is in their Heart, though it
gives Life and Motion to all the other parts of their Body. They must touch and
handle themselves to be convinced of it, because this Heat is Natural. The
cause is the same in respect of Vanity, which is so congenial to the Mind of
Man, that he is insensible of it; and though it is this (as a Man may say) that
gives Life and Motion to the greatest part of his Thoughts and Designs, yet it
often does it in a manner imperceptible by him. He must handle, and feel, and
sound himself inwards to know that he is vain. It Is not sufficiently understood
that it is Vanity which is the First mover, in the greatest part of Humane
Actions; and though Self-love knows this well enough, it knows it only to
disguise it from the rest of Man.

A Commentator then being some ways related, and allied to his Author that he
works upon; Self-love never fails to discover in him notable Subjects for
Praise and Incense, with design to make them redound to the advantage of the
Offerer. And this is performed in so Artificial, so Subtle, and Delicate a
manner, as to be wholly Imperceptible. But this is not the proper place of
exposing all the Wiles of Self-love and Interest.

Nor is the Prejudicate Esteem Commentators have conceived for their Authors,
and the Honor they do themselves in praising them, the only Reason of
Sacrificing to them: Custom is another Motive, and because they think the
Practice necessary. There are Men who have no great Esteem either for certain
Sciences or Authors, who notwithstanding fall zealously to writing Comments on
them; because either their Employment, Chance, or perhaps a capricious Humor
has engaged them in the Attempt: and these too think they are under an
Obligation to be excessive in the Praises of the Sciences, and Authors which
they work on; when not the same time the Authors are Silly and Impertinent; and
the Sciences Ignoble and Useless.

And indeed what can be more ridiculous, than for a Man to undertake to Comment
on an Author whom he thought Impertinent, and to write Seriously on a Subject
he believed to be Insignificant and Useless? It Is necessary therefore to the
Preserving his Reputation, to Praise both the Authors and Sciences; though both
one and the other are Contemptible, and nothing worth: and the fault of
Undertaking an ill work must be mended with another. Which is the Reason that
when Learned Men Comment on different Authors, they fall into Absurdities and
Contradictions.

Upon this Account it is, that almost all prefaces have as little of Truth in
them as good Sense. If a Man Comments upon Aristotle, he is the Genius of
Nature. If a Man writes upon Plato, it is the Divine Plato. They hardly ever
Comment upon the works of Plain Men: but it is always of Men wholly Divine; of
Men who have been the Admiration of their Age, and who have been blessed by
Providence with Light and Understanding above the rest of Mankind. It Is the
same thing too with the matter they treat on: It Is always the finest, the most
exalted, and most necessary of all other.

But that I may not be credited upon my bare word, I will deliver here the way,
where in a Famous Commentator among the Learned, treats the Author that he
Comments on. I mean Averroes who speaks of Aristotle. He says in his Preface
upon the Physics of that Philosopher, that he was the Inventor of Logic,
Moral Philosophy, and Metaphysics; and that he has carried them to the top of
their perfection. Complevit, (says he) quia nullus eorum, qui secuti sunt eum
usque ad hoc tempus, quod est mill and quingentorum annorum, quidquam addidit;
nec invenies in ejus verbis errorem alicujus quantitatis; and talem esse
virtutem in individuo uno miraculosum and extraneum existit: and haec
dispositio cum in uno homine reperitur, dignus est esse Divinus magis quam
humanus. And in other places he still bestows more pompous and magnificent
praises on him: As Lib. 1. de Generatione Animalium. Laudemus Deum qui
separavit hunc virum ab aliis in perfectione, appropriavitque ei ultimam
dignitatem humanam, quam non omnis homo potest in quacunque aetate attingere.
The same he says of him, Lib. 1. Dest. Disp. 3. Aristotelis doctrina est SVMMA
VERITAS, quoniam ejus intellectus fuit finis humani intellectus: quare been
dicitur de illo, quod ipse fuit creatus and datus nobis Divina providentia, ut
non ignoremus poss^bilia sciri.

Must not a Man be mad in good earnest that will talk at this rate? And must
not his Bigottry for this Author be degenerated into Extravagance and Folly?
Aristotle 's Doctrine is the SOVEREIGN TRUTH. It Is impossible for any man to
equal him or come near him in Science. This is the Man that was sent us from
Heaven, to teach us all that is possible to be known. This is he upon whom all
the wise Men are formed; and they are so much more learned, as they better
understand him. As he says in another place: Aristoteles fuit Princeps per quem
perficiuntur omnes Sapientes, qui fuerunt post eum: licet differant inter se in
intelligendo verba ejus, and in eo quod sequitur ex eis. And yet the Works of
this Commentator have been dispersed over all Europe, and into Countries
farther remote. They have been translated out of Arabic into Hebrew; out of
Hebrew into Latin, and it may be into many other Languages: Which Manifestly
shows what Esteem the Learned have had for them. So that a more sensible
instance than this, cannot be given of the Prepossession of Men of Study. For
it evidently shows, that they are not only Opinionated with an Author
themselves, but also communicate their Bigottry to others, proportionably to
the Esteem the World conceives of them. And thus these false Praises
Commentators load him with, are often the cause, that Men of no very brightned
Parts, who betake themselves to the Reading of them, are prepossessed, and
thereby led into infinite Error. See here another instance.

A Man renowned among the Learned, who Founded the Geometry, Praelectiones 13
in principium Elementorum Euclidis.
and Astronomy Lectures in the University of Oxford, begins a Book, which he
wrote upon the Eight first Propositions of Euclid, with these Words. Consilium
meum est, Auditores, si vires and valetudo suffecerint, explicare Definitiones,
Petitiones, communes Sententias, and octo priores Propositiones primi libri
Elementorum; caetera post me venientibus relinquere. And he concludes with
these words. Exolvi per Dei gratiam, Domini Auditores, promissum, liberavi
fidem meam, explicavi pro modulo meo Definitiones, Petitiones, communes
Sententias, and octo priores Propositiones Elementorum Euclidis. Hic annis
fessus cyclos artemque repono. Succedent in hoc munus alii fortasse magis
vegeto corpore, vivido ingenio, etc. A Man of a competent Sense would not
require more than an hour's time, to learn of himself, or with the help of the
meanest Geometrician, the Definitions, Postulates, Axioms, and the Eight first
Propositions of Euclid: they have very little need of any Explication: and yet
here is an Author that talks of his Enterprise, as of some very difficult and
mighty Undertaking. He is apprehensive least his strenth should fail him, Si
vires and valetudo suffecerint. He leaves the Prosecution of them to his
Successors. Caetera post me venientibus relinquere. He thanks GOD for having,
through his particular Mercy, accomplished and made good what he promised.
Exolvi per Dei gratiam promissum; liberavi fidem meam: Explicavi pro modulo
meo. What? the Quadrature of the Circle? the Duplication of the Cube? This
Great Man has explained pro modulo suo, the Definitions, Postulates, Axioms,
and the Eight first Propositions of the first Book of Euclid' s Element^.
Possibly amongst those who shall succeed him, there may some be found of a
stronger and healthier Constitution than himself, to carry on so great a Work.
Succedent in hoc munus alii FORTASSE magis vegeto corpore and vivido ingenio.
But as for his part, he has done enough to sit down and rest. Hec annis fessus
cyclos artemque reponit.

Euclid never thought of being so obscure, or of saying such extraordinary
things, when he composed his Elements, as should necessarily demand a In Qua^to.
Book of near three hundred pages to explain his Definitions, Axioms,
Postulates, and Eight first Propositions. But this Learned Englishman knew how
to enhance the Science of Euclid, and if Age would have permitted him, and he
had but continued in the same Vigor, we should at present have had a dozen or
fifteen mighty Volumes, upon Euclid's Elements only, which doubtless would have
been very beneficial to Novice Pretenders to Geometry, and had made much for
the Honor of Euclid.

See what whimsical designs a falsely termed Learning can put Men upon. This
Gentleman was versed in the Greek Tongue; for we are obliged to him for a Greek
Edition of St. Chrysostom's Works. He possibly had read the Ancient
Geometricians: He could give an Historical Account of their Propositions, no
less than their Descent and Genealogy. He had all the respect for Antiquity,
that ought to be had for Truth; and what is it such a Disposition of Mind
produces? A Commentary upon the Definitions of Terms, the Demands, Axioms, and
the Eight first Propositions of Euclid; much harder to be understood and
remembered, I do not say, than the Propositions he commented on; but than all
that ever Euclid wrote on Geometry.

There are many Men that out of Vanity talk in Greek, and even sometimes in a
strange Language they don't themselves understand: For Dictionaries no less
than Indices, and Common Places, are very great helps to some sorts of Authors:
But there are very few of Prudence enough to keep in their Greek upon a
Subject, where it is needless and impertinent to make use of it. And this makes
me believe it was Prepossession, and an inordinate Esteem for Euclid, that
formed in our Author's Imagination, the first Design of his Book.

If this Gentleman had made as much use of his Reason as his Memory, in a
Matter where Reason should have only been employed: or if he had had as great a
Respect and Love for Truth, as Veneration for the Author he went to expound;
there is great Probability that having misspent so much time upon so frivolous a
Subject, he would have acknowledged Euclid's Definitions of a Plane Angle, and
Parallel Lines, to be Vicious and Defective, and inexpressive of the Nature of
them; and that the Second Proposition is impertinent, since the Proof of it
depends upon the Third Postulate, which is harder to be granted than that
Second Proposition; since in granting that Third Postulate, which is, That we
may describe from any Point a Circle at what interval we please, we not only
grant that a Line may be drawn from a Point equal to another Line; which Euclid
effects in that Proposition after a very round-about manner: But we allow, that
from any Point may be drawn an infinite number of Lines, of what length we
please.

But the Design of most Commentators is not to Illuminate their Authors, and to
find out Truth; it is to make Ostentation of their Learning, and implicitly to
defend the Authors which they Comment on, even to their Vices. It Is not so much
to make themselves or their Authors understood, they talk, as to make him
admired, and themselves together with him. If the Gentleman beforementioned,
had not stuffed his Book with Sentences of Greek, with a great many Names of
unheard of Authors, and such other useless Observations, for the understanding
Common Notions, Verbal Definitions, and Geometrical Postulates, who would have
read his Book? who would have admired him? or who would have conferred on its
Author the Honorary Title of Learned, or of a Man of Sense?

I presume it cannot be doubted after what I have said, but the Indiscrete
Reading of Books often prepossesses the Mind. But as soon as Prepossession
enters in, that which we call Common Sense, is banished out of it. It Is
incapable of Judging soberly of any thing any way relative to the Subject of
its Prepossession: It stains and tinctures with it every Thought; nay, it
cannot apply it self to Subjects quite remote from those it is prejudiced for.
Thus a Man opinionated with Aristotle, can relish nothing but Aristotle: He
must judge of every thing with relation to Aristotle. What does not accord with
that Philosopher, seems false; he has constantly some Saying of Aristotle in
his Mouth; he is citing him upon all occasions, and all sorts of Subjects, both
to prove things so obscure, as no Man can comprehend; and to prove things so
self-evident, as Children cannot doubt of; because Aristotle is to him what
Reason and Evidence are to others.

So if a Man be possessed with the conceit of Euclid and Geometry, he will be
for reducing every thing you shall say to him, to the Lines and Propositions of
his darling Author, and shall talk nothing but with reference to his Science.
The whole would not be bigger than its part; but because Eulid has said it: nor
will he be ashamed to quote him for the Proof of it, as I have sometimes
observed. But this is still more customary with those who are devoted to other
Authors, than those of Geometry; in whose Books nothing is more frequent than
Greek, Hebrew, Arabic Citations, to prove things as evident as the Sun at
Midday.

All this is occasioned by Reason that the Traces imprinted on the Fibers of
the Brain by the Objects of their Prepossession are so deep, as always to
remain gaping and half open: And the Animal Spirits continually passing through
them, preserve them so without permitting them to close again. So that the Soul
having always of necessity, the Thoughts that are connected with these Traces,
becomes as it were enslaved to them; and she is ever troubled, and disquieted,
even when knowing she is wrong, she is willing to be Righted. Thus she is in
constant danger of falling into a great number of Errors, unless she stands
always upon her guard, with an inviolable Resolution of observing the Rule
given in the beginning of this Work; that is, of Denying an entire Consent,
except to things entirely evident.

I pass over the evil Choice that is generally made of the kind of Study Men
apply themselves to, as properly belonging to Moral Philosophy, to treat of;
though it may likewise be reduced here to what has been said of Prepossession.
For when a Man is fallen beyond retrival into the Reading of the Rabbis, and
Books of all sorts of most unknown, and consequently most useless Languages;
and spends his whole Life therein; he does it doubtless out of Prepossession,
and the Imaginary hopes of becoming Learned: though it is impossible by that
Method to acquire any true Sience. But because this Application to unprofitable
Studies does not so much subject us to Error, as waste our Time, to possess us
with a foolish Vanity; I shall not speak here of those who fondly think of
becoming Learned in all these sorts of sordid and unprofitable Sciences, the
number whereof is very great, and the Study usually too passionate and earnest.

CHAP. VIII.
I. Of the Inventors of new Systems. II. The last Error of Men of Learning.

WE have been manifesting the state of the Imagination of Men, of Books, and
Study, I. Of the Inventors of new Systems.
who resign up all to the Authority of some certain particular Authors. There
are others still very opposite to these; who have no respect at all for
Authors, let their Esteem be what it will among the Learned. If they esteemed
them formerly, they are now of a contrary Mind, and set themselves up for
Authors. They love to be thought Inventors of some new Opinions, thereby to
procure Reputation in the World: and are well satisfied, that by saying
something that was never said before, they shall not fail to have their
Admirers.

This sort of People are generally of a strong Imagination; the Fibers of their
Brain are in such a disposition, as to preserve for a long time the Traces of
what has been imprinted on them. Thus when once they have imagined a System
that has in it any thing of probability, it is impossible to beat them out of
it. Whatever any way makes for its confirmation, is most heartily embraced and
retained. And on the contrary, all the Objections that are made to it, are
overlooked; at least are eluded by some frivolous Distinction. They are
inwardly pleased with the sight of their own Workmanship; and of the Esteem,
they hope, will redound to them from it. They only apply themselves to consider
the Image of Truth, deduced from their probable Opinions. They fix this Image
steadfastly before their Eyes, but never behold with a steady View the other
sides of their Sentiments, which would betray their Falsehood.

There must go great Qualifications, to capacitate a Man to be the Inventor of
any true System. For it is not enough to have a quickness of Parts; there must
besides be a certain Capaciousness of Thoughts, and Reach of Mind, which can at
one View take in a clear prospect of a great many things. Little and narrow
Minds with all their Vivacity and Delicacy, are too short-sighted to survey all
that is necessary to be seen, for the establishing a System. They are checked
and even stopped with some little Difficulties that discourage them; or with
some glimmering Lights, which dazzle and carry them away: their Sight is too
narrow to survey at once the whole body of a capacious Subject.

But however Capacious and Penetrating the Mind is, unless it be withal exempt
from Passion and Prejudice, there is no Good to be hoped from it. Prejudices
take up one part of their Mind, and tinge and infect all the rest. The Passions
confound all the Idea's a thousand ways; and make us generally discover in the
Objects, all that we have a mind to find in them. Even the Passion, that we
have for Truth, sometimes deceives us, when it is too vehement; But the
Ambition to be thought Learned, is the great Impediment to our becoming really
so.

Nothing then is more rare and extraordinary, than to find such Men as are
capable of making new Systems; and yet nothing is more common than to find
such, as have framed some System or other to their Humor. We see few of those,
who study much, reason upon common Notions; there is ever some Irregularity in
their Idea's; which is an evident sign they have some particular System we are
unaquainted with. It Is true, all the Books they compose, do not savor of it.
For when their Business is to write for the Public, Men are more cautious of
what they say; and a bare Attention is often enough to undeceive them. Yet we
see Books Published from time to time, which are a sufficient Proof of what I
say. And there are Persons who are proud to let the World know at the beginning
of their Book, that they are the Founders of some new System.

The number of the Inventors of new Systems is much increased by those, who
have been prepossessed with any Author. For it often falls out, that having not
met with Truth, nor any solid foundation in their Opinions of the Authors they
have read; they first enter into a great Dislike, and an high Contempt of all
sorts of Books; and thereupon fall to Imagining some probable Opinion, which
they hug and cherish, and wherein they strengthen themselves in the manner I
have explained.

But as soon as this Heat of Affection for any Opinion is boiled over and
abated, or the Design of Appearing in Public has obliged them to examine it
with a more exact and serious Attention; they discover the Falsity of it, and
throw it up; but with this Condition, that they will never take up any other,
but utterly condemn all those, who shall pretend to the Discovery of any Truth.

So that the last and most dangerous Error, which Men of Study fall into, is
their Imagining there can be nothing known. They have read many Books, both
Ancient and Modern, and have missed of Truth in them: They have had many fine
Notions of their own, which they have found to be false, II. A Considerable
Error of Studious Men.
after a more strict and attentive Examination. From whence they conclude that
all Men are like themselves; and that if those who fancy they have discovered
some Truths should seriously consider them; they would be undeceived as well as
themselves. And this is enough for them to condemn them, without making any
more particular Enquiry; because if they did not condemn them, it would be a
kind of Confession, that they were wiser than themselves; a thing they cannot
think very probable.

They look therefore upon those as Bigoted to their own Thoughts, who give out
any thing as certain and infallible: Nor will they suffer a Man to talk of
Sciences, as of Evident Truths, which cannot reasonably be doubted of; but only
as of Opinions, of which it is good not to be ignorant. Yet these Gentlemen
would do well to consider, that though they have read a great number of Books,
yet they have not read all; or that they have not read them with all the
Attention, that was necessary to a perfect Understanding of them. And that
though they have had many fine Thoughts, which they have found false in the
Conclusion, yet they have not had all that are possible; and so it is no
improbable thing, that others should have found better than themselves. Nor is
it necessary, absolutely speaking, that others should have greater Sense than
they, if that offends them; for it is enough to have had greater Fortune. They
need not be affronted to hear it said, That others have Evident Knowledge of
what they are Ignorant; since we say at the same time, that many Ages have been
ignorant of the same Truths: Not for want of excellent Wits; but because these
excellent Wits have not luckily fallen upon them.

Let them not be angry therefore, that a Man sees clearly, and speaks as he
sees; but let them apply themselves to what is said to them, if their Minds be
still capable of Application, after all their Excursions; and then let them
judge if they please. But if they will not examine it, let them hold their
Tongue. But I would have them reflect a little, whether that Answer so readily
made by them, to most of the things demanded of them, No body Understands it,
No body knows how it is done, be not an injudicious Answer? Since to answer so,
a Man must of necessity believe he knows all that all Men know, or all that is
possible to be known by them. For had they not this Notion of themselves, their
Answer would be still more impertinent. And why should they be so hard put to
it, to say they know nothing of them; since in some particular junctures, they
acknowledge they know nothing at all? And why must all Men be concluded
Ignorant, because they are inwardly convinced they are Ignorant themselves?

There are then three sorts of Persons that apply themselves to Study. The
first are such as are preposterously Bigoted to some Author, or some
insignificant or false Science: The second are such as are prepossessed, and
full with their own Fancies: The last, which usually proceed from the other
two, are such as Imagine they know all that is possible to be known; and who
fancying they know nothing with Certainty, conclude universally that nothing
can be Evidently known, and regard all things that they hear, as bear Opinions.

It Is easy to be seen that all the Faults, incident to these three sorts of
Men, depend on the Properties of the Imagination, explained in the X. and XI.
Chapters, and especially of the First. That all this is owing to Prejudice,
which choaks up their Minds, and makes them insensible to all other Objects,
but those they are prepossessed with. It may be said that their Prejudices do
in their Minds, what the Ministers of Princes do in respect of their Masters;
for as these Gentlemen permit, as little as possible, any others than those of
their own Party and Interest, or such as are unable to displace them from their
Master's Favor, to come to the speech of them; so the Prejudices of the former
suffer not their Minds to take a full View of the pure and unmixed Idea's of
Objects. But they disguise them; they cloth them with their own Liveries; and
thus all masked and discolored present them to the Mind: So that it is next to
impossible it should discover, and throw off its Errors.

CHAP. IX.
I. Of Effeminate Minds. II. Of Superficial Minds. III. Of Men of Authority.
IV. Of the Experimental Philosophers.

I Have, if I mistake not, said enough to discover in general, what are the
Faults of Imagination; and the Errors whereunto Men of Books and Study are most
obnoxious. Now whereas there are few besides, who trouble their heads with
Searching after Truth; and the rest of the World take up with their Opinion; it
seems we might put an end here to this Second Part. However, it is not amiss to
add something concerning the Errors of other Men; as being no unuseful thing to
take notice of them.

Whatever flatters the Senses, extremely affect us; and whatever affects us,
makes us mind it in proportion to its affecting us. I. Of Effeminate Minds
Thus those who resign themselves up to all sorts of most Sensible and Pleasing
Diversions, are incapable of Penetrating into Truths ever so little abstruse
and difficult; because the Capacity of the Mind, which is not infinite, is
filled up with their Pleasures; or at least is very much divided by them.

The generality of Great Men, of Courtiers, of Rich, and Young, and of those we
call the fine Wits, giving themselves to perpetual Diversions, and studying
only the Art of Pleasing, by all that gratify the Concupiscence and the
Senses; by degrees obtain such a Niceness in these things, or such a Softness,
that it may be often said, they are rather the Effeminate, than the fine Wits,
which they would fain be thought. There is a great deal of difference betwixt a
true Fineness, and Softness of Mind. Though these two things are ordinarily
confounded.

The Fine, or the Curious Wits are those whose Reason descend to the least
Differences of things. Who foresee Effects which depend on hidden, un-usual,
and invisible Causes. In brief, they are those who dive farthest into the
Subjects they consider. But the soft Minds have only a counterfeit Delicacy and
Niceness. They are neither Lively nor Piercing: They cannot see the Effects of
even the most gross and palpable Causes. In short, they are unable to
comprehend or penetrate any thing; but are wonderfully nice as to Modes and
Fashions. An ungentile Word, a Rustic Accent, or a little Grimace, shall
provoke them infinitely more than a confused mass of lame and inconcluding
Reasons. They cannot discover the Defect of an Argument, but can critically
discern a false Step or an incompos'd Gesture. In a word, they have a perfect
Understanding of Sensible things, as having made continual use of their Senses;
but have no true Knowledge of things depending on Reason, because they have
scarce ever employed their own.

Yet these are the Men that flourish most in the Esteem of the World; and who
most easily advance to the Reputation of the Fine Wits. For when a Man talks
with a free and easy Air; when his Expressions are pure, and well chosen; when
he serves himself with Figures that please the Senses, and excite the Passions
in an imperceptible manner; though what he says be nothing but Impertinence and
Folly, though there be nothing good or true in his Discourse, yet he shall be
voted by the common Opinion the Fine, the Curious, the Acute Wit. It Is not
perceived that this is only a Soft and Effeminate Mind, that glitters with
false Lights, but never shines out with a genuine Brightness; that only
persuades because we have Eyes, and not because we have Reason.

For what remains, I do not deny but that all Men have a Tincture of this
Infirmity we have now remarked in some part of them. There is no Man whose Mind
is not touched with the Impressions of his Senses and Passions; and
consequently who has not some Adherences to Sensible Manners. All Men differ in
this but in degree of more or less. But the Reason of charging this Fault upon
some particular Men, is, because there are those who acknowledge it to be a
Fault, and labor to correct it: Whereas the Men we have been speaking of, look
upon it as a very advantageous Quality: They are so far from owning this false
Delicacy as the Effect of an Effeminate Softness, and the Original of infinite
Distempers to the Mind, as to imagine it the Product and Sign of the Beauty and
Excellency of their Genius.

To these may be added a vast number of Superficial Minds, II. Of Superficial
Minds.
who never go to the bottom of things; and have but a confused Perception of
the Differences between them; but they are not in the Fault, as are those
beforementioned; for it is not their Divertisements that straiten their Souls
and make them little-minded; but they are naturally so. This Littleness of Mind
proceeds not from the Nature of the Soul, as may perhaps be imagined. It Is
effected sometimes by the paucity or dullness of the Animal Spirits, sometimes
by an immoderate plenty of the Blood and Spirits, by the inflexibility of the
Fibers of the Brain, or by some other Cause not necessary to be known.

There are then two sorts of Minds. The one easily observes the differences of
things; and this is the solid Mind. The other imagines and supposes a
resemblance between them, which is the superficial Character. The first has a
Brain fitly disposed for the Reception of the clear and distinct Traces of the
Objects it considers; and because it is very attentive to the Idea's of these
Traces, it sees the Objects at hand, and surveys every part of them. But the
Superficial Mind receives only the faint and confused Traces thereof; and that,
by the by, very remotely and obscurely; insomuch that they appear alike, as the
Faces of those we behold at too great a distance; because the Mind ever
supposes Similitude and Equality, where it is not obliged to acknowledge
Difference and Inequality; for the Reasons I shall give in the Third Book.

In this Class may be reckoned all your Public Haranguers, and great Talkers;
and many of those who have a great Facility at delivering themselves, though
they speak but seldom. For it is extremely rare for Men of serious Meditation,
to be able to express themselves clearly upon the things they have thought.
They generally hesitate when they come to Discourse about them, as being
scrupulous and fearful of using such Terms, as may excite a false Idea in the
Hearers. Being ashamed to talk purely for Talking sake (as is the way with a
great many who talk peremptorily on all adventures.) They are at a loss at
finding words expressive of their un-obvious and not common Thoughts.

III. Of Men of Authority.
Though I have the greatest Deference and Esteem imaginable for Pious Men,
Divines, and Aged Persons, and, in general, for all those who have deservedly a
great Sway and Authority over others; yet I think my self obliged to say thus
much of them, That it is usual for them to think themselves infallible, because
the World hears them with Respect; that they exercise their Mind but little in
discovering Speculative Truths; that they are too liberal in condemning
whatever their Pleasure and Humor suggests, before they have attentively
considered it. Not that they are to be blamed, for not applying themselves to
the Study of many Sciences, not very necessary for them to know; we allow them
to omit them, and likewise to despise them; but it is not fair to judge of them
out of a fanciful dislike, and ill-grounded suspicions. For they ought to
consider that the Serious Air and Gravity wherewith they speak, the Authority
they have obtained over the Minds of others, and that customary way of
confirming their Discourse with a Text of Scripture, must unavoidably engage in
Error their respectful Auditors; who being incapable of Examining things to the
bottom, are caught with Modes and external Appearances.

When Error comes clothed in the Dress of Truth, it frequently has more
respect than Truth it self: And this illegitimate Respect has very dangerous
Consequences: Pessima res est Errorum Apotheosis, and pro peste intellectus
habenda est si vanis accedat veneratio. Thus when some Men out of a false Zeal,
or a Fondness for their own Thoughts, bring the Holy Scripture to countenance
or support false Principles of Physics, or other of like Nature, they are
often attended to as Oracles, by the admiring Crowd, who credit them upon their
word, because of the Reverence they ascribe to Divine Authority: When at the
same time some Men of a worse Complexion, have taken occasion hereby to
contemn Religion. So that by strangely perverting its Nature, Holy Scripture
has been the Cause of some Men's Errors; and Truth has been the Motive and
Original to other's Impiety. We should then be cautious, says the forecited
Author, of searching after Dead things among the Living; and of presuming by
our own Sagacity of Mind* to discover in the Holy Scriptures, what the Holy
Spirit has not thought fit to declare in it. Ex Divinorum and Humanorum
malesana admixtion^, continues he, non solum educitur Philosophia phantastica,
sed etiam Religio haeretica. Itaque salutare admodum est si mente sobria fidei
tantum dentur quae fidei sunt. All Men, who have any Authority over others,
ought never to determine till they have so much the more seriously considered,
as their Determinations are more obstinately adhered to; and Divines should be
more especially regardful, lest they give scandal and contempt to Religion,
through a false Zeal, by an ambitious desire of their own Fame, and of giving
Vogue to their Opinions. But it being not my Business to prescribe to them
their Duty, let them hearken to St. Thomas Aquinas their Master, Opusc. 2.
who being consulted by his General for his Opinion touching some Points,
answers him in these words of St. Austin.

Multum autem nocet talia, quae ad pietatis doctrinam non spectant, vel
asserere vel negare, quasi pertinentia ad Sacram doctrinam. Dicit enim
Augustinus in 5. Confess. Cum audio Christianum aliquem fratrem ista quae
Philosophi de coelo aut stellis and de Solis and Lunae motibus dixer^nt,
nescientem, and aliud pro alio sentien^em, patienter intueor opinantem hominem;
nec illi obesse video cum de te, Domine Creator omnium nostrum, non credat
indigna, si forte situs and habitus creaturae corporalis ignoret. Obest autem
si haec ad ipsam d^ctrinam pietatis pertinere arbitretur, and pertinacius
affirmare audeat quod ignorant. Quod autem obsit manifestat Augustinus in 1.
super Genes. Ad literam. Turpe est, inquit, nimis and perniciosum ac maxim
cavendum, ut Christianum de his rebus quasi secundum Christianas literas
loquentem, ita delirare quilibet infidelis audiat, ut quemadmodum dicitur toto
coelo errare conspiciens; risum tenere vix possit. Et non tamen molestum est,
quod errans homo videatur: sed quod Authors nostri ab eis qui foris sunt,
talia sensisse creduntur and cum magno eorum exitio, de quorum salute
satagimus, tanquam indocti reprehenduntur atque respuuntur. Vnde mihi videtur
tutius esse, ut h^^c quae Philosophi communes senserunt, and nostrae fidei non
repugnant, neque esse sic asserenda, ut dogmata fidei, licet aliquando sub
nomine Philosophorum introducantur, neque sic ^sse neganda tanquam fidei
contraria, ne sapientibus hujus mundi contemnendi doctrinam fidei, occasio
praebeatur:

It Is a dangerous thing positively to determine concerning matters, that are
not of Faith, as if they were: St. Austin is our Author for it, in the fifth
Book of his Confessions: When I see (says he) a Christian, who is un-instructed
in the Opinions of Philosophers about the Heavens, the Stars, and the Motion of
the Sun and Moon, and who mistakes one thing for another; I I leave him to his
Opinions and Uncertainties. Nor do I see what injury it can do him (provided he
has right Notions of Thee our LORD and CREATOR) to be ignorant of the Site and
Position of Bodies, and the different Regulations of Material Beings. But he
does himself wrong, in that he fancies these things concern Religion, and takes
upon him obstinately to affirm what he does not understand. The same Holy Man
explains his Thoughts more clearly yet, in his first Book of the literal
Exposition of Genesis, in these Words. A Christian should be extremely cautious
of speaking of these things, as if they were the Doctrine of the Sacred
Writings; since an Heathen who should hear him utter his Absurdities, that had
no appearance of Truth, would Ridicule him for it. Thus the Christian would be
put in confusion, and the Heathen but ill-edify'd. Yet that, which on these
occasions is matter of greatest trouble, is, not that a Man is found in an
Error; but that the Heathens, whom we labor to convert, falsely, and to their
unavoidable destruction, imagining that our Authors abound with these
ridiculous Notions, condemn them, and spurn them as Ignorant and Unlearned;
which makes me think it much the safer way, not to affirm as the Maxims of
Faith, the common received Opinions of Philosophers, though not inconsistent
with them, (though the Authority of Philosophers may sometimes be used to make
way for their reception,) nor to reject their Opinions as contrary to Faith,
lest occasion be given to the Wise Men of the World, to contemn the Sacred
Truths of the Christian Religion.

The generality of Men are so careless or unreasonable, as to make no
distinction between the Word of GOD and that of Men, when joined together. So
that they fall into Error, by approving them both alike; or into Irreligion by
the contempt of both indifferently. It Is easy to see what is the Cause of
these last Errors, and how they depend upon the Connection of Idea's, explained
in the XI. Chapter; and I need not stand more largely to explain them.

It seems seasonable to say something here of the Chemists, IV. Of such as make
Experiments*
and of all those in general that employ their time in making Experiments.
These are the Men that are in Search after Truth: Their Opinions are usually
embraced without Scruple and Examination. And thus their Errors are so much the
more dangerous, as they are communicated to others with greater Facility.

The Study of Nature is undoubtedly more Noble, than of Books; Visible and
Sensible Experiments afford us much more certain Proofs of things, than the
Reasonings of Men; and no Objection can be made to those Men, whose
Circumstances of Life have engaged them in the Study of Natural Philosophy, for
endeavoring to excel in it, by making continual Experiments; provided their
greatest Application be made to the more necessary Sciences. We find no fault
with Experimental Philosophy, nor the Improvers of it; but only with their
Defects.

The first of which is, that usually it is not the Light of Reason which
conducts them in the Method of their Experiments, but only Chance. Which is the
reason that they grow little more Learned or Skilful, after having wasted much
of their Time and Fortune therein.

The second is their insisting rather upon Curious and Extraordinary
Experiments, than on those that are more Common; when it is plain that the
Commoner being the more simple, they ought first to be dwelt upon, before a Man
applies himself to the more Compounded, and to those which depend upon a
multitude of Causes.

The third is their earnest and diligent Search after Profitable Experiments;
and their neglect of those, which only serve to illuminate the Mind.

The fourth, that they are too un-exact in their Observations of all the
particular Circumstances of Time, Place, the Quality of the Drugs made use of;
though the least of these Circumstances is capable of frustrating the desired
Effect. For it is observable that the Terms the Virtuo^i use, are Equivocal: The
Word Wine, for instance, signifies so many different things, as there are
different Soils, various Seasons, and several ways of making and preserving it.
So that it may be said in general, there are no where two Vessels of it
altogether alike. And when a Chemist says, To make such an Experiment, take
wine, we have but a very confused Idea of his meaning. For which Reason they
should use a most exact Circumspection in Experiments, and not descend to the
Compound sort, till they are very well acquainted with the more Simple and
Ordinary.

The fifth is, That they make too many Deductions from a single Experiment;
when on the contrary, to the Establishing any one good Conclusion, there should
go generally many Experiments. Though a single Experiment may be assistant to
the inferring many Conclusions.

Lastly, The most part of Naturalists and Chemists consider only the particular
Effects of Nature. They never ascend up to the first Notions of the Things
Bodies are composed of. When yet it is most certain we can have no clear and
distinct knowledge of any particular Phenomenon, unless we are first masters of
the most general Principles, and run them up as high as Metaphysics. To
conclude, they commonly want Courage and Constancy, and are tired and
discouraged with the Toil and Expense. There are many other Faults these
Gentlemen are subject to, but I design not to reckon them all up.

The Causes of these Faults which I have remarked, are the want of Application;
the Properties of the Imagination explained in the Tenth and Eleventh Chapters;
and Men's judging of the Difference of Bodies, and the Changes they undergo,
only from the Sensations they have of them* according to the Explication given
in the First Book.

The THIRD PART: Concerning The CONTAGIOUS COMMUNICATION Of Strong IMAGINATIONS.
CHAP I.
I. Of the Disposition we have to imitate others in all things, which is the
Original of the Communication of those Errors, that depend on the Power of
Imagination. II. Two things that more especially increase this Disposition.
III. What that strong Imagination is. IV. That there are several kinds of it.
Of Fools, and of those that have a Srong Imagination, in the Sense it is here
taken. V. Two considerable Imperfections of Men of a Strong Imagination. VI. Of
the Power they have to persuade, and impose on others.

HAVING already explained the Nature of the Imagination, the Failings it is
subject to, and shown how our own Imagination engages us in Error; all that
remains in this Second Book, is to speak to the Contagious Communication of
Strong Imaginations, I mean that Sway and Power some Minds have of drawing
others into their Errors.

Strong Imaginations are wondrously contagious: They domineer over the weaker,
fashion them by degrees after their own Image, I. Of the Disposition we have to
imitate others in all things which is the Original of the Communication of
those Errors, that depend on the Power of Imagination.
and imprint the same Characters upon them. And therefore since Men of Conceit,
and of a Vigorous and Strong Imagination, are the least reasonable of any;
there are very few Causes of the Errors of Men, more ^niversal than this
dangerous Communication of the Imagination.

In order to conceive what this Contagion is, and how it is transmitted from one
to another, we must know that Men are under a mutual necessity of one another's
Assistance, and are so framed as out of many Bodies to compound one, whereof
all the Parts have a mu^ual Correspondence. For the preserving and cherishing
of which Union, GOD commanded them to have Charity for each other. But whereas
Self-love might by little and little extinguish Charity, and break the Bond of
Civil Society; GOD thought fit for the Preservation of it, to unite Men more
firmly still by Natural Ties, which might subsist in case Charity should fail,
and also defend it against the attacks of Self-love.

These Natural Ties, which we have in common with Beasts, consist in a certain
Disposition of Brain, which makes all Men prone to imitate the Actions of those
they converse with, to frame the same Judgments with them, and to be acted with
like Passions they see them possessed with. Which Disposition is a much
straiter Obligation to bind them to each other, than Charity founded upon
Reason, this Charity being rarely to be met with.

Now when a Man wants this Disposition of Brain, whereby he may be affected
with our Sentiments and Passions, he is Naturally incapable of uniting and
making up one Body with us. He may be compared to those Irregular Stones that
cannot be placed in a Building, because they cannot be joined with the others.

Oderunt hilarem tristes, tristemque jocosi,
Sedatum celeres, agilem gnavumque remissi*
It Is a more considerable Virtue than is imagined, to keep fair with those who
are untouched with our Passions, and whose Notions are contrary to our own. And
we shall have Reason to think so, if we consider that it is a kind of Insulting,
when we see a Man that has just cause of Sorrow or Joy, not to take part with
him in his Sentiments. When a Man is in Sorrow, one should not come before him
with a Gay and Airy look; which bespeaks Joy, and violently imprints the
Motions thereof in his Imagination. This being to disturb him from the state
that is most convenient and pleasant to him; for sorrow is the pleasantest of
all the Passions, to a Man under any Affliction.

There is then a certain Disposition of Brain in all Men whatever, II. Two
things that more especially increase the Disposition we have to imitate others.
which naturally inclines them to conform and adapt themselves to the Manners
of those they live with. Which Disposition has two more principal means to
cherish and augment it; one whereof is in the Soul, and the other in the Body.
The former primarily consists in the Inclination all Men have for Eminency and
Greatness: Which Inclination is a secret Spur and Incitement to our Talking,
Walking, Dressing, and Deporting our selves like Men of Rank and Quality. This
is the Origin of the New Modes, of the Inconstancy and Flux of the present
Languages, and of certain general Corruptions of Manners. In short, this is the
principal Source of all those strange and extravagant Novelties, which have no
Foundation in the Reason, but only in the Humor of Men.

The other means that augment this our Imitative Disposition, and which is the
Matter chiefly to be spoke to in this place, consists in a certain Impression,
which Men of a strong Imagination make upon weak Minds, and delicate and tender
Brains.

By the strong and vigorous Imagination, I mean that Constitution of Brain,
III. What the Strong Imagination is.
which makes it capable of very deep Impressions; which so take up the Capacity
of the Soul, as not to suffer her to attend to other things, besides those
represented by these Images.

Now there are two sorts of Persons who have a strong Imagination in this Sense
explained. The one receive these deep Traces by a disorderly and involuntary
Impression of the Animal Spirits; IV. Two kinds of it.
and the other, which I design more particularly to treat of, receive them
through the Disposition incident to the Substance of their Brain.

It Is plain that the former are absolutely Fools, since they are obliged by the
Natural Union between their Traces and Idea's, to think of things that others
they converse with, do not think of; which incapacitates them from speaking
pertinently to the thing in hand, and making a suitable Answer to the Questions
that are asked them.

Of these there are infinite forts, that differ only in degree; amongst which
may be reckoned all such as are acted without any violent Passion, since in the
time of their Perturbation, the Animal Spirits so forcibly imprint the Traces
and Images of their Passion, that they are unable to think of any thing else.

But it is to be observed, that the Imagination of the weakest Minds, and the
most soft and tender Brains that be, are not in danger of being corrupted by
this sort of People, for two very good Reasons. The first is, that being unable
to conform their Answers to the Idea's of others, they are as unable to
persuade them to any thing; and the second is, that their Discourse is always
heard with contempt, upon the account of so visible a Disorder in their Brain.

It Is true however, that Men in a Passion infect the Spectators with the same;
and strike their Imagination with Impressions like to those they feel
themselves. But because the outrage is so visible, the Impressions it makes are
resisted, and a little time will quite discard them. They wear off of
themselves, when no longer fed and supplied, by the Cause that produced them;
that is, when the transported Person is out of sight, and the sensible View of
the Features the Passion drew upon the Face, produces no more alterations in
the Fibers of our Brain, nor Agitations in our Animal Spirits.

My Design is only to examine that sort of strong and vigo^ous Imagination,
which consists in a Disposition of Brain fit and proper to receive very deep
Impressions, from the weakest and least-active Objects.

It Is no Imperfection to have a Brain disposed for the Imagining things
strongly, and receiving most distinct and lively Images of the most
incon^iderable Objects; provided the Soul still superintends the Imagination,
and these Traces be imprinted by her Orders, and expunged by her Commands:
It Is, on the contrary, the Original of Subtilty and Strength of Wit. But when
the Imagination lords it over the Soul, and these Traces, without staying for
the Orders of the Will, are stamped by the Disposition of the Brain, by the
Action of Objects and the Animal Spirits, it is manifestly a base and
mischievous Quality, and a kind of Madness. Let us try to discover their
Character, whose Imagination is wrought in this manner.

And in order to this, it ought to be re-minded, that the Capacity of the Mind
is very narrow, and that there is nothing so cumbersom, as I may say, or so
soon takes it up, as the Sensations of the Soul, and, in general, all the
Perceptions of Objects that vehemently affect us; and that the deep Traces of
the Brain are ever attended with Sensations or other Perceptions, which
challenge a great Application of Mind. In remembering this, 'twill be easy to
lay open the Minds of Men of strong Imagination, and to discover their real
Characters.

The first whereof is their Incapacity to judge prudently of things any whit
difficult and intricate; because the extent of their Minds, V. Two considerable
Imperfections of Men of a Strong Imagination
being filled with Idea's naturally annexed to these deep Traces, they are not
at liberty of thinking on many things at the same time: When as in Compound
Questions, the Mind, by a quick and desultory Motion, must run over the Idea's
of a great many things, and survey, at one View, all the Relations and
Dependencies, that necessarily go to the Resolution of the Questions.

Every one is conscious from his own Experience, how impossible it is to
contemplate any abstract Truth, when he is under the Sense of Pain, that is any
thing violent; the reason whereof is, that the deep Traces then printed on the
Brain, possess the Capacity of the Mind. Thus those we are speaking of, having,
as his supposed, deeper Traces of the same Objects than others, must have a
Mind of narrower Bounds, and incapable of embracing so many things. The first
Defect therefore of these Men, is their having a little Mind, and so much the
less, as their Brain receives deeper Traces from such Objects as are less
considerable.

The second is their being Visionists, but in so subtle and delicate a way, as
his hard to be discovered: and which makes the common sort of Men not think
them so: And it is only the accurate and clear-sighted Minds, that are
apprehensive of their Visions, and the ramblings of their Fancy.

For the understanding the Original of this Defect, we must farther call to
Mind what has been said at the beginning of the Second Book; that in regard of
what happens in the Brain, the Senses and Imagination differ only in degree of
more or less; and that it is the largeness and depth of the Traces that makes
the Soul sensible of Objects; makes her judge them as present, and in capacity
to affect her; and lastly, near enough to her, to make her feel Pleasure and
Pain: For when the Traces are little, the Soul only imagines the Objects of
them; she judges it not as present, nor looks upon it as very great and
considerable: But in proportion as these Traces grow larger and deeper, the
Soul judges the Object to be bigger and more considerable, that it approaches
nearer to us, and, in conclusion, is capable of touching and hurting us.

The Visionists I speak of are not arrived to that high degree of Madness, as
to believe they see before their Eyes the Objects that are absent: The Traces
of their Brain are not so deep as that comes to: They are not so thorow-pac'd
finished Madmen; for if they were, it would be in vain to talk of them here,
since their Dilusions would be so visible, that no Man could be imposed on by
them, They are not Visionists of Sense therefore, but of Imagination only.
Madmen and Phrenticks are Visionists of the former sort, for that they see not
things as they are, and frequently see those that are not* But our Visionists
are of the latter sort, since they Imagine things quite otherwise than they
are, and Imagine likewise those that are not. And yet it is evident that the
Visionists of Sense, differ from the Visionists of the Imagination only
Secundum plus and minus; and the passage is frequent from one Condition to the
other. For which reason we should represent the distempered Mind of the latter,
by comparing it with that of the former; as being of a more sensible Nature,
and making greater Impression on the Soul, since in things that differ thus
only in degree, those that are less Sensible ought to be expressed by Analogy
to those that are more so.

The second Imperfection then, as has been seen, of Men of a Strong and
Vigorous Imagination, is their being Visionists of Imagination, or simply
Visionists: since the Visionists of Sense go by the Name of Madmen. I come now
to show the ill Qualities of these Visionary Wits.

They exceed all Bounds, and keep no Mean upon any occasion, hightning what is
low and mean, and magnifying what is little, and bringing close what is remote;
since nothing appears to them as it is. They admire or exclaim at every thing
indifferently, without Judgment and Discretion. If their Natural Complexion
disposes them to Fear; I mean if their Animal Spirits be few in number, weak
and unactive, they shall be frighted at the least thing in Nature, and tremble
at the fall of a Leaf. Whereas if they abound with Blood and Spirits, the more
common thing of the two, they shall feed upon empty hopes; and giving
themselves up to their luxuriant Imaginations, build (as we say) Castles in the
Air, with a mighty Joy and Satisfaction. They are vehement in their Passions,
headstrong in Opinions, and ever well satisfied with themselves. But when once
they are ambitious of being looked upon as the Wits of the Age, and set up for
Authors, (for there are Authors of all sorts, Visionists and others;) Good God!
what Extravagancies, Whimsies, and Irregular Motions do we see! wherein Nature
has nothing to do, where all is Affected, forced, and Bombastic. They never
stir but they are upon the Prance, every Step must be in Time and Measure, and
all proceeds in Figures and Hyperboles. If again the Humor takes them to be
Religious, and their own Fancies be their Guide, they turn absolutely Jews and
Pharisees; sticking usually to the Surface and Shadow; and being wholly taken
up with the outside Ceremonies, and little Practices of small or no
importance. Hence they become Scrupulous, Timorous, and Superstitious; to whom
every thing is Faith, every thing Essential, except that which is truly Faith
and Essential. For the most material and weighty things of the Gospel, Justice,
Mercy and Faith, are frequently neglected; whilst their Mind is entertained
(with their Tithing Mint and Cummim) i. e. with the less important Duties of
Religion: But here the Subject grows too plentiful, and there is no need of
making farther Reflection than on what occurs in their ordinary Conversations,
to be satisfied of these Failings, and to observe several others.

But Men of a strong and vigorous Imagination have still other Qualities, very
necessary to be thoroughly explained, For hitherto we have treated only of their
Defects, and we should do them Justice now in speaking of their Advantages; one
whereof, among the rest, more especially belongs to our Subject; because it is
upon the Strength of that they domineer over the Vulgar sort of Minds; they
enter them into their Thoughts, and communicate all the false Impressions to
them, which themselves are affected withal.

This Advantage consists in a Facility of Expressing themselves in a strong and
lively, though unnatural, VI. That Men of a Strong Imagination easily persuade.
manner. Such as Imagine things strongly, express them with much vehemence, and
persuade all those that are convinced, more by the sensible Manner and
Impression, than by the force of Argument: For the Brains of Men of Strong
Imaginations receiving, as has been said, deep Impressions of the Subjects they
imagine, these Impressions are naturally pursued by a great Commotion of the
Spirits, which disposes their whole Body to set off their Thoughts in a ready
and lively manner of Expression. The Air of the Face, the Tone of the Voice,
the Elegancy of their Words animating their Expressions, prepare the Spectators
and Hearers for Attention, and dispose them to a Machinal Reception of the
Image imprinted by the Speakers. For, in fine, when a Man is affect^d with what
he says, he generally affects others with it too; as a Man in a Passion never
fails to be moving: Though his Rhetoric be Inartificial and Irregular, yet he
is sure of gaining his point, because the Air and External Demeanor strike
upon the Senses; and act in a livelier way on the Imagination, than the most
powerful Discourses coldly pronounced: Forasmuch as these Discourses don't
gratify the Senses, nor affect the Imagination.

These Men then have the Advantage of Pleasing, Moving, and Persuading; because
of their Imaging their Thoughts in a most lively and sensible manner: Though
there be other Causes contributing to the Conquest they obtain over the Minds
of others. For they most commonly Discourse upon obvious and easy Subjects,
and suited to Vulgar Capacities. Then they only make use of such Terms and
Expressions as raise the confused Notions of the Senses, which are ever very
Strong and Pathetical; and when they treat of Lofty and Difficult Subjects,
it is in a loose and commonplace way, without venturing a Discussion of
Particulars, and fixing to Principles; whether because they understand not
these Points, or are fearful of being at a loss for Terms, or of perplexing or
tiring the Minds of such as are not capable of much Attention.

And now we may readily judge from what has been said, that the Disorders of
the Imagination are extremely contagious, and that they insinuate and diffuse
themselves into most Minds with a great deal of ease: But whereas those who are
of a Strong Imagination, are generally Enemies to Reason, and irreconcilable to
good Sense; because of the littleness of their Minds, and the Visions they are
subject to; it is manifest to be seen there are few more general Causes of our
Errors, than this contagious Communication of the Disorders and Distempers of
the Imagination: But these Truths deserve to be farther Illustrated by the
Examples, and known Experience of the World.

CHAP. II.
General Instances of the Strength of Imagination.

CHILDREN in respect of their Fathers, but especially Daughters in regard of
their Mothers, afford us very frequent Instances of this Communication of the
Imagination: The same things do Servants in relation to their Masters, Maids in
respect of their Mistresses, Scholars of their Teachers, Courtiers of their
Kings, and generally all Inferiors in respect of their Superiors; supposing
only that Fathers, Masters, and the rest of the Superiors have any Strength of
Imagination themselves. For otherwise it is possible for Children and Servants
to remain untouched, or very little infected, with the languid Imagination of
their Fathers and Masters.

The Effects of this Communication may be likewise observed in Equals; but that
more rarely, for want of that submissive Respect among them, which qualifies
and disposes the Mind for the Reception of the Impressions of strong
Imaginations, without examining them: Last of all, they are to be seen in
Superiors also, with respect to their Inferiors, who sometimes are empowered
with so Lively and Authoritative an Imagination, as to turn the Minds of their
Masters and Superiors which way they please.

'Twill be easy to conceive how Fathers and Mothers make so very strong
Impressions on the Imagination of their Children, if it be considered, that the
Natural Dispositions of our Brain, whereby we are inclined to imitate those we
live with, and to participate of their Sentiments and Passions, are stronger in
Children with respect to their Parents, than in any others; whereof several
Reasons may be given. The first is their being of the same Blood: For as
Parents commonly transmit to their Children the Seeds and Dispositions for
certain Hereditary Distempers; such as the Gout, Stone, Madness; and generally
all those that were not of Accidental Acquirement, or whose sole and only Cause
was not some extraordinary Fermentation of the Humors, as Fevers and some
others; (for of such it is plain there can be no Communication) So they imprint
the Dispositions of their own Brain on the Brain of their Children, and give a
certain Turn to their Imagination, that makes them wholly susceptible of the
same Sentiments.

The second Reason is the little Acquaintance and Converse Children generally
have with other Men, who might sometimes stamp different Impresses on their
Brain, and, in some measure, interrupt the bent and force of the Paternal
Impression. For as a Man, that was never abroad, commonly Fancies that the
Manners and Customs of Strangers are quite contrary to Reason, because contrary
to the usage of his Native Town, or Custom of his Country, whilst he yields to
be carried by the current; so a Child, who was never from his Father's Home,
imagines his Parents Sentiments and Ways of Living to be Universal Reason, or
rather thinks there are no other Principles of Reason or Virtue to be had,
besides the Imitation of them. Which makes him believe, whatever he hears them
say; and do, whatever he sees them do.

But this Parental Impression is so strong, as not only to influence the
Child's Imagination, but to have its Effect on the other parts of the Body. So
that a young Lad shall Walk and Talk, and have the same Gestures as his Father:
And a Girl shall Mimick the Mother in her Gate, Discourse, and Dress: If the
Mother Lisps, the Daughter must Lisp too; if the Mother has any odd fling with
her Head, the Daughter takes the same: In short, Children imitate their Parents
in every thing, even in their Bodily Defects, Grimace, and Faces, as well as
their Errors, and Vices.

There are still many other Causes, which add to the Effect of this Impression.
The chief of which are, the Authority of the Parents, the Dependence of
Children, and the mutual Love between them: But these Causes are as common to
Courtiers, Servants, and, in general, to all Inferiors, as to Children; I
therefore choose to explain them by the Instance of the Court-Gentlemen.

There are those who judge by what is in sight, of that which is unapparent; of
the Greatness, Strength, and Reach of Wit, and Parts, which they see not; by
the Gallantry, Honors, and Riches which they know; and measure the one by the
other: And that Dependency Men are in to the Great, the Desire of partaking of
their Greatness, and that sensible Luster that surrounds them, makes them
ascribe Honors Divine, if I may so speak, to Mortal Men. For GOD bestows on
Princes Authority, but Men attribute to them Infallibility: Such an
Infallibility as has no Boundaries prescribed to it, on any subject, or any
occasion, nor is confined to certain Ceremonies. For the Great know all things
naturally; they are ever in the Right, even in the Decision of Questions which
they do not understand: None attempt to examine their Positions, but those who
want Experience and the Art of Living; and it is Presumption and want of Respect
to doubt of them. But it is no less than Rebellion, at least downright Folly,
Sottishness, (...) Madness to condemn them.

But when we are Honored with a Place in the Favor and Esteem of Great Men,
it is no longer, plain Obstinacy, Conceitedness, and Rebellion; it is a Crime of
a deeper dye; Ingratitude, and Perfidiousness, not to surrender implicitly to
their Opinions. It Is such an unpardonable Offense as utterly incapacitates us
for any of their future Favors. Which is the Reason that Courtiers, and by a
necessary consequence, the generality of the World, indeliberately subscribe to
the Sentiments of their Sovereign, even so far as to Model their Faith by, and
make the Truths of Religion subservient to his Fantastic Humor and Folly.

England and Germany furnish us but with too many Instances, of the blind and
exorbitant Submission of the People to the Wills of their Irreligious Princes,
wherewith the Histories of the late Times abound: And some Men of a
considerable Age, have been known to have changed their Religion four or five
times, by reason of the diverse changes of their Princes.

The Kings and even the Queens of England have the Government of all the States
of their Kingdoms, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil in all Causes. Artic. 37. of
the Religion of the Church of England.
It Is they that are the Approvers of the Liturgies, of the Festival Services,
of the way wherein the Sacraments ought to be Administered and Received. They
appoint, for instance, that our LORD shall not be adored in the Eucharist,
though they oblige to the Receiving it on the Knees, according to the Ancient
Custom. In a word, they arbitrarily change the whole Substance of their
Liturgies, to suit them to the New Articles of their Faith; and together with
their Parliam^nt, have equal Right of judging of these Articles, as a Pope with
a Council; as may be seen in the Statutes of England and Ireland, made at the
beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Lastly, we may add that the Kings of
England have a greater Jurisdiction over the Spirituals, than the Temporals of
their Subjects; because those wretched People, those Children of this World,
are less concerned for the Preservation of their faith, than the Security of
their Fortunes; and readily embrace the Opinions of their Princes, when their
Temporal Interest stands not in the way.

The Revolutions which have happened to Religion in Sweden and Denmark, may
serve as a farther Evidence of the Power some Minds have over others; though
indeed all those Revolutions were contributed to, by many other very
considerable Causes. Which surprising Changes are so many Proofs of the
Contagious Communication of the Imagination, but Proofs too vast and mighty;
and such as confound and dazzle the Mind, rather than enlighten it; because
there are too many Causes concurring to the Production of these great Events.
When Courtiers, and all Men else, so commonly give up the Interest of
Infallible Truths, Essential Truths; Truths that are necessary to be asserted,
unless a Man resolve upon Everlasting Destruction: How can it be expected they
should run any hazard in the Defense of Abstract Truths of as little Certainty,
as they are of Use? If the Religion of the Prince makes the Religion of his
Subjects; the Reason of the Prince will be the Reason of his Subjects too; and
so the Sentiments of the Prince, his Pleasures, his Passions, his Sports, his
Habit, and generally all his Actions will be A-la-mode: For the Prince himself
being as the Original and Essential Mode, nothing that is derived from him will
be out of Fashion: And since all the Irregularities of the Fashion become
Graces and Beauties, it is no wonder that Princes act so forcibly on the
Imagination of other Men.

If Alexander holds his Head awry, his Courtiers will have theirs in the same
Posture: If Dionysius the Tyrant apply himself to Geometry upon Plato's Arrival
in Syracuse, Geometry grows the Study of the Court; and the King's Palace, says
Plutarch, is presently filled with dust, by the vast number of those that are
drawing Figures in it. But as soon as Plato is disgusted with the Tyrant,
Plutarch. Mor. How to distinguish the Flatterer from the Friend.
and the Tyrant disliking his Study betakes himself afresh to his Pleasures:
The Courtiers turn Voluptuaries to accompany him* One would think, continues
that Author, they were enchanted, and that some Circe had Metamorphos'd them
into other Men. Their Affection for Philosophy grows into an Affection for
Debauchery; and their Abhorrence of Debauchery, into the Abhorrence of
Philosophy. And thus Princes can change Vices into Virtues, and Virtues into
Vices; and one word of their Mouth is able to reverse all the Idea's of them.
One Royal Word or Gesture, a Frown or a Lip, shall debase true Science and
Learning, into Pedantry; entitle Rashness, Brutality, and Cruelty, to the
repute of Valor and Greatness of Courage; and make Libertinism and
Profaneness, pass for Force and Liberty of Thought.

But this, as all that I have been saying, supposes that Princes have a Strong
and Lively Imagination; since if it were Weak and Languishing, they could not
Animate their Discourse, nor give it that lively Turn and Vehemence, requisite
to Master and Inslave the weaker Minds.

And now if the Imagination all alone, and unassisted with the supplies of
Reason, can produce so surprising Effects; there is nothing so Fantastical or
Extravagant, but it will persuade, when backed and supported with any apparent
Reasons. Here are some proofs of it.

It Is related by an Ancient Author, That in Ethiopia the Courtiers Crippl'd and
Deformed themselves, lop't off a Limb or two, and sometimes even died, to
imitate their Princes. Diodor. Sicul. Bibl. Lib. 3.
'Twas as scandalous to be seen with a Pair of Eyes, or to walk upright in the
Retinue of a Crooked and One-ey'd King; as it would be ridiculous to appear at
Court now adays in Ruffs and Caps, or in white Buskins and gilded Spurs. This
Ethiopian Fashion was as Extravagant and incommodious, as can be imagined; but
yet it was the Fashion: It was cheerfully followed by the Court, and the Pain
to be endured was less thought on, than the Honor a Man purchased by
manifesting so generous an Affection for his King: In short, this Mode, when
supported by a pretended Reason of Friendship, grew up into a Custom and a Law,
that obtained a considerable Time.

We learn from the Relations of those who have traveled in the Levant, that
this Custom is observed in several Countries; as also some others, as
inconsistent with Reason and good Sense. But there is no necessity of twice
cutting the Line, to see Unreasonable Laws and Customs religiously observed; we
may find the Patrons of Fantastical and Inconvenient Fashions nearer Home: Our
own Country will supply us with enough: Wherever there are Men not insensible
to Passions, and the Imagination has the supremacy over Reason; there will be
fantastical Humors, and Humors unaccountable. If there be not so much Pain to
be suffered in going with bare Breasts, in the most rigid Winter Season, and
stoving up the Body in the excessive Heats of Summer, as in the plucking out an
Eye, or cutting off an Arm; yet the Shame should certainly be greater. I
confess the Pain is not so great, but neither is the Reason of undergoing it so
apparent; and so the Extravagance comes at least to an even poize. For an
Ethiopian might, in justifying himself, say he plucked out an Eye, out of a
point of Loyalty and Honor: But what should a Christian Lady say for Exposing
what Nature and Religion oblige her to conceal? Perhaps, that she did it,
because 'twas the Fashion, and for no other Reason. But she ought to know, That
it is an Extravagant, Inconvenient, Unseemly, and Shameful Fashion on all
Accounts, and proceeds from nothing but a manifest Corruption of Reason, and a
secret Depravation of Heart; and cannot be favored or followed without
Scandal, and openly siding with the Corruption of the Imagination against
Reason; with Impurity against Purity; with the Spirit of the World against the
Spirit of GOD. In a word, to follow this Mode is to violate both the Laws of
Reason, and of the Gospel: But what matters that, you will say, it is the Mode;
that is a Law more Sacred and Inviolable, than That written by the Finger of
GOD upon the Tables of Moses, and those graven by his Spirit on the Hearts of
Christians.

And indeed I cannot see that the English or French have much Reason to laugh
at the Ethiopians and Savages: At the first time of seeing a Crippl'd or
One-ey'd King, in the Front of a Train of Lame and Half-sighted Courtiers; I
confess a Man would scarce forbear lauging: But time would make it familiar,
and instead of ridiculing them for an Infirmity of Mind, he would more admire
perhaps the Greatness of their Courage, and Perfection of their Friendship. But
it is not so with the Fashions of our modern Ladies: Their Extravagancies have
no pretended Reason to uphold them, if they have the Advantage of being less
troublesome, they stand chargeable however with being more irrational. In
short, they bear the Character of an Age still more corrupt in which nothing is
found sufficient to qualify the Disorders of Imagination.

What has been said of Courtiers, ought likewise to be understood of the most
part of Servants in respect of their Masters, Maids in respect of their
Mistresses, and not to make an impertinent Induction of particulars, of all
Inferiors in respect of their Superiors: and especially of Children in respect
of their Parents: Forasmuch as they have a very peculiar Dependence on them,
are cherished and brought up tenderly by them, which is not done in the rest;
and lastly, because Reason inclines Children to such Submission and Respect, as
Reason it self cannot always regulate.

It Is not absolutely necessary for the influencing the Imagination of others to
have some Authority over them, and that they have some kind of Dependence on
us; the sole strength of Imagination is sometimes sufficient to do it: It Is
common for strangers, for Men of no Reputation, for such as we are not
prepossessed with any Esteem of, to have such force of Imagination, and
consequently so lively and charming Expressions, as to persuade us without our
knowing either for what end, or by what means we were persuaded; I confess it
seems strange it should be so, but yet there is nothing commoner.

Now this imaginative Persuasion must proceed from the force of a Visionary
Wit, who has a lively way of Talking, without knowing what he says; and who
thus brings over the Minds of Hearers to give a strong assent, without knowing
what it is they assent to. For the generality of Men give way to the force of
the sensible Impression, and so dazles and confounds them, and makes them
passionately judge of what they confusedly conceived. We desire such as shall
read this Work, to consider this thing, to observe the Instances of it in the
Companies they light upon; and to make Reflection on what happens in their own
Breast on such occasions; which will be a thing of greater use to them than
they can imagine.

But it should be well considered, that there are two things, which wonderfully
contribute to the Power of other's Imagination over us: The first is, a grave
and pious Deportment; the second, a Presumptuous and Libertine Behavior. For
accordingly as we are disposed to Piety or Libertinism, we shall find an Air of
Gravity and Piety in Discourse, or a Presumptuous and Libertine strain shall
act very differently upon us.

It Is true, the one is of more dangerous contagion than the other; but yet we
should equally resist the sensible Manners of either side; and only submit to
the force of the Reasons they are attended with; for ridiculous Nonsense and
Impertinence may be spoke in a grave and sober way; and Blasphemy and
Profaneness, with an Air of Devotion. Wherefore we should, following the Advice
of St. John, examine Whether the Spirits be of GOD, and not trust all sorts of
Spirits. We know the Devils sometimes transform themselves into Angels of
Light; and there are Men who have, as it were, naturally the Mein of Piety, and
Look of Religion, and consequently a well-establish'd Reputation in the World;
who yet exempt Men from their Essential Obligations, even from the loving GOD
and their Neighbor; to enslave them to some foolish Practices, or Pharisaick
Ceremony.

But the Strong Imaginations, whose Impression and Contagion should more
industriously be avoided, are of Men abroad in the World, who affect the being
reputed the Bold Wits; which is a Reputation easily acquired. For it is but
denying, with a particular Grace, Original Sin, the Immortality of the Soul, or
ridiculing some received Opinion of the Church, to set up for such an
accomplished Wit among the Vulgar.

These little Minds are generally full of Life and Fire, of a forward and
haughty Carriage, which sways and disposes Weak Imaginations, to yield to the
vivid and plausible Discourse, which to any thinking Man will appear to have
nothing in it. For as happy as they are at Expressing, they have but very ill
luck at Reasoning. And yet whilst Men, though never so Rational, had rather be
moved and affected with sensible Pleasure, that attends the way of Delivery,
and the specious Expressions, than to enter into an irksome Disquisition of the
Reasons; it is visible these Minds must have the ascendant over others, and so
propagate their Contagion and their Errors, by the Authority they have over the
Imagination of other Men.

CHAP. III.
I. Of the Force of some Authors Imagination. II. Of Tertullian.

ONE of the greatest and most notorious Proofs of the Power some Imaginations
have over others, is the Prevalency some Authors have of persuading without
Reasons. For instance, The Turn, Tertullian, Seneca, Montagne, and some others
give their Discourse, has those Charms and Luster, which dazzle the Minds of
most Men; though it be only a faint Draught of Fancy, and, as it were, the
Shadows of those Authors Imagination. Their Words, as dead and inanimate as
they are, have greater Vigor than the Reasons of others: They enter, they
penetrate, they domineer in the Soul at so imperious a rate, as to challenge
Obedience without being understood, and make their Orders submitted to, before
they are known. A Man has a Mind to believe, but he knows not what. When he
would know what it is he would believe, and approaches, as I may say, those
fleeting Phantoms, to take a View of them, they dissipate into smoke with all
their gaudy Drapery and Luster.

But though these Authors I have named, are the most proper Instances that can
be given, to show the Power of some Men's Imaginations over others, and I
propose them for that purpose; yet I pretend not to condemn them in every
thing. For I cannot forbear having an Esteem for those particular Beauties that
are in them, and a Deference to that universal Approbation they have had for
many Ages; I must declare I have a great Veneration for some of Tertullian's
Works, and especially for his Apology against the Gentiles, and his Book of
Prescriptions against Heretics; and for some parts of the Books of Seneca,
though I have very little Esteem for any thing of Montagne. See the
Illustrations.


Tertullian was indeed a Man of profound Learning, but of a better Memory than
Judgment; and had a greater Penetration and Extent of Imagination, than of
Intellect. There is no doubt but he was a Visionist, in the Sense I have before
explained; and was fraught with most of the Qualities I have attributed to the
Visionary Wits: And the Veneration he had for Montanus's Visions and his
Prophetesses, are an undoubted Demonstration of the Weakness of his Judgment:
His fervent Zeal, and Transports, and Enthusiasms upon trifling Subjects, are a
sensible Indication of a distempered Imagination. What irregular Motions are
there in his Hyperboles and Figures? How many pompous and magnificent Arguments
that owe all their force to their sensible Luster, and persuade merely by
giddying* and dazzling the Mind?

To what purpose, for instance, does that Author, in justifying his wearing the
Philosophers Gown instead of the usual one, allege this Habit was formerly the
Fashion in the City Carthage? Should we at present wear Ruffs and Caps, because
they were in use in the days of our Forefathers? Or would it look well for
Women to put on old-fashioned H^ods and Fardingales, except it be in the
Carnival, when they would disguise themselves to go a Masquerading?

What could be concluded from those pompous and magnificent Descriptions of the
Changes the World undergoes, and what could they contribute to his Apology? The
Moon has different Phases, the Year changes its Seasons, and the Fields have
another Countenance in Summer than in Winter. Inundations lay whole Provinces
under Water; and Earthquakes swallow them up: New Cities are built, and new
Colonies planted; and People in swarms have overrun and depopulated entire
Countries: And therefore the common Toga should be changed for the Philosophic
Pallium. What Affinity is there between the thing to be proved, and all these
Changes, and several others he is at great Pains to find out, and which he
describes in unnatural, obscure, and bombastic Expressions? The Peacock varies
every step he makes; and the Serpent gliding into a narrow hole, slips out of
its Skin, and grows young again; why then should not we change our Habit? Could
any Man in his Wits, and in cold Blood, make such Inferences as these? Chap. 2.
and 3. De Pallio.
Could any that should hear him, hold from laughing? Did not this Author make
giddy the Head, and confound the Intellect of his Reader?

Almost all the remainder of that little Book De Pallio, Multos etiam vidi
postquam been aestuassent, ut eum assequerentur, nihil praeter sudorem and
inanem animi fatigationem lucratos, ab ejus lectione discessisse. Sic qui
Scotinus haberi viderique dignus, qui hoc cognomentum habere voluit, adeo quod
voluit a seipso impetravit, and efficere id quod obtabat valuit, ut liquido
jurare ausim neminem ad hoc tempus extitisse, qui possit jurare hunc libellum a
capite ad calcem usque totum, a se non minus been intellectum quam lectum.
Salm. in Epist. ded. Comment. in Tert.
is filled with Reasons as foreign to his Subject as these; which certainly
prove nothing, but only amuse such as are liable to be amused: But it is
needless to insist longer on this Topic: It may suffice to say, That if
Accuracy of Thought, and Clearness and Distinctness of Discourse, should always
appear in whatever a Man writes (since the end of Writing is to manifest the
Truth) it is impossible to excuse this Author, who, by the Testimony of
Salmasius, the best of our Modern Critics, has laid out all his Endeavors to
become obscure; and has so well succeeded in that Design, that this Commentator
scarce forbore Swearing that no Man ever perfectly understood him. But
supposing the Genius of the Nation, the Humor of the Mode that then prevai^^d,
and lastly, the Nature of Satyr or Raillery, might in some measure justify
this notable Design of being Mysterious and Incomprehensible: yet all this
could never atone for the pitiful Reasons and the Ramblings of an Author, who
in many of his Works, as well as this, speaks whatever comes in's Head;
provided it be in some unordinary Thought, which he can set off in some bold
Expression, with hopes of making Ostentation of the force, or I might say, the
corruption of his Imagination.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Imagination of Seneca.

THE Imagination of Seneca is sometimes as irregular as Tertullian's: His
impetuous Motions carrying him into unknown Regions; where yet he walks with as
great confidence and security, as if he knew where he was, and whither he was
tending. Whenever he makes large steps, steps in Figures, and exactly measured;
he fancies he is far advanced; whereas he imitates the Dancers, that always end
where they begin.

We ought to distinguish the Force and Beauty of Words, from the Force and
Evidence of Reasons. There is doubtless much Force, and some Beauty in the
Words of Seneca; but very little Strength and Evidence in his Reasons: By the
Force of Imagination, he gives such a Turn to his Words, as moves, agitates,
and persuades by the Impression they make on us; but he fails to give that
Distinctness and pure Light, which illuminates and persuades by Evidence. His
Conviction depends on the Commotion he raises, and the Pleasure he suggests;
but such as can read him sedately and undisturbed, that can take heed of
Surprise, and are used to no other Conviction than that of Clearness and
Evidence of Reason, will not, I dare say, be convinced by his Discourse. For,
in short, so he talks handsomely, he is but little solicitous about what he
says; as if it were possible a Man should speak well, without knowing what he
speaks. And thus he commonly persuades, without knowing how or why we are
persuaded; as if it were reasonable to be convinced of any thing without a
distinct Knowledge of it, and Examination of the Proofs that demonstrate it.

What can be more stately than the Idea he give us of his Wiseman; and yet
what at the bottom is more vain and fantastical? The Portraicture he draws of
Plato is too fine to be Natural; but it is such Paint and Varnish, he puts upon
none but the unthinking sort of Men, and those that are unacquainted with
Nature. Cato was a Man, and subject to the Misery of Men: 'Twas only a Fancy
that he was invulnerable, or that when he was struck, he was not hurt: He had
neither the hardness of Adamant to be impenetrable to Iron, nor the stability
of Rocks to be unshaken by the Floods, as Seneca pretends* In a word, he was
not insensible; as Seneca himself is obliged to acknowledge, when his
Imagination is a little cooled, and he reflects a little better on what he
says. Itaque non refert quam multa in illum tela conjiciantur* cum sit nulli
penetrabilis; quomodo quorundam lapidum inexpugnabilis ferro duritia est: nec
secari adamas, aut caedi vel teri potest, sed incurrentia ultro retundit:
quemadmodum projecti in altum scopuli mare frangunt, nec ipsi ulla saevitiae
vestigia tot verberati saeculis ostentant: Ita sapientis animus solidus est,
and id roboris collegit, ut tam tutus sit ab injuria, quam illa quae extuli.
Sen. c. 5. Tract. Quod in sapientem non cadit injuria.

But what? will he not grant that his Wiseman may become miserable, when he
acknowledges he is not insensible to Pain? No by no means; Pain can never
affect him, nor the fear of it disquiet him: For his Wiseman is Paramount to
Fortune, and above the Malice of Men: and they are incapable of giving him any
Disturbance.

Adsum hoc vobis probaturus, sub isto tot civitatum eversore munimenta^incursu
arietis labefieri, and turrium altitudinem cuniculis ac latentibus fossis
repent residere, and aequaturum editissimas arces aggerem crescere. At nulla
machinamenta posse reperiri, quae been fundatum animum agitent. And lower: Non
Babylonis muros illi contuleris, quos Alexander intravit; non Carthaginis, aut
Numantiae moenia una manu capta: non Capitolium arcemve, habent ista hostile
vestigium. Cap. 6.

Quid tu putas cum stolidus ille Rex multitudine telorum diem obscurasset,
ullam sagittam in Solemn incidisse: ut coelestia humanas manus effugiunt, and ab
his qui templa diruunt, aut simulachra conflant, nihil divinitati nocetur; ita
quicquid fit in sapientem, proterve, petulanter, superbe frustra tentatur. Cap.
4. Inter fragorem templorum super Deos suos cadentium uni homini pax fuit. Cap.
5.

Non est ut dicas ita ut soles, hunc sapientem nostrum nusquam inveniri. Non
fingimus istud humani ingenii vanum decus, nec ingentem imaginem rei falsae
concipimus: sed quaelem confirmamus, and exhibuimus and exhibebimus. Ceterum
hic ipse M. Cato vereor ne supra nostrum exemplar sit. Cap. 7.

Videor mihi intueri animum tuum incensum, and effervescentem: paras acclamare.
Haec sunt quae auctoritatem praeceptis vestris detrahant. Magna promittitis,
and quae ne optari quidem nedum credi possunt. And lower: Ita sublato alte
supercilio in eadem, quae caeteri, descenditis mutatis rerum nominibus; tale
itaque aliquid, and in hoc esse suspicor, quod prima specie pulchrum atque
magnificum est, nec injuriam, nec contumeliam accepturum esse sapientem. And
lower: Ego vero sapientem non imaginario honor verborum exornare constitui,
sed eo loco ponere, quo nulla perveniat injuria.

Battering Rams, and other Engines of Wars, will shake the Walls and Towers of
the strongest Garrisons, and in time level them with the Earth: But what
Machines are found sufficient to shake the impregnable Mind of his Wiseman?
Compare not with him the Wall of Babylon forced by Alexander; nor those of
Carthage and Numantia, that one General overturned: Nor lastly, the Capitol,
and the Citadel, which carry the marks of the prevailing Enemy. Arrows shot
against the Sun are spent in vain; Sacriledges committed in the overthrow of
Temples, and the Shrines of the Gods melted down, touch not the Divinity; yet
the Gods may be overwhelmed in the ruins of their own Temples: But his
Wiseman shall never be oppressed; or rather, he may be oppressed, but it is
impossible he should be hurt.

But think not (says Seneca) that the Wiseman I am picturing, is no where to
be found. It Is no vain Fiction of ours* ridiculously to exalt the Mind of Man:
It Is not a Stalking Idea, without Realty and Truth; no, the Original Cato
transcends perhaps the Picture that I make of him.

But methinks, continues he, I perceive your Mind begins to kindle, and grow
hot; and you are ready to cry out, That it is the way to make our selves
contemptible, to promise things above the reach of Faith or Hope; and that the
Stoics only change the Names of things, to speak the same Truths in a more
lofty and supercilious strain. But see how you are mistaken: For it is not our
Design to dignifie the Wiseman with the imaginary Honor of great and pompous
Words; but to set him in a place inaccessible to Injuries and Affronts.

See here now Seneca's weak Reason is hurried away with an impetuous
Imagination. But is it possible for Men, under a continual sense of their
Miseries and Infirmities, to fall into such presumptuous and arrogant Notions?
Can a reasonable Man be persuaded that Pain cannot touch or hurt him? Or could
this All-wise, this Self-sufficient Cato suffer without Disquiet, at least some
Molestation, I don't say the heinous Insults and Abuses of an enraged Rabble,
Dragging, Stripping, Beating him; but the Stinging of a silly Fly? What can be
imagined more weak against so strong and convincing Proofs of our own
Experience, as this pretty Arguing of Seneca, which yet is one of his best
Arguments?

Validius debet esse quod laedit, eo quod laeditur: non est autem fortior
nequitia virtute: non potest ergo laedi Sapiens. Injuria in bonos non tentatur
nisi a malis, bonis inter se pax est. Quod si laedi nisi infirmior non potest,
malus autem bono infirmior est, nec injuria bonis nisi a dispari verenda est,
injuria in Sapientem virum non cadit. Cap. 7.

That which hurts, says he, must be stronger than that which is hurt: But Vice
is not stronger than Virtue; therefore the Wiseman cannot be hurt. To this we
need only answer, Either that all Men are Sinners, and consequently worthy of
the Misery they suffer, as Religion assures us; or that if Vice be not stronger
than Virtue, yet the Vicious may sometimes be more prevalent than the Virtuous,
as Experience manifests.

Epicurus ait, Injurias tolerabiles esse Sapienti, nos injurias non esse
Epicurus was in the right, in saying that Injuries were supportable by a
Wiseman; but Seneca certainly in the wrong, to affirm, The Wiseman could not
be injured. The Virtue of the Stoics could never render them impregnable;
since it is not inconsistent with true Virtue for a Man to be Miserable, and
pitiable at the time of his suffering some Evil: St. Paul and the Primitive
Christians, had doubtless more Virtue than Cato and all the Stoics; and yet
they confessed they were Miserable through the Pains they endured; though they
were Happy through the Prospect of an Eternal Retribution. Si tantum in hac
vita sperantes sumus, miserabiliores sumus omnibus hominibus, says St. Paul.

As it is GOD alone, who through his Grace can give us a real, and a solid
Virtue, so it is from Him only we can receive the Fruition of a solid and real
Happiness; which yet he neither promises, nor gives us in this Life; but in the
other it must be expected from his Justice, as the Recompense of the Miseries
we have undergone for the Love of him in this: We are not as yet in possession
of that Peace and Repose, which nothing can disturb; even the Grace of our LORD
makes us not so Invincible, but it commonly leaves us to the Sense and Feeling
of our own Imbecility, both to certify us there is nothing in the World but is
capable of hurting us; and to teach us to suffer, with a modest Patience and an
humble Resignation, all the Injuries we receive; and not with a fastuous and
haughty Patience, like the Constancy of Proud Presumptuous Cato.

When Cato was struck on the Face, he was not troubled at it; nor would he
revenge or pardon the Affront, but Dogmatically denied that he had received
any. He would be thought infinitely above those that struck him: So that his
Patience was Pride and Arrogance, and affronting and abusing those that injured
him: This Patience of his being a manifest sign, that he looked upon his
Enemies as Beasts, with whom 'twas below him to be angry. And this Contempt of
his Enemies, and great Esteem of himself, is what Seneca calls the greatness of
Courage; Majori animo, says he, (speaking of an Abuse Cato had received,) non
agnovit, quam ignovisset. How extravagant it is to confound Magnanimity with
Pride, and separating Patience from Humility, to join it with an unsufferable
Arrogance. And yet how feelingly does such Extravagance flatter the Vanity of
Man, who is never willing to stoop and abase himself? And how dangerous is it,
for Christians especially, to be instructed out of the Morality of an Author of
so little Judgment as Seneca, and yet of so strong, so lively, and so impetuous
an Imagination, as dazles, and giddies, and drags along the Readers, that have
but little Strength of Mind, but great Propension to whatever indulges
Concupiscence, and their Senses?

Let Christians rather learn from their Master, that they are liable to the
Insults and Injuries of evil Men; and that the Good are sometimes subjected to
the Wicked, by the order of Providence. When one of the Officers of the
High Priest gave our LORD a box on the Ear; that Wiseman of the Christians, he
who was infinitely Wise, and whose Power was as great as his Wisdom, confesses
that Servant was capable of hurting him: He is not vexed at the Affront, nor
does he take Cato's way of Revenge; but pardons, as one that was truly
offended. He was able to revenge Himself, and destroy His Enemies; but he
rather suffers with a modest and an humble Patience, offensive to none, not
even to that Servant that had injured Him. Whereas Cato either could not, or
durst not take a real Revenge of the Affront he had received, and therefore
attempts an imaginary one, which struck in with his Vanity and his Pride. For
he swells and exalts his Mind as high as the Clouds; from whence he looks down
upon Men below as little Flies; and despises them as insignificant Insects,
incapable of offending him, and unworthy of his Indignation. This Vision, is a
Notion worthy of the Wise Cato: It Is this which gives him a greatness of Soul,
and a constancy of Courage, that equals him with the Gods. It Is this which
makes him Invulnerable, as setting him above the Power and Malice of other Men.
Alas, poor Cato! Sapientia hujus mundi stultitia est apud Deum. Quod hominibus
altum est, abominatio est ante Deum. Luc. 16.
Thou fanciest thy Virtue raises thee above all things; whereas thy Wisdom is
Folly, and thy Magnanimity abominable before GOD; whatever the Wisemen of the
World may think of it.

There are Visionists of several kinds. Some fancy themselves transformed into
Cocks and Hens; others think they become Kings and Emperors; and some again
persuade themselves they are independent, and like the Gods. And yet whilst Men
look upon those as Madmen, who are confident of being changed into Cocks and
Kings, they do not always think those so, who say their Virtue renders them
independent, and equal to the Gods. The Reason whereof is, That to be reckoned
a Madman, it is not enough to have Mad Thoughts; but it is moreover requisite
that these Thoughts be taken for Visions and Madnesses by other Men. For Madmen
never go for what they are, among Madmen that are like them, but only among
Rational Men; as Wisemen never pass for what they are, in the Company of
Madmen. Wherefore such are acknowledged for Madmen, who take themselves for
Cocks or Kings; because no Man sees any reason to believe another can be so
easily changed into a Cock or a King: But it is not nowadays that Men first
begin to think they can become as Gods: It has been the belief of all Ages, and
perhaps more of former than the latter; so probable has their Vanity always
made that Opinion. They derive it from their first Parents, for I make no doubt
but Adam and Eve were of the same Sentiment, when they submitted to the
Temptations of the Devil, upon the promise he made them that they should become
like GOD: Eritis sicut Dii. Even the Purest and most Illuminate Intelligencies
were so blinded by their Native Pride, as to believe they might grow
Independent; and thereupon formed a Design of usurping the Throne of the
ALMIGHTY. Thus we need not wonder that Men, who have neither the Purity nor the
Illumination of Angels, should give themselves up to be blinded and seduced, by
the motives of their Vanity.

If the Temptation of Greatness and Independency be the strongest of all
others, it is so upon its appearing to us, as it did to our first Parents,
conformable to Reason, as well as to our Inclination; because we are not at all
times sensible of our whole Dependence. Had the Serpent threatened our first
Parents, saying, Unless you eat of the Fruit, which GOD has forbidden ye, ye
shall be transformed, one into a Cock, and the other into an Hen, we make no
doubt to affirm, they had laughed at the grossness of the Temptation; for even
we should have laughed at it our selves. But the Devil, judging of others by
himself, knew well that the desire of Independency, was the Weak-side where
they were the most easily taken.

The second Reason why we look upon those as Distempered in their Brain, who
affirm they are either Cocks or Kings, but have no such Thoughts of those who
assure us that nothing can hurt them, because they are above Pain, is that the
Hypocondriacks are palpably deceived; and it is but opening the Eyes to have
sensible Proofs of their Delusion. But when Cato affirms that he is not hurt by
him that strikes him, and that he is above all the Injuries that can be done to
him; he affirms it, or may affirm it with that Haughtiness and Gravity, as
makes it impossible to be discovered, whether he is not actually within what he
appears to be without. And we are inclined to believe his Soul is unshaken,
because his Body remains unmovable: For that the outward Deportment of our Body
is a Natural Indication of what happens inwardly to the Soul. Thus a bold Liar,
when he lies with a strong assurance, makes the most incredible things
believed; the Confidence wherewith he delivers them, is a Proof that affects
the Senses, and consequently is a very powerful Motive to Persuasion with the
greatest part of Men. There are then but few that look upon the Stoics as
Visionists, or as hardy Liars; because they can have no sensible Proof of what
passes at the bottom of their Soul; and the Air of their Face is a very
sensible Argument, which easily abuses them; besides that, their Vanity
inclines them to believe that Man's Mind is capable of that Greatness and
Independence, which he boasts of.

All which makes it evident, that there are few more dangerous Errors, or more
easy communicated, than those the Books of Seneca abound with; because they
are Errors of a subtle and delicate Nature, proportioned to the Vanity of Man,
and like that wherein the Devil engaged our first Parents. They are attired in
these Books with most sumptuous and splendid Habiliments, which make way for
their Reception in most Minds. Wherein entering, they seize, stun, and and blind
them; but blind them with a Fastuous Blindness, a Dazzling Blindness; a
Blindness attended with glimmerings of Light; and not an Humbling and
Caliginous Blindness, that makes a Man sensible he is blind, and acknowledge it
to others. The being struck with this Blindness of Pride makes us reckon our
selves the Fine and the Bold Wits; and others also think us so, and admire us.
Beaux Esprits, and Esprits Forts.
So nothing is more contagious than this Blindness; whilst the Vanity and
Sensibility of Men, the Corruption of the Senses and the Passions dispose them
to the desire of being struck with it, and provokes them to strike others with
it also.

I am then of Opinion that there is no Author more fit than Seneca, to
exemplify that contagious Communication of a great many Men, who go by the
Name of the Fine and Bold Wits; and to show how these strong and vigorous
Imaginations domineer over the Weak and Unenlightened Minds; not by the force
and evidence of their Reasons, which are the Productions of the Mind; but by
the Turn, and lively way of Expression, which depend on the Strength of
Imagination.

I know well enough that this Author's Reputation is considerable in the World,
and 'will be looked upon as a rash attempt to have treated him as a very
Imaginative, and Injudicious Author: But 'twas chiefly upon the Account of his
Esteem I have said so much of him here; not out of any Envy or ill Humor, but
because the Estimation he is in, will more sensibly touch the Mind of the
Reader, and more closely apply it to the Consideration of the Errors I have
attacked. For we should, as far as possible, bring the most Eminent Instances,
when the things we say are important, it being sometimes an Honoring a Book,
to Critizice upon it. But yet I am not the only Man that finds fault with the
Writings of Seneca, for not to mention some Famous Men of our own Age, it is
near six hundred Years ago, that a most Judicious Author observed, 1. In
Philosophia parum diligens.

2. Velles eum suo ingenio dixisse alieno judicio.

3. Si aliqua contempsisset, etc. Consensu Eruditorum quam Puerorum amore
comprobaretur. Quintil. lib 10. cap. 2.


there was little Exactness in his Philosophy, little Judgment and Justice in
his Elocution; and his Reputation was rather the result of the Heat, and
indiscreet Inclination of Youth, than the Consent of Learned and Judicious Men.

Publicly to engage the grossest and most palpable Errors, is labor lost,
there being no contagion in them. 'Twould be ridiculous to advertise Men, that
Hypocondriack People are deceived; it is visible to all the World. But if those
very Men, they have the greatest Opinion of, should chance to be mistaken, it is
a piece of service to admonish them, lest they should imitate them in their
Errors. Now it is plain that the Spirit of Seneca is a Spirit of Pride and
Vanity: And whereas Pride, according to the Scripture, is the Origin of Sin;
Initium Peccati Superbia: The Spirit of Seneca cannot be the Spirit of the
Gospel; nor his Morals be allied to the Morals of our SAVIOVR, the only true
and solid Morals.

True it is, that all the Notions of Seneca are not false nor dangerous. And he
may be read with profit by such as have an exactness of Thought, and are
acquainted with the Foundation of Christian Morality. Good use has been made of
him by Great Men, and I have no intent of blaming those, who to accommodate
themselves to the Weakness of others, that had an excessive Esteem for him,
have drawn Arguments from his Works whereby to defend the Morality of our LORD,
and oppugn the Enemies of the Gospel with their own Weapons.

The Alcoran has many good things in it, and some true Prophecies are to be
found in the Centuries of Nostradamus. The Alcoran is made use of, to oppose
the Religion of Mahomet; and Nostradamus's Prophecies may be of use to convince
some Fantastic and Visionary People. But what is good in the Alcoran cannot
make it a good Book, nor can some true Explications in Nostradamus's Centuries
make him ever pass for a Prophet; neither can it be said, that all who make use
of these Authors, approve them, or have for them any real Esteem.

A Man ought not to go about to overthrow what I have said about Seneca,, by
alleging abundance of Quotations out of him, which contain in them nothing but
solid Truths, and consonant to the Gospel: For I grant many such are met with
in that Author; and so there are in the Alcoran, and other mischievous Books.
Nor would he be less to blame, who should overwhelm me with the Authority of
those great Numbers, who have made use of Seneca, since use may be made of what
we think an impertinent Book, provided those we speak to, judge otherwise of it
than our selves.

But to ruin entirely the Wisdom of the Stoics, we need only know one thing,
which is sufficiently proved by Experience, and by what we have already said;
which is, that we are linked and fastened to our Body, our Relations, our
Friends, our Prince, and our Country, by such ties as we neither can break, nor
could for shame endeavor it. Our Soul is united to our Body, and by our Body
to all things Visible, by so potent an Hand, that it is impossible by our own
force, to loosen the Connection* It Is impossible our Body should be pricked,
but we must be pricked and hurt our selves; because the state of Life we are
in, most necessarily requires this Correspondence between us, and the Body
which we have. In like manner it is impossible to hear our selves reproached and
despised, but we must feel some discontent thereupon; because GOD, having made
us for sociable converse with other Men, has given us an Inclination for every
thing, capable to bind and cement us together; which Inclination, we have not
strength enough of our selves to overcome. It Is Extravagance to say that Pain
does not hurt us; and that words of Contumely and Contempt are not at all
offensive to us, as being above such things as these: There is no getting above
Nature, without being assisted by Grace; nor was there ever any Stoic who
despised Glory and the Esteem of Men, through the mere Strength of his Mind.

Men may indeed get the mastery of their Passions, by contrary Passions: They
may vanquish their Fear or their Pain by Vain Glory; I mean only that they may
abstain from Flying or Complaining, when seeing themselves in the midst of a
multitude, the desire of Glory supports them and stops those motions in their
Bodies which put them upon Flight: In this manner they may conquer them; but
this is no Conquest or Deliverance from their slavery; it is possibly to change
their Master for some time, or rather to put on a longer and an heavier chain:
It Is to grow wise, happy, and free only in appearance, but in reality to suffer
an hard and cruel bondage. The natural union a Man has still with his Body, may
be resisted by that union he has with Men; because Nature may be resisted by
the strength of Nature. GOD may be resisted by the forces He himself supplies
us with; but GOD cannot be resisted by the strength of a Man's own mind; Nature
cannot be perfectly vanquished but by Grace: because GOD cannot, if I may be
allowed so to speak, be overcome but by the special auxiliaries of GOD himself.

And thus that so much celebrated and vaunted Division of all things, in such
as depend not on us, and such as we ought not to depend on, is a Division that
seems agreeable to Reason, but is not consistent with this disordered state Sin
has reduced us to. We are united to all the Creatures by the Order of GOD; but
we absolutely depend on them by the Disorders of Sin: So that being incapable
of Happiness, when in Pain or Disturbance, we ought not to hope for Happiness
in this Life, by imagining we have no Dependence upon those things to which we
are naturally slaves. There is no possibility of being happy, except by a
lively Faith, and a solid Hope (which gives us a fore-tast of the Enjoyment of
future Goods) nor of living up to the Rules of Virtue, and overcoming Nature;
unless supported by the Grace merited for us by Our LORD and SAVIOVR JESUS
CHRIST.

CHAP. V.
Of Montagne's Book.

MONTAGNE's Essays may serve as another instance, to prove the Influence some
Imaginations have over others. For that Author has such a sort of a Fine and
Debonaire way, and gives such a Lively and Natural Turn to his Thought, as it is
almost impossible to read him, without being prejudiced in his behalf; that his
affected Negligence admirably becomes him, and indears him to most Men, without
making him contemptible; and his Arrogance is that of a Gentleman, if we may
say so, that makes him respected, and not disliked. That Air of Gentility and
Gallantry, sustained by some stock of Learning, works so prodigiously on the
Mind, that a Man often admires him, and still yields to his Decisions, without
daring to enquire into them, and sometimes without understanding them. It Is not
by the strength of his Reasons he persuades; for Reasons are seldom alleged
for what he advances, at least such as have any force and solidity in them. And
indeed he neither has any Principles whereon to bottom his Reasonings, nor any
Method to make Deductions from his Principles. A Touch of History is no
Argument; nor a little Story a Demonstration: A couple of Verses of Horace, or
an Apophthegm of Cleomenes or Caesar, are not fit to persuade Reasonable Men:
And yet these Essays are nothing but a Contexture of scraps of History, little
Relations, good Words, Distichs and Apophthegms.

Montagne should not be looked upon in his Essays as a Man that argues, but as
one that writes for his Diversion; whose drift is the Pleasure, and not the
Instruction of his Reader: And if those that read him were only diverted by
him, it must be owned that Montagne could not do them so much harm. But it is
next to impossible to forbear loving that which pleases, and not to desire
those Dishes that are agreeable to the Palate. Nor can the Mind long be pleased
with the reading of an Author, but it will take in its Sentiments, or at least
receive some Tincture from them, which mingling with its Idea's, makes them
confused and obscure.

But it is not only dangerous to read Montagne for Diversion; by reason that the
Pleasure a Man takes in him, insensibly engages him in his Opinions; but also,
because his Pleasure is more criminal than is imagined. For it is certain that
this Pleasure arises chiefly from Concupiscence, and that it only feeds and
strengthens the Passions; this Author's way of Writing being only so taking,
because it is sensible and moving, and that it rouses our Passions in an
imperceptible manner.

It would not be time misspent to prove this in particular; and, in general,
that we are pleased with all the diverse Styles of Men, merely on the account of
the secret Corruption of our Morals; but this is not the proper place for it;
and besides it would carry us too far from our purpose. However, if we but
reflect on the Connection of our Idea's and Passions I formerly spoke of; as
also upon what passes within our selves at the time of our Reading some well
wrote piece, we may in some measure discover, that if we love the Sublime
Style, the noble and free Air of some Authors, it is because of our Vanity, and
our Passion for Greatness and Independency. And that the relish we find in that
delicacy of Effeminate Discourses, is derived from no other Fountain, than a
secret Inclination for Softness and Pleasure. In a word, it is Sensibility and
not Reason, a certain Skill and Faculty for what affects the Senses, and not
for Truth, that makes some Authors charm and ravish us, even whether we will or
no. But to return to Montagne.

The Reasons why his greatest Admirers so much cry him up, to me seems to be,
that they thought him a Judicious Author, and far from the imputation of
Pedantry; as also one who was thoroughly acquainted with the nature and
weaknesses of the Mind. If I should show then that Montagne with all his
Gallantry, was as much a Pedant as many others; and that he had a very
imperfect Knowledge of the Mind: I shall make it appear, that those who most
admire him, were not persuaded by the Evidence of his Reasons, but were only
brought over by the Force of his Imagination.

The word Pedant is very Equivocal; but Use, if I mistake not, and even Reason,
will have it signify those, who to make ostentation of their false Science,
quote all sorts of Authors, right or wrong; talk merely for talking sake, and
to be admired by the Ignorant; and without any Judgment or Discretion, amass
together Apophthegms and Passages of History, to prove, or at least pretend to
prove things, that cannot be made out by any thing but Reason.

Pedant is opposed to Rational; and that which makes Pedants so odious to Men
of Sense, is their being Irrational; for sensible Men, naturally loving to
Reason, cannot endure the Conversation of those who reason not at all. Pedants
are unable to reason, because their Mind is little, or else is taken up with
False Learning; and they are unwilling to reason, as knowing they are esteemed
and admired by some sort of People, more for their citing some passage of an
Unknown or Ancient Author, than pretending to Argument and Reasoning. And thus
their Vanity acquiescing in the prospect of the respect that is paid to them,
fixes them to the study of uncommon, and out of the way Sciences, that attract
the Admiration of the Vulgar.

Pedants therefore are vain, and arrogant, of great Memory, and little
Judgments: successful and powerful in Citations, misfortunate and weak in
Reasons: Of a vigorous and capacious Imagination; but desultory and disorderly,
and unable to keep to any Accuracy and Exactness.

Having thus cleared the Notion of the word Pedant, it will be no hard matter
to prove Montagne as much a Pedant as most others, in this signification of it;
which seems most agreeable to Reason and Custom. For I speak not here of the
Pedant of the Long Robe, it being not a Paedagogue's Gown that only makes a
Pedant. Montagne, who had such an aversion to Pedantry, possibly never wore a
Gown; but nevertheless could not divest himself of all his Imperfections. He
has labored much for a Gentleman-like way, but has taken no great pains for
exactness of Thoughts; or if he has, 'twas to very little purpose. And so he
became a Genteel Pedant, or a Pedant of a species entirely new; rather than a
Rational, Judicious, and a Worthy Man.

Montagne's Book contains so evident Proofs of the Vanity and Arrogance of its
Author, as may make it seem an useless Undertaking to stand to remark them. For
a Man must needs be very conceited, that, like him, could imagine the World
would be at the pains of reading so large a Book, merely to gain some
acquaintance with its Author's Humors. He must necessarily distinguish himself
from the rest of the World, and look upon his own Person as the Miracle and
Phoenix of Nature.

All created Beings are under an indispensable obligation of turning off the
Minds of such as would adore them, toward the only One, that deserves their
Adoration: And Religion teaches us never to suffer the Mind and Heart of Man,
Apoc. 2. Conservus tuus sum etc. Deum adora.
whom GOD created for himself, to be busied about us; and to be taken up with
loving and admiring us. When St. John prostrated himself before the Angel of
the LORD, the Angel forbad him, saying; I am thy fellow Servant, and of thy
Brethren: Worship GOD. None but the Devils, and such as partake of their Pride,
are pleased with being worshipped: To require therefore that others should be
affected and taken up with our particulars, what is it but to desire not only
to be worshipped with an outward and apparent, but also with a real and inward
worship? It Is to desire to be worshipped even as GOD himself desires it, that
is, in Spirit and in Truth.

Montagne wrote his Book purely to picture himself, and represent his own
Humors and Inclinations; as he acknowledges himself in the Advertisement to
the Reader, inserted in all the Editions. I give the Picture of my self, says
he: I am my self the Subject of my Book. Which is found true enough by those
that read him; for there are few Chapters wherein he makes not some Digression
to talk of himself: and there are even some whole Chapters wherein he talks of
nothing else. But if he wrote his Book merely to describe Himself, he certainly
Printed it, that his own Character might be read in it. He therefore desired to
be the Subject of the Thoughts and Attention of Men; though he says there is no
reason a Man should employ his time upon so frivolous and idle a Subject. Which
words make only for his Commendation: For if he thought it unreasonable for Men
to spend their time in reading his Book, he himself acted against Common Sense
in publishing it. And so we are obliged to believe either that he Thought not
what he said, or did not what became him.

But it is a pleasant Excuse of his Vanity, to say he wrote only for his Friends
and Relations: For, if so, how chance there were published three Editions? Was
not one enough for all his Friends and Relations? Why did he make Additions to
his Book in the last Impressions, but no Retractions; but that Fortune favored
his Intentions? I add, says he, but make no Corrections, because when once a
Man has made his Book of public right, he has, in my Opinion, no more pretense
or title to it. Let him say what he can better in another, but let him not
corrupt the Works already sold. Of such as these it is folly ^o purchase any
thing before they are dead: Let them think long before they publish. Why are
they in such haste? My Book is always one and the same. He then was willing to
publish his Book for, and deposite it with the rest of the World, as well as to
his Friends and Relations. But yet his Vanity had never been pardonable, if he
had only turned and fixed the Mind and Heart of his Friends and Relations on
his Picture, so long time as is necessary to the reading of his Book.

If it is a Fault for a Man to speak often of himself, it is Impudence, or rather
a kind of Sottishness to praise himself at every turn as Montagne does: This
being not only to sin against Ch^^stian Humility, but also Right Reason.

Men are made for a sociable Life, and to be formed into Bodies, and
Communities. But it must be observed, that every particular that makes a part
of a Society, would not be thought the meanest part of it. And so those who are
their own Encomiasts, exalting themselves above the rest, and looking upon
others as the bottom-most parts of their Society, and themselves as the
Top-most and most Honorable, assume an Opinion of themselves, that renders
them odious, instead of indearing them to the Affections and Esteem of the
World.

It Is then a Vanity, and an indiscreet and ridiculous Vanity in Montagne, to
talk so much to his own Advantage, on all occasions: But it is a Vanity still
more Extravagant in this Author to transcribe his own Imperfections: For if we
well observe him, we shall find that most of the Faults he discovers of
himself, are such as are gloried in by the World, by reason of the Corruption
of the Age: That he freely attributes such to himself, as can make him pass for
a Bold Wit, or give him the Air of a Gentleman; and that with intent to be
better credited when he speaks in his own Commendation, he counterfeits a frank
Confession of his Irregularities. He has reason to say, that The setting too
high an Opinion of one's self, proceeds often from an equally Arrogant Temper.
It Is always an infallible sign that a Man has an Opinion of himself; L. 3. C^.
13
and indeed Montagne seems to me more arrogant and vain, in discommending than
praising himself; it being an insufferable Pride, to make his Vices the Motives
to his Vanity, rather than to his Humiliation. I had rather see a Man conceal
his Crimes with Shame, than publish them with Impudence; and, in my Mind, we
ought to have that Unchristian way of Gallantry in abhorrence, wherein Montagne
publishes his Defects. But let us examine the other Qualities of his Mind.

If we would believe Montagne on his word, he would persuade us that he was a
Man of No Retention; that his Memory was treacherous, and failed him in every
thing: L. 2. Chapter 10 L. 1. Chapter 24 L. 2. Chapter 17
But that in his Judgment, there was no defect. And yet should we credit the
Portraicture he has drawn of his own Mind, I mean his Book, we should be of a
different Opinion. I could not, says he, receive an Order without my
Table Book; and if I had an Oration to speak, that was considerably
long-winded, I was forced to that vile and miserable necessity of learning it
word for word by Heart; otherwise I had neither Presence nor Assurance, for
fear my Memory should show me a slippery trick. Does a Man that could learn
Memoriter, word for word long-winded Discourses, to give him some Presence and
Assurance, fail more in his Memory than his Judgment? And can we believe
Montagne when he says, I am forced to call my Domestic Servants by the Names
of their Offices, or their Countries; it being the most difficult thing to
remember Names; and if I should live long, I am persuaded I should forget my
own? That a plain Gentleman, who could retain by Heart, and word for word, and
with Assurance, long-winded Discourses, should have such a multitude of
Servants, that he could not remember their Names! That a Man, who was Born and
Bred in the midst of Fields and Tillage, L. 12. Ch* 17.
who kept Business and Farms in his Hands; and who says, To be regardless of
what lies at our Feet, of what we have in our Hands, and of what most nearly
concerns the necessities and use of Life, is a thing utterly inconsistent with
his Maxim, should forget the French Names of his Domestics! Could he be
ignorant, as he says, of the most part of our Coins in use, the difference of
one Grain from another, either in the Earth or Granary, unless it were the most
manifest; of the grossest Principles of Agriculture, which there is hardly a
Child but knows; what use Leaven is of in making Bread; and why Wine must stand
sometime in the Fat, before it ferments, and yet has his Mind stored with the
Names of the Ancient Philosophers and their Principles; with the Idea's of
Plato, Epicurus's Atoms, the Plenum and Vacuum of Leucippus and Democritus; the
Water of Thales, Anaximander's Infinity of Nature, L. 2. Chapter 12
Diogenes's Air, the Numbers and Symmetry of Pythagoras, the Infinite of
Parmenides; the Unity of Musaeus; the Water and Fire of Apollodorus; the
Similar Parts of Anaxagoras; the Discord and Friendship of Empedocles; the Fire
of Heraclitus, etc. A Man that in three or four Pages of his Book, quotes more
than fifty different Authors, with their Opinions: Who has filled his Book with
various Historical Passages, and many confused Apophthegms; who in point of
Books, says, History and Poesy were his Excellency: Who contradicts himself
every moment, and in the same Chapter, and even in the speaking of things he
pretends to be best acquainted with; I mean the Qualities of his Mind, should
this Man boast that his Judgment is better than his Memory?

We will confess that Montagne was Excellent at Forgetfulness, since Montagne
assure us of it, and would have us think so; nor is this altogether contrary to
Truth. But let us not believe him on his word, or for the Praises that he gives
himself; that he was a Man of great Sense, and of extraordinary Sagacity of
Mind: For this might engage us in Error, and give too much Countenance to those
false and dangerous Opinions, he puts off with a presumptuous and dogmatical
Arrogance, which only confounds and blinds the feebler sorts of Minds.

The other Encomium they bestow on Montagne, is, that he was perfectly
acquainted with the Mind of Man; that he surveyed it to the bottom, its Nature,
and its Properties; that he knew the strong and weak sides of it; and, in a
word, all that could be known of it. Let us see if he deserve these Praises,
and whence it comes to pass Men are so liberal on his behalf.

Those who have read Montagne, know well enough that he would fain pass for a
Pyrrhonist, and that he takes Pride in doubting of all things. The persuasion
of Certainty in any thing, says he, is a certain testimony of Folly, L. 1. Chapter
22
and extreme incertainty; and there is not a foolisher and less Philosophical
sort of Men, than the Philodox of Plato: On the contrary, he extolls the
Pyrrhonists at that excessive rate in the same Chapter, that it is not to be
doubted but he was of the same Sect. 'Twas necessary in the time he lived, to
doubt of every thing, to pass for a Man of Parts and a Gentleman; and the
Quality of a Bold Wit, which he pretended to, engaged him farther in these
Opinions. Now it is but supposing him an Academick, to be able at one stroke to
manifest him the most ignorant of all Men; not only in what relates to the
Nature of the Mind, but in every thing else. For since there is an Essential
difference between Knowing and Doubting, if the Academicks say what they think;
when they assure us, They know nothing, we may conclude they are the most
Ignorant Persons in the World.

But they are not only the most Ignorant of all others; but also the most
Unreasonable Defenders of their Opinions: For they not only reject what is most
certain, and universally received, to be thought the Bold Wits; but by the same
strength of Imagination, love to talk in a Decisive Magisterial strain, about
the most uncertain and improbable things in Nature. Montagne affords us a
manifest Instance of this Distemper of Mind: And we must necessarily say he was
not only ignorant of the Nature of an Humane Mind, but was in the grossest
Errors upon that Subject, supposing he had said what he thought of it, as he
ought to have done.

For what can we say of a Man that confounds the Mind with Matter, that reports
the most extravagant Opinions of the Philosophers, about the Nature of the
Soul, without despising them; and in a way that gives us to understand he liked
those best, that were most opposite to Reason: Who saw no necessity of the
Immortality of our Souls; who thinks it indiscoverable by Humane Reason; and
who looks upon the Arguments that are given for it, as Dreams, which the desire
of it breeds in us: Somnia non docentis, sed optantis: Who finds fault with Men
for separating from the Crowd of other Creatures, and distinguishing themselves
from Beasts, which he calls our Fellow Brethren and Companions; who believes
they converse with, and understand each other, and ridicule us; as we discourse
and understand one another, and laugh at them; who makes a greater difference
betwixt Man and Man, than betwixt a Man and a Beast: Who attributes even to
Spiders, Deliberation, Thought, and Conclusion. And who after having
maintained, that the Disposition of the Humane Body, had no advantage over that
of Beasts, readily embraces this Opinion. That it is not by our Reason, our
Discourse, our Soul, we have the Ascendant over Beasts; but on the account of
our Beauty, the fineness of our Complexion, and the excellent Disposition of
our Members, in comparison of which we ought to give up our Intelligence,
Prudence, and the rest, as trivial Accomplishments, etc. Can any one say that a
Man who concludes with such the most extravagant Opinions, as that It Is not by
the Deductions of Reason, but our Arrogance and Obstinacy, that we give our
selves the Preeminence above other Animals, had a very exact Knowledge of the
Mind of Man? Or can he think to convince others herein?

But we should do all Men Justice, and impartially declare what was the
Character of Montange's Mind. He had indeed but little Memory, and still less
Judgment: But these two Qualities put together, make not that accomplished
thing which generally goes by the Name of Fineness and Beauty of Wit or Parts.
It Is the Beauty, the Vivacitys and the Extent of Imagination which are the
Ingredients of the Fine Wit. It Is the glittering and not the solid Mind, that
pleases the generality; because they love what touches the Senses above that
which instructs their Reason. And thus taking the Fineness of Imagination for
the Fineness of the Mind, we may say, that Montagne had a Mind Fine, and indeed
extraordinary: His Idea's are false, but handsome. His Expressions irregular and
bold, but taking: His discourses ill-season'd, but well imagined. There appears
throughout his Book the Character of an Original, that is infinitely pleasing.
As great a Copyer as he is, the Copyer is not discerned; his strong and bold
Imagination giving always the turn of an Original, even to what was the most
stolen. To conclude, he has every thing necessary either for pleasing us, or
imposing on us: And, I think, I have sufficiently shown, that it is not by
convincing their Reason he gets into the Favor and Admiration of Men, but by
turning their Mind by an ever-victorious Vivacity of his imperious Imagination.

CHAP. VI.
I. Of Witches in Imagination, and of Wolf-men. II. The Conclusion of the two
first Books.

THE strangest effect of the force of Imagination, is the immoderate Fear of
the Apparition of Spirits, Witchcraft, Spells, and Charms, Lycanthropes or
Wolf-men, and generally of whatever is supposed to depend on the Power of the
Devil.

There is nothing more terrible, or that frightens the Mind more, I. Of
Imaginary Witches.
and makes deeper impressions in the Brain, than the Idea of an invisible
Power, intent upon doing us mischief, and to which we can make no resistance:
Whatever Discourses raise that Idea, are attended to with dread, and curiosity:
Now Men affecting all that is extraordinary, take a whimsical delight in
relating surprising and prodigious Stories, of the Power and Malice of Witches,
both to the scaring others and themselves. And so we need not wonder that
Sorcerers and Witches are so common in some Countries, where the belief of the
Witches-Sabbath is deeply rooted in the Mind: Where all the most extravagant
Relations of Witchcrafts are listened to as Authentic Histories; and where
Madmen and Visionists, whose Imagination has been distempered through the
recital of these Stories, and the corruption of their Hearts, are burnt for
real Sorcerers and Witches.

I know well enough I shall incur the blame of a great many, for attributing
the most part of Witchcrafts to the power of Imagination, as knowing Men love
to be scared and frightened; that they are angry with such as would disabuse
them, and are like those imaginary sick People, who respectfully harken to, and
punctually execute the orders of Physicians who prognosticate direful accidents
to them: For Superstitions are not easily either destroyed or opposed without
finding a great number of Patrons and Defenders. And that Inclination to a
blindfold Belief of all the Dreams and Illusions of Demonographers is
produced, and upheld by the same Cause; which makes the Superstitious stiff and
untractable, as it were easy to demonstrate. However, this ought not to
discourage me from showing in a few words, how I believe such Opinions as these
take footing.

A Shepherd in his Cottage after Supper, gives his Wife and Children a
Narrative of the adventures of the Witches-Sabbath. And having his Imagination
moderately warmed by the Vapors of strong Liquors, and fancying he has been
often an Assistant at that imaginary Rendezvous, fails not to deliver himself
in a manner strong and lively. His natural Eloquence, together with the
Disposition his whole Family is in, to hearken to a Subject so new and
terrible, must doubtless produce prodigious Impressions in weak Imaginations;
nor is it naturally possible but his Wife and Children must be dismayed, must
be affected and convinced with what they hear him say. It Is an Husband, it is a
Father that speaks of what himself has been an Eyewitness and Agent: He is
beloved and respected, and why should he not be believed? The Shepherd repeats
the same thing one day after another; his Wif^'s and Children's Imagination
receive deeper and deeper Impressions of it by degrees, till at last it grows
familiar; their Fears vanish, but Conviction stays behind; and at length
Curiosity invites them to go to it themselves. They anoint themselves, and lay
them down to sleep: This Disposition of Heart, gives an additional heat to
their Imagination, and the Traces the Shepherd had imprinted on their Brain
open, so as to make them fancy in their sleep all the Motions of the Ceremony
he had described to them, present and real. They wake, and ask each other, and
give a mutual Relation of what they say. And thus they strengthen the Traces of
their Vision; and he who has the strongest Imagination, having the best knack
at persuading the rest, fails not in a few Nights time, to Methodize the
Imaginary History of the Sabbath. Here now are your finished Witches of the
Shepherd's making; and these in their turn will make many others, if having a
strong and lively Imagination, they be not deterred by Fear from telling the
like Stories.

There have been known such hearty downright Witches, as made no scruple to
confess to every body their going to the Sabbath; and who were so thoroughly
convinced of it, that though several Persons watched them, and assured them
they never stirred out of their Bed, yet have withstood their Testimony, and
persisted in their own persuasion.

We all know that when Children hear Tales of Spirits, what frights they are
put into, and that they have not courage to stay without Light and Company:
Because at that time their Brain receiving not the Impressions of any present
Object, opens in those Traces that are formed in it by the Story, and that with
so much force, as frequently to set before their Eyes, the Objects represented
to them; And yet these Stories are not told them as if they were true, nor
spoken in a manner denoting the Belief of them in the Speaker; and sometimes
coldly and without the least concern. Which may make it less to be admired,
that a Man who believes he has been present at the Witches-Sabbath, and
consequently affirms it in a serious tone, and with a look of assurance, should
easily convince his respectful Auditory of all the circumstances he describes
to them; and thereby transmit into their Imagination, Impressions, like those
he was himself abused with.

Men in speaking engrave in our Brain such Impressions as they have themselves.
When they are deep they speak in a way that makes a deep Impression upon
others: For they never speak, but they make them like themselves in some thing
or other. Children in their Mother's Womb, have only the Perceptions of their
Mothers; and when brought into the World, imagine little more than what their
Parents are the cause of; even the wisest Men take their Measures, rather from
the Imagination of others, that is, from Opinion and Custom, than from the
Rules of Reason. Thus in the places where Witches are burnt, we find great
numbers of them, it being taken for granted, they are really what they were
executed for; and this Belief is strengthened by the Discourses that are made
of them. Should they cease to punish them, and treat them as Mad-folks, we
should see in a little time no more Witches; because those that are only
imaginarily so, which certainly make the greatest number, would return to sober
Sense again.

It Is certain that True Witches deserve Death, and that the Imaginary are not
to be reputed altogether innocent: For generally they never fancy themselves to
be Witches, without having their Heart disposed to go to the Sabbath, and
anointing their Bodies with some Drug, to bring about their wicked Design: But
by punishing all these Criminals without distinction, the common Persuasion
gathers strength, the Imaginary Witches daily multiply, and a great many People
destroy their Lives and Souls together. Wherefore it is not without Reason,
several of our Courts have left off punishing them; since which, there are
found but few that are within their Jurisdiction; and the Envy, Hatred, and
Malice of the Wicked, cannot use that pretense to the Destruction of the
Innocent.

The Apprehension of Wolf-men, or of Men, who imagine themselves transformed
into Wolves, is a Fancy no less ridiculous. Of Wolf-men.
A Man by an extraordinary Sally of Imagination, falls into a sort of Madness,
that makes him fancy he grows a Wolf every Night. This Disorder of his Mind,
disposes him to the doing all the Actions that Wolves either do, or he has
heard of them. He leaps then out of his House at Midnight, roams along the
Streets, falls upon some Child he meets with, bites, tears, and miserably
misuses it. The Stupid and Superstitious People imagine this Fanatic is really
turned Wolf; because the wretch believes it himself, and has whispered it to
some Persons, who cannot conceal the Secret.

Were it an easy thing to form in the Brain such Impressions, as persuade Men
they are transformed into Wolves; and could they run along the Streets and make
all the havoc those wretched Wolf-men do, without an entire subversion of
their Brain (as it is an easy matter for a Man to go to the Witches-Sabbath, in
his Bed, and without waking) these notable Stories of Men Metamorphos'd into
Wolves, would have no less effect than those that are told of the Rendezvous of
Witches; and we should have as many Wolf-men as we have Wizards. But the
persuasion of being changed into a Wolf, supposes a subversion of Brain much
harder to be effected, than that Disorder of one, who only thought he went to
the Midnight-Sabbath; that is, of one, who fancied he saw in the Night what was
not, and who, when he waked, could not distinguish his Dreams from the Thoughts
he had in the Daytime.

It Is a very common thing for some Men to have such lively Dreams, as to
remember every particular of them when they wake, though the subject of their
Dream, has nothing in it very terrible; and so it is no hard matter for Men to
persuade themselves they have been at the Witches-Sabbath; since to this no
more is required, than that their Brain preserve the footsteps in it, which
were made by the Animal Spirits in their Sleep.

The main Reason way we cannot take our Dreams for Realities, is, the
Incoherence we find in our Dreams, with the things we have done, when awake:
For hereby we discover they are only Dreams. Now this is no Rule for the
Sorcerer to judge by, that his Sabbath is a Dream; for he never goes to the
Sabbath but in the Nightime, and the Occurrences therein are incapable of
having any Connection with the other Actions of the Day; so that it is Morally
impossible he should be made sensible of his Error by this Means. Nor is there
any necessity, that the things fancied to be seen by these pretended Witches at
the Sabbath, should have any Natural Order to one another; since they seem so
much the more real, as they are the more extravagant and confused in Coherence.
Wherefore it makes enough for their Deception, that the Idea's of these
Sabbatic Ceremonies be lively and frightful; as it is impossible they should be
otherwise, if it be considered, that they represent things wholly new and
extraordinary.

But the Imagination must be highly distempered, before a Man can fancy himself
a Cock, a Goat, a Wolf, or an Ox; which is the reason the thing is no commoner;
though these Disorders of Mind sometimes happen either through GOD's punitive
Justice, as in the case of Nebuc^odonosor, related in Scripture, or by a
natural overflowing of Melancholy in the Brain, whereof many Instances are to
be met with in the Books of Physicians.

Though I am satisfied, that real Witches are extremely rare, and that their
Sabbath is nothing but a Dream; and that the Courts, which throw out the
Indictments of Witchcraft, are the most equitable; yet I doubt not but there
may be Sorcerers, Charms, and Witchcraft, and that GOD sometimes permits the
Devil to exercise his Malice upon Men. But we are taught by holy Scripture,
that The Kingdom of Satan is destroyed; and that an Angel of Heaven has chained
up the Devil, and shut him in the Abyss, from whence he shall never escape till
the end of the World: That this is the Strong Man, CHRIST has disarmed and
spoiled; and that the time is come, when the Prince of the World is banished
out of his Kingdom.

He reigned till the Coming of our SAVIOVR, and he reigns still, if any one
will have it so, in those places, where the Knowledge of our SAVIOVR is not
come. But he has no Right or Power over those, who are Regenerated in JESUS
CHRIST. He cannot so much as tempt them, unless by GOD's Permission; and if he
permits it, it is that they may overcome him: It Is therefore doing the Devil too
much honor, to make such Histories, as illustrate his Power, as is done by our
new Demonographers; since these Histories render him formidable to weaker Minds.

We ought to despise the Devils, as we despise Executioners, and tremble before
GOD alone: It Is his Power we should only fear, his Judgments and his Wrath, we
should only dread, and never provoke him by the contempt of his Laws and his
Gospel. He deserves to be attended to, when he speaks himself; and so do Men
when they speak of him. But it is ridiculous to be frightened and troubled when
they speak of the Power of the Devil; our trouble is too great an honor to our
Enemy, who loves to be respected and feared; and we sacrifice to his Pride,
when we prostrate and abase our Mind before him.

It Is now time to put an end to this Second Book, and to remind you, II. The
C^nclusion of the two first Book*
by what has been said in this and the Foregoing Book, That all the Thoughts
the Soul has through the means of, or with dependence on the Body, are wholly
for the Body; and are either all false, or obscure: That they are only
instrumental in uniting us to sensible Goods, and to whatever can procure them,
which Union engages us in infinite Errors and excessive Miseries; though we are
not always sensible of these Miseries, no more than we are of the Errors that
occasion them. I give here a remarkable Instance.

The Union that we had with our Mothers in their Womb, which is the strictest
possible to be had with Mankind, was the Cause of two of the greatest Evils,
namely, Sin and Concupiscence; which are the Original of all our Miseries. And
yet for the forming of our Body, it was necessary that Union should be so close
and strict as it is.

This Union which was broken at our Birth, was succeeded by another, whereby
Children are con-sociated to their Parents and their Nurses. This second Union
was not so strict as the former, and therefore did us not so much mischief;
having only inclined us to believe and imitate all that our Parents and Nurses
do and say. It Is plain this second Union was farther necessary, not as the
first, for the forming, but the preserving of our Body; that we might know all
the things useful or advantageous to it, and might accommodate it to such
Motions as are necessary to obtain them.

Last of all, the Union which we have at present with all Men, is unavoidably
the cause of a great deal of Evil to us; though it be not so strait, as being
less necessary to the Preservation of our Body.

For it is upon the score of this Union, we live by Opinion, that we esteem and
love, what is esteemed and loved in the World, in spite of the Remorse of our
Consciences and the true Idea's that we have of things. I speak not here of the
Union we have with the Mind of other Men; in behalf of which it may be said, we
receive instruction from it: I speak only of the sensible Union that is between
our Imagination, and the Air, and Manner of those that speak to us. We see then
how all the Thoughts we have by the Dependence on the Body, are false, and so
much the more dangerous to the Soul, as they are the more useful to the Body.

Which being so, let us try to rid our selves by degrees of the Delusions of
our Sense, of the Vision and Chimera's of our Imagination, and of the
Impression made by other Men's Imaginations on our Mind. Let us carefully
reject all the confused Idea's we have contracted through the Dependence we are
in to our Body; and let us only admit the clear and evident Idea's which the
Mind receives through its necessary Union with the Divine Logos, or with
Eternal Wisdom and Truth; as we shall explain in the following Book, which
treats Of the Understanding or Pure Mind.

F. MALEBRANCHE'S TREATISE, CONCERNING The Search after TRUTH. BOOK the THIRD,
Concerning The UNDERSTANDING, OR The Pure Intellect.
CHAP. I.
I. Thought is only essential to the Mind. Sensation and Imagination are only
the Modifications of it. II. We know not all the Modifications our Soul is
capable of. III. They are different from our Knowledge and our Love, nor are
they always Consequences of them.

THE Subject of this Third Book is somewhat dry and barren: In which we enquire
into the Mind considered alone, and without any reference to the Body, in order
to discover the Infirmities peculiar to it, and the Errors deriving only from
it. The Senses and Imagination are exuberant and inexhaustible Sources of Error
and Deception: But the Mind acting by it self, is not so subject to straying
and misconduct. It was a difficult thing to put an end to the two last
Treatises; and it is no less difficult to begin this; not that there is not
enough to be said on the Nature and Properties of the Mind; but because we
enquire not here so much into its Properties, as its Weaknesses. It Is not
therefore to be wondered, if this Tract is not so large, nor discovers so many
Errors as the two foregoing; nor ought it to be complained of for being
somewhat Dry, Abstract, and Applicative. For it is impossible in all Discourses
to move the Senses and Imaginations of others; nor ought it always to be done:
A Subject of an abstract Nature, in becoming sensible, commonly grows obscure,
and it is enough to be made intelligible: So that nothing is more unjust, than
the usual Complaints of those, who would know every thing, and yet take pains
for nothing; who take pet, if you desire them to be attentive: who would ever
be touched and moved, and have their Senses and their Passions eternally
gratified: But, we confess our selves unable to give them Satisfaction. Writers
of Comedies and Romances, are obliged to please, and to procure Attention; but
for us, it is sufficient if we can instruct, even those that labor to make
themselves attentive.

The Errors of the Senses and Imagination, proceed from the Nature and
Constitution of the Body; and are exposed to view, by considering what
Dependency the Soul's in to it: But the Errors of the Pure Understanding cannot
be discovered, but by considering the Nature of the Mind it self, and of the
Idea's that are necessary to its knowing Objects. And therefore to penetrate
into the Causes of the Errors of the Pure Understanding, 'twill be necessary to
insist in this Book, on the consideration of the Nature of the Mind, and of
Intellectual Idea's.

In the first place, I shall treat of the Mind, considered in its own Nature,
without any Relation to the Body, to which it is united. So that what I shall
say on this point, will extend to pure Intelligences, and by stronger Reason to
what we call Pure Understanding. For by the Word Pure Understanding, I mean
only to design that Faculty, the Mind has of knowing External Object, without
forming Corporeal Images of them in the Brain, to represent them by. After
which I shall discourse of Intellectual Idea's, by means of which the Pure
Understanding perceives Exterior Objects.

I am persuaded no Man can doubt, after he has seriously thought on it, I.
Thought only is essential to the Soul. Sensation and Imagination are only the
Modifications of it.
but the By the Essence of a thing, I mean that which is first conceived in it,
on which depend all the Modifications observed in it.
Essence of the Mind consists only in Thought, as the Essence of Matter
consists only in Extension; and that according to the different Modifications
of Thought, the Mind one while Wills, and another while Imagines, or has many
other particular Forms, as according to the different Modifications of
Extension, Matter is sometimes Water, sometimes Wood, and sometimes Fire; or
has abundance of other particular Forms.

I only advertise thus much, That by the word Thought, I understand not here
the particular Modifications of the Soul, that is, this or that particular
Thought, but Thought capable of all sorts of Modifications, or of all sorts of
Thoughts; as by Extension is not meant this or that Extension round or square,
for instance, but Extension capable of all sorts of Modifications, or of
Figures: And this Comparison would have no difficulty in it, but that we have
not so clear an Idea of Thought as we have of Extension; for we only know
Thought by Internal Sentiment or Conscience, Second Part of the Pure Mind Chap.
7.
as I make out hereafter.

I am farther persuaded, it is impossible to conceive a Mind, without Thought;
though it is easy enough to conceive one without Actual Sensation, Imagination,
and even without Volition; in like manner, as it is impossible to conceive any
Matter without Extension, though it be easy to conceive one that is neither
Earth nor Mettle, neither square nor round, and which likewise is not in
Motion. Hence we ought to conclude, that as there may be a Portion of Matter;
that is neither Earth nor Metal, neither square nor round, nor yet in Motion;
so there may be a Mind, that neither feels Heat nor Cold, neither Joy nor
Sorrow; that Imagines nothing, and even Wills nothing; so that all these
Modifications are not essential to it. Thought therefore is only the Essence of
the Mind, as Extension only is the Essence of Matter.

But as Matter or Extension, were it without Motion, would be altogether
useless* and incapable of that variety of Forms, for which it is created; and
it is not conceivable that an Intelligent Being designed to produce it in that
manner; so were a Mind or Thought without Volition, it is plain it would be
wholly useless, since that Mind would have no tendency toward the Objects of
its Perceptions; nor would it love Good, for which it was created; So that it is
impossible to be conceived, that an Intelligent Being should have produced it
in such a condition. Notwithstanding, as Motion is not the Essence of Matter,
since it supposes Extension; so Volition is not the Essence of the Mind, since
Volition supposes Perception.

Thought therefore all alone, is what constitutes the Essence of the Mind* and
the different manners of Thinking, as Sensation and Imagination, are only the
Modifications it is capable of, but wherewith it is not always modified: But
Volition is a Property that always accompanies it, whether in Conjunction with,
or Separation from the Body; which yet is not Essential to it, since it
supposes Thought, and it is possible to conceive a Mind without Will, as a Body
without Motion.

However the Power of Willing is inseparable from the Mind, though it be not
essential to it; as the Capacity of being moved is inseparable from Matter,
though it be not included in its Essence. For as it is impossible to conceive
any Matter that cannot be moved, so it is impossible to conceive any Mind, that
has not the Power of Willing, or is incapable of any Natural Inclination. But
again, as Matter may be conceived to exist without any Motion, so the Mind may
be conceived to exist without any Impression of the Author of Nature toward
Good, and consequently without Will. For the Will is nothing but the Impression
of the Author of Nature, which carries us toward Good in general; as we have
explained more at large, in the first Chapter of the First Book.

What has been said in that Treatise of the Senses, and what we have now said,
II. We know not all the Modifications our Soul is capable of.
of the Nature of the Mind, does not suppose we know all the Modifications it
is capable of: We are far from making such like Suppositions; believing on the
contrary, that the Mind has a Capacity of receiving an infinite succession of
diverse Modifications, which the same Mind knows nothing of.

The least portion of Matter is capable of receiving a Figure of three, six,
ten, or of ten thousand Sides; also a Circular, or Elliptic Figure, which may
be considered as Figures of infinite Sides and Angles. The different Species of
each of these Figures are innumerable; Infinite are Triangles of a different
Species, and more still are the Figures of four, six, ten, or ten thousand
Sides, and of infinite Polygones. For a Circle, an Ellipsis, and in general
every regular or irregular Curvilin'd Figure, may be considered as an infinite
Polygone: An Ellipsis, for instance, as an infinite Polygone, but whose Sides
or Angles are unequal, being greater toward the little Diameter, than the
great; and so of other infinite Polygones, more compound and irregular.

A plain piece of Wax therefore is capable of infinite, or rather infinitely
infinite different Modifications, which no Mind can comprehend. What reason is
there then to imagine that the Soul, which is far more noble than the Body,
should be capable only of those Modifications she has already received?

Had we never Felt Pleasure or Pain, had we never Seen Light nor Color; or had
we been with respect to all things, as the Blind and Deaf are, in regard to
Sounds and Colors; should we have had Reason to conclude we were incapable of
all the Sensations we have of Objects? For these Sensations are only the
Modifications of our Soul, as has been proved in the Book concerning the Senses.

It must be granted then, that the Capacity the Soul has of Receiving different
Modifications, is probably greater than the Capacity it has of Conceiving. I
would say, that as the Mind cannot exhaust, or comprehend all the Figures
Matter can be fashioned in, so it cannot comprehend all the different
Modifications possible for the Almighty Hand of GOD to Mint the Soul into,
though it knew as distinctly the Capacity of the Soul, as it knows that of
Matter; which yet it cannot do, for the Reasons I shall bring in the Seventh
Chapter of the Second Part of this Book.

If the Soul, whilst we are on Earth, receives but few Modifications, it is
because it is united to the Body, and depends upon it. All her Sensations have
reference to her Body, and as she has not the Fruition of GOD, so she has none
of those Modifications this Fruition should produce. The Matter whereof our
Body is composed, is capable but of very few Modifications in our Lifetime; it
cannot be resolved into Earth and Vapor, till after our Death: It cannot at
present become Air, Fire, Diamond, or Metal; it cannot grow round, square, or
triangular; it must necessarily be Flesh, and have the Figure of a Man, to the
end the Soul may be united to it. It Is the same case with our Soul: She must
necessarily have the Sensations of Heat, Cold, Color, Light, Sounds, Odors,
Tastes, and many other Modifications, to the end she may continue united to her
Body. All her Sensations are subservient to the Preservation of her Machine.
They trouble her, and dismay her, if but the least inward Spring chance to
break or slaken; which necessarily subjects the Soul to her Body, as long as
her Body is subject to Corruption. But when the Body shall be clothed with
Immortality, and we shall no longer fear the Dissolution of it parts; it is
reasonable to believe the Soul shall be no longer touched with those
incommodious Sensations, which we feel against our Will; but with infinite
others of a different kind, whereof we have at present no Idea; which will
exceed all that we can think, and will be worthy the Greatness and Goodness of
the GOD we shall enjoy.

It Is therefore unreasonable for any one to think he so thoroughly comprehends
the Nature of the Soul, as to be able to pronounce it incapable of any thing
more than Knowledge, and Love. This indeed might be maintained by those who
attribute their Sensations to external Objects, or to their Body; and who would
have their Passions to be in their Hearts. For indeed if we rob the Soul of all
her Passions and Sensations, all that we leave discoverable in her is, no more
than a consequence of Knowledge, or of Love. But I cannot conceive how those
who are retrieved from those Delusions of the Senses, can persuade themselves,
that all our Sensations and our Passions, are nothing but knowledge and Love; I
would say, Species of confused Judgments the Soul passes upon Objects, with
reference to the Body which she Animates. I cannot conceive, how a Man can
affirm Light, Colors, Odors, and the like, to be Judgments of the Soul; for it
seems to me on the contrary, that I distinctly perceive Light, Colors, Smells,
and the other Sensations, to be Modifications quite different from Judgments.

But let us make choice of more lively Sensations, and such as the Mind is most
taken up with; and see what these Persons say of Pain and Pleasure. They will
have these Sensations, with several most considerable S. Aug. lib. 6. de
Musica. Des Carts in his Man, etc.
Authors, to be only the consequences or dependences of the Faculties we we
have of Knowing and Willing; and that Pain, for instance, is only the Regret,
the Opposition, and Aversion the Will has, to what she knows hurtful to the
Body which she loves. Now to me this seems evidently to confound Pain with
Sorrow; but so far is Pain from being a Consequence of the Knowledge of the
Mind, and the Action of the Will, that on the contrary it precedes them both.

If you put, for example, a burning Coal in the Hand of a Man asleep, or that
was warming his Hands behind him; I know not how it can be with any probability
affirmed, that this Man first knew there happened in his Hand some Motions
contrary to the good Constitution of his Body; that hereupon his Will opposed
them; and that his Pain was the Consequence of that Knowledge of his Mind, and
Opposition of his Will. On the contrary, it is in my Opinion undoubtedly
certain, that the first thing this Man perceived as soon as the Coal touched
his Hand, was Pain; and that the Knowledge of the Mind, and Opposition of the
Will, were only the Consequences of it, though they were truly the Cause of the
Sorrow which succeeded the Pain.

But there is a vast difference between this Pain and the Sorrow it produces.
Pain is the first thing the Soul is sensible of; it is not preceded by any
Knowledge, nor can ever be agreeable and welcome of it self. Whereas Sorrow is
the last thing the Soul feels; it is ever preceded with Knowledge, and is
always pleasant of it self. This is evidently manifest from the Pleasure that
attends the Sorrow a Man's affected with, at the direful Representations of the
Theater; for this Pleasure increases with the Sorrow; but Pleasure never
increases with Pain. The Comedians, who study the Art of Pleasing, know well
that they must never lay the Stage in Blood; because the sight, though of a
fictitious Murder, would be too Terrible to be Pleasant: But they are not
afraid of touching the Spectators with a deep Sorrow; because Sorrow is ever
agreeable, when there is occasion to be moved with it. There is then an
Essential difference between Sorrow and Pain; and it can no wise be said, that
Pain is nothing but the Knowledge of the Mind, together with an Opposition of
the Will.

As to all the other Sensations, such as are Smells, Tastes, Sounds, Colors,
the generality of Men do not think they are the Modifications of their Soul.
But on the contrary, judge they are diffused upon the Objects; or at least that
they are only in the Soul, as an Idea of a Square or a Circle; that is, are
united to the Soul, but are not the Modifications of it; and the Reason of
their judging thus is, that this kind of Sensations do not much affect them; as
I have shown in the Explication of the Errors of the Senses.

It ought then, I think, to be concluded, That we know not all the
Modifications incident to our Soul; and that, besides those which she has by
the Organs of Senses, it is impossible for her to have infinite others, which
she has never experimented, nor ever shall, till delivered from the captivity
of her Body.

And yet it must be confessed, that as Matter is not capable of infinite
different Configurations, but because of its Extension; so the Soul is not
capable of different Modifications but on the account of Thought; it being
manifest that the Soul would be incapable of the Modifications of Pleasure,
Pain, and even of those that are indifferent to her, were it not for her being
capable of Perception or Thought.

It is sufficient then to know, that Thought is the Principle of all these
Modifications: If any one will have something in the Soul previous to Thought,
I shall not dispute it with him: But as I am assured that no One has any
Knowledge of his Soul, but by Thought, or by being inwardly conscious of what
passes in his Mind; so I am certain that if any One would reason about the
Nature of the Soul, he ought only to consult that Internal Sensation, which
constantly represents her to himself such as she is, and not to imagine against
the conviction of his own Conscience, that she is an invisible Fire, a subtle
Air, Harmony, or the like.

CHAP. II.
I. The Mind being limited, cannot comprehend any thing of an infinite Nature.
II. Its Limitation is the Origin of a great many Errors: III. And especially
of Heresies. IV. The Mind must be submitted unto Faith.

SO then, that which we immediately discover in the Thought of Man, I. The Mind
being limited, cannot comprehend anything of an infinite Nature.
is its being limited to a very narrow compass; from which consideration may be
drawn two very important Conclusions: As first, that the Soul cannot perfectly
know Infinity. Secondly, that she can have no distinct Knowledge of many things
at once. For as a piece of Wax is incapable of admitting at the same time a
great number of different Figures; so the Soul is incapable of knowing at the
same time a multitude of things. And as again a piece of Wax cannot be square
and round at the same time, but only semi-square and semi-circular; and the
more different Figures it has, the less perfect and distinct they will be; so
the Soul cannot perceive many things at once; and her Thoughts will be so much
more confused, as they are more numerous.

Last of all, as a piece of Wax, which had a thousand Faces, and on each Face a
different Figure, would be neither square, nor round, nor oval, nor could a Man
say what Figure it was of: So it sometimes happens that a Man has such a
multitude of different Thoughts, that he fancies he thinks of nothing at all;
which is exemplified in those that fall into a Trance. The Animal Spirits
irregularly turning in their Brain, excite such a multitude of Traces, as not
to open any one strongly enough, to produce any particular Sensation, or
distinct Idea in the Mind; so that these Persons perceive so many things at
once, that they have no distinct Perception of any, and this makes them
conclude they have perceived nothing.

Not but that sometimes Men swoon away for want of Animal Spirits: But at that
time the Soul having only Thoughts of Pure Intellection, which leave no Traces
in the Brain, we never remember them when we come to our selves; and that makes
us believe we have thought of Nothing. This I have said by the way, to show it
is a mistake to believe the Soul does not always think, because Men fancy
sometimes they think not of any thing.

Every one that reflects but a little upon his own Thoughts, is experimentally
convinced that the Mind cannot apply it self to the consideration of many
things at once, II. The limitation of the mind is the Origin of a great many
Errors.
and a fortiori is unable to comprehend what is infinite. And yet out of an
unaccountable Capricio, such as are not ignorant of this, apply themselves
rather to the Contemplation of infinite Objects, and of Questions that demand
an infinite capacity of Mind, than to such as are suited to the Reach and
Abilities of their mind. And a great many others, who would fain know all
things, study so many Sciences at once, as only confound the Understanding and
incapacitate it for any true Science at all.

How many do we see desirous of comprehending the Divisibility of Matter ad
infinitum* and of knowing how it is possible for a grain of Sand to contain so
many parts in it, as this Earth, though proportionably lesser. What a multitude
of Questions are formed, never to be resolved upon that subject; and many
others which include any thing of Infinity in them; the Resolution of which,
Men think to find in their own Mind? When yet, though they study them till they
sweat, all they gain at last, is only to be opinionated with some Error, or
Extravagance or other.

It Is certainly a very Pleasant thing to see Men deny the Divisibility of
matter to infinitum; merely because they cannot comprehend it, though they
rightly comprehend the Demonstrations that prove it; and this at the same time
that they confess it impossible for the Mind of Man to comprehend Infinity. For
the Arguments which show matter to be divisible to Infinity, are demonstrative,
if there were ever any such; and they acknowledge it when they consider them
with Attention. Notwithstanding which, if they hear Objections proposed, which
they cannot Answer, their Mind recoils from the Evidence just perceived, and
they begin to boggle at them. They are earnestly taken up with the Objection
which they cannot Answer; they invent some frivolous Distinction to the
Demonstrations of infinite Divisibility; and conclude at last they were
deceived; and that all the World is in an Error. Hence they embrace the
contrary Opinion, and defend it by Turgid Points ( Puncta inflata) and such
kind of Extravagances their Imagination is sure to furnish them withal. Now the
reason of their Delusions, is the want of being inwardly convinced, that the
Mind of Man is Finite; and that there is no necessity of comprehending the
Divisibility of Matter to infinity, in order to be persuaded of it: Because all
the Objections that require the Comprehending it for their Resolution, are such
as it is impossible should be resolved.

Would Men only stick to such Questions as these, we should not have much
reason to be concerned at it: For though there may be some that are
prepossessed with particular Errors, yet they are Errors of little consequence.
And as for the rest, they have not altogether lost their time, in thinking on
things they cannot comprehend: For at least they are convinced of the Weakness
of their Mind. It Is good (says a very Judicious Art of Thinking.
Author) to tire and fatigue the Mind with such kind of Subtilties, in order to
tame its Presumption, and to make it less daring, ever to oppose its feeble
Lights to the Truths proposed to it by the Gospel, under pretense it cannot
comprehend them. For since all the strength of the Mind of Men is obliged to
fall under the weight of the least Atom of Matter, and to acknowledge, it
clearly sees, it is infinitely divisible, without being able to comprehend how
it is possible: Is this not visibly to sin against Reason, to refuse to believe
the wonderful Effects of the Almightiness of GOD; (which is of it self
Incomprehensible,) for that very Reason that our Mind cannot comprehend them.

The most dangerous Effect then produced by the Ignorance of, or rather
Inadvertency to the Limitation and Weakness of an Humane Mind; III. And
especially of Heresies.
and consequently to its Incapacity of comprehending what any ways belongs to
Infinity; is Heresy. There are to be seen, if I mistake not, in these days
above any other, a great many Men, who form a peculiar Theology to themselves;
which has no other Foundation than their own Mind, and the Natural Weakness of
their Reason; because even in Subjects, not under the Jurisdiction of Reason,
they will not believe what they cannot comprehend.

The Socinians cannot comprehend the Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation:
And this suffices not only to their dis-believing it, but also to their
Affirming of those that Believe it, in an Arrogant and a Libertine way, that
they are born to Slavery. A Calvinist cannot conceive how it is possible for the
Body of JESUS CHRIST, to be really present in the Sacrament of the Altar, at
the same time he is in Heaven; and hence he thinks he has sufficient Reason to
conclude it impossible, as if he perfectly comprehended how far the Power of
GOD could go.

So a Man that is convinced of his own Liberty, if he falls to work, and heats
his Head in endeavoring to reconcile the Foreknowledge of GOD, and his
Decrees with Liberty, will possibly fall into the Error of those, who do not
believe that Man is a free Agent. For being unable on one hand to conceive how
the Providence and Foreknowledge of GOD can be compatible with the Liberty of
Man; and on the other, his respect for Religion, forbidding him to deny a
Providence, he will think himself obliged to cashire Men of their Freedom; or
not making sufficient Reflection on the Weakness of his Mind, will fancy he is
able to fathom the Mysterious ways GOD has of reconciling his Decrees with our
Liberty.

But Heretics are not the only Men who want Attention to consider the Weakness
of their Mind, and that give it too much Scope and Liberty of Judging of
things, which it cannot attain to: This being the fault of most Men, especially
of some Divines of the later Ages. For we may perhaps reasonably say, that some
of them so frequently employing Humane Reasoning, to prove or explain the
mysteries above Reason, though it may be done with good Intention, and for the
Defense of Religion against Heretics; give frequent occasion to the same
Heretics of adhering obstinately to their Errors, and treating the mysteries
of Faith as Humane Opinions.

The Working and Agitation of the Mind, and the Subtilties of the School, are
no fit means to make Men sensible of their own Weakness, and to inspire them
with that Spirit of Submission requisite to make them humbly resign to the
Decisions of the Church. On the contrary, these Subtle and Humane Reasonings,
may kindle a secret Pride in their Heart, and dispose them to employ their Mind
to evil purpose, by framing a Religion suitable to its Capacity. And so far are
we from seeing Heretics convinced by Philosophic Arguments, and the Reading of
Books purely Scholastical, so as to acknowledge and condemn their Errors; that
on the contrary, we find them daily taking constant occasion from the Weakness
of some School-men's Arguings, to turn the most Sacred mysteries of our
Religion into Jest and Raillery; which indeed are not established on any
Reason, and Explications of Humane Derivation, but only on Authority of the
Word of GOD, written or unwritten, that is transmitted down to us by way of
Tradition.

And indeed it is impossible for Humane Reason to make us comprehend, how one
GOD is in Three Persons: How the Body of our LORD can be really present in the
Eucharist; and how it is consistent for Man to be free, whilst GOD knows from
all Eternity all that Man shall do. The Reasons that are brought to prove and
explain these things are such for the generality, as convince none but those
who are willing to admit them without Examination; but look ridiculous and
extravagant to Men minded to oppugn them, and that are not settled in the
Belief of the Foundation of these mysteries. Nay, it may be said, that the
Objections that are formed against the Principal Articles of our Faith, and
especially against the mysteries of the TRINITY, are so strong, as cannot
possiby admit of any clear, evident, and satisfactory Solution; such I mean, as
one way or other does not shock our weak and staggering Reason: These mysteries
being, in truth, incomprehensible.

The best way of converting Heretics, is not then to accustom them to the
Exercise of Reason, by urging to them only uncertain Arguments, deduced from
Philosophy; because the Truths we would instruct them in, come not under the
Scrutinity of Reason. Nor is it always convenient, to use Argument in Truths,
that can be made out by Reason, as well as Tradition, as the Immortality of the
Soul, Original Sin, the necessity of Grace, the corruption of Nature, and some
others; for fear least the Mind having once tasted the Evidence of Argument,
upon these Questions, will not acquiesce in those which are only proved by
Tradition. On the other hand, they should be taught to quit their own Reason,
by making them sensible of its Weakness, its Limitation, and its Disproportion
to our mysteries; and when the Pride of their mind shall be humbled and brought
down, it will be easy to introduce them into the Sentiments of the Church; by
representing to them her Authority, or explaining to them the Tradition of all
Ages, if they are capable of understanding it.

But whilst men are continually calling of their Sight, from the Weakness and
Limitation of their Mind, their Courage will be puffed up with an indiscreet
Presumption; they will be dazzled by an abusive Light, and blinded with the love
of Glory; and so Heretics will be continually Heretics: Philosophers
obstinate and opinionated: And Men will never leave disputing on all things
they can dispute on, as long as Disputation pleases them.

CHAP. III.
I. The Philosophers dissipate or dissolve the force of their Mind, by applying
it to Subjects, including too many Relations, and depending on too many things;
and by observing no Method in their Studies. II. An Instance taken from
Aristotle. III. That Geometricians on the contrary take a good Method in the
Search of Truth: Especially those who make use of Algebra, and Analyticks. IV.
That their Method increases the strength of the Mind, and that Aristotle's
Logic lessens it. V. Another Fault of Learned Men.

MEN not only involve themselves in a multitude of Errors, I. That the
Philosophers want order in their Studies.
by being busied with Questions, partaking of Infinity, whilst their Mind is
Finite; but by over-matching their Mind which is but of a narrow Reach, with
those of a vast Comprehension.

It has been already said, That as a piece of Wax was incapable of receiving
many perfect and very distinct Figures, so the Mind was incapable of receiving
many distinct Idea's; that is, of perceiving many things distinctly at the same
time. Whence it is easy to conclude, that we should not apply our selves at
first to the finding out occult Truths, the Knowledge whereof depends on too
many things, some of which are unknown to us, or not so familiar as they should
be: For we ought to study with order, and make what we know distinctly,
serviceable to the Learning we know not, or what we know but confusedly. And
yet the most part of those, who take to any Study, trouble not themselves so
much: They never make trial of their forces, nor enter into themselves to try
how far the reach of their Mind will go: It Is a secret Vanity, and a disorderly
Desire of Knowledge, and not Reason, which regulates their Studies: For without
consulting their Reason, they undertake the fathoming the most hidden and
inscrutable Truths, and the resolving Questions, which depend on such a
multitude Relations, that the most quick and piercing Mind would, to the
discovering their Truth with an absolute Certainty, require several Ages, and
infinite Experiments to build upon.

In Medicine and Morality, there are a vast many Questions of this nature; all
the Sciences of Bodies and their Qualities; as of Animals, Plants, Metals, and
their Properties, are such Sciences as can never be made sufficiently evident,
or certain; especially unless they are cultivated in in another manner, than
has been done; and the most simple and least composed, are began with, on which
those other depend. But Men of study care not to be at the pains of a
methodical Philosophy: They are not agreed about the certainty of the
Principles of Physics: They frankly confess they know not the Nature of Bodies
in general, nor their Qualities. And yet they fancy themselves able, for
instance, to account for Old Men's Hairs growing White, and their Teeth
becoming Black, and such like Questions, which depend on so many Causes, as
it is impossible to give any infallible Reason of them. For to this, it is
necessary to know, wherein truly consists the Whiteness of Hairs in particular;
the Humors they are fed with; the Strainers which are in the Body, to let
these Humors through; the Conformation of the Root of the Hairs, or of the
Skin they pass through; and the difference of all these things, in a Young Man,
and an Old; which is absolutely impossible, or at least extremely difficult to
be known.

Aristotle, for instance, has pretended not to be ignorant of that adventitious
Whiteness in the Hairs of Old Men; II. An Instance of the want of order in
Aristotle.
and has given several Reasons for it in several places of his Books. But being
the Genius of Nature, he has not stopped there; but penetrated much farther. He
has moreover discovered, that the Cause which turned Old Men's Hairs white, was
the self-same with that which made some Men, and some Horses, have one Eye
Blue, and the other of another Color. These are his Words: Lib. 5. de
generatione Anim. c. 1.
(...). This is very surprising, but there is nothing un-intelligible to this
Great Man; who gives Reasons for such a vast number of things, in almost all
parts of his Physics, as the most enlightened Men of this Age believe
impenetrable; which must needs give good grounds for an Author's saying, He was
given us by GOD, that we might be ignorant of nothing possible to be known:
Aristotelis est SVMMAVERITAS, quoniam ejus Intellectus fuit finis humani
intellectus. Quare been dicitur de illo, quod ipse fuit creatus, and datus
nobis divina Providentia, ut non ignoremus possibilia sciri. Averroes ought too
to have said, That Aristotle was given us by Divine Providence, for the
understanding what was impossible to be understood. For certainly, that
Philosopher teaches us, not only the things that may be known, but (since we
must believe him on his word, his Doctrine being the Sovereign Truth,
SVMMAVERITAS) he teaches us likewise those things, which it is impossible to
know.

Undoubtedly a Man must have a strong Faith, thus to believe Aristotle, when he
only gives us Logical Reasons; and explains the Effects of Nature, by the
confused Notions of the Senses; especially when he positively determines upon
Questions, which we cannot see possible for Men ever to resolve. Yet Aristotle
takes particular care of admonishing us to believe him on his word: it being an
uncontroverted Axiom, with this Author, That a Disciple is to believe: (...).

True; sometimes Disciples are obliged to believe their Masters: But their
Faith should reach no farther than to Experiments, and matters of Fact. For,
would they become true Philosophers, they ought to examine their Master's
Reasons, and never receive them till they had discovered their Evidence by
their own. But to become a Peripatetic Philosopher, there is no more requisite,
than to believe, and to remember: The same Disposition of Mind going to the
reading that Philosophy, as to the reading of an History. For should a Man take
the freedom of using his Mind and his Reason, he must not expect to grow any
considerable Philosopher. (...).

But the Reason why Aristotle, and a great many other Philosophers have
pretended to know, what can never be known, is their not well distinguishing
the difference betwixt knowing, and knowing; betwixt having a Certain and
Evident Knowledge, and only a Probable and Obscure: And the Reason of their not
having observed that Distinction, is their being taken up always with subjects
of a greater Reach and Comprehension, than their own Mind; so that they have
usually seen only some parts thereof, without being able to take them all in
together; which suffices to the Discovery of many Probabilities, but not for
the evident Discovery of Truth. Besides which, Vanity, being the Motive to
their seeking Science, and Probabilities making more for their Esteem among
Men, than Truth it self, as being more proportioned to the ordinary stature and
ability of the Mind; they neglected to search for the necessary means of
augmenting its Capacity, and giving it a greater Growth and Comprehension; for
which reason they have not been able to go to the bottom of Truths that lay any
thing deep and concealed.

III. That Geometricians take a good Method in search of Truth.
The Geometricians only have well discovered the narrow Capacity of the Mind; at
least have taken such a Method in their Studies, as shows they have a perfect
Knowledge of it; especially those who use Algebra and Analytics; which Vieta
and Descartes have reestablished and perfected in this Age. Which is herein
apparent, that these Men never attempted the Resolution of Difficulties very
Compound, till after having most clearly known the more Simple, which they
depend on; they never fixed to the consideration of Crooked Lines, as of Conick
Sections, till they we perfect Masters of common Geometry. But what is peculiar
to the Analysts, is that, seeing their Mind incapable of Attention to many
Figures at once, IV. That their Method increases* the strength of the Mind, and
that Aristotle 's Logic diminishes it.
and unable to imagine Solids of more than three Dimensions, though there were
frequent necessity of conceiving such as had more; they made use of common
Letters, that are very familiar to us, to express and abridge their Idea's. And
thus the Mind being not confounded, or taken up with the Representation, it
would be obliged to make, of a great many Figures, and an infinite number of
Lines, can survey at a single view, what otherwise was impossible to be seen:
Forasmuch as the Mind can launch out farther, and penetrate into a great many
more things, when its Capacity is managed to the best advantage.

So that all the Skill and Artifice there is in making the Mind deeper-sighted,
and more comprehensive, consists, as shall be explained in another place, in a
dexterous management of its Strength and Capacity; Book 6, in the 1 st Part
concerning Method.
and in not laying it out impertinently on things not necessary to the
discovery of the Truth it is in search of: Which is a thing well worthy to be
observed. For this one thing makes it evident, that the ordinary Logicks are
more proper, to straiten the Capacity of the Mind, than enlarge it; it being
visible, that by employing the Rules they give in the finding out any Truth,
the Capacity of the Mind must be taken up with them; and so it must have the
less Liberty for attending to, and comprehending the whole extent of the
subject it examines.

It Is manifest enough then, from what has been said, that most Men have made
but little Reflection on the Nature of the Mind, when they would employ it in
The Search of Truth; that they have not been thoroughly convinced of its little
Extent, and the necessity there is of Husbanding it well, and increasing it;
and that this is one of the most considerable Causes of their Errors, and of
their so ill success in their Studies.

This is not said with Presumption, that there were ever any who knew not their
Mind was limited, and straightened in its Capacity and Comprehension. This
doubtless has been known, and is still confessed by all the World. But the
generality know it only confusedly, and confess it no farther than
Teeth-outwards: For the conduct they take in their Studies, gives the Lie to
their Confession; since they act as if they truly believed their Mind was
Infinite; and are desirous of diving into things which depend on a great many
Causes, whereof they commonly know not any one.

There is still another Failing, very customary with Studious Men; and that is
their applying to too many Sciences at once; so that if they study six hours a
day, V. Another Fault of Learned Men.
they sometimes study six different things. It Is visible, that this fault
proceeds from the same Cause as the others I have been speaking of. For there
is great probability, that if those, who studied in this manner, knew evidently
how disproportioned it was to the Capacity of their Mind; and that it was more
apt to fill it with Error and Confusion, than with true Science; they would not
let themselves be transported with the disorderly motives of their Passion and
Vanity: For indeed this is not the way to be satisfied in our pursuits, but the
most ready means to know nothing at all.

CHAP. IV.
I. The Mind cannot dwell long upon Objects that have no Relation to it, or
that include not something of Infinity in them. II. The Inconstancy of the
Will, is the Cause of that want of Application, and consequently of Error. III.
Our Sensations take us up more, than the Pure Idea's of the Mind: IV. Which is
the Source of the Corruption of our Morals: V. And of the Ignorance of the
Vulgar sort of Men.

THE Mind of Man is not only subject to Error, for want of being Infinite, I.
The Mind cannot dwell long upon Objects that have no Relation, or that include
not something of Infinity in them.
or for being of less Extent than the Objects of its Consideration; as has been
explained in the two last Chapters: But because it is Inconstant, and nothing
Resolute in its Action; and unable to keep the View fixed and steady on the
Object, long enough to examine all the parts of it.

The better to conceive the Cause of this Inconstancy and Levity of the Mind,
we must know that the Will is the Directress of its Action; that the Will
applies it to the Objects which it loves; and that the same Will is it self in
perpetual fluctuation and disquietude, whereof I assign this to be the Cause.

It Is not to be doubted but GOD is the Author of all things, and has made them
only for Himself, and that he draws the Heart of Man toward him, by a Natural
and Invincible Impression, which he perpetually influences him withal.

It Is impossible for GOD to have willed that there should be any Will that did
not love Him, or that loved Him less than any other Good, if there could be any
other besides Himself; it being impossible for Him to ordain, that a Will
should not love that which was supreamly Amiable, or should love that more
which was less lovely. And thus Natural Love must needs carry us to GOD, as
proceeding from GOD, and nothing being able to stop the motions thereof, unless
GOD Himself that impresses them. There is then no Will whatever, but
necessarily follows the motions of this Love. The Righteous and the Wicked, the
Blessed and the Damned, love GOD with this Love; and it is this Love, in one
sense, that is the Cause of the Misery of the latter. For this Natural Love we
have for GOD, being the same thing with the Natural Impression, which carries
us toward Good in general, toward Infinite Sovereign Good; it is manifest that
all Minds love GOD with this Love, since there is no other that is the
Universal, the Infinite, the Sovereign Good. For, lastly, All Spirits, and even
the Devils, passionately desire to be Happy, and to possess the Sovereign Good;
and they desire it without Choice, Deliberation, and Liberty, by the bent and
necessity of their Nature. Being therefore made for GOD, for an Infinite Good;
for a Good that comprehends in Himself all Goods, the Natural Motion of our
Heart can never stop, till we arrive to the possession of this Good.

The Will then laboring thus with a perpetual thirst, being tossed and
agitated with Desires, Eagerness, II. The Inconstancy of the Will is the Cause
of that want of Application, and consequently of Error.
and Restless longings for that Good it is not in Possession of, cannot but
with much Uneasiness suffer the Mind to dwell any time upon Abstract Truths,
which don't affect it, and which it judges incapable of making it Happy. It
therefore pushes the Mind forward continually to the Research of other Objects;
and when in this hurry and agitation, communicated to it by the Will, it meets
with any Object that carries the Mark of Good, I mean that by approaching the
Soul, makes it sensible of some internal Delight or Satisfaction, then this
Thirst of the Heart rises anew; these Desires, Eagernesses, and Fervencies are
re-kindled; and the Mind obliged to wait on them, fixes it self only on the
Object that either is or seems to be the cause of them, to approximate it to
the Soul, that regales and feeds upon it for some time. But the Emptiness of
the Creatures, being unable to fill the Infinite Capacity of the Heart of Man;
these little Pleasures, instead of extinguishing its Thirst, only provoke and
inflame it, and give the Soul a foolish and vain Hope of being satisfied in the
multiplicity of Earthly Pleasures; which produces a far greater Inconstancy,
and an inconceivable Levity in the Mind, which ought to make the Discovery to
the Soul of all these Goods.

It Is true, when the Mind falls by chance upon an Object of an Infinite Nature,
or which includes something great and mighty in it, its unsettledness and
casting about ceases for some time: For finding that this Object bears the
badge and character of that which the Soul desires, it dwells upon it, and
closes in with it for a considerable time: But this closing and adhesion, or
rather obstinacy of the Mind; to examine Subjects infinite, or too vast and
unweildy, is as useless to it, as that Levity, wherewith it considers those
that are proportioned to its Capacity; since it is too weak to accomplish so
difficult an Enterprise, and in vain it endeavors to effect it: That which
must render the Soul happy, is not, as I may speak, the Comprehension of an
Infinite Object (this she is not capable of) but the Love and Fruition of an
Infinite Good, whereof the Will is capable, through the Motion of Love,
continually impressed on it by GOD Himself.

Which being thus, we need not wonder at the Ignorance and Blindness of
Mankind; because their Mind being subjected to the Inconstancy and Levity of
their Heart, which incapacitate it from considering any thing with a serious
Application, is unable to penetrate into a subject any whit perplexed, and
difficult. For, in short, the Attention of the Mind is to intelligible Objects,
what a steady View of the Eyes is to those of Sight: And as a Man that cannot
fix his Eyes on the Bodies that are about him, can never see them well enough
to distinguish the differences of their least parts, and to discover all the
Relations those little parts have to one another: So a Man who cannot fix the
Eye of his Mind upon the things desired to be known, can never have a
sufficient Knowledge to distinguish all the parts; and to observe all the
Relations that may possibly be between themselves, or themselves and other
subjects.

Yet it is certain that all our Knowledge consists in a clear View of the
Relations things stand in to one another. So that when it happens, as in
difficult Questions, that the Mind must survey at one sight a multiplicity of
Relations, that are between two things or more, it is plain, that if it has not
considered these things very attentively, or if it has but a confused Knowledge
of them, it can never have a distinct Perception of their Relation, and
consequently cannot make any solid Judgment of them.

III. Our Sensations take us up, more than the Pure Idea's of the Mind.
One of the main Causes of our Mind's wanting Application for Abstract Truths,
is our seeing them as at a Distance, whilst other things are continually
offering themselves to the Mind, that are nearer at hand: The great Attention
of the Mind, brings home, as I may say, the remote Idea's of the Objects we
consider. But it often falls out, that when a Man is very intent on
Metaphysical Speculation, he is easily thrown off from them, by some accidental
Sensations breaking in upon the Soul, which sit closer to it than those Idea's:
For there needs no more than a little Pleasure or Pain to do it. The Reason
whereof is, that Pleasure and Pain, and all Sensations in general, See the 7 th
Chap. of the Second Part of this Book.
are within the very Soul: They modifie her, and touch her more to the quick,
than the simple Idea's of Objects of Pure Intellection, which though present to
the Mind, neither touch nor modifie it at all. And thus the Mind on one hand,
being of a straightened and narrow reach, and on the other, unable to prevent
feeling Pain, and all its other Sensations, has its Capacity filled up with
them; and so cannot at one and the same time, be sensible of any thing, and
think freely of other Objects that are not sensible: The Humming of a Fly, or
of any other little Animal, supposing it communicated to the principal part of
the Brain, and perceived by the Soul, is capable (do what we can) of
interrupting our Consideration of very Abstract and Sublime Truths; because no
Abstract Idea's modifie the Soul; whereas all Sensations do.

IV. Which is the Source of the Corruption of our Morals.
From hence arises that Stupidity and Drousiness of the Mind, in regard of the
most Fundamental Truths of Christian Morality; which Men know only in a
Speculative and Fruitless manner, without the Grace of JESUS CHRIST. All the
World knows there is a GOD, and that this GOD is to be served and worshipped.
But who is it, that serves and worships him without the Divine Grace, which
alone gives us a relish of Delight and Pleasure, in these Duties? There are but
very few that do not perceive the Emptiness, and Inconstancy of Earthly Goods,
and that are not convinced with an Abstract, though most certain and evident
Conviction, that they are indeserving of our Cares and Application. But where
are those, who despise these Goods in their Practice, and deny their Pains and
Application to acquire them? It Is only they that perceive some Bitterness and
Distaste in the Enjoyment of them, or that Grace has made sensible to Spiritual
Goods, by an inward Delectation, affixed to them by GOD; it is these only who
vanquish the Impressions of Sense and the Strugglings of Concupiscence: A View
of the Mind alone can never make us resist them as we should do; but besides
that View, there must be a certain Sensation of the Heart: That Intellectual
Light all alone is, if you please, the Sufficient Grace, which makes only for
our Condemnation, which acquaints us with our own Weakness, and of our Duty of
flying by Prayer to Him, who is our Strength: But the Sensation of the Heart,
is a Lively and Operative Grace. It Is this which touches us inward, which fills
us, and persuades the Heart, and without it there is no body that considers
with the Heart: Nemo est qui recogitet cord. All the most certain Truths of
Morality lie concealed in the folds and doubles, and secret corners of the
Mind, and as long as they continue there, are barren and inactive; since the
Soul has no relish of them: But the Pleasures of the Senses dwell nearer to the
Soul; and since she cannot be insensible to, or out of love with Namely a
Natural Love; for we cannot hate Pleasure by an Elective Hatred.
her Pleasure, it is impossible to disengage her self from the Earth, and to
Because Elective Love cannot be long without conforming to Natural Love.
get rid of the Charms and Delusions of her Senses, by her own Strength and
Abilities.

I deny not however but the Righteous, whose Heart has been already vigorously
turned toward GOD, by a preventing Delectation, may without that particular
Grace perform some Meritorious Actions, and resist the Motions of
Concupiscence. There are those who are courageous and constant in the Law of
GOD, by the strength of their Faith, by the care they have to deprive
themselves of Sensible Goods; and by the contempt and dislike of every thing
that can give them any temptation: There are such as act for the most part
without the taste of Indeliberate or Preventing Pleasure: That sole Joy, they
find in acting according to the Will of GOD, is the only Pleasure they taste;
and that Pleasure suffices to make them persevere in their state, and to
confirm the Disposition of their Heart: Those who are Novice Converts, have
generally need of an Indeliberate, or Preventing Pleasure, to disintangle them
from Sensible Goods, to which they are fastened by other Preventing, and
Indeliberate Pleasures. Sorrow and Remorse of their Consciences, are not
sufficient for this purpose; and as yet they taste no Joy: But the Just can
live by Faith, and that in Indigence; and it is likewise in this Estate they
merit most: Forasmuch as Men being Reasonable Creatures, GOD will be loved by
them with a Love of Choice, and not with a Love of Instinct, or an Indeliberate
Love, like that wherewith we love Sensible things, without knowing they be
Good, otherwise than from the Pleasure we receive in them. Notwithstanding,
most Men having but little Faith, and yet constant opportunities of tasting
Pleasures, cannot long preserve their Elective Love for GOD, against their
Natural Love for sensible Goods, unless the Delectation of Grace support them
against the Efforts of Pleasure. For the Delectation of Grace produces,
preserves, and augments Charity, as Sensible Pleasures Cupidity.

It is apparent enough from what has been said, that Men being never free from
some Passion, or some pleasant or troublesome Sensations, have their Capacity
and Extent of Mind much taken up; and when they would employ the remainder of
its Capacity in examining any Truth, they are frequently diverted by some new
Sensations; through the dislike they take to that Exercise, and the Inconstancy
of the Will, which tosses and bandies the Mind from Object to Object, without
letting it stand still. So that unless we have habituated our selves from our
Youth to the conquering all these Oppositions, as I have explained in the
Second Part, we find our selves at last incapable of piercing into any thing
that is somewhat difficult, and demands something of Application.

Hence we are to conclude, That all Sciences, and especially such as include
Questions very hard to be cleared up, and explained, abound with an infinite
number of Errors: And that we ought to have in suspicion those bulky Volumes we
see daily composed on Medicine, Physics, and Morality; and especially on the
particular Questions of those Sciences, which are much more complex than the
general. We should judge too these Books to have so much less worth in them, as
they are better entertained by the common sort of Men; I mean those, who are
little capable of Application, and know not how to set their Mind to work;
because when an Opinion is cried up, and applauded by the People, in a matter
difficult to be made out, it is an infallible sign of its being false, and
founded only on the delusive Notions of Sense, or some false Lights of the
Imagination.

Nevertheless it is not impossible for one Man to discover a great number of
Truths, that were concealed from Ages past; supposing this Person to have no
lack of Parts, and who being in Retirement; as remote as possible from every
thing that might distract his Thoughts, applies himself seriously to the
seeking Truth: Which makes those appear none of the most reasonable Men, who
despise Mr. Des-Cartes's Philosophy, without knowing it; for this only Reason,
that it seems next to impossible for a single Man; to have found out Truth, in
things so deep and concealed as those of Nature. But did they know the way of
Life, that Philosopher chose; the means he employed in his Studies to prevent
the Capacity his Mind's being shared by other Objects, than those he meant to
discover the Truth of: The distinctness of his Idea's on which he established
his Philosophy: And generally all the advantages he had above the Ancients, by
the New Discoveries; they would certainly receive a more strong and reasonable
Prejudice on his behalf, than that of Antiquity, which gives Plato, Aristotle,
and diverse others their Authority.

And yet I would not advise them to ground only on this Prejudice, and to
believe Mr. Descartes a Great Man, and his Philosophy good, because of those
advantageous things that may be said for it. Monsieur Descartes was a Man like
us, subject to Error and Illusion, no less than others. Not any one of his
Works, without even excepting his Geometry, but bears the Character and Earnest
of the weakness of an Humane Mind. Wherefore we ought not to take his word for
what he teaches; but read him according to his own Advice, with Precaution, by
examining whether he is not deceived, and believing nothing that he says,
without being obliged to it by its own Evidence, and the secret Reproofs of our
Reason. For, in a word, the Mind knows nothing truly, but what it evidently
perceives.

We have shown in the preceding Chapters that our Mind is not infinite, that it
is, on the contrary, of but a very indifferent Capacity; and has that Capacity
usually filled with the Sensations of the Soul: And, lastly, that the Mind
receiving its direction from the Will, cannot steadily fix its view upon any
Object, without being suddenly thrown off by the Will's Fluctuation and
Inconstancy. It Is most certain that these things are the most general Causes of
our Errors; and I might stay here to make them more evident in particular: But
what has been already said, will be enough, with such as are capable of
Attention, to give them to understand the weakness of the Humane Mind; I shall
treat more at large in the Fourth and Fifth Book, of the Errors that are owing
to our Natural Inclinations, and our Passions; of which we have now said
something in this Chapter.

The SECOND PART: Concerning The Pure UNDERSTANDING. Of the NATURE of IDEA'S.
CHAP. I.
I. What is meant by Idea's. That they really exist, and are necessary to our
Perceiving all material Objects. II. A Particularization of all the ways
possible for us to perceive External Objects.

I Suppose that every one will grant, that we perceive not the Objects that are
without us immediately, I. What is meant by Idea's. That they really exist, and
are necessary to our Perceiving all material Objects.
and of themselves. We see the Sun, the Stars, and infinite other Objects
without us; and it is not probable that the Soul goes out of the Body, and
fetches a walk, as I may say, about the Heavens to contemplate all the Objects
therein.

It sees them not therefore by themselves; and the immediate Object of the
Mind, when it beholds the Sun, for example, is not the Sun, but something
intimately united to the Soul; and the same thing which I call an Idea. So that
by the Term Idea, I mean nothing but that Object which is immediate, or next to
the Soul in its Perception of any thing.

It ought to be well observed, That in order to the Mind's perceiving any
Object, it is absolutely necessary the Idea of that Object be actually present
to it; which is so certain as not possible to be doubted of. But it is not
necessary there should be any thing without like to that Idea: For it often
happens that we perceive things which don't exist, and which never were in
Nature. And so a Man has frequently in his Mind real Idea's of things that
never were. When a Man, for Instance, imagines a golden Mountain, it is
indispensibly necessary the Idea of that Mountain should be really present to
his Mind. When a Frantic, or a Man in a Fever, or Asleep, sees some terrible
Animal before his Eyes; it is certain that the Idea of that Animal really
exists. And yet that Mountain of Gold and this Animal, never were in Being.

Notwithstanding, Men being as it were naturally inclined to believe that none
but Corporeal Objects exist, judge of the Reallity and Existence of things
quite otherwise than they ought. For when they perceive an Object by way of
Sense, they would have it most infallibly to exist, though it often happens, that
there is nothing of it without; they will have moreover this Object to be just
the same as they perceive it; which yet never happens. But as for the Idea
which necessarily exists, and cannot be otherwise than we see it, they commonly
judge without Reflection, that it is nothing at all; as if Idea's had not a
vast number of Properties (as that the Idea of a square, for instance, were not
very different from that of any Number) and did not represent quite different
things. Which is not consistent with Nothing, since Nothing has no Property.
It Is therefore undoubtedly certain, that Idea's have a most real Existence. But
let us enquire into their Nature, and their Essence; and see what there is in
our Soul capable of making to her the Representations of all things.

Whatever things the Soul perceives, are only of two sorts; and are either
within or without the Soul. Those that are within the Soul, are her own proper
Thoughts; that is, all her different Modifications: For by the words, Thought,
Manner of Thinking or Modification of the Soul, I mean all those things in
general, which cannot be in the Soul, without her perceiving them; such are her
own Sensations, her Imaginations, her Pure Intellections, or simply her
Conceptions, as also her Passions, and Natural Inclinations. Now our Soul has
no need of Idea's to perceive all these things, because they are within the
Soul, or rather because they are the very Soul it self, in such or such a
manner; just as the real Rotundity of any Body and its Motion, are nothing but
the Body figured and translated, after such or such a sort.

But as to the things without the Soul, we can have no perception of them, but
by the means of Idea's, upon supposition that these things cannot be intimately
united to it; and they are of two sorts, Spiritual and Material: As to the
Spiritual, there is some probability they may be discovered to the Soul without
Idea's, immediately by themselves. For though Experience certifies us, that we
cannot by an immediate Communication declare our Thoughts to one another, but
only by words, and other sensible Signs, whereunto we have annexed our Idea's;
yet we may say that GOD has ordained this kind of Economy, only for the time
of this Life, to prevent the Disorders that might at present happen, if Men
should understand one another as they pleased. But when Justice and Order shall
reign, and we shall be delivered from the Captivity of our Body, we shall
possibly communicate our Thoughts by the intimate union of our selves, as it is
probable the Angels may do in Heaven. So that there seems to be no absolute
necessity of Idea's, for the representing things of a Spiritual Nature, since
it is possible for them to be seen by themselves, though in a very dark, and
imperfect manner.

I enquire not here how two Spirits can be united to one another, This
Paragraph is in Italick, because it may be passed over as being difficult to be
understood, unless a Man know what I think of the Soul, and of the Nature of
Idea's.
or whether by that means they can open inwards, and make a mutual Discovery of
their Thoughts. I believe however, there is no Substance purely Intelligible,
except that of GOD; and that nothing can be evidently discovered but in his
Light, and that the Union of Spirits cannot make them visible. For though we be
most intimately united with our selves, we both are, and shall be
unintelligible to our selves, until we see our selves in GOD, and he shall
present to us, in our selves, the perfectly intelligible Idea, which he has of
our Being, included in his own. And thus though I seem to grant that Angels may
manifest to each other, both what they are, and what they think; I must
advertise, that I do it only because I have no mind to dispute it; provided it
shall be granted me, what cannot be controverted, namely, That we cannot discern
material things by themselves, and without Idea's.

I will explain in the Seventh Chapter, what my Notion is of the way whereby we
know Spirits; and I will make it appear, that we cannot at present entirely
know them by themselves, though they may possibly be united to us. But I
discourse in this place chiefly of material Things, which certainly are
incapable of such a manner of Union with our Soul, as is necessary to make them
perceived; for that, they being extended, and the Soul not, there is no
proportion betwixt them. And besides, our Souls never depart from our Bodies,
to measure the Greatness of the Heavens, and consequently cannot see the Bodies
that are without, otherwise than by the Idea's that represent them. And this is
what all the World must agree to.

We affirm then, that it is absolutely necessary that the Idea's we have of
Bodies, and of all other Objects we perceive not immediately by themselves,
proceed from these same Bodies, II. A Particularization* of all the ways
possible for us to perceiv^ External Objects.
or these Objects, or else that our Soul has the power of producing these
Idea's; or that GOD produced them together with her in the Creation; or that he
produces them as often as we think of any Object; or that the Soul has in her
self all the Perfections which she discovers in these Bodies; or lastly, is
united with an All-perfect Being, who comprehends universally in himself all
the Perfections of Created Beings.

There is no perceiving of Objects, but by one of these ways: Let us examine
without Prepossession which seems the probable'st of all, and not be
disheartened at the difficulty of the Question: It may be we shall give a
Resolution clear enough, though we pretend not to give incontested
Demonstrations for all sorts of Persons; but only most convincing Proofs to
such as with thoughtful Attention shall consider them: For it probably would
look like Rashness and Presumption, to talk in a more positive manner.

CHAP. II.
That Material Objects emit not Species which resemble them.

THE most common Opinion is that of the Peripatetics, who pretend, That
External Objects send forth Species, which are like them; and that these
Species are conveyed by the External Senses as far as the Commune Sensorium.
They call these the Species Impressae, because imprinted by Objects on the
outward Senses. These Impressed Species being Material and Sensible are made
Intelligible by the Intellectus Agens, and are fit to be received in the
Intellectus Patiens: These Species thus Spiritualized, are termed Expressae, as
being expressed from the impressed: And by these it is that the Patient
Intellect knows all Material things.

I shall not stand to finish the Explication of these Notable things, and of
the diverse ways Philosophers have of conceiving them. For though they be not
agreed about the number of the Faculties which they attribute to the Internal
Sense and Understanding, and there are also many that are very dubious, whether
they have any need of the Agent Intellect for the knowing Sensible Objects; yet
they almost universally agree in the Emission of the Species, or Images
resembling the Objects they proceed from: And it is only on this Foundation they
multiply their Faculties, and defend their Active Intellect. So that this
Foundation, having no solidity, as will be seen by and by, there is no
necessity of standing to overthrow all the Superstructures they have built upon
it.

I maintain then, it is not probable that Objects should send out Species or
Images in their own likeness; and these are my Reasons for it. The first is
taken from the Impenetrability of Bodies. All Objects, as the Sun, the Stars,
as well as those that are near our Eyes, cannot emit Species of a different
Nature from themselves: and for this Reason it is usually said by the
Philosophers, that these Species are gross and material, to distinguish them
from the expressed Species, which are spiritualized: These Impressed Species of
Objects are therefore little Bodies. They cannot then penetrate each other, nor
all the spaces betwixt Heaven and Earth, which must needs be filled with them.
From whence it is easy to conclude, that they must needs bruise, and batter one
another, some coming one way, and thwarting others coming another; and so it is
impossible they should render Objects visible.

Again, it is possible for one standing on one Point, to see a great number of
Objects which are in the Heaven, and on the Earth. There is then a necessity
that the Species of all these Bodies be reduced into a Point. But they are
Impenetrable, since they are extended, Ergo, etc.

But we not only can see from one end of the same Point, abundance of most
large, and even immense Objects: There is moreover not any Point in all these
great Spaces of the World, from whence we cannot discover an almost
inexhaustible number of Objects, and even Objects as big as the Sun, the Moon,
and Heavens. There is not then any Point in the great Circumference of the
World, wherein the Species of all these things ought not to center, which is
contradictory to all appearance of Truth.

If a Man has a mind to know how all the Impressions of Visible Objects, though
opposed, can be communicated without weakening, let him read Mr. Descartes 's
Dioptrics.
The second Reason is taken from the Change these Species undergo. It is certain
the nearer an Object is, the greater the Species ought to be, since we see the
Object greater. Now we cannot see what it is that can lessen this Species, and
what become of the Parts that composed it, when it was greater. But that which
is still more difficult to conceive, according to their Notion, is, how in
beholding an Object with Magnifying-glasses, or a Microscope, the Species grows
on a sudden, five or six hundred times bigger than it was before; for it is
still harder to be seen from what adventitious Parts it can increase so
mightily in an instant.

The third Reason is, that in looking on a perfect Cube, all the Species of its
faces are unequal, and yet we fail not to see all its faces equally square: And
so in beholding in a Picture Ovals and Parallelograms, which can only send
forth Species of a similar Figure; we see notwithstanding Circles and Squares.
For this makes it manifestly clear, that there is no necessity the Object we
behold should produce Species like it self, in order to our seeing it.

Lastly, it is not conceivable, how it is possible for a Body, that is not
sensibly exhausted, to send constantly Species from out of it self on every
side; how it can continually fill with them, so very capacious Spaces all round
about; and that with an incomprehensible swiftness. For an Object that lay hid,
in the very instant of its Discovery, may be seen many millions of Leagues on
all sides. And what seems much stranger yet* is, that the Bodies which have a
great deal of Action, as the Air, and some others, have not force enough to
extrude from them their representative Images; which the grossest and least
active Bodies can do, as Earth, Stones, and almost all hard Bodies.

But I shall not spend more time in producing all the Reasons that oppugn this
Opinion, because that would be an endless work; the least Essay of Thought
furnishing out an inexhaustible number of them. These we have already urged,
are enough, and even more than were necessary, after what has been said
relating to this Subject, in the first Book, when we explained the Errors of
the Senses. But there being such a multitude of Philosophers devoted to this
Opinion, I thought it necessary to say something of it, to put them upon
reflecting on their own Thoughts.

CHAP. III.
That the Soul has no Power to produce Idea's. The Cause of the Error Men are
guilty of, upon this Subject.

THE second Opinion is theirs, who believe that our Souls have the Power of
producing the Idea's of the things they would contemplate; and that they are
moved to the producing them, by the impressions Objects make upon the Body;
though these impressions, are not Images representative of the Objects they are
caused by: They pretend it is in this, that Man is made after the Image of GOD,
and participates of his Power: That as GOD has created all things out of
nothing, and can annihilate them again; and thence create others wholly new; so
Man has the Power of Creating and Annihilating the Idea's of all things as he
pleases. But there is very good reason to suspect all these Opinions, that
elevate Man so high; as being Notions which commonly derive from his vain and
haughty Heart, and which the Father of Lights never vouchsafed to give him.

This Participation of the Power of GOD, which Men boast of having, whereby to
represent Objects, and to do many other particular Actions, is a Participation
which seems to draw in something of Independency, as it is ordinarily explained.
But it is likewise a Chimerical Participation, which Men's Ignorance and Vanity
have caused them to imagine: For they are under a greater Dependence on the
Goodness and Mercy of GOD, than they suppose. But this is not the place to give
an Explication of these things: Let us only try to make it visible, that Men
have not the Power of forming the Idea's of the things they perceive.

No Man can doubt but that Idea's are real Beings, seeing they have real
Properties; that they differ one from another; and that they represent quite
different things. Nor can it reasonably be doubted, but they are of a Spiritual
Nature, and very different from the Bodies represented by them. All which seems
strong enough to raise a doubt, whether the Idea's by means whereof we perceive
Bodies, are not of a nobler extract, than the Bodies themselves. And in
earnest, the Intelligible World ought to be perfecter than the Material and
Terrestrial, as we shall see in the process of our Discourse; and then, in
affirming that Men are empowered to frame all Idea's as they please, we incur
the danger of maintaining that Men have power of making Beings more noble and
more perfect, than the World which GOD has created. But this reflection never
enters our Heads, by reason of our imagining an Idea to be nothing, because not
obvious to the Senses; or if we look upon it as a Being, it is a Being so
slender and contemptible, that we fancy it annihilated, as soon as absent from
the Mind.

But though it should be true, that Idea's were only little, pitiful,
despicable Beings; they are however Beings, and Beings Spiritual: And Men
having not the Power of Creating, have not consequently the Power of Producing
them. For the Production of Idea's in the manner they explain it, is a true
Creation, and though they endeavor to palliate, and soften the Presumption and
Harshness of this Opinion, in saying, that the Production of Idea's supposes
something antecedent, and Creation supposes nothing; yet they bring no Reason
to solve the Knot of the difficulty.

For it ought well to be heeded, That there is no greater difficulty in
producing Something out of Nothing than in producing it, by presupposing
another thing, out of which it could not be made, and which could contribute
nothing to its Production. There is no greater difficulty, for instance, in the
Creation of an Angel, than in the Production of an Angel from a Stone: Because
a Stone being a Being of a quite opposite kind, cannot be any ways serviceable
to the Production of an Angel. But it may contribute to the Production of
Bread, of Gold, etc. because Stone, Gold, and Bread, are only the same
Extension, of a diverse Configuration, and all these are Material things.

Nay, it is even harder to produce an Angel out of a Stone, than to produce it
out of Nothing; because to the producing an Angel out of a Stone, so far as
that is possible to be done, the Stone must be first Annihilated, and
afterward the Angel Created; but simply to Create an Angel, there needs no
Annihilation at all. If then the Mind produces its Idea's from the Material
Impressions the Brain receives from Objects, it does still the same thing, or a
thing as difficult, or even difficulter, than if it Created them: Since Idea's
being Spiritual, cannot be produced out of Material Images that are in the
Brain, to which they have no Proportion or Analogy.

But some will say, That an Idea is not a Substance: Be it so; but still it is
a Being, and a Being of a Spiritual kind: And as it is impossible to make a
Square of a Spirit, though a Square be not a Substance; so it is impossible to
frame a Spiritual Idea, out of a Material Substance, though an Idea were not a
Substance.

But suppose we should allow the Mind of Man to have an absolute Power of
Creating, and Annihilating the Idea's of things; yet after all; he would never
employ it to the producing them. For as a Painter, though never so excellent at
his Art, could not represent an Animal he had never seen, or had no Idea of; so
that the Picture he was obliged to make of it, would not be like that unknown
Animal; so a Man could not form the Idea of an Object, unless he knew it
before; that is, unless he had already the Idea of it, which has no dependence
on his Will: But if he has the Idea of it already, he knows the Object; and
it is needless to form a new one of it. It Is therefore needless to attribute to
the Mind of Man the power of producing its Idea's.

It may perhaps be said, that the Mind has general and confused Idea's, which
it does not produce; and that those which it produces are particular, more
clever and distinct; but it all comes to the same thing. For as a Painter could
not draw the Picture of a particular Man, so as to be certify'd he had hit it
right, unless he had a distinct Idea of him, and even unless the Person himself
should sit; so the Mind that had only the Idea, for instance, of Being, or of
an Animal in general, could not represent to it self an Horse, nor form any
very distinct Idea thereof, nor be assured this Idea perfectly resembled an
Horse, unless it had a former Idea thereof, wherewith to collate this second.
Now if it had a former, it is in vain to form a second: And the Question
proceeds upon that former. Therefore, etc,

It is true, that whilst we conceive a Square by pure Intellection, we may
besides imagine it, that is, perceive it by drawing the Image of it in the
Brain. But it is to be observed in the first place, that we are not the real and
principal Cause of that Image; but it would take up too much time to explain
it: And again, that the second Idea, which accompanies that Image, is so far
from being more distinct and accurate than the others, that, on the contrary,
it owes all its Exactness to its Resemblance with the first, which serves to
regulate the second. For, in brief, it is not to be believed, that the
Imagination, or even the Senses, make us a more distinct Representation of
Objects, than the Pure Intellect; but only that they make the Mind more
concerned, and applicative: For the Idea's of Sense and Imagination, are not
distinct any farther, than they are conformable with those of Pure
Intellection. The Image of a Square, for instance, that the Imagination
delineates in the Brain, is no otherwise just and regular, than as it conforms
with the Idea of a Square, which we have by Pure Intellection. It Is that Idea
which regulates the Image. It Is the Mind that conducts the Imagination, and
obliges it, as I may say, to look time after time, whether the Image painted by
it, be a Figure of four right and equal Lines, whose Angles are exactly right:
In a word, if that which is imagined, be like that which is conceived. Tanto
meliora esse judico quae oculis cerno, quanto pro sui natura viciniora sunt iis
quae animo intelligo. Aug. 6.3. de Vera Religione.


After what has been said, I suppose no body can doubt, but it is an Error, in
those that affirm the Mind can form the Idea's of Objects; since they attribute
to the Mind a Power of Creating, and even of Creating with Wisdom and Order,
though it has no Knowledge of what it does; a thing utterly inconceivable. But
the Cause of this their Error, is that customary Judgment Men make of one
thing's being the Cause of another, when they are found conjoined together;
supposing that the true Cause of this Effect be unknown to them. It Is for this
Reason, that every one concludes, that a Bowl in motion, meeting with another,
is the true and principal Cause of the motion it communicates to it; that the
Will of the Soul, is the true and principal Cause of the motion of the Arm, and
such like Prejudices as these; because it always happens that a Bowl is moved,
when it lies in the way of another that knocks against it, and we move our Arms
almost as often as we will it; and we do not sensibly perceive what else could
be the Cause of these Motions.

But when an Effect is not so constant an attendant on any thing that is not the
Cause of it, there are ever very many who believe this thing to be the Cause of
the Effect that happens, though all Men fall not into this Error. A Comet, for
instance, appears, and presently after a Prince goes off, etc. Stones are
exposed to the Moon, and are eaten with Worms: The Sun is in Conjunction with
Mars, at the Nativity of a Child; and that Child has some Fortune
extraordinary: This is Argument sufficient to persuade a great many, that the
Comet, the Moon, the Conjunction of the Sun with Mars, are the Causes of the
Effects I have mentioned, and of others that are like them: And the Reason why
all the World is not of the same Opinion, is their Observation that the like
Effects do not at all times attend these Causes.

But all Men having commonly Idea's of Objects present to their Mind, when they
desire it; and this happening many times a day, very few of them but conclude,
that the Will, which accompanies the Production, or rather Presence of Idea's,
is the true Cause of them; because they see nothing at the same time to which
they can attribute them: And they imagine that Idea's cease to exist, when out
of the view of the Mind; and that they begin to exist again, when re-presented
to it.

It Is upon the same account too, that some judge that External Objects send
forth Images that resemble them; so as has been said in the preceding Chapter.
For it being impossible to see Objects by themselves, or any otherwise than by
their Idea's, they judge that the Object produces the Idea; because when it is
present, they see it, when absent, it disappears; and the presence of the
Object, almost always is found in company with the Idea that represents it to
us.

However, if Men were not rash and inconsiderate in their judgments, they ought
only to conclude from the Idea's of things being present to their Mind,
whenever they will have them, that according to the order of Nature, their Will
is for the most part necessary to their having these Idea's, but not that the
Will is the True and Principal Cause that exhibits them to the Mind, much less
that the Will produces them out of nothing, or in the manner they explain it.
Nor is there any more Reason for concluding, that Objects emit Species that
resemble them; because the Soul has seldom any Perception of them, but when
they are present; but only that the Object is for the most part necessary to
the Idea's being present to the Mind. Lastly, They ought not to conclude, that
the Bowl in motion, is the principal and true Cause of the motion of another,
which it meets in its way; since the first has no power of moving it self. They
can only judge, that the Collision of the two Bowls, See the 3 d. Chapter of the 2
d. Part concerning Method.
is an occasion to the Author of the motion of Matter, to execute the decree of
his Will; which is the universal Cause of all things, by communicating to the
other Bowl a part of the motion of the first; that is, to speak more clearly,
by willing that the latter should acquire as much motion as the former lost;
for the impellent force of Bodies can be nothing but the Will of him that
preserves them, as will be made appear in another place.

CHAP. IV.
That we perceive not Objects by means of Idea's Created with us. That GOD does
not produce them in us, every moment we have need of them.

THE third Opinion is of those who pretend, That all Idea's are Created with
us. For our better discovering how little likelihood there is in this Opinion,
we must consider that there are in the World many quite different things,
whereof we have Idea's. But to mention only simple Figures, it is certain that
the number of them is infinite; and even if we fix only on an Ellipsis, it is
not to be doubted but the Mind can conceive an infinite number of Ellipses of a
different Species; inasmuch as it can conceive, that one of its Diameters may
be lengthened to Infinity, the other remaining constantly the same.

So since the Height of a Triangle may be augmented or diminished to Infinity,
the side which serves for the Base, being still the same, we conceive there may
be infinite Triangles upon the same Base, of a different Species. And moreover,
which I desire may be well considered here, the Mind in some manner perceives
that infinite number, though it can imagine but a very few, and a Man cannot,
at one and the same time, have particular and distinct Idea's of many Triangles
of a different Species. But that which should be most especially attended to,
is, that this general Idea the Mind has of an infinite number of Triangles of a
different Species, is a sufficient proof, that if we cannot conceive by
particular Idea's all these different Triangles; in a word, if we cannot
comprehend Infinity, it is not for want of Idea's, or because Infinity is not
present to our Mind; but merely for want of the Mind's Capacity and
Comprehension. If a Man should apply himself to the considering the Properties
of all the diverse Species of Triangles, and even should eternally pursue this
sort of Study, he would find new and particular Idea's, in an endless
succession: But his Mind would tire under the unprofitable Disquisition.

What I have now said of Triangles, may be applied to Figures of five, six, an
hundred, a thousand, or ten thousand sides, and so up to infinity. And if the
sides of a Triangle, being capable of infinite Relations with each other, can
make Triangles of infinite Species; it is easy to be seen that the Figures of
Four, Five, or of a Million of sides, are capable of much greater Differences,
as being subject to a far greater number of Relations and Combinations of their
sides than simple Triangles.

The Mind then discerns all these things, and has Idea's of them all. And it is
certain these Idea's will never be exhausted, though it should employ infinite
Ages in the consideration of one Figure only; and if it perceives not these
infinite Figures all at once, or if it comprehend not infinity, it is only
because its Capacity is too short and limited. It has then an infinite number
of Idea's: What said I, an infinite number? It has so many infinite numbers of
Idea's, as there are different Figures: Insomuch that there being an infinite
number of different Figures, the Mind must have an infinity of infinite numbers
of Idea's, for the Knowledge of Figures only.

Now I demand of them, Whether it is probable that GOD has created so many
things with the Mind of Man? For my own part it can never enter into my Head,
especially since it might be done in another most simple and easy manner, as
we shall see by and by. For whereas GOD acts always by the most simple means,
it seems unreasonable to explain our manner of knowing Objects, by admitting
the Creation of an infinity of ^eings, when the difficulty may be resolved in a
way more easy and natural.

But what if the Mind had a Magazine of all the Idea's necessary to its
Perception of things? It would be still extremely difficult to explain, how the
Soul could make choice of them, to represent Objects to her self; how, for
instance, she could bring it about to perceive the Sun, when it were present to
the Eyes of the Body. For since the Image, the Sun imprints in the Brain, is
nothing like the Idea we have of it, as has been formerly proved; and since
likewise the Soul perceives not the Motion the Sun produces in the Fund of the
Eye, and in the Brain; it is not conceivable, how among such an infinite number
of Idea's which she had, she could exactly divine which it was necessary to
represent, for the imagining or seeing of the Sun. It cannot then be said, that
the Idea's of things were created with us, and that this is sufficient for our
perceiving the Objects that are round about us,

Nor can it be said, that GOD produces every moment so many new Idea's, as we
perceive different things. This is sufficiently refuted, by what has been said
in this Chapter. Besides it is necessary, we should actually have in our selves
the Idea's of all things at all times, since at all times we can Will the
conceiving all things. Which we could never do, unless we had already a
confused Perception of them; that is, unless we had an infinite number of
Idea's present to our Mind. For, to conclude, we cannot Will the Thinking on
Objects, whereof we have no Idea.

CHAP. V.
That the Mind perceives neither the Essence nor the Existence of Objects, by
considering its own Perfections. That none but GOD sees them in that manner.

THE fourth Opinion is, That the Mind stands in need of nothing, but it self,
to perceive Objects; and that it may by reflecting on it self and its own
Perfections, discover all things that are External to it.

It is certain that the Soul perceives in her self, and without Idea's, all the
Sensations and Passions she is capable of: Pleasure, Pain, Cold, Heat, Colors,
Sounds, Odours, Tastes, her Love, her Hatred, her Joy, her Sorrow, and the rest:
Because all the Sensations, and Passions of the Soul, represent nothing out of
her self, which resembles them, and they are only the Modifications the Mind is
capable of. But the difficulty lies in knowing, whether the Idea's that
represent things exterior to the Soul, and resemble them in one manner, as the
Idea's of the Sun, of an House, of an Horse, of a River, are nothing but the
Modifications of the Soul: So that the Mind has no need of any thing but it
self, to represent all these things that are without it.

There are those who make no scruple to affirm, That the Soul being made for
Thinking, has in it self, I mean by considering its own Perfections, all that
is necessary to its Perception of Objects: For being in Effect more noble than
all the things it distinctly conceives, it may be said to contain them in some
Eminent sort, as the Schools love to speak; that is, in a more noble and
sublimated manner than they are in themselves. They pretend that superior
Beings comprehend after this manner the Perfections of the inferior. And
hereupon, being the noblest Creatures that they know, they flatter themselves
with possessing in a Spiritual manner all that is in the Visible World, and
with being able by diversely modifying themselves, to perceive all that the
Humane Mind can attain to know. In a word, they would have the Soul to be a
sort of an Intelligible World; that comprehends in it self the Material and
Sensible World, and infinitely more.

But methinks it is a bold Stroke, to offer a Defense of this Opinion: It Is, if
I mistake not, a Natural Vanity, the love of Independency, and the desire of
resembling Him, who comprehends in Himself all Beings; that confounds the Mind,
and makes us imagine our selves the Possessors of what we have not. Say not,
says St. Augustine, that ye are a Light to your selves. For it is only GOD that
is a Light to Himself, Dic quia tu tibi lumen non es. Sermon. 8. de verbis Domini.
and who may by considering Himself, see all that he has produced, and all that
he is able to produce.

It Is most certain, That there was none but GOD before the Creation of the
World, and that He was not able to produce it without Knowledge, or without
Idea: That consequently the Idea's which GOD had, are not different from
Himself; and so all the Creatures, even the most Terrestrial and Material are
in GOD, though in a manner altogether Spiritual, and to us incomprehensible.

GOD sees therefore in Himself all Beings, by Reflection made on His own
Perfections that represent them to Him. He has besides the perfect Knowledge of
their Existence: For since they depend upon His Will for their Existence, and
He cannot be ignorant of His own Wills; it follows that He cannot be ignorant
of their Existence; and consequently GOD beholds within Himself not only the
Essence of things, but their Existence also.

But it is not the same with Created Spirits, as not being able to see in
themselves either the Essence or the Existence of Things. They cannot see the
Essence of them in themselves, since being of a short and limited Capacity,
they contain not all Beings, as GOD does; who may be styled an Universal Being;
or simply He that is, as He calls Himself. Seeing then the Humane Mind is
capable of knowing all Beings, and Infinite Beings, and yet contains them not
in it self; it is an infallible Argument, that it sees not their Essence in it
self. For the Mind has not only a successive sight of first one thing, then
another, it also actually perceives INFINITE: Though it does not comprehend it,
as has been said in the foregoing Chapter. Wherefore being neither actually
infinite, nor capable of infinite Modifications at the same time, it is
absolutely impossible it should see in it self what it does not contain; it
sees not then the Essence of things by considering its own Perfections, or by
the diverse modifying of it self.

Nor does it see their Existence in it self, because they depend not on its
Will for their Existence; and the Idea's of things may be present to the Mind,
though they do not exist at all. For every one may have the Idea of a golden
Mountain, though there be no such thing as a golden Mountain in Nature: And
though we rely on the Testimonies of the Senses in our judging of the Existence
of Objects, yet Reason does not assure us that we ought always to believe them,
since we manifestly discover that they abuse us. When a Man's Blood, for
instance, is well warmed, or only when he sleeps, he sees sometimes before his
Eyes, Fields, Battles, and the like, which yet are not present, and which
possibly never were. It Is then indubitable, that the Mind neither in it self,
nor by it self, sees the Existence of things, but in that particular depends on
something else.

CHAP. VI.
That we see all things in GOD.

WE have examined in the preceding Chapters Four different ways for the Mind's
perceiving External Objects; none of which seems likely to be true. There only
remains the Fifth, which alone seems agreeable to Reason, and the properest to
manifest the Dependence our Minds have on GOD in all our Thoughts.

It Is requisite to our perfect Understanding it, to call to Mind what has been
delivered in the foregoing Chapter, viz. That it is absolutely necessary for GOD
to have in Himself the Idea's of all the Beings He has created, since otherwise
he could not have produced them: And that hereby he sees all these Beings by
considering the Perfections he includes, whereunto they are related. We ought
to know farther, that GOD is most strictly united to our Souls by His Presence;
so that He may be said to be the place of Spirits, as Space is the place of
Bodies. These two things being supposed, it is certain that the Mind can see
what there is in GOD, which represents Created Beings; that being most
Spiritual, most Intelligible, and most closely Present to the Mind. And so the
Mind may see in GOD all the Works of GOD, supposing GOD willing to discover to
it what He has in Himself, that represents them. Here then are the Reasons
which seem to prove He would rather do this, than create an infinite number of
Idea's in every Mind.

In the first place, though it be not denied absolutely that GOD might have
made infinite upon infinite Numbers of Beings, Representative of Objects with
every Mind he has created; yet it is not to be believed that He has done it.
For it is not only most agreeable to Reason, but moreover apparent from the
Economy of all Nature, that GOD never effects by most Round-about and
difficult ways, what can be done in ways most simple and easy: GOD makes
nothing needless, and without Reason. That which shows His Wisdom and His
Power, is not the working little things by great means; this is against Reason,
and the sign of a limited Understanding: But on the contrary, the effecting
great things by most simple and easy ways. Thus it is that purely with
Extension He produces all we see admirable in Nature; even that which gives
Life and Motion to Animals. For those who would have absolute Substantial Forms
and Faculties, and Souls in Animals, distinguished from the Blood and Organs of
their Body, for the performance of their functions, will at the same time have
GOD to want Understanding, or suppose him unable to effect those admirable
things with Extension all alone. They measure the Power of GOD and His supreme
Wisdom, by the Littleness of their own Mind. Since then it is possible for GOD
to to make all things visible to our Minds, by simply Willing they should see
what is in the midst of themselves; that is, what He has in Himself, Relative
and Representative of these things; it is not likely He should have done
otherwise; and that He should produce for that purpose infinite upon infinite
Idea's, with every Mind that He has created.

But it is to be well observed, that we cannot conclude that our Minds see the
Essence of GOD, from their seeing all things in GOD in this Nature: because
what they see is most imperfect, whereas GOD is most perfect. They see matter
Divisible, Figured, etc. and in GOD there is nothing Divisible or Figured. For
GOD is all Being, as being infinite, and comprehending all; But He is not any
Being in particular; mean while what we see, is only one or more Beings in
particular, and we comprehend not that perfect Simplicity of GOD, who concludes
all Beings within Himself. Besides which it may be said, that we see not the
Idea's of Things, so much as the Things represented by the Idea's; for in
seeing a Square, for instance, we use not to say, we see the Idea of that
Square which is united to the Mind, but only the Square that is without.

The second Reason which obliges me to think that we see all Beings, because
GOD wills the discovery of what is in Himself, representing them; and not
because we have so many Idea's created with us, as there are things to be seen,
is, that this instates created Minds in an absolute Dependence upon GOD, and in
the greatest that possibly can be. For it being so, we not only can see nothing
but what GOD will have us see, but also can see nothing, except what He makes
us see. We are not sufficient of our selves, but our sufficiency is of GOD: 2
Cor. 3.5.
Non sumus sufficientes cogitare aliquid a nobis tanquam ex nobis, sed
sufficientia nostra ex Deo est. It Is GOD Himself that enlightens the
Philosophers, in that Science which ungrateful Men call Natural, though it is
derived to them from Heaven. GOD has showed it unto them: Deus enim illis
manifestavit. Romans 1.19 Jac. 1.17. Ps. 94.10. Joh. 1.9.
He is properly the Light of the Mind, and the Father of Lights: Pater Luminum.
It Is He who teaches Men Knowledge: Qui docet hominem Scientiam. In a word, He
is the true Light, that lights every Man that comes into the World. Lux vera
quae illuminat omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum.

For it is no easy thing to comprehend distinctly the Dependence our Minds have
on GOD, in all their particular Actions; supposing they have every thing, we
distinctly know to be necessary to their Acting, or all the Idea's of things
present to their Mind. And that general and confused term Concourse, whereby
they offer to explain the Dependence Creatures have on GOD, raises no distinct
Idea in a considerate Mind; and yet it is convenient Men should most distinctly
know, how altogether impotent they are without GOD.

But the strongest Reason of all, is the manner of conduct the Mind takes in
the perceiving every thing: It is manifest, and known to every one's own
experience, that when we would think on any thing in particular, we first cast
about our View upon all Beings in general, and afterward apply our selves to
the consideration of the Object we desire to think on: Now it is undoubtedly
certain, that we could not desire the sight of any particular Object, but we
must have already seen it, though it were confusedly and in general: So that it
being possible to desire the seeing all Beings, sometimes one, and sometimes
another, it is certain that all Beings are present to our Mind; and it seems
that all Beings can be no otherwise present to our Mind, than as GOD is present
to it; that is, He that contains all things in the simplicity of his Essence.

It seems too that the Mind would not be capable of representing to it self the
universal Idea's of Genus, Species, and the like, unless it saw all Beings
included in one. For every Creature being a particular Being, it cannot be said,
we see any thing created when we see, for example, a Triangle in general. In
fine, I do not believe there is any way of accounting for the manner of the
Mind's knowing several abstract and general Truths, but by the presence of Him
who can enlighten the Mind ten thousand different ways.

In short, the finest, the most sublime, the most solid and primary proof (or
that which supposes least things) of the Existence of a GOD, is the Idea we
have of what is infinite: For it is certain that the Mind perceives infinite,
though it does not comprehend it; and that it has a most distinct Idea of GOD,
which can only arrive, through the Union it has with Him. Since it is
inconceivable, that the Idea of a Being infinitely perfect, as is that we have
of GOD, should be any thing of a created Nature.

But the Mind has not only the Idea of infinite, but this Idea is precedaneous
to that of finite: For we conceive infinite Being, from our conceiving Being
only, not considering whether it be finite or infinite. But in order to
conceive Finite Being, it is necessary to prescind somewhat from that general
Notion of Being, which consequently must precede it. So then the Mind perceives
not any thing, except in the Idea it has of Infinite; and so far is that Idea
from being formed of a confused collection of all the Idea's of particular
Beings, as the Philosophers imagine; that on the contrary, all these particular
Idea's are only participations of that general Idea of infinite; as GOD derives
not his Being from the Creatures, but all the Creatures have their subsistence
from Him.

The last Proof, which possibly may go for a Demonstration with those who are
used to abstract Reasonings, is this. It Is impossible for GOD to have any other
Principal End of his Actions than Himself. This is a common Notion with all Men
capable of any Reflection; and Holy Scripture will not suffer us to doubt, that
GOD has created all things for Himself. It is necessary then not only that our
Natural Love, I mean the Motion he produces in our Mind, should tend toward
him; but also that the Knowledge and the Light he gives it, should discover
something to us which is in Him: For all that comes from GOD, can have no other
End but GOD. If GOD has made a Mind, and given it the Sun for its Idea, or for
the immediate Object of its Knowledge, GOD, we should think, had made that Mind
and the Idea of that Mind for the Sun, and not for Himself.

GOD cannot therefore make a Mind for the Knowledge of his Works, were it not
that this Mind should in some sort see GOD in contemplating his Works. So that
it may be said, that unless we saw GOD in some manner, we should see nothing at
all; just as we should love nothing at all, except we loved GOD; that is,
except GOD continually impressed on us the love of Good in general. For that
Love being our Will, we are unable to love any thing, or will any thing without
Him; since we cannot love particular Goods, but by determining toward these
Goods the motion of Love that GOD gives us for Himself. Thus as we love not any
thing, but by means of that necessary Love we have for GOD; so we know nothing,
but through that necessary Knowledge we have of Him, all the particular Idea's
which we have of the Creatures, being only the Restrictions of the Idea of the
Creator, as all the Motions of the Will toward the Creatures, are only
Determinations of the Motion toward the Creator.

I suppose there is no Theologist but will agree with me in this, that the
Impious love GOD, with this Natural Love I speak of: And St. Augustine, and some
other of the Fathers maintained it as a thing undoubted, that the Wicked see in
GOD the Rules of Morals, and eternal Truths. So that the Opinion I am
explaining ought not to trouble any body. Ab illa incommutabili luce Veritatis,
Lib* 14. de Trin. cap. 13.
etiam impius, dum ab ea avertitur, quodammodo tangitur. Hinc est quod etiam
impii cogitant aeternitatem, and multa recte reprehendunt recteque laudant in
hominum moribus. Quibus ea tandem regulis judicant, nisi in quibus vident,
quemadmodum quisque vivere debeat, etiamsi nec ipsi eodem modo vivant? Vbi
autem eas vident? Neque enim in sua natura. Nam cum proculdubio mente ista
videantur, eorumque mentes constet esse mutabiles, has vero regulas
immutabiles, videat quisquis in eis and hoc videre potuerit..... Vbinam ergo
sunt istae regulae scriptae, nisi in libro lucis illius, quae veritas dicitur,
unde lex omnis justa describitur......in qua videt quid operandum sit etiam qui
operatur injustitiam, and ipse est qui ab ea luce avertitur a qua tamen
tangitur.

There are in St. Augustine infinite passages of the like Nature, whereby he
proves that we see GOD, even in this Life, through the Knowledge we have of
eternal Truths. Truth is uncreated, immutable, immense, eternal, and above all
things. It is true independently, and by it self, and is beholden to nothing
else for its Perfection. It renders the Creatures more perfect, and all Spirits
are naturally solicitous to know it; nothing can have all these Perfections,
except GOD; therefore Truth is GOD. We see immutable and eternal Truths,
therefore we see GOD. These are the Reasons of St. Augustine. My own are
somewhat different; and I would not unjustly usurp the Authority of so Great a
Man to countenance my Opinion.

It Is my thoughts then that Truths, even those which are eternal, as That twice
two are four, are not so much as absolute Beings; so far am I from believing
them to be GOD. For it is manifest that this Truth consists only in the Relation
of Equality, which is between twice two and four. We do not say then with St.
Augustine, That we see GOD in seeing eternal Truths, but in seeing the Idea's of
these Truths; for Idea's are real, but the Equality between Idea's, which is
the Truth, has nothing real in it. When, for instance, we say, the Cloth we
measure is three Else long. The Cloth and the Else are real, but the Equality
between the three Else and the Cloth is no real Being, but only a Relation
intervening between them. In saying, Twice two are four, the Idea's of the
Numbers are real, but the Equality between them is only a Relation. And thus
according to our own Opinion, we see GOD in seeing eternal Truths; not that
these Truths are GOD, but because the Idea's on which these Truths depend,
exist in GOD; and perhaps too St. Augustine understood it so. We are persuaded
also that we know changeable and corruptible Truths in GOD, though St. Augustine
speaks only of the immutable and incorruptible; since there is no need of
subjecting GOD to any imperfection on this account, nothing being more
required, than that GOD gives us a Manifestation of what He has in Himself,
which relates to these things.

But when I say, that we see in GOD material and sensible Things, special
Notice should be taken that I don't say, We have the Sensations of them in GOD,
but only that they proceed from GOD, who acts upon us. For GOD perfectly knows
sensible things; but not by any Sensation. In perceiving any thing of a
sensible Nature, two things occur in our Perception; Sensation, and Pure Idea.
The Sensation is a Modification of our Soul, and it is GOD who causes it in us;
which he is able to cause, though He has it not Himself; because he sees in the
Idea he has of our Soul, that it is capable of it: As to the Idea, which is
found joined to the Sensation; that is in GOD, and we see it, because he is
pleased to discover it to us. And GOD joins the Sensation to the Idea when the
Objects are present, to the intent we may believe them so, and may enter into
the Sentiments and Passions, that we ought to have with relation to them.

We believe lastly, that all Spirits see the eternal Laws, no less than other
things in GOD; but with some difference. They know the Divine Order, and the
Eternal Truths, and even the Beings GOD has made, according to this Order, and
these Truths, through the Union they necessarily have with the WORD, or the
WISDOM of GOD, who enlightens them, as we have before explained. But it is
through the impression they without intermission receive from the Will of GOD,
which carries them toward Him, and strives, as I may so say, to conform their
Will entirely like His own; that they know this Order to be a Law; I mean that
they know the Eternal Laws; as that Good ought to be loved, and Evil avoided;
that Righteousness ought to be loved more than Riches; that it is better to obey
GOD than to command Men, and infinite other Natural Laws. For the knowledge of
all these Laws is not different from the knowledge of that impression which
they constantly feel within themselves, though they do not always follow it by
the free choice of their Will; and which they know to be common to all Minds,
though it be not equally strong and powerful in them all.

It Is by this Dependence of our Mind, and its Relation, and Union to the WORD
of GOD: and of our Will to his Love, that we are made after the Image and
Similitude of GOD. And though this Image be very much blurred and defaced by
Sin, yet it is necessary for it to subsist as long as we our selves. But if we
bear the Image of the WORD humbled upon Earth, and obey the Motions of the Holy
Spirit; that Primitive Image of our first Creation, that Union of our Mind to
the WORD of the FATHER, and to the Love of the FATHER, and of the SON, will be
repaired, and be made indelible. We shall become like GOD, if we be like the
Man-God. Lastly, GOD will be wholly in us, and we shall be wholly in GOD, in a
far perfecter manner, than that whereby it is necessary to our Subsistence,
that we should be in Him, and He in us.

These then are some of the Reasons that induce us to believe, See the
Illustrations.
that our Minds perceive all things through the intimate presence of Him, who
comprehends all things in the Simplicity of his Essence. Let every one judge of
them, according to the internal conviction he shall receive, after he has
seriously considered them. But for my own part, I can see no probability, in
any other way of explaining it, and I presume this last will appear more than
probable.

Thus our Souls depend on GOD all manner of ways. For as it is He who makes
them feel Pleasure and Pain, and all the other Sensations, by the Natural Union
He has instituted between them and their Bodies, which is no other than His
Decree and general Will: So it is He, who by means of the Natural Union He has
placed between the Will of Man, and the Representation of Idea's, included in
the immensity of the Divine Essence, gives them to know all that they know: Nor
is this Natural Union any thing but his general Will. So that it is He only who
can enlighten us, by representing all things to us, as it is He alone that can
make us happy, by giving us to taste all sorts of Pleasures.

Let us persist then in our persuasion, that GOD is the intelligible World, or
the place of Spirits, as the material World is the place of Bodies. That it is
from His Power they receive all their Modifications; that it is in His Wisdom
they discover all their Idea's; and it is by His Love they are influenced with
all their regulated Motions: And because His Power and His Love are nothing but
Himself; let us believe with St. Paul, that He is not far from every one of us,
and that in Him we live, Act. Apost c. 17.28.
and move, and have our Being. Non long est ab unoquoque nostrum, in ipso enim
vivimus, movemur, and sumus.

CHAP. VII.
I. Four different manners of Perception. II. How it is that we know GOD. III.
How we know Bodies. IV. How we know our own Souls. V. How we know the Souls of
other Men, and Pure Spirits.

IN order to give an extract and illustration of the Notion I have just
established, concerning the manner of our Minds perceiving all the different
Objects of its knowledge, it is necessary I should distinguish in it Four
manners or ways of Knowing things.

I. Four different manners of Perception.
The First is that whereby we know things by themselves.

The Second is that of knowing them by their Idea's; that is, as I understand
it in this place, by something that is different from themselves.

The Third is that of Conscience, or by internal Sensation.

The Fourth is their knowing them by Conjecture.

We know things by themselves immediately and without Idea's, when being of a
most intelligible Nature they can penetrate the Mind, or discover themselves to
it. We know things by their Idea's when they are not intelligible by
themselves, whether because they are Corporeal, or that they cannot penetrate
the Mind, or discover themselves to it. We know by Conscience whatever is not
distinguished from our selves. Lastly, we know by Conjecture the things which
are different from our selves, and from those we know in themselves, and by
Idea's, when we think that some things are like some others that we already
know.

Of all the things that come under our Knowledge we know none but GOD by
Himself. For though there be other Spiritual Beings besides Him; and such as
seem intelligible by their own Nature; yet in our present State there is none
but He that penetrates the Mind, and discovers Himself to it. II. How we know
GOD*
It Is GOD alone that we see with an immediate and direct View; and possibly He
alone is able to enlighten the Mind by his own Substance. Finally, in this
Life, it is from nothing but the Union that we have with Him, that we are
capable of knowing what we know, as has been explained in the foregoing
Chapter. For he only is our Master, who presides over our Mind, according to
St. Austin, without the Deputation or Interposition of any Creature. Humanis
mentibus nulla interposita natura praesidet. Aug. lib. de vera Relig. c. 55.


It cannot be conceived, that any thing Created can represent infinite, that
Being without restriction, the immense Being, the universal Being, can be
perceived by an Idea, that is, by a particular Being, and a Being different
from the universal and infinite Being. But as to particular Beings, there is no
difficulty to conceive how they can be represented by the infinite Being that
includes them, and includes them in a most Spiritual, and consequently most
intelligible manner. Thus it is necessary to say that GOD is intelligible by
Himself, though the knowledge we have* of Him in this Life be very imperfect
and confused; and that Corporeal things are intelligible by their Idea's; that
is to say, in GOD; since GOD alone contains the intelligible World, wherein are
found the Idea's of all things.

But though things are possible to be seen in GOD, it does not follow that we
do see all things in Him: We see only those things in Him whereof we have
Idea's, and there are things We see without Idea's.

III. How we know Bodies.
All things in the World, whereof we have any knowledge, are either Bodies or
Spirits; properties of Bodies, and properties of Spirits. As to Bodies, it is
not to be doubted but we see them together with their Properties by their
Idea's, forasmuch as being unintelligible of themselves, there is no
possibility of seeing them, except in that Being which contains them in an
intelligible manner. Bodies then and their Properties are seen in GOD, and by
their Idea's; and for this reason the knowledge we have of them is most
perfect. I mean, that the Idea that we have of Extension, is sufficient for the
displaying to us all the Properties Extension is capable of; and we cannot
desire a more distinct and fertile Idea of Extension of Figures, and Motions,
than that which GOD furnishes us withal.

As the Idea's of things which are in GOD, include all their Properties; in
seeing their Idea's we can see successively all the Properties of them: for in
seeing things as they are in GOD, we constantly see them in the most perfect
manner, and the knowledge of them would be infinitely Perfect, if the Mind that
perceives them in him were infinite. What is wanting to our knowledge of
Extension, its Figures, and Motions, is not the defectiveness of the Idea that
represents it, but of our Mind that considers it.

But it is not so in point of the Soul; we know her not by her Idea; we see her
not in GOD; IV. How we know the Soul.
we know her only by Conscience: and for that reason the knowledge we have of
her is imperfect. We know nothing of our Soul, but what we feel pass within us.
If we never had had the sensation of Pain, Pleasure, Light, etc. it were
impossible for us to know whether the Soul was capable of them, because we know
her not by her Idea. But if we saw in GOD the Idea that answers to our Soul, we
should at the same time know, or at least, See the Illustrations.
might know all the Properties she is capable of; as we know all the Properties
Extension is capable of, because we know Extension by its Idea.

It is true we know well enough by our Conscience, or by the internal sentiment
we have of our selves, that our Soul is something great and excellent: But it is
possible that what we know of her, is the least part of what she is in her
self. If all we knew of Matter, were only Twenty or Thirty Figures, wherewith
it had been modified, certainly our knowledge of it had been very
inconsiderable, in comparison of what we know by the Idea that represents it.
To understand then the Soul perfectly, it is not sufficient to know that only,
which we receive by internal Sentiment, since our Self-Consciousness discovers
to us, it may be but the least part of our Being.

It may be concluded from what has been said, that though we know the existence
of our Soul better than the existence of our Body, or than of the things about
us, yet we have not so perfect knowledge of the Nature of our Soul, as of the
Nature of our Body; which may serve to reconcile the different Sentiments of
those who say there is nothing better known than the Soul, and of others that
affirm we understand nothing less.

This too may be of Use to prove that the Idea's, which represent something to
us that is External, are not Modifications of our Soul. For if the Soul saw all
things by considering her own Modifications, she ought to have a more clear and
perspicuous knowledge of her own Essence or Nature, than of that of Bodies; and
of the Sensations or Modifications she is capable of, than of all the Figures
or Modifications incident to Bodies. Mean while, she knows not that she is
capable of this or that Sensation, by any View she takes of her self, but by
Experience; whereas she knows Extension to be capable of an infinite number of
Figures by the Idea which represents Extension. There are morover certain
Sensations as Colors and sounds, which the generality of Men cannot discover
to be Modifications of the Soul; but there are no Figures which every one does
not know by the Idea he has of Extension, to be the Modifications of Bodies.

What I have been saying, shows likewise the reason why we cannot give a
Definition explanatory of the Modifications of the Soul. For since we know
neither the Soul, nor its Modifications by Idea's, but only by Sensations; and
such Sensations of Pleasure, for instance, Pain, Heat, or the like, have no
Connection with Words; It is plain that had a Man never seen Color, nor felt
Heat, he could not be made to understand these Sensations by all the
Definitions in the World. Now Men having their Sensations occasionally from the
Body, and all Men's Bodies being not disposed alike, it often happens, that
these words are Equivocal: and that those which are employed to express the
Modifications of our Soul, signify quite contrary to what they design: so that
they often, for instance, make a Man think of Bitter, when it is supposed they
make him think of Sweet.

But though we have not an entire knowledge of our Soul, we are sufficiently
instructed by Conscience, for demonstrating her Immortality, Spirituality,
Liberty, and some other Attributes which it is necessary for us to know; and
for that reason GOD manifests her not to us by her Idea, in the way that he
gives us to know Bodies. True, the knowledge we have of our Soul by Conscience
is imperfect, but it is not false: the knowledge on the contrary we have of
Bodies, by Sensation or Conscience, if we may term Conscience that Sensation we
have of what occurrs in our Bodies, is not only imperfect, but also false.
Wherefore the Idea of Bodies was necessary to correct the Sensations we had of
them. But we have no need of the Idea of the Soul, since the Consciousness we
have of her, engages us not in Error; and there is no fear of mistaking in the
Knowledge of her, if we be careful not to confound her with the Body; which
may be done by Reason. Lastly, if we had had a clear Idea of the Soul, as we
have of the Body, that Idea had made us consider her as too separate from it,
and so it had weakened the union of our Soul with our Body, by hindering us from
regarding our Soul, as expanded through all our Members: which I explain not
more at large.

There remains now no other Objects of our Knowledge to be spoke to, than the
Souls of other Men, and pure Intelligences, and it is manifest we know them only
by Conjecture. V. How we know the Souls of other Men.
We know them not at present, either in themselves, or by their Idea's: and
whereas they are different from us, it is not possible to know them by
Conscience. We conjecture that the Souls of other men are of the same Species
with our own. What we feel in our selves, we presume that they feel too: and
when these Sentiments have no Relation to our Body, we are sure we are not
deceived; because we see certain Idea's and immutable Laws in GOD, according to
which we are certainly assured that GOD acts equally on all Spirits.

I know, that twice two are four; that it is better to be Righteous than Rich:
and I am not deceived in believing others know these Truths, as well as I. I
love Good and Pleasure, I hate Evil and Pain: I am willing to be happy, and I
am not deceived in thinking all Men, and Angels, and even Devils, have the same
Inclinations. I know likewise that GOD will never make Spirits undesirous of
Happiness, or that can be desirous of being Miserable. But I know it with
evidence and certainty, since it is GOD that teaches me: for who could inform me
of the Designs and Wills of GOD, but GOD Himself. But when the Body is a
partner in that which occurrs within me, I am almost ever deceived, if I
measure others by my self. I feel Heat, I see a thing of such a Size, or such a
Color; I have such or such a Taste, upon the application of certain Bodies to
my Palate: and I am deceived, if I judge of others by my self: I am subject to
particular Passions, I have a kindness or aversion to this or that thing, and I
judge that others have the like: but my Conjecture is often false. Thus the
Knowledge we have of other Men is very obnoxious to Error, if we judge of them
only from the Sensations we have of our selves.

Whether there are any Beings different from GOD, our selves, Bodies, and Pure
Spirits, is unknown to us. We can hardly persuade our selves there are; and
after we have examined the Reasons of some Philosophers, who pretend the
contrary, we have found them false: Which has confirmed us in the Notion we had
taken up, that all Men being of the same Nature, we have all the same Idea's,
as having all need of the Knowledge of the same things.

CHAP. VIII.
I. The intimate Presence of the indefinite Idea of Being in general, is the
cause of all the disorderly Abstractions of the Mind: and the most part of the
Chimera's of the Vulgar Philosophy, which hinder many Philosophers from
acknowledging the solidity of true Principles of Physics. II. An Instance
concerning the Essence of Matter.

I. The intimate Presence of the indefinite Idea of Being in general, is the
cause of all the disorderly Abstractions of the Mind: and the most part of the
Chimaera's of the Vulgar Philosophy, which hinder many Philosophers from
acknowledging the solidity of true Principles of Physic.
THAT clear, intimate, and necessary Presence of GOD: I mean that presence of
Being without any particular Limitation; of Being infinite, and in general, to
the Mind, acts stronglier upon it, than the pre^ence of all finite Objects. It
is impossible to divest it self absolutely of this general Idea of Being; since
it is impossible to subsist out of GOD. Perhaps it may be said, that the Mind
can separate it self from him, because it can think on particular Beings. But
this is a mistake. For the Mind in considering any Being in particular, does
not so much separate and recede from GOD, as approach nearer some of His
Perfections, if I may be permitted so to speak, by removing farther off from
others. However, it does not distance it self in that manner, as quite to lose
sight of them; but is ever in a Capacity of seeking them out, and approaching
near them. They are ever present to the Mind, yet the Mind perceives them not
but in an unexplicable confusion, by reason of its Littleness, and the
Greatness of the Idea of Being: A Man may indeed be some time without thinking
on himself; but he cannot, as I think, subsist a moment without thinking on
Being; and even at the time a Man believes he thinks of nothing, he is
necessarily full of the indeterminate and general Idea of Being. But because
the things which are customary to us, and which don't affect us, alarm not the
Mind with any vehemence, nor oblige it to make reflection on them: this Idea of
being so great, so vast, so real, and positive as it is, is so familiar to us,
and makes so little impression, that we fancy that we hardly see it; that we
make no reflection on it; and consequently judge there is little reality in it:
and that it is only formed from a confused collection of all particular Idea's;
though on the contrary it is in this, and by this only, we perceive all Beings
in particular.

Though that Idea which we receive through our immediate union with the WORD of
GOD, never deceives us of it self, as do those we derive from the union we have
with our Body, which represents things to us otherwise than they are; yet I
scruple not to say, That we make so bad use of the best things, that the
indelible presence of this Idea, is one of the principal Causes of all the
disorderly Abstractions of the Mind; and consequently of all that Abstract and
Chimerical Philosophy, which explains all Natural Effects, by the general terms
of Act, Power, Cause, Effect, Substantial Forms, Faculties, Occult Qualities,
Sympathy, Antipathy, etc. For it is certain these Terms, and a great many
others, excite no other Idea's in the Mind, than indeterminate and general
Idea's; that is, Idea's which readily offer themselves to the Mind, without any
trouble, and application on our own part.

Let a Man read with all Attention possible, all the Definitions and
Explications given of Substantial ^orms; let him do his best to search wherein
consists the Essence of all these Entities, which the fruitful Imagination of
Philosophers produces in such multitudes at pleasure, that they are forced to
divide them, and subdivide them over and over again; and I dare engage, that he
shall never excite in his Mind, any other Idea of all these things, than that
of Being, and of Cause in general.

For let us take a view of the customary proceedings of Philosophers. They
observe some new Effect, and presently imagine some new Entity must produce it.
The Fire heats; there is then in the Fire some Entity to produce this Effect,
which differs from the Matter the Fire is composed of: And because Fire is
capable of many different Effects, as of separating Bodies, Pulverizing
Vitrifying, Drying, Hardening, Softning, Dilating, Purifying, and Enlightening
them, etc. therefore they liberally bestow on Fire so many Faculties, or real
Qualities, as it is capable of producing different Effects.

But if we reflect on all the Definitions they give of these Faculties, we
shall find they are nothing else but Logical Definitions, which raise no other
Idea's, than that of Being and Cause in general, which the Mind refers to the
Effect that is produced. So that a Man is nothing the wiser when he has studied
them never so long: For all that is got by this sort of Study, is the imagining
we know better than others, what indeed we know much worse; not only because we
admit many Entities that never were; but also in being prepossessed, we make
our selves incapable of conceiving how it is possible for Matter all alone, as
that of Fire, in being moved against Bodies differently disposed, to produce
all the different Effects we see Fire produce.

It is manifest to all those who have read any thing, That almost all the Books
of Science, and especially those which treat of Physics, Medicine, and
Chemistry, and of all particular things of Nature, are full of nothing but
Argumentations, founded on the Elementary and Secondary Qualities, as
Attractive, Retentive, Concoctive, Expulsive, and such like; upon others which
they term Occult; upon specific Virtues; and many other Entities, which Men
frame and make up out of the general Idea of Being, and out of the Cause of the
Effect which they see; which methinks could not happen, were it not for the
facility they have at considering the Idea of Being in general, which is always
present to their Mind, through the intimate presence of Him who includes all
Beings.

If the vulgar Philosophers would be content to let their Physics go for
simple Logicks; which furnished out Terms for the Discoursing of Natural
things, and if they would give those Men leave to be quiet, who affix to these
Terms distinct and particular Idea's, to make themselves intelligible, we
should have nothing to reprehend in their Conduct: But they set up themselves
for the explaining Nature, by general and abstract Idea's, as if Nature were
her self abstract; and will absolutely have the Physics of their Master
Aristotle, to be real Physics, which searches to the bottom of things, and not
a simple Logic only; though it has nothing sufferable in it, except it be some
Definitions, so loose and indefinite, and some so general Terms, as may be
employed in all sorts of Philosophy. In fine, their Heads are so full of these
imaginary Entities, and these loose and indeterminate Idea's, which spring up
naturally in their Minds, that they are too incapable of fixing their Thoughts
for any time upon the real Idea's of things, to discover their solidity and
evidence. And this is the Cause of that their extreme ignorance of the true
Principles of Natural Philosophy. It Is necessary to give a proof of it.

The Philosophers are sufficiently agreed, That that ought to be looked upon as
the Essence of a thing, which is acknowledged the First in that thing, which is
inseparable from it, II. Of the Essence of Matter. If this Definition of the
word Essence be admitted, all the rest is absolutely demonstrated; if it be not
admitted, it is only a nominal Question, wherein consists the Essence of Matter;
or rather, it cannot be the subject of a Question.
and on which all the Properties which belong to it, depend: So that to
discover wherein consists the Essence of Matter, we must consider all the
Properties that comport with it, or are included in the Idea we have of it: as
Hardness, Softness, Fluidness, Motion, Rest, Figure, Divisibility,
Impenetrability, and Extension; and enquire immediately which of these
Attributes is inseparable from it. Thus Fluidity, Hardness, Softness, Motion,
and Rest, being to be separated from Matter, since there are many Bodies
without Hardness, Fluidity, or Softness, which are not in Motion, or lastly
which are not at rest, it clearly follows that none of these Attributes are
essential to it.

And now there remain only four, which we conceive inseparable from Matter;
namely Figure, Divisibility, Impenetrability, and Extension; wherefore in order
to understand which Attribute is to be taken for its Essence, we must no longer
think of separating them, but only examine which is the Primary, and that
supposes none before it. Now we easily discover that Figure, Divisibility, and
Impenetrability, suppose Extension; and that Extension presupposes nothing: But
this being given, Divisibility, Impenetrability, and Figure, necessarily
follow. Extension then ought to be concluded the Essence of Matter, on
Supposition it has no other Attributes than those beforementioned, and such as
are like them: and I am persuaded no Man in the World can doubt of it, when he
has seriously considered it.

But all the difficulty is to know, Whether Matter has not some other
Attributes, different from Extension, and its Dependants; so that Extension it
self may not be essential to it, but may suppose some other thing, both as its
Subject, and its Pri^ciple.

Many Men, after having most attentively considered the Idea, which they have
of Matter, by all the Attributes that are known of it; after having meditated
likewise on the Effects of Nature, as much as their Strength and Capacity of
Mind would permit them, have been strongly convinced, that Extension supposes
not any thing in Matter, whether because they have had no distinct and
particular Idea of that thing pretended, precedaneous to Extension, or because
they have found no visible Effect to prove it.

For even as to our being persuaded that a Watch has no Entity, different from
the Matter, it is composed of; it suffices to know, how the different
Disposition of the Wheels is able to effect all the Movements of a Watch,
without having any other distinct Idea of what might possibly be the Cause of
these Motions, though there be many Logical to had. So because these Persons
have no distinct Idea of what could be in Matter, were Extension taken away,
and see no Attribute that can explicate its Nature, and because Extension being
granted, all the Attributes conceived to belong to Matter, are at the same time
granted: and because Matter is the Cause of no Effect, which may not be
conceived producible by Extension, diversely configur'd, and diversely moved;
therefore they are persuaded, that Extension is the Essence of Matter.

But as no Man can infallibly demonstrate there is not some Intelligence, or
New-created Entity in the Wheels of a Watch; so no Man can, without a
particular Revelation, be assured as of a Geometrical Demonstration, that there
is nothing but Extension diversely configur'd in a Stone. For it is absolutely
possible for Extention to be joined with something which we don't conceive,
because we have no Idea of it: though it seems very unreasonable to believe and
assert it; it being contrary to Reason, to assert what we neither know, nor
have any conception of.

Yet though we should suppose, That there were something besides Extension in
Matter, yet that would be no Impediment, if we well observe it, why Extension
should not be its Essence, according to the Definition we have given of the
Word. For, in short, it is absolutely necessary that every thing in the World,
should be either a Being, or a Mode of being; and no Thinking and Attentive Man
can deny it. But Extension is not the Mode of a Being; therefore it is a Being.
But because Matter is not constituted of several Beings; as Man, who is
composed of a Body and Mind; Matter being one simple Being, it is manifest that
Matter is nothing but Extension.

Now to prove that Extension is not a Mode of Being, but a real Being; it must
be observed, That a Mode of Being cannot be conceived, but the Being must at
the same time be conceived whereof it is the Mode: We cannot conceive
Rotundity, for Instance, but we must conceive Extension, because the Mode of
Being or Existence, being only the Being it self in such a sort of state, (the
Roundness of tbe Wax, for Instance, being but the Wax it self, in such a sort
or fashion); it is plain that we cannot conceive the Mode without the Being. If
then Extension were a Mode of Being, we could not conceive Extension without
the Being, whereof Extension was the Mode: whereas we easily conceive Extension
all alone. Wherefore it is not a Mode of Being: but consequently a Being of it
self. And so it is the Essence of Matter, since Matter is but a simple Being,
and not composed of many Beings: as I have already said.

But many Philosophers have so accustomed themselves to general Idea's, and
Logical Entities as to have their Mind more possessed with them, than those
that are distinct, particular, and Physical. Which is evident enough from
hence, that their Argumentations upon Natural things, are founded merely on
Logical Notions; such as Act, Power, and an infinite number of Imaginary
Entities, which they take no care to distinguish, from such as are Real. These
Gentlemen therefore finding it wonderful easy, to see after their manner what
they have a Mind to see, imagine they have better Eyes than other Men, and that
they perceive distinctly Extension supposes something else; and that it is only
a Property of Matter, which Matter may be divested of, as of the rest.

Yet if you make a Demand of them, that they would please to explain that thing
which they pretend to perceive in Matter, besides Extension; they offer to do
it several ways, every of which makes it apparent, that they have no other Idea
of it than that of Being, or of Substance in general. This is extremely
evident, if we take notice, That this their Idea includes no particular
Attributes, which agree to Matter. For whilst we take Extension from Matter, we
rob it of all the Attributes and Properties, which we distinctly conceive do
belong to it; and though we leave that imaginary thing, which they suppose the
Essence of it; it being manifest, that neither Earth nor Heaven, nor any thing
we see in Nature, could be made of it. Whereas on the contrary, if we take away
what they fancy, the Essence of Matter, provided we leave Extension, and we
leave all the Attributes and Properties we distinctly conceive, included in the
Idea of Matter: For it is certain, that out of Extension all alone might be
framed an Heaven, an Earth, and all the Visible World, and infinite others. So
this Something which they suppose over and above Extension, having no
Attributes distinctly to be conceived belonging to it, and clearly included in
the Idea we have of it, can have nothing real in it, if we will credit our
Reason; nor can be of any use in explaining Natural Effects. And that which is
said of its being the Subject and Principle of Extension, is said gratis, and
without any distinct Conception in them that say it; that is, they have no
other than a General and Logical Idea of it, as of Subject and Principle: In so
much that we may further imagine a new Subject, and a new Principle of this
Subject of Extension; and so in infinitum, the Mind having the Power of
representing the General Idea's of Subject and Principle, as long as it pleases.

It Is true there is a great probability, that Men had not so puzzled and
obscured the Idea that they have of Matter, had they not some Reasons for it;
and that there are many who maintain contrary Conclusions to these of ours,
upon Theological Principles. Doubtless Extension is not the Essence of Matter,
if that be contrary to our Faith: And we willingly acknowledge it. We are,
thank GOD, very well persuaded of the Feebleness, and Limitedness of an Humane
Mind. We know it is of too little Extent to measure an Infinite Power; that GOD
can do infinitely more than we can conceive; that he communicates only those
Idea's, which represent to us the things that arrive by the order of Nature,
and hides the rest from us. Wherefore we are always ready to submit our Reason
unto Faith; but there is need of better proofs than are generally urged, to
ruin the Reasons we have established: Because the manner of explaining the
Mysteries of Faith, are not of Faith, and we believe these Mysteries, without
conceiving how the manner of them can be distinctly explaind.

We believe, for instance, the Mystery of the TRINITY, though the Humane Mind
is unable to conceive it; and yet we cease not to believe, that the things that
differ not in any third, differ not in themselves: though this Proposition
seems to overthrow it. For we are convinced, that Reason is not to be made use
of, except in Subjects proportioned to its Capacity; and that we ought not to
look steadfastly on our Mysteries, for fear of being dazel'd by them, according
that Admonition of the Holy Spirit, Qui scrutator est Majestatis opprimetur a
gloria.

However, if we thought it convenient for the satisfaction of some Men's Minds
to explain how our Notion upon this matter may be reconciled, with what we are
taught by Faith concerning Transubstantiation; we probably could do it in a way
very distinct, and perspicuous and could no ways offend against the Decisions
of the Church: But we think this Explication may be dispensed with, especially
in this Work.

For it ought to be observed, That the Holy Fathers have almost always looked
upon it as an incomprehensible Mystery; and that they never played the
Philosophers to explain it: but contented themselves for the most part with
unexact Comparisons, fitter to make known the Doctrine than to give a
Satisfactory Explication to the Mind: Therefore Tradition is for such as
Philosophize not on this Mystery, and who sumit their Reason to the Rule of
Faith, without distracting their Brain to no purpose, about most abstruse and
difficult Questions.

We should be to blame, should we require the Philosophers, to give us clear
and easy Explications of the manner of our LORD's Body being in the Eucharist;
for this would be to demand of them novelties in Divinity. And in case the
Philosophers should make an impudent Answer to the Demand, they must be
necessarily obnoxious either to the having their Philosophy or Divinity
condemned. For if their Explications were obscure, they would give reason to
despise the Principles of their Philosophy; if their Answer were easy and
apparent we should have reason to be apprehensive of Novelty in their Divinity.

Since then Novelty in point of Divinity, bears the Impress and Character of
Error, and the World has a right and privilege of despising Opinions merely on
the Account of their being Novel, and having no foundation in Tradition; we
ought not to undertake to give easy and intelligible Explications of those
things, which the Fathers and Councels, have not perfectly explained: and it is
sufficient to hold the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, without offering to make
out the manner of it. For otherwise we might sow the seeds for fresh Disputes,
and Quarrels, whereof there are too many already; and the Enemies of the Truth
would not fail to use them to malicious purpose, and for the oppressing of
their Adversaries.

Disputes in point of Theological Explications, seem to be the most useless and
most dangerous of any; and they are with greater reason to be feared; for that
even Religious Persons often fancy they have a right of breaking their Charity
with such as break with their Opinions. We have but too common Experience of
this Practice; and the cause of it lies not very deep. Wherefore it is always
the best and surest way, not to be eager to speak of things whereof we have no
Evidence, and which others are not disposed to conceive.

Nor ought obscure and uncertain Explications of Mysteries of Faith, which we
are under no obligation to believe, to serve for a Rule and Principle for the
guiding our Reasonings in Philosophy, where nothing but Evidence ought to
persuade us. We are not to change the clear and distinct Idea's of Extension,
Figure, and Local Motion, for the general and confused Idea's of Principle, or
of subject of Extension, of Form of Quiddities, and Real Qualities, and of all
those Motions of Generation, Corruption, and Alteration, and others which
differ from Local Motion. Real Idea's will produce real Science: but from
general and Logical Idea's, can proceed nothing, but a random superficial and a
barren Science. Wherefore we ought with serious Reflection to attend to the
distinct and particular Idea's of things, for the discovering the Properties
they contain; and thereby study Nature instead of losing our selves in these
Chimera's, which are only the litter or offspring of some Philosopher's Brains.

CHAP. IX.
I. The last general Cause of our Errors. II. That the Idea's of things are not
always present to the Mind, when we would have them. III. That every finite
Mind is subject to Error, and why. IV. That we ought not to judge that there is
nothing but Body and Spirit: Nor that GOD is a Spirit, according to our
conception of Spirits.

I. The last general Cause of our Errors.
WE have hitherto treated of such Errors, as may have some occasional Cause
assigned in the Nature of the pure Intellect, or of the Mind, considered as
acting by it self: and in the nature of Idea's; that is to say, in the manner
of the Mind's perceiving external Objects. There remains only one Cause now to
be explained, which may be termed the universal and general Cause of our
Errors; because we can conceive no Error, that has not some sort of dependence
on it. The Cause is this: That Nothing having no Idea to represent it, the Mind
is carried to believe that the things whereof it has no Idea, have no Existence.

It Is certain that the general Source of our Errors, as we have often said, is
our Judgment's having greater extent and latitude, than our Perceptions. For
when we consider any Object, we commonly take the prospect but on one side of
it; but we are not content to judge only of that side we have considered, but
we pronounce of it all entire: And so it often fortunes that we are deceived;
for though the thing be true on the part we have Examined, it is commonly false
on the other we have not; and what we believe true, is no more than probable.
Now it is manifest that we should not judge thus absolutely on things as we do,
did we not think we had considered all the parts of them, or suppose them all
like that which we have examined. So the general Cause of our Errors lies in
this, that having no Idea of the other Faces of the Object, or of their
difference with that which is present to our Thoughts, we believe those other
Faces don't exist; or at least we suppose they have no particular difference.

This manner of acting we think reasonable enough: For since Nothing cannot
form any Idea in the Mind, we have some pretense to believe that the things,
that form no Idea in the Mind, at the time of our Examining them, resemble
Nothing: And that which confirms us in this Opinion, is our being persuaded by
a sort of Instinct, that the Idea's of things are due to our Nature, and are in
such wise subjected to the Mind, that they are obliged to pay their attendance,
when the Mind commands them.

II. That the Idea's of things are not always present to the Mind, when we
would have them.
However, if we would make a little Reflection upon the present state of our
Nature, we should hardly be so strongly bent upon believing all the Idea's of
things, so much at our beck and command. Man, as I may say, is only Flesh and
Blood, since Adam's Transgression: The least impression of his Senses and his
Passions interrupts the strongest Application of his Mind: and the current of
the Spirits and Blood, hurry it along with them, and drive it continually upon
sensible Objects. In vain it strives to withstand the Torrent it is carried by,
and rarely it is, that it thinks of resisting it; so pleasant it finds it to
follow, and so troublesome to struggle against the stream. The Mind therefore
is discouraged and dejected as soon as it has made an attempt to hold, and fix
it self upon a Truth; and it is absolutely false in the state we are in, that
the Idea's of things are present to the Mind, as often as we would consider
them: And therefore we ought not to judge that things are not in being, upon
the only score of our having no Idea's of them.

But though we should suppose Man absolute Master of his Mind, and its Idea's,
yet he would still be subject to Error, III. Every finite Mind is subject to
Error.
by the necessity of his Nature. For the Mind of Man is limited; and every
limited Mind is by Nature liable to Error. The reason whereof is this, that the
least things have Infinite Relations betwixt them, and require an Infinite Mind
to comprehend them. And therefore a limited Mind being unable to embrace, and
comprehend all these Relations, after all that ever it can do, a Man's inclined
to believe, that those which he does not perceive, don't exist; especially when
he does not consider the Weakness and Limitation of his Mind, as it is customary
for him not to do. And thus the Finiteness of the Mind alone, brings along with
it the Capacity of falling into Error.

Notwithstanding, if Men even in this their state of Infirmity and Corruption,
made always good use of their Liberty, they would never be deceived. And for
this reason, every one that falls into Error, is justly blameable, and
deservedly obnoxious to punishment: For no more is requisite for the avoiding
Error, than to judge only of what a Man sees, and not to form complete
judgments on things, before he is assured he has examined them in all their
parts: and this is possible for Men to do. But they had rather subjugate
themselves to Error, than conform to the Rule of Truth; and love to arbitrate
without the trouble of Enquiry: And so we need not wonder if they are guilty of
infinite Errors, and frequently stand chargeable with uncertain and
unwarrantable Judgments.

All the Idea's, for instance, that Men have of Substance, are those of Spirit
and of Body; IV. We ought not to judge that there is no created Being besides
Body and Spirit: nor that GOD is a Spirit, according to the conception of
Spirits.
that is of a thinking, and extended Substance: and thereupon they take upon
them to determine, that whatever exists, is either of Body or Spirit. This is
not said, as if I presumed to affirm there were any Substance, neither Body nor
Spirit: it being too hazardous to maintain those things exist whereof we have
no Idea; since it is supposed that GOD, who conceals not his Works from us,
would have given us some Idea of them. Yet I think we ought to determine
nothing concerning the number of the kinds of Beings which GOD has created,
from the Idea's we have of them: Since absolutely speaking, there may be
Reasons why GOD should conceal them from us, if it were only that these Beings
having no Relation to us, the Knowledge of them would be of little use to us:
as he has not given us Eyes acute enough to reckon the Teeth of an Hand-worm,
since 'twould be useless to the Preservation of our Body, to have so
penetrating an Eyesight.

But though we do not think it fit to judge hastily and rashly, that all Being
is divided into Spirit and Body; yet we think it inconsistent with Reason for
Philosophers, in explaining Natural Effects, to use other Idea's than those
that depend on Thought and Extension: these in Effect being the only distinct
or particular that we have.

There is nothing more Unphilosophical and Irrational, than to imagine vast
numbers of Beings from simple Logical Idea's; to bestow on them infinite
properties; and so to go about explaining things, which no body understands, by
things which not only no body conceives, but which indeed are impossible to be
conceived. This is to take the same course that Blind Men would do, when
intending to discourse of Colors, and maintain the Theses that concern them,
they should make use of the Definitions they receive from the Philosophers, and
thence make their Inferences and Conclusions. For as these blind Men's Arguings
and Disputes about Colors, must needs be pleasant and ridiculous enough, since
they could have no distinct Idea's of the Subjects in Question, and would only
argue from general and Logical Idea's. So the Philosophers can never reason
justly and solidly upon the Effects of Nature, when they only employ general
and Logical Idea's, as of Act, Power, Being, Cause, Principle, Form, Quality,
and others of like Nature, It is absolutely necessary for them to ground their
Disputes and Reasonings only upon the distinct and particular Idea's of Thought
and Extension, and those which are contained in them, as Figure, Motion, etc.
For we can never expect to arrive to the Knowledge of Nature, but by the
Consideration of the distinct Idea's we have of it: and it is better not to
meditate at all, than to throw our Meditation away upon Whimsies and Chimera's.

We ought not however to assert that there is nothing but Spirit and Body,
Thinking and Extended Beings in Nature, since it is impossible for us to be
mistaken. For though these are sufficient for the Explication of Nature, and
consequently we may conclude without danger of erring, That all Natural things,
as far as our Knowledge goes, depend upon Extension and Thought; yet absolutely
speaking, its not impossible but there may be others, whereof we have no Idea,
nor see any Effect.

Men are therefore too rash and precipitate in judging, as an indisputable
Principle, that all Substance is distinguished into Body and Spirit. But they
thence infer a rash and unadvised conclusion* when they determine by the sole
light of Reason, that GOD is a Spirit. it is true, that since we are created
after His Image and Similitude, and we are taught from several places of the
Holy Scripture, that GOD is a Spirit, we ought to believe and call Him so: But
Reason all alone can never teach us so much. It only tells us that GOD is a
Being infinitely perfect; and that he ought rather to be a Spirit than a Body,
since our Soul is more perfect than our Body; but it cannot assure us, there
are not still other Beings more perfect than those Spirits within us, and
ranged in an higher order above them, than our Minds are above our Bodies.

But supposing there were such Beings as these, (as Reason makes it
unquestionable that GOD was able to create them) it is evident they would have a
nearer resemblance to their Maker than our selves: And so the same Reason
informs us, that GOD would rather have their Perfections than ours; which would
be reckoned but imperfections in comparison with them. We ought not therefore
precipitately to imagine that the word Spirit, which we indifferently use to
signify what GOD is, and what we are our selves, is an univocal Term
expressing the same things, or very like. GOD is farther exalted above Created
Spirits, than these Spirits are elevated above Bodies; and we ought not to term
GOD a Spirit so much for a positive Declaration of what He is, as to signify
He is not material. He is an infinitely perfect Being, no Man can doubt of it:
But as we are not to imagine with the Anthropomorphites, that he ought to have
an Humane shape; because that Figure seems the most perfect, though we should
suppose Him Corporeal; so we ought not to think that the Spirit of GOD has
Humane Thoughts, and that his mind is like our own, because we know nothing
perfecter than our own Mind. It Is rather to be believed, that as he includes in
Himself the Perfections of Matter, without being material: (for it is certain
that Matter has a Relation to some Perfection that is in God) so He comprehends
the Perfections of created Spirits, without being a Spirit, after our manner of
conceiving Spirits; that his true Name is HE THAT IS: that is, being without
restriction, all Being, being Infinite and Universal

CHAP. X.
Some Instances of Errors in Physics, wherein Men are engaged by supposing
that the things which differ in their Nature, their Qualities, Extension,
Duration, and Proportion, are alike in these things.

IT has been shown in the Foregoing Chapter, That Men make a rash Judgment in
concluding all Beings under two Heads, either of Body or Spirit; we will make
it appear in the succeeding Chapters, that they not only make rash Judgments,
but false too; and which are the fruitful Principles of innumerable Errors,
when they judge that Beings are not different in their Relations and Modes,
because they have no Idea of these Differences.

It Is certain that the Mind of Man searches only after the Relations of things:
First those which the Objects, it considers, have to it self, and then those
which they have with one another. For Man's Mind is inquisitive only after its
Good and Truth. For the finding out its Good, it considers carefully by Reason,
and by Taste or Sensation, whether the Objects have any Relation of Agreement
with it self. For the discovering Truth, it considers whether the Objects have
any Relation of Equality or Similitude, to each other, or what precisely is the
Quantity that is equal to their Inequality. For as Good is not the Good of the
Mind any farther than it is agreeable to it: so Truth is not Truth, but by the
Relation of Equality or Resemblance, which is found betwixt two things, or
more: whether this Relation be between two or more Objects; as between an Ell,
and a Piece of Cloth: For it is true that this is an Ell of Cloth, because of
the Equality between the Ell and the Cloth: whether it be between two or more
Idea's, as between the two Idea's of Three and Three, and that of Six: for it is
true that Three and Three are Six, because of the Equality between the two
Idea's of Three and Three, and the Idea of Six: Or whether lastly, it be
between Idea's and Things, when the Idea's represent what the Things are. For
when I say, There is a Sun, my Proposition is true, because the Idea's I have
of Existence, and of the Sun, represent that the Sun exists, and that it truly
exists. Every Action of the Mind about, and every Attention to Objects, is only
then to try to discover their Relations, since we apply our selves to the
consideration of things, only for the finding out the Truth or Goodness of them.

But as we have said before in the preceding Chapter, Attention tires and
dispirits the Mind; so that it speedily desists to oppugn and bear against the
Impression of the Senses, that throws it off its Object, and hurries it toward
others, which the love it has to its Body, render grateful and agreeable. It
has but a straightened Capacity, and so the differences which are between the
Subjects it examines being infinite, or almost so, it is incapable of
distinguishing them. Wherefore the Mind supposes imaginary Resemblances, where
it observes no Positive and Real Differences; the Idea's of Resemblance being
more present to it, more familiar and more simple than the other. For it is
manifest that Similitude includes only one Relation, and there is need only of
one Idea, to judge that a thousand things are like; whereas to judge without
fear of being mistaken, that a thousand Objects differ with one another, there
is an absolute Necessity of having a thousand different Idea's present to the
Mind.

Men therefore imagine things of a different Nature, to be of the same, and
that all things of the same Species, hardly differ from one another. They judge
that unequal things, are equal; that those which are inconstant, are constant;
that such as are without Order or Proportion, are best ordered, and most
proportionate. In a word, they believe often that things different in Nature,
in Quality, Extension, Duration, and Proportion, are alike in all these
particulars: But this deserves to be explained more at large by some Examples,
as being the the Cause of an infinite number of Errors.

Spirit and Body, a Substance that Thinks, and a Substance that is Extended, are
two kinds of Being altogether different, and entirely opposite: what belongs to
one, cannot appertain to the other: Yet Men for the most part but little heeding
the Idea they have of Thought, and being continually moved and affected with
Bodies, have looked upon the Soul and Body, as only one and the same thing;
have imagined a Similitude between things, so unlike in every respect. They
would have the Soul to be material; that is to say, extended over all the Body,
and figured as the Body. And thus have attributed to the Mind, what can belong
to nothing but the Body.

Again, Men having the Sensation of Pleasure, Pain, Smells, Tastes, etc. and
their Body being more present to them, than their Soul; (that is, they easily
imagine their Body, but are not able to imagine the Soul,) they attribute to it
the Faculties of Sensation, Imagination, and sometimes give it that of
Conception too; which can belong to nothing but the Soul. But the following
Examples will be more sensible and manifest.

It Is certain that all Natural Bodies, even those that are ranked under the same
Species, differ from one another: that one piece of Gold is not altogether like
another piece, that one drop of Water is different from another drop. It Is with
all Bodies of the same Species, as it is with Faces: All Faces have two Eyes, a
Nose, a Mouth, etc. they are all Faces, and Humane Faces; yet it may be
affirmed there never were two perfectly similar. So one piece of Gold has parts
extremely like another piece; and one drop of Water has undoubtedly a near
resemblance to another, yet we may be certify'd that two drops of Water cannot
be given, though taken from the same River, in an exact resemblance.
Nevertheless, the Philosophers inconsiderately suppose Essential Likenesses
between Bodies of the same Species, or Likenesses that consist in Indivisibili:
For the Essences of things center in an indivisible Point, according to their
false Opinion.

The Reason of their lapsing into so gross and palpable an Error, is because
they will not with any care consider those very things, on which thy compose
huge and mighty Volumes. For as we don't fancy a perfect Similitude in Faces,
because we scrupulously behold them, and survey them closely; and the custom we
have taken of distinguishing them, makes us observe the least differences: So
if the Philosophers considered Nature with attention, they would acknowledge
sufficient causes of diversities, even in those things which produce the same
Sensations, and which for that Reason we ascribe to the same Species; and would
not so credulously suppose Essential Resemblances. Blind Men would be to blame
to suppose Essential Similitudes consisting in Indivisibili between Faces,
because they did not sensibly perceive the differences: And Philosophers have
no more reason to suppose such Similitudes in Bodies of the same Species,
because they discover no differences in them by the Sensations they have of
them.

The Inclination we have for supposing a Likeness in things inclines us farther
to believe there is a set and determinate number of Differences, and Forms; and
that these Forms are fixed to a Point, and incapable of Latitude, more or less.
We think that all Bodies differ from each other as in Degrees and that these
Degrees, also retain certain Proportions together. In a word, we judge of
Material things as of Numbers.

Tis' clearly manifest, that this proceeds from the Mind's losing it self in
the Relations of things incommensurable, as are the infinite Differences to be
met with in Natural Bodies, and its solacing it self with the Imagination of
any Resemblance or Proportion it can find between them; because then it can
represent many things at once with much readiness, and ease. For, as I have
already said, there needs no more than one Idea to judge that many things are
like, but there must be many to judge they are unlike each other. If a Man
knew, for instance, the number of Angels; and that for each Angel there were
ten Archangels; and for every Archangel ten Thrones; and so on, observing the
same Proportion in the progression up to the highest Order of Intelligences:
the Mind might know when it pleased the number of all these Blessed Spirits,
and even by a good strong reflection, determine of them almost at a single
view; which is infinitely delightful to it. And this is what may have induced
some Persons to judge thus of Celestial Spirits; as some Philosophers have done
in another case, of the Gravitation and Levitation of the Elements, making a
Decuple Proportion between them, supposing Fire ten times lighter than Air; and
so of the rest.

When the Mind finds a necessity of admitting Differences between Bodies, by
the different Sensations it has of them, and for some other particular Reasons;
it is sure to allow as little as possibly it can. It Is upon this account it is
easily persuaded, that the Essences of things are in Indivisibili, and that
they are like Numbers, as we have said before; for that then it requires only
one Idea to represent all the Bodies that go under the name of the same Species.

If you put, for example, a Glass of Water into an Hogshead of Wine, the
Philosophers will tell you, the Essence of Wine still remains the same, and the
Water is converted into Wine. That as no number can intervene between three and
four, since a true Unity is indivisible, so it is necessary the Water should be
converted into the Essence or Nature of the Wine, or that the Wine should lose
its own: That as all Numbers of Four are perfectly alike, so the Essence of
Water is exactly the same in all Waters. That as the Number Three Essentially
differs from the Number Two, and cannot have the same Properties; so two Bodies
differing in Specie, differ Essentially, and in such wise, as they can never
have the same Properties which flow from the Essence; and such like things as
these: Whereas if Men considered the true Idea's of things any thing
attentively, they would not be long a discovering, that all Bodies being
extended; their Nature or Essence has nothing in it like Numbers, and that it is
impossible for it to consist in Indivisibili.

But Men not only suppose Identity, Similitude, or Proportion in the Nature,
the Number, and essential Differences of Substances, but in every thing that
comes under their Perception. Most Men conclude that all the fixed Stars, are
fastened as so many Nails in the mighty Vault of Heaven, in an equal distance
and convexity from the Earth. The Astronomers have for a long time given out,
that the Planets roll in exact Circles; whereof they have invented a plentiful
number, as Concentric, Excentric, Epicycles, Deferent, and Equant, to explain
the Phenomena that contradict their Prejudice.

It Is true, in the last Ages, the more Ingenious have corrected the Errors of
the Ancients, and believe that the Planets describe Ellipses, by their Motion.
But if they would have us believe that these Ellipses are regular, as we are
easily inclined to do; (because the Mind supposes Regularity, where it
perceives no Irregularity) they fall into an Error so much harder to be
corrected, as the Observations that can be made upon the Course of the Planets,
want Exactness and Justness, to show the Irregularity of their Motions: which
Error nothing but Physics can remedy; as being infinitely less observable,
than that which occurs in the Systeme of exact Circles.

But there is one thing of more particular occurrence, relating to the Distance
and Motion of the Planets; which is, that the Astronomers not being able to
discover an Arithmetical or Geometrical Proportion, that being manifestly
repugnant to their Observations, some of them have imagined they observed a
kind of Proportion, which they term Harmonical, in their Distances and Motions.
Hence it was that an Astronomer of this Age, in his New Almagistus, begins a
Section intitul'd, Riccioli 2. Vol. Nemo est paulo eruditior in Astronomicis,
qui Coelorum ordinem contemplatus, non agnoscat Harmoniam quandam in Planetarum
intervallis and motibus.
De Systemate Mundi Harmonico, with these words; There is no Man that is never
so little versed in Astronomy, but must acknowledge a kind of Harmony in the
motion and intervals of the Planets, if he attentively considers the Order of
the Heavens. Not that he was of that Opinion; for the Observations that have
been made, gave him sufficiently to understand the extravagance of that
imaginary Harmony, which has yet been the Admiration of many Authors Ancient
and Modern; whose Opinions are related and refuted by Father Riccioli. It is
attributed likewise to Pythagoras and his Followers, to have believed, That the
Heavens by their Regular Motions, made a wonderful Melody, which Men could not
hear, by reason of their being used to it: As those, says he, that dwell near
the Cataracts of the Waters of Nile, hear not the noise of them. But I only
bring this particular Opinion of the Harmonical Proportion between the
Distances and Motions of the Planets, to show that the Mind is fond of
Proportions, and that it often imagines them where they are not.

The Mind also supposes Uniformity in the Duration of things, and imagines they
are not liable to Change, and Instability; when it is not as it were forced by
the Testimonies and report of Sense, to judge otherwise.

All Material things being extended, are capable of Division, and consequently
of Corruption. And every one that makes never so little reflection on the
Nature of Bodies, must sensibly perceive their Corruptibility. And yet there
have been a multitude of Philosophers who believed the Heavens, though
Material, were Incorruptible.

The Heavens are too remote from our Eyes, to discover the Changes which happen
in them; and there seldom any great enough fall out, to be seen upon Earth;
which has been sufficient warrant to a great many Persons to believe they were
really incorruptible. What has been a farther confirmation of their Opinion, is
their attributing to the Contrariety of Qualities, the Corruption incident to
Sublunary Bodies. For having never been in the Heavens, to see how things were
carried on there, they have had no Experience of that contrariety of Qualities
being to be found therein, which has induced them to believe there were
actually no such thing. And hence have concluded the Heavens were exempt from
Corruption, upon this Reason, That what according to their Notion, corrupts
Sublunary Bodies, is not to be found in the higher Regions of the World.

It Is plain that this Arguing has nothing of solidity: for we see no Reason why
there may not be found some other Cause of Corruption, besides that contrariety
of Qualities which they imagine: nor upon what grounds they can affirm, There
is neither Heat nor Cold, neither Drought nor Moisture in the Heavens, that the
Sun is not hot, nor Saturn cold.

There is some probability of Reason to say, That very hard Stones, and Glass,
and other Bodies of like Nature, are not corrupted, since we see they subsist a
long time, in the same Capacity; and we are near enough to observe the Changes
that should happen to them. But while we are at such a Distance from the
Heavens, as we are, it is absolutely against all Reason to conclude they don't
corrupt, because we perceive no contrary Qualities in them, nor can see them
corrupting; and yet they don't only say, they don't corrupt, but that they are
unchangeable and incorruptible: And, a little more, the Peripateticks would
maintain, That Celestial Bodies were so many Divinities, as their Master
Aristotle did believe them.

The Beauty of the Universe consists not in the Incorruptibility of its parts,
but in the Variety that is found in them; and this great Work of the World,
would have something wanting to its Admirable Perfection, without that
Vicissitude of things that is observed in it. A Matter infinitely extended,
without Motion, and consequently rude and without Form, and without Corruption,
might perhaps manifest the infinite Power of its Author, but could give no Idea
of his Wisdom. And for this reason all Corporeal things are corruptible; and
there is no Body whatever, whereunto there happens not some Change, which
alters and corrupts it in process of Time. Journal of the Learned Aug. 9* 1666.
GOD forms even in the Bowels of Stones and Glass, Creatures more perfect and
admirable, than all the Works of Men. These Bodies though extremely hard and
dry, fail not however to corrupt in Time: The Air and the Sun, which they are
exposed to, change some of their parts; and there are found Worms to feed on
them, as Experience manifests.

There is no other difference between very hard and very dry Bodies, and
others, than that the former are composed of very Gross and Solid parts, and
consequently less capable of being agitated, and separated from each other, by
the motion of those that beat against them; which makes us look upon them as
incorruptible. Notwithstanding they are not so in their Nature, as Time,
Experience, and Reason sufficiently evince.

But as to the Heavens, they are constituted of a more fluid and subtle
matter; and especially the Sun, which is so far from wanting Heat, and being
incorruptible, as say Aristotle's Disciples, that ^n the contrary, it is the
hottest of all Bodies, and most subject to change. It Is he that warms, that
agitates, and changes all things. For it is he that produces by his Action,
which is no other than his Heat or the motion of his Parts, all that appears
new in the changes of the Seasons: Reason demonstrates these things: But*
though Reason may be withstood, yet Experience cannot. For, since we have
discovered in the Sun, by the help of a Telescope, or large Glasses, stains or
scurf as big as all the Earth, which have been formed upon him, and dissipated
in a short time: It can no longer be doubted, but he is more subject to change,
than the Earth which we inhabit.

All Bodies then are under a perpetual flux, and continual change; and
especially those that are most fluid, as Fire, Air, and Water; next the parts
of living Bodies, as Flesh and also Bones, and lastly the most hard: and the
Mind is not to suppose a kind of Immutability in things, because it sees not
Corruption or Change in them: For it is no Argument that a thing continues
always like it self, because we can discover no difference in it: nor that
things do not exist, because we have no Knowledge or Idea of them.

CHAP. XI.
Instances of some Errors of Morality, which depend on the same Principle.

THIS Easiness and Propensity of the Mind, to imagine and suppose Likeness,
wherever it does not visibly perceive Difference, engages the generality of
Men in most dangerous Errors in point of Morality. Some instances whereof are
these.

A French Man falls in Company of an English Man, or an Italian: This Stranger
has particular Humors of his own; he has a Fineness and Delicacy of Wit; or if
you had rather, is arrogant and troublesome. This shall forthwith incline the
French Man to judge that all English Men or Italians have the same Character of
Mind, as the Man that he has met with; and make him praise them, or discommend
them all in general: And if he meets with another, he is immediately
prepossessed with a Notion of his being like the former, and he gives way to
some Affection, or secret Aversion on his Account. In a word, he will judge of
all the particulars of these Nations, from the notable proof he has taken from
one or two, that had such certain Qualities of Mind; because having no
Information, elsewhere of their Difference he supposes them all alike.

A Regular of some Order, falls into some enormity, and this is sufficient with
the generality of those that know him, to condemn indifferently all the Members
of the same Society. They all wear the same Habit, and bear the same Name: they
are alike in this, and there needs no more grounds for Vulgar-rate-men, to
imagine they are so in every thing, The Reason why they suppose them alike, is
because they cannot pierce into the bottom of their Hearts, and see wherein
they positively differ.

Slanderers who study for means of blasting the Reputation of their Enemies,
commonly make use of this; and Experience verifies that it generally succeeds.
And indeeed it is most suited and proportioned to the Vulgar standard and
capacity. For it is not sufficient to find in numerous Communities, as holy as
they are, some Persons disorderly in Manners, or unorthodox in Opinion: since
in the Company of the Apostles, whereof JESUS CHRIST Himself was the Head,
there was found a Robber, a Traitor, an Hypocrite; and in a word, a Judas.

The Jews doubtless had been much to blame, had they passed hard and
disadvantagious Censures upon the most Holy Society that ever was, because of
the Avarice and Corruption of Judas; and had they condemned them all in their
Heart, because they suffered so wicked a wretch in their Company; and our LORD
let him go unpunished, though he knew his Crimes.

It Is then a manifest repugnance to Reason, and breach of Charity, to suppose a
whole Community in an Error, from some private Person's being engaged in it;
even though the Heads connived at it, or perhaps were Partisans and Abbetters.
It Is true, when all the Particulars will uphold an Error, or justify the Fault
of their Brother, the whole Fraternity is to be concluded culpable: but it may
be said, that this but rarely happens. For it seems Morally impossible for all
the Particulars of an Order to have Thoughts and Sentiments alike.

Men should never in this manner conclude a General, from a Particular: but
they cannot judge simply of what they see, but run to an extreme on one side or
other. A Regular of such an Order, is a Great Man, or a good Man; from hence
they infer that the whole Order is full of Great or Good Men. So a Regular of
an Order is unsound, and Heterodox, therefore the whole Order is Corrupt and
Heterodox. But these last Judgments are much more dangerous than the former;
because we should always judge charitably of our Neighbor, and the malice and
ill nature of Men, make hard Censures and Discourses, meant for the Dis-repute
of others, more pleasant and welcome, and imprint them deeper on the Mind, than
such Judgments and Discourses, as are made to their Advantage.

When a Man of the World, who is addicted to his Passions, sticks resolutely to
his Opinion, and pretends whilst his Passion is high, that he has Reason to
follow it, he is deservedly concluded Stubborn, and Opinionated; and he will
acknowledge it himself, when his Passion is over. So when a Man of Piety, who
is penetrated with what he says, who is convinced of the Truth of Religion, and
of the Vanity of Worldly things, goes upon the strength of his Lights and
Knowledge, to withstand the Corruptions and Disorders of others, and reprimands
them with some Fervency and Zeal: Worldly Men judge him also to be an
Opiniastre; and so conclude all Devoutness, Wilfulness and Bigottry. Nay they
think the Virtuous and Good, more Opinionated, than the Vicious and Wicked:
Because these latter urging their Corrupt Opinions, as they are buoyed up by
the different commotions of their Blood and Passions; stay not long in the same
Sentiments, but desert them: Whereas the Religious remain constant, and
immovable in theirs, as being built upon fixed and unshaken Foundations, which
depend not on any thing so wavering, as the Circulation of the Blood.

See now the reason why the common sort of People judge the Pious and Virtuous,
as Opinionated as the Vicious; Which is, That Good Men are as Passionate for
Truth and Virtue, as Wicked Men for Vice and Falsehood. Both one and the other
talk much after the same Manner, in defending their Opinions: In this they are
alike, though they differ in the Main.

But this is enough for the World, that is unable to distinguish their Reasons,
and acknowledge the Difference, to judge them Alike in every thing; because
they are Alike in that external way, whereof every body is a competent Judge.

The Godly then are not Obstinate and Opinionated, they are only Constant as
they ought to be. But the Vicious and Licentious, are ever Opinionated, though
they continue but an Hour in their Opinion, For those are the Opinionated only,
who defend a False Opinion, though they defend it but a little time.

The case is much the same with some Philosophers, who maintain Chimerical
Opinions; which they afterward reject. They would have others who defend
certain Truths, the certainty whereof they plainly see, to quit them as Naked
Opinions, as themselves have done those they were impertinently conceited with.
And because it is not easy to pay Deference to them to the prejudice of Truth;
and the Love a Man naturally has for her, makes him heartily espouse her, they
judge this Man an Opiniastre.

Those Persons would be to blame, obstinately to defend their Chimera's; but
the others are to be commended for maintaining Truth with Strength and
Resolution of Mind: The Manner of them both is the same, but the Sentiments are
different: And it is this Difference of Sentiments, which makes the one
Constant, and the other Obstinate, and Opiniated.

The Conclusion of the Three First Books.
FROM the Beginning of this Treatise, I have distinguished, as it were, two
Parts in the Simple and Indivisible Essence of the Soul, one whereof was purely
Passive; the other both Active and Passive together. The First is the Mind or
Understanding; the Second is the Will: I have attributed to the Mind three
Faculties; because it receives its Modifications and its Idea's from the Author
of Nature three several ways. I have called it Sense, when it receives from GOD
Idea's confounded with Sensations; that is, Sensible Idea's, upon occasion of
some Motions happening in the Organs of the Senses, by the Presence of Objects.
I named it Imagination and Memory, when it received from GOD Idea's confounded
with Images; which make a sort of languid and feeble Sensa^ions, which the Mind
receives only from some Traces, produced or excited in the Brain, by the Course
of the Animal Spirits. Lastly, I called it Pure Mind, or Pure Intellect, when
it receives from GOD the All-pure Idea's of Truth, without any mixture of
Sensations and Images; not by the Union it has with the Body, but with that it
has with the WORD, or WISDOM of GOD: not because it exists in the Material and
Sensible World, but because it subsists in the Immaterial and Intelligible
World: not for the knowing Mutable things, that are fit for the Preservation of
Corporeal Life; but for piercing into Immutable Truths, which conserve in us
the Life of the Spirit.

I have shown in the First and Second Book, That our Senses and Imagination are
very useful to the knowing the Relations External Bodies have to our own; that
all the Idea's the Mind receives by means of the Body, are for the Interest of
the Body: that it is impossible to discover any Truth whatever, with Evidence,
by the Idea's of the Senses and Imagination; that these confused Idea's are of
use only in uniting us to our Body, and by our Body, to all sensible things:
and that lastly, if we desired to avoid Error, we should not credit their
Reports: I concluded likewise, That it was Morally impossible to know by the
pure Idea's of the Mind, the Relations which Bodies have with our own: that we
ought not to reason upon these Idea's, to know whether an Apple, or a Stone,
are good to eat; but the way to know, is to try by Tasting: And that though we
may employ our Intellect, for obtaining a confused Knowledge of the Relations
foreign Bodies have with ours; it is always the surest way to make use of our
Senses. I give one Instance more, since so necessary and essential things
cannot be too deeply imprinted on the Mind.

I have a Mind to examine, for Example, Whether it is more advantageous to be
Just or Rich. If I open the Eyes of my Body, Justice looks like a Chimaera, I
see no Allurements that it has. The Just I see miserable, deserted, persecuted,
naked of Defense, and destitute of Comfort: For He that is their Comforter and
Supporter, is not apparent to my Eyes: In a word, I see not what use Justice
and Virtue can be put to. But if I contemplate Riches with my Eyes open, I
presently see the Luster and Splendour of them, and am dazzled. Power, Greatness,
Pleasure, and all sensible Goods, are the Retinue and Attendants of Wealth; and
I have no room to doubt but a Man must be Rich, if he will be happy. Again, If
I employ my Ears; I hear how all Men have Riches in Esteem; and that their Talk
is only about ways of acquiring them; and that they are constantly giving
Praises, Incense, and Honor to those that possess them. This Sense then, and
all the rest inform me, that I must be Rich, before I can be Happy. But let me
shut my Eyes, and stop my Ears, and only interrogate my Imagination, and it
will constantly represent what my Eyes had seen, what they had read, and what
my Ears had heard, to the Advantage and Commendation of Riches; but it will
represent them in a quite other manner, than my Senses: For the Imagination
always augments the Idea's of those things which are related to the Body, and
are the Objects of our Love. If I resign my self to its Conduct, it will
presently lead me into an Enchanted Palace, much what the same with those
celebrated by Poets and Romancers, in magnificent Descriptions; and here I
shall be ravished in gazing on those Beauties, that need not be described,
which will convince me, that the God of Riches that inhabits it, is the only
capable of making me Happy. Lo here, what my Body is able to persuade me, for
it speaks only on its own behalf; and it is necessary to its welfare, that the
Imagination bow beneath the Grandeur, and prostrate it self before the Luster
of Riches.

But if I consider, that the Body is infinitely inferior to the Mind; that it
is not its Master, nor can instruct it in Truth, nor any ways illuminate it;
and if upon this Scene and Prospect I re-enter into, or enquire of my self, or
rather (since I am neither my own Master, nor my own Light) if I approach unto
GOD, and in the calm and silence of my Senses and Passions, make this Demand,
Whether Riches or Virtue is preferable? I shall hear a clear and distinct
Answer, concerning what is to be done; an Eternal Answer, that has been always
given, and which is, and always will be: an Answer that is not necessary to be
explained, since every body know it; such as read this, and such as do not read
it; which is neither Greek, nor Latin, nor French, nor German, but which all
Nations under Heaven understand: An Answer lastly, that consolates the Just in
their Poverty, and desolates Sinners in the abundance of their Riches. I shall
hear this Answer, and remain convinced; and then shall laugh at the Visions of
my Imagination, and the Delusions of my Senses. The Internal Man that is in me,
shall ridicule the Animal and Terrestrial Man, that I carry about me. In fine,
the New Man shall thrive, and the Old Man shall be destroyed; provided in the
mean time I continually obey the Voice of Him, who delivers Himself so clearly,
in the most secret recess of my Reason; and who becoming sensible to
accommodate Himself to my Weakness and Disease, and to give me Life by that
which gave me Death, speaks to me anew, in a most strong and lively, and
familiar way by my Senses; I mean by the preaching of His Gospel: But if I
interrogate Him in all Metaphysical, Natural, and purely Philosophical
Questions, as well as those which respect the Rule of Manners, I shall always
have a faithful Master, who will never deceive me. I shall not only be a
Christian, but a Philosopher; I shall be a sound Thinker, and a Lover of what
is Good: In a word, I shall follow the Road that leads me to all Perfection I
am capable of, either by Nature or by Grace.

We ought then to conclude from all that has been said, that to make the best
use possible of the Faculties of our Soul, of our Senses, Imagination, and
Understanding; we must apply them only to those things, for which they were
given us. We ought carefully to distinguish our Sensations and Imaginations,
from our Pure Idea's; and judge by the former of the Relations our Body has
with those about us; but never make use of them in discovering Truths, which
they always confound. Whereas Pure Idea's must be used in the finding out of
Truths, but omitted, when we judge of the Correspondencies between Exterior
Bodies, and our own: because their Idea's have never reach and extent enough,
to give a thorough Representation of them.

It Is impossible for Men to have sufficient Knowledge of all the Figures and
Motions of the little parts of their Body and Blood; and of those of a
particular Fruit; at a certain Season of their Sickness, to know whether there
is a Relation of Agreement between that Fruit and their Body; See the
Illustrations.
and that if they eat of it they shall recover: Thus our Senses alone are more
useful for the Conversation of our Body, than the Rules of Experimental
Medicine; and Experimental Medicine, than Theoretical. But Theoretical
Medicine, that deferrs much to Experience, and more to the Senses, is the best
of all. Because all these should be caball'd together.

Reason then is of universal use; and this is the Privilege it obtains over the
Senses and Imagination, which are limited and con^in'd to Sensible things: yet
this is to be regularly employed; for though it be the principal part of Our
selves, it often happens to deceive us, by our letting it act too much; because
it cannot act enough without tiring; I mean it cannot know enough to make a
right Judgment, and yet it will still be judging.

F. MALEBRANCHE's TREATISE Concerning the SEARCH after TRUTH. BOOK IV.
Concerning the Inclinations, or Natural Motions of the Mind.
CHAP. I.
I. Inclinations are as necessary to Spirits, as Motions to Bodies. II. GOD
gives no Motion to Spirits, but what tends toward Himself. III. The Tendency
Spirits have to particular Goods, proceeds but from their Motion toward Good
in general. IV. The Original of our chiefest Natural Inclinations: Which will
make up the Division of this Fourth Book.

THERE had been no occasion of Treating on the Natural Inclinations, which are
to be the Subject of this Fourth Book, nor on the Passions, which I am to speak
to in the Fifth, to discover the Causes of our Errors, did not the
Understanding depend on the Will, in the Perception of Objects. But because the
Understanding receives its Direction from the Will, and is determined and fixed
by it, rather to some Objects than others: in order to penetrate into the
Causes of the Errors whereunto we are subject, it will be absolutely necessary
to be well acquainted with the Nature of our Inclinations.

Had God in the Creation of the World, produced a Matter infinitely Extended,
I. Inclinations are as necessary to Spirits, as Motions to Bodies.
without imprinting on it any Motion, there had been no diversity in Bodies.
The whole Visible World at this day, would have been nothing but an unweildy
Mass of Matter, or Extension, which might perhaps have served to show the
Greatness and Power of its Author; but wanting that Succession of Forms, and
Variety of Bodies, wherein the Beauty of the Universe consists, would have
little to invite Spiritual Beings to admire, and adore the Infinite Wisdom of
its Governor.

Now the Inclinations of Spirits seem to be in the Spiritual World, what the
Motions of Bodies are in the Material: and that if Spirits had no Inclinations
or Volitions, that Variety would be wanting to the Order of Spiritual things,
which not only excites to the Admiration of the profound Wisdom of God, (as
does the diversity observed in Material things,) but also of his Mercy,
Justice, and Goodness, and all his other Attributes in general. The difference
then of Inclinations, has an Effect in Spirits much like that which the
diversity of Motions produces in Bodies: and the Inclinations of Spirits,
together with the Motions of Bodies, make up all the Beauty of Created Beings.
So that it is requisite for the former to have several Inclinations, as for the
latter to have different Motions. But let us try to discover what Inclinations
these ought to be.

Were not our Nature corrupted, we should not need to seek by Reason, as we are
now to do, what should be the Natural Inclinations of Created Spirits. We need
but have descended into our own Breast, to have discovered, by an inward
Feeling, or Self-consciousness of what passes within us, all the Inclinations
we ought Naturally to have. But since we are taught by Faith, that Sin has
inverted the Order of Nature, and even by Reason, that our Inclinations are
disordered, as we shall see better in the sequel, we are obliged to another
course. For our Sensations being not to be credited, we are forced to explain
things in an higher and more transcendent manner; but such as will doubtless
seem Chimerical to those who take the Estimate of all things from the Senses.

II. God having no other Principal End of his Actions, than himself, gives no
Motion to Spirits, but what tends toward himself.
It Is an undeniable Truth, That God can have no other Principal End of his
Actions, than Himself: and that he may have many Subordinate Ends, tending all
to the Preservation of the Beings he has created. He can have no Principal End
besides Himself; because, being not liable to Error, he cannot place his
ultimate End in Beings that include not all sorts of Perfection. But he may
have a less Principal, namely, the Preservation of Created Beings; because all
partaking of His Goodness, are necessarily Good, or in the Style of Scripture
Valde Bona. And therefore God loves them; and it is His Love that preserves
them: for their Subsistence is wholly owing to the Love of God. Diligis omnia
quae sunt, says the Wise Man, and nihil odisti eoru^ quae fecisti: nec enim
odiens aliquid constituisti and fecisti. Quomodo autem posset aliquid
permanere, nisi Tu voluisses, aut quod a te vocatum non esset conservaretur?
And indeed it is unconceivable, that things should subsist, which are not
pleasing to an infinitely Perfect and Omnipotent Being; since all things have
their Subsistence only from His Will. God therefore Wills His Glory, as the
Principal End; and the Preservation of His Creatures, only for His Glory.

Natural Inclinations of Spirits, being undoubtedly the constant Impressions of
the Will of Him, who has Created and Preserves them, must, we may conclude, be
entirely like those of their Creator and Preserver. Wherefore they naturally
can have no other Principal End, than His Glory; nor any other Second End, than
their own, and others Preservation: but this still with reference to him who
gives them their Being. For in brief, it seeming undeniable that God cannot
Will that the Wills He has Created should love a Less Good, more than a
Greater; that is, should love what is less amiable, more than what is more so;
it is impossible for Him to Create any Creature, without Directing it toward
Himself, and commanding it to love Him more than all things else; though He may
create it Free, and with a Power of disengaging it self, and diverting from Him.

III. The Tendency Spirits have to Particular Goods, proceeds from their Motion
toward Good in general.
As there is but One Love properly in God, that is, the Love of Himself; and as
He can love nothing but by that Love, since He can love nothing but with
reference to Himself. So He imprints but one Love in us, which is the Love of
Good in general: and we can love nothing but through that Love, since we can
love nothing but what is a Real or Apparent Good. This Love of Good in general
is the Principle of all our particular Affections, since this Love is really
nothing but our Will: The Will of Man, as I have said before, being only the
Continual Impression of the Author of Nature, which carries the Mind toward
Good in general. Surely we ought not to imagine that this Power of Loving
either proceeds from, or depends on our selves; on whom only depends the Power
of Loving wrong, or rather of Rightly Loving Evil things: because being Free,
we can determine, and do actually determine to particular, and consequently
false Goods, the Good Love wherewith God continually influences our Souls, as
long as He preserves them.

But not only our Will, or our Love for Good in general, comes from God; our
Inclinations likewise for particular Goods, which are common to, though
unequally strong in all Men, (such as the Inclination for the Preservation of
our Being, and that of others, to whom Nature has united us) are the
Impressions of the Will of God upon us: For I term indifferently natural
Inclination all the Impressions of the Author of Nature, that are common to all
Created Spirits.

I have been saying, that God loves his Creatures, and that it is this His Love
that both gives and preserves their Being: IV. The Original of the chiefest
Natural Inclinations, which will make up the Division of this Fourth Book.
and whereas he continually imprints on us a Love like His own, (since His Will
both makes, and governs ours,) He gives us all those Natural Inclinations,
which depend not on our Choice, and which necessarily dispose us to the
preserving our own, and our Neighbor's Being.

For though Sin has corrupted all things, it has not utterly destroyed them.
Though our Natural Inclinations have not always God for their End, by the free
Choice of our Will; yet they always have by the Institution of Nature: since
God who both produces and preserves these Inclinations in us, does it only for
Himself. For all Sinners tend to God, by the Impression they receive of Him;
though they recede from Him by the Error and deviation of their Mind. They
love well, it being impossible to love ill, whilst God is the Author of Love:
but they love Evil things; Evil, only because God, who gives Sinners the Power
of Loving, forbids their loving them, by reason of their withdrawing Men, ever
since the Fall, from the Love of Himself. For whilst they imagine that the
Creatures are the Cause of the Pleasure and Pain they feel, or receive
Occasionally from them, they run furiously to the embracing these Bodies, and
so fall into an utter Oblivion of God, who is not Visible to their Fyes.

We have still then the same Natural Inclinations, or Impressions of the Author
of Nature, as Adam had before his fall. We have even the same Inclinations as
the Blessed have in Heaven: For God neither makes, nor preserves any Creatures,
but He possesses them with a Love like His own. He loves Himself, and us, and
all His Creatures: and therefore Creates no Spirits, but withal inclines them
to love God, Themselves, and all the Creatures.

But as all our Inclinations are only the Impressions of Nature's Author, which
carry us to love Him, and all things for His sake, they can never be regular,
but when we love God with all our Strength, and all things for the sake of God,
by a Free and Premeditate Choice of our Will: For it is Injustice and Abusing
the Love of God, which he gives us for Himself, to lay it out on any thing
besides, or without Relation to him.

And thus we now know not only what are our Natural Inclinations, but also what
they ought to be, to become regular, and as they were instituted by their
Author. For all the Disorders of our Inclinations, have no other Root than
this, that we fix our Ultimate End in Our selves, and instead of referring all
to God, center all things upon Self.

First then, we have an Inclination for Good in general, which is the Principle
of all our Natural Inclinations, all our Passions, and all the Free Affections
of our Will.

Secondly, we have an Inclination for the Preservation of our own Being, or
Welfare.

Thirdly, we have an Inclination for other Creatures; which are either useful
to our selves, o^ those we love. We have yet many other particular Inclinations
which depend on these, which probably we may treat of elsewhere. In this Fourth
Book my only Design is to reduce the Errors of our Inclinations to three
Heads, to the Inclination we have for Good in general, to Love of of Our
selves, and of our Neighbor.

CHAP. II.
I. The Inclination for Good in general, is the Principle of the Restlesness of
of the Will. II. And consequently of our Inadvertency and Ignorance. III. The
first Instance, (showing that) Morals are but little known by the generality of
Men. IV. The second Instance, (showing that) the Immortality of the Soul is
controverted by some People. V. That we are in extreme Ignorance, in point of
Abstract things; and which have but little reference to us.

THAT vast Capacity which the Will has for all Goods in general, I. The
Inclination for Good in general, is the Principle of the Restlesness of the
Will.
by reason of its being made for a Good that comprehends in it all Goods, cannot
be filled by all the things the Mind represents to it; and yet the continual
Motion which God impresses it withal, is never stopped; which necessarily gives
a perpetual Disturbance and agitation to the Mind. The Will which seeks after
what it desires, obliges the Understanding to represent all sorts of Objects:
which when represented by the Understanding, the Soul cannot taste; or if she
tastes, she remains unsatisfied. She cannot taste them, because the View of the
Mind is seldom accompanied with Pleasure, which is the Seasoning, whereby the
Soul relishes her Good; and she is not satisfied, because nothing can stop the
Motion of the Soul, except the Author of the Impression: Whatever the Mind
represents, as the Good of the Soul, is finite; and whatever is finite, may
detain her Love for a moment, but cannot fix it. When new and extraordinary
Objects come under the consideration of the Mind, or such as have a Character
of Infinite, the Will gladly bears with an attentive Discussion for some time,
as hoping to find what she is in Search of; because that which appears
Infinite, bears the Signature of its real Good? but after a while, is disgusted
with this, as with the rest, and leaves it. Hence it is ever restless and
fluctuating, because it is fated to seek what it never can find, though always
in hopes of: And it loves whatever is Great, Extraordinary, and Infinite;
because having missed of its true Good, in common and familiar things, it
fancies it may be found in such as are unknown. We shall show in this Chapter,
that the Restlessness of our Will is one of the Principal Causes of our
Ignorance, and the Errors we are guilty of, upon infinite subjects, and in the
two following, shall explain what it is that breeds that our Inclination for
all that is Great, and Extraordinary.

First, It is plain enough from what has been said, That the Will is only
solicitous to apply the Understanding to those Objects which are related to us,
and is very negligent as to the rest: II. And consequently of our Inadvertency
and Ignorance.
For that being by a Natural Impression, ever longing and Impatient after
Happiness, it turns the Understanding only upon those things, which afford us
Pleasure and Advantage.

Secondly, That the Will permits not the Understanding to busy it self long,
even about things that afford some Pleasure; because, as has been said, all
Created things may please us for a season, but they quickly grow distastful,
and then our Mind declines them, and takes new ways to other Delights, and
Satisfactions.

Thirdly, That the Will is prompted to put the Understanding on these desultory
advances from Object to Object, from that confused, and as it were, distant
Representation the Understanding gives of Him; who includes in Himself all
Beings? as has been said in the Third Book. For the Will desiring, as I may so
speak, to bring its real good closer, so as to be affected by it, and to
receive its quickening Motion; excites the Understanding, to represent it by
peice-meal: But then this is no longer the General, the Universal, and
infinitely Perfect Being, which the Mind perceives; but something of a limited
and imperfect Nature, which the Will speedily abandons, as finding it unable to
stops Its Motion, and please It any considerable time, and so pursues after
another Object.

Mean while, the Advertency and Application of the Mind, being absolutely
necessary to the discovery of Truths ever so little abstruse, it is manifest
that the Vulgar of Men, must be most grossly Ignorant, even in point of such
things, as have some reference to them; but inconceivably Blind, as to all
Abstract Truths, and to which they have no sensible Relation. But we must try
to make these things manifest by some examples

III. The first Instance, (showing that) Morals are but little known by the
generality of Men.
There is no Science that stands in so near a Relation to us, as Moral
Philosophy: which teaches us our Duties to God and our King, our Kindred and
Friends, and in general to all about us. Besides it points out the way we must
follow to become eternally Happy: so that all Men are under an Essential
Obligation, or rather an dispensible Necessity of resigning themselves to the
Study of it. Notwithstanding Generations of Men have successively continued six
thousand Years, and yet this Science is still very imperfect.

That part of Morals which respects our Duty to God, and which questionless is
the Principal of all, as relating to Eternity, has been little known by Men of
the greatest Learning; and there are still to be found Men of Sense, who have
no Knowledge of it, though the easiest part of all Moral Philosophy. For first
of all, What difficulty is there to find out the Existence of a God? Every of
his works is a proof of it: All the Actions of Men and Beasts prove it:
Whatever we think, whatever we see, whatever we feel, demonstrates it: In a
word, there is nothing in the World but proves that there is a God; or at least
may prove it, to Men of attentive Minds, who seriously betake themselves to
Search after the Author of all things.

Again, it is evident that we must pursue the Orders of God, if we will be
happy: For since He is Just and powerful, we cannot Disobey him, without being
punished; nor obey Him, without a recompense. But what is it he requires of us?
That we love Him, that our Thoughts be possessed with Him, and our Heart set
upon Him. For, what end had God in Creating Minds, and all things else?
Certainly no other than Himself: So that being made for Him we are
indispensibly obliged from diverting elsewhere the Impression of Love, which He
perpetually maintains in us, in order to our perpetual loving Him.

These Truths are not very difficult to be discovered by any attentive and
considering Man; and yet this sole Moral Principle, That to become Virtuous and
Happy, it is absolutely necessary to Love God above all things, and in all
things, is the Foundation of all Christian Morality. Nor is there need of very
great Application to deduce from thence all necessary Consequences, to settle
the General Rules of our Behavior; though few there are that do it; whilst
daily Disputes arise about Questions of Morality, which are the immediate and
necessary Results of so self-evident a Principle as this before us.

The Geometricians are continually making new Discoveries in their Science; and
if they do not much advance it, it is because they have already drawn from their
Principles, the most useful and necessary consequences: But the greatest part
of Mankind, seem incapable of concluding any thing from the First Principle of
Morals. All their Ideas vanish and dissipate, when their Will inclines them
barely to consider it. Because they will not as they ought; and they will not
as they ought, because they cannot taste it; or that having tasted it, are
presently distasted. For it is an Abstract, Metaphysical, and purely
Intellectual Principle, and not attainable by Sense or Imagination. And
therefore seems to Carnal Eyes, or Minds that see no farther than their Eyes,
to have no solidity. Nothing appears in this Principle likely to settle and
compose the restless agitation of their Will, and thereupon to stop the View of
their Mind, and fix it attentively on considering it. What hope then is there
they should see it well, comprehend it right, and draw those direct Inferences
from it which they ought?

Those who should have but an imperfect apprehension of this Geometrical
Proposition, That the sides of Similar Triangles are proportional, could
certainly be no great Geometricians: But if, besides that confused and
imperfect Perception of that Fundamental Proposition of Geometry, they had some
Interest, why the sides of Similar Triangles should not be proportional; and if
False Geometry were as suitable to their perverse Inclinations as False Morals,
we should see as absurd Paralogisms in Geometry as Morality; because their
Errors would be pleasant to them, and Truth would only trouble, perplex, and
confound them.

Hence we need not wonder at the Blindness of Men in former Ages, who lived
whilst Idolatry flourished in the World, or of such as live at present
unenlightned with the Sunshine of the Gospel: It was needful for Eternal
Wisdom to cloth it self with Sensibility, to instruct Men that enquire only of
their Senses. Four thousand Years together Truth was manifested by speaking to
their Mind; but not entering into themselves, they did not hear it; 'twas
requisite therefore it should speak unto their Ears: The Light which enlightens
all Men, shined upon their Darkness, without dispersing it; and they could not
behold it. Intelligible Light must veil it self and become Visible: The Word
must be made Flesh; and hidden and inaccessible. Wisdom must instruct Men in a
Carnal manner; Carnaliter, says St. Bernard. The Generality of Men, and
especially the Poor, (...). 39. de Natali Domini.
(who are the worthiest Object of their Creator's Mercy and Providence,) those
who are obliged to labor for their Living, are extremely ignorant and stupid.
They hear only because they have Ears, and see only because they have Eyes: But
are incapable of retiring into themselves, by any Effort of Reason, there to
examine Truth, in the silence of their Senses and their Passions. Truth they
cannot apply to, because they cannot relish it; and commonly that application
enters not their Heads, because they cannot think of applying themselves to
unaffecting Objects. Their desultory and restless Will continually casts the
View of their Mind upon all sensible Objects, the Variety of which is pleasant
and diverting. For the Multiplicity and Diversity of Sensible Goods, serve to
con^eal their Vanity, and to keep up our Hopes of finding among them the True
Good, which we desire.

Thus though the Counsels which JESUS CHRIST, in quality of Man, of the Way,
and of Author of our Faith, gives us in the Gospel, are much more proportioned
to the weakness of our Mind, than those which the same CHRIST, as He is Eternal
Wisdom, Internal Truth, Intellectual Light, inspires into our most inward
Reason; and though He renders these His Counsels delectable by His Grace,
sensible by His Example, and convincing by His Miracles; yet Men are so stupid
and inconsiderate, even as to things of greatest importance to be known, that
they scarce ever think of them as behooves them. Not many perceive the
Excellency of the Gospel, nor the Soundness and Necessity of the Precepts of
our LORD; few there are that meditate on them, so as to nourish and strengthen
the Soul by them: The continual tossing and agitation of the Will, which looks
for the Enjoyment of Good, permitting not those Truths to be insisted on, which
seem to deprive the Soul of it. Here follows another proof of what I am
asserting.

Doubtless it much concerns, and lies upon the Wicked, IV. The second Instance,
(showing that) the Immortality of the Soul is controverted by some People.
to know whether their Soul is Mortal, as they suppose it; or Immortal, as
Faith and Reason assure: as being a thing of geatest moment and importance to
them; since the Question lays their Eternity at stake, and the quiet of their
Mind depends on the resolve. Whence comes it that they are ignorant, or
doubtful in the matter, but from their want of serious Attention, and the
Restlesness and Corruptness of their Will, not suffering the Mind to take a
steady View of the Reasons which contradict the Opinion they wish to be true?
For in brief, is it so difficult to discover the difference between the Body
and Soul, betwixt a Thinking and an Extended thing? Must a Man bring so great
an Attention to perceive that a Thought is neither Round nor Square; that
Extention is capable only of different Figures and Motions; but not of Thought
and Reasoning: and so, that what Thinks and what is Extended, are two Beings
altogether opposite. And yet this is all that is requisite to demonstrate the
Immortality of the Soul, and that she is not perishable, though the Body should
be annihilated.

True it is, when a Substance perishes, that the Modes or Manners of its
Existence perish with it: as were a piece of Wax annihilated, it is certain the
Figures of that Wax would be annihilated also: because the Roundness, for
instance, of the Wax is really nothing but the Wax it self, existing in such a
manner, and so cannot subsist without the Wax, whose Mode it is. But though God
should destroy all the Wax in the World, it would not follow from thence that
any other Substance, or Modes of Substance should be annihilated. All Stones,
for example, might subsist, together with their Modes: Because Stones are
Substances or Beings, and not Modes of Being of the Wax.

So though God should annihilate the half of a Body, it would not follow that
the other half was annihilated. The latter half is united to the other, but is
not one with it. And therefore one half being annihilated, it might be
reasonably inferred, that the other half was no longer related to it; but not
that it did it self exist no longer: for being a different Being, it could not
be reduced to nothing by the annihilation of the other. Thence it is manifest,
that Thought being not the Modification of Extension, our Soul is not
annihilated, on supposition that our Body were annihilated by Death.

But we have no reason to imagine that even the Body is annihilated, when it is
destroyed. The parts that make it up, are dissolved into Vapors, and reduced
into Dust: we neither see nor know them any more, I confess; but we cannot
hence conclude they exist not: For the Mind perceives them still. If we
separate a Mustard Seed into two, or four, or twenty parts, we annihilate it to
our Eyes, because we see it no longer: But it is not annihilated in it self, or
to the Mind; for the Mind discerns it, though divided into a thousand, or an
hundred thousand parts.

It Is a common Notion, and received by all that use their Reason rather than
their Senses, That nothing can be annihilated by the ordinary force of Nature.
For as it is naturally impossible for something to be produced from nothing, so
it is impossible for a Substance or Being to be reduced to nothing. Bodies
indeed may corrupt, if you call Corruption the Changes that befall them, but
cannot be annihilated. What is round, may become square; what is Flesh, may
become Earth, Vapor, and whatever you please: for all Extention is capable of
all sorts of Configuration: But the Substance of what is round, or Flesh, can
never perish: There are certain settled Laws in Nature, by which Bodies change
successively their Forms; because the successive Variety of these Forms, makes
the Beauty of the Universe, and causes us to admire its Author. But there is no
Law in Nature for the annihilation of any Being, because Nothingness, wants all
Beauty, as well as Goodness; and the Author of Nature is the Lover of his
works. Bodies then may change, but can never perish.

But if any one sticking to the Verdict of his Senses, shall obstinately
maintain, that the dissolution of Bodies is a true Annihilation; because the
parts they resolve into, are invisible: Let him do so much as remember that
Bodies cannot be divided into these invisible parts, but by reason of their
Extension. For if the Mind be not extended, it must be indivisible, and if
indivisible, must be acknowledged incorruptible in that sense. But how can the
Mind be imagined extended and divisible? A right Line will divide a Square into
two Triangles, Parallelograms or Trapezia: But by what Line may a Pleasure, a
Pain, or a Desire be conceived to be divided? and what Figure would result from
that Division? Certainly I cannot believe the Imagination so fruitful in false
Ideas as to satisfy it self in this particular.

The Mind therefore is neither extended, nor divisible, nor susceptible of the
same changes as the Body; and yet it must be owned, that it is not immutable by
its Nature. If the Body is capable of an infinite number of different Figures,
and different Configurations; the Mind is likewise capable of a world of
different Ideas, and different Modifications. And as after our Death, the
Substance of our Flesh will resolve into Earth, Vapors, and infinite other
Bodies, without annihilation; so our Soul without falling back into Nothing,
will have Thoughts and Sensations very different from those she has during this
Life. At present it is necessary that we live, and that our Body be composed of
Flesh and Bone; and in order to live, it is necessary the Soul should have Ideas
and Sensations, relating to the Body she is joined to. But when she shall be
divested of her Body, she shall enter upon a perfect Liberty of receiving all
sorts of Ideas and Modifications, very different from those she has at present;
as the Body on its part shall be free to receive all sorts of Figures and
Canfigurations, nothing like those it is obliged to make the Body of a living
Man.

It is, if I mistake not, manifest from what I have said, That the Immortality
of the Soul is no such hard thing to comprehend. Whence comes it then, that so
many doubt of it, but from their Inadvertency, and want of Attention to the
Reasons that are requisite to convince them? or whence proceeds this
negligence, but from the Unsetledness and Inconstancy of the Will, incessantly
disturbing the Understanding? So as not to give it leisure for a distinct
Preception, even of Ideas that are the most present to it, such as are those of
Thought and Extension: as a Man in the heat of a Passion, casting his Eyes
round about him, seldom distinguishes the Objects that are nearest, and most
exposed to View. For indeed the Question of the Immortality of the Soul, is one
of the easiest to be resolved, when without listening to the Imagination, we
bring the Mind attentively to consider, the clear and distinct Idea of
Extension, and the Relation it can have with Thought.

If the Inconstancy and Levity of the Will, hinders the Understanding from
piercing to the bottom of things that are most present to it, and of mightiest
Importance to be known; it is easy to judge what greater Remoras it will afford
the Mind, to prevent its Meditating on such as are Remote and Unconcerning. So
that if we are under the Grossest Ignorance and Blindness, as to most things of
greatest consequence to be known; I cannot tell how we should be very
Intelligent and Enlightened, as to those that seem altogether Impertinent and
Fruitless.

This I need not stand to prove by tedious Instances, and which contain no
considerale Truths; for if we must be ignorant of any thing, that best can be
despens'd with, which is of no use: and I had rather not be credited, than make
the Reader lose time by unprofitable things.

Though there are but very few, that are seriously taken up with things
altogether Vain and Useless; yet those few are too many: But the number cannot
be too great of such as neglect them and despise them; provided only they
forbear to judge of them. A limited Understanding is not blameable for not
knowing several things, but only for judging of them. For Ignorance is an
unavoidable Evil: But Error both may, and ought to be avoided: Ignorance of
many things is excusable, but headlong inconsiderate Judgments never.

V. That we are in extreme ignorance in point of Abstract things; and which
have but little reference to us.
When things are nearly related to us, are Sensible and easily Imaginable; we
may say that the Mind intends them, and that some Knowledge of them is
attainable: for knowing that they relate to us, we think of them with some
inclination; and feeling them to affect us, our Application grows pleasant and
delightful: So that we should, as to many things, be wiser than we are, but for
the Restlesness and Agitation of our Will, that perpetually troubles and
fatigues our Attention.

But when things are abstract and insensible, it is difficult to acquire any
certain Knowledge of them: not that abstract things are in their own Nature
intricate and puzling; but because the Attention and View of the Mind commonly
begins and ends with the Sensible View of Objects: for as much as we mostly
think of only what we see and feel, and as long as we see and feel it.

It Is certain, that if the Mind could easily keep up to clear and distinct
Ideas, without being as it were supported by some Sensation; and without having
its Attention perpetually disturbed by the Restlesness of the Will; we should
find no great difficulties in infinite Natural Questions, but in a short time
should get rid of our Ignorance, and Errors about them, which we now look upon
as inexplicable.

For instance, it is an indisputable Truth to every Man that makes use of his
Reason, that Creation and Annihilation exceed the ordinary force of Nature.
Should we now stick to the consideration of that pure Notion of the Mind and
Reason, we should not so readily admit the Creation and Annihilation of such
innumerable multitudes of New Beings, as of Substantial Forms, Real Qualities,
and Faculties, and the like. We should look for the reason of Natural Effects,
in the distinct Ideas of Extension, Figure and Motion; and this is not so
difficult as is imagined: For all Nature hangs in a continued chain, and the
parts of it mutually prove each other.

The Effects of Fire, as those of Cannons and Mines, are very wonderful; and
their Cause as secret and concealed. Nevertheless, if Men instead of adhering
to the Impressions of their Senses, and false and delusive Experiments, should
insist on that sole Notion of Pure Intellect: That it is impossible for a Body
gently moved to produce a Violent Motion in another; since it cannot
communicate more moving Force, than it has it self; it would be easy from that
single Notion to conclude, there is some subtle and invisible Matter; that it
is violently agitated, and universally diffused among all Bodies, and several
things of like kind, which might serve to explain the Nature of Fire, and to
discover other yet more intricate and hidden Truths.

For seeing so great Motions produced in a Cannon or a Mine, and all the
visible surrounding Bodies, in too little Commotion to effect them, we are
infallibly assured there are other invisible and insensible Bodies, which have
at least so much Motion as the Cannon Bullet; but being extremely fine and
subtle may, when alone, pass freely and without bursting any thing through the
Pores of the Cannon, before it is fired; that is, as may be seen explained at
large in Mr. des Carts, before they have surrounded the hard and gross parts
of the Saltpeter, which the Powder is composed of. But when the Fire is
kindled, that is, when these most subtle and agitated particles, have
encompassed the gross and solid parts of the Saltpeter, and so have
communicated their most forcible and violent Motion to them; all must
necessarily burst: because the the Pores of the Cannon, which gave a free
passage on all sides to the subtle parts we speak of, when alone; are not
large enough to receive the gross parts of the Saltpeter, and others that make
the Powder, when agitated by the subtle particles that environ them.

For as the Water of a River shakes not the Bridge it runs under, because of
the minuteness of its parts. So this most fine and subtle Matter continually
passes through the pores of all Bodies, without causing any sensible
alteration. But, as again that River is able to overturn a Bridge, when bearing
down its Stream huge massy pieces of Ice, or other more solid Bodies, it dashes
them against it with the same Force that it self is moved by: so the subtle
Matter is capable of those astonishing Effects, observable in Cannons and
Mines; when having communicated to the parts of the Powder, swimming in the
midst of it, an infinitely more violent and rapid Motion, than that of Rivers
and Torrents; these same parts of the Gunpowder cannot freely pass through the
Pores of the including Bodies, because of their too great bulk: and therefore
open themselves a way, by violently breaking what withstands them.

But it is not very easy to imagine these so subtle and refined Bodies, and
they are looked upon as Chimeras, because they cannot be seen. Contemplatio
fere desinit cum aspectu; says My Lord Bacon. And indeed the greatest part of
Philosophers had rather invent some New Entity, than be silent about things
they do not understand. If it be objected to their false, and inconceivable
Suppositions, that Fire must necessarily be composed of parts rapidly moved,
because of those violent Motions it produces; whilst nothing can communicate
what it has not: (which surely is a most clear and solid Objection) they will
be sure to confound all by some childish and imaginary Distinction, such as
Causes univocal and equivocal, that they may seem to say something, when indeed
they say nothing at all. For in fine, it is a received Maxim with all
considering Men, That there can be no equivocal Cause in Nature, and Ignorance
has only invented them.

Those then who are desirous of knowing Nature, should take care to fix more to
clear and distinct Notions. They should a little check and resist that Levity
and Inconstancy of their Will, if they would penetrate to the bottom of things:
for their Minds will ever be feeble, superficial and desultory, whilst their
Wills remain roving, fickle and inconstant.

It must be confessed that it is a painful and tiresome thing, and full of
constraint, to become attentive, and go to the bottom of the things we have a
mind to know. But nothing can be had without pains. Mean time, it is a reproach
to Men of Sense, and Philosophers, who are obliged by all manner of reasons to
the Search and Defense of Truth, to talk they know not what, and to be
satisfied with what they do not understand.

CHAP. III.
I. Curiosity is natural, and necessary. II. Three Rules to moderate it. III.
An Explication of the first of these Rules.

AS long as Men shall have an Inclination for a Good that exceeds their
Strength, I. Curiosity is natural and necessary.
and they shall not enjoy it; they will ever have a secret Inclination for
whatever carries the Character of New and Extraordinary. They will constantly
be persuing after things, which they have not yet considered, with hopes of
finding what they seek for: and whereas their Minds can never be fully
satisfied, without the Intuition of him, for whom they are created; so they
will always be restless and tossing about, till He appears to them in His Glory.

This Disposition of Minds, is doubtless very consonant to their Condition; it
being infinitely better restlesly to search after Truth, and Happiness which
they do not possess, than to fix on a false and ill-grounded security, by
taking up with Falsehood, and Seeming Goods, the ordinary Desserts they feed on:
Men ought not to be insensible to Truth and Hapiness, and what is New and
Extraordinary ought to quicken them. For there is a Curiosity, which we may
permit them, or rather which we ought to recommend to them. So then common and
ordinary things containing not the true Good; and the Ancient Opinions of
Philosophers, being most uncertain; it is reasonable we should be Curious for
New Discoveries, and always unquiet in the Enjoyment of ordinary Goods.

Should a Geometrician go to give us New Propositions contrary to Euclide's;
and pretend to prove that Science full of Errors, as Hobbs has essayed in a
Book he wrote against the Pride of the Giometricians; I confess we should be to
blame to be pleased with such sorts of Novelties; since Truth being found, we
ought to be constant in embracing it, our Curiosity being given us only to
excite us to the Discovery. And therefore it is no common fault with
Geometricians, to have a Curiosity for new Opinions in their Science: They
would quickly be disgusted with a Book, whose Propositions contradicted those
of Euclid: for that, being infallibly assured of the truth of his Propositions,
by incontestable Demonstrations, their Curiosity must cease on that respect: An
infallible sign that our Inclination for Novelty, proceeds only from our want
of Evidence, as to the Truth of things we desire naturally to know; and our not
possessing the Infinite Goods, which we naturally long to enjoy.

It Is then just and equitable, that men should be excited by Novelty, and fond
of persuing it: But however there are Exceptions to be made, II. Three Rules to
moderate Curiosity.
and some Rules to be observed; which may easily be deduced from our Assertion,
viz. That the Inclination for Novelty, is only given us to discover Truth, and
our real Goods.

These Rules are three in number; the first of which is, That Men must not love
Novelty in matters of Faith, which are not under the Jurisdiction of Reason.

The second, That Novelty is no reason to induce us to believe things to be
true or good; that is, we must not judge any Opinion true, because it is Novel;
nor any Good capable of contenting us, because it is new and extraordinary, and
we have never yet enjoyed it.

The third, That when we are moreover assured that some Truths lie so deep,
that it is Morally impossible to discover them: and that some Goods are so
little, and slender, that they can never satisfy us; the Novelty ought not to
raise our Curiosity, nor must we give way to be seduced by false Hopes. But we
will explain these Rules more at large, and show that the want of observing
them engages us in a vast number of Errors.

We commonly meet with Men of two quite opposite humors: some that will always
blindly and implicitly believe; III. A particular Explication of the first of
these Rules.
others, that will ever plainly and evidently perceive. The former having
scarce ever made use of their Reason, indifferently believe whatever they hear;
the latter resolving always to exercise their Mind, even in matters that are
infinitely above it, equally despise all sorts of Authorities. Those are
commonly of a stupid or weak capacity, as Children and Women; these are Haughty
and Libertine Wits, as Heretics and Philosophers.

We very rarely meet with Men exactly poised in the midst of these two
Extremes, who seek not for Evidence in matters of Faith, by a vain and
fruitless Agitation of Mind; or that sometimes believe not without Evidence
false Opinions about Natural things, by an indiscreet Deference, and servile
Submission of Spirit. If they be Men of Religion, and defer greatly to the
Authority of the Church, their Faith extends sometimes, if I may be allowed to
say so, to Opinions purely Philosophical; and they pay them the same respect as
the Truths of the Gospel; whilst their illegitimate Zeal too readily prompts
them to censure and condemn all of a different Sentiment and Persuasion. Hence
they entertain injurious suspicions against Persons that make New Discoveries;
and it is sufficient to pass for a Libertine with them, to deny Substantial
Forms; that the Creatures feel Pleasure and Pain, and other Philosophical
Opinions, which they believe true, without any evident Reason; only because
they imagine some necessary Dependencies between these Opinions and matters of
Faith,

But if Men are more bold and daring, the Spirit of Pride carries them to
despise the Authority of the Church; and they are hardly brought to submit to
it. They delight in harsh and presumptuous Opinions, and love to be thought
Bold Wits; and upon that prospect, talk of Divine things irreverently, and with
a sort of domineering Arrogance; d^spising, as too credulous, such as speak
modestly of some received Opinions. Lastly, they are extremely disposed to
doubt of every thing, and are quite opposite to those, who too easily submit to
the Authority of Men.

It Is manifest, that these two Extremes have nothing laudable, and that those
that require not Evidence in Natural Questions; are no less culpable than
others, who demand it in the Mysteries of Faith. But yet the former, who hazard
the being mistaken in Philosophical Questions, by too easy a Belief, are
doubtless more excusable than the latter, who run in danger of Heresy, by a
presumptuous doubting. For it is less perilous to fall into infinite Errors of
Philosophy, for want of examining them, than into one Heresy, for want of an
humble Submission to the Authority of the Church.

The Mind reposes it self upon finding Evidence, but it is tossed and disturbed
when it finds none; because Evidence is the Character of Truth. And therefore
the Error of Libertines and Heretics proceeds from their Doubting that Truth
is to be met with in the Decisions of the Church; because they see it not with
Evidence, and hoping at the same time, that the Points of Faith may be
evidently known. Now their passion for Novelty is corrupt and disordered,
because having already the Truth, in the Faith of the Church, they ought no
longer to seek for it: besides that the Truths we are taught by Faith, being
infinitely above our Reason, they could not be discovered, supposing, according
to their false Notion, that the Church was guilty of Error.

But as many Err, by refusing to submit to the Authority of the Church; so
there are no fewer that deceive themselves, by submitting to the Authority of
Men. The Authority of the Church must always be yielded to, because it can
never err: but we must never blindfoldly resign to the Authority of Men,
because they are always liable to mistake. The Doctrines of the Church
infinitely transcend the powers of Reason, but the Doctrines of Men are subject
to it: So that if it be an intolerable Vanity and Presumption to follow the
Guidance of our Mind, in seeking for Truth in matters of Faith, without Respect
to the Authority of the Church; it is likewise a sordid Levity, and a
despicable Meanness of Spirit, blindly to believe upon the Authority of Men, in
Subjects depending on Reason.

Notwithstanding which, it may be said, that most of those who bear the Name of
Learned in the World, have purchased their Reputation merely by getting by rote
the Opinions of Aristotle, Plato, Epicurus, and some other Philosophers, and by
blindfoldly embracing, and wilfully maintaining their Opinions. An Acquaintance
with the Sentiments of some Philosophers, is enough to entitle to Degrees, and
exterior Badges of Learning in the Universities: And provided a Man shall
swear in Verba Magistri, he shall speedily commence a Doctor. Most Communities
have a Ped, and Learning peculiar to themselves, which every private Person is
obliged to stand and fall by. What is true in one Society is false in another.
They sometimes take pride in maintaining the Doctrine of their Order against
Reason and Experience; and think they are obliged to warp and distort the
Truth, or make their Authors buckle, that they may be consistent with it: Which
has occasioned an infinite multitude of trifling Distinctions, which are so
many By-ways to lead infallibly to Error.

If any Truth be now adays discovered, Aristotle must have known it; but if
Aristotle be against it, the Discovery is false. Some make that Philosopher
speak one way, some another; for all Pretenders to Learning teach him to speak
in their own Dialect. There is no Impertinence but he is introduced as
uttering; nor any New Discovery, but is found enigmatically treasured up in
some corner of his Books. In a word, he constantly contradicts himself; if not
in his Works, at least in the Mouths of his Professors. For though the
Philosophers declare, and indeed design to teach his Doctrine, yet it is an hard
thing to find two to meet upon his Opinions; because in effect his Books are so
obscure, and abound with so many loose, indefinite, and general Terms, that
even those Men's Notions may with some likelihood be ascribed to him, that are
the most opposite in the World. He may be made to say any thing in some of his
Works, because he says just nothing, whilst he makes much Noise; as Children
make the Bells ^ound what they have a mind to, because they are very noisie,
but inarticulate.

It Is true, it seems reasonable to fix and determine the Mind of Man to
particular Opinions, to keep it from rambling* and extravagance: But why must
it be done by Falsehood and Error? Can Error be thought capable of reuniting
divided Minds? If we consider how rare it is to find Men of Sense and Parts
satisfied with reading Aristotle, and persuaded they have acquired true
Science, though grown old in poring on his Books, we shall evidently perceive
that nothing but Truth and Evidence can quiet the Agitation of the Mind; and
that Disputes, Aversions, Errors, and Heresies, are kept up and fortified by
the Corrupt Course and Method of Men's Study. Truth consists in indivisibili, is
incapable of Variety, and nothing else can reunite Men's Minds: But Error and
Falsehood can only divide and disturb them.

I make no question but there are such as honestly believe, that he, whom they
style the Prince of Philosophers, is guilty of no Error; and that his Works
are the Magazines of true and sound Philosophy. There are Men who imagine, that
in the space of two thousand Years, the Time since he wrote, no Man has been
able to say he has made a Blot, or been guilty of a Mistake; and so making him
infallible in a manner, they can pin their Faith upon him, and quote him as
infallible. But it is not worth while to stand to answer such Gentlemen as
these, because their Ignorance must needs be exceeding gross, and meriting more
to be pitied than oppugn'd: I desire only of them, if they know that either
Aristotle, or any of his Followers, have deduced any Truth from the Principles
peculiar to him; or if possibly themselves have done it, that they would
declare it, explain it, and prove it; and I promise them never more to speak
but to Aristotle's Praise and Commendation. His Principles shall no longer be
calumniated as useless, since they have at last been serviceable to prove one
Truth. But we have no Reason to hope this: For the Challenge has been long
since offered, and M. Des Carts, among the rest, has done it in his
Metaphysical Meditations, almost Forty Years ago, and obliged himself to
demonstrate the Falsehood of that pretended Truth. And there is great
Probability no Man will ever venture to attempt what M. Des Cartes's greatest
Enemies, and the most zealous Defenders of Aristotle's Philosophy never yet
durst undertake.

I beg leave then, after this, to say, That it is Blindness, Slavishness of
Spirit, and Stupidity, thus to betray Reason to the Authority of Aristotle,
Plato, or whatever other Philosopher: That it is Loss of Time to read them, out
of no other Design than to remember their Opinions; and it is to waste that of
others too, to teach them in that manner. And I may say with St. Augustine, Quis
tam stulte curio^us est, qui filium suum mit^at in Scholam, ut quid Magister
cogitet discat?
That a Man must be sottishly curious, who sends his Son to the College to
learn the Opinions of his Tutour. That the Philosophers cannot instruct us by
their Authority; and to pretend to it is a piece of Injustice: That it is a kind
of Madness and Impiety to take a solemn Oath of Allegiance to them: And,
Lastly, that it is to detain Truth in an unjust Bondage, from Interest, and
Partiality, to oppose the New Opinions of Philosophy, that may be true, to keep
up the credit of such as are known to be either false or useless.

CHAP. IV.
A Continuation of the same Subject. I. An Explication of the Second Rule
concerning Curiosity. II. An Explication of the Third.

I. The Second Rule concerning Curiosity.
THE Second Rule to be observed is, That Novelty should never pass with us as a
Reason to believe things to be true. We have often said, That a Man ought not
to acquiesce in Error, and the seeming Goods which he enjoys: That it is just
he should seek for the Evidence of Truth, and the True Good, which he does not
possess, and consequently have an Inclination for things that are New and
Extraordinary: Yet he is not, for all that, to cleave to them, or to believe,
out of a Levity of Humor, that Opinions are true, because novel; and that
Goods are real, because they have not been experienced. Novelty should only put
him upon examining New things carefully; which he ought not to despise, because
he does not know them; nor rashly to believe, to contain what his Hopes and
Wishes aim at.

But here follows a thing of common Observation: When Men have examined Ancient
and Received Opinions, without perceiving the bright Light of Truth; when they
have tasted Common Goods, without finding the solid Pleasure that should attend
the Possession of Good; and when their Desires and Longings are not abated by
ordinary Goods and Opinions: If then they hear of any thing new and
unexperienced, the Idea of Novelty gives them Grounds of hoping that this is
the very thing they search for. And because they commonly flatter themselves,
and willingly believe things are as they wish them to be, their Hopes
strengthen as fast as their Desires increase, till at last they insensibly grow
into imaginary Assurances: Hereupon they so inseparably annex the Idea of
Novelty to the Idea of Truth, that the one is never excited without the other;
and that which is newest, seems always truer and better than what is more
ordinary and common. Wherein they widely differ from some others, who from an
Abhorrence of Heresy, having joined the Idea of Novelty with that of Falsity,
imagine all New Opinions false, and including something of dangerous Importance.

Thence it may be concluded, That this customary Disposition of the Mind and
Heart of Man, in respect of all that bears the Character of Novelty, is one of
the most general Causes of their Errors: It hardly ever conducts them to the
Truth; but when it does, it is purely by Chance, and good Luck; and it
constantly obviates their Possession of their True Good, by engaging them in
that Multiplicity of Divertisements, and falsely seeming Goods, the World is
filled with; which is the most dangerous Error Man can fall into.

II. The Third Rule concerning Curiosity.
The Third Rule against the excessive Desires of Novelty, is, That when we are
otherwise assured that some Truths lie so deep, that it is morally impossible to
discover them; and that some Goods are so little and slender, that they cannot
make us happy, the Novelty of them ought not to excite our Curiosity.

Every one may know by Faith, Reason, and Experience, That all created Goods
are notable to fill the infinite Capacity of the Will. We are taught by Faith,
that all worldly things are Vanity; and that our Happiness consists neither in
Riches nor Honors. Reason assures us, that since it is not in our Power to
bound our Desires, and that we are carried by a Natural Inclination to the
loving all Goods; that we cannot become Happy, but by possessing HIM who
contains them all. Our own Experience makes us sensible, that we are not Happy
in the Possession of the Goods we enjoy, because we are still desirous of
others. Lastly, We daily see that the mighty Goods which Princes, and the most
Potent Kings enjoy on Earth, are incapable of filling their Desires: That they
have even more Disturbances and Troubles than other Men; and that being on the
highest Point of Fortune's Wheel, they must be infinitely more shaken and
agitated by its Motion than those which sit lower and nearer its Axis: For in
short, they never fall, but it is from a Precipice; they receive no little
Wounds, and all that Grandeur which attends them, and which they incorporate
with their own Being, only enlarges and extends them, that they may receive a
greater Number of Wounds, and be more exposed to the Insults and Blows of
Fortune.

Faith, Reason, and Experience thus assuring us, that earthly Goods and
Pleasures, which we have never tasted, could not make us Happy, though we
should enjoy them; special Care ought to be taken, according to the Third Rule,
to supersede being flattered with the vain Hope of Felicity, which Hope
insensibly increasing, proportionably to our Passions and Desires, will at last
end in a false Confidence, and an ill-grounded Assurance. For when we are
extremely passionate for any Good, we always imagine it excessively great; and
by degrees persuade our selves we shall be happy in the Enjoyment.

These vain Desires then must be resisted, since to try to satisfy them would
be a fruitless Attempt: But especially for this Reason, that when we give way
to our Passions, and spend our Time to afford them Satisfaction, we lose GOD,
and all things with him; we only run from one seeming Good to another, live
always in false Hopes, distract and agitate our selves a thousand ways, and
meet with perpetual Oppositions and frustrations, because the desired Goods are
sought, but cannot be possessed by many at once; and at last we die, and can
enjoy nothing more: For, as we are taught by St. Paul, They that will be rich,
fall into temptation and a snare, 2 Timothy 6.9.
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition: for the love of money is the root of all evil.

But if we ought not to be sollicitous for the Goods of the Earth, which are
new to us, as being certain that the Happiness we are in search of, is not to
be found in them; much less ought we to desire to know the new Opinions about a
vast many difficult Questions: as being otherwise convinced, that an humane
Mind can never discover the truth of them. Most of the Questions treated of in
Morals and Physics, are of that nature; which may afford us Reason to suspect
the generality of those Books we see daily composed upon very obscure and most
perplexing Subjects* For though, absolutely speaking, the Questions they
contain are solvable; yet, so few Truths being hitherto discovered, and so many
to be known before we can come to those that are handled in these Books; they
cannot be read without hazarding to lose much by them.

But yet this is not the Method that is taken, but the quite contrary: Men
examine not whether what is said be possible. Promise them only extraordinary
things, as, the Restitution of Natural Heat, Radical Moisture, Vital Spirits,
or other Unintelligible Matters; and you excite their vain Curiosity, and
prepossess them. It Is enough to dazzle them, and win their Assent, to offer them
Paradoxes; to make use of obscure Words, Terms of Influence, or the Authority
of some unknown Authors; or to make some very sensible and unusual Experiment,
though it have no reference to the thing advanced. For Confusion is Conviction
to some sorts of People.

If a Physician, a Surgeon, or an Empirick, quote but some Greek and Latin
Sentences, and talk to their Hearers in new and extraordinary Terms, they take
them for Great Men; they give them the Prerogative of Life and Death, and
believe them as they would an Oracle: They imagine themselves too, that they
are elevated to a pitch above the common size, and pierce to the bottom of
things. And if one happen to be so indiscreet, as to testify, that five or six
insignificative Words that prove nothing, will not go down for Reason; they
think a Man void of Common-sense, and that he denies First Principles: And
indeed, these Gentlemen's First Principles are five or six Latin Words of an
Author, or some Greek Passage, if they have greater Abilities.

It is even necessary for skilful Physicians to talk sometimes in an unknown
Tongue to their Patients, to purchase Reputation, and to make themselves
attended to.

A Physician who can go no farther than Latin, may pass well enough in a
Country Parish, because Latin is Greek and Arabic to the Illiterate. But if a
Physician cannot at least read Greek, ^o learn some Aphorism of Hypocrates, he
must not expect to pass for a Scholar with the Inhabitants of a City, who
commonly understand Latin. And so the most Learned amongst them, knowing this
Humor of the World, are forced to talk like Cheats and Quacks; and we are not
always to take an Estimate of their Parts and Learning from the Discourse they
have in their Visits.

CHAP. V.
I. Of the Second Natural Inclination, or of Self-love. II. The Division of it
into Love of Being, and of Well-being; or, of Greatness and Pleasure.

THE Second Inclination which the Author of Nature constantly impresses on our
Will, is, The Love of our selves, and Our own Preservation.

We have already said, That GOD loves all his Works; I. Of the Second natural
Inclination, or of Self-love.
and that it is only his Love which preserves them in their Being; and that
it is his Will, that all Created Spirits should have the same Inclination with
his own. It Is his Will therefore, that they all have a natural Inclination for
their own Preservation, and that they love themselves. So that Self-love is
reasonable, because Man is really amiable; in as much as GOD loves us, and
would have us love our selves: but it is not reasonable to love our selves
better than GOD; since GOD is infinitely more lovely than we are. It is injust
for us to place our ultimate End in our selves, and to center our Love there,
without reference to GOD; since having no real Goodness, or Subsistence of our
selves, but only by the participation of the Goodness and Being of GOD, we are
no farther amiable than we stand related to him.

Nevertheless, the Inclination we should have for GOD, is lost by the Fall; and
our Will now has only an infinite Capacity for all Goods, or Good in general;
and a strong Inclination to possess them, which can never be destroyed. But the
Inclination which we ought to have for our own Preservation, or our Self-love,
is so mightily increased, that it is at last become the absolute Master of our
Will: It has even changed and converted the Love of GOD, or the Inclination we
have for Good in general, and that due to other Men, into its own nature. For
it may be said, that the Love of our selves at present ingrosses all, because
we love all things but with relation to our selves; whereas we should love GOD
only first, and all things after as related to him.

When Faith and Reason certify us, that GOD is the sovereign Good, and, that
he alone can fill us with Pleasures, we easily conceive it our Duty to love
him, and readily afford him our Affections; but, unassisted by Grace, Self-love
always is the first Mover. All pure and defecate Charity is above the strength
of our corrupt Nature; and so far are we from loving GOD for himself, that
Humane Reason cannot comprehend how it is possible to love him, without
Reference to our selves, and making our ultimate End our own Satisfaction.
Self-love therefore is the only Master of our Will, ever since the Disorders of
Sin: and the Love of GOD, and our Neighbor, are only Consequences of it; since
we love nothing at present, but with the hopes of some Advantage, or because we
actually receive some Pleasure therein.

This Self-love branches into two sorts; viz. Into the Love of Greatness, and
the Love of Pleasure; II. The Division of Self-love, of Being, and of
Well-being; or of Greatness and Pleasure.
or into the Love of ones Being, and the Perfection of it, and into the Love of
Well-being or Felicity.

By the Love of Greatness, we affect Power, Elevation, Independency, and a
Self-subsisting Being. We are, after a sort, ambitious of having a Necessary
Being; and in one sense desire to be as Gods: for GOD only has properly Being
and Necessary Existence, for that every Depending Nature exists only by the
Will of its Upholder. Wherefore Men, in desiring the Necessity of their Being,
desire Power and Independency, which may set them beyond the reach of the Power
of others. But by the Love of Pleasure, they desire not barely Being, but
Well-being; Pleasure being the best and most advantageous Mode of the Soul's
Existence.

For it must be noted, That Greatness, Excellency, and Independency of the
Creature, are not Modes of Existence, that render it more happy of themselves;
for it often happens, that a Man grows miserable, in proportion to his growing
great: But as to Pleasure, it is a Mode of Existence, which we cannot Actually
receive, without being Actually more happy. Greatness and Independency are
commonly External Modes, consisting in the relation we have to things about us.
But Pleasures are in the very Soul, are real Modes, which modifie her, and are
naturally adapted to content her. And therefore we look upon Excellency,
Greatness, and Independency, as things proper for the Preservation of our
Being, and useful sometimes, by the order of Nature, to the continuance of our
Well-being. But Pleasure is always a Mode of the Mind's Existence, which of it
self renders it Happy and Content. So that Pleasure is Well-being; and the Love
of Pleasure, the Love of Well-being.

Now this Love of Well-being is sometimes more powerful and strong than the
Love of Being: and Self-love makes us desire Nonexistence, because we want
Well-being. This Desire is incident to the Damned, for whom it were better,
according to the Saying of our SAVIOR, not to be at all, than to be so ill as
they are; because these Wretches being the declared Enemies of him who contains
in himself all Goodness, and who is the sole Cause of all the Pleasures and
Pains we are capable of; it is impossible they should enjoy any Satisfaction.
They are and will be eternally miserable, because their Will shall ever be in
the same Disposition and Corruption. Self-love therefore includes two Loves,
that of Greatness, Power, and Independence, and generally of all things thought
proper for the preservation of our Being; and that of Pleasure, and of all
things necessary to our Well-being; that is, to our being Happy and Content.

These two Loves may be divided several ways: whether because we are compounded
of two different parts, of a Soul and Body, by which they may be divided; or
because they may be distinguished or specified by the different Objects, that
are serviceable to our Preservation. But I shall insist no longer upon this,
because, designing not a Treatise of Morality, there is no need of making an
exact Disquisition and Division of all the things relating to us, as our Goods.
Only this Division was necessary to reduce into some order the Causes of our
Errors.

First, I shall speak to the Errors that are caused by the Inclination we have
for Greatness, and whatever sets our Being free from Dependence upon others. In
the next place, I shall treat of those which proceed from our Inclination to
Pleasure, and whatever meliorates our Being as much as possible, and contents
us most.

CHAP. VI.
I. Of the Inclination we have for whatever elevates us above others. II. Of
the false Judgments of some Religious Persons. III. Of the false Judgments of
the Superstitious and Hypocrites. IV. Of Voetius, Mr. Des Cartes's Enemy.

WHatever tends to exalt us above others, by making us more perfect, as Science
and Virtue; or gives us Authority over them by rendering us more powerful, I. Of
the Inclination we have for whatever elevates us above others.
as Honors and Riches; seems to put us in a sort of Independence. All those
that are below us, reverence and fear us; are always prepared to execute what
we please for our Preservation, and are afraid of offending us or resisting our
Desires: which makes Men constantly endeavor to be Masters of these
Advantages, which elevate them above others* for they don't consider that their
Being and Well-being depend, in truth, on GOD alone, and not on Men: and that
real Greatness, which shall make them everlastingly happy, consists not in the
Rank they bear in the imagination of others, as impotent and miserable as
themselves; but in an humble Submission to the Will of GOD: who being just,
will not fail to reward such as persevere in the Order he has prescribed them.

But Men not only desire actually to possess Science and Virtue, Dignities and
Riches; but lay out their whole Endeavors, that they may at least be thought
really to possess them. And if it may be said of them, That they are more
sollicitous to be Truly Rich, than to be thought so; we may say too, they are
less careful to be Truly Virtuous, than to appear so: for, as was handsomely
said by the Author of the Moral Reflections; Virtue would not go far, unless
Vanity bore her Company.

The Reputation of being Rich, Learned, Virtuous, produces in the Imagination
of those about us, or that are of nearest Concernment to us, very advantageous
Dispositions on our behalf; it lays them prostrate at our feet, actuates them
on our account, and inspires them with all the Motions that tend to the
preservation of our Being, and the augmentation of our Greatness: which makes
Men careful to preserve their Reputation, as a Good they have need of, to live
conveniently in the World.

All Men then have an Inclination for Virtue, Science, Honors, and Riches; and
for the Reputation of possessing these Advantages. We will now make it appear,
by some Instances, how these Inclinations may engage us in Error: and will
begin with the Inclination for Virtue, or for the Appearance of it.

Those who seriously labor to become Virtuous, employ most of their Thoughts
and Time in the learning Religion, and the exercise of Good Works: They desire,
with St. Paul, to know only CHRIST Crucified, the Remedy of the Disease, and
Corruption of their Nature: They wish for no more Light than is requisite to
their living as becomes Christians, and to discover their Duties: And next they
study only to grow fervent and punctual in Devotion; and so trouble not
themselves with those Sciences which seem barren, and insignificant to their
Salvation.

Which Conduct is not to be blamed, but highly esteemed. II. Of the false
Judgments of some Religious Persons.
Happy should we think our selves exactly to have served it, as we repent the
not having sufficiently persu'd it. But what is reprovable is, That there being
undoubtedly Sciences purely Humane, of greatest Certainty as well as Use, which
take off the Mind from sensible things, and accustom or prepare it insensibly
to relish the Truths of the Gospel: Some pious Persons too liberally condemn
them without Examination, as either unprofitable or uncertain.

True it is, that most of the Sciences are very uncertain and useless. It Is no
Mistake, to think they contain only very insignificant Truths. No body's
obliged to study them; and it is better to despise them altogether, than to be
charmed and dazzled with them. However, we may affirm, That the Knowledge of
some Metaphysical Truths is most necessary. The Knowledge of an Universal
Cause, or of the Existence of a GOD, is of indispensible necessity; since even
the Certainty of Faith depends on the Knowledge which Reason affords of the
Existence of a GOD: We ought to know, that it is His Will that constitutes and
governs Nature; that the Strength and Power of Natural Causes is merely his
Will: in a word, that all things depend on GOD all manner of ways.

Again, it is necessary to know what is Truth; the means to distinguish it from
Error: The Distinction betwixt Bodies and Spirits, and the Consequences that
may be drawn from it, as the Immortality of the Soul, and many others of like
nature, which may be infallibly known.

The Knowledge of Man, or of one's Self, is a Science that cannot reasonably be
despised: It is stored with infinite things, absolutely necessary to be known,
in order to an Accuracy and Penetration of Mind. And if it may be said, that a
gross and stupid Man is infinitely superior to Matter, because he knows that
he exists, which Matter does not know: Those who are acquainted with the Nature
of Man, are certainly much above the Ignorant and Stupid, because they know
what they are, which the others don't.

But the Science of Man does not only merit our Esteem because it exalts us
above others, but much more for abasing us, and humbling us before GOD. This
Science thoroughly acquaints us with the Dependence we have on him in all
things, even in our most customary Actions: It manifestly discovers the
Corruption of our Nature, disposes us to have recourse to him, who alone can
cure us; to fasten upon him, to distrust our selves, and quit our
Self-adherencies and Engagements: and furnishes us with several other very
requisite Dispositions of Mind, to fit us for the Grace of the Gospel.

Nor can a superficial Tincture, and a general Knowledge, at least of
Mathematics and Nature, be dispensed with. Those Sciences should be learned
when we are young, as disengaging the Mind from things sensible, and preventing
its growing soft and effeminate: they are very useful to the Conduct of Life,
and even bring us to GOD; the Knowledge of Nature doing it directly of it self,
and that of Mathematics collaterally, by the Disgust it infuses, for the false
Impressions of the Senses.

The Virtuous and Religious would do well not to dis-esteem these Sciences, nor
look on them as uncertain or useless, till they are certain they have studied
them so thoroughly, that they can pass a sound Judgment on them. There are
others enough, which they are at liberty to despise as peremptorily as they
please. They may sentence to the Flames the Heathen Poets and Philosophers, the
Rabbis, with some Historians, and a multitude of Authors, on whose Stock many
set up for Fame and Learning; and we shall easily forgive them. But let them
not condemn the Knowledge of Nature, as contrary to Religion; since Nature
being ruled by the Will of GOD, the True Knowledge of it gives us to understand
and admire the Divine Power, Greatness, and Wisdom. For, last of all, it is
probable that GOD has formed the Universe, that Spirits might be employed in
studying it; and by that study be brought to know and reverence its Author. So
that those who condemn the study of Nature, seem to be Opposers of the Will of
GOD; but that they would have it thought, that since the Fall the Humane Mind
is incapacitated for that study. Nor let it be said, that the Knowledge
concerning Man puffs up the Mind, and renders it vain and arrogant; because
those who are supposed to understand Humane Nature best (though frequently they
understand it very little) are intolerably proud and presumptuous. For it is
plain, that no Man can be well acquainted with himself, but he must be sensible
of his Weakness and his Misery.

So then it is not true and solid Piety that so commonly condemns what it does
not understand, but rather Superstition and Hypocrisy. III. Of the false
Judgments of the Superstitious and Hypocrites.
The Superstitious, out of a slavish Fear, and a dejection and timerousness of
Spirit, start and boggle at a lively and penetrating Wit. Explain to them, for
instance, the natural Reasons of Thunder, and its Effects, and you shall be a
reputed Atheist. But Hypocrites, by a diabolical Malignity, transform
themselves into Angels of Light: for they employ the appearances of Truths of
universally sacred and revered Authority, to withstand, from out of partial
Interests, such Truths as are rarely known, and of little Reputation. Thus they
oppugn Truth by her own Image: and whilst they ridicule in their Heart what is
reverenced by the World, they establish their Reputation so much more deep and
impregnable in the Minds of Men, as the Truth they have abused is more sacred
and inviolable.

Such Persons are the strongest, powerfullest, and most formidable Enemies of
the Truth. They are not indeed very common: but there need be but few to do a
world of mischief. The Show of Truth and Virtue frequently do more Evil, than
Truth and Virtue themselves do Good. For one subtle Hypocrite is enough to
overthrow what cost a great many truly wise and virtuous, much labor and pains
to build.

Of Voetius.
Monsieur Des Carts, for instance, has demonstratively proved the Existence of
a GOD, the Immortality of our Souls, and a great many other both Metaphysical
and Physical Questions: and our Age is under infinite Obligations to him for
the Truths he has discovered to us. Notwithstanding, there starts up an
inconsiderable Person, and takes upon him (being an hot and vehement Declamer,
and in Esteem with the People for the Zeal he manifested for their Religion) to
compose Books full of Calumnies against him, and accuse him of the vilest
Crimes. Des Carts was a Catholic, and was Tutored in his Studies by the
Jesuits, whom he frequently mentioned with an honorable respect. This was
enough with that malicious Spirit, to persuade a People, opposite to our
Religion, and easy to be provoked upon Matters so nice as those of Religion
are, that he was an Emissary of the Jesuits, and had dangerous Designs: because
the least shadow of Truth in Points of Faith, has more influence on Men's
Minds, than real and effective Truths in Matters of Physics or Metaphysics,
for which they have little or no regard. Des Carts wrote of the Existence of a
GOD; and this was sufficient for this Slanderer to exercise his false Zeal, and
to oppress all the Truths that made for his Enemy's Defense. He accused him of
Atheism, and of cunningly and clandestinely teaching it; like that infamous
Atheist Vanino, burned at Toulouse, who, to cover his Malice and Impiety, wrote
for the Existence of a GOD. For, one of the Reasons he alleges for his Enemy's
being an Atheist, was, that he wrote against the Atheists, as did Vanino, for a
cloak to his Villainy.

So easy is it for a Man to overwhelm Truth, when supported with the shows of
it, and when once he has obtained an Authority over weaker Minds. Truth loves
Gentleness and Peace; and though she be very strong, yet she sometimes yields
to the Pride and Arrogance of Falsehood and a Lie, dressed up and armed in her
own Appearances. She knows that Error cannot finally prevail against her; and
if it be her Fate sometimes to live proscribed and in obscurity, it is only to
wait more favorable opportunities of manifesting her self: for she generally
at last breaks out* in greater Strength and Brightness, even in the very place
of her Oppression.

It Is no wonder to hear an Enemy of Des Carts, a Man of a different Religion,
and ambitious to raise himself upon the Ruins of Men above him, an injudicious
Haranguer; in a word, a Voetius, to talk contemptuously of what he neither does
nor will understand. But it is to be admired, that such as are neither Enemies
to Des Carts, nor his Religion, should be possessed with an Aversion and
Contempt of him, on the account of the Reproaches they have read in Books
composed by the Enemy both to his Person and his Church.

That Heretick's Book, entitled Desperata Causa Papatus, is a sufficient Proof
of his Impudence, Ignorance, Outrage, and desire of seeming Zealous, thereby to
purchase a Reputation amongst his Flock: which shows that he is not a Man to be
trusted on his Word. For as we are not to believe all the fabulous Stories he
has heaped together in his Book against our Religion; so we are not to believe,
on the strength of his Affirmation, those bitter and hainously injurious
Accusations he has forged against his Enemy.

It Is not then the part of a Rational Man, to enter into a Persuasion that M.
Des Carts was a dangerous Person; because they have, perchance, read it in
some Book, or heard it said by others, whose Piety is awful and respected: for
Men's bare words are not to be credited, when they accuse others of the highest
Crimes; nor is the Zeal and Gravity it is spoken in, sufficient Inducement to
persuade us of the Truth of it. For, in short, it is possible for Folly and
Falsehood to be set off in the same manner as better things, especially when the
Speaker is won over to the Belief of them out of Simplicity and Weakness.

It Is easy to be informed of the Truth or Falsehood of the Indictment drawn up
against M. Des Carts; his Writings being easy to come by, and not difficult
to be understood by an Attentive Person. Let a Man therefore read his Books,
that better Evidence may be had against him than a bare Hearsay; and after he
has well read them, and digested them, it may be hoped the Plea of Atheism will
be thrown out, and on the contrary, all due Respect and Deference paid to a
Man, who in a most simple and evident manner has demonstrated not only the
Existence of a GOD, and the Immortality of the Soul, but a great number of
other Truths, that till his time were never thought on.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Desire of Science, and of the Judgments of the falsely Learned.

THE Mind of Man is doubtless of a little Reach and Capacity, and yet he longs
to know every thing: All Humane Sciences are unable to satisfy his Desires,
though he has not room to comprehend any one in particular. He is constantly
disquieted, and impatient for Knowledge, either because he hopes to find what
he seeks for, as we have said in the foregoing Chapters; or, because he is
persuaded that his Soul is agrandiz'd by the vain possession of some
extraordinary Knowledge.

The irregular Desire of Happiness and Greatness, puts him upon the Study of
all Sciences, hoping to find Happiness in moral, and looking for that false
Greatness in speculative Knowledge.

Whence comes it, that there are Men who spend their Life in Reading the
Rabbis, and such like Books, written in foreign, obscure, and corrupt
Languages, by injudicious and senseless Authors; but from a Persuasion that the
Knowledge of the Oriental Tongues gives them a wonderful Lift and Exaltation
above others that know nothing of them? and what can bear up their Courage
under so ungrateful, unpleasant, painful, and useless a Study, but the hope of
Eminency, and the prospect of some vain Greatness? And indeed, they are looked
upon as extraordinary Men: they are complemented upon their profound Learning;
they are more awfully listened to than others: and though we may, for the most
part, pronounce them the most injudicious of all, if it were only for wasting
their Life on so insignificant a Business, which can neither make them wiser
nor happier; yet they are supposed to have greater Sense and Judgment than
others: Because they are more knowing in the Derivation of Words, we think them
more learned in the Nature of Things.

It Is for the same Reason that Astronomers employ their Time and Fortune to get
an accurate Knowledge of what is not only useless, but impossible to be known:
They would find in the Courses of the Planets such an exact Regularity, as does
not belong to them; and erect Astronomical Schemes to foretell Effects, the
Causes whereof they do not know. They have framed a Selenography, or Geography,
of the Moon, as if Men designed to travel thither; and have already shared that
World amongst the most famous Astronomers: few of them but are awarded some
Province in this Country, as a Recompense for their Labors: And I question
whether they think it not a piece of Honor to have been in the good Graces of
him who so magnificently distributed these Kingdoms.

What makes Rational Men so hot in the Study of this Science, whilst at the
same time they are grossly ignorant as to most useful Truths, but that there
seems to be something great in the Knowledge of Heavenly Transactions: The
Knowledge of the least thing happening in the Upper World, seems more Noble,
Sublime, and befitting the Greatness of their Mind, than the Knowledge of
things vile, abject, and corruptible, as they think Sublunary Bodies. The
Excellency of a Science, derives from the Excellency of its Object. This is a
notable Principle! The Knowledge of the Motion of Inchangeable and
Incorruptible Bodies, is therefore most noble and elevated of all other; and as
such, seems worthy of the Greatness and Excellency of their Mind.

Thus it is Men suffer themselves to be dazzled with a false Idea of Greatness,
which flatters and excites them. The Imagination struck, falls down before the
Phantom, which it reverences, to the blinding Reason that should judge of it,
and turning it upside down. Men seem to be in a Dream, when they judge of the
Objects of their Passions; to have their Eyes sealed up, and to be destitute of
common Sense. For what is there of so great Importance in the Knowledge of the
Motions of the Planets? Don't we know enough already to regulate our Months and
Years? Why so much ado, to know whether Saturn is incircled with a Ring, or a
great multitude of Little Moons? and why must we make Parties hereupon? What
Reason is there for a Man to boast himself upon the Prediction of the Greatness
of an Eclipse? when possibly the Success was owing only to a luckier Guess.
There are Men appointed and encouraged by the Royal Order to observe the Stars;
let us sit down content with their Observations. This Employment they follow
with Reason, because they engage in it by Duty: It is their proper Business;
and therefore their Labors are successful, as grounded upon Art, and carried
on with all imaginable Accuracy and Application; and they want nothing to
promote their Endeavors. Thus we ought to be fully satisfied as to a Ma^ter
that concerns us so little, whilst they communicate to us their Discoveries.

It Is requisite that many Persons study Anatomy, since its Knowledge is
exceeding useful; that Knowledge being most to be desired which has most Use
and Advantage. Whatever contributes any thing to our Happiness, or rather to
the easing our Infirmities, and mitigating our Miseries, may, and must be
studied. But to be prying whole Nights at the end of a Telescope, to discover
in the Heavens some Spot, or new Planet or other; to ruin a Man's Health and
Happiness, to neglect all his Business, that he may pay constant Visits to the
Stars, and measure their Magnitudes and Situations, is, in my mind, entirely to
forget both what a Man is at present, and what he shall be hereafter.

But you will say perhaps, that this manifests the Greatness of him who made
these mighty Objects: To which I say, That the least Fly shows forth the Power
and Wisdom of GOD, to those who attentively consider it without prejudice to
its Littleness, more than all that the Astronomers know concerning the Heavens:
Yet Men are not made to consider Flies; and we think their pains but ill
employed, who have studied to inform us how the several Lice of every
respective Animal are made, and how different Worms are transformed into Flies
and Butter-flies. They may, if they please, for their diversion, when they have
nothing else to do, busy themselves about these things: but they ought not to
spend their whole time upon them, unless they are become insensible to their
miseries.

But it lies upon them to be incessantly endeavoring to know GOD and
themselves, to labor seriously to get rid of their Errors and Prejudices, of
their Passions, and Inclinations to Sin; to be importunate in the search of
Truths most needful for them: for at last those shall be found to be most
judicious, who are most careful in the Enquiry after the solidest Truths.

The principal Cause which engages Men in these false Studies, is, their having
conjoined the Idea of Learned to these vain and unfruitful Sciences, instead of
annexing it to the solid and necessary. When once a Man has the Thoughts of
growing Learned in his Head, and the Spirit of Polimathy begins to work, he is
little concerned to know what Sciences are most necessary, either to guide him
by the Rules of Virtue, or to perfect his Reason: he only fixes his Eye on such
as go for the Learned in the World, and observes what they have in them that
makes them so considerable. All the most solid and necessary Sciences being of
common and easy access, can neither make their Possessors admired nor
respected: for common things, however fine and admirable in themselves, are
carelessly and supinely regarded; which makes the Pretenders to Learning, dwell
but little on Sciences necessary to the Conduct of Life, and the Perfection of
the Mind. For these raise not in them that Idea of the Sciences which they had
formed, as not being those they admired in others, and which they would have
others to admire in them.

The Gospel, and Morality, are Sciences too common and ordinary for them: they
love to be skilled in the Criticisms of some words to be met with in the
Ancient Philosophers or Greek Poets. The Tongues, as Arabic and Rabbinage, and
all except their genuine native Language, seem worthy their Study and
Application: If they read the Holy Scriptures, it is not to learn Piety and
Religion; but, Points of Chronology and Geography, and Difficulties of Grammar,
take them wholly up: and they are more earnest to know these things, than the
salutary Truths of the Gospel: they aim at the possession of the Science they
have foolishly admired in others; and for which they are likely to be admired
by other Fools in their turn.

It Is so with them in point of Natural Knowledge; not the most Useful, but the
least Common, is their Beloved. Anatomy is too mean and low for them; but
Astronomy is more noble and exalted. Ordinary Experiments are unworthy their
Application; but those rare and wonderful Experiments which can never instruct
us, are those they most carefully observe.

Histories that are the most Rare and Ancient, they glory to know: and whilst
they are ignorant of the Genealogy of Princes that at present Reign, are
diligent in searching for the Pedigree of those who died four thousand Years
ago. They scorn to learn the most common Histories of their own Times, yet
endeavor to be critically skilled in the Fables and Fictions of the Poets.
They know not so much as their own Relations; yet will, if you desire it, cite
several Authorities to prove that a Citizen of Rome was allied to an Emperor:
and a great many other such things.

Hardly can they tell the Names of the common Garments in present Use, yet
busy their Heads to know what were in wear with the old Greeks and Romans.
Their own Country Animals they are ignorant of; while they grudge not to spend
several Years in composing huge Volumes on the Creatures of Scripture; that
they may seem to have a better guess than others at the Signification of
unknown Terms: Such a Book is the Hearts-delight of its Author, and of its
learned Readers; for being patched up of Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic Passages,
etc. of Rabbinical and such like dark and extraordinary Citations; it satisfies
the Vanity of its Author, and the ridiculous Curiosity of those that read it,
who fancy themselves learneder than others, when they can confidently affirm
there are six different Words in Holy Writ signifying a Lion, or the like.

They commonly understand not the Map of their own Country, or even the Model
of their Town, whilst they study the Geography of Ancient Greece, Italy, of the
Gauls in Julius Caesar's Time, or of the Streets and public Places of old
Rome. Labor stultorum, says the Wiseman, affliget eos qui nesciunt in urbem
pergere. They know not the way to their City, yet are foolishly fatigued with
fruitless Enquiries: They know not the Laws or Customs of the Places where they
live, yet carefully study the Ancient Right, the Laws of the Twelve Tables, the
Customs of the Lacedaemonians, or of the Chinese, or the Ordinances of the Great
Mogul. Lastly, they would know whatever's Rare, Extraordinary, and Remote, and
unknown by others, having by an Overthrow of Reason affixed the Idea of
Learning to these things: whilst to be esteemed Learned, it is enough to know
what others know not, and yet be ignorant of the best and most necessary
Truths. True, the Knowledge of all these things, and the like, is called
Science, Erudition, Doctrine; Use will have it so: But there is a Science which
the Scripture styles Folly: Doctrina stultorum fatuitas. I never yet observed
that the Holy Spirit, which bestows so many Elogies on Science, in Sacred Writ
says any thing in Commendation of that false Science I have been speaking of.

CHAP. VIII.
I. Of the Desire of seeming Learned. II. Of the Conversation of the Falsely
Learned. III. Of their Works.

IF the immoderate Desire of Growing Learned makes Men oftentimes more
ignorant, I. Of the Desire of seeming Learned.
the Desire of being thought so, not only renders them more ignorant, but seems
to give a total Subversion to their Reason. For the World abounds with such as
lose common Sense, because they will out-shoot it; and speak nothing but silly
things, because they will speak only in Paradox. They deviate so far from the
common Thoughts of Mankind, whilst they purpose the acquiring the Character of
Rare and Extraordinary Wits, that they effectively gain their point, and are
never considered without much Admiration or Contempt.

They are regarded with Admiration, when being raised to some Preferment or
Honor, which conceals them, we fancy them as much above others in their Parts
and Learning, as they are by their Quality and Birth. But we frequently make a
very different Estimate, when viewing them near at hand, and drawing the
Curtain of their surrounding Grandeur, we find them contemptible, or even Fools
and Changelings.

The Falsely Learned show themselves manifestly in the Books they write, as also
in their ordinary Conversation. It will not, perhaps, be amiss to give a proof
of it.

As it is Vanity, and Desire of Ostentation, which engages them in their
Studies; II. Of the Conversation of the falsely Learned.
so when they find themselves in Company, the Passion and Desire of
Preheminency re-kindles and transports them. They are instantly so high upon
the Wing, that we lose sight of them; nor can they often themselves tell where
they are. They are so fearful of not being above all their Auditors, that they
are vexed to think any one can teach them: they will stomach the Demand of an
Explication, and upon the least opposition put on the Look of Scorn and
Arrogance. In brief, The things they say are so novel, and extraordinary, and
so remote from common Sense, that the Wise have much ado to hold from laughing,
while the Ignorant are stunned and thunderstruck.

The first Heat being over, if any Man of an Head strong, and settled enough
not to be overturned, shows that they are out, they will however stick
obstinately to their Errors: the very Look of their confused and giddied
Hearers, turns their own Head round; and the sight of so many Approvers, which
they have convinced by the Impression, convinces them by rebound; at least, if
it does not convince them, it flushes them with Courage to maintain their false
Opinions. Their Vanity will not suffer them to make any Retraction: they
constantly invent some Reason for their Defense. They never speak with greater
Fervency and Zeal, than when they have nothing to say. They fancy it an
Affront, and a Design to make them despicable, to offer any Reason against
them: and the stronger and more judicious it is, the more it provokes their
Pride and Aversion.

The best way to defend Truth against them, is, not to dispute it: for, it is
better both for them and us to leave them to their Errors than provoke their
Hatred. We must take care not to wound their Heart, when we would heal their
Mind; the Wounds of the former being more dangerous than those of the latter:
beside that, we sometimes fortune to have to do with a Person truly Learned,
whom it is possible we may despise, for want of rightly taking his Conceptions.
We must therefore request of those who talk in so decisive a Strain, to explain
themselves as distinctly as they can, without suffering them to change the
Subject, or make use of obscure and equivocal Terms: and if they be truly
Learned, something may be got by their Discourse. But if they be falsely
Learned, they will quickly be entangled and confounded by their own Words, and
can thank no body for it but themselves. And even from hence we may, perhaps,
receive some Instruction or Diversion, if we may be allowed to divert our
selves with others Infirmities, when we try to cure them. But what is more
considerable, we shall prevent the weaker sort, who hear them with Admiration,
from engaging in Error, by following their Decisions.

For it must be observed, that Fools, or such as are Machinally managed, and
follow sensible Impressions, being far more numerous than Men of an enlarged
Thought, and governable by Reason; one of these Pretenders cannot dictate and
determine upon a Point, but there always are more who believe him on his Word,
than others who distrust him. But because these falsely Learned recede as far as
possible from common Thoughts: either out of a desire of finding an Opponent,
whom they roughly handle, to elevate and show themselves; or a Subversion of
Mind, and Spirit of Contradiction: their Decisions are, for the most part,
false or obscure, and they are seldom attended to, without drawing the
Contagion of Error.

Now the Method of discovering the Corruptness or Solidity of others Opinions,
is very difficultly put in practice. The Reason whereof is, That these
Pretenders to Science are not the only Persons who would be thought to know
every thing: It Is a Failing almost universal; but more especially incident to
Men of some Reading and Study: which makes them always forward to talk, and
explain their own Notions; but negligent and inadvertent as to other men's. Such
as are most Complaisant and Rational, inwardly despising another's Opinion,
make show only of an Attentive Mien, whilst their Eyes betray their Thoughts,
and show that they are busied upon a quite contrary thing; not on answering
what is said to them, but on what they desire to prove: which is the thing that
frequently renders Conversation so disagreeable. For as there is nothing more
grateful, or wherein a Man could honor us more, than the comprehending our
Reasons, and approving our Opinions; so there is nothing so offensive as to see
others not take, nor care to take our Meaning. For it is no pleasure to talk and
converse with Statues; especially Statues that are only so to us, because they
have little Esteem for us, are careless to please us, and sollicitous only to
content themselves, by recommending their own Abilities. But if Men could hear,
and answer well at once, Discourse would be most useful, as well as pleasant:
whereas whilst every one endeavors to be reputed Learned, all that is got by it
is Conceitedness, and unintelligible Disputes. Charity is sometimes wounded,
and Truth seldom discovered.

But the Ramblings which the Falsely Learned are in their Conversation subject
to, are in some measure excusable. It may be said in their behalf, that in
these Discourses Men use not much Caution and Advertency; and that the nicest
and most judicious fall frequently into Trifles and Impertinencies: and that
they don't intend a Collection should be made of their Sayings, as was of
Scaliger's and Cardinal du Perron's.

There is Reason in these Excuses, and we are easy to believe these Faults
deserve some sort of Indulgence. We are indeed willing to talk in Company; but
there are some unfortunate Seasons, in which we but ill succeed. We are not
always in temper to think, or to speak justly: and the time is so short in some
Conjunctures, that the Mind never so little clouded or absent, miserably falls
into extravagant Absurdities, even in Persons most accurate and piercing.

But though the Faults which the Falsely Learned are guilty of in Conversation,
are excusable; yet those they commit in their Books, after due Thinking and
Consideration, are unpardonable; especially if frequent, and not compensated by
some good things: For by writing an ill Book, a Man occasions loss of time to a
multitude of Readers; subjects them to the same Errors he himself is guilty
of, and causes them to deduce still many others from them: which is not a
little Evil.

But though it be a greater Crime than is imagined, to compose an Evil, or only
an Useless Book; yet the Author is oftener rewarded than punished for it. For
some Crimes there are which escape the Lash, either because they are the
Fashion, or because the Judges are not courageous enough to condemn such
Criminals as they think more Ingenious than themselves.

For Authors are commonly looked on as rare and extraordinary Persons, above
the ordinary size of Men; and therefore are reverenced instead of being
despised and punished. So that there is little hopes of having a Tribunal
erected for the trying and condemning all the Books that tend only to debauch
and corrupt Reason.

And for this Reason, we must never expect to have the Republic of Learning
better governed than any other; as consisting of Men no less than the rest. But
in order to free our selves from Error, it is fit that even greater Liberty be
permitted in this than other Republics, where Novelty is always dangerous. For
it would be a means to confirm us in our present Errors, to rob the Literate
World of its Liberty, and indifferently to condemn all sorts of Novelties.

It Is hoped then, I shall not be blamed for speaking against the Government of
the Learned Commonwealth, and endeavoring to show, that frequently the Great
Men of it, who for their profound Learning are the Admiration of the rest, are
at bottom but haughty and vain Creatures, void of Judgment, and all true
Science. I am obliged to use this freedom of Speech, to prevent a blindfold
Submission to their Decisions, and engaging in their Errors.

III. Of the Books of the Falsely Learned.
The Proofs of their Vanity, their want of Judgment, and of their Ignorance, are
evidently deduced from their own Works: For if a Man would take the pains to
examine them with purpose to judge of them by the Light of common Sense,
un-forestall'd with an Esteem for these Authors, he might find that the Designs
of their Studies are mostly such as an injudicious Vanity has formed, and their
principal End, not the perfecting their Reason; and much less the regulating
the Motions of their Heart; but only the puzzling others, and seeming Wiser Men
than they.

From this Prospect it is (as has been said before) that they treat but of rare
and unusual Subjects, and explain themselves in as rare and unusual Terms, and
quote only rare and extraordinary Authors. They disdain to write in their own
Language, as being too common; or in plain, perspicuous, and easy Latin, since
their Design is, not to be Understood, but only to Write, and to be Admired.
They seldom apply themselves to Subjects that are serviceable to the management
of Life; that is too trite and vulgar: it not being their purpose to be useful
to others, or themselves, but only to be reputed Learned.

They either allege no Reasons of things which they advance; or if they do,
they are so mysterious and incomprehensible, as neither themselves, nor any
body else, can evidently conceive. Clear Reasons they have none; but if they
had, they would not use them: because they surprise not the Mind, are thought
too simple and common, and suited to the Abilities of all Mankind. They rather
bring Authorities to prove, or with pretense to prove their Notions: for the
Authorities employed seldom prove any thing by the Sense they contain, but only
by being Greek and Arabic. But perhaps it will be pertinent to speak something
of their Quotations, which will acquaint us in part with the disposition of
their Mind.

It is, methinks, manifest that nothing but a falsly-term'd Learning, and a
Spirit of Polimathy, could bring these Citations into fashion, as they have
formerly been, and are still at this day with some of the Learned. For it is
usual with some Authors to be perpetually quoting long Sentences, without any
Reason for it: whether because the things they advance are too clear to be
doubted of; or that they are too intricate and obscure to be made out by the
Authority of their Authors; since they could know nothing of them: or lastly,
because the Citations inserted are inserviceable to adorn and beautify their
Discourse.

It Is repugnant to common Sense, to bring a Greek Passage to prove the Air
transparent, because it is evident to all the World; to employ the Authority of
Aristotle to persuade us that Intelligences move the Heavens, because we are
certain Aristotle could not know it; and lastly, to mingle strange Languages,
Arabian and Persian Proverbs with French, English, or Latin Books, written for
every body: forasmuch as these Citations cannot be ornamental; at least, are
such fantastical Ornaments as disgust most Persons, and can satisfy but very
few.

Nevertheless, the greatest part of those who would fain be thought Learned,
are so extremely pleased with this kind of Gi^^rish, that they blush not to
quote in strange Tongues which they do not understand; and tug might and main
to draw into their Books an Arabic Passage, which they cannot so much as read.
Thus they puzzle themselves strangely, to effect a thing repugnant to good
Sense; but that sacrifices to their Vanity, and makes them esteemed by So^s.

One very considerable Fault is still behind; which is, that they are but in
little care to seem to have read with Choice and Judgment: all they desire
being, to be reckoned great Readers, especially of obscure Books, that they may
seem more Learned; of Books that are scarce and dear, that they may be thought
to have every thing; of wicked and impious Books (which honest Men are afraid
to read) with much the same Spirit as some boast to have acted Crimes, which
others dare not. Hence they rather cite very Dear, very Rare, very Ancient and
Obscure Books, than other more Common and Intelligible: Astrological,
Cabalistical, and Magical Books, than such as are good and wholesome: as if
they did not see, that Reading being a kind of Conversing, they should rather
desire to seem industriously to have sought the Acquaintance of Good and
Intelligible, than Wicked and Obscure Authors.

For, as no Man in his Senses would choose out for ordinary Converse People that
want an Interpreter, when the same things that are to be learned of them might
be known another way; so it is ridiculous to read Books not to be understood
without a Dictionary, when the same things may be had in those that are more
intelligible. And, as it is a sign of a depraved Nature, to affect the Company
and Conversation of the Impious; so it is the Criterion of a corrupt Heart, to
delight in reading Wicked Books. But it is an extravagant Pride, for a Man to
pretend to have read those which he has not: which yet is a thing of very
common occurrence. For we find Men of Thirty Years standing, quote more ill
Books in their Works, than they could have read in many Ages: whilst they would
have others believe, they have very exactly read them. But most of the Books of
some of these Learned Gentlemen, owe their Birth to the kind Dictionary, and
all their Reading may be reduced to the Indexes of the Books they quote, and
some Common Places heaped together from out of different Authors.

I venture not to enter into the Particulars of these things, nor to give
Instances to prove them; for fear of provoking Persons so fierce and choleric
as these Learned Pretenders, as not caring to be reviled in Greek and Arabic.
Besides that, it is needless more sensibly to evince what I have said by
particular Allegations, the Mind of Man being ready enough to tax the
Management of others, and make particular Application of this Discourse. In the
mean time, let them hug themselves, and feed upon this vain Fantom of
Greatness; and give one another the Applauses which we deny them. For we have
been, perhaps, already too troublesome, by molesting them in their so seemingly
sweet and grateful Enjoyments.

CHAP. IX.
How the Inclination for Honors and Riches conduces to Error.

Honors and Riches, no less than Virtue and Science, which we have already
spoke of, are principal Acquirements to give us the Ascendant over other Men.
For there seems to accrue to our Being a Growth and Enlargement, and kind of
Independency from the Possession of these Advantages. So that the Love we have
for our selves, naturally streaming out to Honors and Riches, every body may
be said to have some sort of Inclination for them. We will explain in brief,
how these Inclinations obviate the Discovery of Truth, and engage us in
Falsehood and Error.

It has been shown in several places, that much Time and Labor, Assiduity and
Contention of Mind, must go to the clearing up Compound Truths, surrounded with
Difficulties, and depending on many Principles. Whence it is easy to conclude,
that Men of public Characters, of great Employments, who have large Estates to
look after, and great Affairs to manage, and whose Hearts are fixed upon Riches
and Honors, are not the fittest Enquirers after Truth; and that they commonly
err in point of all things, difficultly known whenever they pretend to judge of
them: And that because,

First, They have little time to lay out in the Search of Truth.

Secondly, They take but little Pleasure in this Search.

Thirdly, They are very incapable of Attention, because the Capacity of their
Mind is divided by the multitude of the Ideas of the things they wish for;
which take up their Thoughts whether they will or no.

In the fourth place, They fancy they know every thing, and can hardly be
induced to believe their Inferiors have more Reason than themselves: some
Matters of Fact they may vouchsafe to learn of them, but are above being taught
by them solid and necessary Truths: contradict them, or disabuse them, and they
fly out in a Passion.

In the fifth place, Because much Incense of Applause is usually given them in
all their Imaginations, though never so false and remote from common Sense; and
such as differ from their Opinion, though only to defend undeniable Truths, are
rallied and ridiculed: And it is the fulsome Flatteries of those about them,
that strengthen them in their Errors, encourage that illegitimate Esteem of
themselves, and set them up for unappealable Judges of all things.

In the sixth place, They dwell only upon Sensible Notions, as fitter for
common Conversation, and to keep up the Esteem of Men, than the pure and
abstract Ideas of the Mind, which we employ in the finding out of Truth.

Lastly, Those who aspire to any Dignity, strive, as much as possible, to
accommodate and demean themselves to the Measure and Capacity of others;
because nothing provokes Men's Envy and Aversion like the pretending to uncommon
Notions. Rare it is for Men, whose Minds and Hearts are taken up with the
Thoughts and Desires of making their Fortunes, to be able to discover hidden
Truths: but when they do, they abdicate them out of Interest, and because the
Defense of them will not accord with their Ambition. A Man must side commonly
with Injustice to become a Magistrate: Solid and uncommon Piety is a frequent
Bar to a Benefice; and the generous Love of Truth, often deprives Men of the
Pulpit it should be taught in.

All these Reasons in conjunction, extremely subject Men to Error; and
incapacitate, for the Discovery of occult Truths, such as are exalted above
others by their Honors, Birth, and Fortune, or who are only intent upon making
Establishments, and raising Estates. For among the things that are requisite to
the avoiding Error, in Questions any whit abstruse, there are two especially
not easy to be met with in the Persons forementioned; viz. Attention of Mind,
to go to the bottom of Things; and Retention, not to judge of them with too
much Precipitation. Those very Men who are Elected for the Instructing others,
and who should have no other Aim or Interest, than the qualifying themselves
for that purpose, commonly grow Erroneous as soon as they take Public
Employments: either because having but little time to themselves, they cannot
give Attention and Application to things that require much; or, that being
strangely ambitious of being thought Learned, they confidently pronounce of all
things without Reserve, and are impatient either of Opposition or Instruction.

CHAP. X.
Of the Love of Pleasure, with regard to Morality. I. That Pleasure is to be
shunned, though it make us happy. II. It ought not to carry us to the loving
Sensible Goods.

WE have treated in the three last Chapters, of the Inclination we have for the
Preservation of our Being; and shown how it occasions us to fall into several
Errors. We shall now speak to That we have for our Well-being; that is, for
Pleasures, and whatever makes us more happy or content, or is thought capable
of doing it: And we will attempt to discover the Errors that spring from this
Inclination.

There is a Tribe of Philosophers, that endeavor to persuade the World, That
Pleasure is no Good, nor Pain an Evil; that it is possible to be happy in the
midst of most violent Pains, and miserable in the midst of the greatest
Pleasures. As these Philosophers are very Pathetical and Imaginative, they
carry away weak Minds which give way to the Impression their Discourse produces
in them: For the Stoics are somewhat Visionary, and Visionists are vehement;
and so easily imprint on others the false Sentiments they are themselves
prepossessed with. But because there is no Conviction against Experience, and
internal Conscience, or Sensation; all these pompous and magnificent Reasons,
which dazzle and stagger the Imaginations of Men, vanish with all their Gaudery
and Luster, as soon as the Soul is touched with any sensible Pleasure and Pain.
And those who have placed all their Confidence in this false Persuasion of
their Mind, find themselves, upon the least Assault of Vice, destitute of
Wisdom, forceless, and unnerv'd: they are sensible they were deceived, and find
they are vanquished.

I. Pleasure ought to be shunned, though it makes us happy.
If the Philosophers cannot give their Disciples Strength to Conquer their
Passions, they should at least forbear to seduce them, and make them fancy they
have no Enemies to Assault. Things should be spoken as they are: Pleasure is
always a Good, and Pain always an Evil: But it is not always for our Good, to
enjoy Pleasure; and it is sometimes advantageous to suffer Pain.

But to make my Meaning more intelligible, we must know,

First, That none but GOD is powerful enough to act upon us, and to produce in
us the Sense of Pleasure and Pain. For it is manifest to every Man that consults
his Reason, and despises the Reports of Sense, that it is not the Sensible
Objects that really act upon us, nor is it any more the Soul that produces in
her self her Pain and Pleasure occasionally from them.

Secondly, That in ordinary Procedure no Good is to be given, but to encourage
us to, or recompense us for some good Action; nor any Evil to be afflicted, but
either to prevent a wicked Action, or to punish it; and therefore since GOD
always acts with Order, and by the Rules of Justice, every Pleasure must
incline us to some Good Action, or Reward us for it, and every Pain avert us
from some bad Action, or punish us for it.

Thirdly, There are Actions which are good in one sense, and evil in another.
It Is, for instance, an evil Action to expose ones self to Death when GOD
forbids it; but a good, when he commands it. For all our Actions are good or
bad, because GOD had commanded or forbidden them by his first General Will,
which is the Order and Institution of Nature; or by his other Wills or
particular Commandments, which are necessary to its re-establishment.

I affirm then, That Pleasure is always good, but that it is not always
advantageous to enjoy it; and that first, Because instead of engaging us to
him, who alone is capable of causing it; it disengages us from him, to unite us
to the falsely seeming Cause of it: it loosens us from GOD, to unite us to a
vile Creature. For though those whom true Philosophy has enlightened, think
sometimes that Pleasure is not caused by External Objects, which may in some
measure incline them to the acknowledging and loving GOD in all things; yet
since the Sin* the Reason of Man is so feeble, and his Senses and Imagination
so prevalent over his Mind that they speedily corrupt his Heart, whilst he
deprives not himself, according to the Advice of the Gospel, of whatever leads
not of it self to GOD. For the best Philosophy is unable to cure the Mind, and
withstand the Corruptions of Pleasure.

Secondly, Because Pleasure being a Reward, it is an Act of Injustice for a Man
to produce in his Body those Motions which oblige GOD, pursuant to his first
Will, to give us the Sensation of Pleasure, when we don't deserve it; either
because the Action we do is unprofitable, or criminal; or that being full of
Sin, we have no Right to demand a Recompense. The Enjoyment of Sensible
Pleasures was justly due to Man in his Regular Actions, whilst he remained
Innocent. But ^ince the Fall, there are no Sensible Pleasures entirely
innocent, or incapable of harming us when we taste them. For it is commonly
sufficient only to taste them, to become their Slave.

Thirdly, GOD being Just, cannot choose but punish one day the Violence that was
done him, by obliging him to reward with Pleasure criminal Actions committed
against him. When our Soul shall be dis-united from our Body, GOD will be
dispensed from the Obligation he has imposed upon himself of giving Sensations
answerable to the Motions of the Animal Spirits; but he will still be obliged
to satisfy his Justice: and so that will be the season of his Wrath and
Vengeance. Then though he change not the Order of Nature, but remain ever fixed
and immutable in his first Will, he will punish the unmerited Pleasures of the
Voluptuous with Pains that will never have an end.

Fourthly, Because the Certainty we have in this Life of the future Execution
of that Justice, exagi^ates the Mind with dreadful Anxieties, and throws it
into a sort of Despair, which renders the Voluptuous miserable, even amidst the
greatest Pleasures.

Fifthly, Because of those disquieting Remorses, which almost ever attend the
most Innocent Pleasures, by reason we are inwardly convinced we don't deserve
them: which Remorses rob us of a certain internal Joy that is found even in the
Severities of Repentance.

And therefore though Pleasure be a Good, yet it must be acknowledged, that the
Enjoyment of it is not always to our Advantage, for the foregoing Reasons: And
for others of like nature, most requisite to be known, and easily deducible
from them; it must be granted, that it is most commonly highly advantageous to
suffer Pain, though really an Evil.

Nevertheless, every Pleasure is a Good, and actually makes happy the Enjoyer
at the time of Enjoyment, and so long as he enjoys it: and every Pain is an
Evil, and makes the Sufferer actually unhappy at the instant of suffering, and
so much as he suffers it. The Righteous and Holy may be said to be the most
miserable of all Men in this Life, and most worthy of Compassion. Si in vita
tantum in Christo speramus, miserabiliores sumus omnibus hominibus, says St.
Paul. 1 Cor. 15.16.
For those that weep, and suffer Persecution for Righteousness sake, are not
blessed for suffering Persecution for the sake of Righteousness, but because
the Kingdom of Heaven is Theirs; and a great Reward is laid up for them in
Heaven: that is, because they shall be happy. Such as are persecuted for
Righteousness, are thereby Righteous, Virtuous, and Perfect, as being in the
Divine Order, and because Perfection consists in the observing it. But they are
not happy, because they suffer. There shall be a time when they shall suffer no
more, and then they shall be happy, as well as righteous and perfect.

However, I deny not but the Righteous even in this Life may be in some measure
happy, by the Strength of their Hope and Faith, which bring those future Goods
as it were present to their Minds: For it is certain, that the vigorous and
lively Hope of any Good brings it closer to the Mind, and anticipates the
Enjoyment: and thus makes a Man happy in part, since it is the Taste and the
Possession of Good, it is Pleasure, that makes us happy.

Therefore we should not tell Men that Sensible Pleasures are not good, and
that they render the Possessors never the Happier, since this is false; and at
the time of Temptation they find it so to their Misfortune. They ought to be
told, That these Pleasures are in their own nature good, and after a sort
capable to make them happy; yet for all that to be avoided, for such like
Reasons as the forementioned; but that they have not strength enough to
withstand them of themselves, because they desire to be happy by an invincible
Inclination, which these transitory Pleasures, to be avoided by them, in some
measure satisfy: and therefore are under a fatal necessity of being lost,
unless rescued and assisted. These things are to be inculcated to them, to give
them a distinct Knowledge of their own Imbecillities, and their need of a
Redeemer.

We ought to speak to Men as our Lord, and not as the Stoics do, who
understand neither the Nature nor Distemper of an humane Mind. We must
continually tell them they are to hate and despise themselves, and not look for
a Settlement and Happiness here below; that they must continually bear their
Cross, or the Instrument of their Suffering, and lose their Life at present, to
save it everlastingly. Lastly, we must show them their Obligation to act quite
contrary to their Desires, to make them sensible of their Impotence to Good.
For their Will is invincibly bent on Happiness; which it is impossible actually
to obtain, without doing what they have a Mind to. Perhaps being sensible of
their present Evils, and knowing their future, they will humble themselves on
Earth: possibly they will cry to Heaven, will seek out a Mediator, stand in
fear of sensible Objects, and conceive a salutary Abhorrence for whatever
flatters Concupiscence and their Senses. Probably they may enter into that
Spirit of Prayer and Repentance so necessary to the obtaining Grace, without
which no Strength, no Health, no Salvation can be expected.

II. It ought not to carry us to the loving Sensible Goods.
We are inwardly convinced, that Pleasure is good; which inward Conviction is
not false: for Pleasure is really so. We are naturally convinced, that Pleasure
is the Character of Good, and that natural Conviction is certainly true: for
whatever causes Pleasure, is unquestionably very good, and amiable. But we are
not assured that sensible Objects, or even our Soul it self, are capable of
producing Pleasure in us. For there is no reason why we should believe it, but
a thousand why we should not. Thus sensible Objects are neither good nor
amiable: they are to be employed, as serviceable to the Preservation of Life;
but we must not love them, as being incapable of acting upon us. The Soul ought
only to love what is good to her, and able to make her happier and more
perfect: and therefore nothing but what is above her can be the Object of her
Love, since it is evident her Perfection can derive from nothing that is not so.

But because we judge that a Thing is the Cause of some Effect when it
constantly attends it, we imagine that sensible Objects act on us, because at
their approach we have fresh Sensations, and because we see not him who causes
them really in us. In tasting a Fruit, we have a Sensation of Sweetness; and we
attribute that Sweetness to the Fruit, which we judge both to cause it and
contain it. We see not GOD, as we see and touch this Fruit; nay, we do not so
much as think on him, nor perhaps on our selves. And so we judge not that GOD
is the true Cause of that Sweetness; nor that it is a Modification of our Soul:
but impute both the Cause and Effect to the Fruit we eat.

What I have said of Sensations relating to the Body, may be understood of
those which have no relation to it; such are those which are incident to pure
Intelligences.

A Spirit contemplates it self, and finds nothing wanting to its Happiness or
Perfection, or else sees that it is not in possession of what it desires. Upon
the View of its Happiness it feels Joy; upon the sight of its Misery it feels
Sorrow. It immediately imagines, that it is the sight of its Happiness which
produces in it self this Sensation of Joy; because this Sensation still
accompanies this Perception; and fancies likewise that the sight of its Misery
is what produces in it the Sensation of Sorrow: because the latter is a
constant Attendant of the former. The true Cause of these Sensations, which is
GOD alone, does not appear to it; nor does it, it may be, think on GOD. For GOD
acts in us in an imperceptible manner.

GOD rewards us with a Sense of Joy, when we find our selves in the state we
ought to be in, to the intent we may continue in it, that our Anxiety may
cease; and that we may fully enjoy our Happiness without suffering the Capacity
of our Mind to be taken up with any thing else. But he produces in us a
Sensation of Sorrow, when we know we are not in our convenien^ state, to the
end we may not stay in it; but restlesly seek out for the Perfection which we
want. For GOD continually drives us toward Good, when we know that we do not
possess it, but gives us a powerful Check when we see we are fully possessed of
it. Wherefore it is evident to me, that the Sensations of Intellectual Joy and
Sorrow, no less than Sensible, are not the voluntary Productions of the Mind.

Our Reason then should constantly teach us to discover that invisible Hand
which fills us with Good, and which lies disguised to our Mind under Sensible
Appear^nces. This Hand we are to adore and to love, and also to fear; since
though it loads us with Pleasures, it can likewise over-whelm us with Pains. We
ought to love it with a Love of Choice, an enlightened Love, a Love worthy of
GOD, and our selves. Our Love is worthy of GOD, when it proceeds from our
Knowledge of his being Amiable: and this Love is worthy of our selves; for that
being Reasonable Creatures, we ought to bestow our Love on that which Reason
teaches us is worthy of it. But we love sensible Things with a Love unworthy
our selves, and undeserved by them: whilst being reasonable, we love them
without any Reason for it; as not clearly knowing them to be lovely: and on the
contrary, knowing they are not. But we are betrayed by Pleasure to the Love of
them; the blind and irregular Love of Pleasure being the true Cause of the
false Judgments of Men in Subjects of Morality.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Love of Pleasure, with Reference to Speculative Sciences. I. How it
disables us from discovering Truth. II. Some Instances.

OUR Inclination for Sensible Pleasures being misgovern'd, is not only the
Original of those dangerous Errors we are guilty of, in Subjects of Morality,
and the general Cause of the Corruption of our Manners; but likewise one of the
main Causes of the Depravation of our Reason: And it insensibly engages us in
most gross, but less dangerous Errors, in point of Subjects purely
Speculative; because it disables us from bringing a sufficient Attention to
comprehend and judge well of things that do not affect us.

We have spoken several times already of the Difficulty we find to apply our
selves to Subjects somewhat Abstract, the Subject of our Discourse requiring
it. As toward the End of the First Book, where we showed that Sensible Ideas
more affecting the Soul, than Ideas purely Intellectual, she was more taken up
with the outside manners than the Things themselves. So again, in the Second,
where treating of the Tenderness of the Fibers of the Brain, we showed whence
the Softness of certain Effeminate Minds proceeded. Lastly, in the Third, when
speaking of the Attention of the Mind, it was necessary to show, that it was
very careless of things Speculative; but very attentive to such as affected
her, and made her feel Pleasure or Pain.

Our Errors have most commonly several Causes contributing to their Rise; so
that it ought not to be thought it is for want of Order, that we repeat almost
the same things, and assign several Causes of the same Errors; it is really
because they have so many. I still speak of Occasional Causes; for we have
often declared, they have no other true and real Cause, than the wrong use of
our Liberty; which wrong use consists in our not using it so much as we might,
as we have explained at the beginning of this Treatise.

We are not therefore to be blamed, if, in order to make it fully conceived,
how, for Instance, the Sensible Manners Things are involved in, surprise and
lead us into Error, we were obliged, by way of Anticipation, to speak of our
Inclination for Pleasures in the other Books, which seems fitter to have been
reserved for this, wherein we purposely treat of the Natural Inclinations; (and
the same may be said of other things in other places:) All the harm that will
come of it, is this, that we may dispense with many things here, which we had
been obliged to explain, if it had not been done elsewhere.

All things in the Humane Nature are so linked and twined to one another, that
we find our selves often, as it were, overwhelmed with the Number of things
necessary to be said at the same time, to set our Conceptions in an open and
clear Light. We are sometimes forced to let things go unseparated, which Nature
has joined together; and to proceed against our own prescribed Method, when
this Method throws us in Confusion, as it inevitably does on some Occasions.
And yet, after all, it is impossible to make others take in all our
Conceptions. All that can commonly be pretended to, is, to put others in a
Capacity of discovering with Pleasure and Ease what we have discovered our
selves with great Pains and Fatigation. And since it is impossible to make any
Discovery without Attention, our Studies should be chiefly employed on Means of
making others Attentive. This is what we have essayed to do, though, we must
acknowledge, but weakly performed; and we are the willinger to confess we have
been defective, that the Confession may provoke our Readers to supply
themselves, what is wanting in us, to make them attentive, in order to
penetrate the Bottom of Subjects, which deserve to be thoroughly considered.

Infinite are the Errors wherein our Inclination for Pleasures, and in general
for whatever affects us, engages us; because that Inclination dissipates the
Sight of the Mind, and fixes it con^inually on the confused Ideas of the
Senses, and the Imagination; and inclines us to judge over-hastily of all
things by the bare Relation which they have to us.

Truth never appears but when we see things as they are in themselves; which we
never do, I. How it disables us from disvering Truth.
unless we see them in him who contains them, in an intelligible manner. When
we perceive them within our selves, we perceive them at a very lame and
imperfect rate; or rather we perceive our own Sensations, and not the things we
desire to perceive, and which we falsely think we do.

To see things as they are in themselves, requires much Application, because at
present we cannot unite to GOD without great Pain and Reluctance: But to see
them in our selves, requires no Application at all on our part, since we are
sensible of what touches us whether we will or no. We do not naturally find any
Preventing Pleasure in our Union with GOD; the pure Ideas of things do not
touch and quicken us: Therefore the Inclination we have for Pleasure, is not a
Means to apply and unite us to GOD, but on the contrary slackens our
Engagements to him, and perpetually removes us farther from him, carrying us
continually to consider things by their Sensible Ideas, because these false and
impure Ideas are those that affect us. Love of Pleasure then, and the Actual
Enjoyment of it, which revives and corroborates this Love, throw us continually
off Truth, to plunge us into Error.

Those therefore who would draw near to Truth, to be illuminated by its Light,
must begin by the Privation of Pleasure. They must carefully shun whatever
sensibly affects, and agreeably shares the Mind. For the Voice of Truth cannot
be heard, unless in the Silence of the Senses and the Passions: An Aversion to
the World, and Contempt for all Sensible things, being equally necessary to the
Perfection of the Mind as to the Conversion of the Heart.

When our Pleasures are great, and our Sensations lively* we are incapable of
the most simple Truths; nor do we agree to common Notions, unless of a sensible
Make and Character. When our Pleasures, or other Sensations are moderate, we
may discover some plain and easy Truths: But if it were possible to be
absolutely delivered from Pleasures and Sensations, we should be able easily to
discover the most abstract and difficult Truths that are known. For
proportionably to our Removing from what is not GOD, we approach to GOD
himself; we avoid Error, and discover Truth. But ever since the Fall, since
the disorderly Love of Preventing Pleasure, which domineers and triumphs, the
Mind is grown so weak, that it can pierce into nothing; and so materializ'd,
and dependent on its Senses, that it cannot lay hold of things abstract and
unaffecting. With much ado it perceives common Notions, and for want of
Advertency, frequently concludes them false or obscure. It cannot distinguish
the Truth of things from their Utility, the Relation they have to one another,
from the Relation they have to it self, and often takes those to be most true
that are most useful, agreeable, and moving. Finally, this Inclination infects
and muddies all our Perceptions of Objects, and consequently all the Judgments
that we make of them. Here follows some Examples:

II. Some Instances.
It Is a common Notion, that Virtue is preferable to Vice; that it is better to be
Sober and Chaste, than Intemperate and Voluptuous. But the Inclination for
Pleasure so strangely confounds that Idea on certain Occasions, that we have
but a transient glimpse of it, nor can draw those Consequences from it that are
necessary to the Management of Life. The Soul is violently bent upon the
Pleasures she hopes for, that she supposes them innocent, and seeks only for
the Means of enjoying them.

Every body well knows that it is more eligible to be Just than Rich: That
Justice exalts a Man more than the Possession of the most magnificent
Buildings, which often serve more to manifest the Greatness of the Injustices
and Crimes of the Possessor, than his own Grandeur. But the Pleasure that
wretched Men receive in the vain Ostentation of their false Grandeur,
sufficiently fills up the narrow Capacity of their Mind, to conceal and obscure
so evident a Truth from them. They absurdly imagine they are Great Men, because
they have Great Houses.

Special Algebra, (or Analyticks,) is certainly the finest, I mean the most
fruitful and most certain of all Sciences. Without it, the Mind has neither
Penetration nor Extent; and with it, it is capable of knowing almost whatever
is possible to be certainly and evidently known. As imperfect as this Science
has been, it has made Famous all that have been skilled in it, and knew how to
employ it, having by it discovered Truths that seemed incomprehensible to other
Men. It is so well proportioned to an Humane Mind, that without dividing its
Capacity with things useless to the Question, it infallibly conducts it to its
Point. In a word, it is an Universal Science, and as it were the Key of all
other. Yet as valuable as it is in it self, it has no Charms nor Luster to
captivate Men; for this Reason only, that it is not of a Sensible Nature. It
has been buried in Oblivion for many Ages, and there are still very many that
know not so much as the Name; and scarce one in a thousand to be found that
understands any thing of it. The most Learned, who have revived it in our Days,
have not yet carried it very far, nor handled it with that Order and
Perspicuity it deserves. Being Men no less than others, they have grown at
length disgusted with these pure Truths, whilst unaccompanied with Sensible
Pleasure; and the Uneasiness of their Will, debauched by Sin; the Levity of
their Mind, which depends on the Motion and Circulation of the Blood, have
withheld them from feeding and growing upon those great, those vast and second
Truths, which are the Immutable and Universal Rules of all transitory and
particular Truths possible to be exactly known.

Metaphysick likewise is an Abstract Science, which flatters not the Senses,
nor does the Soul receive any Pleasure in the Study of it; and for the same
Reason it is so miserably neglected, that it is usual to find Persons stupid
enough confidently to deny Common Notions. There are those who stick not to
deny, that we may, or ought to affirm of a thing, what is included in the clear
and distinct Idea we have of it: That Nothing has no Properties: That a thing
cannot be annihilated without a Miracle: That a Body cannot move by any Force
of its own: That a Body in Motion cannot communicate to occurrent Bodies more
Motion than it has it self; and other things of the same kind. They have never
considered these Axioms with a View steady, and distinct enough, to see clearly
the Truth of them; and they have sometimes tried Experiments, which have
abusively convinced them, that some of these Axioms were false.

They have seen in certain Junctures, that two visible Bodies meeting each
others, have ceased to move at the Instant of their Collision. They have
observed in others, that the impuls'd Body had more Motion than the visible
impelling; and this sensible Observation of some Experiments, the Reasons
whereof they don't perceive, makes them determine about things against certain
Principles, and which go for common Notions with all Attentive and Considering
Men. Ought they not to consider, that Motions may be communicated from Visible
to Invisible Bodies, when Bodies meet in their Motion? And from Visible to
Invisible on other Occasions? When a Body is suspended by a Cord, it is not the
Scissars which cut the Cord, which gives Motion to that Body, but an Invisible
Matter: When we throw a Fire-coal into an heap of Gun-pouder, it is not the
Motion of Coal, but an Invisible Matter which separates all the Parts of the
Powder, and actuates them with a Motion capable of blowing up an House. A
thousand unknown Ways there are whereby the Motion of an Invisible Matter is
communicated to Gross and Visible Bodies: At least it is not evident that it
cannot be done, as it is evident that the moving Force of Bodies can neither be
augmented nor diminished by the ordinary Strength of Nature.

Thus Men seeing that the Wood they throw on the Fire ceases to be what it was,
and that all the sensible Qualities they observe in it, vanish away, imagine
from thence they have Right to conclude it possible for a thing to return into
Nothing, whence it came. They see the Wood no more, and they see but a few
Ashes that succeed it, and thereupon judge that the greatest part of the Wood
is reduced to nothing, as if it could not be separated into Parts not possible
to be seen. At least it is not so evident that this is impossible, as it is
evident that the Power which gives Being to all things is not liable to Change;
and that by the ordinary Force of Nature, Being cannot be reduced to Nothing,
as Nothing cannot begin to be. But few Men know what it is to retire into
themselves, to hear the Voice of Truth speaking to them within, by which they
ought to judge of all things; it is their Eyes that govern their Determinations.
They judge by what they feel, and not by what they conceive; for they feel with
Pleasure, but conceive with Pain.

Demand of all the Men in the World, whether it may not be affirmed without
Danger of Error, that the Whole is greater than its Part; and I am positive
not one will be found, but will immediately answer pertinently to the Question.
Ask them afterward, whether we may with the same Security affirm of a thing,
what we clearly conceive to be included in the Idea representing it, and you will
find that few will grant it without boggling and hesitation; more will deny,
and most of all will not know what to say to it. And yet this Metaphysical
Axiom, viz. That we affirm of a thing what we clearly conceive to be contained
in the Idea that represents it, is more evident than this Axiom, The Whole is
bigger than its Part: For as much as this last is not an Axiom, but only a
Conclusion in respect of the former; it may be proved from the former Axiom,
That the Whole is bigger than its Part; but the former cannot be proved by any
other, as being absolutely the First and the Foundation of all clear and
evident Knowledge. Whence comes it then that no body hesitates at this
Conclusion, and yet many doubt of the Principle from whence it is taken; but
only that the Ideas of Whole and Part are sensible, and we see, as we may so
say, with our Eyes, that the Whole is bigger than its Part, but have no ocular
Proof of the Truth of the prime Fundamental Axiom of all the Sciences?

Whereas there is nothing is this Axiom which naturally fixes and applies the
Mind, we must be willing to consider it, and that too with some Constancy and
Resolution, to be evidently convinced of the Truth of it. The Earnestness of
the Will must supply the Defect of sensible Inducements: But the Thoughts of
considering Objects which have no Charms for the Senses, never enter Men's
Heads; or if they do, their Endeavor is too languid and ineffectual.

For (to carry on our said Instance) they think it is evident, That the Whole is
bigger than its Part; that a Mountain of Marble is possible; and that a
Mountain without a Valley is impossible, but that there is not equal Evidence
for the Existence of a GOD. Nevertheless, we may assert, that there is equal
Evidence in all these Propositions, since they are all at an equal distance
from the first Principle.

This is the first Principle: We must attribute that to a thing which we
clearly conceive to be contained in the Idea that represents it. We clearly
apprehend there is more Magnitude in the Idea we have of the Whole, than in
that we have of its Part; that Possible Existence is contained in the Idea of a
Marble Mountain, Impossible Existence in the Idea of a Mountain without a
Valley, and Necessary Existence in the Idea we have of GOD; that is, of a Being
Infinitely Perfect. Therefore the Whole is greater than its Part; therefore a
Marble Mountain is possible to exist; therefore it is impossible for a Mountain
without a Vale to exist; therefore GOD, or Being Infinitely Perfect,
necessarily exists. It is visible that these Conclusions are equally remote
from the first Principle of all the Sciences, and therefore are equally evident
in themselves; and so it is as evident that GOD exists, as that the Whole is
bigger than its Part. But because the Ideas of Infinite, of Perfections, of
Necessary Existence, are not sensible, as are the Ideas of Whole and Part, Men
fancy they have no Perception of what they have no Sensation; and though these
Conclusions are equally evident in themselves, yet they are not equally
received.

There are Men who would fain persuade us, that they have no Idea of an
Infinitely Perfect Being; which makes me wonder how they came to answer
positively to the Demand, Whether an Infinitely Perfect Being is round, or
square, or the like: For they ought to say, they did not know, if it were true
that they had no Idea of it.

There are another sort who acknowledge it is good Arguing to conclude, that
GOD is not an Impossible Being, from the Perception we have that the Idea of
GOD involves no Contradiction, or Impossible Existence; and they will not allow
us to conclude in like manner, that GOD necessarily exists, from our conceiving
Necessary Existence to be included in the Idea we have of him.

Lastly, There are others who pretend, that this Proof of the Existence of a
GOD is a Fallacy; and the Argument is conclusive only on the Supposition of the
Truth of GOD's existing, as if we did not prove it. Our Proof is this: We are
to attribute to a thing what we clearly conceive to be included in the Idea
that represents it. This is the General Principle of all the Sciences.
Necessary Existence is included in the Idea that represents a Being Infinitely
Perfect. They willingly grant it; and consequently we must conclude, that an
Infinitely Perfect Being exists. Allowed, say they, on Supposition that this
Being Exists.

But let us make a like Answer to a like Argument, that we may judge of the
solidity of their Answer. A like Argument is this: We are to attribute to a
thing what we clearly conceive to be included in the Idea that represents it.
This is the Principle. We clearly conceive four Angles to be included in the
Idea which represents a Square; or, we clearly conceive possible Existence to
be included in the Idea of a Marble Tower. Therefore a Square has four Angles;
therefore a Marble Tower is possible. I say these Conclusions are true,
supposing a Square has four Angles, and that a Marble Tower is possible; just
as they answer, That GOD exists, supposing he exists; that is, in short, that
the Conclusions of these Demonstrations are true, supposing they are true.

It Is true, should I form such an Argument as this: We must attribute to a
thing what we clearly conceive to be included in the Idea that represents it;
we clearly conceive necessary Existence to be included in the Idea of a Body
Infinitely Perfect: Therefore an Infinitely Perfect Body exists. Should I form
such an Argument, I say, I might reasonably be answered, that it was
inconcluding for the actual Existence of a Body Infinitely Perfect; and that
all it could infer, was this, That supposing such a Body was in Being, it
would have an independent Existence. The Reason whereof is this, that the Idea
of a Body Infinitely Perfect is a Fiction of the Mind, or a composed Idea, and
which consequently may be either false, or contradictory, as indeed it is. For
we cannot clearly conceive a Body Infinitely Perfect, because a Being
particular and finite, as Body is, cannot be conceived Universal and Infinite.

But the Idea of GOD, of Being in General, Unlimited, Infinite Being, is no
Fiction of the Mind. It Is not a composed Idea that includes any Contradiction;
there is nothing more simple, though it comprehends whatever is, or whatever
may be. Now this Simple and Natural Idea of Being, or of Infinite, includes
necessary Existence: For it is evident that Being, (I say not this or that
Being) has its Existence of it self; and that Being connot be actually
inexistent, since it is impossible and contradictory, that true Being should be
without Existence. It Is possible for Bodies not to be, because they are such
particular Beings, which participate of Being, and depend on it: But Being
without Restriction, is necessary, independent, and derives what it is only
from it self; all that is, proceeds from it; and on that account it self is,
whatever is: But were there not any thing in particular, this would be, because
it is from it self; and it could not be clearly conceived, as not Being, were
it not for our representing it as Being in particular, or such a Being, and our
considering quite another Idea than belonged to it. For those that perceive not
that GOD is, commonly consider not Being, but this or that Being, and
consequently a Being that may or may not exist.

However, in order to make this Argument of the Existence of a GOD more
distinctly conceived, and to give a clearer Answer to some Objections that
might be made to it, we must remember that, in perceiving a created Being, we
see it not in it self, nor by it self; but, as has been proved in the Third
Book, by the View of certain Perfections that are in GOD, representing it. So
that the Essence of that Creature may be seen without seeing its Existence; we
may see in GOD what represents it, though it does not exist: And for the
Reason, necessary Existence is not included in the Idea that represents it; it
not being necessary that it exist, in order to our seeing it. But the Case is
different with the Infinitely Perfect Being; we cannot see him but in himself:
For nothing Finite can represent what is Infinite. GOD therefore cannot be seen,
but he must exist. The Essence of a Being Infinitely Perfect cannot be seen,
without seeing its Existence. We cannot see it barely as a possible Being; For
what is there to contain it? Nor can we thing of it but it must exist.

But it is to no purpose to offer these Demonstrations to the Common sort of
People: These are Demonstrations which we call Personal, because they convince
not Universally. If we would convince them, we must apply such as are of a more
sensible Nature; and surely they are plentiful enough: For there is no Truth
that has more Proofs than that of the Existence of a GOD. This we urged only to
show, that Abstract Truths, making little Impression on our Senses, pass for
Illusions and Chimeras: Whereas gross and palpable Truths, that strike the
Senses, forcing the Soul to consider them, induces us to believe they have much
Reality, because ever since the Fall they have made powerful Impressions on our
Mind.

For the same Reason it is never to be hoped, that the Vulgar of Men will ever
submit to that Demonstration, which proves Brutes to be insensible; namely,
that since they are innocent, as all the World allows; and, I suppose, if they
were capable of Sensation, it might happen that under an Infinitely Just and
Omnipotent GOD, an Innocent Creature might suffer Pain; which is a Penalty, and
the Punishment of some Sin. Men are commonly incapable of seeing the Evidence
of this Axiom, Oper. Perf.
Sub justo* Deo, quisquam, nisi mereatur, miser esse non potest; which St.
Austin with a great deal of Reason urges against Julian, to prove Original Sin,
and the Corruption of our Nature. They fancy there is nothing of Strength, or
Truth in this, nor in many other Axioms, which prove that Beasts have no
Sensation; because, as has been said, these Axioms are Abstract, have nothing
sensible or palpable in them, and make no Impression on the Senses.

Those sensible Actions and Motions performed by Beasts for the Preservation of
their Life, though only probable Inducements, affect us more, and consequently
weigh more with us to believe they endure Pain, when we strike them, and they
cry, than that abstract Reason of Pure Intellect, though most certain and
evident in it self: For it is plain, that most Men have no other Reason to
believe that Beasts have Souls, than the sensible View of all those things they
do for the Preservation and Security of Life.

Which from hence is sufficiently apparent, that most People fancy there is no
Soul in an Egg, though the Transmutation of an Egg into a Chicken, I speak
according to common Opinion, which is, that the Chicken is formed from the Egg,
though perhaps it is no more than nourished by it.
is infinitely harder than the bare Conservation of the Chicken when completely
formed: For as greater Art is required to fabric a Watch out of a piece of
Iron, than to make it go when it is perfectly made; so a Soul should rather be
admitted in the Egg, for the Formation of the Chicken, than for making the
Chicken live, when entirely formed. But Men don't see with their eyes the
admirable Conduct that goes to the forming of a Chicken, as they still sensibly
observe its method of looking out what is necessary to its own Preservation. And
therefore they are not disposed to believe there are Souls in Eggs, from any
sensible Impression of those Motions which are requisite to transform them into
Chickens; but they ascribe Souls to Animals, by reason of the sensible
Impression they receive from the external Actions these Animals perform for
their vital Preservation: though the Reason I have here alleged, is stronger
for the Souls of Eggs than of Chickens.

This second Reason, namely, that Matter is incapable of Sensation and Desire,
is, without doubt, a Demonstration against those who ascribe Sense to Animals,
whilst they confess their Souls corporeal. But Men will rather
eternally-confound and perplex these Reasons, than acknowledge a thing
repugnant to barely probable, but most sensible and pathetick Arguments; and
there is no way fully to convince them, but by opposing other Sensible Proofs
to theirs, and giving an ocular Demonstration, that all the Parts of Animals
are mere Mechanism; and that they may move without a Soul, by the bare
Impression of Objects, and their own particular Frame and Constitution: as
Monsieur Des Carts has begun to do, in his Treatise concerning Man. For all
the most certain and evident Reasons of the pure Intellect will never obviate
the obscure Proofs they have from the Senses: and it were to expose our selves
to the Laughter of superficial and inattentive Persons, to pretend to prove by
Reasons somewhat higher than ordinary, that Animals have no Sense.

We must therefore well remember, that the strong Inclination we have for
Divertisements, Pleasures, and in general, for whatever affects us, exposes us
to a multitude of Errors; because our Capacity of Mind being limited, this
Inclination constantly disturbs our Attention to the clear and distinct Ideas
of the Pure Understanding, proper for the Discovery of Truth, to apply it to
the false, obscure, and deceitful Ideas of the Senses; which influence the Will
more by the Hope of Good and Pleasure, than they inform the Mind by their Light
and Evidence.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Effects which the Thoughts of future Happiness and Misery are capable
of producing in the Mind.

IF it often happens that little Pleasures and light Pains, which we actually
feel, or even which we expect to feel, strangely confound our Imagination, and
disable us from judging on things by their true Ideas; we cannot imagine but
the Expectation of Eternity must needs work upon our Mind: But it is requisite
to consider what it is capable of producing in it.

We must in the first place observe, That the Hope of an Eternity of Pleasures,
does not work so strongly on our Minds, as the Fear of an Eternity of Torments:
The Reason is, Men love not Pleasure so much as they hate Pain. Again; by a
Self-conscious Sensation which they have of their Corruptions, they know they
are worthy of Hell: and they see nothing in themselves deserving of so great
Rewards, as is the participating the Felicity of God himself. They are sensible
as often as they will, and even sometimes against their Will, that far from
meriting Rewards, they deserve the greatest Punishments; for their Conscience
never quits them: But they are not so constantly convinced that GOD will
manifest his Mercy upon Sinners, after having satisfied his Justice upon his
SON. So that even the Righteous have more lively Apprehensions of an Eternity
of Torments, than Hopes of an Eternity of Pleasures. Therefore the prospect of
Punishment works more upon them, than the prospect of Reward. Here follows what
it is capable of producing, not all alone, but as a principal Cause.

It begets infinite Scruples in the Mind, and strengthens them in such a
manner, that it is almost impossible to get rid of them. It stretches Faith, (as
I may so speak) as far as Prejudices, and makes Men pay that Worship which is
due to GOD alone, to imaginary Powers. It obstinately fixes their Mind on vain
or dangerous Superstitions; and causes them fervently and zealously to embrace
Humane Traditions and Practices, needless to Salvation; Jew and Pharisaick-like
Devotions, which servile Dread has invented. Finally, it flings some Men into
the darkness of Despair; so that confusedly beholding Death as Nothing, they
brutally wish to perish, that they may be freed of those dreadful Anxieties and
Disquiets that torment and frighten them.

The Scrupulous and Superstitious have commonly more of Charity than Self-love;
but only Self-love possesses the Desperate: for rightly to conceive it, a Man
must extremely love himself, who rather chooses no Being than an ill one. Women,
Young People, and those of a weak and timorous Mind, are most obnoxious to
Scruples and Superstitions, and Men more liable to Despair.

It Is easy to conceive the Reasons of all this: For the Idea of Eternity*
being manifestly the greatest, most terrible, and dreadful, of all those that
astonish the Mind and strike the Imagination, must needs be attended with a
large Retinue of additional Ideas, all which contribute to a wonderful effect
upon the Mind, by reason of the Analogy they have to that great and terrible
Idea of Eternity.

Whatever has any relation to Infinite, cannot be a little thing; or if it be
little in it self, by that relation it grows so vast and immense, as not to be
compared with any thing Finite. Therefore whatever has, or is fancied to have
any relation to that unavoidable Dilemma, concluding for an Eternity either of
Torments or Delights; necessarily dismays the Mind, that is capable of any
Reflection or Thought.

Women, Young People, and feeble Minds, having, as I have formerly said, the
Fibers of their Brain soft and pliable, receive very deep Traces, or
Impressions, from that two-edged Consideration; and when, through the plenty of
their Spirits, they are more disposed to Sensation than just Reflection on
things, they admit, through the Vivacity of their Imagination, a great number
of spurious Impressions, and false accessory Ideas, which have no natural
Relation to the principal. Nevertheless, that Relation, though imaginary,
nourishes and confirms those spurious Traces, and false accessory Ideas which
it has produced.

When Men are engaged in a troublesome Lawsuit, which they don't understand,
and it takes up all their Thoughts; they commonly fall into needless Fears and
Apprehensions, that there are certain things prejudicial to their Cause, which
the Judges never think of, and which a Lawyer would not fear. The Success of
the Affair is of so great Concernment to them, that the Concussion it produces
in their Brain, spreads and propagates it self to distant Traces, that have
naturally no relation to it. It Is just so with the Scrupulous; they causlesly
fancy to themselves Subjects of Fears and Disquiet; and instead of examining
the Will of GOD in Holy Writ, and referring to Men of untainted Imagination,
they constantly intend an Imaginary Law, which the disorderly motions of Fear
have engraven in their Brain. And though they be inwardly convinced of their
Infirmity, and that GOD requires not certain Duties they prescribe themselves,
as being inconsistent with his Service; yet they cannot forbear preferring
their Imagination to their Understanding, and submitting rather to some
confused and terrifying Sensations, that throw them into Error, than to the
Evidence of Reason, which brings them back to a good Assurance, and reduces
them into the right way of Salvation.

There is commonly a good stock of Virtue and Charity in Persons tormented with
Scruples, but not so much in People devoted to certain Superstitions; and whose
principal Employment is some Jewish and Pharisaick Practices* GOD requires to
be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: He is not satisfied with our making Faces,
and paying external Ceremonies; with our bending the Knee before him, and
praising him with a Lip-offering, when our Heart is far from him. If Men are
content with these exterior Marks of Respect, it is because they cannot fathom
the depth of the Heart; for even they would be worshipped in Spirit and in
Truth. GOD demands our Mind and our Heart, which as he has created, so he
preserves only for himself: But many there are, who, to their own misfortune,
deny him those things which he has all manner of Right and Claim to. They
harbor Idols in their Hearts, which they adore with a spiritual and true
Worship, and to which they sacrifice themselves, and all they have. But because
the true GOD threatens, in the Recesses of their Conscience, to punish their
excessive Ingratitude with an Eternity of Torments, and yet they cannot think
of quitting their beloved Idolatry; they therefore bethink themselves of an
external Performance of some good Works. They betake themselves to Fasting, to
Almsgiving, and Saying of Prayers, as they see others do; and continue some
time in such like Exercises: but whereas they are painful to those that have
not Charity, they commonly forsake them, to substitute some little Practicks,
and easy Devotions, in their room; which striking in with Self-love,
necessarily, but insensibly, subvert the whole System of Morals which our LORD
has left us. They are faithful, fervent, and zealous Defenders of those Humane
Traditions which Un-enlightned Persons make them believe most useful, and the
frightful Idea of Eternity daily represents, as absolutely necessary to their
Salvation.

It fares not so with the Righteous: They hear no less than the Wicked the
Menaces of their GOD; but the confused Noise of their Passions does not deafen
them to his Counsels. The false Glarings of Humane Traditions do not dazzle them
so far, as to make them insensible to the Light of Truth. They place their
Confidence in the Promises of CHRIST, and follow his Precepts; as knowing that
the Promises of Men are as vain as their Counsels. However, it may be said,
that the Dread which the Idea of Eternity breeds in their Minds, sometimes
effects so great a Commotion in their Imagination, that they dare not
absolutely condemn these Humane Traditions; and that sometimes they approve
them by their Example, because they have A show of Wisdom in Will Worship and
Humility, Col. 2.23.
like those Pharisaick Traditions mentioned by St. Paul.

But that which more especially deserves to be considered in this place, and
which does not so much relate to Moral as Intellectual Disorder, is, that the
forementioned Fear stretches the Faith as well as Zeal of those it infects, to
things false, or unworthy the Holiness of our Religion. There are many who
believe, and that with a stiff and obstinate Faith, That the Earth rests
immovably in the Center of the World: That Brutes are sensible of Real Pain:
That Sensible Qualities are strewn and diffused over Objects: That there are
Forms or Real Accidents, distinguished from Matter; and a world of the like
false or uncertain Opinions, because they conceit it would be repugnant to
their Faith to deny them. They are frighted with the Expressions of the Holy
Scripture, which speaks to our Capacity, and consequently makes use of the
received manners of Speech, without design of making us Philosophers. They
believe not only what the Spirit of GOD means to teach them, but likewise all
the Opinions of the Jews: They cannot see, for example, that Joshua speaks
before his Soldiers, as even Copernicus, Galilaeus, and Des Carts would speak
to the Vulgar part of Men; and that though he had been of the Opinion of these
Philosophers, he would not have commanded the Earth to stand still, since he
could not have manifested to his Army, in words which they did not understand,
the Miracle GOD showed for his People. Don't those who believe the Sun
immovable, say to their Servants, to their Friends, or to those who are of
their Opinion, that The Sun Rises and Sets? Do they affect to speak differently
from others, whenever their chief Design is not to Philosophize? Was Joshua so
admirably versed in Astronomy? Or if he was, did his Soldiers understand it?
But were he and his Soldiers Astronomers, could we think they would be playing
the Philosophers, when their Thoughts were intent on Fighting? Joshua therefore
must have spoke as he did, though both he and his Soldiers were of the same
Opinion that the best Astronomers hold nowadays. And yet the Words of that
great General, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and what is said afterward,
that the Sun stood still according to his Command; persuade a great many, that
the Opinion of the Earth's Motion is not only dangerous, but also absolutely
Heretical, and unwarrantable. They have heard that some Devout Men, whom we are
to treat with much Deference and Respect, have censured and condemned it; and
have some confused Notion of what happened to a Famous Galilaeus* put into the
Inquisition for maintaining the Earth moved.
Astronomer of our own Age, upon that occasion: All which seems sufficient to
make them obstinately believe, that Faith is concerned in that Opinion. A
certain confused Sensation, raised and encouraged by a Motion of Fear, which
yet they are scarce aware of, throws them into Suspicions of those who follow
Reason in things of Reason's Jurisdiction. Hence they regard them as Heretics,
they hear them but with Impatience, and Regret of Mind: and these their secret
Apprehensions breed in them as great a Reverence and Submission to these
Opinions, and several others purely Philosophical, as to Truths that are
Objects of Faith.

CHAP. XIII.
I. Of the Third Natural Inclination; viz. The Friendship we have for other
Men. II. It makes us approve the Thoughts of our Friends, and deceive them by
undue Praises.

OF all our Inclinations taken in the general, and in the Sense explained in
the first Chapter, there remains now to be spoken to, only that which we have
for those we live with, and for all the Objects round about us: of which I
shall say but little, since it rather respects Morals and Politics than our
Subject. And whereas this Inclination is always accompanied with the Passions,
it might perhaps be more appositly treated of in the next Book: But it is not of
so great concern, to be so nicely methodical in this Case.

That we may rightly comprehend the Cause and Effects of this Natural
Inclination, I. Of the Third Natural Inclination, viz. The Friendship we have
for other Men.
it is requisite to know, that GOD loves all his Works, and that he strictly
unites them to one another for their mutual Preservation. For Loving
incessantly the Works he produces (it being his Love that produces them) he
also continually impresses on our Heart a Love for his Works; that is, he
produces constantly in our Heart a Love like his own. And to the intent the
Natural Love we have for our selves might not swallow up, or too much infringe
upon that which we have for exterior things; but on the contrary, that these
two Loves which GOD puts in us, might cherish and strengthen each other: he has
so artfully united us with all things about us, and especially with those
Beings of the same Species as our selves, that their Evils naturally afflict
us, their Joy rejoices us; their Rise, their Fall, or Diminution, seem to
augment or diminish respectively our own Being. The new Honors of our
Relations or Friends, the fresh Achievements of those who have the nearest
Engagements to us: The Conquests and Victories of our Prince, and even the late
Discoveries of the New World, give, as it were, an additional growth to our
Substance. Belonging to all these things, we rejoice at their Grandeur and
Extent: We gladly would, that even the World was without Bounds; and that
Notion of some Philosophers, that the Works of GOD are infinite, not only seems
worthy of GOD, but most agreeable to Man; who can conceive nothing nobler, than
the being a part of Infinity; whilst as inconsiderable as he is in himself, he
fancies he feels himself infinitely enlarged by an expansion of Thought into
the infinite Beings that surround him.

It Is true, the Union we have with all those Bodies that roll in the vast
spaces, is not very binding; and consequently insensible to the greatest part
of Men: and there are some who interess themselves so little in the Discoveries
made in the Heavens, that one would think they had no natural Union to them;
did we not know that it was for want of Knowledge, or for their too applicative
Adherencies to other things.

The Soul, though united to the Body which she animates, is not always sensible
of the Motions that occur in it; or if she be, yet she does not always actually
consider them. The Passion whereby she is acted being often greater than the
Sensation wherewith she is affected, makes her seem to have a stricter Adherence
to the Object of her Passion, than to her own Body. For it is chiefly by the
Passions that the Soul expands her self abroad, and finds she is actually
related to all surrounding Beings: as it is especially by Sensation that she
expands through her own Body, and finds she is united to all the Parts that
compose it. But as we are not to conclude that the Soul of a Man, in a Passion,
is not united to his Body, because he exposes himself to Death, and is
unconcerned for his own Preservation; so it ought not to be imagined we are not
naturally engaged to all things, because there are some we are not at all
concerned for.

Would you know, for instance, whether Men have any Adhesions to their Prince,
or their Country? Enquire out such as are acquainted with the Interests of
them, and have no particular Engagements of their own to take them up; and you
will then see how earnest they are for News, how impatient to hear of Battles,
how joyful for a Victory, and how melancholy upon a Defeat. And this will
convince you how strictly Men are united to their Prince, and their Country.

In like manner, would you know whether Men are united to China, Japan, the
Planets or Fixed Stars? Enquire out, or only imagine to your self, some whose
Country or Family enjoy a settled Peace, who have no particular Passions, and
that are not actually sensible of the Union that binds them to nearer Objects
than the Heavens; and you will find, if they have any Knowledge of the
Magnitude and Nature of these Stars, they will rejoice at the Discovery of any
of them; will consider them with Pleasure: and, if they have Art enough, will
willingly be at the pains of observing and calculating their Motions.

Such as are in the hurry of Business, have little Curiosity for the Appearance
of a Comet, or the Incidence of an Eclipse; but Men that have no such
Dependencies to nearer things, find themselves considerable Employment about
such Events: because indeed there is nothing but what we are united to, though
we have not always the Sense of this Union; as a Man does not always feel the
Soul united, I don't say to his Arm or Hand, but to his Heart and Brain.

The strongest Natural Union which GOD has established between us and his
Works, is that which cements and binds us to our Fellow-Brethren, Men. GOD has
commanded us to love them as our Second-selves; and to the end that Elective
Love, with which we prosecute them, might be resolute and constant, he supports
and strengthens it continually with a Natural Love, which he impresses on us:
and for that purpose has given us some invisible Bonds, which bind and oblige
us necessarily to love them; to be watchful for their, as our own Preservation,
to regard them as parts necessary to the whole, which we constitute together
with them: and without which we could not subsist.

There is nothing more admirably contrived, than those Natural Correspondencies
observable between the Inclinations of Men's Minds, between the Motions of
their Bodies; and again, between these Inclinations and these Motions. All this
secret Chain-work is a Miracle, which can never be sufficiently admired, nor
can ever be understood. Upon the Sense of some sudden surprising Evil, or which
a Man finds, as it were, too strong for him to overcome by his own Strength, he
raises, suppose, a loud Cry. This Cry forced out frequently without thinking on
it, by the disposition of the Machine, strikes infallibly into the Ears of
those who are near enough to afford the Assistance that is wanted: It pierces
them, and makes them understand it, let them be of what Nation or Quality
soever: for it is a Cry of all Nations and all Conditions, as indeed it ought to
be. It makes a Commotion in the Brain, and instantly changes the whole
Disposition of Body in those that are struck with it; and makes them run to
give succor, without so much as knowing it. But it is not long before it acts
upon their Mind, and obliges their Will to desire, and their Understanding to
contrive, means of assisting him who made that Natural Petition; provided
always, that urgent Petition, or rather Command, be just, and according to the
Rules of Society. For an indiscreet Outcry made upon no occasion, or out of an
idle Fear, produces in the Assistants Indignation or Laughter, instead of Pity:
because to cry without cause, is to abuse things established by Nature for our
Preservation. That indiscreet Cry naturally produces Aversion, and the desire
of Revenging the Affront that was offered Nature; that is, The settled Order of
things: if he that made it without cause, did it wilfully. But it ought only to
produce the Passion of Derision, mingled with some Compassion, without
Aversion, and desire of Revenge; if it were a Fright, that is, a false
Appearance of a pressing Exigency, which caused the Clamor. For Scoff, or
Ridicule, is necessary to re-assure and correct the Man, as Fearful; and
Compassion to succor him as Weak. It Is impossible to conceive any thing better
ordered.

I pretend not to explain, by an Example, what are the Springs and Movements,
or secret Combinations in Men's Brain, as in that of all other Animals, whereby
the Author of Nature maintains the Concordance and Union necessary to their
Conservation. I only make some Reflection upon these Contrivances, to put Men
upon considering them, and diligently searching and discovering (not how these
Engines play, or how their Movement is communicated through the Air, the Light,
and all the little Bodies that surround us, for that is near incomprehensible,
and not necessary, but) what Effects they have. By several different
Observations, we find there are Ties which unite us together, but we cannot
accurately discern how it is performed. We easily see that a Watch points out
the Hour, but it requires time to find out the Reasons of it. And there are so
many different Movements in the Brain of the least of Animals, as far surpass
the most compound Clock-work in the World.

As the perfect Knowledge of our Machinal Constructure is not possible, so it
is not absolutely necessary: but the Effects its Springs and Movements are
capable of producing, are indispensibly necessary to be known, for the
well-managing our selves. There is no necessity of knowing how a Watch is made,
to make use of it; but to use it in measuring out our Time, it is at least
necessary to know that it shows the Hours. Yet there are Men so little capable
of Reflection, that we might almost compare them with Machines purely inanimate.
They feel not in themselves the Elaterium, which slackens upon the sense of
Objects. They are frequently tossed and agitated, without perceiving their own
Motion; are Slaves, and yet insensible of their Bonds. Finally, they are
conducted a thousand different ways, without perceiving the hand of their
Conductor. They fancy themselves the sole Authors of the Motions which they
perform: and not distinguishing what passes within them, pursuant to a free Act
of their Will, from what the Impression of surrounding Bodies produces; they
think they are their own Guides, even when they are guided by another. But this
is not a place proper for the Explication of these things.

Those Alliances which Nature's Author has founded between our Natural
Inclinations, in order to unite us to one another, seem yet more worthy our
Application and Enquiries, than those between Bodies, or between Minds, with
reference to Bodies: For all things are so admirably disposed, that those very
Inclinations which seem most repugnant to Society, are the most useful to it,
when they are somewhat moderated.

The Desire, for Instance, which all Men have of Greatness, directly tends to
the Subversion of all Societies. Nevertheless, this Desire is so tempered by
the Order of Nature, that it conduces more to Public Welfare than many other
weak and languid Inclinations: For it breeds Emulations, it provokes Men to
Virtue, it bears up their Courage in the Services paid to their Country; and
so many Conquests would not be obtained, did not the Soldiers, and especially
the Officers, aspire to Glory and great Commands: So that all the Particulars
that constitute Armies, laboring only for their private Interests, fail not to
procure Happiness to their Countries. Which evidences how highly advantageous
it is to the Public Good, that all Men should have a secret Ambition for
Greatness and Promotion, provided it be moderated.

But if all the Particulars should seem what they really are, should they
frankly confess to others, they designed to be the principal Parts of the Body
they compose, and never to be the meanest, this would not be the means to unite
them together. All the Members of a Body cannot be the Head and Heart; there
must be Feet and Hands, Little as well as Great, Members to Obey as well as to
Command. And if every Member of a Society should openly say, he would Command,
and never Obey, as in effect every one naturally wishes, it is visible that all
Politic Bodies would fall to Ruin and Confusion, and Injustice would reign on
Earth.

It was necessary therefore, that those who have the most Sense, and are the
fittest to command, as the topmost and noblest Parts of a Community, should be
naturally Civil; that is, should be disposed by a secret Inclination, to
express to others by their Behavior, and by the Civility and Courtesy of
Expression, how unworthy they think themselves of any Consideration, and that
they are the meanest of all; but that those they address to, are worthy of all
sorts of Honors, and that they pay them the greatest Esteem and Veneration.
Lastly, to supply the Defect of Charity, and Love of Order, it was needful for
those that command others, to have the Art of deceiving them, by an imaginary
Abasement, consisting in external Civilities, and good Words, that they might
enjoy an unenvied Pre-eminence; which is necessary in all Bodies: For by that
means each Particular possesses after a sort the Grandeur he desires. The great
possess it really, I speak as a Man: For the Truest Earthly Grandeur consists
only in the Imagination.
and the Little and Weak only in Imagination, being in a measure persuaded by
the Compliments of others, that they are not considered as they are, that is,
the Lowest and Meanest of the People.

By the way, it is easy to conclude, from what we have said, that it is a great
Offense to Civility to speak often of one's self, especially to one's own
Advantage, though we had all possible Accomplishments; it being not allowed to
speak to Persons we converse with, as if we looked down upon them, unless in
some Circumstances, and when certain external Characters give us a sensible
Pre-eminence: For Contempt is the greatest of Injuries; it is that which is most
capable of dissolving Society; and we can never hope that a Man, whom we have
given to understand we think beneath us, will associate with us, because no Man
can endure to be thought the meanest Member of the Body he is of.

The Inclination therefore Men have to Complimenting, is the fittest to
counterbalance that other for Esteem and Elevation; and to soften that internal
Pain those feel, who are the lowest Parts of the Body-Politick. Nor can we
doubt but the Mixture of these two Inclinations is very efficacious to the
keeping up Society.

But there is a strange Corruption in these Inclinations, no less than in
Friendship, Compassion, Good Will, and others, which tend to the uniting Men
together. What ought to hold up a Civil Society, is commonly the Cause of its
Disunion and Downfall; and, not to depart from my Subject, is often the Cause of
the Communication and Establishment of Error.

Among all the Inclinations necessary to Civil Society, those which subject us
most to Error, are Friendship, Favor, Gratitude, and whatever induce us to
speak too advantageously on others in their Presence.

We set no Bounds to our Love of the Person of our Friends; II. This
Inclination makes us approve the Thoughts of our Friends* and deceive them by
undue Praises.
together with them we love whatever after any sort appertains to them; and
whereas they commonly express their Vehemence and Passion for the Defense of
their Opinions, they insensibly incline us to believe, approve, and defend
them, with as great or greater Obstinacy and Passion than themselves; because
it would often look but ill in them, to be hot in maintaining their Opinions,
whereas we might defend them without being blamed for it: For in them it would
be Self-love, in us Generosity.

Our Affection for other Men proceeds from as many Accounts, as they may
please, and serve us several ways; Likeness of Humors, of Inclinations,
Employments; their Air, their Behavior, their Virtue, Estate, the Affection or
Esteem they express for us, the Services they have formerly done, or those we
hope from them, and many other particular Reasons, determine us to love them:
If it fortune then that any one of our Friends, that is, some Person who has
the same Inclinations, an handsome Deportment, delightful Discourse, a virtuous
Repute, or is of great Quality; who testifies an Esteem and Affection for us,
who has done us any former Service, or from whom we hope any future; or, in
fine, whom we love for any other particular Reason: If such a Person, I say,
chances to advance any Proposition, we greedily embrace it, without consulting
our Reason. We maintain his Opinion, insollicitous for the Truth of it, and
even sometimes against the Conviction of our Conscience, according as we are
determined, by either the Obscurity and Confusion of our Mind, the Corruption
of our Heart, or the Advantages we hope to reap from our False Generosity.

There is no need of bringing particular Examples of what I say, since we
rarely can be in Company an Hour together, without observing several, if we
make but a little Reflection. Favor and Laughter, according to the Common
Saying, are seldom on the side of Truth, but almost always on the side of those
we love. It Is a Well-bred and Obliging Gentleman that speaks; he is certainly
therefore in the right: If what he says be only probable, it is looked upon as
true; if absolutely impertinent and ridiculous, it will at least amount to a
Probability. If it be a Man that loves me, esteems me, has done me some
Kindness, or is disposed or capacitated to do it, has maintained my Opinion on
other Occasions, I shall be both ungrateful and unwise, if I oppugn his, or
even fail to applaud him. Thus Truth is sported with, and made to truckle to
our Interest, and we caress the false Opinions of each other.

A worthy Man ought not to take it ill to be informed, or instructed, if it be
done by the Rules of good Manners; but if our Friends are disgusted, when we
modestly represent to them their Mistake, we must permit them to love
themselves and their Errors, since they will have it so, and because we have
no Power to command them, nor to change their Mind.

But a true Friend ought never to approve the Errors of his Friend; for we
ought to consider, that we do them greater Injury than we imagine, when we
defend their Opinions without distinction. Our Applauses serve only to swell
their Heart, and strengthen them in their Errors, whereby they grow
incorrigible, and act, and decide at last, as if they were infallible.

Whence comes it that the most Rich, the most Powerful, the most Noble, and
generally all that are above others, believe themselves commonly infallible,
and deport themselves as if they had more Reason than Men of a Lower and Meaner
Condition, but from a servile Approbation indifferently given to all their
Thoughts? So likewise the Approbation we give our Friends, insensibly leads
them to believe themselves wiser than others; which makes them arrogant,
presumptuous, and imprudent, and obnoxious to the grossest Errors, without
perceiving them.

For which Reason it is, that our Enemies often do us better Service, and open
our Mind more by their Oppositions, than our Friends by their Applauses,
because the former keep us to our Guard, and make us give heed to what we
advance; which one thing suffices to acquaint us with our Ramblings, but the
latter lull us to sleep, and give us an ungrounded Confidence that makes us
Vain and Ignorant. Men should never therefore admire their Friends, and submit
to their Opinions, out of an Affection; as they ought not out of Disaffection,
to oppose their Enemies. But they ought to divest themselves of the Spirit of
Flattery and Contradiction, that they may grow sincere, and approve the
Evidence of Truth where ever they find it.

We ought moreover to fix it well in our Mind, that most Men are disposed to
Flatter or Compliment us, through a kind of Natural Inclination, either to show
their Parts, or to obtain the good Favor of others from the Hope of a Return;
or, lastly, out of a kind of Invidiousness and Raillery: And we ought never to
let our Brains be turned with any thing they can say to us. Is it not a thing
of daily Practice, to see Men that are unacquainted, cry up each other to the
Heavens, upon the very first Intercourse? And what more common than for Men to
give excessive Praises, and to express even Extatick Admiration to a Person
upon a Public Performance, even in the Company of those with whom they have
ridiculed him just before? Whenever a Man cries out, and turns pale with
Admiration, as if astonished at what he hears, it is no good Proof that the
Speaker utters Wonders; but rather, that he has a flattering Auditory, that he
has Friends, or it may be Enemies, that give themselves diversion: That he
talks in an engaging strain, that he is Rich, or Powerful; or, if you will,
it is a good Proof that his Discourse is founded on the confused and obscure,
but very moving and agreeable Notions of the Senses; or that he has a lively
Imagination, since Praises are bestowed on Friendship, Riches, Honors,
Probabilities, but rarely upon Truth.

'Twill perhaps be expected, that having treated in general of the Inclinations
of the Mind, I should now descend to an exact Discussion of all the particular
Motions it is sensible of, upon the Sight of Good and Evil, viz. That I should
explicate the Nature of Love, Hatred, Joy, Sorrow, and all the Intellectual
Passions, whether General or Particular, Simple or Compound. But I have not
obliged my self to account for all the different Motions whereof the Mind is
capable.

I am willing to have it known, that my principal Design in all the foregoing
Treatise concerning the Search after Truth, was to make Men sensible how weak
and ignorant they are, and how subject to Error and Sin. I have said it, and I
say it again, perhaps it will be remembered, I had never designed a Thorough
particular Explication of the Nature of the Mind; but I have been obliged to
say something of it, to lay open its Errors in their Principle, to unfold them
methodically, in a Word, to make my self intelligible. If I have transgressed
the Bounds I had prescribed my self, ^t was because I had, methought, new
things to say, which seemed of moment, and which I believed might be read with
Pleasure. Perhaps I was mistaken; but that Presumption was necessary ^o
encourage me to write them. For who would say any thing, if he did not hope to
be attended to? I have said, it is true, several things which seem to have less
Analogy with the present Subject than would be the particular Treatment of the
Motions of the Soul, and I acknowledge it. But it is not my Intention to put my
self under any Constraint, when I propose to my self a Method. I lay down a
Rule to go by; but I presume it may be permitted me to turn aside as I walk,
when any thing falls in my way to be considered. I presume too I have the
Liberty of diverting to a Resting Place, provided I lose not Sight of the Road
I am to pursue. Such as will not ease themselves with me, may go on if they
please, it is but turning to a new Page. But if they take it amiss, I would let
them know that there are many who find that the Resting Places I have made
choice of, make their Journey easier, and more pleasant.

The End of the First Volume.
PREFACE to the Second Volume; Which may serve as an Answer to the
ANIMADVERSIONS on the First.
SOme time since was published a Book entitled, Animadversions upon the Search
after Truth, wherein, at the same time, are examined part of M. des Carts 's
Principles, being a Letter by an Academick in Paris, etc. It Is said this Book
attacks me, and truly not without Reason; for the Title shows it, and the
Author manifests it was his Design; which gives me a Right and imposes on me a
sort of Obligation of speaking my Thoughts of it. For besides that, I ought to
disabuse some people who delight in these petty Quarrels, and immediately
determine on the side of the Critics that gratify their Passion; I think my
self bound to give some Answer to the Aggressor, that I may not be thought to
be ^ilent out of Insolence or Impotence.

The Animadverter may pardon me, if he pleases, if I sometimes seem to give him
Provocation; I should be very sorry so much as to design it. But I cannot
defend my self without wounding him, nor repel the Blows he makes at me,
without making him feel, and others know his Weakness and Imbecility.
Self-defence is a natural Obligation, but the Defense of Truth is absolutely
indispensible.

See here in short his Design: He supposes the Book he animadverts on, is a
Method for laying the Foundations of the Sciences. He reduces this Method to
fourteen Heads, and shows that they are either Suppositions without Proof, or
Assertio^s without Foundation, and consequently that the Substance of the Book
is entirely useless to the Enquiry after Truth; though there are here and there
some Observations in it that place it in the rank of Works which have gained
the Estimation of our Age.

I answer in General, that the Author of the Animadversions has not understood,
or has dissembled the Understanding the Design of the Book he impungs; it being
plain that the principal Design of it, is to discover the Errors we are
subject to. It Is true it treats of the Nature of the Senses, Imagination and
Intellect; but it is manifest, and I precaution in several places, that this is
only to discover these Errors in their Causes: This being the Method I always
endeavor to observe, as believing it most advantageous to the enlightening the
Mind.

The Title of the first Page of the Book he opposes, wherein are to be seen in
Capitals, CONCERNING THE ERRORS OF THE SENSES; the very Table of the same
Book, or rather the Place where I make the Division of the whole Work, might
have taught him my Design, if he had desired to know it, where he might have
read these words, which methinks are clear enough: Chap. 4. E. 1.
And so all the Errors of Men, and the Causes of them, may be reduced to five
Heads, and we shall treat of them according to that order. First, We shall
speak of the Errors of the SENSES. Secondly, Of the Errors of IMAGINATION.
Thirdly, Of the Errors of the PURE INTELLECT. Fourthly, Of the Errors of our
INCLINATIONS. And fifthly, Of the Errors of the PASSIONS. And thus having made
an Ess^y to rid the Soul of the Errors which she is subject to, WE SHALL,
Lastly, LAY DOWN A GENERAL METHOD TO CONDUCT HER IN THE SEARCH OF TRUTH. It Is
plain enough from this Division, that the first Volume, which is the subject of
our A^thor's Animadversions, treats only of the Senses, Imagination and
Intellect, and that the Method which he supposes I have given, ought to be the
Subject of the Second Volume.

Nevertheless as he is pleased to make me undertake a Design I do not execute,
that he may have the more to Charge upon my Conduct, so he goes to prove it was
my Design to lay down a Method in that Book. I do him no Injury, says he, Page
9, 10.
in looking on his Book as a Method to lay the Foundations of the Sciences: For
besides that the Title expresses so much, he declares himself upon the Point in
the following manner; Page 1.
Let us examaine the Causes and Nature of our Errors, and since the Method of
examining things, by considering them in their Birth and Origin, is the most
regular and perspicuous, and serves better than others to give us a thorough
knowledge of them, let us try to put it here in practice.

I do a Man no Injury, when I say he designs to draw an Hercules; but if I show
that instead of an Hercules, he takes a Polyphemus, or Thersites, I make him
ridiculous: Should I say with many others, that the Animadverter is a
Cartesian, or that he designed by his Animadversions on my Book to defend the
Doctrine of Des Carts, I should not wrong him; but if at the same time I
should show that he opposes me without understanding me, I should possibly
offend him. It Is then injuring a Man, to charge upon him Designs which he never
had, to render him ridiculous. But a Man must be wretchedly in the wrong who
imposes them on such as have, like me in several places, explained themselves
clearly upon the Subject.

But the Title of my Book evidences as much, for it is concerning the Search
after Truth. I answer, That to search out Truth, two things are requisite;
first to be delivered from the Prejudices of Childhood, or vulgar Errors;
Secondly, to have a good Method. The Title of the Book is comprehensive of
these two parts. I have given the first in the former Volume, but the
Animadverter will needs have it, that I have given the second; which surely is
unreasonable. He ought rather to correct the Title by the Book, if the Title
displeased him, than to go about to ruin a whole Book for the Title's sake.

But, continues our Aurhor, I declare my self upon the Point in this manner,
Let us examine the Causes and Nature of our Errors, and since the Method of
examining things, Page 10.
by considering them in their Birth and Origin, is the most regular and
perspicuous, and serves better than others to give us a thorough knowledge of
them; let us try to put it here in practice.

I have been showing, that I have declared distinctly enough in the Division I
have made of my work, that I gave not my Method in the first Volume; this
cannot be doubted. But let us see whether this passage was enough to make him
think I have given a Method: I say, Let us examine the Causes and Nature of our
Errors. My Design therefore according to this Passage, is to examine the
Causes and Nature of our Errors. That Is plain. I continue, And since the
Method of examining things by considering them in their Birth and Origin, is
more regular and perspicuous than others; let us try to put it in practice.

My Design therefore is to examine the Causes and Nature of our Errors
methodically; can any one from hence believe I have given a Method? If so, we
may believe there is no Author but has given a Method, since there is none but
has the same Design as my self to write methodically. I might even say that the
Animadverter has designed to give a Method, and impugn him by his own Weapons,
but that he had rather be thought to have written without any. These are the
Proofs employed by him to demonstrate I have given a Method.

The fourteen Heads of this Imaginary Method, are in the places whence they are
taken, either incidental Propositions, or Answers to Objections, or Opinions he
ascribes to me, for want of Understanding what he engages; or lastly Examples,
which of themselves neither are nor can be Heads of a Method. Here follows the
first of these Heads.

I begin thus, The Mind (or Soul) of Man being neither material nor extended,
is undoubtedly a simple Substance, Page 1.
indivisible, and without any Composition of Parts, notwithstanding it has been
the custom to distingish in it two Faculties, namely, the Understanding and the
Will; which it is necessary in the first place to explain: for it seems, etc.
And in order to render the abstract Ideas of these two words sensible, I
explain them not as our Author misrepresents me, with Relation to the Essence
of Matter, which he supposes unknown; but by Relation to the Properties which
all the World acknowledge are in Matter: i. e. the capacity of being moved, and
of receiving different external Figures, and internal Configurations.

The Animadverter supposing, as has been said, that the Book he impugns is a
Method, begins thus: Page 20.
The first thing to be observed when a Man pretends to the search of Truth, is
not to suppose he has already found it, though he be in perfect possession of
it, etc. And lower, Which thing the Author seems not to have sufficiently
considered; Page 21.
for at his very first setting out, he engages in the supposition of a thing,
the Knowledge whereof is the principal motive to his Enquiry after Truth, and
which he ought not to determine before he had exhausted the greatest Questions
in Philosophy. Thus it is he enters on his matter in his first Chapter. The
Mind of Man being neither material nor extended, etc. It Is easy to see this
Supposition is not indifferent, etc.

I answer, first, that it was not my Design to give a Method in the Book he
impugns, but only to prepare the Mind by delivering it from Prejudices.

Secondly, that though it had been my Design, I might have supposed some
Truths, which are commonly acknowledged; as that the Soul is not material:
especialy if I employ them not as a Foundation to build some System on.

I answer in the third place, that the Proposition he will have to be an Head
of my Method, is an incidental Proposition. The bare construction of the words,
is a sufficient indication; the process of the Discourse an undeniable proof;
and all that I say in this place might subsist though the Soul were material.
It Is not the part of a good Critic to take an incidental Proposition, for a
Fundamental, and an Head of a Method. Nor is this to prove I have supposed to
have found the Truth I am in quest of; since the thing I suppose, or rather
which I do not examine, is not of any use to me.

When it was necessary, to the sequel of Discourse, to know that the Soul was a
kind of Being distinct from Matter, Book 1. Chapter 9. B. 3. in several places.
I have proved it, or referred to those that have. But why will he oblige me to
prove a thing in this place, which would be useless to the following Discourse,
and I should have been sorry to have proved here? Whether the Soul be material
or not, it is always true, that it has been the custom to distinguish two
Faculties in it, the Understanding and Will. These two words are in use, and I
may employ them; they are perhaps obscure, and I ought to define them; and
because their Ideas are abstract, I may make them sensible. This is what I have
done, and I cannot yet see what any one can blame in it.

At my very first setting out, he says, I engage in the supposition of a thing,
the knowledge whereof is the principal motive to my Enquiry after Truth, and
which I ought not to determine before having exhausted the greatest Questions
in Philosophy.

All this Discourse is false, I engage not in a Supposition, for incidental
Propositions come not into account. The principal motive to my Enquiry after
Truth, is not to know whether the Soul be Material or Immaterial; and so far is
this Question from being insoluble, till having drained the greatest Questions
of Philosophy, that its Resolution depends on no other. This Question is not
complex'd, and the bare Comparison of Ideas which answer to the terms is
sufficient to resolve it, as I shall show in the sixth Book, though this is not
discoverable by those who make more use of their Imagination than their Reason.
There is no necessity of explaining this more at present; we need but know that
this Supposition is an incidental Proposition, from which I draw no Conseqence,
and which I should have been to blame to prove; and yet if we will credit the
Animadverter, Page 22.
What is worst of all, is that this sole Anticipation is enough to ruin all
the hopes the Search after Truth might have raised in us.

In the four or five first Pages which our Animadverter spends in refuting the
first pretended Head of the Imaginary Method, many things would deserve our
consideration, if we thought our selves obliged to let the World know all his
Faults; for he imposes on me here, as in other places, without any Proof,
Opinions and Designs which never entered my Head; and he does it with a
confidence which is capable of surprising all those who believe others on their
Words. I am willing to think he is too honest and sincere a Man to prevaricate,
and to be prodigal of that Respect which is due to the Public; but if so,
there is Levity or Temerity in his enterprise: he should not have undertaken to
oppose what he did not understand. Yet I cannot choose but relate how he
finishes his first Attack; we shall know what we are to think of the rest by
the Beginning and End.

I said that the Soul being a Simple and Indivisible Substance has no parts;
however it had been the custom to distinguish in it two Faculties, the
Understanding and Will, etc. This has given occasion to the Animadverter to
accuse me of Contradiction; and after having proved, after his manner, by many
Interrogations and Rhetorical Figures extremely convincing, he concludes with
these words, which represent his whole figurative Reasoning in short, and for
that Reason he has put it in Italick; Which is the same thing, says he, as if I
should say, THE SOUL IS WITHOUT ANY COMPOSITION OF PARTS; BUT YET I AM GOING TO
EXPLAIN HOW SHE CONTAINS THEM. You see, Sir, continues he, that this
Supposition serves only to throw us immediately into obscurity; besides that,
it is contrary on other grounds to the success of this Method. But who ever
took Faculties for Parts? Certainly the Passion for Criticizing must be very
blind, to put into the Mouth of a Man of Parts, so extraordinary Comparisons,
and to make him believe the World must be content with them. But let us examine
his second Head of my pretended Method, and see how he impugns it.

After having shown that to the avoiding Error, we must only give our consent
to things appearing in such Light and Evidence as make it impossible for us to
withhold it, without clearly Understanding the secret Reproaches of our Reason:
I adjoyn; Page 9.
It Is not however to be denied but there are some Truths, besides those of
Faith, for which it would be unreasonable to demand indisputable
Demonstrations, as are those which relate to matter of Fact in History, and
other things which have their dependence on the Will of Men; for there are two
kinds of Truth, the one necessary, the other contingent. And because these two
words Necessary and Contingent, are not it may be clear enough, I explain them
thus: I call necessary Truths those which are immutable by their Nature, and
those which have been fixed and determined by the Will of God, which is not
subject to change: All other sorts of Truth are contingent. And lower, We
demand therefore an exact observation of the Rule we have been establishing in
the Search of necessary Truths, the knowledge of which may be called Science;
and we must be content with the greatest probability in History, which includes
the knowledge of things contingent. For under, etc.

I wish it might be examined, first, whether the things I have been saying are
clear or obscure? Whether it may not be supposed there are necessary Truths, as
that 2 times 2 are 4, and contingent Truths as that Mr. -- shall say such a
thing at such an hour, especially when we have no design of establishing any
System upon this Supposition? Whether there be any thing more certain than this
Supposition, whereby it may be proved. Lastly, whether a Man can reasonably
persuade himself, that I lay down for one of the Heads of my Method, or a
Supposition essential to any System, a Proposition which begins with FOR.

This being supposed I come now to produce the Reasonings of our Animadverter
against what I have said of contingent and necessary Truths, I shall only place
in the Margin some Notes or Answers I shall think necessary; this being the
shortest and easiest way for me; since it is an harder thing than is imagined
to answer clearly such as are unintelligible and inconsequent Reasoners. For we
must at least put their Objections in some form to solve them, which cannot be
always done, either because they will not bear it, or because we do not
understand them. For my own part, I am very glad it cannot be imagined I use
the Animadversions, as the Animadverter has used the Search; or that from
different Passages of this Book I compose an incomprehensible piece of Nonsense.

ANIMADVERSIONS. The Second Supposition concerning Necessary Truths, Page 9.
ANIMADVERSIONS.
THE Second thing supposed by the Author is, that there are two sorts of
Truths, Necessary and Contingent. I know not for what reason he looks upon what
he here asserts, as (a) undeniable, and why he does not think of proving it.
For this is one of the most considerable Questions that has employed the
Learned, especially the Ancients; insomuch that the first Philosophers were (b)
all, except Parmenides, of a contrary opinion to that he maintains in this
place. Yet Parmenides acknowledged but one necessary Truth, whereas he supposes
a very great number. Protagoras believed there was no Truth on the part of
things, so far was he from owning any necessary; and that Man was the Measure
and Rule of all that could come in Question; that there was nothing but mere
Appearances, and no Realities, and consequently there were no Truths to seek,
or Errors to avoid, all being equally true, or rather equally false. The
Pyrronists have still maintained there was nothing certain or truly determined,
or that if there were, yet we could not know it. The new Philosophers grant
that individuals are no wise immutable, but are subject to continual
Vicissitudes; which being so, what becomes of necessary Truths? I speak not of
those which are found in the Mathematics, that ought to make a Question (c)
apart; but of those he supposes in Physics, Medicine and Morality, though I
still except those which regard the Essence or Existence of a God. Where then
could he place them, except in the (d) Species and Essences of the same
Individuals which are subject to change? And if these Essences or Species are
nothing but Ideas, as may be suspected if their immutability be only in
appearance, should not we, in following that supposition, engage in an Error,
which would absolutely exclude us from the knowledge of the true state of
things?

But let us see what the Author calls necessary Truths, for at least he
explains what he means by these words, I call necessary Truths, those which are
immutable by their Nature, and those which have been fixed and determined by
the Will of God, which is not subject to change.

To say that these Truths are immutable by their Nature, what is it more than
to say, they are immutable because immutable, unless this signifies they are
essentially so without any external assistance? But if these Truths were
necessary in this manner, how were they determined by the Will of God, since
God being free, as the Author will not deny, he might, if he had pleased, have
not determined them to be immutable (e). And if so, they are immutable only by
Grace, because God willed it so, and determined them to that state of
immutability.

This being so, how come they to be immutable by their Nature, since it was
possible for them to be liable to change? But if it were not possible for them
to be subject to change, how could they be determined by God to be immutable?
and how could he have fixed them by the operation of his Will?

The Author may explain himself upon this Point, if he think convenient; mean
time it is no little concern to know whether God can change the Essences of
things, and make two Contradictories true at the same time; for as a celebrated
Divine of our Age has said upon the same words that are now under examination,
Is God the Author of the Truth of his own Existence? Or ought we to affirm that
we can form a right-lined Triangle, whose three Angles shall be greater than
two Rights; or that shall have one Side longer than the other two? In a word,
if it be possible for Contradictories to be true and false at the same time,
what will become of humane Reasoning? And what shall we say to those
Theological Conclusions, which assure us that God is not Corporeal, that he is
not subject to Change, that he has always been? (f) etc.

(g) Might we not say in following this Hypothesis, that its possible for him
to have been eternally, and not to have been eternally; that he is liable and
not liable to change? I mean not to pronounce upon so difficult a Question, but
I may affirm the Author had no right to do it, especially in the Circumstances
he has done it, and without alleging sufficient Proofs.

Yet methinks I perceive a show of Reasoning in these words, and by the Will of
God which is not subject to change. He seems to consider the Will of God as the
Cause of the Necessity of these Truths. But if so, he proves too much in the
place where we complain he proves nothing at all; for if what God wills be
immutable, because his Will is not subject to change; it follows that whatever
he wills, must have an equal immutability, since it is the same Will which is
the Cause of it: Mean while it is certain he wills things which are subject to
change, when he determines the Existence or Nonexistence of Creatures in the
Vicissitude of times (h). Thus though God should have fixed these Truths but
for some Ages, his Will thereby would be no less immutable, than for his
producing daily all those admirable changes which make the Beauty of the
Universe.

But the Author will say, God wills that these Truths should be immutable for
ever. But how could he know this, had he any particular Revelation? yet he
speaks as possitively as if he was very certain.

It may be he bottoms upon this, that if these Truths seem immutable to us
whilst they are subject to change, we should err in pretending to Science (l).
But if it were so, all that could thence be concluded is that the first
Philosophers, the Academicks and Pyrronists, have better Philosophiz'd than the
Peripateticks, Cartesians, and other Dogmatists; and I do not believe the
Author would establish his Philosophy upon such a Sophism, unless there were
necessary Truths, we could have no true Science; therefore there are necessary
Truths.

(m) But though we might suppose there were necessary Truths in Physic,
Medicine, etc. and might determine about this Question, without being utterly
excluded from the knowledge of Truth.

Though these Truths were necessary by their Nature, and their immutability by
some new Mystery was still an effect of the free determination of the Will of
God.

Though the necessity of these Truths proceeded from the immutability of this
Will, whilst yet it is the Cause of all the Changes happening in the Universe.

Though we should be moreover assured that God had resolved to preserve these
Truths in an entire immutability.

We must still suppose in order to enter into his Opinion, the knowledge of the
Existence of God and of his Will, of his Liberty and of his Power.

(n) Which obliges me to make some Reflections upon what he has borrowed from
Faith to add to Reasons Philosophical, which is what we may look upon as his
third Supposition.

After having proved that we must yield only to Evidence, except in matters of
Faith, which are not submitted to the disquisition of Reason; I conclude with
these words. Page 9.
Mysteries then of Faith must be distinguished from things of Nature: we ought
equally to submit to Faith and to Evidence, but in the concernments of Faith we
must not look for Evidence, as in those of Nature we ought not to take up with
Faith; that is, with the Authority of Philosophers. In a word, to be a Believer
it is required to assent blindly, but to be a Philosopher it is necessary to see
plainly.

Mysteries of Faith must be distinguished from things of Nature. Thus
judiciously speaks the Author, and concludes with these words, which might even
pass for (o) a Proverb: To be a Believer it is required to assent blindly, but
to be a Philosopher it is necessary to see plainly. Mean while I wonder he
observes not in his Book the Resolution he made of not (p) mingling the
concerns of Religion with the decisions of Philosophy: for it is too visible
that one half of his Book is nothing but Reflections upon original Sin, depraved
Manners, and corrupt Inclinations, which Christian Morality is to correct.

(q) I blame not his Piety in this, nor believe it a thing unbecoming a
Christian to labor upon these Subjects. But that ought to be reserved for
Sermons.

(r) Or if he had designed to take the occasion of insinuating these Morals, as
knowing that the true way of moving the Heart pathetically is to do it by
discovering to the Mind the Truths that are of nearest concernment to it; he
might have satisfied that laudable desire, but should have contrived for that
purpose particular Chapters, which he has done too in some places. But once
more, a very little thing will serve to confound the Light we begin to receive
in the Search after Truth.

(s) We cannot at the same time satisfy both Reason and Faith, since Reason
obliges us to open our Eyes, and Faith commands us to shut them.

(t) And yet I find he has so interwoven his principal Propositions with the
Credenda of Religion, that he seems to talk more like a Divine than
Philosopher. For example, Page 6.
among other things he concludes, That (u) if the Will had not this Liberty,
but must have embraced every thing that came clothed with an appearance of
Truth, it would have almost ever been deceived; whence probably it might be
concluded that the Author of its Being was the Author of its Errors and
Seducements. And afterward, We have therefore a Liberty given us by God, that
we might avoid falling into Error. It Is visible this reasoning is founded on
the Author's supposing God will not deceive us (x). But may it not be doubted
whether God has not made us for the enjoyment of probability only, and resolved
to reserve the knowledge of Truth as his own peculiar; or whether he designs
not this as a pure accession to our Happiness (y) in Heaven; wherefore we ought
not to conclude that he would be a Deceiver, if he should not afford us the
means of discovering it.

(z) I leave it, Sir, to you to think what the Pyrronists would say, if they
should hear this arguing. Many such there are in the process of this piece,
especially in the last part, whereof most Chapters contain Arguments which
include theological Questions (a).

(b) Whether then he considers all these Suppositions as Articles of Faith, or
regards them as Truths demonstrable by Philosophy, he ought still to
distinguish them from the Fundamentals of his Work.

If he considers them as Articles of Faith, he is very well p^rsuaded they are
obscure: If he looks on them as conclusions of Humane Science, his Method ought
to precede them, and not employ them as Principles to depend upon.

If I thought the World would be concerned to know exactly that the
Animadverter has not understood what he has pretended to encounter, I would
thus continue him on to the end of his Book, and would make it undeniably
appear that he has hardly ever taken my Sense, and that he had no Idea of my
Design; but I believe that reasonable Men will be very indifferent in this
particular: and therefore not to weary them to no purpose, and yet to discharge
that Debt which some persons think I owe to Truth, I will answer in few words
all the Chapters of the Animadversions; and I desire such as shall have leisure
and curiosity enough, to examine whether my Answers are just, by confronting
the Animadversions with the Search.

In the fourth Article or Chapter, the Animadverter opposes my Opinions at
large, without knowing them. He does not consider there are two sorts of
Traces, one which the Mind forms to represent things by, as the Trace which
accompanies the Idea of a Square; the other which accompanies abstract Ideas
but represents them not; such are the Traces which the Sound of Words and the
Sight of Characters produce in the Brain, which naturally have no power to
represent or raise Ideas. This one Distinction overthrows the grand Reasonings
of our Author.

In this fifth Chapter he puts upon me many Opinions which I never had. It Is
not true, That I acknowledge all our Ideas to be but Modes of our Soul's
existing. Page 44.
On the contrary, I have in the third Book which he reflects on, given a
Chapter on purpose to show that Opinion indefensible. When a Man will play the
Critic, it is fit, methinks, he should read the Book he takes to task. Page 47.
Nor is it true, that I own that the Ideas we receive by the Senses, represent
only the Effects produced in us hy external Objects. I have said the contrary
in several places, in the fifteenth Chapter of the first Book, and elsewhere.
Why does he not cite, or rather why does he not examine what he Criticizes on?
For what remains, I cannot distinctly conceive all the Argumentations he here
makes. I know not the Reason of them: those who attentively read them may think
of them what they please. But I scruple not to affirm, that he is so far from
impugning my Opinion about the manner of the Minds perceiving external Objects;
that on the contrary, what he says in this Article shows he knows nothing of it.

In his sixth Chapter, he imposes on me what he calls my sixth Supposition; or
rather he has no knowledge of my Opinion upon that Subject: To me he seems not
so much as to have read what I have written on it; Page 56, 57.
he affirms in several places that I bottom upon Mr. des Carts 's resolution
upon that Question, when yet my Opinion is entirely different from his. But
it is evident to all that understand Mr. des Carts, and have read what I have
said upon that Question, that the Author neither understands mine nor Mr. des
Cartes's Opinions. Meanwhile he argues vehemently without knowing what he
opposes, and even sometimes without discovering what he aims at.

The Author is very much in the wrong in his seventh Chapter, to require me to
prove the Existence of Extension, Page 62.
when I mean only to assault the Errors of the Senses in point of sensible
Qualities, and I should have repented if I had followed that Method. I prove
what is serviceable to me in the sequel, and I establish nothing upon the
Supposition he attributes to me. Page 64.
Moreover I cannot tell how it came into his Head, after seven years, to
complain of an Answer of Monsieur Rohault; he should have replied to it whilst
he was alive, but he wanted courage: for every one knows with what accuracy and
force that learned Man repelled the Blows that were offered him, and with two
or three words, pronounced without all manner of Heat and Passion, humbled the
Imagination of such as being full of themselves, thought to cover him with
confusion.

In answer to the eighth Chapter, I desire the Author to take notice, first,
that there is difference between an Evil, Page 80.
and the Representation of it; and therefore the Will may fly the former, and
yet aquiesce in the latter. Secondly, that though the Will be nothing but the
natural Motion of the Soul toward Good in general? yet the Rest or
Acquiescence of the Soul in evident Truths proceeds from the Will, because Rest
is produ'd by Motion. God will still imprint on us this natural Motion of Love,
when we shall entirely repose our selves upon him. For the Motion of Love does
not cease by the possession of Good, and by the view of Truth, as Motion of
Bodies is interrupted by Rest. We might say farther, that even Bodies rest not
as capable of Figures, but with respect to Motion. The rest need no Answer, if
the Reader will carefully consider those places in the Search which he attacks;
for it is needless to answer Objections which vanish upon a distinct
Understanding of what I have written, though they appear considerable in
themselves.

In the ninth Chapter the Author opposes my own Objections, and neglects the
Answers I have given them; and not knowing there are several sorts of Liberty,
he fancies, with a great deal of Joy, that I have fallen into a Contradiction.

I have nothing to say to his Tenth Chapter, but that what he comments on seems
too clear to stand in need of his Reflections; Page 98.
and that I think it cannot reasonably be doubted there is a City in Italy
called Rome, though it cannot be mathematically demonstrated.

In the eleventh Chapter, the Author does not observe that I have referred to
some Books of St. Austin, and the Meditations of Mr. des Carts, to prove a
thing, which yet is sufficiently received, and which he pretends I had no right
to suppose. He ought to know my Design was not to establish a System, and to
remember that all I vigorously demand, is, to enter into some diffidence of our
Senses; as I have cautioned in the last Chapter concerning the Errors of the
Senses.

In answer to the Consequences he infers in his Twelfth Chapter, against an
Example alleged by me, and which he will have to pass for an Head of my
Method, we need but say, that Men ought to reason only upon their clear and
distinct Ideas, whithout being sollicitous about what they cannot reach; and
that it is not necessary to know whether there are actually Bodies without us,
to conclude many Physical Truths.

I have no more to say to his Thirteenth Chapter, but that I wish a Man would
attentively read what I have said concerning the manner of our knowing the
Soul, in the Seventh Chapter of the Second Part of the Third Book, and the
Chapter following, where I speak of the Essence of Matter.

Last of all, to do justice to the Reasonings of the last Chapter; it suffices
to know distinctly my manner of explaining how we see external Objects.

This is all I thought necessary to answer to the Animadverter, as being
persuaded that those who thoroughly conceive my Notion will have no need of an
Illustration upon the pretended Difficulties he urges to me; and others who
have not read nor comprehended the things I treat of in the Book he opposes,
would not understand the largest Answers I could give them.

It Is sufficiently manifest from the three first Chapters of the
Animadversions, which I have refuted more at large, what, we are to think of
the other, which I have answered in a word or two. Those who have Time and
Inclination may examine them more exactly: but for my own part I should think I
wasted both my own time and that of others, if I should stay to collect all the
Paralogisms which are scattered through his Book, to acquaint those persons
with them, who doubtless have little or no desire to know them.

The Reason and Judgment of worthy Men cannot suffer those long-winded
Discourses, which tend to no good, but only show the Spleen and ill Humor of
their Authors; and it is a ridiculous thing to imagine that others interess
themselves in our Quarrels, and to call them to be Witnesses of the weakness
and vain efforts of our Adversary.

He that attacks me has no reason to find fault with my manner of Defense; for
if I answer not all his Animadversions in an ample way, it is not because I
despise him. He may conclude, that I should not have warded off the Blows he
designed me, if I did not think him able to hurt me; and I think I have more
reason to complain of the negligence of his Animadverting, than he has to be
angry at my manner of answering him. Had our Author zealously buckled to engage
me, I am persuaded he had found me Exercise; for I judge not of the Strength of
his Parts by a venturous Sally of his Pen, which he seems only to make by way
of Pastime. Thus the negligence he manifests is to my advantage, and for my
part I complain not of his remisness, as being unworthy his Application and his
Anger. All that I am sorry for, is, that he speaks not seriously of serious
things; that he sports with Truth, and wants some of that Respect which is due
to the Public, when he trys to over-wit it several different ways, as this
Answer in part has manifested.

If I have been obliged to speak of him as I have done on some occasions, he
must thank no body but himself; for I have suppressed, for fear of displeasing
him, many Expressions and Thoughts, which his manner of acting breeds naturally
in the Mind. I have so great an Aversion to all useless Con^ests, and that are
prejudicial to Charity, that I will never answer those who oppose me without
understanding me, or whose Discourses give me some reason to believe they have
some other motive than the Love of Truth. As for others I shall endeavor to
satisfy them. I see plainly, that if I were obliged to answer all that have
the good Will of assaulting me, I should scarce ever enjoy the repose I desire.
But as there is no Law in France which hinders them from speaking, so there is
none which forbids me to be silent.

It may be whilst I am silent, my Insulters may find themselves ill treated by
some invisible hand; for I cannot help it, if the Love of Truth provokes some
Wits, who might do it with better Grace, to defend a Work in which they had no
part. But I wish this promise I make, and freely without any constraint, may be
remembered; and that those Writings may not be imputed to me, which I might
make, but which I declare I never will. Mean-time I think that those that have
nothing solid to oppose to me, had much better say nothing, than fatigue the
World with Writings, which break Charity, and are useless to the discovery of
Truth.

ANSWER.
(a) IT IS because this is more certain than any thing else, and that there is
nothing certain if this be not. For if Two times Two are necessarily equal to
Four, if a Whole be necessarily bigger than its Part, there are necessary
Truths. I know not for what reason the Animadverter would have me think of
proving what cannot be proved, unless by something more obscure and difficult.
This is not to Philosophize Pref. Page 4.
after the manner of the ancient Academy.

(b) This is curious and far fetched. All the first Philosophers, except
Parmenides, have denied there were necessary and contingent Truths. What wonder
is it? It Is a fine thing, this Erudition; certainly Meditation can never teach
us what we learn from the reading the Ancients, though we understand them but
by halves. But it is visible that our Author understands the old Philosophers no
better than the new.

(c) I say indeed that ought to make a Question apart, but he will let it have
no part.

(d) The demand is pleasant, but the Author would not have made it, if he had
but read the Third Book of the Search after Truth, since I have there clearly
given my Thoughts upon these things. But it seems our Author takes Truths for
certain little Beings, which are born and die every Moment.

(e) There are two sorts of immutable Truths. Some are immutable of themselves,
or by their Nature, as that twice Two are Four; and others because they have
been determined by the Will of God, which is not subject to change; as that a
Bowl should move another on such an encounter. It Is easy to see he has not
understood what he pretends to oppose. He was not aware that the Conjuctive
Particle and had sometimes the same purport as the Disjunctive or; for if he
had observed it, he could with no good Grace have seriously wrangled upon the
Ambiguity of a Particle. He might have easily considered that Truths which are
Necessary by their Nature, as that Two times Two make Four, need not the Will
of God to make them such. But be it granted, that I had not sufficiently
explained my self; yet the place on which he criticizes being but accessory to
my Design, it was not necessary to explain my self more at large. Would a Man
be at the pains of reading it, he might see I needed only to say, there were
necessary Truths, and that I was not obliged to examine the cause of their
nececessity.

(f) For my part I know not what he drives at: this is a very commodious way of
criticizing; a Man has Reason whenever he desires it.

(g) He imposes on me three Falsities in six Lines. I have never determined
upon this Question, neither in undue Circumstances, nor with insufficient
Proofs; for I have not so much as spoken of it; but if he has a mind to know my
Thoughts of it, I fear not to affirm that God cannot cause Contradictories to
be true and false at the same time.

(h) He confounds Beings with Truths. Man is capable of Reason and Sense. A
Globe may be divided into two Hemispheres. A Man and a Globe are subject to
change, but these Truths are immutable.

(l) All this concerns not me, but only shows the Fecundity of our Author.

(m) Consider, if you please, all these Flourishes, endeavor to understand
them, and admire how the Imagination seduces Reason: I think our Author may be
said to resemble a Man, who imagining he sees his Enemy at hand, should
presently charge against the Phantom, should pierce it with his Sword, should
cut off its Head; and then, overjoyed with so successful and easy a Conquest,
should triumphantly exclaim, though my Pistols had miscarried, my sword had run
him through; but though my Sword had missed him, yet I had cut off his Head;
but lastly, though his Head should have remained upon his Shoulders, yet I
found him so feeble and easily to be conquered, that I had nothing to fear from
him. It Is visible from all these Flourishes, that our Author fancies he has
severely handled me, whilst yet I am as insensible of his Wounds, as the Enemy
the poor Man thought he had so cruelly Butchered.

(n) I ought in our Author's opinion to have begun with Theology to prove
methodically there are necessary and contingent Truths: but I do not believe
that Conduct would have had the Approbation of many People; and seeing it is an
hard task to content the Critics, I cannot believe our Animadverter would have
been well satisfied. This third Head, which I am going to comment on, as on the
preceding, sufficiently shows us what he is.

(o) I know not whether what I say ought to be ranked amongst Proverbs and
Quibbles, for that depends upon the Taste; and I refer my self to those whom the
Passion for criticizing has not made over scrupulous and dainty. They likewise
may reflect whether this niceness suits well with the Author of this Discourse,
and whether he ought so much to pretend to an exquisite Taste.

(q) Can he not see that these things are not of themselves Articles of Faith,
and that we may speak of the Goodness of God, depraved Manners, and corrupt
Inclinations without having recourse to Faith.

(p) There Is a great difference between mingling and confounding. I shall
always distinguish things of Faith from those of Nature, as I here say ought to
be done. But I never made a Resolution not to speak of God or Christian
Morality in treating about the Search after Truth. The Author seems not to
understand me, that he may play the Critic with less trouble.

(r) There are in these Animadversions some little Raileries which provoke to
Pity, but this might raise ones Indignation. Let him know once for all, that if
I consented to the Publication of this Book, 'twas chiefly because it contains
those things which he condemns as Enthusiasms. Page 12.


(s) If he speaks of himself, we ought to take his word for it.

(t) What he has said is true, but what he goes to conclude from it is false,
it being Reason and not Faith which teaches us God is no Deceiver.

(u) He has here suppressed two words, which give all the force to my
reasoning, which runs thus, If it must infallibly and necessarily have embraced
every thing; we shall see by and by what reason he had for this Retrenchment.

(x) Reason teaches us, that God is no Deceiver, and Faith supposes it; which
is quite contrary to what the Animadverter imagines.

(y) It cannot be doubted when we have Reasons for it; but it is needless to
stand to answer all these Questions.

(z) I do not conclude it with that Argument: Mine is good, and this good for
nothing; there is difference between INFALLIBLY and NECESSARILY forcing us to
embrace Error, and not giving us the means to discover Truth. Certainly these
words, Infallibly and Necessarily, ought not to be suppressed.

(a) He cannot show a place in the whole Book he animadverts on, where I
suppose any Article of Faith as a Principle from whence to draw any
Consequences Essential to the Search of Truth. But he imagines if a Man speaks
but of the Goodness of God, depraved Manners, and corrupt Inclinations, he is
treating of some Article of Faith.

(b) Methinks these two Conclusions have no other aim than to gain by surprise
some little Applauses from such as give them gratis.

ADVERTISEMENT.
SInce the first Impression of this second part, two Books have been published
relating to it. The first entitled, Animadversions upon the Animadversions on
the Search after Truth, wherein is discovered, etc. I am highly obliged to the
Author of these Animadversions for the Honor he seems to do me by the Title of
his Book; but since this Title may make the World believe I had some hand in
his Work, I think my self obliged to say, that though I am very well satisfied
with his Person, I am not extremely pleased with his Book. Methinks that those
who meddle in defending or opposing others, ought to read their Works
carefully, so as to be thoroughly acquainted with their Opinions. But the Search
after Truth, you will say, merits not the Application of Men of Parts: True, it
deserves not therefore that the Person spoken of, who undoubtedly is a Man of
great Sense and Worth should either impugn or defend it.

The Title of the second Book runs thus; The Animadverter's Answer to the
Preface of the second Volume of the Search after Truth, wherein is examined
etc. I entreat those who interess themselves in the difference of others, not
to believe me on my bare word, nor easily to imagine I am in the right. I think
I have Liberty to demand of them, that they will carefully examine the Answers
I have made to the Animadversions in that Preface, and the Argumentations of
the Animadverter, in reference to the Book opposed? so I think I may without
offense to the Author of this Answer, require of those who would judge of it,
not to imagine he has reason on his side, upon a slight and transient reading
of his Book. I desire them not to judge of any of his Answers before having
examined it, with reference to this Preface and the preceding Books. Take here
for an instance the first of his Answers, which begins thus.

Upon what the Author of the Search pretends, the Animadverter imposes on him
touching his Design Page 1* The Animadverter's Answer.
. It Is not imposing on him, to make his Book pass for a Collection of
Observations, thought by him useful to the discovery of Truth. It Is plain I
have positively declared that I look upon his Book, as a Collection of many
Remarks, etc. If the Author had considered these words, he would not have
accused me of imposing on him: for he could not deny but he had a Design of
offering something serviceable to the discovery of Truth, which is all that I
attributed to him. And lower, Wherein I even prove that that is not to be
imputed to him, which he affirms I impose upon him. Lastly, he concludes this
Article with these words; It Is therefore evident the Author of the Search
cannot prove I impose on him, unless he will maintain he had a Design of
writing a Book altogether useless to the Search of Truth.

These Words might possibly make a Man imagine, I had without Reason accused
the Animadverter of imposing on me in the Design of the Search; but whoever
would but confront what he here says with the foregoing Preface, or with what
he has said himself, page 9, 10. of his Animadversions, would I hope be of
another mind. That I may not give the trouble of turning to it, these are my
words.

Nevertheless as he is pleased to make me undertake a Design I do not execute,
that he may have the more to charge upon my Conduct, so he goes to prove it was
my Design to lay down a Method in that Book. I do him no injury, says he, in
looking on his Book as a Method to lay the Foundation of the Sciences. For
besides that the Title expresses so much, he declares himself upon the Point in
the following manner: Let us examine the Causes and Nature of our Errors; and
since the Method of examining things by considering them in their Birth and
Origin is the most regular and perspicuous, and serves better than others to
give us a thorough knowledge of them, let us try to put it here in practice.

Methinks these words, I do him no injury, says he, etc. which I cite out of
the Animadversions, are clear enough, and that a Man need but understand
English to see that the Animadverter imposes on me a Design of giving a Method,
and pretends too to prove it by the Title of the Search, as also by a passage
of the same Book; and yet he boldly concludes this Article with these words,
It Is therefore evident the Author of the Search cannot prove I impose on him,
etc.

But what! he has positively declared he looked upon the Search after Truth, as
a Collection of many Observations. I cannot deny, says he, but he had a Design
of offering something useful to the discovery of Truth, which is ALL (mark that
word) I attribute to him. Since he has a mind to be diverted, see my Answer.

A Painter has drawn a Polyphemus, and standing behind his Piece, hears some
Critic say, Look here, Gentlemen, the Artist designed to paint an Hercules;
but if you mind it, it is a Polyphemus. The Painter, out of patience, starts
from behind the Scene, and gives the Spectators to undrestand, he had no Design
of representing an Hercules, and that he imposes on him. The Critic surpised,
addresses the Painter, Sir, why so angry? what did you design to represent?
Polyphemus, returns the Painter. Strange, Sir! replies the Critic, why do you
say I impose on you? I call these Gentlemen to witness, that ALL that I said,
was, you had drawn a Polyphemus: upon which the Painter withdraws contented,
and says no more.

I think my self therefore obliged to rest silent upon such like Answers. I
have shown by the Animadverter's own words, that he imposes on me a Design of
giving a Method in the first Book of the Search, and that he likewise pretends
to prove it. I have cited the place of the Animadversions, from whence I have
taken my proof. Nevertheless, this Author affirms he does not impose on me;
that it is evident I cannot prove it; that he proves quite contrary; that what I
say he imposes on me is not to be imputed to me; that ALL he atributes to me is
a Design of offering something useful to the discovery of Truth. In a word,
that he has positively declared he looked on the Search as a Collection of many
Observations? as if from his regarding the Search as a Collection, it were to
be concluded I had no other Design.

I say no more then, but hope this Example may keep Men from judging without
examining. I have taken the three first Pages of his Book, and have not given
my self the liberty of choosing, which ought to be considered; yet I intend not
this for an Answer, remembering the obligation I have laid on my self at the end
of the preceding Preface; and I had rather those who think I have not satisfied
the Animadversions, because I have answered but three Chapters at length,
should say, this Book whereof I answer but three Pages, remains without Reply,
than weary the World with Answers, which tend only to the justifyng other
Replies.

F. MALEBRANCHE's TREATISE Concerning the SEARCH after TRUTH. TOME II. BOOK V.
CHAP. I.
Of the Nature and Original of Passions in general.

THE Mind of Man has two essential or necessary Relations extremely different;
the one to God, and the other to its Body. As mere Mind, it is essentially
united to the Divine Word, the Eternal Wisdom and Truth; since it is only by
that Union that it is capable of thinking, as is proved in the Third Book. As a
humane Mind, it has an essential Relation to its Body, since it is by Virtue of
that Union that it imagines and perceives by its Senses, as is explained in the
First and Second Book. We call the Mind Sense or Imagination, when the Body is
the natural or occasional Cause of its Thoughts: and we call it Understanding,
when it acts by it self, or rather, when God acts in it, or his Light
illuminates it several different ways, without a necessary Relation to what is
done in the Body.

It Is even so with the Will of man; as a Will, it essentially depends on the
Love that God bears to himself, on the Eternal Law, and in short on the Will of
God. It is only because God loves himself, that we love any thing; for if God
did not love himself, or did not continually influence the Soul of man with a
Love like his own; that is, with the Motion of Love, which a Man feels in
himself for Good in general; we should love nothing, we should will nothing,
and consequently should be destitute of Will; since Will is nothing else but
that Impression of Nature that carries us toward Good in general, as has been
said several times Book 1. Chap. 1. and elsewhere.
.

But the Will, considered as the Will of Man, essentially depends upon the
Body, since it is by reason of the Motion of the Blood and Animal Spirits, that
it feels its self affected with all its sensible Commotions. And therefore I
have called Natural Inclinations all the Motions, which the Soul has common
with pure Intelligences, together with some in which the Body has a great
Share, but of which it is only the indirect Cause and End, and I have explained
them in the foregoing Book. -- Here I understand by Passions, All the Motions
which naturally affect the Soul, on occasion of the extraordinary Motion of the
Blood and Animal Spirits. And so shall these sensible Commotions be the Subject
of this Book.

Though the Passions be inseparable from the Inclinations, and Men be only
susceptible of a sensible Love and Hatred, because they are capable of a
Spiritual Love and Hatred; however it was though fit to treat of them
separately, in order to prevent Confusion. For if it be considered, That the
Passions are far stronger and livelyer than the Natural Inclinations; that they
have for the most part other Objects, and are always produced by different
Causes: it will be granted, That we do not distinguish, without Reason, things
that are inseparable in their own Nature.

Men are capable of Sensations and Imaginations only because they are capable
of pure Intellections, the Senses and Imagination being inseparable from the
Mind; and yet none finds fault with those that distinctly treat of those
Faculties of the Soul, which are naturally inseparable.

Last of all, the Senses and Imagination differ not more from the pure
Understanding, than the Passions from the Inclinations. And therefore as the
three first Faculties use to be distinguished, so ought also the two last; that
we may the better distinguish what the Soul receives from its Author, with
Relation to its Body, from that which it also has from him, but without that
Relation.

The only Inconveniency that may grow out of the distinction of two things so
naturally united, is the necessity of repeating some things that had been said
before, as is usual in the like occasions.

Man is one, though he be Compounded of several parts, and the union of those
parts is so intimate, that one of them cannot be affected without a Commotion
of the whole. All his Faculties are linked together, and so subordinated, that
it is impossible to explain some of them, without touching upon the others. So
that when we labor to find out a Method to prevent Confusion, we necessarily
fall into Repetitions: but it is better to repeat, than not to be Methodical,
because we ought above all to be plain and intelligible; and therefore whatever
we can do in this occasion, is to repeat, if possible, without wearying the
Reader.

The Passions of the Soul are Impressions of the Author of Nature, which
incline us to love our Body* and whatever is useful for its preservation: As
the natural Inclinations are Impressions of the same Author, that principally
move us to love him as the Sovereign Good.

The natural or occasional Cause of these Impressions is the Motion of the
Animal Spirits, which disperse through the Body, to produce and maintain in it
a disposition suitable to the Object perceived, that the Mind and Body may in
that conjuncture mutually help each other. For it is the Institution of God that
our Willings be attended with such Motions of our Body, as are fit to put them
in execution; and that the Motions of our Body which Machinally rise in us, at
the perception of some Object, be followed with a Passion of the Soul, that
inclines us to will what seems at that time profitable to the Body. It is the
continual Impression of the Will of God upon us, that keeps us so strictly
united to a portion of matter; for if that Impression of his Will should cease
but a moment, we should instantly be rid of the Dependency upon our Body, and
all the Changes it undergoes.

For I cannot understand what some people imagine, that there is a necessary
Connection betwixt the Motion of the Blood and Animal Spirits, and the
Commotions of the Soul. Some small Particles of Choler violently move in the
Brain, must therefore the Soul be agitated with some Passion, and must that
Passion be Anger rather than Love? What Relation can there be conceived betwixt
the Idea of an Enemy's Imperfections, the Passion of Contempt or Hatred, and
the Corporeal Motion of some Particles of the Blood, that beat against some
parts of the Brain? How they can imagine that the one depend upon the other,
and that the Union or Connection of two things so distant, and so incompatible,
as the Mind and Matter, can be caused and preserved any otherwise, than by the
continual and Almighty Will of the Author of Nature, is to me unconceivable.

Those that suppose that Bodies necessarily and by themselves communicate their
Motion to each other, in the instant of their concourse, make but a probable
supposition? neither is their prejudice altogether groundless, since Bodies
seem to have an Essential Relation to Bodies. But the Mind and Body are two
sorts of Beings so opposite, that those who think that the Commotions of the
Soul necessarily follow upon the Motion of the Blood and Animal Spirits, do it
without the least probability. For nothing but our own Consciousness of the
Union of those two Beings, and the Ignorance of the continual Operations of God
upon his Creatures, can make us imagine another Cause of the Union of our Soul
and Body, than the Will of God.

It is hard to determine, whether that Union or Connection of the thoughts of
the Mind of Man, with the Motions of his Body, is a punishment of Sin, or a
Gift of Nature. And some persons believe it a rash and imprudent Attempt to
choose one of these Opinions rather than the other. It is well known, that Man
before his Sin was not a Slave, but absolute Master of his Passions, and that
he could, merely by his Will, stop at his pleasure, the Agitation of the Blood
that caused them. But we can hardly persuade our selves that the Body did not
importune the Soul of the first Man to find out such things as were fit for the
preservation of his Life: We can scarce believe but Adam before his Sin found
Fruits pleasant to the sight and grateful to the Taste, if we rightly consider
the words of the Holy Scripture; nor shall we come to think that the Economy
of the Senses and Passions, which is so wonderfully contrived and adapted to
the preservation of the Body, is a Corruption of Nature, instead of its
Original Institution.

Doubtless Nature is at this present corrupted: the Body acts too violently
upon the Mind: and whereas it ought only to make an humble Representation of
its wants to the Soul, it domineers over her, takes her off from God, to whom
she ought to be inseparably united, and continually applies her to the search
of such sensible things, as tend to its preservation. She is grown as it were
material and terestrial ever since her Fall; the Essential Relation and Union
that she had with God being broken, that is to say, God being withdrawn from
her, as much as he could be without her destruction and annihilation. A
thousand disorders have attended the absence or departure of him that preserved
her in Order; and without making a longer Enumeration of our Miseries, I freely
confess that Man since his Fall is corrupted in all his parts.

That Fall however has not quite destroyed the Work of God; for we can still
discover in Man, what God at first put in him; and his immutable Will, that
constitutes the Nature of every thing, was not changed by the Inconstancy and
Fickleness of the Will of Adam. Whatever God has once willed he still wills,
and because his Will is efficatious, brings it to pass. The Sin of Man was
indeed the Occasion of that Divine Will, that makes the Dispensation of Grace,
but Grace is not contrary to Nature; neither do they destroy each other; since
God is not opposed to himself, that he never repents, and that his Wisdom being
without Limits, his Works will be without End.

And therefore the Will of God, that constitutes the Dispensation of Grace, is
superadded to that which makes the Economy of Nature, in order to repair and
not to change it. There are then in God but these two general Wills, and the
Laws by which he governs the World depend on one or other of them. It will
plainly appear, by what follows, that the Passions are very well ordered, if
considered only in reference to the Preservation of the Body, though they
deceive us in some very rare and particular Occasions, which the universal
Cause did not think fit to remedy. Thence I conclude, That the Passions belong
to the Order of Nature, since they cannot be ranked under the Order of Grace.

It Is true, that seeing the Sin of the first man has deprived us of the Help of
an always-present God, and always ready to defend us; It may be said, That Sin
is the Cause of our excessive adhesion to sensible things, because Sin has
estranged us from God, by whom alone we can be rid of our Slavery.

But without insisting longer upon the Enquiry after the first Cause of the
Passions let us examine their Extent, their particular Nature, their End, their
Use, their Defects, and whatever they comprehend.

CHAP. II.
Of the Union of the Mind with sensible things; or of the Force and Extent of
the Passions in general.

IF all those who read this Work would be at the pains to reflect upon what
they feel within themselves; it would not be necessary to insist upon our
Dependency upon all sensible Objects. I can say upon this Head but what every
one knows as well as I do, if he will but think on it; and was therefore very
much inclined to pass it over. But Experience having taught me, That Men often
forget themselves so far, as not to think or be aware of what they feel, nor to
enquire into the Reason of what passes in their own Mind; I thought it fit to
propose some Considerations that may help them to reflect upon it. And even I
hope, That those who know such things will not think their Reading ill
bestowed: for though we do not care to hear simply rehearsed what we very well
know, yet we use to be affected with Pleasure at the hearing of what we know
and feel together.

The most honorable Sect of Philosophers, of whose Opinions many Pretenders
boast still now adays, will persuade us, That it is in our power to be happy.
The Stoics Tunc beatum esse te judica cum tibi ex te gaudium omne nascetur;
cum in his quae homines eripiunt, optant, custodiunt, nihil inveneris, non dico
quod malis, sed quod velis. Sen. Epist. 124.
continually say, We ought only to depend upon our selves; we ought not to be
vexed for the Loss of Dignities, Estates, Friends, Relations; we ought to be
always calm and without the least Disturbance whatever happens; Banishment,
Injuries, Affronts, Diseases, and even Death are no Evils, and ought not to be
feared, and a thousand Paradoxes of that Nature, which we are apt enough to
believe; both because of our Pride, that makes us affect Independency, as that
because Reason teaches us that most part of the Evils, which really afflict us,
would not be able to disturb us, if all things remained in good Order.

But God has given us a Body, and by that Body united us to all sensible
things: Sin has subjected us to our Body, and by our Body made us dependent
upon all sensible things. It is the Order of Nature, it is the Will of the
Creator, that all the Beings that he has made should hang together: And
therefore being united to all things, and the Sin of the first Man having made
us dependent on all Beings, to which God had only united us: there is now none
but he is at once united and subjected to his Body, and by his Body to his
Relations, Friends, City, Prince, Country, Clothes, House, Estate, Horse, Dog,
to all the Earth, to the Sun, the Stars, and the Heavens.

It Is then ridiculous to tell Men, that it is in their power to be happy, wise,
and free: It is to jeer them, seriously to advise them they ought not to be
afflicted for the Loss of their Friends or Estates. For as it were absurd to
exhort Men not to feel Pain when they are beaten, or not to be sensible of
Pleasure when they eat with an Appetite; so the Stoics are either
unreasonable, or not in good earnest, when they cry, That we ought not to be
sorry for the Death of our Father, the Loss of our Goods, our Banishment,
Imprisonment, and the like; nor to be glad of the happy Success of our Affairs:
since we are united to our Country, Goods, Friends, etc. by a Natural Union,
which at present has no dependence on our Will. I grant that Reason teaches us,
we are to undergo Banishment without Sorrow: but the same Reason likewise
teaches us we ought to endure the cutting off our Arm without Pain; because the
Soul is superior to the Body, and that, according to the light of Reason, her
happiness or misery ought not to depend upon it: but it is ridiculous to argue
against Experience, which in this occasion will convince us that things are not
so, as our Reason intimates they ought to be.

The Philosophy of the Christians is quite different from that; they deny not
but Pain is an Evil, and that it is hard to be separated from those things to
which Nature has united us, or to rid our selves from the Slavery Sin has
reduced us to. They agree that it is a Disorder that the Soul shall depend upon
her Body, but they own withal that she depends upon it, and even so much that
she cannot free her self from that Subjection but by the Grace of our Lord. I
see, Romans 7*23, 24*
says St. Paul, another Law in my Members warring against the Law of my Mind,
and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in my Members. O
wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? the
Grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord shall do it. The Son of God, his
Apostles and all his true Disciples command us above all to be Patient, because
they know that Mis^ry must be the Expect^tion and Portion of the Righteous. In
short, true Christians or true Philosophers, say nothing but what is agreeable
to sound Reason and Experience; whereas all Nature continually impugns the
proud Opinion and presumption of the Stoics.

The Christians know that to free themselves in some manner from the Subjection
they are under, they must endeavor to deprive themselves of all those things
that they cannot enjoy without Pleasure, nor want without Pain; it being the
only means to preserve that Peace and Liberty of Mind, which they owe to their
Deliverer's Beneficence. On the contrary the Stoics, following the false
Notions of their Chimerical Philophy, imagine that they are wise and happy, and
that they need but think upon Virtue and Independency, to become Virtuous and
Independent. Sound Reason and Experience assure us, that the best way not to
feel the smart of stinging is to shun the Nettle: but the Stoics say, Sting me
never so much, I shall by the strength of my Mind, and the help of my
Philosophy, raise my self so high above my Body, that all your pricking shall
not reach me. I can demonstrate that my Happiness depends not upon it, and that
Pain is not an Evil; and you shall see by the Color of my Face, and by the
whole deportment of my Body, that my Philosophy has made me invulnerable.

Their Pride bears up their Courage, however it hinders not but that they
should suffer Pain with Vexation, and be really miserable; so that their Union
with their Body is not destroyed, nor their Pain vanished; but all this
proceeds from their Union with other Men, strengthened by the desire of their
Esteem, which in some manner withstands the Union of their Soul with their
Body. The sensible view of the Spectators, to whom they are united, stops the
Course of the Animal Spirits that should follow upon the pain, and blots out
the Impression they would make upon their Face; for was there no body to look
on them, that Phantasm of Constancy and Liberty of Mind would presently vanish:
So that the Stoics do only in some degree withstand the Union of their Soul to
their Body, by making themselves greater Slaves to other Men, to whom they are
united by a drift of Glory. And it is therefore an undoubted truth, that all Men
are united to all sensible things, both by Nature and their Concupiscence;
which may sufficiently be known by Experience, and of which all the Actions of
Mankind are sensible demonstrations, though Reason seems to oppose it.

Though this Union be common to all Men, it is not however of an equal Extent
and Strength in all; for as it proceeds from the Knowledge of the Mind; so it
may be said that we are not actually united to unknown Objects. A Clown in his
Cottage does not concern himself with the Glory of his Prince and Country, but
only with the honor of his own and the Neighboring Villages; because his
Knowledge does not extend farther.

The Union with such Objects as we have seen, is stronger than the Union to
those we have only imagined, or heard relation of; because by Sensation we are
more strictly united to sensible things, as leaving deeper Impressions in our
Brain, and moving the animal Spirits in a more violent manner, than when they
are only imagined.

Neither is that Union so strong in those that continually oppose it, that they
may adhere to the Goods of the Mind, as it is in those who suffer themselves to
be carried away and enslaved by their Passions, since Concupiscence increases
and strengthens that Union.

Last of all, the several Employments and States of this Life, together with
the various dispositions of diverse Persons, cause a considerable difference in
that sensible Union which Men have with Earthly Goods: Great Lords have greater
Dependencies than other Men, and their Chains, as I may call them, are longer.
The General of an Army depends on all his Soldiers, because all his Soldiers
reverence him. This Slavery is often the Cause of his Valor; and the desire of
being esteemed by those that are Witnesses of his Actions, often drives him to
Sacrifice to it more sensible and rational desires. The same may be said of all
Superiors, and those that make a great Figure in the World, Vanity being many
times the Spur of their Virtue, because the love of Glory is ordinarily
stronger than the love of Truth. I speak here of the love of Glory, not as a
simple Inclination but a Passion, since that love may become sensible, and is
often attended with very lively and violent Commotions of the Animal Spirits.

Again the different Ages and Sexes are primary Causes of the difference of
Passions. Children love not the same things as adult and old Men, or at least
love them not with that Force and Constancy. Women depend only on their Family
and Neighborhood; but the dependencies of Men extend to their whole Country,
because it is their part to defend it; and that they are mightily taken up with
those great Offices, Honors and Commands, that the State may bestow upon them.

There is such a variety in the Employments and Engagements of Men, that it is
impossible to explain them all. The disposition of Mind in a Married Man is
altogether different from that of a single Person; for the former is in a
manner wholly taken up with the care of his Family. A Friar has a Soul of
another make, and depends upon fewer things than the Men of the World, and even
than Secular Ecclesiastics, but he is stronger fastened to those few things.
One may argue in the same manner concerning the different States of Men in
general, but the little sensible engagements cannot be explained, because they
differ almost in every private Person; it often happening that men have
particular Engagements altogether opposite to those that they ought to have in
reference to their condition. But though the different Genius and Inclinations
of Men, Women, Old Men, Young Men, Rich, Poor, Learned, and Ignorant, in short
of all the different Sexes, Ages and Conditions, might be fully treated of in
general; yet they are too well known by those that are conversant with the
World, and of all the thinking part of Mankind, to increase with them the Bulk
of this Book; especially, seeing that our Eyes may afford us a very pleasant
and solid Instruction of all such matters. But if any choose to read them in
Greek, rather than to learn them by his own reflection on what he sees, I refer
him to the second Book of the Rhetoricks of Aristotle; which I take to be the
Masterpiece of that Philosopher; because he says there few things, in which he
can be mistaken; and that he seldom ventures to prove what he asserts.

It is therefore evident that the sensible Union of the Mind of Men, with
whatever has any Relation to the preservation of their Life, or of the Society
of which they are Members, differs in different Persons; reaching farther in
those that have more Knowledge, that are in a higher Station, and are endued
with a larger Fancy; whereas that Union is stricter and stronger in those that
are more sensible, that have a livelyer Imagination, and have more blindly
given up themselves to the violence of their Passions.

Such Considerations upon the almost infinite Bands that fasten Men to sensible
Objects, are of an extraordinary Use; and the best way to become a great
proficient in this sort of Learning, is the study and observation of our
selves; since from the Inclinations and Passions, of which we are conscious in
our selves, we can be fully assured of all the inclinations of other Men, and
can make a good guess at a great part of the Passions they are subject to: to
which adding the Information we can get of their particular Exgagements, and of
the different Judgments that follow from every different Passion, of which we
shall speak hereafter; it may perhaps not prove so hard a Task to guess most
part of their Actions, as it is for an Astronomer to foretell an Eclipse. For
though Men be free, yet it seldom happens that they make use of their Liberty,
in opposition to their natural Inclinations and violent Passions.

Before the Close of this Chapter I must observe, that it is one of the Laws of
the Union of the Soul and Body, that all the Inclinations of the Soul, even
those she has for Goods, that have no relation to the Body, should be attended
with Commotions of the Animal Spirits, that render those Inclinations sensible;
because Man being not a pure Spirit, it is impossible he should have any
Inclination altogether pure, and without mixture of any Passion whatsoever. So
that the love of Truth, Justice, Virtue, of God himself, is always attended by
some Motion of the Animal Spirits that render that love sensible, though we be
not aware of their sensibility, being then taken up with livelyer Sensations.
Just as the Knowledge of Spiritual things is always accompanied with traces on
the Brain, which indeed make that Knowledge more lively, but commonly more
confused: It Is true we are frequently inapprehensive of the Imagining Faculty's
mixing in any manner with the Conception of an abstracted Truth. The Reason of
it is, that those Truths are not represented by Images, or traces of Nature's
Institution, and that all the traces that raise such Ideas, have no Relation
with them, but such as proceeds from Chance, or the Free Will of Men. For
Instance, Arithmeticians and Algebraists, who apply themselves to very
abstracted Objects, make however a very great use of their Imagination, in
order to fix the view of their Mind upon these Spiritual Ideas. The Ciphers,
the Letters of the Alphabet, and the other Figures which they see or imagine,
are always joined to those Ideas, though the traces that are wrought by these
Characters have no proper Relation to those abstracted Objects, and so can
neither change nor obscure them: Whence follows, that by a proper Use and
Application of these Ciphers and Letters, they come to discover such remote and
difficult Truths, as could not be found out otherwise.

Since therefore the Ideas of such things as are only perceivable by the pure
Understanding, can be connected with the traces of the Brain, and that the
sight of Objects that are beloved, hated or feared by a Natural Inclination,
can be attended with the Motion of the Animal Spirits; it plainly appears, that
the thoughts of Eternity, the fear of Hell, the hope of an Eternal Happiness,
though they be Objects never so insensible, can however raise in us very
violent Passions.

And therefore we can say that we are united in a sensible manner, not only to
such things as relate to the preservation of our Life, but also to Spiritual
things, with which the Mind is immediately, and by it self united. And even it
often happens, that Faith, Charity, and Self-Love, make that Union with
Spiritual things stronger, than that by which we are joined to all sensible
Objects. The Soul of the true Martyrs is more united to God, than to their
Body; and those that suffer Death for asserting a false Religion, which they
believe to be true, give us sufficiently to know, that the fear of Hell has
more power upon them than the fear of Death. There is for the most part so much
heat and obstinacy on both sides, in the Wars of Religion, and the defense of
Superstitions, that it cannot be doubted but some Passion has a hand in it; and
even a Passion far stronger and stedfaster than others, because it is kept up
by an Appearance of Reason, both in such as are deceived, and in those that
follow the Truth.

We are then united by our Passions to whatever seems to be the Good or the
Evil of the Mind, as well as to that which we take for the Good or Evil of the
Body. Whatever can be known to have any relation to us can affect us, and of
all the things we know, there is not one but it has some reference or other to
us. We are somewhat concerned even for the most abstracted Truths, when we know
them; because there is at least that Relation of Knowledge betwixt them and our
Mind, and that in some manner we look on them as our Property, by virtue of
that Knowledge. We feel our selves as wounded when they are impugned; and if we
be wounded, then surely we are affected and disturbed. So that the Passions
have such a vast and comprehensive Dominion, that it is impossible to conceive
any thing in reference to which it may be said, that Men are exempt from their
Empire. But let us now see what is their Nature, and endeavor to discover
whatever they comprehend.

CHAP. III.
A particular Explanation of all the Changes, happening either to the Body or
Soul in every Passion.

SEven things may be distinguished in each of our Passions, save Admiration
only, which is indeed but an Imperfect Passion.

The first is the Judgment the Mind makes of an Object, or rather the confused
or distinct View of the Relation that Object has to us.

The second is a New Determination of the Motion of the Will toward that
Object, provided it be or seem to be a Good. Before that View, the Natural
Motion of the Soul was either undetermined, that is to say, she was carried
toward Good in general, or it otherwise determined by the knowledge of some
particular Object. But in the very instant of the mind's perceiving that
Relation of the new Object to it self, that general Motion of the Will is
forthwith determined, conformably to the perception of the Mind. The Soul
advances near that Object by her Love, that she may relish it, and discover her
good in it, through a sensible delectation which the Author of Nature affords
her, as a Natural Reward of her Inclination to Good. She judged that that
Object was a Good by an abstracted and unpathetick Reason, but she persists in
the persuasion of it, through the Efficacy of Sensation; and the livelyer that
Sensation is, the stronger is her adhesion to the Good that seems to be the
Cause of it.

But if that particular Object be considered as Evil, or able to deprive us of
some Good, there happens no New Determination in the Motion of the Will; but
only the Motion toward the Good, opposed to that seemingly evil Object, is
augmented: which augmentation is greater or les^er, as the Evil seems to be
more or less formidable to us. For indeed we hate only because we love, and the
Evil that is without us is judged no farther Evil, than with reference to the
Good of which it deprives us: So that Evil being considered as a privation of
Good, to fly from Evil is to fly the privation of Good, which is the same thing
as to tend toward Good; and therefore there happens no new determination of
the Natural Motion of the Will, at the presence of an unwelcome Object; but
only a Sensation, painful, distasteful or embittered, which the Author of
Nature inflicts on the Soul, as a pain naturally consequent to her being
deprived of Good. Before Sin, that Sensation was not a pain, but only a
warning; because, as I have said elsewhere, Adam might, whenever he pleased,
stop the Motion of the Animal Spirits that produce Pain: So that, if he ever
felt pain, 'twas because he consented to feel it; or rather he never felt any,
because he never had a mind to feel it.
Reason alone had not been sufficient to carry her to it, wherefore this
painful and vexing Sensation is superadded to quicken her. Thence I conclude,
that in any Passion whatsoever, all the Motions of the Soul toward Good, are
the Motions of Love. But as we are affected with diverse Sensations, according
to the various Circumstances that attend the View of Good, and the Motion of
the Soul toward it; so we come to confound our Sensations with the Commotions
of the Soul, and to imagine as many different Motions in the Passions, as there
are different Sensations.

Upon this head it must be observed that Pain is a true and real Evil, and no
more the Privation of Pleasure, than Pleasure the Privation of Pain: for there
is a great difference betwixt not feeling or being deprived of such a Sensation
of Pleasure, and the actual enduring of Pain: So that every Evil is not
precisely so, because it deprives us of Good, but only that Evil, as I have
explained, that is without us, or is not a Modification of our Soul.
Nevertheless as by Goods and Evils we commonly understand things good or evil,
and not the Sensations of Pleasure and Pain, which are rather the natural
Tokens by which the Soul distinguishes Good from Evil; it may be said methinks
without Equivocation, that Evil is nothing but the privation of Good, and that
the natural motion of the Soul, that removes us from Evil, is the same with
that which carries us to good; for in brief, all natural Motion being an
Impression of the Author of Nature, whose acting centers in himself, and who
can incline us only toward himself: The true Motion of the Soul is always
essentially the Love of Good, and but accidentally an Aversion from Evil.

I grant that Pain may be considered as an Evil, and in that sense the Motion
of the Passions, which is stirred up by it, is not real, since we never will
Pain; and though we positively will the absence of Pain, yet it is only because
we positively will the Preservation or Perfection of our Being.

The third thing to be observed in every Passion is the Sensation that attends
them; the Sensation of Love, Hatred, Desire, Joy, Sorrow, which are all
different in the different Passions.

The fourth thing is a new Determination of the course of the Animal Spirits
and Blood to the outward and inward parts of the Body. Before the View of the
Object of the Passion, the vital Spirits were dispersed throughout the whole
Body, for the preservation of all its parts in general; but at the appearance
of that new Object, all this Order and Economy is disturbed, and most part of
the Spirits are thrown into the Muscles of the Arms, Legs, Face, and other
exterior parts of the Body, to put them in a disposition suitable to the
ruling Passion, and to give it such a gesture and motion, as are necessary for
the obtaining or avoiding the imminent Good or Evil: But if its own Forces are
insufficient for its occasions, these same Spirits are distributed in such a
manner as make it machinally utter certain words and cries; and which diffuse
over the Face and the rest of the Body, such an air and comportment, as is
capable of actuating others with the same Passion it self is possessed with.
For Men and Beasts having a mutual cohesion by the Eyes and Ears, when any one
of them is in a violent Commotion, it necessarily affects the Spectators and
Hearers, and naturally makes upon their Imagination such an Impression as
troubles them, and moves them to preserve it.

As to the rest of the Animal Spirits, they violently descend into the Heart,
Lungs, Liver, Spleen, and other Viscera, thence to draw contributions, and to
hasten those parts to send forth a sufficient and timely supply of Spirits,
necessary to preserve the Body in that extraordinary Contention.

The fifth thing is a sensible Commotion of the Soul, who feels her self
agitated by an unexpected overflow of Spirits. This sensible Commotion of the
Soul always attends that Motion of the Spirits, that the Soul may participate
of all that affects the Body; even as the Motion of Spirits is raised in the
Body, when the Soul is carried toward any Object. For the Body and Soul being
mutually united, their Motions are reciprocal.

The sixth thing are several Sensations of Love, Hatred, Joy, Desire, Sorrow,
that are produced, not by the Intellectual view of Good or Evil, as those that
have been already mentioned, but by the various concussions that are caused in
the Brain by the Animal Spirits.

The seventh thing is a certain Sensation of Joy, or rather internal
Satisfaction, which detains the Soul in her Passion, and assures her that she
is in the fittest State she can be, in reference to the Object she considers.
This internal satisfaction attends all the Passions whatsoever, whether they
proceed from the sight of an Evil, or from the sight of a Good, Sorrow as well
as Joy. This satisfaction makes all the Passions pleasant, and induces us to
yield our consent, and give up our selves to them; and it is that satisfaction
which must be overcome by the Delights of Grace, and the Comforts of Faith and
Reason. For as the Joy of the Mind is the result of a certain or evident
Knowledge that we are in the best state that can be in relation to the Objects
perceived by the Understanding; so the pleasantness of the Passions is a
natural consequence of that confused Sensation we have of being in the best
state we can be in reference to those things we perceive by our Senses. Now
it is by the Joy of the Mind, and the Comforts of Grace, that the false delight
of the Passions, which makes us Slaves to sensible Goods, must be vanquished.

All the forementioned things are to be found in all the Passions, unless they
be raised by confused Sensations, and that the Mind perceive not the Good or
Evil from whence they proceed; for then it is plain that they have not the three
first qualifications. It likewise appears that all these things are not free,
since they are in us without our Consent, and even against it since the Sin;
but that the Consent of our Will is the only thing which is really in our
power. However it will be fit to explain all these things more at large, and to
make them more sensible by some Instances.

Let us suppose a Man to whom an Affront has been actually offered, or one
whose Imagination is either naturally strong and lively, or overheated by some
Accident, as a Disease or a Surfeit of Sorrow and Melancholy. This Man in his
Closet fancies that such a one, who perhaps does not think upon him, is willing
and ready to wrong him. The sensible View, or the Imagination of the Opposition
betwixt the Actions of his Enemy and his own designs, will be the first Cause
of his Passion.

That the Motion of this Man's Will may acquire some new determination, it is
not absolutely necessary that he should receive, or imagine he receives any
Affront; for it is sufficient that his Mind only should think on it, without his
Body's being concerned in it. However as this new determination would not be
the determination of a Passion, but only a most weak and languishing
Inclination: It Is better to suppose that some great opposition is actually made
to this Man's Designs, or that he strongly fancies that it will be so; than to
make another Supposition, wherein the Senses and Imagination are little or not
at all concerned.

The second thing to be considered in this Man's Passion, is an increase of the
Motion of his Will toward that Good, of which his real or pretended Enemy
endeavors to deprive him: the stronger the opposition is, or appears, the more
considerable will be the increase. He at first hates his Adversary, only
because he loves that Good, and his Hatred against him grows in proportion to
his Love for it; because the Motion of the Will in the Passion of Hatred is at
bottom nothing else but a Motion of Love; that Motion of the Soul toward Good
not differing from that by which she avoids its Privation, as has been already
observed.

The third thing is a Sensation suitable to that Passion; in our Instance it is
a Sensation of Hatred. But though the Motion of Hatred be the same with that of
Love, yet the Sensation of Hatred is altogether different from that of Love, as
any one may experience in himself. Motions are Actions of the Will, but
Sensations are Modifications of the Mind. The Motions of the Will are natural
Causes of the Sensations of the Mind; and these Sensations of the Mind
reciprocally encourage and keep up the Motions of the Will in their
Determination. The Sensation of Hatred is in the Man before us, the natural
result of the Motion of his Will, excited upon the view of Evil, and this
Motion is afterward maintained by the Sensation it has produced.

What we have just now said of this Man might happen to him, though he had not
a Body. But because he is made up of two Substances naturally united, the
Motions of his Soul are communicated to his Body, and those of his Body to his
Soul; so that the new Determination, or the increase of the Motion of his Will,
naturally causes a new Determination in the Motion of the Animal Spirits, which
is always different in all the Passions, though the Motion of the Soul be still
almost the same.

The Spirits therefore are violently driven into the Arms, Legs and Face, to
dispose the Body in a manner adapted to the Passion, and to shed over the Face
the Look of an injured Person, with reference to all the Circumstances of the
Injury received, and to the Quality and Capacity both of the Agent and Patient.
That Expansion of the Spirits is so much the more strong, abundant and quick,
as the Good is greater, the Opposition more vehement, and the Brain livelyer
affected.

And therefore if the Person whereof we speak only imagine himself injured, or
if he receive a real but slight injury, that makes no considerable concussion
in the Brain, the Expansion of the Animal Spirits will prove weak and
languishing, and perhaps insufficient to alter the natural and ordinary
Disposition of the Body. But if the Outrage be exceeding great, or the
Imagination enflamed, the Brain will be extraordinarily shaken, and the Spirits
so violently dispersed, that in a moment they will imprint on the Face and Body
the Symptoms of the ruling Passion. If he be strong enough to obtain the
Victory, his Countenance will be fierce and threatening. If weak and unable to
withstand the overwhelming Evil, he will appear humble and submissive. His
Moans and Tears naturally exciting in the Spectators, and even in his Enemy
Motions of Pity, he will draw from thence those succors which he could not
expect from his own strength. True it is, that if the Spirits and Fibers of the
Brain, in the Spectators and Adversary of that unhappy Wretch, be already
agitated with a violent Motion, contrary to that which breeds Compassion in the
Soul, the bemoanings of the Distressed will but increase their Fury; and so
would his undoing be inevitable, should he always keep the same Countenance and
Aspect. But Nature has provided for it, for at the sight of the imminent loss
of a great good, there are naturally produced on the Face such strange and
surprising Characters of Rage and Despair, as to disarm the most Barbarous
Enemies, and to make them as it were unmovable. That frightfull and unexpected
sight of the Lineaments of Death, drawn by the Hand of Nature upon the Face of
an unfortunate Person, stops in the very Enemy, stricken therewith, the Motions
of the Spirits and Blood, that carried him to Revenge; and in that favorable
moment of Audience, Nature printing again an humble submissive air upon the
Face of the poor Wretch, that begins to entertain some hopes, because of the
unmovableness, and alteration of the Countenance, of his Enemy, the Animal
Spirits of that Enemy receive a new determination, of which they were not
capable a moment before; and this Machinal Motion of Compassion which he yields
to, inclines the Soul to yield to the Pleas of Charity and Mercy.

Because a Man taken up with a Passion cannot, without a great plenty of
Spirits, produce or preserve in his Brain an Image of his Misery lively enough,
nor a Concussion sufficiently strong, to give his Body an extraordinary and
constrained Disposition: the corresponding Nerves within the Body receive upon
his sight of the Evil, the Concussions and Agitations that are necessary to
infuse, into all the Vessels that communicate with the Heart, fit Humors, to
the producing such Spirits as the Passion requires. For the Animal Spirits
spreading through the Nerves that go to the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, and all
the other Viscera, agitate and shake them, and by their Agitation force out
such Humors as those parts keep in reserve, for the Wants and Exigencies of
the Machine.

But if those Humors always flowed in the same manner into the Heart; if they
received an equal Fermentation in different times, and the Spirits, that are
made of them, regularly ascended into the Brain, we should not see such hasty
Changes in the Motions of the Passions. For instance, the sight of a Magistrate
would not stop, of a sudden, the extravagant Transports of an enraged Person,
persuing his Revenge; and his Face, all fiery with Blood and Spirits, would not
in an instant turn pale and wan for fear of Punishment.

So, to hinder those Humors that are mixed with the Blood from entering the
Heart constantly in the same manner, there are Nerves that surround all the
Avenues thereof, which being compressed or dilated by the Impression, that the
sight of the Object, and the strength of the Imagination produce in the
Spirits, shut up or open the way to those Humors. And lest the said Humors
should undergo the same Agitation and Fermentation in the Heart in diverse
times; there are other Nerves that cause the Beatings of it, which being not
equally agitated in the different Motions of the Spirits, drive not the Blood
with the same force into the Arteries. Other Nerves spread through the Lungs,
distribute the Air to the Heart, by constringing or relaxing several Branches
of the Trachea used in Respiration, and order the Fermentation of the Blood
proportionably to the Circumstances of the predominant Passion.

Last of all, to regulate with the greatest Accuracy and Readiness the Course
of the Spirits, there are Nerves surrounding the Arteries, as well those that
end in the Brain, as those that carry the Blood into the other parts of the
Body; so that the Concussion of the Brain, which accompanies the unexpected
Sight of some Circumstance, for which it is convenient that the Motions of the
Passion should be altered, suddenly determines the Course of the Spirits to the
Nerves thus surrounding the Arteries; that by their Contraction they may shut
up the Passage to the Blood that ascends into the Brain, and by their
Dilatation lay it open to that which runs into all the other Parts of the Body.

When those Arteries that carry the Blood to the Brain are free and open; and
on the contrary, those that disperse it through the rest of the Body are
strongly bound up by these Nerves, the Head must all be full of Blood, and the
Face appear all fiery; but some Circumstance altering the Commotion of the
Brain, that caused that Disposition in the Nerves, the Arteries that were
strait bound are loosened, and on the contrary, the Arteries of the Brain
strongly contracted. Then is the Head emptied of Blood, the Face covered with
Paleness, and the small quantity of Blood, which issues from the Heart, and
which the Nerves before mentioned admit into it, as the Fuel to keep in Life,
descends most or all into the lower parts of the Body; the Brain wants Animal
Spirits, and all the rest of the Body is seized with Weakness and Trembling.

To explain and prove the Particulars of what we have mentioned, it would be
necessary to give a general Knowledge of Physics, and a particular of the
Humane Body; but those two Sciences are still too imperfect to be treated of
with as much Accuracy as I could Wish: besides that, should I proceed farther
in this Matter, it would carry me too far from my Subject; and therefore I only
design here to give a gross and general Idea of the Passions, and am satisfied,
provided that this Idea be not false.

Those Concussions of the Brain, and Motions of the Blood and Spirits, are the
fourth thing to be found in every Passion, and produce the fifth, namely the
sensible Commotions of the Soul.

At the very Instant that the Animal Sprits are driven from the Brain into the
rest of the Body, to produce such Motions as are fit to keep up the Passion;
the Soul is carried toward the good perceived: and this more or less strongly,
according as the Spirits come down from the Brain with more or less vehemence;
for it is that Concussion of the Brain which agitates the Soul and the Animal
Spirits.

The Motion of the Soul toward Good is so much stronger, as the View of Good
is more sensible and apparent; and the Motion of the Spirits that proceed from
the Brain, and flow into the other parts of the Body, is the more violent, as
the Vibration of the Fibers of the Brain, caused by the Impression of the
Object or of the Imagination, is more forcible; because that Concussion of the
Brain occasioning a more sensible and lively View of Good, necessarily makes
the Commotion of the Soul in the Passions to increase proportionably to the
Motion of the Spirits.

Those Commotions of the Soul are not different from those that immediately
follow the Intellectual View of Good, which we have mentioned before: only they
are stronger and livelyer, because of the Union of the Soul and Body, and the
sensibleness of the View that produces them.

The sixth thing to be met with is the Sensation of the Passion; the Sensation
of Love, Hatred, Desire, Joy or Sorrow* This Sensation is not at all different
from that which has been spoken of; only it is livelyer, because the Body has a
greater share in it: but it is always attended with confused Sensation of
Satisfaction, that makes all the Passions grateful; which is the last thing to
be found in each of them, as has been already hinted.

The Cause of this last Sensation is such; At the sight of the Object of a
Passion, or of any new Circumstance, part of the Animal Spirits are driven from
the Head to the outward Parts of the Body, to put it in the Disposition that
the Passion requires; together with which some other Spirits make a violent
descent into the Heart, Lungs, and other Viscera, to draw from thence the
necessary Supplies, as has been already sufficiently explained. Now the Body is
never in a convenient Sta^e, but the Soul relishes it with great Satisfaction;
whereas it is never in a State contrary to its Good and Preservation, but that
she endures it with pain. And therefore when we follow the Motions of our
Passions, and stop not the Course of the Spirits, which the View of the Object
of the Passion produces in the Body, to put in it the most convenient State
with relation to that Object, the Soul by Nature's Law is affected with a
Sensation of Satisfaction and Delight, because her Body is in the Disposition
it requires: whereas when, according to the Laws of Reason, the Soul stops the
Current of the Spirits, and withstands those Passions, she suffers a Pain
proportionable to the Evil that may from thence arise to the Body.

For as the Reflection that the Soul makes upon her self is necessarily
accompanied with the Joy or Sorrow of the Mind, and afterward with the Joy or
Sorrow of the Senses; when doing her Duty, and submitting to the Orders of God,
she is conscious that she is in a due and convenient state; or when having
given her self up to her Passions, she is afterward affected with Remorse,
which teaches her that she is in a corrupt Disposition: So the Course of the
Spirits raised for the good of the Body, is first attended with sensible, and
afterward with Spiritual Joy or Sorrow, according as the Course of the Animal
Spirits is retarded or promoted by the Will.

There is however this notable difference betwixt the Intellectual Joy that
attends the clear Knowledge of the good Estate of the Soul, and the sensible
Pleasure that accompanies the confused Sensation of the good disposition of the
Body; that the intellectual Joy is solid and substantial, without Remorse, and
as immutable as its Original Cause, the Truth; whereas sensible Joy is almost
ever followed with the Sorrow of the Mind, or the Remorse of the Conscience,
and is as restless and fickle, as the Passion or Agitation of the Blood from
whence it proceeds. To conclude, the first is for the most part attended with
an exceeding Joy of the Senses when it is derived from the Knowledge of the
great good that the Soul possesses; whereas the other is very rarely
accompanied with any great Joy of the Mind, though it proceeds from a Good,
considerable for the Body, but contrary to the Good or Perfection of the Soul.

It Is nevertheless true, That without the Grace of our Lord, the satisfaction
the Soul relishes when she gives her self up to her Passions is more grateful,
than that which she enjoys when she follows the Rules of Reason; which
satisfaction is the Source of all the Disorders that have attended the Original
Sin, and would have made us all Slaves to our Passions, had not the Son of God
rid us from their Tyranny, by the Delectation of his Grace. For what I have
said on behalf of the Joy of the Mind in opposition to the Joy of the Senses,
is only true amongst the Christians, and was altogether false in the Mouths of
Seneca, Epicurus, and all the most rational of the Heathen Philosophers;
because the Yoke of Christ is only sweet to those that belong to him, and his
Burden only light* when his Grace helps us to support the Weight of it.

CHAP. IV.
That the Pleasure and Motion of the Passions engage us in Errors, and false
Judgments about Good; That we ought continually to resist them. How to impugn
Libertinism.

ALL those general Qualities and Effects of the Passions, that we have hitherto
treated of, are not free, they are in us without our Leave, and nothing but the
Consent of our Will is wholly in our Power. The View or Apprehension of Good is
naturally followed with a Motion of Love, a Sensation of Love, a Concussion of
the Brain, a Motion of the Spirits, a new Commotion of the Soul that increases
the first Motion of Love, a new Sensation of the Soul, that likewise augments
the first Sensation of Love; and lastly, a Sensation of Satisfaction which
recompenses the Soul for the Bodies being in a convenient State. All this
happens to the Soul and Body naturally and mechanally; that is, without her
having any part in it, nothing but her Consent being her own real Work. This
Consent we must regulate, preserve, and keep free, in spite of all the Struggle
and Attempts of the Passions. We ought to submit our Liberty to none but God,
and to yield to nothing but to the Voice of the Author of Nature, to inward
Evidence, and Conviction, and to the secret Reproaches of our Reason. We ought
never to consent, but when we plainly see, we should make an ill Use of our
Liberty, in withholding our Consent. This is the principal Rule to be observed
for the avoiding of Error.

God only makes us evidently perceive, That we ought to yield to what he
requires of us; to him alone therefore we ought to devote our Services. There
is no Evidence in the Allurements and Caresses, in the Threats and Frightnings
caused in us of the Passions; they are only confused and obscure Sensations, to
which we must never yield up our selves. We must wait till all those false
Glimpses of the Passions vanish, till a purer Light illuminates us, till God
speaks inwardly to us. We must enter within our selves, and there seek him that
never leaves us, that always enlightens us. He speaks low, but his Voice is
distinct; his Light is weak, but pure. But no, his Voice is as strong as it is
distinct, and his Light is as bright and active as it is pure. But our Passions
continually keep us from home, and by their Noise and Darkness, hinder us from
being instructed by his Voice, and illuminated by his Light. He speaks even to
those that ask him no Questions; and those, whom Passions have carried farthest
from him, fail not yet many times to hear some of his Words, Heb. iv.12, 13.
but loud, threatening, astonishing Words, sharper than a two-edged Sword,
piercing into the inmost Recesses of the Soul, and discerning the Thoughts and
Designs of the Heart. For all things are open to his Eyes, and he cannot see
the unruly Actions of Sinners, without lashing them inwardly with smarting
Reproofs. We must then re-enter into our selves, and approach near him; we must
interrogate him, listen to him, and obey him; for by always listening to him, we
shall never be deceived; and always obeying him, we shall never be subjected to
the Inconstancy of the Passions, and the Miseries due to Sin.

We must not, like some pretenders to Wit, whom the Violence of Passion has
reduced to the Condition of Beasts; who, having a long time despised the Law of
God, seem at last to have retained no Knowledge of any other than that of their
infamous Passions: We must not, I say, imagine, as do those Men of Flesh and
Blood, that it is following God, and obeying the Voice of the Author of Nature,
to give up our selves to the Motions of Passions, and to comply with the secret
Desires of our Heart: This is the utmost possible Blindness; it is, according to
St. Paul, the temporal Punishment of Impiety and Idolatry, that is to say, the
Desert of the most enormous Crimes. And herein indeed the greatness of this
terrible Punishment consists, that instead of allaying the Anger of God, as do
all the others in this World, it continually exasperates and increases it, till
that dreadful Day comes, wherein his just Wrath shall break out to the
Confusion of Sinners.

Their Arguings however seem likely enough, as being agreeable to common Sense,
countenanced by the Passions, and such, I am sure, as all the Philosophy of
Zeno could never overthrow. We must love Good, say they; Pleasure is the Sign
which Nature has affixed to it to make it known, and that Sign can never be
fallacious, since God has instituted it to distinguish Good from Evil. We must
avoid Evil, say they again; Pain is the Character which Nature has annexed to
it, and a Token in which we cannot be mistaken; since it was instituted by God
for the distinguishing it from Good. We feel Pleasure in complying with our
Passions, Trouble and Pain in opposing them; and therefore the Author of Nature
will have us to give up our selves to our Passions, and never to resist them,
since the Pleasure and Pain wherewith he affects us in those Cases, are the
infallible Criterion of his Will. And consequently, it is to follow God, to
comply with the Desire of our Hearts; and it is to obey his Voice, to yield to
the Instinct of Nature, which moves us to the satisfying our Senses and our
Passions. This is their way of Reasoning, whereby they confirm themselves in
their infamous Opinions: And thus they think to shun the secret Reproofs of
their Reason; and in Punishment of their Crime God suffers them to be dazzled
by those false Glimpses; delusive Glarings, which blind them instead of
inlightning them, and strike them with such an insensible Blindness, as they do
not so much as wish to be cured of it. God delivers them to a reprobate Sense,
he gives them up to the Desires of their corrupt Heart; to shameful Passions,
to Actions unworthy of Men, as the Holy Scripture speaks, that having fatned
themselves by their Debauches, they may to all Eternity be the fit Sacrifice of
his Vengeance.

But let us solve this Difficulty which they offer. The Sect of Zeno, not
knowing how to untie the Knot, has cut it, by denying that Pleasure is a Good,
and Pain an Evil: But that is too venturous a Stroke, and a Subterfuge
unbecoming Philosophers, and very unlikely, I am sure, to convert those who are
convinced by Experience, That a great Pain is a great Evil. Since therefore
Zeno, and all his Heathen Philosophy, cannot solve the Difficulty of the
Epicures, we must have recourse to a more solid and enlightened Philosophy.

It Is true, that Pleasure is Good, and Pain Evil; and that Pleasure and Pain
have been joined by the Author of Nature to the Use of certain Things, by which
we judge whether they are Good or Evil, which make us pursue the Good and fly
from the Evil, and almost ever follow the Motions of the Passions. All this is
true, but relates only to the Body, which to preserve, and keep long a Life
much like to that of Beasts, we must suffer our selves to be ruled by our
Passions and Desires. The Senses and Passions are only given us for the good of
the Body; sensible Pleasure is the indelible Character which Nature has affixed
to the Use of certain Things, that without putting our Reason to the trouble of
examining them, we might presently employ them for the preservation of the
Body; but not with intent that we should love them: For we ought only to love
those Things which Reason undoubtedly manifests to be our Good.

We are Reasonable Beings; and God, who is our Sovereign Good, requires not of
us a blind, an instinctive, a compelled Love, as I may say, but a Love of
Choice, an enlightened Love, a Love that submits to him our whole Intellectual
and Moral Powers. He inclines us to the Love of him, in showing us by the Light
that attends the Delectation of his Grace, that he is our Chief Good; but he
moves us toward the Good of the Body only by Instinct and a confused Sensation
of Pleasure, because the Good of the Body is undeserving of either the
Attention of our Mind, or the Exercise of our Reason.

Moreover, our Body is not our selves; it is something that belongs to us, and,
absolutely speaking, we cannot subsist without it: The Good of the Body
therefore is not properly our Good; for Bodies can be but the Good of Bodies.
We may make use of them for the Body, but we must not be taken up with them.
Our Soul has also her own Good, viz. the only Good that is superior to her,
the only one that preserves her, that alone produces in her Sensations of
Pleasure and Pain: For indeed none of the Objects of the Senses can of
themselves give us any Sensation of them; it is only God who assures us of
their Presence, by the Sensation he gives us of them; which is a Truth that was
never understood by the Heathen Philosophers.

We may and must love that which is able to make us sensible of Pleasure, I
grant it: But by that very Reason we ought only to love God, because he only
can act upon our Soul; and the utmost that sensible Objects can do, is to move
the Organs of our Senses. But what matters it, you will say, from whence those
grateful Sensations come? I will taste 'em. O thou ungrateful Wretch! know the
Hand that showers down Good upon thee. You require of a just God unjust
Rewards: You desire he should recompense you for the Crimes you commit against
him, and even at the very time of committing them; you make use of his
immutable Will, which is the Order and Law of Nature, to wrest from him
undeserved Favors; for with a guilty Managery you produce in your Body such
Motions as oblige him to make you relish all sorts of Pleasures. But Death
shall dissolve that Body; and God, whom you have made subservient to your
unjust Desires, will make you subservient to his just Anger, and mock at you in
his turn.

It Is very hard, I confess, that the Enjoyment of Corporeal Good should be
attended with Pleasure, and that the Possession of the Good of the Soul should
often be conjoined with Pain and Anguish. We may indeed believe it to be a
great Disorder, by this Reason, that Pleasure being the Character of Good, and
Pain of Evil, we ought to possess a Satisfaction infinitely greater in loving
God, than in making use of sensible Things; since He is the true, or rather the
only Good of the Mind. So doubtless will it be one Day, and so was it most
probably before Sin entered into the World: At least, it is very certain, that
before the Fall Man suffered no Pain in discharging his Duty.

But God is withdrawn from us since the Fall of Adam; he is no more our Good by
Nature, but only by Grace; we feel now no Delight and Satisfaction in the Love
of him, and he rather thrusts us from, than draws us to him. If we follow him,
he gives us a Rebuff; if we run after him, he strikes us; and if we be
obstinate in our Persuit, he continues to handle us more severely, by
inflicting very lively and sensible Pains upon us. And when, being weary of
walking through the rough and stony Ways of Virtue, without being supported by
the Repast of Good, or strengthened by any Nourishment, we come to feed upon
sensible Things, he fastens us to them by the relish of Pleasure, as though he
would reward us for turning back from him, to run after counterfeit Goods. In
short, since Men have sinned, it seems, God is not pleased that they should
love him, think upon him, or esteem him their only and sovereign Good. It is
only by the delectable Grace of Christ our Mediator, that we sensibly perceive
that God is our proper Good. For Pleasure being the sensible Mark of Good, we
then perceive God to be our Good, when the Grace of our Redeemer makes us love
him with Pleasure.

Thus the Soul not knowing her own Good, either by a clear View, or by
Sensation, without the Grace of Jesus Christ, she takes the Good of the Body
for her own; she loves it, and closes to it with a stricter Adhesion by her
Will, than ever she did by the first Institution of Nature. For Corporeal Good
being now the only one left that is sensible, must needs operate upon Man with
more Violence, strike his B^ain livelier, and consequently be felt and imagined
by the Soul in a more sensible manner: And the Animal Spirits receiving a more
vehement Agitation, the Will by consequence must love it with a greater Ardency
and Pleasure.

The Soul might before Sin blot out of her Brain the too lively Image of
Corporeal Good, and dissipate the sensible Pleasure this Image was attended
with. The Body being subject to the Mind, the Soul might on a sudden stop the
quavering Concussion of the Fibers of the Brain, and the Commotion of the
Spirits, by the mere Consideration of her Duty: But she lost that Power by Sin.
Those Traces of the Imagination, and those Motions of the Spirits, depend no
more upon her; whence it necessarily follows, that the Pleasure, which by the
Institution of Nature is conjoined to those Motions and Traces, must usurp the
whole Possession of the Heart. See Dial. 5. of Chris^ian Conversations, about
the end.
Man cannot long resist that Pleasure by his own Strength; it is Grace that must
obtain a perfect Victory; Reason alone can never do it: None but God, as the
Author of Grace, can overcome himself as the Author of Nature, or rather
exorate himself as the Revenger of Adam's Rebellion.

The Stoics, who had but a confused Knowledge of the Disorders of Original
Sin, could not answer the Epicures. Their Felicity was but Ideal, since there
is no Happiness without Pleasure, and no Pleasure to be sensibly perceived by
them in Virtuous Actions. They might feel indeed some Joy in following the
Rules of their fantastic Virtue; because Joy is a natural Consequence of the
Consciousness our Soul has of being in the most convenient State. That
Spiritual Joy might bear up their Spirits for a while, but was not strong
enough to withstand Pain, and overcome Pleasure. Secret Pride, and not Joy,
made them keep their Countenance; for when no body was present, all their
Wisdom and Strength vanished, just as Kings of the Stage lose all their
Grandeur in a Moment.

It is not so with those Christians that exactly follow the Rules of the
Gospel. Their Joy is solid, because they certainly know, that they are in the
most convenient State: Their Joy is great, because the Good they possess
through Faith and Hope is Infinite; for the Hope of a great Good is always
attended with a great Joy; and that Joy is so much livelier, as the Hope is
stronger; because a strong Hope representing the Good as present, necessarily
produces Joy, as also that sensible Pleasure which ever attends the Presence of
Good. Their Joy is not restless and uneasy, because grounded on the Promises
of God, confirmed by the Blood of his Son, and cherished by that inward Peace
and unutterable Sweetness of Charity, which the Holy Ghost sheds into their
Hearts. Nothing can separate them from their true Good, which they relish and
take Complacency in by the Delectation of Grace. The Pleasures of Corporeal
Good are not so great as those they feel in the Love of God. They love Contempt
and Pain: They feed upon Disgraces, and the Pleasure they find in their
Sufferings, or rather the Pleasure they find in God, for whom they despise all
the rest, to unite themselves to him, is so ravishing and transporting, as to
make them speak a new Language, and even boast; as the Apostles did of their
Miseries and Abuses, when they departed from the presence of the Council,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of JESUS.
Act. 5.41.
Such is the Disposition of Mind in true Christians, when they are most basely
affronted for the Defense of Truth.

CHRIST being come to restore the Order which Sin had overthrown, and that
Order requiring that the greatest Goods be accompanied with the most solid
Pleasures; it is plain, that things ought to be in the manner we have said. But
we may farther confirm and strengthen Reason by Experience; for it is known,
that as soon as any Person has formed but the bare Resolution to despise all
for God, he is commonly affected with a Pleasure or internal Joy, that makes
him as sensibly and lively perceive that God is his Good, as he knew it
evidently before.

The true Christians assure us every Day, that the Joy they feel in an unmixt
loving and serving God, is inexpressible; and it is but reasonable to believe
the Relation they make of what happens within them. On the contrary, the
Impious are perpetually vexed with horrible Disquietudes; and those that are
shared betwixt God and the World, partake of the Joys of the Just, and of the
Vexations of the Impious: They complain of their Miseries, and it is reasonable
to believe that their Complaints are not groundless. God strikes Men to the
Quick, and through the very Heart, when they love any thing besides him; and
it is this Stroke that causes a real Misery. He pours an exceeding Joy into
their Minds, when all their Adherencies are to him only, and that Joy is the
Spring of true Felicity. The Abundance of Riches and Elevation to Honors being
without us, cannot cure us of the Wound God makes; and Poverty and Contempt,
that are likewise without us, cannot hurt us under the Almighty's Protection.

By what we have said, it is plain, That the Objects of the Passions are not our
Good, that we must not follow their Motions, unless it be for the Preservation
of Life; that sensible Pleasure bears the like Proportion to Good, as
Sensations to Truth; and that as our Senses deceive us in Matters of Truth, so
do likewise our Passions in point of our Good; that we ought to yield to the
Delectation of Grace, because it evidently moves us to the Love of a true Good,
is not followed with the secret Reproaches of Reason, as the blind Instinct and
confused Pleasure of the Passions; but is always attended with a secret Joy,
suitable to the good State we are in. Last of all, since God alone can operate
upon the Mind of Man, he cannot find any Happiness out of God, unless we would
suppose that God rewards Disobedience, or that he commands to love more, what
less deserves to be loved.

CHAP. V.
That the Perfection of the Mind consists in its Union with God, by the
Knowledge of Truth, and the Love of Virtue; and contrariwise, that its
Imper^ection proceeds only from its Dependency on the Body, caused by the
Disorder of the Senses and Passions.

THE shortest Reflection is sufficient to let us know, that the Good of the
Mind must needs be something of a Spiritual Nature, for our Bodies are much
inferior to our Mind; they are unable to act upon it by their own strength;
they cannot immediately unite themselves to it; lastly, ^hey are not
intelligible of themselves, and therefore cannot be its Good: whereas Spiritual
things being intelligible of their own Nature, can be united to the Mind, and
consequently be its Good, provided they be Superior to it. For that a thing
may be the Good of the Mind, it must not only be Spiritual as it self; but it
must also be Superior to it, that it may act upon it, enlighten it, and reward
it; since otherwise it cannot make it perfecter and happier, nor by consequence
be its Good. Now, of all Intelligible or Spiritual things, God alone is thus
Superior to the Mind; whence it follows, That nothing but God alone, either
is, or can be, our true Good; and that we cannot become either more happy or
more perfect, but by enjoying him.

Every one is persuaded that the Knowledge of Truth, and the Love of Virtue,
make the Mind mo^e perfect; and that the Blindness of the Mind, and the
Depravation of the Heart, lessens its natural Perfection. The Knowledge of
Truth, and the Love of Virtue, cannot then be any thing else but the Union of
the Mind to God; or, if I may so speak, a Possession of him: and, on the
contrary, the Blindness of the Mind, and the Depravation of the Heart, can be
nothing else but a separation of the Mind from God, and its Union with
something Inferior to it, viz. with the ^^dy; since that is the only Union
that can make it imperfect and unhappy. And therefore to know the Truth, or to
know things as far as they are agreeable to the Rules of Truth, is really to
know God. And to love Virtue, or to love things as far as they are amiable, or
according to the Rules of Virtue, is to love him.

The Mind is situate, as it were, betwixt God and Bodies, betwixt Good and
Evil, between that w^i^h enlightens, and that which blinds it; that which
rules, and that which misrules it; that which can make it perfect and happy,
and that which can render it imperfect and miserable. When it discovers some
Truth, or sees things as they are in their own Nature; it sees them in the
Ideas of God, that is, discovers them by a clear and distinct view of what is
in God representing them. For, as I have observed elsewhere, the Mind of Man
contains not in it self the Perfections or Ideas o^ all the Beings it is
capable of perceiving: it is not the universal Being, and therefore cannot see
i^ it self such things as are distinguished from it self. It does not instruct
or enlighten it self, by consulting with it self, as being neither Perfection
nor Light to it self; it stands in need to be enlightened by the immense Light
of Eternal Truth. Thus the Mind, by knowing Truth, is united to God, and in
some manner knows and possesses him.

We may not only say, That a Mind perceiving the Truth, partly knows God, who
comprehends it; we may add also, That in some sort it knows things as God
himself knows them. For the Mind knows their true Relations, and so does God;
the Mind sees them in viewing the Perfections of God that represent them; God
perceives them the same way: for God neither perceives by Sense, nor
Imagination; but sees in himself, as being the Intellectual World, the
Corporeal and Sensible World, which he has created. It Is the same with the Mind
in its Knowledge of Truth: it comes not to it by Sensation or Imagination; for
Sensations and Pantasms offer but false Representations of things to the Mind;
so that whosoever discovers the Truth, sees it in the Intellectual World, to
which it is united, and in which Good sees it; for this material and sensible
World, is not intelligible of it self: so that the Mind sees in the Light of
God as does God himself, all the things which it plainly sees, though it sees
them very imperfectly and so very differently from God in that respect. Thus
when the Mind sees Truth, it not only is united to God, possesses and beholds
God, but also sees Truth in one sense as God himself sees it.

So when we love according to the Rules of Virtue, we love God; for by
regulating our Love according to these Rules, the Impression of Love toward
him, which he continually produces in our Heart, is not turned off by free
Will, nor changed into Self-Love. The Mind at that time freely follows the
Impression which God gives: and God never giving any Impression which does not
tend toward him; since he only acts for himself, it is plain, That to love
according to the Rules of Virtue, is to love God.

But it is not only to love God; it is likewise to love as God loves: He loves
himself only, and his Works but because they relate to his Perfections, and
proportionably to the degrees of Conformity they have with them; It being the
same Love by which God loves himself, and whatever he has made or done. To love
according to the Rules of Virtue, is to love God only, to love him in all
things, and to love things proportionably as they partake of his Goodness and
Perfections; since this is to love them according to the degree they are
lovely. In short, it is to love by the Impression of the same Love by which God
loves himself; for it is the Love by which God loves himself, and whatever else
with relation to him, that animates us, when we love as we ought: whence I
conclude, That we then love, as God loves.

It is therefore evident, That the Knowledge of Truth, and the regular Love of
Virtue, constitute all our Perfection, since they are the costomary Attendants
on our Union with God; which also affords us the Enjoyment of him* as far as we
are capable of it, in this Life: whereas the Blindness of the Mind, and the
Depravation of the Heart, make our Imperfection; and are the Results of the
Union of our Soul and Body, as I have proved in several Places; showing that we
never know the Truth, nor love the real Good, when we follow the Impressions of
our Senses, Imaginations, and Passions.

All this is evident; and yet Men, who all passionately desire the Perfection
of their Being, care but little to increase the Union which they have with God;
nay, they are continually at work to strengthen and enlarge that which they
have with sensible things. The Cause of that surprising Disorder cannot be too
much explained.

The Possession of Good must naturally produce two Effects in the Possessour;
at once must render him more perfect, and more happy: however it does not
always fall out so. It Is impossible indeed that the Mind should actually enjoy
a Good, without being actually more perfect; but it may happen that it actually
enjoys it, without being actually happier. Those that know Truth best, and love
most the most lovely Goods, are always actually more perfect, than those that
live in blind Ignorance, and disorderly Practice; but they are not always
actually happier. It is even so with Evil; it ought at once to make both
imperfect and unhappy; but though it always makes Men more imperfect, yet it
does not always make them more unhappy; or at least makes them not unhappy
proportionably to its making them imperfect. Virtue is often bitter and
distastful, whereas Vice is sweet and pleasant; so that it is especially by
Faith and Hope, that pious Men are truly happy; whilst the wicked have the
actual Enjoyments of Pleasures and Delights. It ought not to be so indeed, but
however it is so; Sin has brought forth that Disorder, as I said in the
foregoing Chapter, and that Disorder is the principal Cause, not only of the
Corruption of our Morals, but also of the Ignorance and Darkness of our Mind.

By that Disorder it is that our Imagination persuades it self, that Bodies may
be the Good of the Mind: For Pleasure, as I have often said, is the sensible
Character, or Mark, of Good. But now of all the Pleasures we enjoy upon Earth,
the most sensible are those which we imagine to receive by the Body. We judge,
though too inconsiderately without doubt, that Bodies can be, and are,
effectually our Good. And it is so hard to oppose the Instinct of Nature, and to
withstand the Arguments of the Senses, that the design of it does not so much
as come into our Mind. We think not on the Disorders introduced by Sin. We
consider not that Bodies can act upon the Mind but as occasional Causes: that
the Mind cannot immediately, or by it self, enjoy any Corporeal thing, and that
all the ways it has of uniting to an Object are by its Knowledge and Love; that
God only is superior to it, can reward or punish it, by Sensations of Pleasure
or Pain, that can enlighten and move it, in a word, act upon it. Those Truths,
though most evident to attentive Minds, are not however so powerful to convince
us, as is the deceiving Experience of a sensible Impression.

When we consider something as part of our selves, or look on our selves as a
part of that thing, we judge it our Good to be united to it; we love it, and
this love is so much the greater, as the thing, whereunto we think our selves
united, seems to be a more considerable part of the whole we make up together
with it. Now there are two sorts of Proofs, which persuade us that a thing is
part of our self, viz. the Instinct of Sensation, and the Evidence of Reason.

By the Instinct of Sensation I am persuaded that my Soul is united to my Body,
or that my Body makes part of my Being; but I have no full Evidence of it,
since I know it not by the light of Reason, but by the Pain or Pleasure I feel
at the presence and impression of Objects. My Hand is pricked, I suffer Pain;
thence I conclude, that my Hand makes part of my self: my Clothes are rent, and
I endure nothing; therefore, I say, my Clothes are not my self: my Hair is cut
without Pain, but cannot be plucked up without smart; that puzzles the
Philosopher, and he knows not what to determine. In the mean while this
perplexity shows, that even the wisest rather judge by the instinct of
Sensation than by the light of Reason, that such or such things belong or
belong not to themselves. For should they determine them by Evidence, and the
light of Reason, they would quickly know, that the Mind and the Body are two
sorts of Beings, altogether opposite; that the Mind cannot be united to the
Body by it self, and that the Soul is wounded when the Body is struck, only
because of her Union with God. It Is then only by the Instinct of the Sensation
that we look on our Body, and all the sensible things to which we are united,
as part of our selves, that is, as belonging to that which thinks and feels in
us: For what is not, cannot be known by evident Reason, since Evidence
discovers Truth alone.

But on the contrary, it is by the light of Reason that we know the Relation we
have with Intellectual things. We discover, by a clear View of the Mind, that
we are united to God in a more strict and essential manner than to our Body;
that without him we are nothing, and neither can do, nor know, neither will,
nor be sensible of any thing: that he is our All, or if we may so speak, that
we make up a whole with him, of which we are but an infinitely small part. The
light of Reason discovers us a thousand Motives to love God only, and to
despise Bodies, as unworthy of our Love. But we are not naturally sensible of
our Union to God, nor persuaded that he is our All, by the Instinct of sense;
it is only the Grace of our Lord which produces in some Men that spiritual sense
to help them to overcome the contrary Sensations, by which they are united to
their Body. For God, as the Author of Nature, inclines Minds to the love of him
by a Knowledge of Illumination, and not of Instinct; and in all probability,
it is but since the Fall that God, as the Author of Grace, has superadded
Instinct to Illumination; because our light is at present so mightily impaired,
as to be incapable of bringing us to God, being besides continually weakn'd by
contrary pleasure or instinct, and rendered ineffectual.

We therefore discover by the light of the Mind, that we are united to God, and
to the intellectual World which he contains; and are convinced by Sensation,
that we are united to our Body, and by it to the material and sensible World
God has Created. But as our Sensations are more lively, moving, frequent and
lasting than our Illuminations, so it is not strange that our Sensations should
agitate us, and quicken our love for sensible things; whereas our Light
dissipates and vanishes, without producing any zeal and ardency for Truth.

It Is true that several Men are persuaded that God is their real Good, love him
as their All, and earnestly desire to strengthen and increase their Union with
him. But few evidently know, that by meditating on the Truth we unite our
selves to God, as far as natural strength can attain; that it is a sort of
Enjoyment of him, to contemplate the true Ideas of things; and that that
abstracted view of some general and immutable Truths, on which all the
particulars depend, are flights of a Mind that sequesters it self from the Body
to unite it self to God. Metaphysics, speculative Mathematics, and all those
universal Sciences, which regulate and contain the particular, as the Universal
Being comprehends all particular Beings, seem to be Chimerical to most Men, as
well to the pious as to those that do not love God. So that I dare hardly make
bold to say, that the study of those Sciences is the most pure and perfect
Application to God, that the Mind may be naturally capable of; and that it is
by the sight of the Intellectual World, which is their Object, that God has
produced and still knows this sensible World, from which Bodies receive their
Life, as Spirits live from the other.

Those that purely follow the Impressions of their Senses, and motions of their
Passions, are not capable of relishing the Truth, because it flatters them not.
And even the Virtuous, who constantly oppose their Passions when they proffer
them false Goods, do not always resist them when they conceal from them the
Truth, and make it despicable; because one may be pious without being a Man of
parts. To please God we need not exactly know, that our Senses, Imagination,
and Passions, always represent things otherwise than they are; since it appears
not that our Lord and his Apostles ever intended to undeceive us of several
Errors upon this matter, which Descartes has discovered to us*

There is a great difference betwixt Faith and Understanding, the Gospel and
Philosophy: the greatest Clowns are capable of Faith, but few can attain to the
pure Knowledge of Evident Truth. Faith represents to vulgar Men God as the
Creator of Heaven and Earth, which is a sufficient motive of Love and Duty
toward him; whereas Reason, knowing that God was God before he was Creator,
not only considers him in his Works, but also endeavors to contemplate him in
himself; or in that immense Idea of the infinitely perfect Being, which is
included in him. The Son of God, who is the Wisdom of his Father, or the
Eternal Truth, made himself Man, and became sensible, that he might be known by
Men of Flesh and Blood, by gross material Men; that he might instruct them by
that which was the Cause of their Blindness, and draw them to the love of him,
and disengage them from sensible goods, by the same things that had enslaved
them; for having to do with Fools, he thought fit to take upon him a sort of
Folly whereby to make them wise: So that the most pious Men, and truest
Believers, have not always the greatest Understanding. They may know God by
Faith, and love him by the help of his Grace, without understanding, that he is
their All, in the sense Philosophers understand him; and without thinking, that
the abstracted Knowledge of Truth is a sort of a Union with him. We ought not
therefore to be surprised, if so few Persons labor to strengthen their natural
Union with God by the Knowledge of Truth, since to this there is required a
continual opposition of the Impressions of the Senses and Passions, in a very
different way from that which is usual with the Virtuous, who are not always
persuaded, that the Senses and Passions abuse them in the manner that has been
explained in the foregoing Books.

The Sensations and Thoughts, in which the Body has a share, are the sole and
immediate Cause of the Passions, as proceeding from the Concussion of the
Fibers of the Brain, raising some particular Commotion in the Animal Spirits:
And therefore Sensations are the only sensible proofs of our dependence on some
things, which they excite us to love: but we feel not our Natural Union with
God, when we know the Truth, and do not so much as think upon him, because he
is, and operates in us so privately and insensibly, as to be imperceptible to
our selves: And this is the Reason that our natural Union with God raises not
our Love for him. But it goes quite otherwise with our Union to sensible
things. All our Sensations prove it, and Bodies appear before our Eyes, when
they act in us. Their Action is visible and manifest. Our Body is even more
present to us than our Mind, and we consider the former as the best part of our
Selves. So that our Union to our Body, and by it to sensible Objects, excites
in us a violent Love, which increases that Union, and makes us depend on things
that are infinitely below us.

CHAP. VI.
Of the more general Errors of the Passions, with some particular Instances.

IT IS the part of Moral Philosophy to discover the particular Errors
concerning Good, in which our Passions engage us, to oppose irregular
affections, to restore the Integrity of the Heart, and to rule the Course of
our Life. But here we chiefly aim at giving Rules to the Mind, and finding out
the Causes of our Errors, in reference to Truth; so that we shall not proceed
farther in those Matters that relate to the Love of true Good. We are tending
to the Instruction of the Mind, and only take the Heart in the way, in as much
as the Heart is its Master. We search into Truth it self, without a special
Respect to our selves; and we consider its Relation with us, only because that
Relation is the Spring of Self-love's disguising and concealing it from us: for
we judge of all things by our Passions, whence it is that we mistake in all
things, the Judgments of Passions never agreeing with the Judgments of Truth.

It Is what we learn in these excellent Words of St. Bernard. Amor sicut nec
Odium, veritatis Judicium nescit. Vis Judicium Veritatis audire? Sicut audio,
Joan. 5.30.
sic judico: non sicut odi, non sicut amo, non sicut timeo. Est Judicium Odii,
Joan. 19.7.
ut illud; Nos Legem habemus, and secundum legem nostram debet mori. Est and
Timoris, Joan. 11.48.
ut illud; Si dimittimus eum sic, venient Romani, and tollent nostrum locum and
gentem. Judicium vero Amoris, ut David de filio parricida, 2 Samuel 18.5.
Parcite, inquit, puero Absalom. S. Bern. de grad. humilitatis.
Neither Love nor Hatred know how to make a Judgment according to Truth. Will
you hear a true Judgment? As I hear, I judge, says our Lord; he says not as I
hate, as I love, or as I fear. Here you have a Judgment of Hatred: We have a
Law, say the Jews, and by that Law he ought to die. Here a Judgment of Fear: If
we let him alone, say the Pharisees, the Romans shall come, and take away our
Place and Nation. Here another of Love, as that of David, speaking of his
Parricide Son, Spare the young Man Absalom.

Our Love, Hatred, and Fear cause us to make false Judgments only. Nothing but
the pure Light of Truth can illuminate our Mind; nothing but the distinct Voice
of our common Master can cause us to make true Judgments, provided we only
judge of what he says, and as he says, in Imitation only of our Lord, as I hear
I judge: But let us see how it is that our Passions seduce us, that we may the
easier resist them.

The Passions are so nearly related to the Senses, that, remembering what has
been said in the first Book, it will not be difficult to explain, how they lead
us into Error; because the general Causes of the Errors of the Passions are
altogether like to those of the Errors of the Senses.

The most general Cause of the Errors of the Senses, is, as we there have
shown, our attributing to external Objects, or to the Body, the proper
Sensations of our Soul, annexing Colors to the Superficies of Bodies,
diffusing Light, Sounds and Odours in the Air, and fixing Pain and Titillation
to those Parts of our Body that receive some Changes by the Motion of other
contiguous Bodies.

Almost the same thing may be said of the Passions: we too rashly ascribe to
the Objects, that cause, or seem to cause, them, all the Dispositions of our
Heart, our Goodness, Meekness, Malice, Sowreness, and all the other Qualities
of our Mind. The Object that begets some Passion in us, seems afrer a sort to
contain in it self the Passion produced in us, when we consider it, as sensible
things seem to contain in themselves the Sensations, which their Presence
excites in us. When we love any Person, we are naturally inclined to believe
that he loves us, and can hardly imagine that he designs to hurt us, or to
oppose our Desires. But if Hatred succeed in the place of Love, we cannot
Persuade our selves that he has any Affection for us; we interpret all he does
in the worst Sense, we are always distrustful and upon our Guard, though he
thinks not upon us, or perhaps intended to do us Service. In short, we
unjustly attribute to the Person that stirs up a passion in us, all the
Dispositions of our Heart, and with as much Imprudence, as we ascribe to the
Objects of the Senses, all the Qualities of our Mind.

Moreover by the same Reason that we believe, other Men receive the same
Sensations from the same Objects as we do; we think they are agitated with the
same Passions, for the same Subjects if they are in a State of being
susceptible of them. We suppose them to love and desire the same things as we
our selves do, whence proceed secret Jealousies and Hatreds, if the desired
Good cannot be enjoyed entire by several; for the contrary happens in Goods
that can be possessed without Division by several Persons, as Science, Virtue,
the Sovereign Good, and the like. We also suppose that they hate, fear or fly
from the same things that we do; whence proceed secret Plots or public
Associations, according to the nature and state of the thing hated, by which
means we hope to rid our selves of our Miseries.

We therefore ascribe to the Objects of our Passions the Commotions they
produce in us, thinking that all other Men, and even sometimes Beasts, are
agitated as we are; and besides judge yet more rashly, the Cause of our
Passions, which is often but imaginary, is really in some Object.

When we have a passionate Love for any Body, his Grimace and Faces are
charming, his Ugliness is not distastful, his ill-composed Motions and Gestures
are regular, or at least natural. If he never speak, he is wise; if he be a
great Talker, he is witty; if he speak upon all adventures, he is Universal; if
he continually interrupt others, it is because he is full of Fire, of Life, and
Spirit; if he pretend to top and sway every where, it is because he deserves it.
Thus can Passion cover or dissemble the Imperfections of Friends, and
advantagiously set off their most inconsiderable Qualities.

But when that Friendship, which only proceeds as other Passions do, from the
Agitation of the Blood and Animal Spirits, comes to cool, through want of Heat
and Spirits fit to nourish it; when Interest or some false Relation alters the
Disposition of the Brain; then Hatred succeeding Love, is sure to represent to
us in that Object of our Passion all the Defects that are capable of stirring
up our just Aversion. We perceive in him Qualities quite contrary to those we
admired before: We are ashamed of having loved him; and the ruling Passion
never fails to justify it self, and to ridicule that which it has followed.

The Power and Injustice of Passions are not included within such narrow Limits
as those we have described, but extend infinitely farther; not only disguising
their principal Object, but also whatever has any reference to it. They make us
love not only the Qualities of our Friends, but also most part of those of the
Friends to our Friends. And in those who are endued with any strength and
extent of Imagination, the Passions have so vast a reach and outlet, that it
is not possible to determine their Limits.

Those Things I have mentioned, are such general and fruitful Principles of
Error, Prejudice, and Injustice, that it is impossible to observe all the
Consequences of them: Most of the Truths, or rather Errors, entertained in
some Places, Times, Commonalties, and Families, proceed from thence. What is
followed in Spain, is rejected in France; what is true at Paris, is false at
Rome; what is certain amongst the Dominicans, is uncertain amongst the
Franciscans; and what appears undoubted to the Black Friars, seems an Error to
the White. The Dominicans believe themselves obliged to stick to St. Thomas.
Why? Because that Doctor was one of their Order: Whereas the Franciscans follow
the Opinion of Scotus, because he was a Black Friar.

There are likewise Truths and Errors proper to certain Times. The Earth
turned two thousand Years ago; then it remained unmovable till our Days,
wherein it has began to turn again. Aristotle was formerly burnt, and a
Provincial Council, approved by the Pope, most wisely forbad his Physics to be
taught: He was admired ever since, and falls now again into Contempt. Opinions
that are now publicly received in the Schools, were formerly rejected as
Heresies, and their Assertors excommunicated by the Bishops; because Passions
stirring up Factions, Factions establish those sorts of Truths or Errors, that
are as inconsistent as the Principle they proceed from. Men may indeed be
indifferent as to the Unmovableness of the Earth, Council. A^gl. per Spelman.
A^. 1287.
or the Essence of Bodies, considered in themselves; but they are no longer so,
when they look on those Opinions as defended by their Adversaries. Thus Hatred,
kept up by a confused sense of Piety, breeds an indiscreet Zeal, that kindles
by degrees, and at last produces such Events, as are not so surprising to all
the World, till a great while after their arrival.

We can hardly imagine that Passions should reach so far, because we know not
that their Impetuosity extends to whatever may satisfy them. Perhaps H^man
would have done no harm to the Jewish People; but because Mordecai, a Jew,
forbore to salute him, he on a sudden designed the destroying of the whole
Nation, that his Revenge might be the more splendid.

Two Men sue each other about a Piece of Land; they ought only to produce in
Court their Titles to it, and to say nothing but what relates to the Case, or
to set it off fair. However, they seldom fail to slander one another, to
contradict each other in every thing, to raise trifling Contestations and
Accusations, and to intricate the Suit with an infinity of Accessory
Circumstances, which confound the Principal. In short, the Passions reach as
far as the sight of the Mind does, in those that are affected by them. I would
say, there is nothing to which we may suppose their Object to be related, but
their Motion will extend to it; which is done after the following manner.

The Tracks of the Objects are so connected to each other in the Brain, that it
is impossible the Course of the Spirits should violently move any one of them,
without raising several others at the same time. The principal Idea of the
Thing perceived, is therefore necessarily accompanied with a vast number of
accessory Ideas, which increase more and more, as the Impression of the Animal
Spirits is more violent. Now that Impression cannot but be very violent in the
Passions, because they continually hurry into the Brain abundance of such
Spirits as are fit to preserve the Traces of the Ideas which represent their
Object. So that the Motion of Love or Hatred extends not only to the Chief
Object of either Passion, but also to all the Things that are found any ways
relating to it; because the Motion of the Soul in the Passion follows the
Perception of the Mind, as the Motion of the Animal Spirits in the Brain
follows the Traces of the Brain, as well those that excite the principal Idea
of the Passion's Object, as those that are related to it.

And therefore we must not be surprised if Men carry their Hatred or Love to
such a height, and commit such strange and capricious Actions. Every one of
those Effects has its proper Cause, though unknown to us; because their
accessory Ideas being not always like to ours, we cannot rightly judge of them:
So that Men act always by some particular Reason, even in those Actions that
appear most extravagant to us.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Passions in particular: And first, Of Admiration, and its ill Effects.

WHatever I have said hitherto of the Passions is general, yet it is no hard
matter to draw particular Inferences from it: If one do but reflect upon what
occurs in his own Breast, and upon the Actions of others, he will discover at
one View, a greater number of those Truths, than can be explained in a
considerable time. However, there are so few who think of retiring into
themselves, and make any Attempt to that purpose, that, to quicken them, and
raise their Attention, it will not be amiss somewhat to descend into
Particulars.

It seems, when we handle or strike our selves, that we are almost insensible;
whereas if we be but never so little touched by others, we receive such lively
Sensations as awaken our Attention. In a word, as it never comes into our Mind
to tickle our selves; and if it did, perhaps the Attempt would be unsuccessful:
So, almost for the same Reason, the Soul cares not to feel and sound her self,
is presently disgusted at that sort of Exercise, and commonly is incapable of
feeling or knowing all the Parts that belong to her, till touched and made
sensible to her by others: So that it will be necessary, for the facilitating
some People in acquiring the Knowledge of themselves, to mention some of the
particular Effects of the Passions, to ^each them, by touching them, of what
Make and Constitution their Soul is of.

In the mean while, those that shall read the following Thoughts, must be
forewarned, that they will not always be touched to the Quick, nor be aware
that they are subject to the Passions and Errors of which I shall speak;
because particular Passions are not always the same in all Men.

All Men indeed have the same natural Inclinations, which referr not to the
Body; and likewise all those that relate to it, when it is in a very good
Constitution: But its various Tempers and frequent Alterations, produce an
infinite Variety in particular Passions: To which diversity of Constitutions,
if that variety of Objects be added, which cause very different Impressions
upon those who follow not the same Employments and manner of Life, it will
plainly appear, that such a Person, who is lively touched by some Things in one
Place of his Soul, may be absolutely insensible as to many others; so that we
should commonly mistake, should we always judge of the Commotions of others by
what we feel in our selves.

I am not afraid of being deceived, when I assert, That all Men would be happy;
for I fully and certainly know, that Chinese and Tartars, Angels and Devils, in
a word, all Spirits whatsoever, have an Inclination for Felicity: Nay, I know
that God shall never produce any Spirit without that Desire. I never saw either
Chinese or Tartar; so that I never learned it from Experience, nor yet from my
inward Consciousness, which only teaches me that I would my self be happy. God
alone can inwardly convince me, that all other Men, Angels, and Devils, desire
Happiness; and he only can assure me, that he will never create a Spirit that
shall not care for Felicity: For who else can positively assure me of what he
does, and even thinks? And as he cannot deceive me, so I may safely rely on
what I learn from him: And therefore I am certain that all Men would be happy,
because that Inclination is natural, and independent on the Body.

It goes quite otherwise with particular Passions: For, because I love Music,
Dancing, Hunting, Sweetmeats, high-season'd Dishes, etc. I cannot certainly
conclude that other Men have the same Passions. Pleasure is doubtless sweet and
grateful to Men; but all find it not in the same Things. The Love of Pleasure
is a Natural Inclination, not depending upon the Body, and therefore general to
all Men: But the Love of Music, Hunting, or Dancing, is not general, because
the Disposition of the Body from which it proceeds being different in several
Persons, the Passions they produce are not always the same.

General Passions, as Desire, Joy, and Sorrow, are the Mean betwixt natural
Inclinations and particular Passions. They are general, as well as
Inclinations; but they are not always of the same strength; because the Cause
which produces and feeds them is not always equally active. There is an
infinite Variety in the Degrees of Agitation of the Animal Spirits, in their
Plenty and Scarcity, in their Solidity and Fineness, and in the Relation
betwixt the Fibers of the Brain and those Spirits.

And therefore it often happens, that we touch not Men in any part of their
Soul, when we treat of particular Passions; but if they chance to be touched,
they are violently moved. On the contrary, the mentioning of general Passions
and Inclinations never fail to affect us, but so weakly and faintly, that we
are scarce sensible of it. I mention this, lest any should judge of what I say
by his own Commotions, that he either has, or shall receive from my Discourse;
but rather that he should judge of it by considering the Nature of the Passions
I speak of.

Should we purpose to handle all the particular Passions, and distinguish them
by the Objects that raise them, it is plain, the Task would be endless, and we
should only repeat the same thing: The former, because the Objects of the
Passions are infinite; the latter, because we should be constantly engaged in
the same Subject. The particular Passions for Poetry, History, Mathematics,
Hunting, Dancing, are but one general Passion: For, for example, the Passions
of Desire or Joy for whatever pleases, are not different Passions, though
delightful Objects in particular differ much.

And therefore the Number of Passions must not be multiplied by the Number of
Objects, which are infinite; but only by the principal Relations they may have
to us: And so it will appear, as we shall explain it hereafter, that Love and
Hatred are the Mother-Passions, which produce no other general Passions,
besides Desire, Joy, and Sorrow: that the particular Passions are made up only
of those Three primitive, and more or less compounded, according to the number
of accessory Ideas, that attend the principal Idea of the Good or Evil, which
has raised them, or as the Good and Evil are more or less circumstantiated with
reference to us.

If we remember what has been said of the Connection of Ideas, and that in all
great Passions the Animal Spirits being extremely agitated, stir up in the
Brain all the Traces any ways related to the moving Object; we shall own, that
there is an infinite Variety of different Passions, which have no particular
Names, and cannot be explained but by saying they are inexplicable.

If the primitive Passions, of the Complication of which others are made up,
were not susceptible of more or less, it would not be difficult to determine
the Number of all the Passions; but that number of complicated Passions must
needs be infinite, because one and the same Passion having infinite Degrees,
may by its Conjunction with others be infinitely complicated; so that there
were perhaps never two Men affected with the same Passion, if by that Name be
understood an even Mixture and Likeness of all the Motions and Sensations that
are occasionally raised in us upon the presence of some Object.

But as more or less do not alter the Species, so it may be said, that the
Number of Passions is not infinite; because the Circumstances that attend Good
or Evil, which excite the Passions, are not innumerable. But let us explain our
Passions in particular.

When we see any thing the first time, or when having seen it several times
accompanied with some Circumstances, we see it again attended with others, we
are surprised, and admire it. Thus a new Idea, or a new Connection of old
Ideas, raises in us an Imperfect Passion, which is the first of all, and named
Admiration. I call it imperfect, because it is not excited either by the Idea or
Sense of Good: The Brain being then struck in some unusual Places, or in a new
manner, the Soul is sensibly moved, and therefore must needs strongly apply her
self to what is new in that Object; for the same Reason that a bare Tickling
the Soale of the Feet raises a very lively and moving Sensation in the Soul,
rather by the Novelty than by the Strength of the Impression.

There are other Reasons of the Application of the Soul to new Things; but I
have explained them, where I speak of the Natural Inclinations. Here we
consider the Soul only as related to the Body, in which respect the Commotion
of the Spirits is the natural Cause of her Application to new Things.

In Admiration, strictly taken, we consider things only as they are in
themselves, or as they appear, and look not on them as related to us, or as
good or bad. Hence it comes, that the Spirits disperse not through the Muscles
to give the Body the Disposition that is required for persuing Good, or
shunning Evil; and shake not the Nerves that go to the Heart and other Viscera,
to hasten or retard the Fermentation or Motion of the Blood, as it happens in
other Passions. All the Spirits go the Brain, to print a lively and distinct
Image of the surprising Object, that the Soul may consider and know it again;
whilst the rest of the Body remains in the same posture, and as unmovable: For
as there is no Commotion in the Soul, so there is no Motion in the Body.

When the admired Things appear great, Admiration is always followed with
Esteem, and sometimes with Veneration; whereas it is always accompanied with
Contempt, and sometimes with Disdain, when they appear little.

The Idea of Grandeur causes a great Motion of the Spirits in the Brain, and
the Tracks that represent it are kept very long: And likewise a great Motion of
the Spirits raises in the Soul an Idea of Greatness, and powerfully fixes the
Mind on the Consideration of that Idea.

On the contrary, the Idea of Littleness produces but an inconsiderable Motion
of Spirits in the Brain, and the Traces representing it are soon blotted out:
And likewise a small Motion of Spirits raises in the Soul an Idea of Meanness,
and stays the Mind but little on the Consideration of that Idea. Those things
deserve to be taken notice of.

When we consider our selves, or something united to us, our Admiration is
always accompanied with some moving Passion, which however only agitates the
Soul and the Spirits, that go to the Heart; because there being no Good to
seek, nor Evil to avoid, the Spirits disperse not themselves through the
Muscles, to dispose the Body to some Action.

The Contemplation of the Perfection of our Being, or of something belonging to
it, naturally produces Pride, or Self-esteem, Contempt of others, Joy, and some
other Passions. The Contemplation of our own Grandeur, causes Haughtiness; that
of our Strength, Valor, or Boldness; and that of any other Advantage naturally
raises some other Passion, which is still a kind of Pride.

On the contrary, the Con^ideration of some Imperfection of our Being, or of
something belonging to it, naturally produces Humility, Contempt of our selves,
Reverence for others, Sorrow, and some other Passions. The ^ight of our
Littleness causes Pusilanimity; that of our Weakness, Timidity* and that of any
Disadvantage whatsoever, naturally raises some other Passion, which is still a
kind of Humility. But neither that Humility, nor that Pride, are properly
Virtues or Vices; being only Passions or involuntary Commotions, which yet are
very useful to Civil Society, and even in some Cases absolutely necessary for
the preservation of the Life or Goods of those that are actuated by them.

It Is necessary, for instance, to be humble and timorous, and even outwardly to
testify that Disposition of the Mind, by a modest Look, and respectful or
timorous Deportment, when we are in the Presence of a Person of Quality, or one
that is proud and powerful: It being almost ever profitable for the Good of the
Body, that the Imagination should stoop before sensible Grandeur, and give it
outward Marks of its inward Submission and Veneration. But this is done
naturally and machinally, without the Consent of the Will, and sometimes
notwithstanding its Opposition. Even such Beasts, as Dogs, which stand in need
of prevailing upon those with whom they live, have ordinarily their Bodies so
disposed, that it machinally takes the Posture that is most suitable, in
reference to those that are about them: For that is absolutely necessary to
their Preservation. And if Birds, and some other Creatures, want such a
Disposition, it is because they need not assuage the Fury of those whom they can
escape by Flight, or whose Help is not necessary for the Preservation of their
Life.

It can never be too much observed, that all the Passions which are raised in
us, at the sight of something external, machinally spread on the Face those
Looks that are fit and suited to our present State; that is, those that are apt
by their Impression machinally to dispose the Spectators to such Passions and
Motions as are useful for the Good of Civil Society. Admiration it self, when
produced in us by the Perception of something external, which others can
consider as well as we, puts the Face in such a Shape as is fit to strike
others with a machinal Impression of Admiration; and which acts so regularly on
the Brain, that the Spirits contained in it are driven to the Muscles of the
Face, to fashion it into a Look altogether like our own.

This Communication of the Passions of the Soul and the Animal Spirits, to
unite Men together, in reference to Good and Evil, and to make them altogether
like, not only by the Disposition of their Mind, but also by the Posture of
their Body, is so much the greater and more observable, as the Passions are
more violent; by reason that the Animal Spirits are then agitated with more
strength. And this must needs be so, because the Good and Evil being then
greater, or more present, requires a greater Application, and a stricter
Association of Men to seek or avoid them. But when the Passions are moderate,
as Admiration usually is, their Communication is insensible; and they do not
alter the Countenance, by which the Communication uses to be wrought: For there
being no urgent Occasion, it would be needless to put a Force on the
Imagination of others, or to take them off from their Business, to which their
Application is perhaps more requisite, than to the looking on the Causes of
those Passions.

There is nothing more wonderful, than that Economy of the Passions and
Dispositions of the Body, in reference to the surrounding Objects. All our
machinal Actions are most becoming the Wisdom of our Maker. God has made us
susceptible of all those Passions chiefly to unite us with all sensible Things,
for the Preservation of Society, and of our corporeal Being; and his Design is
so exactly performed by the Construction of his Work, that we cannot but admire
his Wisdom in the Contrivance of the Springs and Texture of it.

However, our Passions, and all those imperceptible Bands which tie us to the
surrounding Objects, often prove, by our own Fault, fruitful Causes of Errors
and Disorders. For we make not of our Passions the Use we ought to do; we allow
them every thing, and know not so much as the Bounds we ought to prescribe to
their Power; so that the weakest and least moving Passions, as Admiration for
instance, have strength enough to draw us into Error. Some Examples whereof
are these.

When Men, and especially those that are endu'd with a lively Imagination,
contemplate the best side of themselves, they find for the most part a great
deal of Self-complacency and Satisfaction; and their internal Satisfaction is
increased by the Comparison they make betwixt themselves and others that are
not so airy and spirituous: Besides that they have many Admirers, and that few
of their Opposers gain Success and Applause; for Reason is seldom or never
applauded, in opposition to a strong and lively Imagination. In short, the Face
of their Hearers takes on such submissive and dutiful Looks, and expresses, at
every new Word they say, such lively Strokes of Admiration, that they admire
themselves too; and that their Imagination, pufft up with their pretended
Advantages, fills them with an extraordinary Satisfaction of themselves. And
since we cannot see Men in the height of a Passion, without receiving some
impression from it, and adopting, as I may say, their Sentiments; how should it
be possible that those who are surrounded with a Throng of Admirers, should
give no access to a Passion that is so flattering and so grateful to Self-love?

Now that high Esteem which Persons of a strong and lively Imagination have of
themselves and their good Qualities, puffs them up with Pride, and gives them a
Magisterial and Decisive Comportment; they listen to others, but with Contempt;
they answer, but with Jeering; they think, but with reference to themselves;
and as they look on the Attention of the Mind, that is so requisite for the
discovery of Truth, as a Slavery; so they are altogether indocible. Pride,
Ignorance, and Blindness, go hand in hand. The bold, or rather vainglorious
Wits, will not be the Disciples of Truth, and never retire into themselves,
unless it be to contemplate and admire their supposed Perfections; so that he
who resists the Proud, shines in the middle of their Darkness, without
dissipating it.

There is, on the contrary, a certain Disposition of the Blood and Animal
Spirits, that occasions too mean Thoughts of our selves. The Scarcity, the
Dullness, and Fineness of the Animal Spirits, joined to the Coursness of the
Fibers of the Brain, cause the Imagination to be weak and languishing: And the
Contemplation, or rather the confused Sense of that Faintness of Imagination,
is what breeds in us a vicious Humility, which we may call Meanness of Spirit.

All Men are susceptible of the Truth, but all apply not themselves to him who
alone is able to teach it. The Proud make their Address and listen but to
themselves; and the Dis-spirited make their Application to the Proud, and
submit themselves to their Determinations. Both the one and the other give ear
to bare Men. Proud Minds follow the Fermentation of their own Blood, that is,
their own Imagination; and the Low-spirited are over-sway'd by the overruling
Countenance of the Proud, and so are both subjected to Vanity and Lies. The
Proud is like a rich and powerful Man, who has a great Retinue, who measures
his own Greatness by the number of his Attendants, and his Strength by that of
the Horses of his Coach: whereas the Low-spirited is like a poor, weak, and
languishing Wretch, who though he have the same Spirit and Principles, yet
because he is Master of Nothing, imagines he is almost Nothing himself.
However, our Retinue is not our self, and so far is the plenty of the Blood and
Animal Spirits, the vigor and impetuousness of the Imagination, from leading
us to the Truth, that on the contrary nothing carries us so far from it;
whereas it is the Dull, if I may so call them, that is, the cool and sedate
Minds, that are the fittest for the Discovery of solid and hidden Truths. Their
Passions being silent and quiet, they may listen in the Recess of their Reason
to the Truth that teaches them; but most unhappily they mind not its Words,
because it speaks low, without a forcible sound, and that nothing wakens them
but a mighty Noise. Nothing convinces them but what glitters to appearance, and
is judged great and magnificent by the Senses; they love to be dazzled with
Brightness, and rather choose to hear those Philosophers, who tell them their
Stories and Dreams, and assert, as the false Prophets of former times, that the
Truth has spoken to them (though it has not) than to listen to Truth it self.
For they have already suffered four thousand Years, and that without
opposition, humane Pride to entertain them with Lies, which they reverence and
keep to, as to Holy and Divine Traditions. It seems the God of Truth is wholly
gone from them; they think on him and consult him no more, they meditate no
more, and cover their neglect and laziness, with the delusive pretenses of a
sacred Humility.

It Is true, that we cannot of our selves discover the Truth; but we can do it
at all times with the assistance of him that enlightens us, and can never do
it with that of all the Men in the World. Those that know it best cannot show
it to us, unless we ask it of him, to whom they have made their Application;
and unless he be pleased to answer our Questions, that is, our Attention, as he
has done theirs. We are not therefore to believe, because Men say this or that,
for every Man is a Liar; but because he that cannot deceive speaks to us, and
we must perpetually interrogate him for the solution of our Difficuties. We
ought not to trust to them that speak only to the Ears; instruct but the Body,
or at the utmost move but the Imagination. But we ought attentively to listen
unto, and faithfully believe him who speaks to the Mind, informs the Reason,
and piercing into the most abstruse Recesses of the inward Man, is able to
enlighten and strengthen him, against the outward and sensible Man, that
continually labors to seduce and corrupt him. I often repeat these things,
because I believe them most worthy of a serious Consideration. God alone is to
be honored, because he only can endue us with Knowledge, as it is he alone that
can fill us with Pleasure.

There is sometimes in the animal Spirits, and the rest of the Body, a
Disposition that provokes to Hunting, Dancing, Running, and other Corporeal
Exercises, wherein the Force and Activity of the Body are most conspicuous:
Which Disposition is very ordinary to young Men, especially before their Body
be in a State of Consistency. Children cannot stay in one place, and will
always be moving, if they follow their humor. For whereas all their Muscles
are not yet strengthened, nor perfectly finished; therefore God, who as the
Author of Nature, regulates the Pleasures of the Soul, with reference to the
Good of the Body, causes them to be delighted with such Exercises as may
invigorate it. Thus whilst the Flesh and Fibers of their Nerves are yet soft,
the Channels through which the animal Spirits must necessarily flow, to produce
all sorts of Motion, are wore, and kept open, Humors have no time to settle,
and all Obstructions and Causes of Corruption are removed.

The confused Sensation that young Men have of that Disposition of their Body,
makes them pleased with the thoughts of their Strength and Dexterity. They
admire themselves when they know how to measure their Motions, and to make
extraordinary ones, and are ambitious of being in the presence of Spectators
and Admirers. Thus they strengthen by degrees their Inclination to Corporeal
Exercises, which is one of the principal Causes of Ignorance and Brutishness.
For besides the time that is by that means lavisht away, the little use they
make of their Understanding, causes the chief part of the Brain, in whose
tractableness the force and quickness of the Mind especially consists, to
become altogether inflexible, and the animal Spirits, through disuse, are
difficultly dispersed in the Brain, in a manner requisite to think of what they
please.

This incapacitates most part of the Nobility and Gentry, especially such as
follow the War, to apply themselves to any thing. They answer with a Word and a
Blow, as the Proverb says; for if you speak any thing that they don't willingly
hear, instead of thinking upon a suitable Reply, their Animal Spirits
insensibly flow into the Muscles that raise the Arm, and make them answer
without Consideration, with a Blow, or a Threatening Gesture; because their
Spirits, agitated by the Words they hear, are conveyed to such Places, as are
most open through Habit and Exercise. The sense of their Corporeal Strength
confirms them in those insulting Manners; and the submissive Aspect of their
Hearers puffs 'em up with such an absurd Confidence, as makes them believe they
have said very fine things, when they have but haughtily and brutishly uttered
Impertinencies; being flater'd by the Fear and Caution of the Standers by.

It is not possible to have applied our selves to any Study, or to make actual
profession of any Science, to be either Author or Doctor, without being
conscious of it. But that very Consciousness naturally produces in some Men
such a vast Number of Imperfections, that it would be better with them if they
wanted those Honorable Qualities. As they look upon them as their most
considerable Perfections, so they are extremely pleased with that
Contemplation; they set them before the Eyes of others with all the possible
Dexterity, and conceive they have thereby right to judge of every thing without
Examination. If any be so courageous as to contradict them, they at first
endeavor skillfully, and with a sweet and obliging Countenance, to insinuate
what they are, and what right they have to determine of such Matters: And if
any still presume to oppose them, and that they be at a loss for an Answer,
they do not stick openly to declare what they think of themselves and of their
Adversaries.

Every inward Sense of any Qualification we enjoy, naturally swells up the
Courage. A Trooper well mounted and accoutred, who neither wants Blood nor
Spirits, is ready to undertake any thing; that Disposition inspiring him with
an undaunted Boldness. So it goes with a Man of Letters; when he fancies
himself to be Learned, and that the Haughtiness of his Heart has corrupted his
Mind, he becomes, if I may so speak, bold and fierce against Truth. Sometimes
he rashly impungs it without knowing it, at other times he consciously betrays
it; and relying upon his imaginary Learning, is always ready to assert, either
the Affirmative or Negative, according as he is possessed with a Spirit of
Contradiction.

It goes quite otherwise with those that make no Ostentation of Learning: they
are not positive; neither do they speak, unless they have something to say; and
it even often happens that they remain silent when they should speak. They have
neither that Fame, nor those outward Characters of Learning, which spur Men on
to speak without Knowledge, and so may decently hold their Peace: but the
Pretenders are afraid to make a stop, since they are sensible they shall be
despised for their Silence, even when they have nothing to say; and that they
are not always in danger of falling into Contempt, though they speak but
Impertinencies, provided they utter them with a Scientifick Confidence.

What makes Men capable of thinking, enables them to know the Truth; but
neither Honors, Riches, University-Degrees, nor Chimerical Erudition, makes
them capable of thinking. It Is their own Nature, for they are made to think,
because they are created for the Truth. Even bodily Health qualifies them not
for thinking well, but only is a less Hinderance than Sickness. Our Body
assists us in some manner in perceiving by Sense, and imagining; but not at all
in conceiving. For though without its Help we cannot attentively meditate, nor
oppose the continual Impression of the Senses and Passions, which endeavor to
perplex and obliterate our Ideas, because in this present State, we cannot
overcome the Body, but by the Body; yet it is plain that the Body cannot
illuminate the Mind, nor produce in it the Light of Understanding, since every
Idea that discovers the Truth proceeds from Truth it self. All that the Soul
receives from the Body relates only to it, and when she follows those Glimpses,
she sees nothing but Phantasms and Dreams; that is to say, she sees not things
as they are in themselves, but only as they have relation to her Body.

As the Idea of our own Greatness or Littleness is a frequent occasion of
Error, so likewise the Ideas of outward things that have refference to us,
make no less dangerous an Impression. We have already observed that the Idea of
Greatness is always attended with a great Motion of Spirits, and a great Motion
of the Spirits is ever accompanied with the Idea of Greatness: and that on the
contrary, that of Littleness is always followed with a small Motion of Spirits,
which is in its turn accompanied with the Idea of Meanness. From that Principle
it is easy to infer, that such things as produce in us great Motions of Spirits,
must naturally appear greater, stronger, and more real and perfect than others;
for in the word Greatness I comprehend all those Qualifications, and such like.
So that sensible Good must needs seem to us more considerable and solid, than
that which cannot be felt; if we judge of it by the Motion of the Spirits, and
not by the pure Idea of Truth. A great House, a sumptuous Retinue, a fine
Furniture, Offices, Honor, Riches, will then appear to us to have more
greatness and reality in them than Justice and other Virtues.

When we compare Virtue to Riches by the pure Eyes of the Mind, we prefer
Virtue: but if we make use of our Corporeal Eyes and Imagination, and judge of
those things by the Motion of the Spirits, which they raise in us, we shall
doubtless choose Riches rather than Virtue.

It Is from the same Principle that we imagine that spiritual and insensible
things are almost nothing; that the Ideas of our Mind are less noble than the
Objects they represent; that there is less reality and substance in the Air
than in Metalls, and in Water than in Ice; that those vast Spaces that reach
from the Earth to the Firmament, are empty, or that the Bodies that fill them
have not so much reality and solidity, as the Sun and Stars. In short, our
reasoning upon that false Principle induces us into an infinite number of
Errors, concerning the Nature and Perfection of every thing.

A great Motion of Spirits, and by consequence a strong Passion, always
attending the sensible Idea of Grandeur, and a small Motion, and consequently a
weak Passion, still accompanying the sensible Idea of Meanness; we are very
attentive to, and bestow a great deal of our time on the study of such things
as raise the sensible Idea of Grandeur; whereas we neglect those which afford
but the sensible Idea of Meanness. Those great Bodies, for instance, which make
their Circumvotions over our Heads, have ever made a great Impression upon Men,
who at first adored them, because of their Light and Brightness, or sensible
Idea of Grandeur; some bolder Wits presumed to examine their Motions: so that
the Stars have been in all Ages the Object, either of the Study, or of the
Veneration of the greatest part of Mankind. It may even be said, that the fear
of their Fantastic Influences, which still fright Astrologers and weak
Persons, is a sort of Adoration, paid by a Brainsick Imagination, to the Idea
of Greatness that represents Celestial Bodies.

But the Body of Man, on the contrary, that is infinitely more admirable, and
deserves more our Application, than whatever we can know of Saturn, Jupiter,
and other Planets, has remained a long time almost unknown. The sensible Idea
of dissected parts of Flesh, having nothing great, but being rather distastful
and noisome; it is but a few years since Men of Parts have looked upon Anatomy,
as a Science that deserved their study. There have been Princes and Kings that
boasted of being Astronomers; the height and magnitude of the Stars seemed to
suit their Dignity and Grandeur: but I know not of any that were ever ambitious
of knowing Anatomy, and skilfully dissecting a Heart, or a Brain. The same may
be said of several other Sciences.

Rare and extraordinary things incite in Men's Minds greater and more sensible
Motions, than such as are seen every day; we admire them, and by a natural
Consequence we fix on them an Idea of Greatness, that is followed with Passions
of Esteem and Reverence. This perverts the Reason of several Persons, who are
so very respectful and curious of all the Remains of Antiquity, and whatever
comes from far, or is rare and extraordinary, that they are as Slaves to them;
because the Mind dares not sit and pronounce upon the Objects of its Veneration.

I grant Truth is in no great danger, because some Men are taken up with the
Medals, Arms and Habits of the Ancients, or with the Dress of the Chinese and
Savages. It is not altogether unserviceable, to know the Map of Ancient Rome,
nor the ways from Tomquin to Nanquin, though it be more useful to us to know
those from London to Oxford, or from Paris to St. Germain or Versailles. In
short, we cannot find fault with those that will enquire into the History of
the Wars betwixt the Greeks and Persians, betwixt the Tartars and Chinese; let
them have for Thucydides, Xenophon, or any other whatsoever, as much
Inclinations as they please. But we cannot suffer that Admiration of Antiquity
should lord it over Reason; that it should be forbidden to make use of our
Understanding in examining the Opinions of the Ancients, and that the Discovery
and Demonstration of their Errors should pass for a rash and presumptuous
Attempt.

Truth is of all Times and Ages. If Aristotle did discover it, it may still be
found out: his Opinions are to be proved by strong Reasons; for if they were
solid in his time, they will be so in ours. It Is to deceive our selves, to
pretend to demonstrate natural Truths by humane Authorities. It may perhaps be
proved, that Aristotle has had such and such Thoughts, upon such and such
Subjects; but it is a very slender improvement of Reason, to read Aristotle, or
any other Author, with great Diligence and Trouble, that we may historically
learn his Opinions, and teach them to others.

We cannot without Indignation look on some Universities that were established
for the Enquiry and Defense of Truth, and are now turned into particular Sects,
and boast of studying and maintaining the Opinions of some Men. We are ready to
fall into Passion at the reading of those Philosophers and Physicians, who
store their Books with so many Quotations, that one would rather take them for
Commentaries of the Civil and Cannon Law, than for Tracts of Natural Philosophy
and Physic. For who can suffer that Reason and Experience should be deserted,
and the Fancies of Plato, Aristotle, Epi^urus, or any other Philosopher,
blindly followed.

Such strange methods would perhaps strike us dumb with Amazement, though we
were not hurt by them; I mean, though these Gentlemen did not impung the Truth,
which alone we think our selves obliged to espouse: But their admiring the
Dreams of the Ancients inspires them with a blind Zeal against Truths newly
discovered; they cry them down without knowing them; they oppose them without
understanding them, and by the strength of their Imagination infuse their
Sentiments into the Minds and Hearts of their Auditors and Admirers.

As they judge of those new Discoveries by the Esteem they have for their
Authors, and that their Contemporaries which they have seen and conversed with,
have not that big and extraordinary Appearance, which the Imagination
attributes to Ancient Authors; so they have no Consideration for the Modern.
For the Idea of the Men of our Age raises nothing but Contempt, because it is
not attended with violent and surprising Motions.

Limners and Statuaries never represent Ancient Philosophers as other Men, but
give them a big Head, and a broad and high Forehead, and a long and venerable
Beard. That Is a good Argument to prove that the Vulgar Sort has some such Idea
of them; for Painters picture things as they represent them to themselves, and
follow the Natural Motions of the Imagination; and so for the most part we look
on the Ancients as Uncommon Men. Whereas Imagination representing Men of our
Age like to those with whom we daily converce, and producing no extraordinary
Motion in the Spirits, raises nothing in the Soul but Contempt and Indifferency
toward them.

I have seen Des-Crates, said one of those learned Admirers of Antiquity, I
have known him, and conversed with him several times; he was an honest Man, and
no Fool, but had nothing extraordinary. He had formed a contemptible Idea of
the Cartesian Philosophy, because he had conversed with the Author some
minutes, and had not observed in him those great and extraordinary Looks that
oversway the Imagination. If he were puzzled with some Arguments of that
Philosopher, he proudly said, meaning it a sufficient Answer, That he had known
him formerly. I could wish those Gentlemen might see Aristotle otherwise than
in Picture, and converse an hour with him, provided he should speak French, or
English, and not Greek, and not make himself known, before they had declared
their Opinion of him.

Such things as bear the Character of Novelty, whether they be new in
themselves, or appear in a new Order or Situation, agitate us very much,
striking the Brain in places that are most sensible, because least exposed to
the Course of the Spirits. Such things as bear a sensible Mark of Greatness, do
also strangely move us, because they stir up a great Motion of the Spirits. But
such as at once come attended with Characters of Novelty and Greatness, do not
simply move us: they overthrow, ravish, stupifie us by their violent Commotions.

For Instance, Those who speak nothing but Paradoxes attract the Admiration of
weak Minds, because what they say has the Character of Novelty: those that
speak by Sentences, and use high and lofty Flights, inspire Veneration, because
they seem to say something great. But those that join Loftiness to Novelty, and
Greatness to Rarity, never fail of ravishing and stupifying the Vulgar Sort,
though they should speak but Impertinences; for that pompous and stately
Nonsense, insani fulgores, those false Declamatory Glitterings for the most
part dazzle the Eyes of infirm Minds, and make such a lively and surprising
Impression upon their Imagination, that they know not where they are, that they
venerate the Power that blinds 'em, and cast 'em down, and admire, as shining
Truths, confused and unexpressible Sensations.

CHAP. VIII.
A Continuation of the same Subject; What good Use can be made of Admiration,
and other Passions.

ALL Passions have two very considerable Effects, for they apply the Mind, and
win the Heart: by the former they may, by a due use, be made serviceable to the
Knowledge of Truth; because Application produces that light by which it is
discovered: but the latter Effect is always disadvantageous; because Passions
cannot win the Heart, but by corrupting the Reason; and representing things,
not as they are in themselves, or according to Truth, but as they are related
to us.

Admiration is, of all Passions, that which least affects the Heart; because
it is the Sight of things considered as Good or Evil, that agitates us, and that
the Consideration of their Greatness or Smallness, without any other Relation
to us, makes but little Impression upon us: so that the Admiration that attends
the Knowledge of the Greatness or Littleness of new things, we consider,
corrupts the Reason much less than any other Passion; and can even be of great
use for the Knowledge of Truth, provided we be very careful to hinder its being
followed by other Passions, as it happens for the most part.

In Admiration the Animal Spirits are strongly driven to those places of the
Brain, that represent the new Object as it is in it self; which print thereon
Traces of it, distinct and deep enough to be long continued, and consequently
afford to the Mind a clear Idea, and easy to be remembered; and therefore it
cannot be denied, but Admiration may be very useful to Sciences, since it
applies and enlightens the Mind; whereas other Passions apply the Mind, but
enlighten it not. They apply it, because they raise the Animal Spirits, but
enlighten it not, or enlighten it with false and deceiving Glimpses, because
they drive those Spirits in such a manner, as that they represent Objects, only
as they are related to us, and not as they are in themselves.

There is nothing harder, than to apply our selves a considerable time to any
thing which we admire not: because the Vital Spirits are not then easily
carried to places fitted to represent them. In vain we are exhorted to be
attentive; we can have no Attention, or none sufficiently long, though we may
have an abstracted, but not moving Persuasion, That the thing deserves our
Application. We must needs deceive our Imagination to quicken our Spirits, and
represent to our selves in a new Manner, the Subject on which we will meditate,
that we may raise in us some Motion of Admiration.

We meet every day with Men that relish not Study, and find nothing so painful
as the Application of Mind: They are convinced that they ought to study certain
Matters, and to do their utmost endeavors for it; but their endeavors are,
for the most part, vain; their progress is inconsiderable, and quickly followed
by weariness. True it is that the Animal Spirits obey the order of the Will,
and make us attentive, when we desire it, but when the Commanding Will is the
Will of mere Reason, that is not kept up by some Passion, it is so weak and
languishing, that our Ideas are like wandering Phantasms, that afford us but a
transient glimpse, and vanish in a moment. Our Animal Spirits receive so many
private Orders from the Passions, and are become by nature and habit so prone
to perform them, that they are easily turned from those new and rough ways,
through which the Will endeavors to lead them. So that it is especially in
such Cases, that we need a particular Grace to know the Truth, since we cannot
any considerable time bear up the Mind against the incumbent weight of the
Body; or if we can, yet we never do all we are able.

But when some Motion of Admiration quickens us, the animal Spirits naturally
run to the Tracks of the Object which have raised it, represent it clearly to
the Mind, and produce in the Brain whatever is required to Perspicuity and
Evidence, without putting the will to the trouble of managing the rebellious
Spirits. Hence it comes that those that are prone to Admiration, are fitter to
study than others; are quick and ingenious, and others slow and dull.

In the mean while, when Admiration grows to such an Excess, as to produce
Amazement and Stupefaction, or when it does not excite to rational Curiosity,
it may prove of very ill Consequence because the animal Spirits are then taken
up with representing the admired Object by one of its Faces, without so much as
thinking on the others, which ought no less to be Considered. Those Spirits
likewise supersede their spreading through all the parts of the Body for the
performance of their ordinary Functions, whilst they imprint such deep Traces
of the Object, and break so great a number of the Fibers of the Brain, that
that Idea raised by them can never be blotted out of the Mind.

It is not enough that Admiration should make us attentive, unless it makes us
curious; neither is it suficient for the full knowledge of an Object, to
consider one of its Faces, unless we be so far inquisitive, as to examine them
all; that we may judge of it upon sure grounds. And therefore when Admiration
moves us not to examine things with the utmost Accuracy, but instead of that
stops our Enquiry, it is very unprofitable to the Knowledge of Truth, because
it fills up the Mind with likelihoods and probabilities, and incites us to
judge rashly and precipitately of all things.

Admiration must not center in its self, but its business is to facilitate
Examination. The Animal Spirits that are naturally excited in Admiration, offer
themselves to the Soul, that she may use them to represent the Object more
distinctly to her self, and to know it better. This is Nature's Institution,
for Admiration ought to move us to Curiosity, and Curiosity to conduct us to
the Knowledge of Truth: But the Soul knows not how to make an Advantage of her
own Strength; she prefers a certain satisfactory Sensation, that she receives
from the plenty of the Spirits that affect her, before the Knowledge of the
Object that has raised them; and she chooses rather to be conscious of her own
Riches than to dissipate them by use; not much unlike those Misers who choose
rather to hoard up their Treasures, than to supply their wants with them.

Men are generally pleased with whatever raises any kind of Passion. They not
only spend Money to be moved to Sorrow, by the Representation of a Tragedy, but
they also throw it away upon Legerdemains, that may stir up their Admiration;
since it cannot be said that they give it to be deceived. Therefore that inward
and satisfactory Sensation, which we are conscious of in Admiration, is the
principal cause why we dwell upon it, without putting it to the use which
Nature and Reason prescribe to us. For that delectable Sensation so powerfully
holds the Admirers Bent to the admired Object, that they will fall into a
Passion, if any show them its Vanity. A mourning Person relishes so well the
sweetness of Sorrow, that he is angry with those that go about to make him
merry. The case is the same with Admirers; who seem to be wounded by the
Endeavors that are made to demonstrate the unreasonableness of their
Admiration, because they feel that the secret Pleasure they receive from that
Passion, diminishes proportionably as the Idea that caused it vanishes from the
Mind.

The Passions perpetually labor to justify themselves, and insensibly
persuade us we do well to be led by them. The Satisfaction and Pleasure, with
which they affect the Mind, that is to be their Judge, draws it over by degrees
to their side, inspiring it with such, and the like Reasons. We are to judge of
things but according to our Ideas, but of all Ideas the most sensible are the
most real, since they act upon us with the greatest force, and therefore it is
by those Ideas that I must judge of them. Now the Subject I admire contains a
sensible Idea of Greatness, I must then judge of it by that Idea, for I ought
to esteem and love Greatness; and therefore I am in the right when I insist
upon, and am taken up with that Object. And indeed the Pleasure which the
Contemplation of its Idea affords me is a natural proof that it is for my good
to think upon it; since I seem to add to my growth by such thoughts, and fancy
that my Mind is more enlarged by embracing so great an Idea; whereas the Mind
ceases to exist when it thinks upon nothing. Should that Idea vanish, my Mind,
it seems, should vanish with it, or at least become smaller and narrower, if it
should fix upon a less considerable Idea; so that the preservation of that
great Idea, being the preservation of my own Greatness, and the perfection of
my Being, I am in the right to admire; nay others ought to admire me for it,
should they give me my due. For I am really something great, by the Relation I
have to great things, and I enjoy them in some manner by my Admiration, and
that Foretast which a sort of Hope affords me. Other Men would be Happy, as
well as I am my self, if, knowing my Greatness, they should fix themselves upon
the Cause that produces it; but they are blind and insensible to great and fine
things, and know not how to raise and make themselves considerable.

It may be said, That the Mind naturally, and without Reflection, argues in
some such manner, when it it suffers it self to be led away by the abusive
Meteors of the Passions: Those Reasonings have some Likelihood, though their
Weakness be sufficiently visible; however, that Probability, or rather the
confused Sense of the Probobility that attends natural and inconsiderate
Arguments, is so prevalent, that they never fail of seducing us, when we stand
not upon our guard.

For Instance, When Poetry, History, Chemistry, or any other Humane Science has
struck the Imagination of a young Man with some Motions of Admiration, if he do
not carefully watch the Attempt these Motions make upon his Mind, if he examine
not to the bottom the Use of those Sciences, if he compare not the Trouble of
learning them with the Benefits that may accrue to him; in short, if he be not
as nice in his Judgment as he ought to be, he runs the hazard of being seduced
by his Admiration, showing him only the fairest Part of those Sciences; and
it is even to be feared, lest they should so far corrupt his Heart, as that he
should never awake out of his Dream, even when he comes to know it to be but a
Dream; because it is not possible to blot out of the Brain deep Tracks,
engraven and widened by a long-continued Admiration. And therefore we ought to
take diligent care to keep our Imagination untainted; that is to say, to hinder
the formation of dangerous Traces, that corrupt the Heart and Mind. I shall
here set down a very useful Way to prevent not only the Excess of Admiration,
but also of all other Passions in general.

When the Motion of the Animal Spirits is so violent, as to imprint on the
Brain deep Traces that corrupt the Imagination, it is always attended with some
Commotion of the Soul: And as the Soul cannot be moved without being conscious
of it, she is thereby sufficiently warned to stand upon her guard, and to
examine whether it be for her good to suffer those Traces to be enlarged and
finished. But at the time of the Commotion, the Mind is not so free, as rightly
to judge of the Usefulness of those Traces, because the same Commotion deceives
and inclines it to indulge them: We must therefore endeavor to stop that
Commotion, or to turn to some other Place the Current of the Spirits that cause
it; and in the mean while it is absolutely necessary to suspend our Judgment.

But we ought not to imagine that the Soul always can, by her bare Will, stop
the Course of the Spirits that hinder her from making use of her Reason; her
ordinary Power being not sufficient to quell Motions not raised by her; so that
she must dexterously endeavor to deceive an Enemy that attacks her unawares.

As the Motions of the Spirits stir up respective Thoughts in the Soul, so our
Thoughts excite such and such Motions in the Brain; so that to stop a rising
Motion of the Spirits, a bare Will is not sufficient, but Stratagem must be
used; and we must skilfully represent to our selves such Things as are contrary
to those that stir up and indulge that Motion, whence a Revulsion will arise:
But if we would only determine another way the Motion of the Spirits already
risen, we must not think of contrary but only different Things from those that
have produced it, which will certainly make a Diversion.

But because the Diversion and Revulsion are great or little, as the new
Thoughts are accompanied with a greater or less Motion of the Spirits; we must
carefully observe, what sort of Thoughts agitate us most, that we may in urging
Occasions represent them to our seducing Imagination, and use our selves so
much to that sort of Resistance, that no surprising Motion may affect our Soul.

If we take care firmly to unite the Idea of Eternity, or some other solid
Thought, to those violent and extraordinary Motions, they will never be stirred
up for the future, without raising that Idea, and furnishing us with Weapons to
resist them. This appears from Experience, and from the Reason mentioned in the
Chapter Of the Connection of Ideas Book 2. Part 2. Chap. 3.
; so that we must not imagine it absolutely impossible, by a dexterous
Managery, to conquer our Passions, when we are steadfastly resolved upon it.

However, by that Resistance we ought not to pretend to Impeccability, nor to
the avoiding of all Errors whatsoever.

First, Because it is very difficult to acquire and preserve such a Habit, as
that our extraordinary Motions shall raise in us Ideas fit to oppose them.

Secondly, Though we should have gotten that Habit, those Motions of the
Spirits will directly excite the Ideas to be impugned, and but indirectly
supply us with the necessary Weapons to assault them: So that the Evil Ideas,
being still the principal, will be stronger than the Good, that are but
accessory; and the latter ever stand in need of the Help of the Will.

Thirdly, Those Motions of the Spirits may be so violent, as to take up the
whole Capacity of the Soul; so that there will remain no room, if I may so
speak, for the reception of the accessory Idea, that is proper to make a
Revulsion in the Spirits; or not at least for such a Reception as may incite us
to an attentive Contemplation of it.

Lastly, There are so many particular Circumstances, that can make that Remedy
useless, that though it ought not to be neglected, yet we must not rely too
much upon it. We must have a perpetual Recourse to Prayer, that we may receive
from Heaven necessary Helps in the time of Temptation; and in the mean while
endeavor to present to the Mind some Truths so solid and prevalent, as that
they may overcome the most violent Passions. For I must needs add by the way,
That several pious Persons often return into the same Faults, because they fill
their Mind with a great many Truths that are more glittering than solid, and
fitter to weaken and dissolve, than to fortify it against Temptations; whereas
others, that are not endued with so much Knowledge, faithfully stick to their
Duty, because of some great and solid Truth, which they have rendered familiar,
and which bears 'em up and strengthens them in all Occasions.

CHAP. IX.
Of Love and Aversion, and their principal Species.

LOve and Hatred are the Passions that immediately succeed Admiration; for we
dwell not long upon the Consideration of an Object, without discovering the
Relations it has to us, or to something we love. The Object we love, and to
which consequently we are united by that Passion, being for the most part
present, as well as that which we actually admire; our Mind quickly, and
without any considerable Reflection, makes the necessary Comparisons, to find
out the Relations they have to each other, and to us; or else is naturally
aware of them, by a preventing Sense of Pleasure and Pain. Then it is, that the
Motion of Love we have for our selves, and for the beloved Object, extends to
that which is admired; if the Relation it has immediately to us, or to
something united to us, appear advantageous, either by Knowledge or Sensation.
Now that new Motion of the Soul, (or rather that Motion of the Soul newly
determined, joined to that of the Animal Spirits, and followed with the
Sensation that attends the new Disposition, that the same new Motion of the
Spirits produces in the Brain) is the Passion we call here Love.

But when we feel by any Pain, or discover by a clear and evident Knowledge,
that the Union or Relation of the admired Object would prove disserviceable to
us, or to something united to us, then the Motion of the Love we have for our
selves, or for the Thing united to us, terminates in us, or cleaves to the
united Object, without following the View of the Mind, or being carried to the
admired Thing. But as the Motion toward Good in general, which the Author of
Nature continually imprints on the Soul, carries her to whatever is known and
felt, because what is either intelligible or sensible is Good in it self; so it
may be said, that the Resistance of the Soul against that natural Motion which
attracts it, is a kind of voluntary Motion, which terminates in Nothingness.
Now that voluntary Lest any should mistake what I call here voluntary Motion, I
desire him to read the first Illustration on the first Chapter. It would
intricate my Conceptio^s should I say whatever relates to it, to satisfy the
Nicety of some Persons.
Motion of the Soul being joined to that of the Spirits and Blood, and followed
by the Sensation that attends the new Disposition, which that Motion of the
Spirits produces in the Brain, is the Passion we call here Aversion or Hatred.

That Passion is altogether contrary to Love, and yet it is never without Love:
It is altogether contrary to it, because Aversion separates, and Love unites;
the former has most commonly Nothingness for its Object; and the latter has
always a Being: The former resists the natural Motion, and makes it of no
effect; whereas the latter yields to it, and makes it victorious. However,
Aversion is never separated from Love, because Evil, the Object of the former,
is the Privation of Good; so that to fly from Evil, is to fly from the
Privation of Good; that is to say, to tend to Good: And therefore the Aversion
of the Privation of Good, is the Love of Good. But if Evil be taken for Pain,
the Aversion of Pain is not the Aversion of the Privation of Pleasure; because
Pain is as real a Sensation as Pleasure, and therefore is not the Privation of
it: But the Aversion of Pain, being the Aversion of some internal Misery, we
should not be affected with that Passion, should we not love our selves.
Lastly, If Evil be taken for what causes Pain in us, or for whatever deprives
us of Good, then Aversion depends on Self-love, or on the Love of something to
which we desire to be united: So that Love and Aversion are two
Mother-Passions, opposite to each other; but Love is the First, the Chief, and
the most Universal.

As at that great Distance and Estrangement we are from God since the Fall, we
look upon our Being as the Chief Part of the Things to which we are united; so
it may be said in some sense, that our Motion of Love for any thing whatsoever,
is an Effect of Self-love. We love Honors, because they raise us; our Riches,
because they maintain and preserve us; our Relations, Prince, and Country,
because we are concerned in their Preservation. Our Motion of Self-love reaches
to all the Things that relate to us, and to which we are united; because it is
that Motion which unites us to them, and spreads our Being, if I may so speak,
on those that surround us, proportionably as we discover by Reason, or by
Sensation, that it is our Interest to be united to them.

And therefore we ought not to think, that, since the Fall, Self-Love is only
the Cause and Rule of all other Affections; but, that most part of other
Affections are Species of Self-love: For when we say, that a Man loves any new
Object, we must not suppose that a new Motion of Love is produced in him; but
rather, that knowing that Object to have some Relation or Union with him, he
loves himself in that Object, and that with a Motion of Love coeval to himself.
For indeed without Grace there is nothing but Self-love in the Heart of Man:
The Love of Truth, of Justice, of God himself, and every other Love that is in
us, by the first Institution of Nature, have ever since the Fall been a
Sacrifice to Self-love.

There is no doubt, however, but the most wicked and barbarous Men, Idolaters
and Atheists themselves, are united to God by a natural Love, of which
consequently Self-love is not the Cause; for they are united to him by their
Love to Truth, Justice, and Virtue; they praise and esteem good Men, and do not
love them because they are Men, but because they see in them such Qualities as
they cannot forbear to love, because they cannot forbear to admire and judge
them amiable. And therefore we love something besides our selves; but Self-love
overrules all the rest, and Men forsake Truth and Justice for the smallest
Concerns: For when by their natural Force they venture their Goods and Lives to
defend oppressed Innocence, or on any other Occasion, their greatest Spur is
mere Vanity, and the hopes of getting a Name by the seeming Possession of a
Virtue which is reverenced by all the World. They love Truth and Justice when
on their side, but never against themselves; because without Grace they cannot
obtain the least Victory over Self-love.

There are many other sorts of natural Love: We naturally love our Prince,
Country, Relations, those that have any Conformity of Humor, Designs, and
Employments with us: But all those sorts of Love are very weak, as well as the
Love of Truth and Justice; and Self-love being the most violent of all,
conquers them so easily, as to find no other Resistance but what it creates
against it self.

Bodies that strike against others, lose their Motion proportionably as they
communicate it to the stricken; and, after having moved many other Bodies, may
at last entirely lose their own Motion. It is not so with Self-love: It
determines every other Love by its Impressions upon it, and its own Motion
diminishes not; on the contrary, it gets new Strength by its new Victories: For
as that Motion never goes out of the Heart, so it cannot be lost, though it be
continually communicated.

Self-love is therefore the Ruling and Universal Love, since it is to be found,
and bears the sway every where; so that all the Passions having no proper
Motion of their own, it may be said, that Self-love is the most extensive and
powerful of all Passions, or the Ruling and Universal Passion. And as all
Virtues are but Species of that first Virtue we call Charity, according to St.
Austin; so all Vices and Passions are but as so many Effects and Sorts of
Self-love, or of that general Vice we call Concupiscence.

We often distinguish in Morals the Virtues or Species of Charity, by the
Difference of Objects; but that sometimes confounds the true Idea we ought to
have of Virtue, which rather depends on its own Motive, than any thing else:
And therefore we shall not follow that Method in treating of the Passions, nor
distinguish them by the Objects; because one and the same Object may excite
them all, and that ten thousand Objects may raise but one. For though Objects
differ from each other, yet they differ not always in relation to us, nor do
they stir up in us different Passions. The promised Staff of a Marshall of
France differs from a Bishop's Crosier, or Pastoral Staff promised; yet those
two Marks of Honor excite almost the same Passion in the Ambitious, since they
raise in the Mind of both the same Idea of Good. But the same Mareschal's
Staff, when promised, granted, enjoyed, taken away, stirs up Passions
altogether different, because it raises in the Mind different Ideas of Good.

We must not then multiply the Passions by their different Objects that cause
them; but only admit as many as there are accessory Ideas that attend the chief
Idea of Good or Evil, and considerably alter it in relation to us. For the
general Idea of Good, or the Sensation of Pleasure, which is good to him that
enjoys it, agitating the Soul and Animal Spirits, produces the general Passion
of Love; and the accessory Ideas of that Good determine that general Agitation
of Love, and Course of the Spirits in such a particular manner, as puts the
Mind and Body in a convenient Disposition in relation to the perceived Good:
And thus they produce all the particular Passions.

And therefore the general Idea of Good produces an indeterminate Love, which
is but an Extension of Self-love. The Idea of Good, as possessed, produces a
Love of Joy: The Idea of Good, not as possessed, but hoped for, that is, as
judged possible to be possessed, produces a Love of Desire: And lastly, The
Idea of any Good, that is neither possessed nor hoped for; or, which is the
same, the Love of any Good which we cannot hope to enjoy without losing some
other, or which we cannot preserve when we are possessed of it, produces a Love
of Sorrow. Those are the Three simple and primitive Passions that have Good for
their Object; for the Hope that produces Joy, is not a Commotion of the Soul,
but a simple Judgment.

However, we must observe, That Men confine not their own being within
themselves, but extend it to all Things and Persons, to whom they believe it
their Advantage to unite themselves: So that we must conceive that they are
possessed in some manner of a Good, when enjoyed by their Friends, though they
do not possess it immediately themselves: And therefore when I say, That the
Possession of Good produces Joy, I understand it not only of an immediate
Possession or Union, but also of any other; for we naturally feel a Joy upon
the Success or good Fortune of those we love,

Evil, as I said, can be taken Three ways; for the Privation of Good, for Pain,
and for the Thing that causes the Privation of Good, or produces Pain.

In the first sense, the Idea of Evil being the same with the Idea of a Good
not enjoyed, it is plain that Idea produces Sorrow, or Desire, or even Joy; for
Joy is always excited from that we find our selves exempt of the Privation of
Good, that is to say, when we possess Good: So that those Passions that refer
to Evil, taken in that sense, are the same as those that relate to Good,
because at the Bottom they have likewise Good for their Object.

When Evil signifies Pain, which alone is always a real Evil to him that
suffers it, whilst he suffers it; then the Sense of that Evil produces those
Passions of Sorrow, Desire, and Joy, that are Species of Aversion, and not of
Love; because their Motion is altogether opposite to that which accompanies the
Perception of Good, that Motion being but the Resistance of the Soul against
the natural Impression.

The Actual Sense of Pain produces an Aversion of Sorrow. The Pain we suffer
not, but are afraid to suffer, produces an Aversion of Desire. And lastly, the
Pain we neither suffer, nor are afraid to suffer; or, what is the same, the
Pain that shall be attended by a considerable Reward, or the Pain from which we
are freed, produces an Aversion of Joy. Those are the Three simple or primitive
Passions that have Evil for their Object; for the Fear that produces Sorrow, is
not a Commotion of the Soul, but a bare Judgment.

Lastly, If by Evil we understand the Person or the Thing that deprives us of
Good, or causes us to endure Pain, the Idea of Evil produces a Motion of Love
and Aversion together, or only a Motion of Aversion: The former, when the Evil
is that which deprives us of Good; for by the same Motion we tend toward Good,
and fly from that which hinders its Possession: And the latter, when it is the
Idea of an Evil which causes Pain in us; for it is by the same Motion of
Aversion that we hate Pain, and whatever produces it.

And therefore there are Three simple or primitive Passions that relate to
Good, and as many that refer to Pain, or to that which causes it, viz. Joy,
Desire, and Sorrow. For we are joyful when Good is present, and Evil is past;
we are sorrowful when Good is gone, and Pain is present; and we are agitated
with Desires when Good and Evil are to come.

Those Passions that relate to Good are particular Determinations of that
Motion God gives us for Good in general, and therefore have a real Object; but
others, who have not God for the Cause of their Motion, terminate only in
Nothingness.

CHAP. X.
Of Passions in particular; and in general of the way to explain them, and to
know the Errors they cause.

WHen we consider how Passions are formed, it visibly appears, that their
Number is undeterminable, or that there are more than we have Terms to express
them by. For Passions differ not only by the various Complication of the Three
first Primitive, which would not increase them to a great Number; but also
differ by the different Perceptions and Judgments that cause or accompany them.
Those different Judgments of the Soul, concerning Good or Evil, produce
different Motions in the Animal Spirits, to dispose the Body in relation to the
Object, and consequently cause in the Soul Sensations that are not altogether
like: Whence it proceeds, that some Passions are observed to differ from each
other, though their Commotions be not different.

In the mean while, the Commotion of the Soul being the chief Thing observable
in every Passion, it is better to refer them to the Three original Passions, in
which those Commotions are very different, than to treat confusedly and
disorderly of them, in reference to the different Perceptions we may have of
the Good and Evil that raises them. For we may have so many different
Perceptions of Objects, in reference to Time, to our selves, to what belongs to
us, to the Persons or Things to which we are united, either by Nature or
Choice, that it is wholly impossible to make an accurate Enumeration of them*

When the Soul perceives any Good which she cannot enjoy, it may perhaps be
said, that she hopes for it, though she desires it not: However, it is plain,
that this her Hope is not a Passion, but a simple Judgment. And therefore it is
the Commotion that attends the Idea of any Good, of which we take the Enjoyment
to be possible, that adopts Hope into a true Passion. It is the same when Hope
grows into Security: For the latter is a Passion, only because of the Commotion
of Joy that mixes with that of Desire; since the Judgment of the Soul that
considers any Good as certain, is a Passion but as much as it is a foregoing
Taste of the Good that affects us. Last of all, When Hope diminishes, and is
succeeded by Despair, it is visible again, that the latter is a Passion but
because of the Commotion of Sorrow that mixes with that of Desire; for the
Judgment of the Soul, that considers any Good as unattainable, would not be a
Passion, should we not be actuated by that Judgment.

But because the Soul never looks upon Good or Evil without any Commotion, and
even without any Alteration in the Body, we often give the Name of Passion to
the Judgment that produces it, confounding together whatever happens both to
the Soul and Body at the sight of any Good or Evil: For the Words, Hope, Fear,
Boldness, Shame, Impudence, Anger, Pity, Derision, Grief, and the Names of all
other Passions in common use, are short Expressions made up of several Terms,
by which can be explained in particular whatever Passions contain.

We understand by the Word Passion the View of the Relation any thing has to
us, the Commotion and Sensation of the Soul, the Concussion of the Brain, and
the Motion of the Spirits, a new Commotion and Sensation of the Soul; and
lastly, a Sensation of Pleasure that always attends the Passions, and makes
them grateful. All these we commonly understand by the Name of Passions; but
sometimes it only signifies either the Judgment that raises it, or only the
Commotion of the Soul, or the bare Motion of the Spirits and Blood, or lastly,
something else that accompanies the Commotion of the Soul.

It is very useful, for the Knowledge of Truth, to abridge Ideas and
Expressions; but that often causes some considerable Error, especially when
those Ideas are abridg'd by popular Use: For we ought never to abridge them,
but when we have made them very clear and distinct, by a great Application of
Mind; and not, as it is ordinarily done, as to Passions and sensible Things,
when we have made them familiar to us by their Sensations, and the mere Action
of the Imagination, which easily imposes on the Mind.

There is a great difference betwixt the pure Ideas of the Mind, and the
Sensations or Commotions of the Soul. Pure Ideas are clear and distinct, but
it is a hard Task to make them familiar; whereas Sensations and Commotions are
intimate with us, but can never plainly and distinctly be known. Numbers,
Extension, and their Properties, may be clearly known; but unless we make them
sensible by some expressive Characters, it is very difficult to represent them
to our Mind, because whatever is abstracted moves us not. On the contrary, the
Commotions and Sensations of the Soul may easily be represented to the Mind,
though the Knowledge we have of them be but confused and imperfect; for all the
Words that raise them, lively strike the Soul, and make it attentive. Thence it
proceeds, that we often imagine we rightly understand some Discourses that are
altogether incomprehensible; and that reading some Descriptions of the
Sensations and Passions of the Soul, we persuade our selves that we perfectly
comprehend them; because they strongly move us, and that all the Words that
reverberate upon our Eyes agitate our Soul. The hearing of the very Names of
Shame, Despair, Impudence, etc. straightway excite in our Mind a confused Idea,
and obscure Sensation, that powerfully influences us; and because this
Sensation is very familiar to us, and presents it self without any Trouble or
Endeavor of the Mind, we fancy it to be clear and distinct. These Words,
however, are the Names of compounded Passions, and by consequence abridg'd
Expressions, which popular Use has made up of many confused and obscure Ideas.

Seeing we are obliged to employ such Terms as common Use has approved of, the
Reader should not be surpised to meet with Obscurity, and sometimes with a
sort of Contradiction in our Words. And if it were but considered that the
Sensations and Commotions of the Soul, that answer to the Terms used in such
Discourses, are not wholly the same in all Men, because of their different
Dispositions of Mind, they would not so easily condemn us, when they could not
enter into our Opinions. This I say, not so much to prevent Objections against
my self, as that we may understand the Nature of the Passions, and what we are
to think of Books treating of such Matters.

After so many Cautions, I shall not stick to say, that all the Passions may be
referred to the three Primitive, namely, Desire, Joy and Sorrow; and that it is
specially by the different Judgments the Soul makes of Goods and Evils, that
such as relate to the same Primitive Passion differ from each other.

For Instance, I may say that Hope, Fear, and Irresolution, that is the Mean
betwixt them both, are Species of Desire: That Boldness, Courage and Emulation,
etc. have a greater Relation to Hope, than to all others; and that Timidity,
Cowardice, Jealousy, etc. are Species of Fear.

I may say, that Alacrity and Glory, Kindness and Gratefulness, are Species of
Joy, caused by the Sight of the Good that we know to be in us, or in those to
whom we are united; as Derision or Jeering is a sort of Joy, commonly arising
at the Sight of the Evil that befalls those from whom we are separated. Lastly,
That Distaste, Tediousness, Regret, Pity, Indignation, are so many kinds of
Sorrow, caused by the Consideration of something displeasing.

But besides those Passions, and several others I pass by, which particularly
relate to some of the Primitive Passions, there are yet many others, whose
Commotion is almost equally compounded, either of Desire and Joy, as Impudence,
Anger and Revenge; or of Desire and Sorrow, as Shame, Regret and Vexation; or
of all Three together, when Motives of Joy and Sorrow meet. And though these
last Passions have no particular Names that I know of, they are however the
most common; because in this Life we scarce ever enjoy any Good without a
Mixture of Evil, nor suffer any Evil without Hopes of being freed of it, and
enjoying Good. And though Joy be altogether contrary to Sorrow, yet it allows
of its Company, and even admits it an equal Sharer in the Capacity of the Soul
as Volent, when the Sight of Good and Evil divide its Capacity as Intelligent.

All the Passions therefore are Species of Desire, Joy and Sorrow; and the
chief difference betwixt those of the same sort must be taken from the
different Perceptions or Judgments that cause or accompany them. So that to
become learned in the Nature of Passions, and to make of them the most accurate
Enumeration possible, it is requisite to enquire into the different Judgments
that may be made of Good and Evil. But as we especially intend to find out the
Cause of our Errors, we need not so much to insist upon the Judgments that
precede or cause the Passions, as upon those that follow them, and which the
Soul makes of Things when she is agitated by some Passion, because those last
Judgments are the most liable to Error.

Such Judgments as precede and cause the Passions, are almost ever false in
something, because they are, for the most part, grounded upon such Perceptions
of the Soul as consider Objects in relation to her, and not as they are in
themselves. But the Judgments that follow the Passions are false all manner of
ways; because such Judgments being only made by the Passions, are only grounded
upon the Perceptions the Soul has of Objects as relating to her, or rather to
her own Commotion.

In the Judgments that precede the Passions, Truth and Falsehood are joined
together; but when the Soul is agitated, and judges by every Inspiration of the
Passion, Truth vanishes, and Falsehood remains to be the Principle of so many
more false Conclusions as the Passion is greater.

All Passions justify themselves, continually offering to the Soul the moving
Object, in the fittest way for preserving and increasing her Commotion. The
Judgment, or the Perception that causes it, gets still new Forces from the
Increase of the Passion, and the Passion likewise augments proportionably as
the Judgment that produces it, in its turn, is strengthened.

Thus false Judgments and Passions join in Confederacy, for their mutual
Preservation. And should the Heart never cease sending up Spirits for keeping
open the Tracks of the Brain, and supplying the Expenses, which that violent
Sensation or Commotion make of the same Spirits, Passions would perpetually
increase, and never allow us to be sensible of our Errors. But as all our
Passions depend on the Fermentation and Circulation of the Blood, and that the
Heart can never furnish as many Spirits as are necessary for their
Preservation, they must needs expire when the Spirits diminish, and the Blood
grows cool again.

Though it be an easy matter to discover the ordinary Judgments of Passions,
yet it is not a thing to be neglected; there being few Subjects that deserve
more the Application of an Enquirer after Truth, who endeavors to free himself
from the Dominion of the Body, and will judge of every thing by true Ideas.

We may instruct our selves in this Matter two ways, either by pure Reason, or
by our inward Consciousness, when we are agitated by some Passion. For
Instance, Experience teaches us, That we are apt to judge of those we love not,
to their Disadvantage, and to spit all the Venom of our Hatred at the Object of
our Passion. We also know by Reason, that as we cannot hate but what is Evil;
so it is necessary for the preservation of Hatred, that the Mind should
represent to it self the worst part of its Object. For it is sufficient to
suppose that all Passions justify themselves, and give such a Disposition,
first to the Imagination, then to the Mind, as is fit to preserve their own
Commotion, directly to conclude what are the Judgments which all the Passions
cause us to make.

Those that are endued with a strong and lively Imagination, that are extremely
sensible, and much subject to the Motions of Passions, may perfectly inform
themselves of those things by their own inward sense; and it often comes to
pass, that they speak of them in a more pleasing and instructing manner than
others, whose Reason over-tops their Imagination: yet it follows not, that
those that discover best the Springs of Self-love, that penetrate farthest into
Man's Heart, and more sensibly discover its Recesses, are always the greatest
Understandings. This only proves that they are livelier, quicker of
Imagination, and sometimes more malicious than others.

But those that without consulting their inward Sense, make use only of their
Reason to enquire into the Nature and Effects of Passions; though they be not
always so quick-sighted as others, are always more rational, and less obnoxious
to Error; because they judge of things as they are in themselves: They see
very near what Men posse^t with Passions can do, as they suppose them more or
less agitated; but do not rashly judge of the Actions of others, by what they
would do themselves in such Occasions; for they well know, that Men are not
equally sensible to the same things, nor alike susceptible of involuntary
Commotions, and therefore it is not by consulting our Sensations which the
Passions create in us, but by listening to Reason, that we must treat of the
Judgments that accompany them; lest we should draw our own Picture, instead of
discovering the Nature of Passions in general.

CHAP. XI.
That all the Passions justify themselves. What Judgments they cause us to
make in their Vindication.

WE need no long deduction of Arguments to demonstrate, That all Passions
justify themselves: That Principle is sufficiently evident, both by our
internal Consciousness of our selves, and the Behavior of those we see
agitated by them; and therefore we need only barely propound it, to consider it
as we should do. The Mind is such a Slave to the Imagination, that it always
obeys when the Imagination is overheated; and dares not answer when the same
is incensed, because it meets with Abuses when it resists, and is always
rewarded with some Pleasure when it humors that imperious Faculty. Even those
whose unruly Imagination persuades them they are transmuted into Beasts, find
out Reasons to prove they must live as Beasts do, walk Four-footed, eat Grass,
and imitate every Action that is purely Brutal. They find Pleasure in living by
the Impressions of their Passion, and suffer inward Pain in resisting it; which
is sufficient to make Reason, that commonly descends to be the Slave to
Pleasure, to argue in such a manner as may best defend the Cause of it.

If therefore it be true that all Passions justify themselves, it is evident
that Desire must of it self move us to judge favorably of its Object, if it be
a Desire of Love, and unkindly if it be a Desire of Aversion. The Desire of
Love is a Motion of the Soul raised by the Spirits, that provoke it to the
Enjoyment or Use of such things as are not in its power; for we desire even the
Continuation of our Enjoyment, because future things depend not on us. It Is
then necessary for the Justification of that Desire, that the Object which
produces it be esteemed good in it self, or in reference to something else: the
contrary must be said of that Desire, which is a kind of Aversion.

I grant, we cannot judge any thing to be good or bad, without some Reason; but
Passions have no Object which is not good in some sense. And if it may be said
there are some, which contain no real Goodness, and therefore cannot be
contemplated as Good by the Mind; yet no one can say but they may be enjoyed as
Good, since they are supposed to agitate us; and that Commotion, Enjoyment, or
Sense is more than sufficient to move the Soul to entertain a kind Opinion of
the Object.

If we so easily judge that Fire contains in it self the Heat we feel, and
Bread the Savor we relish, because of the Sensation those Bodies excite in us;
though that be never so incomprensible to the Mind, which cannot conceive Heat
and Savor as Modifications of a Body: thence it follows, That there is no
Object of our Passions, how vile and contemptible soever it appears, but we may
judge it good, when the Enjoyment of it affects us with pleasure. For as we
imagine that Heat goes out of Fire when we feel it, so we blindly believe, that
the Objects of the Passions cause the pleasure which we receive in their
Enjoyment, and that therefore they are good, since they are able to do us
good. The like may be said of the Passions that have Evil for their Object.

But, as I said just before, there is nothing but deserves either Love or
Aversion, either by it self, or by something else to which it relates; and when
we are agitated with some Passion, we quickly discover in its Object the Good
or Evil that may nourish the same. It is therefore easy to know by Reason the
Judgments which our Passions make, whilst agitating us.

For, if a Desire of Love move us, we may well conceive that it will not fail
to justify it self, by the favorable Judgments it shall make of its Object.
We easily perceive that those Judgments will have more Extent, as the Desire
shall be more violent; and that they will be sometimes absolute and without
exception, though but a very small part of the thing appears good. We may
without difficulty understand that those favorable Judgments will reach all
things, that shall have, or seem to have, any Connection with the principal
Object of the Passion, proportionably to the strength of the Passion, and the
Extent of the Imagination. The contrary will happen if it be a Desire of
A^version, the Reasons of which are as easily comprehended, and perfectly
confirmed and made good by Experience. But let us make these Truths more
sensible and familiar by some Instances.

Men naturally desire Knowledge, because all Minds are created for Truth. But
that Desire, how just and reasonable soever it may be in it self, often becomes
a dangerous Vice, by the false Judgments that attend it; Curiosity frequently
offers to the Mind vain Objects of its Study and Lucubrations, ascribes to them
false Ideas of Greatness, ennobles them with the deceiving Luster of Rarity,
and dresses them up with such gay and splendid Apparel, that one can hardly
forbear to Contemplate them with too much Pleasure and Application.

There is no Trifle but will wholly take up some Persons, whose fruitless Toil
is still justified by the false Judgments that arise from their vain Curiosity.
For instance, those that bestow their time in Learning Tongues, imagine that
all the Sciences consist in the Knowledge of Terms, and find out a Thousand
Reasons to justify themselves; and the Veneration those pay them whom an
unknown Term confounds, is none of the weakest, though the least reasonable.

Some Persons employ their whole lives in learning to speak, who ought perhaps
to hold their Peace all the while; since it is evident he ought to be silent,
who has nothing worth the hearing to say. But it is not that which they propose
from their Learning. They should know that he must think well, use his
Understanding to exactness, discern Truth from Falsehood, clear Ideas from
obscure, those of the Mind from those of the Imagination, that will speak
accurately. They imagine themselves fine and uncommon Wits, because they know
how to please the Ear with an Elegant Harmony, how to flatter the Passions by
Figures and ^aking Gestures; how to rejoice the Imagination by lively and
sensible Expressions; whilst they leave the Mind empty of Ideas, void of Light
and Understanding.

Some probable reason may justify their Passion, that spend a great deal of
time in the study of their own Tongue, since they make use of it all their
Life; but as to those who indifferently apply themselves to all sorts of
Languages, I know not what to say in their behalf. The Passion of those who
make a complete Library of all sorts of Dictionaries, may be excusable, as well
as the Curiosity of those, who make a collection of Coins and Medals of all
Countries and Times; that may be useful in some occasions, and if it do them
not much good, at least it does them no harm; a Storehouse of such Curiosities
being not cumber^ome, since they carry not with them either their Books or
Medals. But how may the Passion of those be justifiable, that make their Head a
Library of Dictionaries, that neglect their Affairs and Essential Duties for
words of no use. They are smatterers in their own Tongue, frequently mingling
strange and unknown words in their Discourses, and never paying their
Countrymen with Current Money. Their Reason seems not to be better guided than
their Tongue; for all the Corners and Recesses of their Memory are so full of
Etymologies, that their Minds must lie as stifled under the innumerable number
of words that are perpetually flying about it.

However, it must be granted that Philologers and Linguists will not stick for
Reasons to justify their capricious Studies. Which to know, you need but to
listen to the Judgments those pretenders to Science make of Tongues; or suppose
some Opinions, that are taken amongst them for undoubted Axioms, together with
the Inferences that may be deduced from them. For instance, that those Persons
who speak several Tongues, are as many individual Men as they know different
Languages, since Speech distinguishes us from Beasts; that the Ignorance of
Tongues deprives us of a multitude of things, since Ancient Philosophers and
Strangers are more Learned then we. Suppose but these and the like Principles
and Conclusions, and you will quickly form such Judgments as are fit to beget the
Passion for Tongues, and consequently like those, wherewith the same Passion
inspires the Linguists to vindicate their Studies.

There is not a Science so abject and contemptible, but some part of it will
shine very bright to the Imagination, and dazzle the Mind, when Passion
heightens those false Glimpses. That Splendor, I own, vanishes when the Blood
and Spirits cool, and the Light of Truth begins to shine; but that Light
disappears also, when the Imagination grows warm again, and leaves but some
transitory Shadows of those solid Reasons which pretended to condemn our
Passion.

Farthermore, when the Passion that agitates us finds it self a dying, it
repents not of its demeanor, but on the contrary it disposes all things,
either to an honorable Funeral, or to be revived spedily again; that is to
say, it always prepares the Mind to frame Judgments in its Vindication. In this
condition it makes a sort of Alliance with such other Passions as may keep it
up in its weakness, supply it with Spirits and Blood, in its necessity; raise
it out of its Ashes, and give it a new Birth. For Passions are not unconcerned
for one another, and those that can live together, faithfully contribute to
their mutual preservation. So that all the Passions that are not contrary to
the Studies of Tongues, or of any thing else, do continually solicit and
fully confirm those Judgments that are made to vindicate it.

A Pretender to Learning imagines himself, now as surrounded with respectfull
Hearers, then as Conqueror of those whom he has amazed with his unintelligible
words; and almost always as one raised far above the common sort of Men. He
flatters himself with the Commendations he receives, with the Preferments that
are proposed to him, with the Courtship that is made to him. He Is of all Times
and Countries: He is not limited, as vulgar Wits, to the present, nor confined
within the Walls of his Town; but is continually communicating himself abroad,
and his Communication makes his Delight. See how many Passions combine together
to manage the Cause of pretended Learning, how hotly they prosecute their
Judgments, and bribe the Mind in its favor.

Should every Passion act separately, without caring for the rest, they would
vanish immediately after their Rise, not being able to make a sufficient number
of false Judgments to maintain themselves, and defend the Glimmerings of
Imagination against the Light of Reason: But all Passions concur admirably well
to their mutual Preservation, assisting and strengthening each other, though
never so remote, provided they be not declared Enemies, as though they were
minded to follow the Rules of a well-ordered State.

If the Passion of Desire were alone, all the Judgments it might pass would
only amount to represent the Good as attainable: For the Desire of Love,
considered as such, is produced by the Judgments we make, that it is possible
to enjoy such a Good: And so this Desire could only form Judgments about the
Possibility of enjoying it; since the Judgments which follow and preserve the
Passions, are exactly like those which precede and produce them. But that
Desire is animated by Love, fortified by Hope, increased by Joy, renewed by
Fear, attended by Courage, Emulation, Anger, Irresolution, and several other
Passions, that form each in their turn a great variety of Judgments, which
succeed each other, and maintain the Desire that has produced them. It Is not
therefore strange that the desire of a mere Trifle, or of a Thing that is
evidently hurtful or fruitless, should however justify it self against Reason
for many Years, nay, during the whole Life of a Man that is agitated with it,
since so many other Passions endeavor to vindicate it. I shall here set down
in few Words how Passions justify themselves, that I may explain Things by
distinct Ideas.

Every Passion agitates the Blood and Spirits, which, when agitated, are driven
into the Brain by the sensible Sight of the Object, or the Strength of the
Imagination, in such a manner as is fit to imprint deep Tracks representing
that Object. They bend, and even sometimes break by their impetuous Course the
Fibers of the Brain, and thereby leave the Imagination soiled and corrupted.
For these Traces obey not the Commands of Reason, nor will they be blotted out
when it pleases; on the contrary, they put a Force upon it, and oblige it
incessantly to consider Objects in such a manner as moves and inclines it to
favor the Passions. Thus the Passions act upon the Imagination, and the
corrupted Imagination makes an Effort against Reason, by continually
representing Things not as they are in themselves, that the Mind might
pronounce a true Judgment; but as they are in reference to the present Passion,
that it might pass a favorable Sentence in its behalf.

The Passions not only bribe the Imagination and Mind in their favor, but
produce in other Parts of the Body such Dispositions as are necessary to
preserve them. The Spirits they move, stop not in the Brain, but run, as I have
elsewhere shown, to all other Parts of the Body, especially to the Heart, the
Liver, the Spleen, and the Nerves that surround the principal Arteries; and
lastly, to all Parts whatsoever, that may supply necessary Spirits for the
maintenance of the predominant Passion. But while these Spirits disperse
themselves into all the Parts of the Body, they destroy all along, and by
degrees, whatever might hinder their Course, and make their Passages so
slippery and smooth, that a very inconsiderable Object exceedingly moves us,
and consequently inclines us to make such Judgments as favor the Passions:
Thus it comes to pass, that they establish and justify themselves.

If we consider how various the Constitution of the Fibers of the Brain, and
withal the Commotion and Quantity of the Spirits and Blood may be, in the
different Sexes and Ages, we shall easily and nearly conjecture to what
Passions some Persons are most subject, and consequently, what Judgments they
pass upon Objects. For instance, we may make a very near Guess, by the plenty
or want of Spirits that is observable in some People, the same Thing being
proposed and explained to them in the same manner, that some of them will make
Judgments of Hope and Joy, whilst others shall pass such Judgments as proceed
from Fear and Sorrow.

For those that abound with Blood and Spirits, as young Men, choleric Persons,
and those that are of a Sanguine Complexion use to do, being very susceptible
of Hope, because of the secret Sense of their Strength, will not believe that
they shall meet with any Opposition to their Designs, which they may not
overcome; and so will quickly feed themselves with a borrowed Taste of the Good
they hope to enjoy, and will pass such Judgments as are fit to justify their
Hope and Joy. But those that want agitated Spirits, as Old Men, and those that
are of a Phlegmatic and Melancholy Temper, being inclined to Fear and Sorrow,
because their Soul is conscious of her own Weakness, and destitute of Spirits
to perform her Orders, will make quite contrary Judgments, imagine insuperable
Difficulties to justify their Fear, and give up themselves to Envy, Sorrow,
Despair, and other sorts of Aversion, of which weak Persons are most
susceptible.

CHAP. XII.
That such Passions as have Evil for their Object, are the most Dangerous and
Unjust: And that those that have the least Mixture of Knowledge, are the most
lively and sensible.

OF all the Passions the several sorts of Aversions make their Judgments the
most remote from Reason, and the most dangerous; there being no Passion which
corrupts and bribes Reason so much in its behalf, as Hatred and Fear; Hatred
chiefly in the Choleric, or in those whose Spirits are in a perpetual
agitation; and Fear in the Melancholy, or those whose gross and heavy Spirits
are neither easily moved, nor soon quieted. But when ^atred and Fear conspire
together to bribe Reason, which is very frequently done, then there are no
Judgments so unjust and capricious, but they will pass and defend them with an
insuperable Obstinacy.

The Reason of this is, That as in this Life Evil strikes the Soul more to the
quick, than Good; so the Sense of Pain is livelier than that of Pleasure:
Injuries and Scandals more sensibly affect us, than Commendations and Applause;
and though there are Men indifferent as to the enjoying some Pleasures, and
receiving certain Honors; yet there is scarce one that can bear Pain and
Contempt without Uneasiness.

And therefore Hatred, Fear, and other sorts of Aversion, that have Evil for
their Object, are most violent Passions, which shake the Mind with such
unexpected Commotions, as discompose and stupifie it, and quickly pierce into
the bottom of the Heart, dethrone Reason, and pass upon all sorts of Subjects
erroneous and unjust Sentences, to favor their tyrannical Madness.

Of all Passions they are the most cruel and distrustful, contrary to Charity
and Civil Society, and at the same time the most ridiculous and extravagant,
since they give such impertinent and frantic Judgments, as excite the Laughter
and Indignation of all other Men.

Those Passions inspired the Pharisees with these absurd Discourses: What are
we doing? This Man works many Miracles: Joh. 11.47.
If we let him alone, all Men will believe in him, and the Romans will come and
destroy both our City and Nation. They agreed that our Savior had wrought many
Miracles; for the Resurrection of Lazarus was undeniable: But what were the
Judgments of their Passions? To murder both JESUS and Lazarus whom he had
raised from the Dead! Why JESUS? Because, say they, if we let him alone, all
Men will believe in him, and the Romans shall come and extirpate our Nation.
Joh. 12.11.
And why Lazarus? Because that, by reason of him, many of the Jews went away,
and believed on Jesus. Oh Judgments equally Cruel and Irrational! Cruel,
through Hatred; and Irrational, through Fear: The Romans shall come, and
destroy our City and Nation.

The same Passions moved a great Assembly, consisting of Annas the High Priest,
Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and as many as were of the Kindred of the
High Priest, to speak thus: What shall we do with these Men? Act. 4.16, 17.
For that, indeed, a notable Miracle has been done by them, is manifest to all
them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. But lest it should spread
farther, let us threaten to punish them severely, if they preach the Name of
JESUS any more.

All those great Men, agitated by their Passions, and blinded by their false
Zeal, pass Judgment both impertinent and unjust. They dare not punish the
Apostles, because of the People, and that the Man who had been miraculously
cured was above Forty Years of Age, and present in the Assembly; but threaten
them, lest they should ^each in the Name of Jesus; supposing they ought to
condemn the Doctrine, Act. 5.28.
because they put the Author to death: You intend, say they, to bring this
Man's Blood upon us.

When false Zeal unites it self to Hatred, it shelters it from the Reproofs of
Reason, and justifies it so well, that we scruple not to be led by its Motions.
When Ignorance and Weakness accompany Fear, they extend it to innumerable
Subjects, and drive on its Commotions to that height, that the least Suspicion
disturbs and frightens Reason.

False Zealots imagine they serve God, when they obey their Passions: They
blindly follow the secret Motions of their Hatred, as Inspirations from
internal Truth; and insisting with great satisfaction on the Proofs of Sense
that justify that Excess, their Errors become confirmed with an unconquerable
Stubbornness.

As to ignorant and weak Persons, they create to themselves Matter of
ridiculous and fantastic Fears; like Children that walk in the dark without a
Guide and Light, fancy frightful Bugbears, are distur'd and cry out as though
they were undone. Knowledge retrieves them if they be ignorant; but if they be
weak, their Imagination continues crazed, and the least thing that relates to
that frightful Object, renews the Tracks, and opens the Current of the Spirits,
which cause the Symptoms of their Fear: So that it is altogether impossible to
cure or pacify them for ever.

But when false Zeal meets with Hatred and Fear in a weak Mind, it incessantly
produces such unjust and violent Judgments, as cannot be thought upon without
Horror* To change a Mind possessed with those Passions, requires a greater
Miracle than that which converted St. Paul; and his Cure would be absolutely
impossible, could we se^ Bounds to the Power and Mercy of God.

Those that walk in the Dark, rejoice at the sight of Light; but this Man
cannot suffer it, because it wounds him by opposing his Passion. His Fear is in
some sort voluntary, as being produced by his Hatred; and therefore he loves to
feel its Commotions, because we love to be agitated even with the Passions that
have Evil for their Object, when the Evil is only imaginary, or rather when we
know, as in Tragedies, that the Evil cannot hurt us.

The Phantasms which those that walk in the Dark frame in their Imaginations,
vanish at the Approach of Light; but the idle Dreams of this sort of Men will
not disappear at the Light of Truth, which instead of dissipating the Darkness
of their Mind, incenses their Imagination; so that the frustrated Light
recoils, because they are wholly taken up with the Objects of their Passion;
and it seems those Apparitions have a real Body, since they reflect some weak
Rays of the Light that falls upon them.

But though we should suppose in those Men a sufficient Teachableness and
Attention, to listen to, and comprehend the Reasons that may dissipate their
Errors; yet their Imagination being disordered by Fear, and their Heart
corrupted by Hatred and false Zeal, those Reasons, how solid soever they might
be, could not long stop the impetuous Stream of those violent Passions, nor
hinder them from speedily justifying themselves by sensible and convincing
Proofs.

For we ought to observe, that there are transitory Passions, which never
return; whereas there are others that are constant and permanent. Those that
are not kept up by the sight of the Mind, but are only produced and fortified
by the sensible View of an Object, and the Fermentation of the Blood, are not
lasting, but commonly die soon after their Birth; whereas those that are
associated with the Contemplation of the Mind, are steady, because the
Principle that produces them is not subject to change, as Blood and Humors
are. So that Hatred, Fear, and all other Passions that are excited or preserved
by the Knowledge of the Mind, and not raised by the sensible View of Evil, must
needs be durable, and withal very violent and unjust. However, those Passions
are not the most lively and sensible, as we shall now show.

The Perception of Good and Evil, which raises the Passions, is produced Three
ways; by the Senses, by the Imagination, and by the Mind. By way of the Senses
it produces very quick and sensible Passions; by way of the Imagination, much
weaker; but those which proceed from the Perception of Good and Evil by the
Mind alone, are true Passions, on no other account than as that View of Good
and Evil is always attended by some Motion of the Animal Spirits.

Passions are only given us for the good of the Body, and for uniting us by it
to sensible Things: For though sensible Things are neither good nor bad, in
reference to the Mind; yet they are so in relation to the Body, to which the
Mind is united: So that the Senses and Imagination, discovering much better
than the Mind the Relation of sensible Objects to our Body, must needs raise
Passions far livelier than a clear and evident Knowledge: But because our
Knowledge is always attended with some Commotion of the Spirits, a clear and
evident Knowledge of a great Good, or a great Evil, not to be discovered by the
Senses, always raises some secret Passion.

However, all clear and evident Knowledge of any Good or Evil, is not always
followed with a sensible and perceptible Passion; as all our Passions are not
accompanied with an intellectual Knowledge. For, as we sometimes think upon
Good or Evil, without being conscious of any Commotion; so we often feel our
selves agitated with Passion, without knowing or sometimes without being
sensible of the Cause. A Man that sucks in a good Air is affected with Joy, and
knows not why, nor what sort of Good he enjoys that produces it: And if some
invisible Corpuscle mixes with his Blood, and hinders its Fermentation, he is
taken with Sorrow, and may even ascribe the Cause of it to something visible,
that offers it self to him in the time of his Passion.

Of all Passions, none are more sensible nor quick, and consequently less
mingled with Knowledge, than Horror and Antipathy, Agreeableness and Sympathy.
A Man sleeping under the Shadow of a Tree, often starts up, when a Fly stings
him, or a Leaf tickles him, as though a Serpent had bitten him: The confused
Sense of a Thing as terrible as Death it self, frightens him, and he finds
himself surpised with a very strong and violent Passion, which is an Aversion
of Desire, before he bethinks himself. On the contrary, a Man in want discovers
by chance some small Good, the Sweetness of which surprises him; and he is
inconsiderately taken up with that Trifle, as though it were the greatest Good
in the World, without making any Reflection on it. The same happens in the
Motions of Sympathy and Antipathy. We see in a Company a Person whose
Deportment and Manners have some secret Agreeableness to the present
Disposition of our Body; so his Sight pierces and strikes us, and we are
inclined, without Reflection, to love and wish him well. Thus we are agitated
by I don't know what, since Reason has no Share in it. The contrary befalls
those whose Aspect and Looks shed, as it were, Disgust and Aversion: They have
I know not what, that offends and puts us back: for the Mind understands
nothing in it; the Senses only are competent Judges of sensible Beauty and
Ugliness, which are the Objects of those kinds of Passions.

F. MALEBRANCHE's TREATISE Concerning the SEARCH after TRUTH. BOOK VI.
Concerning METHOD.
CHAP. I.
The Design of this Book. Two general Ways for the Preserving Evidence in the
Search of Truth, which shall be the Subject of this Tract.

WE have seen in the foregoing Books, that the Mind of Man is very obnoxious to
Error; that the Deceptions of his Senses Lib. I.
, the Visions of his Imagination Lib. II.
, and the Abstractions of his Mind Lib. III.
, lead him into frequent Mistakes; that the Inclinations of his Will Lib. IV.
, and the Passions of his Heart Lib. V.
, almost ever conceal the Truth from him, and never suffer it to appear without
being tinged with those false Colors that flatter Concupiscency. In short, we
have partly discovered the Errors of the Mind, with their Causes: Now it is
time we should show the Way that leads to the Knowledge of Truth, and give the
Mind all the possible Skill and Strength to walk therein, without straying or
wearying it self in vain.

But, to spare the Readers an unprofitable Labor, we think fit to advise them,
this Last Book is only made for such as earnestly desire to seek the Truth by
themselves, and to make use of the Force of their own Mind for that purpose. I
require them to despise for a while all probable Opinions, to wave the
strongest Conjectures, to neglect the Authority of all the Philosophers, to
free themselves, as far as possible, from all Prejudice, Interest, and Passion;
to enter into an extreme Mistrust of their Senses and Imagination: In a word,
well to remember the greatest part of the Things that have been said in the
former Books.

I attempt, in this last Book, to give the Mind all the Perfection it can
naturally attain to, by supplying it with the necessary Helps to become more
attentive and enlarged, and prescribing it those Rules that must be observed in
the Inquiry after Truth, that it may never mistake, but learn in time whatever
can be known.

Could I carry this Design to its utmost Perfection, which I pretend not, this
being but an Essay toward it, I might boast to have found out an Universal
Science, which would make those truly learned that knew how to make use of it;
since they would have the Foundation of all the particular Sciences, which they
would acquire proportionably as they should make use of that Universal Science:
For, by this Treatise we endeavor to render the Mind capable of passing a true
and certain Judgment upon all the Questions that are not beyond its reach.

As, to be a good Mathematician, it is not sufficient to learn by Heart all the
Demonstrations of Euclid, Pappus, Archimedes, Apollonius, and others that have
written of Geometry; so, to be a Learned Philosopher, it is not enough to have
read Plato, Aristotle, Des Carts, and perfectly to know their Sentiments upon
Philosophical Questions. For the Knowledge of all the Opinions and Judgments of
other Men, either Philosophers or Geometricians, is rather a History, than a
Science; the true Science that perfects, as far as possible, the Mind,
consisting in a certain Ability of solidly judging of all things proportioned
to its Reach. But, not to lose time, nor prepossess the Reader with precipitate
Judgments, let us begin to treat of such an important Matter.

First of all, we ought to remember the Rule that has been established, and
proved at the beginning of the First Book, because it is the Foundation and
Principle of whatever we shall say hereafter. And therefore I repeat it; We
must never give a full Consent, but to those Propositions that appear so
evidently true, that they cannot be denied it, without feeling an inward Pain,
and the secret Reproaches of our Reason; that is to say, without clearly
knowing we should make a wrong Use of our Liberty by withholding our Consent.
For, as many times as we yield to Probabilities, we certainly venture to be
mistaken; and it is but by good Chance, or a lucky Hit, if we be not really
deceived. So that the confused Sight of a great number of Probabilities, upon
different Subjects, makes not our Reason more perfect; nothing but the clear
View of the Truth being able to afford it any real Perfection and Satisfaction.

Thence it is easy to conclude, That since, according to our first Rule,
nothing but Evidence can assure us that we are not deceived, we ought to take a
special care to preserve that Evidence in all our Perceptions; that we may pass
a sound Judgment upon all the Things to which our Reason can attain, and
discover as many Truths as we are capable of.

The Things that can produce and preserve that Evidence, are of two sorts; some
are within us, and in some manner depending on us; others are out of our
Jurisdiction. For, as to see distinctly visible Objects, it is required to have
a good Sight, and to fix it steadfastly upon them; which two Things are in us,
or in some manner depending on us: So it is requisite to have a sound
Understanding, and a strong Application, in order to pierce into the bottom of
intelligible Truths; which two Things are in us, or in some sort in our power.

But as the Eyes stand in need of Light to see, which Light depends upon
foreign Causes; so the Mind needs Ideas to conceive, which, as it has been
proved elsewhere, have no Dependency upon us, but are furnished to us by a
foreign Cause. So that should the Ideas of Things supersede being present to
our Minds, as often as we desire to see them; should he that enlightens the
World conceal them from us; it would not be more possible for us to redress it,
or to know any thing, than it is to see visible Objects when the Light is gone.
But we have no reason to fear it: For the Presence of Ideas being natural to
our Minds, and depending on the general Will of God, which is constant and
immutable, they can never disappear, nor fail us in the Discovery of such
Things as are attainable by Natural Reason. For, the Sun that enlightens the
Minds, is not like that which illuminates Bodies; it is never eclipsed, nor
goes ever down, but penetrates every thing without dividing its Light.

The Ideas of all Things being then continually present to us, even when we do
not attentively consider them; all that we need do to make all our Perceptions
evident, is only to look for such Means as can increase the Attention and
Extent of the Mind; as nothing else is required on our side, to distinguish
visible and present Objects, but to have good Eyes, and to fix them thereupon.

However, because the Objects we consider have more Relations than we can
discover at once, by a simple Essay of Thought; we still need some Rules,
skilfully to unfold the Difficulties; by which Succors, the Mind, being grown
more attentive and extended, may with a full Evidence discover all the
Relations of the Thing examined.

We shall divide this Sixth Book into Two Parts. We shall treat in the First,
of those Supplies that may afford the Mind more Attention and Extent; and in
the Second we shall prescribe those Rules that it must follow in the Inquiry
after Truth, to pass sound and undeceivable Judgments.

CHAP. II.
That Attention is necessary to preserve Evidence in our Knowledge: That the
Modifications of the Soul make her attentive, but share and take up too much
her Capacity of Perceiving.

WE have shown at the Beginning of this Work, that the Understanding does
nothing but perceive; and that, as to its Concern, there is no difference
betwixt bare Perceptions, Judgments, and Reasonings, unless it be, that the
second and third are Perceptions more composed than the first; because they not
only represent many Things, but also the Relations they have together. For
naked Perceptions represent only Things to the Mind; whereas Judgments
represent the Relations that are betwixt Things and Reasonings, the Relations
that are betwixt the Relations of Things, provided they be simple Reasonings;
for if they were Complex, they would represent Relations of Relations, or
compound Relations, which are between the Relation of Things, and so ad
infinitum. For, proportionably as Relations multiply, so the Reasonings, that
represent them to the Mind, become more composed: However, Judgments and simple
Reasonings, as well as those that are composed, are but, as to the
Understanding, bare Perceptions, since it does no more than simply perceive, as
has been already observed.

Whence it appears, that the Understanding never falls into Error, since there
is none in Perceptions; and, that Error it self is not of an intelligible
nature: For, as we have already said many times, it consists in a too hasty
Consent of the Will, which suffers it self to be dazzled by some false Glimpse,
and, instead of keeping its Liberty as long as possible, negligently relies
upon the Appearance of Truth.

Notwithstanding, as it commonly happens that the Understanding has but
confused and imperfect Perceptions of Things; so it is really a Cause of our
Errors, though only occasional. For, as the Corporeal Sight leads us into
Mistake, when it represents outward Objects confusedly and imperfectly;
confusedly, when they are at too great a distance, or for want of Light; and
imperfectly, when it only shows such Faces of them as look toward us: So the
Understanding often having but a confused and imperfect Conception of Things,
because they are not sufficiently present to it, and that it discovers not all
their Parts, causes the Will, that too easily yields to those obscure and
imperfect Conceptions, to fall into many Errors.

We must then look out for Means that may hinder our Perceptions from being
confused and imperfect. And because, as every one knows, nothing can make them
more clear and distinct, than Attention; we must find out Means to become more
and more attentive. Thus we may hope to keep to Evidence in our Reasonings, and
even to survey all at once the necessary Connection betwixt all the Parts of our
longest Inferences.

To find out those Means, it is necessary to persuade our selves of what has
been said elsewhere, That the Mind gives not an equal Attention to all the
Things it perceives: For it applies it self infinitely more to such as affect,
modifie, and penetrate it, than to those which, though they be present, yet do
not concern or belong to it: In short, it is more taken up with its own
Modifications, than with the bare Ideas of Objects, which Ideas are Things
different from it self.

Thence it comes, that we consider but with tediousness, dislike, and
remissness, the abstracted Ideas of the pure Understanding; that we apply our
selves much more to Things that we imagine, especially when our Imagination is
strong, and the Tracks of our Brain very deep: And lastly, that we are wholly
taken up with sensible Qualities, and even so, that we can afford no Attention
to the pure Ideas of the Mind, when we feel something very pleasant or painful.
For Pain, Pleasure, and other Sensations, being Modes of the Souls Existence,
it is impossible we should exist without perceiving them, and having the
Capacity of the Mind taken up, since our Sensations are nothing but Perceptions.

But it is not so with the pure Ideas of the Mind, since they may be intimately
united to it, without its taking the least notice of them. For, though God is
most intimately united with us, and comprehends the Ideas of whatever we see;
yet those Ideas, though never so present, and, as I may say, in the middle of
our selves, are concealed from us, when the Motions of the Spirits do not raise
their Traces, or when our Will applies not the Mind to consider them; that is
to say, when it performs not those Acts to which the Author of Nature has
joined the Representation of those Ideas. This is the Foundation of whatever we
shall say concerning the Means that can improve our Attention, which Means will
be drawn from the very Nature of the Mind; so that it is to be hoped, that they
will not prove fruitless and chimerical, as many others, that are more puzling
than serviceable. And though they should not be as useful as we could wish, yet
the Time that shall be bestowed upon their Reading will not be entirely lost,
since this will afford us a fuller Knowledge of the Nature of the Mind.

The Modifications of the Soul have Three Causes, the Senses, the Imaginations,
and the Passions: For every one experimentally knows, that Pain and Pleasure,
and all other strong Sensations, lively Imaginations, and vehement Passions,
take up the Mind so much as to make it incapable of Attention, at the time they
too vigorously affect it; because they fill, as I may say, its whole Capacity,
or Faculty of Perceiving. And even when those Modifications are moderate, they
still divide its Capacity in some sort; so that it cannot give up it self
wholly to the Consideration of abstracted Truths.

Thence we must draw this important Conclusion, That those that will earnestly
apply themselves to search after Truth, must carefully, and as far as possible,
avoid all the Sensations that are too lively, as a great Noise, a bright Light,
Pleasure, Pain, etc. That they must incessantly watch over the Purity of their
Imagination, lest deep Traces should be imprinted on their Brain, which would
continually disturb, and, as it were, dissolve the Mind; and that they must
above all stop the Motions of the Passions, which make so powerful an
Impression on the Body and Soul, that it is for the most part impossible the
Mind should think upon any thing else. For though the pure Ideas of Truth are
always present, yet they cannot be attended to, while the whole Reach and
Compass of our Thoughts are charged with these penetrating Modifications.

However, as it is not possible that the Soul should be free of Passion,
Sensation, or any other particular Modification, we must make a Virtue of
Necessity, and endeavor to draw, from those very Modifications, such Succors
as can make us more attentive: But the Use of them requires great Skill and
Circumspection, if we desire to make an Advantage of them; and we must
carefully examine how far we have occasion for them, that we may use them only
when the necessity of being attentive compels us to it.

CHAP. III.
Of the Use that can be made of the Passions and Senses, to preserve the
Attention of the Mind.

THE Passions that may successfully incite us to the Enquiry after Truth, are
those that afford Strength and Courage to overcome the trouble of rendering our
selves attentive: There are some good, and others bad; the Good are such as the
Desire of finding out the Truth, of getting so much Light as to conduct our
selves, and be useful to our Neighbors, and the like; the Bad, or Dangerous
are, the Desire of getting Fame, of making Establishments, of rising above our
Fellows, and others yet more corrupted, of which we need not speak.

In our present unhappy State, it often happens, that the least rational
Passions are the most inciting to the Enquiry after Truth, and are more
pleasant Consolations in all the Troubles we are at to discover it, than such
as are juster, and more reasonable: For Instance, Vanity moves us much more
than the Love of Truth; and we see every day such Persons as are
extraordinarily given to study, as long as they find Men before whom they can
boast of their Learning; whereas they entirely forsake it, when they meet with
no body more to listen to them. The confused Prospect of the Glory that
surrounds them when they vend their Opinions, bears up their Courage in the
most fruitless and tedious Studies: But if either by Chance, or the Necessity
of their Affairs, they come to be taken off from that little Flock of
Applauders, their Heat presently cools, the most solid Studies are no longer
alluring; Distaste, Tediousness and Moro^eness overtake them, and make them
forsake all. Vanity did triumph over their natural Laziness, but now Laziness
triumphs over the Love of Truth; for Vanity may sometimes resist Laziness, but
Laziness commonly proves too strong and powerful for the Love of Truth.

However, as the Passion for Glory may be referred to a good End, as, to the
Glory of God, the public Use, the Preservation of our good Name; some Persons
may perhaps be allowed, in some cer^ain Cases, to make use of that Passion, as
a powerful Help to make the Mind more attentive. But Care must be taken to use
it only when the reasonable Passions, whereof mention has been made, are not
sufficient, and that our Duty engages us to apply our selves to Subjects that
are very disgusting; First, because that Passion is very dangerous to the
Conscience; Secondly, because it insensibly draws us into ill Studies, that
have more Luster than Use or Truth in them; and Lastly, because it is very
difficult to moderate it, and that we often become its Fool and Property; and
instead of enlightening the Mind, we only strengthen the Concupiscence of Pride,
which both corrupts our Moral Powers, and darkens our Understanding with an
undissolvable Obscurity.

For it must be considered how That Passion insensibly increases, settles and
fortifies it self in the Heart of Man; and when it is too violent, instead of
helping the Mind in the Search of Truth, it strangely blinds it, and even
persuades it that Things are just as it desires they should be.

Sure it is, there would not be so many false Inventions, nor imaginary
Discoveries, were not Men's Heads giddy'd by the ardent Desire of appearing
Inventors. For the firm and obstinate Persuasion wherein several Persons have
been to have found, for Instance, the Perpetual Motion, the Quadrature of the
Circle, the Duplication of the Cube by ordinary Geometry, in all likelihood
proceeded from an extraordinary Desire of seeming to have performed what others
have vainly attempted.

And therefore it is fitter to excite in us such Passions as are so much more
useful to our searching out of Truth, as they are more strong, and wherein the
Excess is not to be feared: Such are the Desires of making a good Use of our
Mind; of freeing our selves from Prejudices and Errors; of getting a
sufficient Light to behave our selves in our Condition; and such others as
neither engage us into fruitless Studies, nor carry us on to rash and
inconsiderate Judgments.

When we have begun to taste the pleasure of making use of our Mind, to be
sensible of the Profit that arises from it, have freed our selves of violent
Passions, and have disrelish'd sensible Pleasures, which always prove the
Masters of, or rather the Tyrants over Reason, in those that indiscreetly give
up themselves to them; we need not other Passions, but such as we have spoken
of, to become attentive upon the Subjects on which we desire to meditate.

But most Men are not in that Condition; they have neither Taste, nor
Understanding, nor Curiosity for any thing but what affects the Senses; their
Imagination is corrupted by an almost infinite Number of deep Traces, which
raise none but false Ideas; and as they depend upon all the Objects that resort
to the Senses and Imagination, so they always judge by the Impression they
receive from them; that is, with reference to themselves. Pride, Debauchery,
the various Engagements, the restless Desires of Advancement, which are so
common amongst the Men of the World, darken the Sight of Truth, and stifle in
them the Sense of Piety; because they separate them from God, who alone is able
to enlighten, as he alone is able to govern us. For we cannot increase our
Union with sensible Things, without diminishing that which we have with
intellectual Truth, since we cannot be at the same time strictly united with
Things so different and opposite.

Those whose Imagination is pure and chaste, that is, whose Brain is not filled
up with deep Traces, that fasten them to visible Things, may easily unite
themselves to God, listen attentively to the Truth that speaks to them, and
even forbear the Use of the most just and rational Passions. But as to those
that live amongst the Great, who depend upon too many things, and whose
Imagination is soiled by the false and obscure Ideas of sensible Objects, they
cannot apply themselves to the Truth, unless they be born up by some Passion,
strong enough to countervail the Weight of the Body, that carries them down;
and to imprint Traces on their Brain, that may make a Revulsion upon the Animal
Spirits. However, as every Passion can only by it self perplex our Ideas, they
ought to use that Help but so far as Necessity requires; and all Men ought to
study themselves, that they may proportionate their Passions to their Weakness.

It is no hard matter to find a Method of raising in us such Passions as we
desire, since the Knowledge we have given in the foregoing Books of the Union
betwixt Soul and Body has sufficiently opened the way to it: In a word, no more
is required, than to think attentively upon those Objects, that by the
Institution of Nature are able to raise the Passions. Thus we may almost at any
time excite in our Hearts whatever Passion we have occasion for; but because we
can easier excite them at any time than suppress them, or remedy the Disorders
they cause in the Imagination, we must be very sober and cautious in employing
them.

Above all, we must take care not to judge of Things by Passion, but only by
the clear Sight of the Truth, which is almost impossible when the Passions are
somewhat lively; they ought only to raise our Attention, but they never fail of
stirring up their proper Ideas, and violently driving the Will to judge of
Things by those Ideas that affect it, rather than by the pure and abstracted
Ideas of Truth, that make no Impression upon it: So that we often make
Judgments which last no longer than the Passion, because they are not produced
by the clear Sight of the immutable Truth, but by the Circulation of the Blood.

True it is that Men are wonderfully obstinate in some Errors, which they
maintain as long as they live; but then those Errors have other Causes than
the Passions, or at least depend on such as are permanent and lasting,
proceeding from the Constitution of the Body, from Interest, or from some other
durable Cause. For Instance; Interest being a Motive of a continual standing,
produces a Passion that never dies; and the Judgments that arise from it are
very long lived. But all the other Sentiments of Men, which depend upon
particular Passions, are as inconstant as the Fermentation of their Humors:
They say one while this, another while that; and yet what they say is commonly
conformable to what they think: And as they run from one counterfeit Good to
another, by the Motion of their Passion, and are disgusted at it when that
Motion ceases; so they run from one false System into another, and ardently
assert a false Opinion, when Passion makes it probable; which, the Passion
ebbing, they afterward forsake. By their Passions they taste of every Good,
without finding any really so; and by the same Passions see all Truths, without
discovering any thing absolutely true; though in the time of their Passion,
what they taste seems to them the Sovereign God, and what they see an
undeniable Truth.

The Senses are the second Spring, whence we can draw Succors to make the Mind
attentive. Sensations are the very Modifications of the Soul, and differ from
the pure Ideas of the Mind; the former raising a much stronger Attention than
the latter. So that it is plain, that to supply the want of Application to
insensible Truths, it may be fit to express them in a sensible and moving
manner.

It Is for that Reason, that Geometricians express by sensible Lines, the
Proportions that are betwixt several Magnitudes; for by drawing Lines upon
Paper, they draw, as I may say, answerable Ideas upon their Mind, and make them
more familiar by Seeing them at the same time that they Conceive them. Thus
several very difficult Things may be taught to Children, though they be not
susceptible of abstracted Truths, by reason of the Nicety of the Fibers of
their Brain: Their Eyes see nothing but Colors, Pictures, Images; but their
Mind considers the Ideas that answer those sensible Objects.

But we must take a special Care not to over-shadow the Objects which we will
consider or represent to others, with so much Sensibility, that the Mind should
be more taken up with it, than with the Truth it self, which is a most
considerable and common Fault; for we meet every day with Men that apply
themselves only to what moves the Senses, and express themselves in such a
sensible manner, that Truth is as stifled under a vain and pompous Apparel of
their false Eloquence; so that their Hearers, being more affected with the
Measure of their Periods, and the Motions of their Figures, than by the Reasons
they allege, give way to be persuaded, without so much as knowing what causes
their Persuasion, or what they are persuaded of.

And therefore we must so carefully moderate the Sensibility of our
Expressions, as only just to make the Mind attentive. There is nothing more
beautiful than Truth; neither can we pretend to make it handsomer, by daubing
it with sensible Colors, that have no Solidity in them, and are pleasing but a
short time. We might perhaps make it more fine and delicate, but should enerve
and emasculate it: So that we ought not to set it off with so much Luster and
Brightness, that the Mind be more taken up with the Ornaments, than with the
Body it self; this being to deal with it as some Persons do with themselves,
when loaded with such abundance of Gold and precious Stones, they appear the
least considerable part of the whole which they make up with their Clothes. We
must dress the Truth as are those Magistrates of Venice, who are obliged to
wear a plain Gown and a Cap, to distinguish them from the Commonalty; that Men
may look on their Faces with Reverence and Attention, without admiring their
Apparel. Lastly, We must take care not to surcharge it with too great a Retinue
of delightful Things, that dissipate the Mind, and obstruct its View, lest we
should give to any thing else the Honors due to it: As it often happens to
Princes, who cannot be distinguished amongst the great Number of their
Courtiers and Attendants, who assume to themselves that Air of Greatness, and
Majestical Countenance, which only becomes the Sovereigns themselves.

But to give a more considerable Instance, I say, that Truth must be proposed
to others, as it manifests it self. The Sight of Men, since the Fall of their
Forefathers, is too weak to look on Truth it self, and therefore Sovereign
Truth has made it self sensible by coming invested with our Humanity, that it
might attract our Thoughts, enlighten our Mind, and appear lovely to our Eyes.
So we may, according to that Pattern, adorn with something sensible the Truths
we endeavor to understand our selves, and to teach others, that we may fix the
Mind upon them, which loves what is sensible, and is not easily delighted by
Things that flatter not the Senses. The Eternal Wisdom has made it self
sensible, but not glittering and pompous; becoming sensible, not to fasten us
to what is sensible, but to raise us to what is intellectual, and to condemn
and sacrifice Sensibility in his own Person. So we must make use, in the
Knowledge of Truth, of something sensible, but not too splendid; that cannot
indear too much the sensible Object, but only keep open the Eye of our Mind in
the Contemplation of mere intellectual Truths: Such Sensibility should be
employed, as we may dissipate, annihilate, and willingly sacrifice upon the
Sight of the Truth, to which it has conducted us. The Eternal Wisdom has
offered it self to us from without, in a sensible manner, not to keep us
abroad, but that we may retire within our selves, and that the Inner Man might
intellectually consider it: So we must, in our Search of Truth, make use of
something sensible, which may not keep us abroad gazing on its Luster, but make
us enter into our selves, and strengthen our Attention and Union to the Eternal
Truth, which only is able to rule the Mind, and enlighten it upon any Subject
whatsoever.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Use of Imagination to make the Mind attentive, and especially of the
Usefulness of Geometry.

WE had need be very circumspect and cautious in the Choice and Use of those
Helps that we may draw from our Senses and Passions, to become attentive to the
Truth; because our Senses and Passions too vividly affect us, and so much fill
up the Capacity of the Mind, that it often sees nothing but its own Sensations,
when it proposes to discover Things in their own Nature. But as to those
Succors which our Imagination may afford us, they make the Mind attentive,
without fruitlesly dividing its Capacity, and wonderfully help us to a clear
and distinct Perception of Objects; so that they are for the most part very
useful, as will be made plain by some Instances.

We know that a Body is moved by two or several different Causes, toward two
or several different Places, whereunto it is equally or unequally driven by
these Forces; that the Force of the Motion perpetually increases or decreases,
according to some known Proportion. We are asked what way that Body goes, in
what place it shall be at such or such a Moment, with what degree of Celerity
it shall be endued when it is come to such a place; and other like Questions.

1. From the point A, whence we suppose that it begins to move, draw the
indefinite Lines AB, AC, that make the Angle BAC, if they cut each other; for
AB and AC are direct, and cut not each other when the Motions they express are
directly opposite. Thus we distinctly represent to the Imagination, or, if you
please, to the Senses, the way that Body should take when it is only moved by
one of these Forces, either toward B, or C.

2. But if the Force that moves it toward B be equal to that which moves it
toward C, then divide the Lines AB and AC into the parts 1, 2, 3, 4. I, II,
III, IV, equally distant from A: If the Force that moves it toward B be double
of that which moves it toward C, take in the Line AB Parts that are double of
those that you cut in AC: If that Force be subduple, take them subduple; if it
be thrice greater or lesser, cut them likewise thrice greater or lesser; and so
proportionably. The Divisions of those Lines will represent to the Imagination
the different Degrees of those moving Forces, and withal, the Space that they
shall cause the Body to run over.

3. Draw through those Divisions Parallels upon AB and AC, to have the Lines
1X, 2X, 3X, etc. equal to AI, AII, AIII, etc. and IX, IIX, IIIX, equal to A1,
A2, A3, etc. that represent the Spaces through which those Forces carry that
Body. Through the Intersections of those Parallels draw the Line AXYE, that
represent to the Imagination, first, the true Greatness of the composed Motion
of that Body which is supposed to be driven at the same time toward B and C,
by two different Forces, according to some certain Proportion: Secondly, The
Way that it is to pass through: And, lastly, All the Places in which it must be
in a determinate Time. So that this Line serves not only to bear up the Sight
of the Mind in the Inquiry after all the Truths that are discoverable in the
Question proposed; but also represents the Solution of it in a sensible and
convincing manner.

First, That Line AXYE expresses the true Degrees of the compound Motion: For
we sensibly perceive, that if each of the Forces which produce it can promote
the Body a Foot in a Minute, its composed Motion will be of two Foot in a
Minute, if both moving Forces do perfectly agree; since in that Case it is
enough to add AB to AC. But if those Forces are not altogether equal, the
composed Motion AE will be greater than one of the Compoundings, AB or AC, by
the Line YE: Whereas if those Motions be opposite in any thing, the composed
will be lesser than either of the compounding, by the Line YE; and if they be
entirely opposite, it will come to nothing.

Secondly, The Line AXYE represents to the Imagination the Way which that Body
shall go: For we sensibly perceive in what Proportion it shall advance more to
one than to the other side. We likewise perceive, that all the compound Motions
are direct, when each of the compounding is always the same, though they be
unequal betwixt themselves; or when the Compoundings are always equal betwixt
themselves, though they be not constantly the same. Lastly, It plainly appears,
that the Lines described by those Motions are crooked, when the Compounding are
both unequal to each other, and not always the same.

Thirdly, Last of all, That Line represents to the Imagination all the Places
in which that Body, driven by two different Forces toward two different
Places, shall be found; so that we can precisely mark the Point in which that
Body shall be in any Instant whatsoever. For instance, If you desire to know in
what Place that Body shall be at the beginning of the fourth Minute, divide the
Lines AB, or AC, in such Parts as express the Space through which those known
Forces might each of them carry that Body within a Minute; take three of those
Parts in either of these Lines, then draw through the beginning of the fourth
3X parallel to AB, or IIIX parallel to AC; for it is evident that the Point X,
which either of those Parallels determine in the Line AXYE, designs the Place
in which that Body shall be at the beginning of the fourth Minute of its
Motion. Thus that Method of examining Questions, not only keeps up the View of
the Mind, but also affords the Solution of them, and withal a sufficient Light
to discover unknown Things by a few that are known.

For Instance: After what has been said, it is enough only to know, that a Body
that was in A at such a time, is in E at such another; and that the different
Forces that drive it, describe Lines that make such an Angle as BAC, to
discover the Line of its composed Motion, and the different Degrees of Celerity
of the simple Motions; provided we know that those Motions are equal or uniform
to each other. For when we have two Points of a Right Line, we have it entire,
and we can compare the Right Line AE, or the composed Motion that is known,
with the Lines AB, and AC, that is, with the simple Motions that are unknown.

Now let us afresh suppose a Stone driven from A to B, by an uniform Motion,
but descending toward E with an unequal, like to that which ponderous Bodies
are thought generally to tend to the Center of the Earth, according to the
common Opinion; that is to say, let the Spaces which it passes over be amongst
themselves as the Squares of the Times in which it passes them over; the Line
which it shall describe will be a Parabola, and the Point in which the Stone
shall be at every Moment of its Motion, may be determined with the utmost
Nicety and Exactness.

For, if at the first Moment that Body falls Two Foot from A toward C, in the
second Six, in the third Ten, in the fourth Fourteen, and that it be driven by
an uniform Motion from A toward B, which is Sixteen Foot in length; it is
evident, that the Line which that Body describes is a Parabola, whose Parameter
is Eight Foot long; because the Square of the Lines that are applied the
Diameter, which Lines mark the Times, and the regular Motion of A toward B, is
equal to the Rectangle of the Parameter, through the Lines that mark the
unequal and accelerated Motions; so that the Squares of the applied Lines, or
the Squares of the Times, will be amongst themselves, as the Parts of the
Diameter contained betwixt the Pole and the applied Lines.

16: 64:: 2: 8 64: 144:: 8: 18, etc.

The bare looking on the sixth Figure is sufficient to persuade us of all this;
for the Semicircles show that A2 is to A4, that is, to the applied Line 2X, its
equal, as 2X is to A8: That A18 is to A12, that is, to the applied Line 18X, as
18X is to A8, etc. And therefore, that the Rectangles A2 by A8, and A18 by A8,
are equal to the Squares of 2X and 18X, etc. and consequently those Squares
have the same Proportion to each other, as those Rectangles.

The Parallels upon AB and AC, which cut each other at the Points XXX, do also
sensibly show the Way of that Body, and the Places in which it must be at such
a time. Lastly, They represent to the Eyes the true Degrees of the composed
Motion, and of its Acceleration, in any determinate Time.

Let Us suppose again a Body moving from A toward B and C, but unequally on
both sides. If that Inequality be always and every where alike, or if it either
increases or diminishes in the same proportion, the Line which it shall
describe will be a Right.

And though there should be an Inequality, either in the Augmentation or
Diminution of the simple Motions, whatever that Inequality be, it will not be
hard to find the Line that represents to the Imagination the Motion composed of
the simple Motions, if you express those Motions by Lines, and draw to these
Lines Parallels cutting each other: For, the Line that shall pass through all
the Intersections of those Parallels, will represent the Motion composed of
those Motions that are unequal, and unequally increased or diminished.

For example, If we suppose that a Body is moved by two equal or unequal
Forces, whatever they be; that one of those Motions still increases, or
diminishes, in any given Geometrical, or Arithmetical Proportion; and that the
other Motion increases or diminishes in some other Arithmetical, or Geometrical
Progression; to find out the Points through which the Line must pass that
represents to the Eyes and Imagination the Motions composed of those Motions,
draw, as has been said, the two Lines AB and AC, that express the simple
Motions, and divide those Lines as those several Motions are supposed to
accelerate, at the Points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5: If the Motion represented by the Line
AC increases or diminishes in such an Arithmetical Progression as 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. And if the Motion represented by the Line AB increases in this double
Progression, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or diminishes in the subduple Progression, 4, 2,
1,,,, divide it at the Points 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or 4, 2, 1,, ^/4,; lastly, draw
through those Divisions Parallels to AB and AC, and the Line AE, that passes
through all the Points of the Intersection of those Parallels, will be the Line
representing the composed Motion, and the Way through which the Body moves.

If we desire exactly to know how long a Body has been in coming to such a
Point, from its setting out; the Parallels drawn from the Point upon AB, or AC,
will show it; for the Divisions of AB, and AC, mark the Time. And likewise, if
we desire to know the Place to which a Body shall arrive within some certain
Time, the Parallels drawn from the Divisions of the Lines AB and AC, that
represent the Time, will, by their Intersection, show us the Point we seek for.
As to its Distance from the Term whence it has begun to move, it will always be
easy to know it, by drawing a Line from that Point toward A; for the Length
of that Line will be known, by comparing it either to AB or AC, which are
known. But as to the Length of the Way through which that Body has run, in
advancing to this Point, it will still be hard to discover it; because AE, the
Line of its Motion, being crooked, cannot be compared with either of those
Right Lines.

If you would determine the infinite Points through which that Body must pass,
that is, nicely describe, and by a continual Motion, the Line AE, you had need
make a Pair of Compasses that should move according to all the Conditions
expressed in the Suppositions that have been mentioned; which would be very
difficult to invent, and impossible to perform, and almost unprofitable, to
discover the Relations of Things betwixt themselves; since commonly we need not
all the Points of which a Line is composed, but only some, to help the
Imagining Faculty, when it considers those Motions.

Those Instances are sufficient to show, that we may by Lines express and
represent to the Imagination most of our Ideas; and that Geometry, which
teaches to compare those Lines, and thereby know their several Relations, is of
a greater use and extent than is commonly supposed. For, Astronomy, Music,
Mechanics, and generally all the Sciences, whose Objects are susceptible of
more or less, and may be considered under the Notion of extended, that is to
say, all accurate Sciences, may be referred to Geometry; because all
Speculative Truths, consisting in the Relations of things, or in Relations
betwixt their Relations, they may all be referred to Lines; Geometrical
Consequences may be drawn from them; and when those Consequences are made
sensible by Lines, it is almost impossible to mistake. Thus may Sciences be
carried very far with great easiness.

For Instance, The Reason why we distinctly know, and precisely mark an Octave,
a Fifth, a Fourth in Music, is that the Sounds are expressed by Strings
exactly divided; and that we know that the String which sounds an Octave is in
double proportion with that from whence the Octave rises; that a Fifth is with
it in a Sesquialter Proportion, or as 3 to 2, and so of the rest. For the Ear
alone cannot judge of Sounds, with so much nicety and accuracy as a Science
requires. The most skilful Practitioners, the most delicate and nicest Ears are
not sensible enough to observe the difference betwixt certain Sounds, and
judging of things by the Sensation they have of them, fasly imagine that
there is none at all. Some cannot distinguish betwixt an Octave and 3 thirds,
others fancy that the Major Tone differs not from the Minor; so that the Comma,
which is their Difference, is insensible to them, and much more the Schisma,
which is but the half of the Comma.

And therefore, it is Reason alone that manifestly shows us, that the space of
the String which makes the Difference betwixt certain Sounds, being divisible
into several parts, there may still be a great number of different Sounds, very
useful for Music, which the Ear cannot distinguish. Whence it plainly
appears, that without Arithmetic and Geometry, we should have no exact and
regular Knowledge of Music; neither could we succeed in that Science but by
Chance and Imagination, and so Music would cease from being a Science,
grounded upon undeniable Demonstrations. In the mean while it must be granted,
that the Songs which owe their birth to the strength of Imagination, are, for
the most part, finer and more pleasant to the Senses, than those that are
composed by Rule.

And likewise in Mechanics, the Heaviness of a Body, and the Distance of the
Center of Heaviness from its Prop, being capable of more of less, both may be
figured by Lines: So that Geometry is useful to discover and demonstrate an
infinite number of new Inventions, very convenient to this Life, and pleasing
to the Mind, because of their Evidence.

For Instance, If a Weight of six pounds is to be put in aequilibrium with one
of three, let that Weight of six pound hang on the Arm of a Balance, at two
Foot distance from the Prop: then only knowing this general Principle of all
Mechanics, That Weights to stand in aequilibrium, must be in a reciprocal
Proportion with their Distances from the Prop; (that is, That one Weight must
be to the other, as the Distance betwixt the last Weight and the Prop is to the
Distance of the first Weight from the said Prop;) it will be easy to find out
by Geometry, what must be the Distance of a Weight of Three pounds, that all
may remain in aequilibrio; if you find by the Twelfth Proposition of the Sixth
Book of Euclid, a fourth proportional Line, which here will be of four Foot. So
that you may plainly discover all the Truths that depend upon that fundamental
Principle of Mechanics, (when once known,) by the use of Geometry; that is, by
representing with Lines whatever can be considered in Mechanics.

Geometrical Lines and Figures are therefore most proper to represent to the
Imagination, the Relations betwixt Magnitudes, or betwixt things that differ in
degree of more and less, as Spaces, Times, Weights, etc. as well because they
are most simple Objects, as that they are imagined with great easiness. It may
even be said, to the Honor of Geometry, That Lines can represent to the
Imagination more things than the Mind can know. Since Lines can express the
Relations of incommensurable Magnitudes, that is, such Relations as cannot be
known, because there is no common Measure to compare them together. But that
Advantage is not very considerable, as to the Search after Truth; because those
sensible Representations of incommensurable Magnitudes, discover nothing to the
Mind.

Geometry is therefore exceedingly useful, to make the Mind attentive to those
things, whose Relations we desire to discover: However it must be granted, that
it is sometimes an Occasion of Error, because the evident and pleasant
Demonstrations of that Science, takes us up so much, that we have not a
sufficient Regard for the Consideration of Nature. Thence it comes, that the
new-invented Engines do not all succeed; that those Musical Composures, in
which the Proportions of Consonances are best observed, are not always the most
grateful; and that the most accurate Calculations of Astronomy do not always
best foretell the Incidence and Duration of Eclipses. Nature is not abstracted;
Levers and Wheels, in Mechanics, are not Mathematical Lines and Circles: All
Men are not pleased with the same Musical Tunes, nor even the same Man at
different times; for their Satisfaction proceeds from the Commotions of their
Spirits, than which nothing can be more variable. And as to Astronomy, the
Course of the Planets is not perfectly regular, whilst floating in the vast
Spaces they are irregularly carried by the fluid Matter that surrounds them: So
that the Errors of Astronomy, Music, Mechanics, and all Sciences in which
Geometry is used, are not to be ascribed to that undoubted Science, but to the
false Application that is made of it.

For Instance, we suppose that Planets, by their Motion, describe Circles and
Ellipses perfectly regular, And though that be not exactly true, yet w^ do
well to suppose it so, that we may draw Inferences from thence, and because it
wants but little of being true; but we must still remember, that the Principle
from which we argue is a Supposition. Likewise in Mechanics, we suppose Wheels
and Levers perfectly hard without gravity and rubbing, and like to Mathematical
Lines and Circles: or rather, we have not a sufficient consideration for the
said Gravity and rubbing, for the Nature of the Matter, and the Relation those
things have betwixt them. We mind not that Hardness and Bulk increase
Heaviness; Heaviness fretting, whilst fretting diminishes Force, and causes the
Engine to break, or wears it out very quickly: So that what often succeeds upon
a small portion of Matter, seldom takes effect upon a great Body.

No wonder therefore if we mistake, since we argue from Principles not fully
known; nor yet because it rids us not of all Errors, must we imagine Geometry
useless. It makes us draw from our Suppositions very true and consequential
Inferences; and affords us an evident Knowledge of what we consider, by making
us attentive. We can even discover by its means, the Falsehood of our
Suppositions; for being certain of the Truth of our Reasonings, which however
do not agree with Experience, we discover that our Principles are false. But
without Geometry and Arithmetic we can discover nothing, that is somewhat
difficult, in the most accurate Sciences, though we argue from certain and
undeniable Principles.

We must then look upon Geometry as a sort of universal Science, which opens
and enlarges the Mind, makes it attentive, and affords it so much Skill as to
regulate its Imagination, and to draw from it all the possible Succors. For by
the assistance of Geometry, the Mind regulates the Motion of the Imagination,
and the Imagination regulated keeps up the View and Application of the Mind.

But that we may learn to make a good use of Geometry, we must observe that all
the things that fall under the Imagination, are not as easily imaginable one as
the other; since all the Images do not equally fill the Capacity of the Mind.
It Is more difficult to imagine a Solid than a Plain, and this than a simple
Line; because the clear perception of a Solid requires a greater thought than
that of a Plain, and a Line. Even Lines differ, as to this, amongst themselves;
a Parobolick, Elliptick, or some other very composed Line, requires more
thinking, that is, takes up the Mind more than the Figure of a Circle, and this
than a right Line; because it is harder to imagine Lines that are described by
very composed Motions, and have several different Relations, than those that
are drawn by Motions very simple, and have but a few Relations. For Relations
cannot be clearly perceived without the Attention of the Mind to several
things, and as their number is greater, so must the thought or the perception
be more extended. Hence it happens, that there are Figures so much composed,
that they extend beyond the reach of a distinct Imagination; whereas others may
be imagined with great facility.

Amongst the three sorts of Right-lined Angles, viz. the acute, the right, and
the obtuse, none but the Right raises a very distinct and determinate Idea. For
as there are an Infinity of either acute or obtuse Angles, that differ all from
one another; so we can imagine nothing nicely nor distinctly, when we imagine
an acute or obtuse Angle. But we cannot be mistaken in imagining a right Angle;
the Idea of it is so very distinct, and its Image which it raises in the Brain
so very nea^ and just.

True it is, that we may determine the general and indefinite Idea of an acute
Angle to the particular Idea of an Angle of 30 degrees, which Idea is as
accurate as that of an Angle of 90, that is, or a right Angle; but the Image of
it, which we may endeavor to imprint on the Brain, will never ^e so very
exact, as that of a right Angle; being not used to describe that Image, we
cannot draw it but by thinking on a Circle, or on the determinate Portion of a
Circle divided into equal Pa^^s. But to imagine a right Angle, we need not
think on that division of a Circle; the bare Idea of a Perpendicular is
sufficient for the Imagination to draw the Image of that Angle; and we can
^^present Perpendiculars without trouble, being used to see all things standing
upright.

Hence it is easy to judge, That to have a simple, distinct, and
well-determin'd Object, apt to ^e easily imagined, and consequently to make the
Mind attentive, and to promote its Evidence in the Truths it is in quest of; we
must reduce all the Magnitudes we consider to plain Superficies, termin'd by
Lines and right Angles, as are perfect Squares, and other right Angled Figures,
or to bare right Lines; for these are the Figures whose nature is the most
easily known.

We pretend not however that all the Subjects of our Knowledge and Enquiry, may
be represented by Geometrical Lines and Figures. There are many, which neither
can nor ought to be brought under that Rule. For Instance, the Knowledge of a
God, Allmighty, All-just, on whom all things depend all manner of ways, who
commands his Creatures to obey his Orders, that they may be capable of
Happiness; that Knowledge, I say, is the Principle of all Morality, and of an
infinite number of certain and undoubted Consequences; yet neither the
Principle, nor the Consequences, can be represented by Geometrical Figures.
Neither is it possible to figure and represent by Lines many Notions of Natural
Philosophy, which yet may evidently discover to us several Truths. However, it
may be truly said, that an Infinity of things may be examined and learned by
that Geometrical Method; which is ever advantageously employed, since it
accustoms the Mind to Attention, by causing it to make a regular use of its
Imagination; and that things which are learned that way, are more clearly
demonstrated, and easier retained than others.

I might have ascribed to the Senses, the Assistances we derive from Geometry,
to preserve the Attention of the Mind; but though Lines be something sensible,
yet, I thought, Geometry belongs rather to the Imagination, than to the Senses.
It would be unprofitable to set down my Reasons for it; which could only
justify the order I have observed in this Treatise: and that is a thing not
very material to our purpose. I have not yet spoken of Arithmetic and Algebra,
because the Ciphers and Letters of the Alphabet, that are used in those
Sciences, are not so serviceable to strengthen the Attention of the Mind as to
encrea^e its Extent, as we shall explain it in the following Chapter.

These are the general Helps to improve the Attention of the Mind: I know of no
other, besides a firm Resolution of being attentive; of which we forbear to
speak, because we suppose it in those that give up themselves to study.

There are, however, some others particular to some Persons; as, some Meats,
some Drinks, some Places, some Dispositions of the Body, and the like; which
every one must learn from Experience, observing the State of his Imagination
after the Meal, and what Things best preserve, or most dissipate the Attention
of the Mind. This only may be said in general, That the moderate Use of such
Aliments as make many Animal Spirits, is very fit to improve the Attention of
the Mind, and the Strength of the Imagination, when it is weak and languishing.

CHAP. V.
Of the Means to improve the Extent and Capacity of the Mind: That Arithmetic
and Algebra are of absolute Necessity to it.

WE ought not hastily to imagine, that the Extent and Capacity of the Mind can
really be increased. The Humane Soul is, if I may so speak, a determined
Quantity, or a Portion of Thought, contained within some certain Bounds, which
she cannot pass: She cannot grow greater, or more capacious than she is: She
neither swells up, nor dilates, as it is commonly believed of Liquors and
Metals; and perceives never more at one time, than another.

This, I confess, seems contrary to Experience; since sometimes we think upon
many Objects, and sometimes but upon one; and even we often suppose, that we
think upon nothing. However, if it be considered, that Thought is to the Soul,
what Extension is to Matter; it will plainly appear, that as a Body cannot
truly be more extended at one time than another, so, if we conceive it right,
the Soul cannot think more at one time than another; whether it be then that
she perceives many Objects, or is taken up with one, or even when she is said
to think upon nothing.

But the Reason why we imagine that we think more at one time than another, is,
that we do not sufficiently distinguish betwixt confused and distinct
Perceptions. More Thought is doubtless required, or the Capacity of Thinking
must be more filled, distinctly to perceive several Objects, than one alone;
but we need not more Thought, to perceive many Things confusedly, than one
alone distinctly. Thus the Degrees or Quantity of Thought is equal in the Soul,
when she considers many Things, and when she considers only one: For, when she
is taken up with one Thing, she has always a clearer Idea of it, than when she
applies her self to many.

For, it is fit to be observed, That a simple Perception sometimes contains as
much Thought, or fills as much the Thinking Capacity of the Mind, as a
Judgment, and even a composed Reasoning; since Experience teaches us, that the
simple but lively, clear, and evident Perception of one Thing, engages our
Application, and possesses us as much, as a composed Reasoning, or the ob^cure
and confused Perception of several Relations betwixt many Things.

For, as there is as much or more Sensation in the sensible Sight of an Object,
which I hold near my Eyes, and curiously examine; than in the Sight of a
spacious Field, on which I cast a negligent and careless Eye; because the
nearness of the Sensation of the Object near my Eyes, makes up for the Extent
of that confused Sensation of those many Things which I slightly and
unattentively look upon in a Field: So the spiritual Sight the Mind has of an
Object, is often so lively and distinct, that it contains as much and more
Thought, than the View of the Relations betwixt many Things.

True it is, that at some certain times it seems to us as though we thought but
upon one Thing, which yet we can hardly comprehend; whereas at other times we
comprehend that Thing, and several others, with great easiness: Thence we
imagine, that the Soul has more Extent, and a larger Capacity of Thinking, at
one time, than at another. But our Mistake is visible; for the Reason why at
some certain times we can scarce conceive the easiest Things, proceeds not from
the Capacity of the Soul's being straightened or impaired; but from its being
filled with some lively Sensation of Pain or Pleasure, or with a great number
of weak and dark Sensations, that cause a sort of Giddiness, which is commonly
nothing else but the confused Sensation of a great number of Things.

A Piece of Wax is susceptible of a very distinct Figure; but cannot admit two,
without a Mixture of both; since it cannot be perfectly round and square at the
same time: and if one should pretend to give it a Million of Figures, none of
them would be distinct. And in that Case, supposing that Piece of Wax capable
of knowing its own Figures, yet it could not tell which it is that terminates
it on all sides, the number would be so great. It is even so with our Soul,
when a very great number of Modifications take up her Capacity; she can
perceive none distinctly, because she has not a separate Sensation of them, and
so thinks she is sensible of nothing. She cannot say that she feels Pain,
Pleasure, Light, Sound, Savor; it is none of those Qualities, and yet it is them
all together, she is sensible of.

And though we should suppose that the Soul is not subject to the confused and
unruly Motion of the Animal Spirits, and so free from the Contagion of her
Body, as to have her Thoughts altogether independent on what happens in it; yet
it might fall out that we should easier understand some Things at one time than
at another, without any Enlargement or Diminution in the Capacity of our Soul;
for then we might think upon particular Objects, or of Being indefinite and in
general.

The general Idea of Infinite is inseparable from the Mind, and wholly takes up
its Capacity, whenever it thinks upon no particular Thing: For when we say,
that we think on nothing, it signifies not that we think not upon that general
Idea, but only that our Thoughts are not applied to any particular Object.

And certainly, if that Idea did not fill our Mind, we could not think, as we
do, upon all sorts of Things; since we cannot think upon Objects of which we
have no Knowledge. And if that Idea were not more present to the Mind when we
suppose we think upon nothing, than when we are busy about some particular
Object, we could as easily think upon whatever we please, when we are mightily
taken up with some particular. Truth, as when we are not attentive unto any
thing: Which is repugnant to Experience. For, to instance, when we are strongly
engaged in meditating on some Geometrical Proposition, we find not so much
easiness to think upon other Things, as when we are diverted by no particular
Thought. And therefore we think more on the General and Infinite Being, when we
think less on the Particular and Finite; and we think always as much at one
time as at another.

We cannot then improve the Extent and Capacity of the Mind, by swelling it up,
as I may say, and giving it more Reality than it has received from Nature: But
only by a skilful and dexterous managing thereof; which is done to the best
advantage by Arithmetic and Algebra: For those Sciences afford Means of
abridging Ideas so methodically, and reducing them into such an Order, as that
the Mind, with its little Extent, is capable, with their Assistance, of
discovering very composed Truths, and such as appear at first sight
incomprehensible. But we must draw these Things from their Principle, that we
may explain them with more clearness and certainty.

Truth is nothing else but a real Relation, either of Equality or Inequality:
Whereas Falsehood is but the Negation of Truth, or a false and fantastic
Relation. Truth is that which is, and Falsehood is not; or, if you will, is
that which is not. We never mistake when we see Relations that are, since we
cannot be deceived when we see the Truth: But we always mistake, when we judge
that we see some Relations that are not in being; for then we see a Falsehood,
we see what is not, or rather we see not at all. Whoever sees a Relation of
Equality betwixt two times Two, and Four, sees a Truth, because there is such a
Relation as he sees; and whoever sees a Relation of Inequality betwixt twice
Two, and Five, sees a Truth, because he sees a Relation that really is: But
whoever judges that he sees a Relation of Equality betwixt two times Two, and
Five, mistakes, because he sees, or rather supposes he sees, a Relation of
Equality where there is none. Truths are but Relations, and the Knowledge of
Truths is the Knowledge of Relations: But Falsehood is not, and the Knowledge
of Falsehood, or a false Knowledge, is, if it may be so said, the Knowledge of
what is not; and what is not, cannot be known, but by Relation to what is: So
Error cannot be understood, but by comparing it to Truth.

There may be distinguished as many Species of Falsehood, as of Truth; and as
there are Three sorts of Relations, viz. of one Idea to another; of an Object
to its Idea, or of an Idea to its Object; and lastly, of one Object to another:
So there are Three kinds of Truth and Falsehood; namely, betwixt Ideas, betwixt
Things and their Ideas, and betwixt Things themselves. It is true, that 2 times
2 are 4; it is false, that twice 2 are 5: That is a Truth and a Falsehood
betwixt Ideas. It Is true, that there is one Sun; it is false, that there are
two: Here you have a Truth and a Falsehood betwixt Things and their Ideas. It Is
true, that the Earth is bigger than the Moon; and it is false, that the Sun is
smaller than the Earth: There is a Truth and Falsehood betwixt Objects
themselves.

Of those Three sorts of Truths, such as are betwixt Ideas are Eternal and
Immutable, and upon that account are the Rule and Measure of all others;
because every Rule and Measure ought to be unchangeable. And as Arithmetic,
Algebra, and Geometry, are general Sciences, that rule and contain all the
particular; so they only consider those sorts of Truths. All Truths or
Relations betwixt Creatures, or betwixt Ideas and created Things, are obnoxious
to those Changes whereof Creatures are susceptible. Nothing but the Truth
betwixt our Ideas and the Sovereign Being, or betwixt Ideas themselves, is
Immutable; because neither God, nor the Ideas he contains, are subject to
Alteration.

And therefore it is only that sort of Truths which are betwixt our Ideas, that
we try to discover by the Exercise of our Reason; since we, for the most part,
make use of our Senses to discover the others; as, we use our Eyes and Hands to
ascertain us of the Existence of Things, and to know the Relations of Equality
or Inequality betwixt them. There is nothing but Ideas of which the Mind can
Infallibly know the Relations by it self, and without the use of Senses. But
there are not only Relations betwixt our Ideas, there are also Relations
betwixt the Relations of our Ideas, betwixt the Relations of those Relations,
betwixt the Collection of many Relations, and so ad infinitum; that is to say,
that there are Truths infinitely compounded and perplexed. In Geometrical Style
we call a simple Truth, or the Relation of one Idea to another, (as the
Relation of 4 to 2, or to 2 times 2) a Geometrical Reason, or only a Reason:
For the Excess and Defect of an Idea, or, to use the common Terms, the Excess
or Defect of a Magnitude, is not properly a Reason; nor equal Excesses and
Defects, equal Reasons. When the Ideas or Magnitudes are equal, there is a
Reason of Equality, and one of Inequality when they are unequal.

The Relation betwixt Relations of Magnitudes, that is to say, between Reasons,
is called Compounded Reason, because it is a compounded Relation; as the
Relation of 6 to 4, and 3 to 2. When the Compounding Reasons are equal, the
Compounded bears the Name of Proportion, or Duplicate Reason. The Relations of
8 to 4, and 6 to 3, are a Proportion; because those two Relations are equal.

It must be observed, That all the Relations or Reasons, as well simple as
compounded, are true Magnitudes, that very Name of Magnitude being a relative
Term, and necessarily importing a Relation: For, there is nothing Great by it
self, and without Relation to another, besides the Infinite or Unite. All
entire Numbers are as true Relations as Fractions themselves, or as Numbers
compared with, or divided by, others; though we do not consider this, because
entire Numbers may be expressed by one Arithmetical Figure. So 4, for instance,
or 8/2, is as true a Relation as 2/4, or 2/8, though the Unite to which 4
relates, be not expressed, but understood, 4 being equal to 4^^, or 8/2; and
therefore every Magnitude being a Relation, or every Relation being a
Magnitude, it is plain that we can express all Magnitudes by Ciphers, and
represent them by Signs to the Imagination.

So that all Truths being but Relations, to know all Truths exactly, both
simple and compounded, it is sufficient to have an exact Knowledge of all sorts
of Relations, simple and compound: We have already observed, that there are
two, viz. Relations of Equality, and Inequality. It is plain, that those of
Equality are alike; and that as soon as we know that a Thing is equal to
another that is known, we have an accurate Knowledge of its Relation: But it
goes not so with Inequality; for because we know that a Tower is higher than a
Fathom, and lower than a thousand, it follows not that we have a true Idea of
its Height, or of its Relation with a Fathom.

To compare things together, or rather critically to measure the Relations of
Inequality, there is required a very exact Measure, a simple and very
intelligible Idea, an universal Measure, which may be adap^ed to all sorts of
Subjects. That Measure is Unity, which serves to measure all Things, and
without which it is impossible to have an accurate Knowledge of any. But all
Numbers being made up of Unites, it is evident, that without the Ideas of
Numbers, and a Method of comparing and measuring those Ideas, that is, without
Arithmetic, it is not possible to make any Progress in the Knowledge of
Compound Truths.

And as Ideas, and the Relations betwixt Ideas; in short, all sorts of
Magnitudes can be greater or less than others; so they cannon be made equal,
but by more or less Unites joined, or repeated as often as it is necessary: So
that it is only by the Addition and Subtraction of Unity, or of the Parts of
the Unity (when it is conceived as divided) that we exactly measure all sorts of
Magnitudes, and discover all sorts of Truths. Now Arithmetic and Algebra are,
of all Sciences, those that afford us most Skill and Light to effect those
Operations, and to manage the Capacity of the Mind to the best Advantage, since
they endue it with all the Perfection and Extent that it is capable of, and
teach it to discover all the Truths that can be exactly known.

For ordinary Geometry does not so perfect the Mind, as the Imagination; and
the Truths which that Science discovers, are not always so evident as the
Masters of it fancy. For instance: They suppose they have expressed the Value
of some Magnitudes, when they have proved them to be equal to some Lines, that
are the Subtendant of Right Angles, whose Sides are perfectly known; or to
others, that are determined by some one of the Conick Sections. But their
Mistake is visible; for those Subtendants are unknown themselves. We know more
exactly the 8, or the 20, than a Line imagined or described upon Paper, to be
the Subtendant of a Right Angle, whose Sides are 2, or one Side of which is 2,
and the other 4: At least we know, that the 4 is very near 3, and that the 20
is about 4 and there are Rules to come infinitely nearer and nearer the true
Magnitude; and if we cannot attain to it, it is because the Mind cannot
comprehend Infinite. Whereas we have but a very confused Idea of the Magnitude
of Subtendant Lines, and are even obliged to have recourse to the 8, or the 20,
to express them. So that the Geometrical Constructions that are used to
represent the Value of unknown Quantities, are not so conducible to the Mind,
to discover the Relations or Truths sought for, as to rule the Imagination: But
as we are more inclined to employ our Imagination, than our Mind; so Men of
Learning have commonly more esteem for Geometry, than for Arithmetic and
Algebra.

To understand perfectly, that Arithmetic and Algebra, joined together, are a
real Logic, or the Means to discover the Truth, and afford the Mind as much
Extent as it can acquire, it is sufficient to make some Reflections upon the
Rules of those Sciences.

We have observed, That all Truths are but Relations; that the most simple, and
best known of all, is that of Equality; that it is the initial Relation, from
whence we must begin to measure others, whereby to have an exact Idea of
Inequality; that the Measure of Inequality is the Unite, which must be repeated
or subtracted as often as the Excess or Defect of unequal Magnitudes require it.

Thence it is plain, that all the Operations that may be subservient to
discover the Relations of Equality, are only Additions and Subtractions;
Additions of Magnitudes, to make Magnitudes even; Additions of Relations, to
make equal Relations, or to put Magnitudes in proportion with each other; and
lastly, Additions of the Relations of Relations, to equal Relations of
Relations, or to put Magnitudes in a Compound Proportion.

To equal 4 to 2, we need only add 2 to 2, or subtract 2 from 4; or lastly, to
add the Unite to 2, and subtract it from 4; that is plain.

To even the Relation or Reason of 8 to 2, to that of 6 to 3, we must not add 3
to 2, or subtract 3 from 8, so that the Excess of one Number to the other ever
should be equal to 3, which is the Excess of 6 above 3; that would be an
Addition, and Evening of simple Magnitudes: But we must consider first, which
is the Magnitude of the Relation of 8 to 2, or what is the Value of 8/2; and we
shall find, that dividing 8 by 2, the Quotient of that Reason will be 4, or
that 8/2 is equal to 4. We must likewise see which is the Magnitude of the
Relation of 6 to 3; and finding it equal to 2, we shall discover, that those
two Reasons, 8/2 equal to 4, and 6/^ equal to 2, differ only by 2: So to make
them even, we may either add 6/3 to 6/3, equal to 2* which will make ^2/3, that
is, a Relation equal to 8/2; or subtract 4/2, equal to 2, from 8/2, which will
make 4/2, that is, a Relation equal to 6/3; or lastly, adding the Unite to 6/3,
and sutracting it from 8/2, we shall have 9/3 and 6/2, which are equal
Relations; for 9 is to 3, as 6 to 2.

Lastly, To find out the Greatness of Inequality betwixt Relations, proceeding,
one from a Compounded Reason, or from the Relation of a Relation of 12 to 3,
and 3 to 1; and the other from a Compounded Reason, or from the Relation of a
Relation, as of 8 to 2, and 2 to 1; we must follow the same Method. First, The
Magnitude of the Reason of 12 to 3, is marked by 4; 4 being the Quotient of the
Reason of 12 to 3, and 3 the Quotient of that of 3 to 1; and the Quotient of
Reason of the Quotients 4 and 3, is 4/3. Secondly, The Quotient of 8 to 2, is
4; and that of 2 to 1, is 2; and the Quotient of the Quotients 4 and 2, is 2:
So that the Inequality betwixt the Relations, that here result from the
Relations of the Relations, is the Difference betwixt 4/2 and 2, that is to
say, ^/3: And therefore add 2/^ to the Relation of the Reasons 12 to 3, and 3
to 1; or subtract them from the Relations of the other Reasons, 8 to 2, and 2
to 1; and you will make even those Relations of Relations, and produce a
Compounded Proportion. Thus we may use Additions and Subtractions to equal
Magnitudes, and their Relations both simple and compounded; and likewise to
frame an accurate Idea of the Greatness of their Inequality.

True it is, that we use also Multiplications and Divisions, both simple and
compounded; but they are only Compound Additions and Subtractions. To multiply
4 by 3, is to make as many Additions of 4, as 3 contains Unites; or to find a
Number that has the same Relation to 4, as 3 with the Unite. To divide 12 by 4,
is to subtract 4 from 12 as often as possible; that is, to find a Relation to
the Unite, that may be equal to that of 12 to 4; for 3, which is the Quotient,
has the same Relation to 1, as 12 has to 4. The Extractions of the Square,
Cubick, and other Roots, are but Divisions, to find out one, two, or three mean
proportional Magnitudes.

It Is evident, that the Mind of Man is so narrow, his Memory so unfaithful, and
his Imagination so shallow, that, without the use of Figures, and Writing, and
the Skill of Arithmetic, it would be impossible to make the necessary
Operations, to know the Inequality of Magnitudes, and their Relations,
especially where many Numbers must be added or subtracted; or, which is the
same thing, when those Numbers are very great, and can be added but by Parts:
For some of them would still be forgotten, there being no Imagination so
extended, as to add together very great Fractions, as 4723/1203,
12431/17240122; or to subtract one from the other.

Multiplication, Division, and the Extraction of Roots in entire Numbers, are
infinitely more puzling, than simple Additions or Subtractions. The Mind alone,
without the help of Arithmetic, is too shallow and weak to make such
Operations; and it would be to no purpose to insist upon the Proofs of it.

Notwithstanding, Analyticks, or Algebra, is still more excellent than
Arithmetic; because it less divides the Capacity of the Mind, and abridges the
Ideas in the most simple and easy manner imaginable. What may be done in a
long time by Arithmetic, is performed in a moment by Algebra, without puzling
the Mind by the Change of Ciphers; and the Tediousness of Operations. And
lastly, There are knowable Things, and necessary to be known, of which
Arithmetic alone cannot afford the Knowledge; but I believe not that there is
any Thing useful, and which may be certainly and exactly known, but it may be
found out by an Arithmetical and Algebraical Method. So that those two Sciences
are the Foundation of all others, and help us to the true Means to acquire all
those that are accurate, because the Capacity of the Mind cannot be better
managed than it is by Arithmetic, and especially by Algebra.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SIXTH BOOK, Concerning METHOD.
CHAP. I.
Of the Rules that are to be observed in the Search after Truth.

HAving explained the means how to improve the Attention and Extension of the
Mind, by which alone it may acquire a greater perfection, that is, become more
enlightened, sagacious and piercing; it is time to set down those Rules, the
Observation whereof is absolutely necessary to resolve any Question whatsoever.
I shall insist long upon it, and endeavor to explain them by several
Instances; that their necessity may be better known, and the Mind accustomed to
make use of them; it being not so difficult or necessary, to know them
theoretically, as to put them in Practice.

Let none expect here very extraordinary, surprising and abstruse things: For
on the contrary, that those Rules may be good, they must be very simple,
natural and few, very plain and intelligible, and depending on each other; in
short, such as may lead our Mind, and rule our Attention, without distracting
either: For Experience shows that the Logic of Aristotle is of no great use,
because it takes up the Mind too much, and disturbs the Attention it ought to
give to the Subjects of its Enquiry. Let then those Lovers of Mysteries and
rare Inventions lay aside for a while that capricious humor, and consider, as
attentively as they can, whether the Rules we shall prescribe are sufficient to
preserve Evidence in the Preceptions of the Mind, and to discover the most
hidden Truths. Unless they suffer themselves to be unjustly prejudiced against
those Rules, by the simplicity and easiness of the same, I hope that the great
use which may be made of them, as we shall show hereafter, will convince them,
that the most clear and simple Principles are the most pregnant and fecund, and
that rare and difficult things are not always so useful as our fruitless
Curiosity endeavors to persuade us.

The Principle of all those Rules is, that we must always preserve Evidence in
our Reasonings, to discover Truth without Fear, and danger of being mistaken.
From that Principle follows this general Rule, that respects the Subject of our
Studies: We ought only to Reason upon such things, whereof we have clear and
distinct Ideas; and by a necessary consequence, we must still begin with the
most simple and easy Subjects, and insist long upon them, before we undertake
the Enquiry into such as are more composed and difficult.

The Rules that concern the Method to be taken in resolving Questions, depend
likewise on the same Principle; and the first of those Rules is, that we must
very distinctly conceive the State of the Question proposed to be resolved:
that is, have Ideas of the Terms so distinct, as that we may compare them
together, and discover the Relations which we look for.

When those Relations cannot be found out by an immediate comparison of their
Ideas, then the second Rule is, that we must try by an Essay of Thought to
discover one, or several intermediate Ideas, that may be a means or common
measure to discover the Relations that are betwixt those things. A special care
is to be taken that those Ideas be the more clear and distinct, as the
Relations we endeavor to discover are more nicely exact and numerous.

When the Questions are very difficult, and require a long Examination, the
third Rule is, that we must carefully take off from the Subject to be
considered, all things whose Examination is not needful to the Discovery of the
Truth we are in quest of. For the Capacity of the Mind must not be vainly
shared and divided, but its strength must only be employed in such things as
may enlighten it; so that all those things which are to be laid aside, are such
as concern not the Question, and which, when taken off, leave it whole and
entire.

When the Question is thus brought within the least compass, the fourth Rule
is, to divide the Subject of our Meditations into Parts, and consider them one
after the other in a natural order; beginning with the most simple, or those
that contain the least number of Relations, and never meddling with the more
composed, before the most simple are distinctly known, and become familiar.

When they are become familiar by Meditation, the fifth Rule is, to abridge
Ideas and dispose them in the Imagination, or write them upon Paper, that they
may no longer clog and fill up the Capacity of the Mind. Though that Rule be
always useful, yet it is not of absolute necessity; unless it be in very
intricate Questions, that require a great extent of Mind, (for the Mind is only
enlarged by the abridgment of Ideas). But the use of that Rule and the
following, is best known by Algebra.

The Ideas of all the things that necessarily require Examination, being clear,
familiar, abridg'd, and disposed and ranged in good order in the Imagination,
or written upon Paper, the sixth Rule is, to compare them all by the Rules of
Complications, one with the other alternately, either by the View of the Mind
alone, or by the Motion of the Imagination, attended with the View of the Mind,
or by the Calculation of the Pen joined to the attention of the Mind and
Imagination.

If amongst all the Relations that result from those Comparisons, you find not
that which you enquire after, then take off again all the Relations that are
not subservient to resolve the Question, make the others familiar, abridge
them, posture and dispose them in the Imagination, or write them upon Paper,
compare them together by the Rules of Complications, and then see whether the
composed Relation that is looked for, is one of the composed Relations that
result from those new Comparisons.

If none of those new discovered Relations contain the Solution of the
Question, then take off again those that are useless, make the other familiar,
etc. [That is, do the same over and over, and] continuing thus, you shall
discover the Truth or Relation you enquire after, how composed soever it may
be; provided you can extend the Capacity of your Mind to it, by abridging your
Ideas, and still in all your Operations having before your Eyes the Scope you
aim at. For it is the continual and steady view of the Question which must
regulate all the advances of the Mind; since we should always know whither we
are going.

We must above all take care not to satisfy our selves with some glimpse or
likelihood; but begin anew so often the Comparisons that are conducible to
discover the Truths enquired after, as that we may not withold our Assent to
it, without feeling the secret Lashes and Reproofs of our internal Master that
Answers our Questions, that is, the Application of our Mind, and the Desires of
our Heart. Then will that Truth serve as an infallible Principle, to proceed in
the Acquisition of Sciences.

All the Rules we have given are not necessary in all sorts of Questions: for
the first Rule is sufficient in those that are easy: and we need but in some
others the first and second. In short, since we must make use of those Rules,
'till we have discovered the Truth we seek for; it follows, that the more
difficult the Questions are, the greater must the number of those Rules be
which we must put in practice.

Those Rules are not very numerous, but very natural, as depending upon each
other, and may be made so familiar as to fall of themselves into the Mind, as
often as shall be requisite. In short, they can rule the Attention of the Mind
without dividing it, which is in great part what we could desire; but they look
so inconsiderable in themselves, that to make them more recommendable, it is
necessary to show that the Philosophers are fallen into a great many Errors,
and Extravagancies, by not observing so much as the two first, which are the
chief and easiest of all; whereas Des Carts, by their use, has discovered all
those great and fruitful Truths, which are to be learned in his Works.

CHAP. II.
Of the general Rule that concerns the Subject of our Studies: That
School-Philosophers observe it not, which is the Cause of several Errors in
their Physics.

THE first of these Rules, and which respects the Subject of our Studies,
teaches, that we must not argue, except from clear Ideas; whence it follows,
that to study methodically, we must begin with things most simple and easy to
be understood, and insist long upon them, before we undertake to enquire after
the more composed and difficult.

Every one will easily grant the necessity of that general Rule; plainly
seeing, that he walks in the dark, who reasons upon obscure Ideas, and
uncertain Principles. But 'twill be matter of surprise to hear us affirm, that
it is hardly ever observed; and that the greatest part of those Sciences, which
still at this day flush the Pride of some false Pretenders to Science, are only
grounded upon such Ideas, as are either too confused, or too general, to be
conducible to the finding out of Truth.

Aristotle, who so justly deserves the Quality of Prince of such Philosophers,
(as being the Father of that Philosophy which they so studiously cultivate,)
reasons very seldom upon other Ideas, than such as are confused and sensible,
and upon others that are general, undetermined, and representing nothing
particular to the Mind. For the ordinary Expressions of that Philosopher are so
perplexed, as to represent only to the Senses and Imagination, the confused
Sentiments we have of sensible things; or to make his Disciples speak in such a
rambling and indeterminate manner, as not to understand themselves. Most of his
Works, but especially his Eight Books of Physics, on which are as many
different Commentators as there are Professors of Philosophy, are a mere
Logical Tattle, where he talks much, and says nothing: Not that his Style is
too copious and diffused, but because he has a particular Talent at being
succinct, and saying nothing but Words. In his other Works he makes not such
frequent use of his loose and general Terms; but those he employs raise only
the confused Ideas of the Senses; by which Ideas he pretends, in his Problems,
and elsewhere, to resolve in two Words an infinite Number of Questions, of
which it may be demonstrated that they are altogether insoluble.

But that my Meaning may be better understood, what I have proved in other
Places must here be remembered, viz. That all the Terms that excite nothing but
sensible Ideas, are equivocal; nay, and what is to be well observed, Equivocal
from Error and Ignorance, which must needs cause an infinite number of
Delusions.

The Word Ram is equivocal, signifying an Animal that ruminates, and a
Constellation into which the Sun enters at Spring; but that seldom causes any
Mistake: For he must be an Astrologer with a Witness, who should imagine any
Relation betwixt those two Things, and believe, for instance, that we are
subject at that time to vomit up the Medicines that we take, because the Ram is
a ruminating Beast. But as to the Terms of sensible Ideas, but few acknowledge
them for Equivocal. Aristotle and the Ancient Philosophers did not so much as
dream on it; which will be agreed to by any one that has read any of their
Books, and distinctly knows the Cause why those Words are liable to
Equivocation. For nothing is more evident, than that the Philosophers Opinion,
as to that Matter, was quite contrary to the Truth.

For instance: When they say, that Fire is hot, Grass green, Sugar sweet; they
understand, just as Children, and the vulgar of Men, that Fire contains in it
what they feel when they warm themselves; that Grass has painted upon it the
Colors they see; that Sugar is endued with that Sweetness they taste when they
eat it; and so as to all other visible and sensible Qualities; which cannot be
denied by those that have read their Writings. They talk of sensible Qualities
as of Sensations; they take Heat for Motion. And thus, by the Equivocation of
Terms, they confound the Modes of Existence peculiar to Bodies, with the
Modifications of the Soul.

It Is no longer since than Des Cartes's time, that to those confused and
indeterminate Questions, Whether Fire is hot, Grass green, and Sugar sweet,
etc. we use to answer by distinguishing the Equivocation of sensible Terms that
express them. If by Heat, Color, and Savor, you understand such and such
Dispositions of Parts, or Motion of insensible Particles, then Fire is hot,
Grass green, and Sugar sweet. But if by Heat, and other Qualities, you
understand what I feel when near the Fire, what I see when I see Grass, etc.
Fire is not hot, nor Grass green, etc. For the Heat I feel, and the Colors I
see, are only in the Soul, as has been proved in the First Book. But as Men
commonly suppose, that what they feel is the same with that which is in the
Object; so they believe they are in the right, when they judge of the Qualities
of Objects by their own Sensations: And thus they hardly say two Words without
speaking a Falsehood, and never say any thing upon that Matter, but what is
obscure and confused; and that for the several following Reasons.

First, Because all Men have not the same Sensations of the same Objects, nor
even the same Man in different Times, or when different Parts of his Body are
affected by them. What is sweet to one, is bitter to another; what is hot to
one, is cold to another; what seems hot to a Man when he is cold, feels cold to
himself when he is hot, or when other Parts of his Body are affected. Water,
that feels warm to the Hands, will seem cold if we wash with it any Part near
the Heart. Salt, that is savoury to the Tongue, is pricking and smarting to a
Wound. Sugar is sweet, and Aloes very bitter to the Tongue; but nothing is
either sweet or bitter to the other Senses: So that when we say, a Thing is
cold, sweet, bitter, etc. that same has no certain Signification.

Secondly, Because different Objects can cause the same Sensation. Plaster,
Bread, Snow, Sugar, Salt, etc. are of the same Color; and yet their Whiteness
is different, if we judge of 'em otherwise than by the Senses: And therefore
when we say, that Meal is white, we say not any thing distinctly significative.

The third Reason is, Because such Qualities of Bodies as occasion Sensations
altogether different, are however almost the same; whereas such as excite very
near the same Sensation, are often very different. The Qualities of Sweetness
and Bitterness differ but little in Objects; whereas the Sense of Sweet
essentially differs from that of Bitter. The Motions that cause Smart and
Tickling, differ but in more or less; and yet the Sensations of Tickling and
Smart are essentially different. On the contrary, the Sharpness of Fruit
differs not so much from Bitterness, as Sweetness does; however, that sharp
Quality is the farthest from Bitterness that possibly can be: For, a Fruit that
is sharp for being unripe, must undergo a great many Changes, before it grows
bitter from Rottenness, or too much Ripeness. When Fruits are ripe, they taste
sweet; and bitter, when over-ripe: Bitterness and Sweetness therefore in Fruits
differ but in degree of more and less; which may be the Reason why they seem
sweet to some Persons, whilst they taste bitter to others: Nay, there are those
to whom Aloes seem as sweet as Honey. The same may be said of all sensible
Ideas; so that the Words Sweet, Bitter, Salt, Sour, Acid, etc. Red, Green,
Yellow, etc. of such and such a Smell, Savor, Color, etc. are all equivocal,
and raise no clear and distinct Idea in the Mind. However, School-Philosophers,
and the vulgar part of Men, judge of all the sensible Qualities of Bodies by
the Sensations they receive from them.

Nor do the Philosophers only judge of these sensible Qualities by their own
Sensations of them; but also judge of the Things themselves, from the Judgments
they have passed about sensible Qualities: For, from their having had
Sensations of certain Qualities essentially different, they judge that there is
a Generation of new Forms, producing those fantastic Differences. Wheat
appears yellow, hard, etc. Meal, white, soft, etc. Thence, upon the Testimony
of their Eyes and Hands, they infer, That those Bodies are essentially
different, unless they chance to think on the Manner of the Transmutation of
Wheat into Flower: For Meal is nothing but bruised and ground Corn; as Fire is
only divided and agitated Wood; as Ashes are but the grossest Parts of the
divided Wood without Agitation; as Glass is but Ashes, whose Particles have
been polished and rounded by the Attrition caused by the Fire: And so in other
Transmutations of Bodies.

It Is therefore evident, that sensible Words and Ideas are altogether
unserviceable to a just stating, and clear resolving of Questions; that is, to
the Discovery of Truth. Yet there are no Questions, how intricate soever they
may be, by the equivocal Terms of the Senses, but Aristotle, and most part of
other Philosophers, pretend to resolve them in their Books, without the
foregoing Distinctions, and without considering that they are equivocal by
Error and Ignorance.

If, for example, those Persons who have employed the best part of their Life
in reading Ancient Philosophers and Physicians, and have wholly imbibed their
Spirit and Opinions, are asked whether Water be wet, whether Fire be dry, Wine
hot, the Blood of Fishes cold, Water rawer than Wine, Gold perfecter than
Mercury; whether Plants and Beasts have Souls; and a thousand like undetermined
Questions; they rashly answer, by consulting only the Impressions of Objects
upon their Senses, or the Tracks the reading of Authors has left upon their
Memory. They never think those Terms are equivocal; it is a Wonder to them they
should need a Definition; and they cannot endure those that endeavor to let
'em understand, that their Procedure is too quick, and that they are seduced by
their Senses; and though they are never at a loss for Distinctions to perplex
the most evident Things, yet in these Questions, in which Equivocation needs so
much to be removed, they find nothing to distinguish.

If we consider, that most of the Questions of Philosophers and Physicians
contain some equivocal Terms, like to those that have been spoken of; we shall
not doubt, but that those Learned Gentlemen, that could not define them, were
unable to say any Thing solid and real, in the bulky Volumes they have
composed: Which is, in a manner, sufficient to overthrow most of the Opinions
of the Ancients. It is not so with Des Carts; he perfectly knew how to
distinguish those Things: He never resolves any Question by sensible Ideas; and
whoever shall be at the pains to read him, shall see, that he clearly,
evidently, and almost ever demonstratively, explains the chief Operations of
Nature by the sole and distinct Ideas of Extension, Figures, and Motion.

The second sort of equivocal Words, that is much in request amongst
Philosophers, contains all those general Terms of Logic by which any Thing may
be easily explained, without so much as knowing it. Aristotle was the Man that
made the most of it; his Books are full of nothing else, and some are but a
mere Logic: He proposes and resolves all Things by the specious Words of
Genus, Species, Act, Power, Nature, Form, Faculty, Quality, Causa per se, Causa
per accidens: His Followers can hardly understand that those Words signify
Nothing, and that one is not more learned than he was, when he has heard, that
Fire dissolves Metals by its dissolving Faculty; that a Man digests not,
because his Stomach is weak, or because his Concoctive Faculty does not operate
as it should do.

I grant, that those who use such general Terms and Ideas for the Explication
of all Things, commonly fall not into so many Errors, as those that only
employ such Words as raise the confused Ideas of the Senses. The
School-Philosophers are not so liable to be deceived, as some opinionative and
dogmatical Physicians, who build Systems upon Experiments, the Reasons of which
are unknown to them; because the Schoolmen talk so generally, that they do not
venture much out of their Depth.

Fire heats, dries, hardens, and softens, because it has the Faculty of
producing those Effects: Sena purges by its purgative Quality: Bread nourishes
by its nutritious Quality. These Propositions are not liable to mistake; for a
Quality is that which denominates a Thing by such a Name; Master Aristotle's
Definition is undeniable: But he speaks true only because he says nothing; and
if his rambling, loose, and indefinite Notions engage not into Error, at least
they are wholly unserviceable to the Discovery of Truth.

For, though we know that there is in Fire a substantial Form, attended with a
Million of Faculties, like to that of heating, dilating, melting Gold, Silver,
and other Metals, lightening, burning, roasting; the Idea of that substantial
Form, with all its Faculties of producing Heat, Fluidity, Rarefaction, will not
help me to resolve this Question, Why Fire hardens Clay, and softens Wax? There
being no Connection betwixt the Ideas of Hardness in Clay and Softness in Wax,
and those of a substantial Form in Fire, and its Faculties of Rarefaction,
Fluidity, etc. The same may be said of all general Ideas; which are utterly
insufficient for resolving any Question.

But when I know that Fire is nothing else but divided Wood, whose Parts are in
a continual Agitation, by which alone it raises in me the Sensation of Heat;
and that the Softness of Clay consists in a Mixture of Water and Earth; those
Ideas being not general and confused, but particular and distinct, it will not
be difficult to perceive that the Heat of Fire must harden Clay, nothing being
easier to conceive, than that one Body may move another, if it meet with it,
being it self in Motion. We likewise easily perceive, that since the Heat we
feel near the Fire is caused by the Motion of the invisible Particles of Wood
striking against our Hands, Face, etc. if we expose Clay to the Heat of Fire,
the Particles of Water, that are mixed with those of Earth, being more thin and
disunited, and consequently more agitated by the Action and Impulse of the
fiety Corpuscles, than the gross Particles of Earth, must be separated and
expelled, and the other remain dry and hard. We shall perceive with the same
Evidence, that Fire must produce a quite contrary Effect upon Wax, if we know
that it is composed of Particles that are branched, and almost of the same
Bulk. Thus may particular Ideas be subservient to the Enquiry after Truth,
whilst loose and undeterminate Notions are not only altogether unserviceable,
but also insensibly engage us into Error.

For, these Philosophers are not content to make use of those general Terms,
and uncertain Ideas which answer to them; they moreover pretend, that those
Words signify some particular Beings; they give out, that there is a Substance
distinguished from Matter, which is the Form of it; and withal, an infinite
Number of little Beings, really distinguished from that Matter and Form, of
which they suppose as many as they have different Sensations of Bodies, or as
those Bodies are supposed to produce different Effects.

However, it is visible to any attentive Person, that those little Beings, for
instance, that are said to be distinguished from Fire, and supposed to be
contained in it for the producing Heat, Light, Hardness, Fluidity, etc. are but
the Contrivances of the Imagination, that rebels against Reason; since Reason
has no particular Idea that represents those little Beings. When the
Philosophers are asked, What is the illuminating Faculty in Fire? They only
answer, That it is a Being which is the Cause that Fire is capable of producing
Light. So that their Idea of that illuminating Faculty differs not from the
general Idea of Cause, and the confused Idea of the Effect they see; and
therefore they have no clear Idea of what they say, when they admit those
particular Beings; and so say what they not only understand not, but what is
impossible to be understood.

CHAP. III.
Of the most dangerous Error in the Philosophy of the Ancients.

PHilosophers not only speak without understanding themselves, when they
explain the Effects of Nature by some Beings of which they have no particular
Idea; but also establish a Principle whence very false and pernicious
Consequences may directly be drawn.

For, supposing with them, that there are in Bodies certain Entities
distinguished from Matter, and having no distinct Idea of those Entities; it is
easy to imagine, that they are the real or principal Causes of the Effects we
see. And this is the very Opinion of the vulgar Philosophers. The prime Reason
of their supposing those substantial Forms, real Qualities, and other such like
Entities, is, to explain the Effects of Nature: But when we come attentively to
consider the Idea we have of Cause or Power of acting, we cannot doubt but that
it represents something Divine: For, the Idea of a Sovereign Power is the Idea
of a Sovereign Divinity; and the Idea of a subordinate Power, the Idea of an
inferior Divinity, yet a true Divinity; at least, according to the Opinion of
the Heathens, supposing it to be the Idea of a true Power or Cause. And
therefore we admit something Divine in all the Bodies that surround us, when we
acknowledge Forms, Faculties, Qualities, Virtues, and real Beings that are
capable of producing some Effects by the force of their Nature; and thus
insensibly approve of the Sentiments of the Heathens, by too great a Deference
for their Philosophy. Faith indeed corrects us; but it may perhaps be said,
that the Mind is a Pagan, whilst the Heart is a Christian.

Moreover, it is a hard Matter to persuade our selves, that we ought neither to
fear nor love true Powers and Beings, that can act upon us, punish us with some
Pain, or reward us with some Pleasure. And as Love and Fear are a true
Adoration, it is hard again to imagine why they must not be adored: For,
whatever can act upon us as a true and real Cause, is necessarily above us,
according to Reason and St. Austin; and, by the same Reason and Authority, it is
likewise an immutable Law, That inferior Beings should be subservient to
superior: Whence that great Father concludes, That the Body cannot operate
upon the Soul Ego enim ab anima h^c corpus animari non pu^o, nisi intention
^acientis: nec ab isto quicquam illam pati arbitror, sed facere de illo, and in
illo, tanquam subjecto divinitus dominationi suae. l. 6. Mu^c. c. 5. See also
De quantit. Anim. c. 34.
, and that nothing can be above her but God only.

The chief Reasons that God Almighty uses in the Holy Scriptures, to prove to
the Israelites, that they ought to adore, that is, to love and fear him, are
drawn from his Power to reward or punish them; representing to them the
Benefits they have received from him, the Punishments he has inflicted upon
them, and his Power that is always the same. He forbids them to adore the Gods
of the Heathens, as such as have no Power over them, and can do them neither
harm nor good. He commands them to honor him alone, as the only true Cause of
Good and Evil, Reward and Punishment; Amos 3.6.
none of which can befall a City, according to the Prophet, but what comes from
him, by reason that natural Causes are not the true Causes of the Hurt they
seem to do us; and as it is God alone that acts in them, so it is He alone that
must be feared and loved in them: Soli Deo Honor and Gloria.

Lastly, The Sense of fearing and Loving what may be the true Cause of Good and
Evil, appears so natural and just, that it is not possible to cast it off. So
that in that false Supposition of the Philosophers, which we are here
endeavoring to destroy, that the surrounding Bodies are the true Causes of our
Pain and Pleasure; Reason seems to justify a Religion like the Pagan Idolatry,
and approve the universal Depravation of Morals.

Reason I grant, teaches not, to adore Onions and Leeks, for instance, as the
Sovereign Divinity; because they can never make us altogether happy when we
have them, or unhappy when we want them: neither did the Heathens worship them
with an equal Homage as their great Jupiter, whom they fansied to be the God of
Gods; or as the Sun, whom our Senses represent as the universal Cause, that
gives Life and Motion to all things, and which we can hardly forbear to look on
as the Sovereign Divinity, if we suppose, as the Pagan Philosophers, that he
Comprehends in his Being, the true Causes of what he seems to produce, as well
upon our Soul and Body, as upon all the Beings that surround us.

But if we must not pay a Sovereign Worship to Leeks and Onions, they deserve,
at least, some particular Adoration; I mean they may be thought upon and loved
in some manner, if it be true, that they can in some sort make us happy, and
may be honored proportionably to the good they do us. Surely Men that listen
to the Reports of Sense, think Pulse capable of doing them good; otherwise the
Israelites would not have bewailed the loss of them in the Wilderness, or
looked on themselves as unhappy, for being deprived thereof, had they not
fansied to themselves some great Happiness in the Enjoyment of them. See what
an Abyss of Corruption Reason plunges us into, when it goes hand in hand with
the Principles of Pagan Philosophy, and follows the footsteps of the Senses.

But that the Falsehood of that wretched Philosophy, and the Certainty of our
Principles, and Distinctness of our Ideas may not be longer doubted; it will be
necessary plainly to establish the Truths that contradict the Errors of the
Ancient Philosophers, or to prove in few words, that there is but one true
Cause, since there is but one true God; that the Nature and Force of every
thing is nothing but the Will of God; that all Natural things are not real, but
only occasional Causes; and some other Truths depending on them.

It is evident, that all Bodies, great and little, have no force to move
themselves: a Mountain, a House, a Stone, a Grain of Sand, the minutest and
bulkiest Bodies imaginable, are alike as to that. We have but two sorts of
Ideas, viz. of Spirits and Bodies; and as we ought not to speak what we
conceive not, so we must only argue from those two Ideas. Since therefore our
Idea of Bodies, convinces us that they cannot move themselves, we must conclude
that they are moved by Spirits. But considering our Idea of finite Spirits, we
see no necessary Connection betwixt their Will, and the Motion of any Body
whatsoever; on the contrary, we perceive that there is not nor can be any.
Whence we must infer, if we will follow Light and Reason, That as no Body can
move it self, so no Created Spirit can be the true and principal Cause of its
Motion.

But when we think on the Idea of God, or of a Being infinitely perfect, and
consequently Almighty, we are aware that there is such a Connection betwixt his
Will and the Motion of all Bodies, that it is impossible to conceive he should
will that a Body be moved, and it should not be moved. And therefore if we
would speak according to our Conceptions, and not according to our Sensations,
we must say that nothing but his Will can move Bodies. The moving force of
Bodies is not then in themselves, this force being nothing but the Will of God:
Bodies then have no proper Action, and when a moving Ball meets with another,
and moves it, the former communicates nothing of its own to the latter, as not
having in it self the Impression it communicates; though the former be the
Natural Cause of the latter's Motion; and therefore a natural Cause is not a
true and real Cause, but only an occasional; which in such or such a Case
determines the Author of Nature to act in such or such a manner.

It Is certain that all things are produced by the Motion of visible or
invisible Bodies; for Experience teaches us, that those Bodies, whose parts are
in greater Motion, are always the most active, and those that Cause the
greatest Alterations in the World: so that all the Forces of Nature are but the
Will of God, who Created the World; because he willed it, who spoke and it was
done Psalm. 33* 9.
; who moves all things, and produces all the Effects we see, because he has
established some Laws, by which Bodies Communicate their Motion to each other
when they meet together; and because those Laws are efficacious, they and not
the Bodies act. There is then no Force, Power, nor true Cause in all the
Material and sensible World: Nor need we admit any Forms, Faculties, or real
Qualities to produce Effects, which the Bodies bring not forth, or to divide
with God his own Essential Force and Power.

As Bodies cannot be the true Causes of any thing; so likewise the most Noble
Spirits are subject to the same impotency on that respect: They cannot know any
thing, unless God enlightens them; nor have the Sensation of any thing, unless
he modifies them; nor will, unless he moves them toward himself: They may
indeed determine the Impression God has given them to himself, toward other
Objects; but I doubt whether it can be called a Power. For if to be able to sin
is a Power, it is such a one, as the Almighty wants, says St. Austin
somewhere. If Men had of themselves the Power of loving Good, it might be said
that they have some Power; but they cannot so much as love, but because God
Wills it, and that his Will is Efficacious. They love, because God continually
drives them toward Good in general, that is, toward himself, for whom alone
they are Created and preserved. God moves them, and not themselves, toward
Good in general: and they only follow that Impression by a free Choice,
according to the Law of God, or determine it toward false and seeming Goods,
according to the Law of the Flesh; But they cannot determine it but by the
sight of Good. For being able to do nothing without an Impression from above,
they are incapable of loving any thing but Good.

But though it should be supposed, which is true in one sense, that Spirits
have in themselves the Power of knowing Truths, and loving Good; should their
Thoughts and Will produce nothing outwardly, it might still be said, that they
were impotent and unoperative. Now it seems undeniable, that the Will of
Spirits is not able to move the smallest Body in the World; it being evident
there is no necessary Connection betwixt the Will we may have of moving our Arm,
for instance, and the Motion of the same Arm. It moves indeed whenever we will
it, and we may be called, in that sense, the natural cause of the Motion of our
Arm; yet natural Causes are not true, but only occasional, as acting by the
mere force and efficacy of the Will of God, as we have already explained.

For how is it possible for us to move our Arm? To perform this, it is required
we should have Animal Spirits, and send them through certain Nerves toward
certain Muscles, to swell up and contract them, for so that Motion is
performed, as some pretend, though others deny it, and assert that the Mystery
is not yet discovered. However it be, most Men know not so much as that they
have Spirits, Nerves and Muscles, and yet move their Arms with as much and more
dexterity than the most skilful Anatomists. Men therefore will the moving their
Arm, but it is God that is able, and knows how to do it. If a Man cannot
overthrow a Tower, yet he knows what must be done to effect it: but not one
amongst them knows what the Animal Spirits must do to move one of his Fingers.
How should they then move the whole Arm of themselves? These things appear very
evident to me, and, I suppose, to all thinking Persons; though they may be
incomprehensible to others, such as are only used to the confused voice of the
Senses.

But Men are so far from being the true Causes of the Motions produced in their
Body, that it seems to imply a Contradiction they should be so. For a true
Cause is that betwixt which and its Effect, the Mind percieves a necessary
connection; for so I understand it. But there is none besides the infinitely
perfect Being, betwixt whose Will and the Effects the Mind can perceive a
necessary Connection; and therefore none but God is the true Cause, or has a
real Power of moving Bodies. Nay, it seems unconceivable, that God should
communicate this Power, either to Angels or Men: And those that pretend that
the Power we have of moving our Arm is a true Power, must by Consequence grant
that God can give Spirits the Power of creating, annihilating, and doing all
possible things; in short, that he can make them Almighty, as I am going to
pove.

God needs not Instruments to act, it is enough he should Will the Existence of
a thing, in order to its Existing; because it is contradictory that he should
will a thing, and his Will should not be fulfilled. And therefore his Power is
his Will, and to communicate his Power is to communicate his Will; so that to
communicate his Will to a Man or an Angel, can signify nothing else, but to
will that whenever that Man or Angel shall desire that such or such a Body be
moved, it may actually be moved. In which Case I see two Wills concurring
together, that of God, and that of the Angel, and to know which of them is the
true Cause of the Motion of that Body, I enquire which is the Efficacious. I
see a necessary Connection betwixt the Will of God, and the thing willed; in
this Case God wills that whenever the Angel shall desire that such a Body be
moved, it be really so. There is then a necessary Connection betwixt the Will of
God, and the Motion of that Body, and consequently God is the true Cause of
that Motion, and the Will of the Angel is only occasional.

Again, to make it more evidently manifest, let us suppose God wills it should
happen quite contrary to the Desire of some Spirits, as may be thought of the
Devils, or some other wicked Spirits in Punishment of their Sins. In that Case
it cannot be said God communicates his Power to them; since nothing happens of
what they wish. However the Will of those Spirits shall be the natural Cause of
the produced Effects: as such a Body shall be removed to the Right, because
they wish it were moved to the Left; and the Desires of those Spirits shall
determine the Will of God to act, as the Will of moving the Parts of our Body,
determine the first Cause to move them; and therefore the Desires of all finite
Spirits are but occasional Causes.

If, after all these Reasons, it be still asserted, that the Will of an Angel
moving a Body is a true, and not a bare occasional Cause; it is evident, that
the self-same Angel might be the true Cause of the Creation and Annihilation of
all things, since God might as well communicate to him his Power of Creating,
and annihilating Bodies, as that of moving them, if He should will that they
should be created, and annihilated: in a word, if he willed that all things
should be performed according to the Angel's Desires, as he wills that Bodies
be moved as the Angel pleases; if therefore it may be said, that an Angel or
Man are true Movers, because God moves Bodies as they desire; that Man or Angel
might likewise be called true Creatours, since God might create Beings on
occasion of their Will: Nay, perhaps it might be said, that the vilest of
Animals, or even mere Matter, is the real Cause of the Creation of some
Substance; if it be supposed with some Philosophers, that God produces
substantial Forms, whenever the Disposition of Matter requires it. And lastly,
since God has resolved from all Eternity, to create some certain things, at
some certain times; those Times might also be called the Causes of the Creation
of such Beings; with as much right as it is pretended, that a Ball meeting with
another is the true Cause of the Motion that is communicated to it; because
God, by his general Will, that constitutes the Order of Nature, has decreed,
that such or such Communication of Motions should follow upon the Concourse of
two Bodies.

There is then but one true Cause, as there is one true God: Neither must we
imagine, that what precedes an Effect does really produce it. God himself
cannot communicate his Power to Creatures according to the Light of Reason; He
cannot make them true Causes, and change them into Gods. But though he might
do it, we conceive not why he should will it. Bodies, Spirits, pure
Intelligences, all can do nothing. It Is he who has made Spirits, that
enlightens and moves them; it is he who has created Heaven and Earth, that
regulates all their Motions: In fine, it is the Author of our Being that
performs our Desires; Semel jussit, semper paret: He moves even our Arms, when
we use them against his Orders; for he complains by his Prophets, That we make
him subservient to our unjust and criminal Desires.

All those little Divinities of the Heathens, all those particular Causes of
Philosophers, are Chimeras, which the wicked Spirit endeavors to set up, that
he may destroy the Worship of the true God. The Philosophy we have received
from Adam, teaches us no such things; but that which has been propagated by the
Serpent; for, ever since the Fall, the Mind of Man is turned Heathen. That
Philosophy, joined to the Errors of the Senses, has made Men pay their Worship
to the Sun, and is still the universal Cause of the Disorders of their Mind,
and the Corruption of their Heart. Why, say they, by their Actions, and
sometimes by their Words, should we not love Bodies, since they are able to
afford us Pleasure? And why are the Israelites blamed for lamenting the Loss of
the Garlic and Onions of Egypt, since the Privation of those things, which
enjoyed, afforded them some Happiness, made them in some sort unhappy? But the
Philosophy that is mis-call'd New, and represented as a Bugbear to frighten
weak Minds; that is despised and condemned without hearing: that New
Philsosophy, I say, (since it must have that name,) destroys all the Pretenses
of the Libertines, by the establishing its very first Principle that perfectly
agrees with the first Principle of the Christian Religion Haec est Religio
Christiana, fratres mei, quae praedicatur per universum mundum horrentibus
inimicis, and ubi vincuntur murmurantibus* ubi praevalent saevientibus; haec
est Religio Christiana, ut COLATVR VNVS DEVS, NON MVLTI DII, QVIA NON FACIT
ANIMAM BEATAM NISI VNVS DEVS. Aug. Tr. 23. in Joan.
, namely, That we must love and fear none but God, since none but He alone can
make us happy.

As Religion declares that there is but one true God, so this Philosophy shows
that there is but one true Cause. As Religion teaches that all the Heathen
Divinities are but dead Metals, and immovable Stone; so this Philosophy
discovers, that all the second Causes, or Divinities of the Philosophers, are
but unactive Matter, and ineffective Wills. As Religion commands, not to bow to
those Gods that are not Gods, so this Philosophy teaches, not to prostrate our
Minds and Imagination before the fantastic Grandeur and Power of pretended
Causes, which are not Causes: which we ought neither to love, nor to fear, nor
be taken up with; but think upon God alone, see and adore, love and fear him in
all things.

But that is not the Inclination of some Philosophers; they will neither see
God, nor think upon him; for ever since the Fall there is a secret Opposition
betwixt God and Man. They delight in Gods of their own Invention; in loving and
fearing the Contrivances of their Heart, as the Heathens did the Works of their
Hands. They are like those Children, who tremble at the sight of their
Play-Fellows, after they have daubed and blackened them. Or, if they desire a
more noble Comparison, though perhaps not so just, they resemble those famous
Romans, who reverenced the Fictions of their Mind, and foolishly adored their
Emperors, after they themselves had let loose the Eagle at their Canonization.

CHAP. IV.
An Explication of the Second Part of the General Rule: That the Philosophers
observe it not, but that Des Carts has exactly followed it.

WE have been showing to what Errors Men are liable, when they reason upon the
false and confused Ideas of the Senses, and their rambling and undetermined
Notions of Logic; whence it appears, that to keep to Evidence in our
Perceptions, it is absolutely necessary exactly to observe that Rule we have
prescribed; and to examine which are the clear and distinct Ideas of things,
that we may only argue by deduction from them.

In that same general Rule, concerning the Subject of our Studies, there is yet
a remarkable Circumstance; namely, That we must still begin with the most
simple and easy things, and insist long upon them, before we undertake the
Enquiry after the more composed and difficult. For if, to preserve Evidence in
all our Perceptions, we must only reason upon distinct Ideas, it is plain that
we must never meddle with the Enquiry of compound things, before the simple, on
which they depend, have been carefully examined, and made familiar to us by a
nice Scrutiny; since the Ideas of compound things, neither are, nor can be
clear, as long as the most simple, of which they are composed, are but
confusedly and imperfectly known.

We know things imperfectly, when we are not sure to have considered all their
Parts: and we know them confusedly, when they are not familiar enough to the
Mind, though we may be certain of having considered all their Parts. When we
know them but imperfectly, our Argumentations are only probable: when we
perceive them confusedly, there is neither Order not Light in our Inferences;
and often we know not where we are, or whither we are going: But when we know
them both imperfectly and confusedly, which is the commonest of all, we know
not so much as what we would look for, much less by what Means we are to find
it: So that it is altogether necessary to keep strictly to that Order in our
Studies, Of still beginning by the most simple Things, examining all their
Parts, and being well acquainted with them, before we meddle with the more
composed, that depend on the former.

But that Rule agrees not with the Inclination of Man, who naturally despises
whatever appears easy; his Mind being made for an unlimited Object, and almost
incomprehensible, cannto make a long Stay on the Consideration of those simple
Ideas, which want the Character of Infinite, for which he is created. On the
contrary, and for the same Reason, he has much Veneration, and an eager
Passion, for great, obscure, and mysterious Things, and such as participate of
Infinity: Not that he loves Darkness; but that he hopes to find in those deep
Recesses a Good, and Truth capable of satisfying his Desires.

Vanity likewise gives a great Commotion to the Spirits, stirring them to what
is great and extraordinary, and encouraging them with a foolish Hope of hitting
right. Experience teaches, that the most accurate Knowledge of ordinary Things
gives no great Name in the World; whereas to be acquainted with uncommon
Things, though never so confusedly and imperfectly, always procures the Esteem
and Reverence of those who willingly conceive a great Idea of whatever is out
of their depth of Understanding: And that Experience determines all those who
are more sensible to Vanity than to Truth, (which certainly make up the
greatest Number) to a blindfold Search of a specious, though chimerical,
Knowledge of what is great, rare, and unintelligible.

How many are there that reject the Cartesian Philosophy, for that ridiculous
Reason, That its Principles are too simple and easy: There are in this
Philosophy no obscure and mysterious Terms; Women, and Persons unskilled in
Greek and Latin, are capable of learning it. It must then be, say they,
something very inconsiderable, and unworthy the Application of great Genius's.
They imagine, that Principles so clear and simple are not fruitful enough to
explain the Effects of Nature, which they supposed to be dark, intricate, and
confused: They see not presently the Use of those Principles, that are too
simple and easy to stop their Attention long enough to make them understand
their Use and Extent. They rather choose to explain Effects whose Causes are
unknown to them, by unconceivable Principles, than by such as are both simple
and intelligible. For the Principles these Philosophers are wont to explain
obscure Things by, are not only obscure themselves, but utterly
incomprehensible.

Those that pretend to explain Things extremely intricate, by Principles clear
and generally received, may easily be refuted, if they succeed not; since to
know whether what they say be true, one needs only comprehend well what they
say. The falsely-learn'd are not pleased with this, and obtain not the
Admiration they pursue in using intelligible Principles; for, as soon as one
understands their Notions, he plainly perceives that they say nothing: But when
they make use of unknown Principles, and speak of very complex'd Things as
though they exactly knew all their Relations, they are admired by their
Hearers, who understand not what they say; because we are naturally inclined to
reverence whatever goes above the reach of our Understanding.

Now, as obscure and incomprehensible Things seem to hang better with each
other, than with such as are clear and intelligible; so incomprehensible
Principles are much more made use of in very difficult and abstruse Questions,
than such as are easy and intelligible. There is nothing so difficult, but, by
the means of these Principles, Philosophers and Physicians will solve it in few
Words; for their Principles being yet more incomprehensible than any Questions
that can be proposed them, those Principles being taken for granted, no
Difficulty can afterward put them to a Nonplus.

Thus, for instance, they boldly, and without boggling, make answer to these
dark and undetermined Questions, viz. Why the Sun attracts Vapors? Why the
Peruvian Bark stops the Quar^an Ague? Why Rhubarb purges Choler, and the
Polychrest-Salt Phlegm? and the like. Most Men seem pretty well satisfied with
their Answers, because obscure and incomprehensible Things shake Hands
together: But unintelligible Principles suit not Questions that may be clearly
and easily resolved, because by that Solution it plainly appears, that they are
altogether insignificant. The Philosophers cannot explain, by their Principles,
How Horses draw a Coach? Why Dust stops a Watch? How the Trepoly-Stone cleanses
Metals, and a Brush our Clothes? For, they would appear ridiculous to all the
World, should they suppose a Motion of Attraction, and Attractive Faculties, to
explain why the Coach follows the Horses; and a Detersive Faculty in the Brush,
for cleansing of Clothes, etc. So that their great Principles are only
serviceable in dark and intricate Questions, by reason of their
Incomprehensibility.

We ought not therefore to insist upon any Principle that appears not plain and
evident, and of which it may be supposed, that some Nations reject it: But we
must attentively consider the Ideas we have of Extension, Figure, and Local
Motion, and the Relations they have between them: If we conceive them
distinctly, and find them so plain and clear, as to be persuaded they were ever
generally received by all Nations, we must dwell upon them, and examine all
their Relations: But if they seem obscure and dark to us, we must endeavor to
find others. For, if to avoid the Fear of Mistakes and Errors, it is always
requisite to preserve Evidence in our Percep^ions, it follows, that we must
argue only from clear Ideas, and from Relations distinctly known.

To consider in order the Properties of Extension, we must, as Des Carts did,
begin with the most simple Relations, and thence proceed to the more composed;
not only because this Method is the most natural, and bears up the Mind in its
Operations; but also because God ever acting with Order, and by the most simple
Ways, that sort of Examination of our Ideas, and their Relations, will better
manifest to us his Works. And if we consider, that the most simple Relations
always offer themselves first to the Imagination, when it is not determined to
think rather on one Thing than another, it will appear, that to find out that
Order we prescribe, and to discover very composed Truths, it is sufficient to
look attentively, and without prejudice, upon Objects; provided always we skip
not too hastily from one Subject to another.

When we look attentively upon Matter, we easily conceive that one Part may be
separated from another; that is to say, we easily conceive a Local Motion,
which Motion produces a Figure in each of the Bodies moved. The most simple of
all Motions, which first occurs to the Imagination, is a Motion in a Right
Line. Supposing then, that some Part of Matter is moved in a Right Line, it
will necessarily displace some other Portion of Matter it shall find in its
way, which latter shall circularly move to take the Room which the former has
left: Hence comes a Circular Motion. And if we conceive infinite Motions in a
Right Line, in an infinite number of similar Parts of that immense Extension we
consider, it will again necessarily follow, that all these Bodies mutually
hindering each other, shall all conspire by their reciprocal Action and
Re-action, that is, by the mutual Communication of all their particular
Motions, to produce one that is Circular.

That first Consideration of the most simple Relations of our Ideas, already
discovers to us the necessity of the Vortexes of Des Carts, that their Number
will be so much greater, as the Motions in a Right Line of all the Parts of the
Extension, having been more contrary to each other, shall with more difficulty
have been reduced to the same Motion; and that amongst those Vortexes, the
greatest will be those in which most Parts shall have concurred together to the
same Motion, or whose Parts shall have had more Strength to continue their
Motion in a Right Line.

In the mean while, care must be taken not to dissipate nor weary our Mind, by
vainly applying it to the vast Number and unmeasurable Greatness of those
Vortexes: We must rather insist upon some one of them for some time, and
orderly and attentively enquire after all the Motions of the Matter it
contains, and all the Figures wherewith the Parts of that Matter may be endued.

As there is no simple Motion but that in a Right Line, we must first consider
it, as that in which all Bodies continually tend to move themselves; since God
always acts by the most simple Ways: And if Bodies move Circularly, it is only
because meeting with constant Oppositions, they are perpetually turned from
their direct Motion. So that all Bodies being not of an equal Bulk, and the
biggest having more Strength than others to continue their Motion in a Right
Line, we easily conceive, that the smallest Bodies must sink to the Center of
the Vortex, and the biggest rise toward the Circumference; since the Lines
which moving Bodies are supposed to describe at the Circumference of a Circle,
are nearer to a Right Line, than those which they describe toward the Center.

If we conceive again, that every Part of that Matter could not at first move,
and meet with a perpetual Opposition to its Motion, without being smoothed and
rounded, and having its Angles broken off; we shall discover, that all that
Extension will be composed of two sorts of Bodies, viz. of round Globules,
which perpetually turn upon their own Center, and that in several different
Ways, and, besides that particular Motion, are carried about by the Motion
common to all the Vortex; and of a very fluid and agitated Matter, produced
from the Motion of the foresaid Globules. Besides the Circular Motion common to
all the Parts of the Vortex, that subtle Matter must yet have another
particular, and almost direct, from the Circle of the Vortex to the
Circumference, through the Intervals of the Globules, that leave a Passage
open: So that the Motion composed of those Motions will represent a Spiral
Line. That fluid Matter, called by Des Carts, the first Element, being divided
into Parts that are much smaller, and have not so much strength to continue
their direct Motion, as the Globules, or second Element; it is evident, that the
first Element must take up the Center of the Vortex, and fill the empty Spaces
which the Parts of the Second leave between them; and that the rest of the
Vortex must be filled with those Parts of the Second, and come nearer to the
Circumference, proportionably to their Bulk, or to the Force they have of
continuing their Motion in a Direct Line. As to the Figure of the whole Vortex,
after what has been said, it cannot be doubted, but that the Distance from one
Pole to the other, will be shorter than that of the Line which cuts the
Equator. And if we consider that the Vortexes surround and compress each other
unequally, we shall plainly see that their Equator By Equator I understand the
greatest Crooked Line which the Matter of the Vortex describes.
is a crooked irregular Line, that comes near to an Ellipsis.

These are the Things that offer themselves naturally to the Mind, when we
attentively consider what should happen to the Parts of Extension, perpetually
tending to move in a Right Line, that is, in the most simple Motion. If we now
suppose a Thing which seems most worthy the Divine Power and Wisdom, namely,
That God has formed the whose Universe at once, in the same State those Parts
would have naturally fallen into and disposed themselves in time, by the most
simple Ways; and that he preserves them by the same natural Laws: In a word, if
we compare our Ideas with the visible Objects, we shall conclude, that the Sun
is the Center of the Vortex; that the Corporeal Light, which it diffuses every
where, is nothing but the continual Effort of the little Globules, tending to
remove from the Center of the Vortex; which Light must be communicated in an
Instant through those vast Spaces, because they being full of those Globules,
one cannot be pressed upon, without the Motion of all the others that are
opposite to it.

Several other Consequences may be drawn from what has been said, because the
most simple Principles are the most fruitful to explain the Works of a Being
which always acts by the most simple Ways. But we still want to consider some
Things that will be incident to Matter. Let us then imagine, that there are
several Vortexes, like to that we have described in few Words; that the Stars,
which are so many Suns, are the Centres of those Vortexes, which surround each
other, and are disposed in such a manner, as that they hinder one another
Motion the least they can; but that before Things came to that Perfection, the
weakest Vortexes were carried away, and as it were swallowed up by the
strongest.

To understand this, we need but suppose that the first Element, which is at
the Center, may fly, and perpetually flies out through the Intervals of the
Globules, toward the Circumference of the Vortex; and that at the same time
that this Center or Star empties it self through the Equator, other Matter of
the first Element comes into it through the Poles; for neither the Star nor its
Poles can empty themselves at one side, without being filled at another, since
there is no Vacuity in Extension. But as an infinite number of Causes may
hinder a great Quantity of the first Element from coming into that Star, the
Parts of the first Element that shall be forced to remain in it, will be
necessitated to adapt themselves so, as to move one and the same way; which
causes them to fasten and link themselves together, and constitutes them into
Spots; which condensing and thickning into Crusts, cover by degrees the Center;
and out of the most subtle and agitated of all Bodies, are formed into gross
and solid Matter. This course sort of Matter is called by Des Carts, the third
Element, and is endued with an infinite number of Shapes and Figures, as is the
first Element, from which it is generated and produced.

That Star being thus overgrown with Spots and Crusts, and become like the
other Planets, has no longer a sufficient Strength to defend its Vortex against
the continual Struggle and Irruptions of those that surround it; therefore it
insensibly diminishes: The Matter that composes it, is dispersed on all sides,
and the strongest of the neighboring Vortexes carries the greatest part away,
and at last involves the Planet that is the Center of it. This Planet being
wholly surrounded with the Matter of the great Vortex, swims along in it, only
keeping, together with some of the Matter of its own Vortex, its former
Circular Motion, and takes at last such a Situation, as puts it in Aequilibrio
with an equal Quantity of the Matter in which it swims. If it has but little
Solidity and Magnitude, it descends very near the Center of the surrounding
Vortex; because having no great Force to continue its Motion in a Right Line,
it must take such a Place in that Vortex, as that an equal Quantity of the
second Element, endeavoring to remove from the Center, may be in Aequilibrio
with it; that being the only Place where it can be exactly balanced. If that
Planet be of greater Bulk and Solidity, it must seek its Aequilibrium in a
Place more distant from the Center of the Vortex. And lastly, If there is no
Place in the Vortex, in which an equal Quantity of its Matter has as much
Solidity as this Planet, and consequently as much Strength to continue its
Motion in a Direct Line, perhaps because the Planet shall be very bulky, and
overgrown with very solid and condensed Crusts; it shall not stop in that
Vortex, as finding no Aequilibrium in the Matter that composes it; but pass
from Vortex to Vortex, until it meets with a Place in which it may be equally
balanced by a competent Quantity of Matter; so that it will sometimes be seen
in its Passage, as the Comets are, when it shall be in our Vortex, and at a
convenient Distance from us: But it will not be seen in a long time, when it
shall be in other Vortexes, or in the utmost Boundary of ours.

If we hereupon conclude, that a single Vortex may, by reason of its Bulk,
Strength, and advantageous Situation, insensibly undermine, involve, and carry
away several Vortexes, and even such as shall have conquered others; it will
necessarily follow, that the Planets that have been formed in the Center of the
conquered Vortexes, being entered into the great and conquering Vortex, place
themselves in Aequilibrio with an equal Volume of the Matter in which they
swim: So that if those Planets are unequal in Solidity, they will float at
unequal Distances from the Center of the Vortex in which they swim. But if two
Planets have very near the same Force to continue that Direct Motion; or if a
Planet carries in its small Vortex one or several other smaller Planets, which
it shall have conquered, according to our Way of conceiving the Formation of
Things: Then the smallest Planets will turn about the greatest, whilst the
greatest shall turn upon its own Center; and all these Planets shall be carried
by the Motion of the great Vortex, at a Distance very near equal from its
Center.

We are obliged, by the Light of Reason, to dispose in that Order the Parts
that compose the whole Universe, which we imagine to have been formed by the
most simple Ways. For all that had been said is only grounded on the Idea of
Extension, the Parts of which are supposed to move in the most simple Motion,
which is that in a Right Line. And when we examine by the Effects, whether we
are mistaken in the Explication of Things by their Causes, we are surprised to
see the Phenomaena of Celestial Bodies so perfectly agreeing with our
Ratiocinations. For we perceive all the Planets that are in the middle of a
small Vortex turning upon their own Center, as the Sun does, and swimming in
the Vortex of the Sun, and about the Sun; the smallest and least solid nearest
to it, and the most solid at a greater distance. We likewise observe, that
there are some, as the Comets, which cannot remain in the Vortex of the Sun:
And lastly, that there are several Planets, which have other smaller turning
about them, as the Moon does about the Faith: Jupiter has four of them, Mars
has three, and perhaps Saturn has so many, and so small, that they resemble a
continued Circle, of which the thickness cannot be perceived, because of their
too vast distance. Those Planets being the biggest we can observe, it may be
imagined, that they have been produced from Vortexes which had a sufficient
strength to conque^ others, before they were involved in the Vortex we live in.

All these Planets turn upon their own Center, the Earth within 24. hours, Mars
within 25. or thereabouts, Jupiter within about 10, etc. They all turn about
the Sun, Mercury the nearest in about 4. Months; Saturn the remotest in about
30. Years, and those that are betwixt them in more or less time, which however
keep not an exact proportion with their distance. For the matter in which they
swim makes a swifter Circumvolution when it is nearer to the Sun, because the
Line of its Motion is then shorter. When Mars is opposite to the Sun, he is
then near enough to the Earth, but is at a vast distance from it when he is in
Conjunction with him. The like may be said of the other superior Planets, as
Saturn and Jupiter; for the inferior, as Venus and Mercury are, to speak
properly, never opposite to the Sun. The Lines, which all the Planets seem to
describe about the Earth, are no Circles, but are very like Ellipses, which
Ellipses seem very much to differ, because of the different Situation of the
Planets in reference to us. In short, whatever may be observed with any
certainty in the Heavens, touching the Motion of the Planets perfectly agrees
with what has been said of their Formation by the most simple ways.

As to the fixed Stars, Experience teaches us, that some diminish and entirely
vanish away, whilst others that are wholly new appear; the luster and bulk of
which sensibly increase. They increase or diminish proportionably as the
Vortexes, in whose Center they lie, admit more or less of the first Element. We
cease to see them when they are overspread with Spots and Crusts, and begin to
discover them, when those Spots, which obstruct their luster, are entirely
dissipated. All these Stars keep very near the same distance from each other,
since they are Centres of Vortexes which are not conquered, and remain Stars as
long as they can resist the Invasion of others. They are all bright like as
many little Suns, because they are all, as he is, the Centers of unconquered
Vortexes. They are all at an unequal distance from the Earth, though they
appear as if they were fastened to a Vault; for if the Parallaxe of the nearest
with the remotest has not yet been observable, by the different situation of
the Earth from 6 to 6 Months; it is because that difference is too
inconsiderable in reference to our distance from the Stars, to make that
Parallaxe sensible. Perhaps by means of the Telescopes, it will one day or
other become somewhat observable. In short, whatever the Senses and Experience
may observe in the Stars, differs not from what we have discovered by the Mind,
whilst we examined the most simple and natural Relations that are betwixt the
Parts and the Motions of Extension.

To search after the Nature of Terrestrial Bodies; we must conceive that the
first Element being made up of an infinite number of different Figures, the
Bodies that result from their Mixture must be very different. So that there
will be some whose Parts shall be branched, others long, others very near
round, but all irregular, several ways. When their Parts are branched and
gross, they are hard, but flexible, and not elastick, as Gold: If their Parts
be not so gross, they are soft, and fluid, as Gums, Fats, Oils; but if their
branched Parts be extremely fine, they are like the Air. If the long Parts of
Bodies are gross and inflexible, they are pungent, incorruptible, and
dissolvible, as Salts; if those long Parts be flexible, they are insipid like
Water; if the gross Parts be of very irregular and different Figures, they are
like Earth and Stones. In short, thence must needs arise Bodies of several
different Natures, and two will hardly be found exactly alike, by reason of the
infinite number of Figures incident to the first Element, which can never be
complicated after the same manner in two different Bodies. What Figure soever
those Bodies may have, if their Pores be large enough to give way to the second
Element's passing all manner of ways, they will be transparent like Air, Water,
Glass, etc. If the first Element entirely surrounds some of their Parts and
affords them a sufficient force and commotion to repel the second Element on
all sides, they will appear Luminous like flame; if they drive back all the
second Element that falls upon them, they will be very white; if they receive
it without repelling it, they will be very black; and lastly, if they repel it
by several Concussions and Vibrations, they will appear of different colors.

As to their Situation, the heaviest, or those that have least force to
continue their direct Motion, will be the nearest to the Center, as are Metals:
Earth, Water and Air, will be more remote, and all Bodies will keep the same
Situation in which we observe them; because they will recede from the Center of
the Earth, as far as their Motion will allow.

It must not seem strange that I now say, that Metals have less force to
continue their direct Motion, than Earth, Water, and other less solid Bodies,
though I have formerly said, that the most solid Bodies have more strengh than
others to continue their direct Motion. For the Reason why Metals are not so
apt to continue to move, as Earth and Stones, is that Metals have less Motion
in themselves; it being true however, that of two Bodies unequal in solidity,
but moved with an equal swiftness, that the most solid will have more force to
pursue its Motion in a right Line; because the most solid has then the greater
Motion, and that Motion is the Cause of strength.

But if we would understand the Reason why Bodies, gross and solid, are heavy
toward the Center of Vortexes, but light at a considerable distance from it;
we must know, that these Bodies receive their Motion from the subtle matter
that invirons them, and in which they swim. Now that subtle matter actually
moving in a Circular Line, and only tending to move in a right Line; it only
Communicates that Circular Motion to the gross Bodies it carries along with it:
and as to its tendency to remove from the Center in a Right Line, it only
communicates that to them as far as it is a necessary sequel of the Circular
communicated Motion. For it must be observed, that the Parts of the subtle
matter tending to different sides, can only compress the gross Body they
convey; since that Body cannot go several different ways at the same time. But
because the subtle Matter, that lies about the Center of the Vortex, has a far
greater Motion than that which it spends in circulating, and because it
communicates only its Motion Circular, and common to all its Parts, to the
gross Bodies which it carries; and that if these Bodies should chance to have
more Motion than what is common to the Vortex, they would soon lose that
overplus, by communicating it to the little Bodies they meet with; thence it is
evident, that gross Bodies, toward the Center of the Vortex, have not so much
Motion as the Matter in which they swim; each part of which has its own
particular and various Motion, besides the Cicular and common. Now if gross
Bodies have less Motion, they have less Tendency to move in a right Line, and
if they have less Tendency, they are forced to yield to those that have more,
and consequently to approach the Center of the Vortex, that is, in short they
must be heavyer, as they are more gross and solid.

But when solid Bodies are very remote from the Center of the Vortex, as the
Circular Motion of the subtle Matter is then very great, because it spends very
near its whole Motion in wheeling about; Bodies have then so much more Motion
as they have more Solidity; because they go as swift as the subtle Matter in
which they swim: and so they have more force to continue their direct Motion.
Wherefore gross Bodies at a certain distance from the Center of the Vortex,
are so much lighter as they are more solid.

This makes it apparent, that the Earth is metallic toward the Center, and
not so solid about the Circumference; that Water and Air must remain in the
Situation wherein we see them; but that all those Bodies are That is, are
driven toward the Center of the Earth.
ponderous; the Air as well as Gold and Quicksilver; because they are more
solid and gross than the first and second Element. This shows likewise that the
Moon is at too great a distance from the Center of the Vortex of the Earth to
be heavy, though it be solid; that Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter,
and Saturn, cannot fall into the Sun, and that they are not solid enough to
travel out of this Vortex, as the Comets do; that they are in Aequilibrio with
the Matter in which they swim, and that if a Musket Ball, or a Cannon Bullet,
could be shot high enough, those two Bodies would become little Planets, or
perhaps Comets, that would not stay in any Vortex, as being endued with a
competent Solidity.

I pretend not to have sufficiently explained all the things I have mentioned,
or to have deduced from the simple Principles of Extension, Figure and Motion
all the possible Inferences, I only intended to show the Method Des Carts has
used in the discovery of Natural things, that this Method and his Ideas may be
compared with those of other Philosophers; I designed here no more, and yet I
may venture to assert, that if one would supersede admiring the Virtue of the
Loadstone, the regular Motion of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, the noise
of Thunder, the Generation of Meteors; in short, if any desire to get a
well-grounded Knowledge of Natural Philosophy, as he can do nothing better
than to read and medi^ate his Books; so he can do nothing at all, unless he
follows his Method, I mean unless he Reason as he did, upon clear Ideas, still
beginning with the most simple and familiar.

Neither do I pretend that this Author is Infallible; for I think I can
demonstrate that he has been mistaken in several places of his works. But it is
more advantageous for his Readers to believe that he has been deceived, than
if they were persuaded that whatever he said was true: A Man that should take
him to be infalible would read him without Examination, believe him without
understanding what he says, learn his Opinions as we learn History, and would
never form and perfect his Mind. He himself advertises his Readers to observe
whether he be deceived, and to believe nothing of what he says, but what the
Evidence compells them to. For he is not like those false pretenders to
Science, who endeavoring to Lord it over the Minds, will be believed upon
their own word; and who instead of making Men the Disciples of the inward
Truth, by proposing only clear and distinct Ideas, labor what they can to
submit them to the Authority of Heathens, and press upon Men incomprehensible
Opinions by unintelligible Reasons.

The chief thing that is found fault with in Des Cartes's System, is the manner
in which he feigns that the Sun, Stars, Earth, and all the Bodies that surround
us, have been produced; forasmuch as it seems contrary to what Holy Writ
teaches us of the Creation of the World; since, according to him, one would
say, that the whole Universe has been formed of its own accord, so as we see it
now adays; to which several Answers may be made.

First, As to the pretended Contrarieties betwixt Moses and Des Carts, those
that assert it, have not perhaps examined them both, with as much Attention as
those who have shown, by public Writings, that the sacred History of the
Creation perfectly agrees with the opinion of that Philosopher.

But the chief Answer is, that Des Carts never pretended that things should
ever have been made by degrees, and as he describes them. For at the first
Article of the Fourth Part of his Philosophical Principles, which runs thus:
That the former Hypothesis is to be retained, notwithstanding its being false,
to find out the true Causes of natural Things; he expressly asserts the contrary
in these words. Though I pretend not that the Bodies of this visible World were
ever produced in the manner that has been described before, of which the Reader
has been already sufficiently forewarned; yet I must still keep to the same
Hypothesis, to explain what appears upon Earth; For if I may, as I hope I can,
plainly show by those means the most intelligible and certain Causes of all
Natural things, and they cannot be found out another way; I may thence
reasonably conclude, that though the World was not at the Beginning framed in
this manner, but created immediately by God, yet the Nature of all things it
contains ceases not to be the very same, as though they had been produced in
that very method.

Des Carts knew that to understand the Nature of things, they must be
considered in their Birth and Original, and that beginning with those that are
most simple, we ought to drive them up to the Fountain head, and that the
business is not to examine, whether God working by the most simple ways, formed
the World by degrees, or struck it out at a single Blow; but that, in what
manner soever God may have produced his Works, they ought to be first
considered in their Principles, if we would understand them, and afterward we
should observe, how consistent our thoughts are with the Operations of God, by
comparing them together. He knew that the Laws of Nature, by which God
preserves all his Works in their present Order and Situation are the same Laws,
with those by which he might have formed and disposed them; It being evident to
all considering Men, that if God had not disposed his Works in an instant, in
the same manner they would have ordered and postur'd themselves in time; the
whole Economy of Nature would be destroyed, since the Laws of Preservation
would be contrary to those of the first Creation. If the whole Universe remains
in the Order in which we see it, it is because the Laws of Motion which preserve
it in that Order, were capable of producing it in it; and if God had
established it in an Order different from that into which those Laws of Motion
should have put it, all things would be turned upside down, and place
themselves by the force of those Laws, in the Order which they at present keep.

A Man desires to discover the Nature of a Chicken, to that end he opens every
day Eggs taken from under a Brood-Hen; he examines what part moves and grows
first, he quickly perceives that the Heart begins to beat, and to drive out
Blood through small Conduits on all sides, that are the Arteries; which Blood
comes back to the Heart through the Veins, that the Brain likewise appears at
first, and that the Bones are the last formed. By that he frees himself from
many Errors, and even draws from those Observations several Consequences very
useful for the Knowledge of living Creatures. What fault may be found with the
conduct of such a Man, and how may it be given out, that he pretends to
persuade, that God formed the first Chicken, by creating an Egg, and giving it
a competent degree of heat to hatch it? because he tries to discover the Nature
of Chickens in their first Formation?

Why then should Des Carts be accused of being opposite to the Holy
Scriptures, for that designing to discover the Nature of visible things, he
examines the formation of them by the Laws of Motion, which are inviolably
observed on all occasions. He never Princ. Part. 3.. 45.
doubted but that the World was created at first with all its perfection; that
there were Sun, Earth, Moon and Stars; that in the Earth there were not only
the Seeds of Plants, but also the Plants themselves; and that Adam and Eve were
not born Infants, but made adult. The Christian Faith teaches us that, and
natural Reason persuades us the same; for when we consider the infinite Power
of God, we cannot think he should ever have made any thing which was not
altogether perfect. But as we should better understand the nature of Adam and
Eve, and the Trees of Paradise, by examining how Children are insensibly formed
in their Mothers Womb, and how Plants are derived from their Seeds, than by
merely considering how they were when Created by God at the Creation of the
World; so if we can find out Principles very simple and easy, out of which, as
out of some Seeds, we can manifestly show the Stars, the Earth, and all visible
things might have been produced; though we very well know that it was never so,
(yet) that will be more conducible to explain their Nature, than if we should
only describe them so as they now are, or as we believe they were Created, and
because I suppose I have found out such Principles, I shall endeavor briefly
to Explain them.

Des Carts was persuaded that God formed the World all at once; but he also
believed that God Created it in the same State and Order, and with the same
Disposition of Parts, in which it would have been, had it been made gradually,
and by the most simple ways. And that thought is worthy both of the Power and
Wisdom of God; of his Power, because he has made in a Moment all his Works in
the highest Perfection; and of his Wisdom, because he has shown that he
perfectly foresaw whatever could befall Matter, if it were moved by the most
simple ways: and likewise because the Order of Nature could not subsist, if the
World had been produced by ways, that is, by Laws of Motion, contrary to the
Laws by which it is preserved, as I have already mentioned.

It Is ridiculous to say, that Des Carts believed the World might have been
formed of it self, since he owns with all those that follow the light of
Reason, that Bodies cannot move themselves by their own strength; and that all
the immutable Laws of the Communication of Motions are but consequences of the
immutable Will of God, who always acts in the same manner. His proving that God
alone gives Motion to Matter, and that Motion produces in Bodies all their
different Forms, was sufficient to hinder the Libertines from making an
Advantage of his System. On the contrary, if Atheists should reflect on the
Principles of this Philosopher, they would quickly be forced to confess their
Errors; for if they can assert, with the Heathens, that Matter is uncreated,
they cannot also maintain that it can move it self by its own Power: So that
Atheists would at least be obliged to acknowledge the true Mover, if they
refused to confess the true Creator. But the Ordinary Philosophy affords 'em
sufficient pretenses to blind themselves, and defend their Errors; for it
speaks of some impressed Virtues, certain motive Faculties, in a word, of a
certain Nature which is the Principle of Motion in every thing; And though they
have no distinct Idea of it, yet by reason of the Corruption of their Heart,
they willingly put it in the room of the true God, imagining that it performs
all the Wonders that they see occur.

CHAP. V.
An Explication of the Principles of the Peripatetick Philosophy, in which is
shown, that Aristotle never observed the Second Part of the General Rule; and
his Four Elements, with the Elementary Qualities, are examined.

THat the Reader may compare the Philosophy of Des Carts with that of
Aristotle, it will be convenient to set down in few words what the latter has
taught concerning Elements and Natural Bodies in general; which the most
learned believe he has done in his Four Books Of the Heavens. For his Eight
Books of Physics belong rather to Logic, or perhaps to Metaphysics, than to
Natural Philosophy; since they consist of Nothing but loose and general terms,
that offer no distinct and particular Idea to the Mind. Those Four Books are
entitled Of the Heavens, because the Heavens are the chief amongst the simple
Bodies which he treats of.

That Philosopher begins his Work by proving that the World is perfect, in the
following manner. All Bodies have three Dimensions and cannot have more,
because the number three comprehends all, according to the Pythagoreans. But
the World is the Coacervation of all Bodies, and therefore the World is
perfect. By that ridiculous Proof, it may also be demonstrated, that the World
cannot be more imperfect than it is, since it cannot be composed of parts that
have less than three Dimensions.

In the Second Chapter, he first supposes some Peripatetick Truths, as that all
Natural Bodies have of themselves the force of moving, which he proves neither
here nor elsewhere; but on the contrary asserts, in the First Chapter of his
Second Book of Physics, that to endeavor to prove it is absurd, because it is
evident of it self, and that none but those who cannot distinguish what is
known of it self from what is not, insist upon proving plain by obscure things.
But it has been shown elsewhere, that it is altogether false that natural
Bodies should have of themselves the force of moving, and it appears evident
only to such as follow, with Aristotle, the Impressions of their Senses, and
make no use of their Reason.

Secondly, He says that all local Motion is made in a Line, either direct or
circular, or composed of both; but if he would not think upon what he so rashly
proposes, he ought at least to have opened his Eyes that he might see an
Infinite number of different Motions, which are not made of either the right or
circular: Or rather he ought to have thought that the Motions composed of the
direct may be infinitely varied, when the compounding Motions increase or
diminish their swiftness in an infinite number of different ways, as may be
observed by what has been said before Sup. Chapter 4.
. There are, says he, but two simple Motions, the right and the Circular, and
therefore all the others are composed of them. But he mistakes, for the
Circular Motion is not simple, since it cannot be conceived, without thinking
upon a Point to which it relates, and whatever includes a Relation is relative
and not simple. This is so true that the Circular Motion may be conceived as
produced from two Motions in a right Line, whose Swiftness is unequal,
according to a certain Proportion. But a Motion composed of two others, made in
a right Line, and variously increasing or diminishing in swiftness, cannot be
simple.

Thirdly, He says that all the simple Motions are of three sorts, one from the
Center, the other toward the Center, and the third about it. But it is false
that the last, viz. the Circular Motion should be simple, as has been already
said. And it is false again that there are no simple Motions besides upwards and
downwards. For all the Motions in a right Line are simple, whether they
approach to, or remove from the Center, the Poles, or any other Point. Every
Body, says he, is made up of three Dimensions, and therefore the Motion of all
Bodies must have three simple Motions. What Relation is there betwixt simple
Motions and Dimensions? Besides, every Body has three Dimensions, and none has
three simple Motions.

Fourthly, He supposes that Bodies are either simple or composed, and calls
simple Bodies, those that have the force of moving themselves, as Fire, Earth,
etc. adding, that the compounded receive their Motion from the compounding. But
in that sense there are no simple Bodies, since none have in themselves any
Principle of their Motion: there are also none composed, since there are no
simples of which they should be made; and so there would be no Bodies at all.
What Fancy is it, to define the simplicity of Bodies by a Power of moving
themselves. What distinct Ideas can be fixed to the Words of simple and
composed Bodies, if the simple are only defined in Relation to an Imaginary
moving force? But let us see what Consequences he draws from those Principles.
The Circular Motion is simple. The Heavens move Circularly, and therefore their
Motion is simple: But simple Motion can be ascribed only to a simple Body, that
is to say, to a Body that moves of it self; And therefore the Heavens are a
simple Body distinguished from the four Elements, that move in right Lines.
It Is plain enough that such Arguments contain nothing but false and absurd
Propositions. Let us examine his other Proofs, for he alleadges a great many
shameful and nonsensical ones, to prove a thing as useless as it is false.

His second Reason to show that the Heavens are a simple Body distinguished
from the Four Elements, supposes that there are two sorts of Motion, one
natural, and the other violent or against Nature. But it is sufficiently plain
to all those that judge of things by clear and distinct Ideas, that Bodies
having not in themselves any such Principle of their Motion as Aristotle
pretends, there can be no Motion violent or against Nature. It Is indifferent to
all Bodies to be moved or not, either one way or another. But this Philosopher,
who judges of things by the Impressions of the Senses, imagines that those
Bodies, which by the Laws of the Communications of Motions, always place
themselves in such or such a Situation, in reference to others, do it of their
own accord, and because it is most convenient for them, and best agrees with
their Nature. Here follows the Argument of Aristotle.

The Circular Motion of the Heavens is natural, or against Nature. If natural,
the Heavens are a simple Body distinguished from the Elements, since the
Elements never move circularly by a natural Motion. If the Circular Motion of
the Heavens is against their Nature, they will be some one of the Elements, as
Fire, Water, etc. or something else. But the Heavens can be none of the
Elements: as for instance, if the Heavens were Fire, that Element tending
naturally upwards, the Heavens would have two contrary Motions, viz. the
circular and the ascending, which is impossible. If the Heavens be some other
Body, which moves not circularly by its own Nature, they will have some other
natural Motion, which cannot likewise be; for if that Motion be ascending, they
will be Fire or Air; and if descending, Water or Earth: Therefore, etc. I shall
not insist upon showing the particular Absurdities of those Reasonings, but
only observe in general, that all that which this Philosopher here says, has no
signification, and that there is neither Truth nor Inference well drawn. His
third Reason is as follows.

The first and most perfect of all simple Motions must be that of a simple
Body, and of the first and most perfect among simple Bodies. But the circular
Motion is the first and most perfect amongst simple Motions, because every
circular Line is perfect, and that no right Line is so. For if it be finite,
something may be added to it; if infinite, it is not yet perfect, since it has
no end (...) and (...) make a Pun in Greek, as in English Finis and finished.
Thus that Philosopher proves, that an infinite Line is not perfect, because
it is not finished.
, and that things are not perfect but when they are finished; and therefore the
circular Motion is the first and most perfect of all, and a Body moving
circularly is simple, and the first and most Divine amongst simple Bodies. Here
you have his fourth Reason.

Every Motion is either natural, or not; but every Motion which is not natural
to some Bodies, is natural to some others: For, we see that the ascending and
descending Motions, which are not natural to some Bodies, are so to others; for
Fire naturally descends not, but Earth does. Now the Circular Motion is not
natural to any of the Four Elements; there must then be a simple Body to which
that Motion is natural; and therefore the Heavens, which move Circularly, are a
simple Body, distinguished from the Four Elements.

Lastly, The Circular Motion is either natural or violent to some Body or
other: If it be natural, it is evident that Body must be one of the most simple
and perfect: But if it be against Nature, it is strange how that Motion endures
for ever; since we see that all Motions against Nature are of a short
continuance. And therefore we must believe, after all those Reasons, that there
is some Body separated from all those that environ us, whose Nature is the more
perfect, as it lies at a greater distance. Thus argues Aristotle; but I defy
the best and most intelligent of his Interpreters to fix distinct Ideas to his
Words, and to show that this Philosopher begins with the most simple Things,
before he speaks of the more composed; which is however altogether necessary to
exact Reasonings, as I have already proved.

If I were not afraid of being tedious, I would be at the pains to translate
some Chapters of Aristotle: But besides that none who can understand him, care
to read him in English, or in any other vulgar Tongue, I have sufficiently
shown, by what I have related from him, that his Way of Philosophizing is
wholly unserviceable to the Discovery of Truth: For, he says himself, in the
Fifth Chapter of this Book, That those that mistake at first in any thing,
mistake ten thousand times more, if they proceed: So that it being apparent,
that he knows not what he says in the two first Chapters of his Book, we may
reasonably believe, that it is not safe to yield to his Authority, without
examining his Reasons. But that we may be the more persuaded of it, I proceed
to show, that there is no Chapter in this First Book but has some Impertinency.

In the Third Chapter he says, That the Heavens are incorruptible, and
incapable of Alteration; of which he alleges several Childish Proofs, as, that
they are the Habitation of the Immortal Gods, and that no Change was ever
observed in them. This last Proof would be good enough, could he say, that ever
any Body was come back from thence, or that he had approached Celestial Bodies
sufficiently near to observe their Alterations. And yet I doubt whether at this
time any one should yield to his Authority, since Telescopes assure us of the
contrary.

In the Fourth Chapter he pretends to prove, That the Circular Motion has no
Opposite; though it be plain, that the Motion from East to West is contrary to
that which is made from West to East.

In the Fifth Chapter he very weakly proves, That Bodies are not Infinite;
drawing his Arguments from the Motion of simple Bodies: For what hinders, but
there may be above his Primum mobile some unmovable Extension.

In the Sixth, he loses time in showing, That the Elements are not Infinite:
For, who can doubt of it, when he supposes, with him, that they are included
within the surrounding Heavens? But he ridicules himself, by drawing his Proofs
from their Gravity and Lightness. If Elements, says he, were Infinite, there
would be an Infinite Heaviness and Lightness; which cannot be: Ergo, etc. Those
that desire to see his Arguments at length, may read them in his Books; for I
reckon it a loss of Time to relate them.

He goes on in the Seventh Chapter to prove, That Bodies are not Infinite; and
his first Argument supposes it necessary for every Body to be in Motion, which
he neither does nor can demonstrate.

In the Eighth he asserts, That there are not many Worlds of the same Nature,
by this ridiculous Reason, That if there were another Earth besides this we
inhabit, the Earth being ponderous of its own nature, it would fall upon ours,
which is the Center of all ponderous Bodies. Whence has he learned this, but
from his Senses?

In the Ninth he proves, That it is not so much as possible that there should
be several Worlds, because if there was any Body above the Heavens, it would be
simple or composed, in a natural or violent State; which cannot be, for Reasons
which he draws from the Three sorts of Motions already spoken of.

In the Tenth he asserts, That the World is Eternal, because it cannot have had
a Beginning, and yet last for ever; because we see, that whatever is made, is
corrupted in Time. He has learned this likewise from his Senses: But who has
taught him, that the World will always endure?

He spends the Eleventh Chapter in explaining what Incorruptible signifies; as
though Equivocation was here very dangerous, or that he was to make a great Use
of his Explanation. However, that Word Incorruptible is so clear of it self,
that Aristotle needed not have troubled himself with explaining in what Sense
it must be taken, or in what Sense he takes it. It had been more convenient to
define an infinite Number of Terms, very usual with him, which raise nothing
but sensible Ideas; for so perhaps we should have learned something by the
reading of his Works.

In the Last Chapter of this First Book of the Heavens, he endeavors to show,
That the World is incorruptible, because it is impossible it should have had a
Beginning, and yet last eternally. All Things, says he, subsist either for a
finite or infinite Time; but what is only infinite in one sense, is neither
finite nor infinite, and therefore nothing can subsist in that Manner.

This is the way of arguing with the Prince of Philosophers, and the Genius of
Nature; who, instead of discovering, by clear and distinct Ideas, the true
Cause of natural Effects, lays the Foundation of a Pagan Philosophy upon the
false and confused Ideas of the Senses, or upon such Ideas as are too general
to be useful to the Search after Truth.

I condemn not Aristotle for not knowing that God has created the World in
Time, to manifest his Power, and the Dependency of Creatures; and that he will
never destroy it, to show that he is immutable, and never repents of his
Designs: But I may find fault with him for proving, by trifling Reasons, that
the World is of Eternal Duration. For, though he be sometimes excusable as to
the Opinions he maintains, yet he is for the most part intolerable as to the
Reasons he alleges, when he treats of Subjects that are somewhat difficult.
What I have already said, may perhaps be sufficient to evince it; though I have
not related all the Errors I have met with in the Book whence the former are
extracted, and that I have endeavored to make him speak plainer than is
customary with him.

But for an entire and full Conviction, that the Genius of Nature will never
discover the secret Springs and Contrivances of it, it will be convenient to
show, that his Principles, upon which he reasons for the Explication of natural
Effects, have no Solidity in them.

It Is evident that nothing can be discovered in Physics, without beginning
with the most simple Bodies; that is, with the Elements; into which all others
are resolved, because they are De Coelo, l. 3. c. 3.
contained in them either actually or potentially, to speak in a Peripatetick
Style. But no distinct Explication of those simple Bodies can be found in the
Works of Aristotle; whence follows, that his Elements being not clearly known,
it is impossible to discover the Nature of Bodies which are composed of them.

He says indeed, that there are four Elements, Fire, Air, Water and Earth; but
he gives no clear Manifestation of their Nature, by any distinct Idea: He
pretends not that those Elements are the Fire, Air, Water and Earth that we
see; for if it were so, our Senses at least would afford us some Knowledge of
them. I grant that in several places of his Works he endeavors to explain them
by the Qualities of Heat and Cold, Moisture and Dryness, Gravity and Levity.
But that Method is so impertinent and ridiculous, that it cannot be conceived
how so many Learned Men could be satisfied with it; which I proceed to
demonstrate.

Aristotle pretends in his Book of the Heavens, that the Earth is the Center of
the World, and that all Bodies which he is pleased to call simple, because he
supposes that they are moved by their own Nature, must move by simple Motions.
He asserts, that besides the Circular Motion, which he pretends to be simple,
and by which he proves that the Heavens, which he supposes to move circularly,
are a simple Body, there are two other simple Motions; one downwards, from the
Circumference to the Center; and the other upwards, from the Center to the
Circumference: That those simple Motions are proper to simple Bodies, and
consequently that Earth and Fire are such Bodies; one of which is altogether
heavy, and the other perfectly light. But because Gravity and Levity may be
proper to a Body, either wholly, or in part, he concludes that there are two
other Elements, or simple Bodies, one of which is partly light, and the other
partly ponderous, viz. Water and Air. Thus he proves that there are four
Elements, and no more.

It is plain to all those who examine the Opinions of Men by their own Reason,
that all those Propositions are false, or cannot at least be taken for clear
and undeniable Principles, which may afford very plain and distinct Ideas,
whereon to lay the Foundation of Natural Philosophy. It Is certain that nothing
can be more absurd, than to establish the Number of Elements upon the imaginary
Qualities of Heaviness and Lightness; saying, without any farther Proof, that
some Bodies are ponderous, and others light, of their own Nature: For if any
thing may be asserted without Proof, it may be said that all Bodies are
naturally heavy, and endeavor to approach the Center of the World, as the
place of their Rest. And the contrary may be asserted too, viz. That all Bodies
are light of their own Nature, and tend to rise to the Heavens, as to the place
of their greatest Perfection. For if you object to him who maintains the
Gravity of Bodies, that Fire and Air are light; he needs but answer, that Fire
and Air are not light; but that being less ponderous than Earth and Water, they
seem to us to be light: And that it goes with those Elements, as with a piece
of Wood that appears light upon the Water; not by reason of any natural Levity,
since it falls down when in the Air; but because Water being heavier, seizes
the lower Place, and forces it to ascend.

On the contrary, If you object to him that defends the natural Levity of
Bodies, that Earth and Water are ponderous; he will likewise answer, That those
Bodies seem heavy, because they are not so light as those that surround them:
That Wood, for instance, appears to be ponderous when in the Air, not because
of its natural Gravity, since it ascends when in the Water, but because it is
not so light as Air.

And therefore it is ridiculous to suppose, as an undeniable Principle, that
Bodies are either light or heavy of their own Nature; it being, on the
contrary, evident, that none has the Force of moving it self, and that it is
indifferent to be moved either upwards or downwards, to the East or to the
West, to the South or to the North, or in any other possible manner.

But let us grant to Aristotle, That there are four Elements, such as he
pretends; two of which are heavy, viz. Earth and Water; and the two other light
of their own Nature, viz. Fire and Air; what Consequence may be drawn from
thence, for the Knowledge of the Universe? Those four Elements are not the
visible Fire, Air, Water and Earth, but something quite different, which we
know neither by the Senses, nor by Reason, having no distinct Idea of them. Let
all natural Bodies be composed of them, since Aristotle has said it: But the
Nature of those Compounds is still unknown, and cannot be discovered, but by
knowing the four Elements, or the simple Bodies of which they are made, since
the Composed is known only by the Simple.

Fire, says Aristotle, is light by its own Nature; the ascending Motion is
simple: Fire is therefore a simple Body, since Motion must be proportioned to
the Moveable. Natural Bodies are composed of simple, there is then Fire in all
natural Bodies, but a Fire which is not like to that we see; for Fire is often
but in potentia in the Bodies that are made of it. What signify all these
Peripatetick Discourses? That there is Fire in all Bodies, either actual or
potential, that is to say, that all Bodies are composed of something we see
not, and the Nature of which is wholly unknown unto us. Now we have made a very
fair Progress.

But though Aristotle shows us not the Nature of Fire, and other Elements, of
which all Bodies are made up; yet one may imagine, that he will at least
discover their principal Qualities and Properties. Let us also examine what he
says upon that Account.

He declares that there are four principal Qualities which belong to the Sense
of Touching, L. 2. and 3. de Gene. and Corrup.
viz. Heat, Cold, Humidity and Siccity; of which all the other are composed. He
distributes those primitive Qualities into the four Elements, ascribing Heat
and Dryness to Fire, Heat and Moisture to the Air, Cold and Moisture to Water,
and Cold and Dryness to Earth. He asserts that Heat and Cold are active
Qualities; but that Dryness and Moisture are passive. He defines Heat, What
congregates Things of the same kind; Cold, What congregates Things either of
the same, or of different Species; Moisture, What cannot easily be contained in
its own Limits, but is easily kept within foreign Bounds; and Dryness, What is
easily contained within its own Limits, but will hardly be adapted to the
Bounds of surrounding Bodies.

Thus, according to Aristotle, Fire is a hot and dry Element, and therefore
congregates Homogeneous Things, is easily contained within its own Limits, and
hardly within others: Air is a hot and moist Element, and therefore congregates
Homogeneous Things, can hardly be kept within its own Limits, but easily within
others: Water is a cold and moist Element, and therefore congregates both
Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Things, is hardly contained within its own
Limits, but easily within others: And lastly, Earth is a cold and dry Element,
or such an one as aggregates Things, both of the same and different Natures, is
easily contained within its own Limits, but can hardly be adapted to others.

There you have the Elements explained, according to the Opinion of Aristotle,
or the Definitions he has given of their principal Qualities; and because, if
we may believe him* the Elements are simple Bodies, out of which others are
constituted; and their Qualities are simple Qualities, of which all others are
composed, the Knowledge of those Elements and Qualities must be very clear and
distinct, since the whole Natural Philosophy, or the Knowledge of all sensible
Bodies, which are made of them, must be deduced from thence.

Let us then see what may be wanting to those Principles. First, Aristotle
fixes no distinct Idea to the Word Quality: It cannot be known whether by
Quality he understands a real Being distinguished from Matter, or only a
Modification of Matter; he seems one while to take it in the former, and at
another time in the latter Sense. I grant that in the 8th Chapter of his
Categories, he defines Quality, that by which Things are denominated so or so;
but that is not plain and satisfactory. Secondly, His Definitions of the four
Primitive Qualities, viz. Heat, Cold, Moisture and Dryness, are either false,
or useless. We will begin with his Definition of Heat: Heat, says he, is that
which congregates Homogeneous Things.

First, Though that Definition should be true, That Heat always congregates
Homogeneous Bodies; yet we cannot see how it perfectly explains the Nature of
Heat.

Secondly, It Is false that Heat congregates Homogeneous Things; for Heat
dissipates the Particles of Water into Vapor, instead of heaping them
together: It congregates not likewise the Parts of Wine, or any Liquor or Fluid
Body whatsoever, even to Quicksilver. On the contrary, it resolves and
separates both Solid and Fluid Bodies, whether of the same or different
Natures; and if there be any, the Parts of which Fire cannot dissipate, it is
not because they are homogeneous, but because they are too gross and solid to
be carried away by the Motion of the fiery Particles.

Thirdly, Heat, in reality, can neither congregate nor segregate the Parts of
any Body whatsoever; for, that the Parts of Bodies may be congregated,
separated or dissipated, they must be moved: But Heat can move nothing, or at
least, it appears not that it can move Bodies; for though we consider Heat with
all the possible Attention, we cannot discover that it may communicate to
Bodies a Motion which it has not it self. We see, indeed, that Fire moves and
separates the Parts of such Bodies as lie exposed to its Action, but it is not
perhaps by its Heat, it being not evident whether it has any; it is rather by
the Action of its Parts, which we visibly perceive to be in a continual Motion;
for these fiery Particles striking against a Body, must needs impart to it
somewhat of their Motion, whether there is or is not any Heat in Fire. If the
Parts of that Body be not very solid* Fire will dissipate them; but if they be
very gross and solid, Fire can but just move them, and make them slide one over
the other. And Lastly, If there be a Mixture of subtle and gross Parts, Fire
will only dissipate those which it can push so far as to separate them from the
others. So that Fire can only separate; and if it congregate, it is only by
Accident. But Aristotle asserts quite contrary: De Gener. and Corrupt* l. 2. c.
2.
Separating, says he, which some ascribe to Fire, is but congregating
Homogeneous Things; for it is only by Accident that Fire carries off Things of
different Nature.

If this Philosopher had at first distinguished the Sensation of Heat, from the
Motion of the small Particles, of which the Bodies called hot are composed, and
had afterward defined Heat, taken from the Motion of Parts, by saying, that
Heat is what agitates and separates the invisible Parts, or which visible
Bodies are made up; he would have given a tolerable definition of Heat; though
not full and satisfactory: because it would not accurately discover the Nature
of Motion in hot Bodies.

Aristotle defines Cold, what congregates Bodies of the same, or different
Nature: but that Definition is worth nothing, for Cold congregates not Bodies.
To congregate them, it must move them: but if we consult our Reason we shall
find, that Cold can move nothing; for we understand by that word, either what
we feel when we are cold, or what causes our Sensation. As to our Sensation,
it is plain that it is merely Passive, and can neither move nor drive any thing.
And as to the Cause of that Sensation, reason tells us, if we examine things,
that it is merely rest, or a Cessation of Motion: So that Cold in Bodies being
no more than the Cessation of that sort of Motion which attends Heat, it is
evident that if Heat separate, Cold does not. And therefore Cold coacervates
neither things of the same, nor of different nature; since what cannot drive on
Bodies cannot amass them together. In a word, as it does nothing, it must needs
congregate nothing.

Aristotle judging of things by his Senses, imagined Cold to be as positive as
Heat; and because the Sensations of Heat and Cold are both real and positive,
he supposes them both likewise to be active Qualities: and indeed, if we follow
the Impressions of the Senses, we shall be apt to believe that Cold is a very
active Quality; since cold Water congeals, accumulates, and hardens in a moment
melted Gold and Lead, when they are poured upon it from a Crucible; though the
Heat of those Metals be yet strong enough to separate the Parts of the Bodies
which they touch.

It Is plain, by what has been said in the First Book, concerning the Errors of
the Senses, That if we rely upon the Judgment the Senses make of the Qualities
of sensible Bodies, it is impossible to discover any certain and undeniable
Truth, that may serve as a Principle to proceed in the Knowledge of Nature. For
one cannot so much as discover that way, what things are hot, and what cold;
amongst several Persons, who touch lukewarm Water, it feels cold to those that
are hot, See Book I. from chapter 11. ^o chapter 15.
and hot to those that are cold. And if we suppose Fishes susceptible of
Sensation, it is very probable that they feel it warm, when all or most Men feel
it cold. It is the same with Air, that seems to be hot or cold, according to
the different Dispositions of the Bodies of those that are exposed to it.
Aristotle pretends that it is hot, but I fancy that the Nothern Inhabitants
are of another Opinion, since several learned Men, whose Climate is as hot as
that of Greece, have asserted it to be cold. But that Question, which has made
so much noise in the Schools, will never be resolved, as long as no distinct
Idea shall be affixed to the Word Heat.

The Definitions Aristotle lays down of Heat and Cold cannot settle that Idea.
For Instance, Air, and even Water, though never so hot and scalding, congregate
the parts of melted Lead together with those of any other Metal whatsoever. Air
conglutinates all sorts of Fat joined with Gums, or any other solid Bodies. And
he shall be a very formal Peripatetick, who should think of exposing Mastich,
to the Air, to separate the pitchy from the Earthy part, and other compound
Bodies to uncompound them. And therefore Air is not hot, according to the
Definition which Aristotle gives of Heat. Air separates Liquors from the Bodies
that are imbued with them, hardens Clay, dries spread Linen, though Aristotle
makes it moist, and so is hot and drying, according to the same Definition;
therefore it cannot be determined by that Definition, whether or no Air is hot.
It may indeed be asserted that Air is hot in reference to Clay, since it
separates the Water from the Earthy Part. But must we try all the various
Effects of Air upon all Bodies, before we can be assured, whether there is Heat
in the Air we breath in? If it be so, we shall never be sure of it, and it is as
good not to philosophize at all upon the Air we respire, but upon some certain
pure and elementary Air, not to be found here below, of which we can very
dogmatically assert, with Aristotle, that it is hot, without giving the least
Proof of it, nor even distinctly knowing what we understand either by that Air,
or by the Heat ascribed to it. For thus we shall lay down Principles scarce to
be destroyed; not because of their Plainness and Certainty, but by reason of
their Darkness, and their being like to Apparitions, which cannot be wounded,
because they have not a Body.

I shall not insist upon Aristotle's Definitions of Moisture and Dryness; it
being evident, that they explain not their Nature. For according to those
Definitions, Fire is not dry, since it is not easily contained within its own
limits; and Ice is not moist, since it keeps within its proper Bounds, and can
difficultly be adapted to external Bounds. But if fluid be understood by the
Word humid, or moist, it may again be said, that Ice is not moist; and that
Flame, melted Gold, and Lead, are very humid. If by humid or moist be
understood what easily cleaves to any thing, Ice is not humid, and Pitch, Fat,
and Oil, are moister than Water, since they cleave to Bodies more strongly than
it does. Quicksilver is moist in that sense, for it cleaves to Metals; whereas
Water is not perfectly moist, since it cleaves not to most of them. So that
it is unserviceable to have recourse to the Testimony of the Senses, to defend
the Opinions of Aristotle.

But without farther examining his wonderful Definitions of the four Elementary
Qualities, let us suppose that whatever the Senses teach us of those Qualities
is incontestable: let us muster up all our Faith, and believe all those
Definitions very accurate: Only let it be allowed us to enquire whether all the
Qualities of sensible Bodies are made of these Elementary Qualities. Aristotle
pretends it, and he must do so indeed, since he looks upon those Four primitive
Qualities, as the Principles of all the things which he intends to explain in
his Books of Physics.

He teaches us, that Colors are produced from the Mixture of those Four
Elementary Qualities; White is produced when Moisture exceeds Heat; as in old
Men, when they grow gray; Black when Moisture is exhausted, as in the Walls of
Cisterns; and all other Colors by the like Mixtures: that Odours and Savours
arise from different Degrees of Dryness and Moisture, mixed together by Heat
and Cold; and that even Gravity and Levity do depend thereon. In short, All
sensible Qualities must needs be produced, according to Aristotle, by Two
active Principles, viz. Heat and Cold: and composed of Two passive, namely,
Dryness and Moisture; that there may be some probable Connection betwixt his
Principles, and the Consequences he draws from them.

However it is yet a harder Task to persuade us of such things, than any of
those that have been hitherto related from Aristotle. We can scarce believe
that the Earth, and other Elements, would not be colored, or visible, if they
were in their natural Purity, without Mixture of those Elementary Principles,
though some learned Commentators on that Philosopher assert it. We understand
not what Aristotle means when he assures us, that gray Hair is produced by
Moisture, because in old Men Moisture exceeds Heat; though to illustrate his
thought we put the definition instead of the thing defined. For it looks like
an incomprehensible piece of Nonsense to say that the Hair of old Men becomes
gray, because what is not easily contained within its own Limits, but may be
within others, exceeds what congregates homogeneous things.

And we are as hard put it to believe that Savor is well explained, by saying
it consists in a mixture of Dryness, Moisture, and of Heat, especially when we
put, instead of those words, the Definitions given by that Philosopher; as it
would prove useful, if they were just and good. And none perhaps could forbear
laughing, if instead of the Definitions which Aristotle gives of Hunger and
Thirst when he says, that Hunger is the desire of what is hot and dry, and
Thirst the desire of what is cold and moist; we should substitute the
Definitions of those words, calling Hunger the desire of that which coacervates
things of the same nature, and is easily contained within its own Limits, and
difficultly within others; and defining Thirst, the desire of that which
congregates things of the same and different natures, and which can hardly be
contained within its own bounds, but is easily kept within others.

Surely it is a very useful Rule to know whether Terms have been well defined,
and to avoid mistakes in reasoning, often to put the Definition instead of the
thing defined; for that shows whether the words are equivocal, and the Measures
of the Relations false and imperfect, or whether we argue consequently. If it
be so, what Judgment can be made of Aristotle's Arguments, which become an
impertinent and ridiculous Nonsense, when we make use of that Rule? and what
may also be said of all those who argue upon the false and confused Ideas of
the Senses, since that Rule which preserves Light and Evidence, in all exact
and solid Reasonings, brings nothing but confusion in their Discourses?

It Is not possible to lay open the foolish Capriciousness and Extravagance of
Aristotle's Explications upon all sorts of matters. When he treats of simple
and easy Subjects, his Errors are plain and obvious to be discovered; but
when he pretends to explain very composed things and depending on several
Causes, his Errors are as much compounded as the Subjects he speaks of; so
that it is impossible to unfold them all, and set them before others.

That great Genius, who is said to have so well succeeded in his Rules for
defining well, knows not so much as which are the things that may be defined,
because he puts no Distinction betwixt a clear and distinct* and a sensible
Knowledge, and pretends to know and explain other things of which he has not so
much as a distinct Idea. Definitions ought to explicate the Nature of things,
and the words of which they consist must raise in the Mind distinct and
particular Notions. But it is impossible to define in that manner sensible
Qualities, as Heat, Cold, Color, Savor, etc. When you confound the Cause with
the Effect, the Motion of Bodies with the Sensation that attends it; because
Sensations being Modifications of the Soul, which are not to be known by clear
Ideas, but only by internal Sensation as I have explained it in the third Book;
it is impossible to fix to those words, Ideas which we have not.

As we have Distinct Ideas of a Circle, a Square, a Triangle, and therefore
know distinctly their Nature, so we can give good Difinitions of them, and even
deduce from our Ideas of those Figures all their Properties, and explain them
to others by such words as are fixed to those Ideas. But we cannot define
either Heat or Cold, in as much as they are sensible Qualities, because we know
them not distinctly, and by Ideas; but only by Conscience and inward Sensation.

Neither must we define the Heat that is without us by any of its Effects. For
if we substitute such a Definition in its place, we shall find that it will
only conduce to lead us into Error. For Instance, if Heat be defined what
congregates homogeneous things, without adding any thing else, we may by that
Definition mistake for Heat such things as have no Relation to it. For then it
might be said, that the Loadstone collects the Filings of Iron, and separates
them from those of Silver, because it is hot; that a Dove eats Hempseed when it
leaves other Grain, because that Bird is hot; that a covetous Man separates his
Guineas from his Silver, because he is hot. In short, there is no impertinency,
but that Definition would induce one into it, were he dull enough to follow it.
And therefore that Definition explains not the nature of Heat, nor can it be
employed to deduce all its properties from it: since by literally insisting
upon it, we should draw ridiculous Conclusions; and by putting it instead of
the thing defined, fall into Nonsense.

However, if we carefully distinguish Heat from its Cause; though it cannot be
defined, in as much as it is a Modification of the Soul, whereof we have no
Idea: yet its Cause may be defined, since we have a distinct Idea of Motion.
But we must observe that Heat* taken for such a Motion, causes not always in us
the Sense of Heat. For Instance, Water is hot, since its Parts are fluid, and
in Motion, and most probably it feels warm to Fishes, at least it is warmer than
Ice, whose Parts are more quiet; but it is cold to us, because it has less
Motion than the Parts of our Body; what has less Motion than another, being in
some manner quiet, in respect of that. And therefore it is not with reference to
the Motion of the Fibers of our Body, that the Cause of Heat, or the Motion
that excites it, ought to be defined. We must, if possible, define that Motion
absolutely, and in it self: for then our Definition will be subservient to know
the Nature and Properties of Heat.

I hold not my self obliged to examine farther the Philosophy of Aristotle, and
to extricate his so much confused and puzling Errors. I have shown, methinks,
that he proves not the Existence of his four Elements, and defines them wrong;
that his Elementary Qualities are not such as he pretends, that he knows not
their Nature, and that all the Second Qualities are not made of them; and
lastly, that though we should grant him that all Bodies are composed of the
four Elements, and the Second Qualities of the First, his whole System would
still prove useless for the finding out of Truth, since his Ideas are not clear
enough to preserve Evidence in all our Reasonings.

If any doubt whether I have proposed the true Opinions of Aristotle, he may
satisfy himself by consulting his Books of the Heavens, and of Generation and
Corruption, whence I have exextracted almost all that I have said of him. I
would relate nothing out of his Eight Books of Physics, because some learned
Men pretend they are but a mere Logic; which is very apparent, since nothing
but rambling and undetermined Words are to be found in them.

As Aristotle often contradicts himself, and that almost all sorts of Opinions
may be defended by some Passages drawn out of him, I doubt not but some
Opinions, contrary to those I have ascribed to that Philosopher, may be proved
out of himself: And I shall not warrant for him; but it is sufficient for me
that I have the Books I have quoted, to justify what I have said of him; and I
care little whether those Books are Aristotle's, or not; taking them for such,
as I find them upon the public Fame; for we ought not to trouble our selves
with enquiring into the true Genealogy of Things, for which we have no great
Esteem.

CHAP. VI.
General and necessary Directions to proceed orderly in the Search after Truth,
and in the Choice of Sciences.

LEST it should be said, that we have only been destroying the Reasonings of
others, but establish nothing certain and undeniable of our own; it will be
convenient to propose, in few words, what Order we ought to observe in our
Studies, for the avoiding Error: and I design withal to show some Truths and
Sciences that are very necessary, as bearing such a Character of Evidence, as
that we cannot withold our Consent, without feeling the secret Upbraidings of
our Reason. I shall not explain at large those Truths and Sciences; that is
already done, and I intend not to reprint the Works of others, but only to
refer to them, and to show what Order we must keep in our Studies, to preserve
Evidence in all our perceptions.

The first Knowledge of all, is that of the Existence of our Soul; all our
Thoughts are so many undeniable Demonstrations of it, for nothing is more
evident, than that whatever actually thinks, is actually something. But though
it be easy to know the Existence of our Soul, yet her Essence and Nature are
not so easily discovered. If we desire to know what she is, we must take care
above all, not to confound her with the things to which she is united. If we
doubt, will, argue; we must only believe, that the Soul is something that
doubts, wills, argues, and nothing more, as long as we have not felt in her
other Properties: for we know our Soul only by the inward Sensation we have of
her. We must not mistake her for our Body, for Blood, for Animal Spirits, for
Fire, and many other things for which Philosophers have mistaken her. We must
believe of the Soul no more than we are forced to believe of her, by a full
conviction of our inward Sense, for otherwise we shall be deceived. Thus we
shall know, by a simple view, or by internal Sensation, whatever may be known
of the Soul; without being obliged to long reasonings that might lead us into
Error. For when we reason, Memory operates; and wherever Memory operates,
there may be Error; supposing our Knowledge should depend on some wicked
Spirits that should take delight in deceiving us.

Though I should suppose, for instance, a God, who took delight in thus abusing
me; yet I am persuaded that I could not be deceived in a Knowledge of simple
Perception, as is that by which I know that I am, that I think, or that 2 and 2
are 4. For I am conscious to my self, that in this extravagant Supposition,
such a deluding Spirit, though never so potent, could not make me doubt that I
am, or that 2 times 2 are 4; because I perceive those things with a simple view
or Perception, and without the use of Memory. But when I reason, as I see not
evidently the Principles of my Reasonings, but only remember that I have
evidently seen them. If that seducing God should join that Remembrance to false
Principles, as he might do if he pleased, I should conclude nothing but what
was false. Just like those that make long Calculations; fancying they remember
that they have plainly seen that 9 times 9 are 72, or that 21 is a primitive
Number, or some other Error of that Nature, draw false Inferences from thence.

And therefore it is necessary to know God, and to be assured that he is no
Deceiver; if we desire to be fully convinced that the most certain Sciences, as
Arithmetic and Geometry are true Sciences; for without that their Evidence is
not full, and we can still withold our Consent. And it is likewise necessary
to know by a simple View, and not by Reasoning, that God is no Deceiver; since
reasoning may still be false, in the supposition of a deluding God.

All the ordinary Proofs of the Existence and Perfections of God, drawn from
the Existence and Perfections of his Creatures, are methinks liable to this
Defect, that they convince not the Mind with a simple Perception. All those
Arguments are Reasonings convincing in themselves; but because they are
Reasonings, they are not demonstrative in supposing a wicked and deceitful
Genius. They sufficiently show that there is a Power superior to us, which is
granted even by that foolish Supposition: but they do not fully persuade us
that there is a God, or a Being infinitely perfect; so that the Conclusion of
those Arguments is more evident than the Principle.

It Is more evident that there is a Power superior to us, than that there is a
World, since no Supposition can obviate our demonstrating that superior Power;
whereas in supposing an evil and deceitful Spirit, it is impossible to prove
the Existence of the World: because it may still be conceived, that this wicked
Genius gives us the Sense of things that are not in being; as Sleep, and some
Distempers, make us perceive things that never were, and even feel an actual
pain in imaginary Members, such as we have lost, or that we never had.

But the Arguments of the Existence and Perfections of God, drawn from our Idea
of infinite, are Proo^s of simple sight. We see there is a God, as soon as we
perceive infinite; because necessary Existence is included in the Idea of
infinite, and that nothing but infinite can furnish to us the Idea of an
infinite Being. We likewise see that God is no Deceiver, because knowing that
he is infinitely perfect, and that infinite cannot want any Perfection, we
plainly perceive that he will not seduce us, and even that he cannot, because
he can but what he wills, and what he is able to will. And therefore there is a
God, a true God, and a God that never deceives us; though he does not always
enlighten us, and that we are obnoxious to Mistakes, when we want his Light.
Attentive Minds perceive all those Truths, by a simple intuitive Perception,
though we seem to make Arguments, that we may demonstrate them to others; so
that they may be supposed as unquestionable Principles of our Reasonings; for
having known that God delights not in deceiving us, nothing hinders but we may
proceed to Reason.

It Is also plain that the certainty of Faith depends on that Principle, That
there is a God incapable of Deceit. For the Existence of God, and the
Infallibility of his Divine Authority, are rather a natural Knowledge and
common Notions, as to Minds capable of serious Attention, than Articles of
Faith; though to have a Mind susceptible of a sufficient Attention rightly to
conceive those Truths, and willingly to apply our selves to the understanding
them, be a particular Gift of God.

From that Principle, That God is no Deceiver, we might likewise infer, that we
have a real Body, to which we are united in a particular manner, and that we
are surrounded with several others See Illustration X. of Book I.
. For we are inwardly convinced of their Existence by the continual Sensations,
which God produces in us, and which we cannot correct by Reason, without
offending Faith; though we can correct by Reason the Sensations that represent
them, as endu'd with some Qualities and Perfections that are not in them: So
that we ought not to believe that they are such as we see or imagine them, but
only that they exist, and that they are such as we conceive them by Reason.

But that we may proceed orderly, we must not yet examine whether we have a
Body, whether there are others about us, or whether we have only bare
Sensations of Things which exist not. Those Questions include too great
Difficulties, and are not perhaps so necessary as may be imagined to perfect
our Mind, and to have an accurate Knowledge of Natural and Moral Philosophy,
and some other Sciences.

We have within us the Ideas of Numbers and Extension, whose Existence is
undeniable, and their Nature immutable; and which would eternally supply us
with Objects to think on, if we desire to know all their Relations: It is
necessary to begin to make use of our Minds upon those Ideas, for some Reasons,
which it will not be amiss to explain, whereof the principal are Three.

The First is, That those Ideas are the most clear and evident of all: For if,
to avoid Error, we must still keep to Evidence in our Reasonings, it is plain
that we must rather argue from the Ideas of Numbers and Extension, than from
the confused or composed Ideas of Physics, Morals, Mechanics, Chemistry, and
other Sciences.

Secondly, Those Ideas are the most distinct and exact of all, especially those
of Numbers: So that the Habit (which proceeds from the Exercise of Arithmetic
and Geometry) of not being content till we precisely know the Relations of
Things, endues the Mind with such an Exactness of Thought, as is not to be
found in those that are satisfied with the Probabilities so obvious to be met
with in other Sciences.

The Third and chief Reason is, That those Ideas are the immutable Rules and
common Measure of all the Objects of our Knowledge: For those that perfectly
know the Relations of Numbers and Figures, or rather the Art of making such
Comparisons as are requisite to know them, have a kind of Universal Knowledge,
and a very sure Means evidently and certainly to discover whatever goes not
beyond the ordinary Limits of the Mind. But those that are not skilful in this
Art, cannot with Certainty discover such Truths as are somewhat intricate,
though they have very clear Ideas of Things, and endeavor to know their
Compound Relations.

These, or the like Reasons, moved some of the Ancients to apply their Youth to
the Study of Arithmetic, Algebra and Geometry. Undoubtedly they well knew that
Arithmetic and Algebra endue the Mind with such an Insight and Penetration, as
was not to be gotten by other Studies; and that Geometry manages the
Imagination so well, as that it is not easily puzzled or confounded; for that
Faculty of the Soul, so necessary to Sciences, acquires by the Use of Geometry,
such an universal Nicety as promotes and preserves the clear View of the Mind,
even in the most intricate Difficulties.

And therefore, he that desires always to preserve Evidence in his Perceptions,
and discover naked Tru^hs, without Mixture of Darkness and Error, must begin
with the Study of Arithmetic, Algebra and Geometry, after he has obtained some
Knowledge, at least of himself, and the Sovereign Being. As for Books that make
the Way to those Sciences easy, I may refer to the Meditations of des Carts,
as to the Knowledge of God, and our selves; to the Elements of Mathematics,
newly printed, as to Arithmetic and Algebra; to the New Elements of Geometry,
printed in 1667, or to the Elements of Father Taquet, Jesuit, printed at
Antwerp in 1665, as to ordinary Geometry; and as to Conick Sections, and the
Solution of Geometrical Problemes, to the Treatises of Monsieur de la Hire,
entitled, Of Conick Sections, Of Geometrical Places, and Of the Construction
of Equations; to which may be added, the Geometry of des Carts.

I would not have advised to the Elements of Mathematics, as to Arithmetic
and Algebra, if I knew any Author who had clearly demonstrated those Sciences;
but Truth obliges me to a thing, for which I may be blamed by some People; for
Algebra and Analyticks being altogether requisite for the Discovery of composed
Truths, I must needs show my Esteem for a Book which carries those Sciences
very far, and which, in the Opinion of many Learned, explains them more clearly
than they had been hitherto.

By the careful Study of those general Sciences, we shall evidently know a
great Number of Truths, very serviceable in all accurate and particular
Sciences. We may afterward study Natural and Moral Philosophy, as being very
useful, though no^ very fit to make the Mind nice and quick-sighted. And if we
desire to preserve Evidence in all our Perceptions, we must take a special Care
not to be opinionated of any Principle that is not evident, and to which the
Chinese, for instance, would not be supposed to dissent, after having thoroughly
weighed and considered it.

And therefore we must only admit in Physics those Notions which are common to
all Men, such as Axioms of Geometry, and the clear Ideas of Extension, Figure,
Motion, Rest, and others of that nature, if there be any. Perhaps it will be
said, that Extension is not the Essence of Matter: But what is that to the
purpose? It Is sufficient that the World, which we conceive to consist of
Extension, appears like to that we see, though it be not made of such a Matter,
which is good for nothing, and altogether unknown, whilst so much Noise is made
about it.

It is not absolutely necessary to examine whether there are actually External
Beings, corresponding to those Ideas; for we argue not from those Beings, but
from their Ideas. We must only take care that our Reasonings which we make upon
the Properties of Things, agree with our inward Consciousness; that is, that
our Thoughts perfectly agree with Experience; because in Physics we endeavor
to discover the Order and Connection of Effects with their Causes, either in
Bodies if they exist, or in the Sense we have of them if they are not in being.

I say not, however, that we can doubt whether Bodies are actually existing,
when we consider that God is not a Deceiver; and that the Order he has
constituted in our Sentiments of Things* both as to natural Occurrences, and
such as are wrought to create our Belief of what Reason is at a Loss to
comprehend, is very regular. But I observe this, because it is not necessary to
insist at first very long upon a thing which no body doubts of, and is not
extremely conducible to the Knowledge of Physics, considered as a true Science.

Neither must we puzzle our Heads with enquiring whether there are in the
Bodies about us some other Qualities, besides those of which we have clear
Ideas; for we must only reason upon our Ideas; and if there be any thing of
which we have no clear, distinct and particular Idea, we shall never know it,
nor argue from it with any Certainty: Whereas, perhaps, by reasoning upon our
Ideas, we may follow Nature, and perhaps discover that she is not so hidden as
is commonly imagined.

As those who have not studied the Properties of Numbers, often imagine that it
is not possible to resolve some Problemes, which are however simple and easy;
so those that have not meditated upon the Properties of Extension, Figures and
Motions, are very apt to believe, and even to assert, that most part of the
Physical Questions are inexplicable. But we must not be deterred by the Opinion
of those who have examined nothing, or nothing at least with due Application:
For though few Truths concerning Natural Things have been fully demonstrated,
yet it is certain that there are some that are general which cannot be doubted
of, though it be very possible not to think upon them, to know nothing of them,
and to deny them.

If we meditate orderly, and with due Time and all necessary Application, we
shall discover several of those certain Truths I speak of: But for more
Convenience, it will be requisite carefully to read des Cartes's Principles of
Philosophy, without approving of any thing he says, till the Strength and
Plainness of his Reasons shall suffer us to doubt no longer.

As Moral Philosophy is the most necessary of all Sciences, so it must be
studied with the greatest Application; it being very dangerous to follow in
this the Opinions of Men. But to the avoiding Error, and keeping to Evidence
in our Perceptions, we must only meditate upon such Principles as are confessed
by all those whose Hearts are not corrupted by Debauchery, and their Minds
blinded with Pride: For there is no Moral Principle undeniable to Minds of
Flesh and Blood, who aspire to the Quality of Bold Wits. Such People conceive
not the most simple Truths; or if they do, they constantly deny them through a
Spirit of Contradiction, and to keep up the Reputation of great Wits.

Some of the most general Principles of Morality are, That God having made all
things for himself, has made our Understanding to know, and our Will to love
him: That being so just and powerful as he is, we cannot be happy but by
obeying his Commands, nor be unhappy in following them: That our Nature is
corrupted, our Mind depending on our Body, our Reason on our Senses, and our
Will on our Passions: That we are incapable of performing what we plainly see
to be our Duty, and that we have need of a Redeemer. There are yet many other
Moral Principles; as, That Retirement and Penitency are necessary to diminish
our Union with sensible Objects, and to increase that which we have with
intelligible Goods, true Goods, and the Goods of the Mind: That we cannot enjoy
vehement Pleasures, without becoming Slaves to them: That nothing must be
undertaken by Passion: That we must not long for Settlements in this Life, etc.
But because these last Principles depend on the former, and on the Knowledge of
Man, it behooves us not to take them at first for granted. If we orderly
meditate upon those Principles, with as much Care and Application as so great a
Subject deserves, and admit no Conclusion for true but such as follows from
those Principles, we shall compose a very certain System of Morals, and
perfectly agreeable with that of the Gospel, though not so large and complete.

I grant that in Moral Reasonings it is not so easy to preserve Evidence and
Exactness, as in some other Sciences; and that the Knowledge of Man being
absolutely necessary to those that will proceed far, many Learners make no
considerable Progresses therein: They will not consult themselves, to be
sensible of the Weakness of their Nature: They are soon weary of interrogating
the Master, who inwardly teaches them his Will; that is, the Immutable and
Eternal Laws, and the true Principles of Morality: They cannot listen with
Pleasure to him that speaks not to their Senses, who answers not according to
their Desires, and flatters not their secret Pride: They have no Veneration for
such Words, the Luster of which dazles not their Imagination, which are lowly
pronounced, and never distinctly heard but when the Creatures are silent: But
they consult with Pleasure and Reverence Aristotle, Seneca, or some new
Philosophers, who seduce them by the Obscurity of their Words, by the Elegancy
of their Expressions, or the Probability of their Reasons.

Since the Fall of our first Parents we esteem nothing but what refers to the
Preservation of the Body, and the Conveniences of Life; and as we discover
that sort of Good by means of the Senses, so we endeavor to use them on all
Occasions. The Eternal Wisdom, which is our true Life, and the only Light that
can illuminate us, often shines but upon the Blind, and speaks but to the Deaf,
when it speaks within the Recesses of our Soul, because we are for the most
part exercised abroad. And as we are continually putting Questions to the
Creatures, to learn any News from them of the Good we are in search of, it was
requisite, as I have said elsewhere, that this Wisdom should offer it self to
our Senses, yet without going out of our selves, that we might learn by
sensible Words and convincing Examples, the way to eternal Happiness. God
perpetually imprints on us a natural Love for him, that we may always love him;
yet by that same Motion of Love we incessantly recede from him, running with
all the strength he gives us to the sinsible Good which he forbids us to love;
and therefore as he desires we should love him, so he must make himself
sensible and offer himself before us, to stop by the delectation of his Grace
all our restless Agitations, and begin our Cure by Sensations or Satisfactions,
like to the preventing Pleasures that had been the Original of our Disease.

For these reasons I pretend not that Men may easily discover, by the strength
of their Mind, all the Rules of Morality necessary to Salvation, and much less
that they should be able to act according to their Light; for their Heart is
still more corrupted than their Mind. I only say, that if they admit nothing
but evident Principles, and argue consequently from them, they shall discover
the same Truths that are taught us in the Gospel: because it is the same
Wisdom, which speaks immediately, and by it self, to those that discover the
Truth in evident Reasonings, and which speaks in the Holy Scriptures to those
that understand them in their right sense.

We must therefore study Morality in the Gospel, to spare our selves the
trouble of Meditation, and to learn with certainty the Laws and Rules of our
Life and Manners. As to those who are not satisfied with a bare Certainty,
because it only convinces the Mind, without enlightening it, they must meditate
upon those Laws, and deduce them from their natural Principles; that they may
know evidently by Reason what Faith has already taught them, with an absolute
Certainty. Thus they will convince themselves, that the Gospel is the most
solid Book in the World, that Christ perfectly knew the Disorders and
Distempers of Nature, that he has rectified and cured them in a manner the most
useful to us, and most worthy of himself, that can be conceived. But that the
Light of Philosophers is nothing but a dark Night, and their most splendid
Virtues, an intolerable Pride: In short, that Aristotle, Seneca, and all the
rest are but Men, to say nothing worse.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Use of the First Rule concerning particular Questions.

WE have sufficiently insisted upon the general Rule of Method, more especially
regarding the Subject of our Studies, and shown, that Des Carts has exactly
followed it in his System of the World; whereas Aristotle and his Disciples
have not observed it. We proceed now to the particular Rules that are necessary
to resolve all sorts of Questions.

The Questions that may be formed upon all sorts of Subjects are of so many
Kinds, as that it is not easy to enumerate them. However I shall set down the
principal. Sometimes we search after the unknown Causes of some Effects that
are known, and sometimes after unknown Effects by known Causes. Fire burns and
dissipates Wood, we enquire after the Cause of it. Fire consists in a violent
Motion of the fiery Particles; we desire to know what Effects that Motion is
able to produce, whether it may harden Clay, melt Iron, etc.

Sometimes we seek the Nature of a thing by its Properties, and sometimes its
Properties by its Nature, that is known to us. We know, or suppose, that Light
is transmitted in a moment; and however, that it is reflected and collected by
a concave Mirror, so as to consume and melt the most solid Bodies; and we
design to make use of those Properties to discover its Nature. On the contrary
we know, that all the space that reaches from the Earth to the Heavens, is full
of little Spherical and most movable Bodies, which continually endeavor their
removal from the Sun: We desire to discover whether the endeavor of those
small Bodies may be transmitted in an instant; whether being reflected by a
concave Glass, they must unite themselves, and dissipate or melt the solidest
Bodies.

Sometimes we enquire after all the Parts of the Whole, and sometimes after the
Whole by its Parts. We search after all the unknown Parts of a Whole that is
known, when we seek all the Aliquot Parts of a Number, all the Roots of an
Equation, all the Right Angles of a Figure, etc. And we enquire after an
unknown Whole, all the Parts of which are known, when we seek the Sum of
several Numbers, the Area of many Figures, the Dimensions of different Vessels.
Or we seek a Whole, one Part of which is known, and whose other Parts, though
unknown, include some known Relation with that which is unknown; as when we
seek what is that Number, one Part of which, as 15, being known, makes with the
other part the half, or the third of an unknown Number; or when we seek an
unknown Number equal to 15, and to the double of the Root of that unknown
Number.

Lastly, We often enquire whether some things are equal, or like to others; and
how much they are unequal or different: As when we desire to know whether
Saturn is greater than Jupiter, and how much the former surpasses the latter:
Whether the Air of Rome is hotter than that of London, and how many degrees.

What is general in all Questions is, that they are formed for the Knowledge of
some Truths; and because all Truths are Relations, it may generally be said,
that in all Questions, we search but after the Knowledge of some Relations,
either betwixt things, or betwixt Ideas, or betwixt things and their Ideas.

There are Relations of several sorts, as betwixt the Nature of things, betwixt
their Magnitudes, their Parts, their Attributes, their Qualities, Effects,
Causes, etc. but they may all be reduced to two, viz. to Relations of Magnitude
and of Quality; comprehending under the former, all those in which things are
considered as suceptible of more and less; and all the others under the latter.
So that it may be said, that all Questions tend to discover some Relation,
either of Magnitude or of Quality.

The first and chief Rule is, That we must very distinctly know the state of
the Question to be resolved; and have such distinct Ideas of its Terms, that we
may compare them together, and discover their unknown Relations.

We must then first very clearly perceive the unknown Relation enquired after;
for it is plain, that if we have no certain Mark to distinguish it, when it is
sought for, or when it is found, our labor will be fruitless.

Secondly, We must, as far as possible, make the Ideas which answer to the
Terms of the Question, distinct, by taking off their Equivocation; and make
them clear, by considering them with all the possible Attention: for if those
Ideas are so confused and obscure, as that we cannot make the necessary
Comparisons, to discover the Relations we look for, we are not yet in a state
of resolving the Question.

Thirdly, We must consider with all possible Attention, the Conditions
expressed in the Question, if any there be; since without that we can but
confusedly understand the state of that Question: besides that the Conditions
commonly trace out the way to resolve it. So that when the state of a Question,
and its Conditions are rightly understood, we not only know what we enquire
after, but also sometimes by what means it may be discovered.

I grant that Conditions are not expressed in all Questions, but then those
Questions are undeterminate, and may resolved several ways; as when it is
required to find out a Square Number, a Triangle, etc. without specifying any
other particulars: Or it may be that the Querist knows not how to resolve, or
that he conceals them, in order to puzzle the Resolver; as when it is required
to find out Two mean Proportionals betwixt Two Lines, without adding by the
Intersection of the Circle and Parabola, or of the Circle and Ellipsis, etc.

And therefore it is altogether necessary, that the distinguishing Character of
what is searched after, be very distinct, and not equivocal, or that it be only
proper to the thing enquired; otherwise we could not be certain whether the
Question proposed is resolved. We must likewise carefully separate from the
Question all the Conditons that make it intricate, and without which it
subsists entire; because they fruitlessly divide the capacity of the Mind.
Besides that we have not a distinct perception of the state of the Question, as
long as the Conditions that attend it are useless.

Suppose, for instance, a Question were proposed in these Words; to cause that
a Man besprinkled with some Liquors, and crowned with a Garland of Flowers, be
not able to rest, though he sees nothing that is capable of moving him. We must
enquire whether the word Man is Metaphorical; whether the word Rest is
equivocal; whether it relates to local Motions, or to Passions, as the last
words, though he sees nothing that is capable of moving him, seem to hint:
Lastly, We must enquire whether the Conditions, besprinkled with some Liquors,
and crowned with a Garland of Flowers are essential. Lastly, The state of that
ridiculous and undeterminate Question being thus plainly known, 'twill be easy
to resolve it, by saying that we need but put a Man in a Ship, with the
Conditions expressed in the Question.

The Skill of those that propose such Questions, is to join some Conditions to
them, that seem necessary though they be not so; that the Mind of the Resolver
may be diverted to things that are unserviceable, as to the Solution of it. As
in this Question, which Servant-Maids often put to Children; I have seen, say
they, Hunters, or rather Fishers, which carried with them what they could not
catch, and threw into the Water what they caught; the Mind being prepossessed
with the Ideas of Fishers that take Fish, cannot understand the state of that
Foolish Question; the whole Difficulty of which comes from hence, that we think
not that Hunters and Fishers, as well as other Men, often seek in their Clothes
some little Animals, which they throw away if they catch, and carry with them
if they find them not.

Sometimes all the Conditions that are necessary to resolve a Question are not
mentioned, which makes them as hard as the expressing of unserviceable
Characters, as in the following; to make a Man unmovable, without binding or
wounding him; or rather, by putting his little Finger into his Ear; so that he
shall not be able to stir, until he takes his little Finger out of his Ear;
that at first appears impossible, and it is really so: for any one may walk
having his little Finger in his Ear; but there wants a Condition, which, if it
were expressed, would remove the whole Difficulty: for you need but make a Man
embrace a Bed-post, or something like, and put his little Finger into his Ear,
so that the Post be included between his Arm and Ear, it being plain he cannot
stir without taking out his Finger. It is not mentioned that there is yet
something to be done, on purpose that the Mind should not seek for, nor
discover it. But those that undertake the resolving of such Questions, must
make all the Queries that are requisite, to understand the point wherein lies
the Stress of the Difficulty.

Those arbitrary Questions appear to be foolish, and are indeed so in one
Sense, as far as nothing is learned by their Solution. However they are not so
different from natural Questions as may be imagined; for both are resolved by a
Method that is very near the same. And as the Skill or Maliciousness of Men,
makes arbitrary Questions intricate and difficult; so natural Effects are of
themselves surrounded with Obscurity and Darkness, that must be dissipated by
the Attention of the Mind, and by Experiments, which are a sort of Queries put
to the Author of Nature; even as Equivocations, and useless Circumstances are
taken off from arbitrary Questions, by the skilful Queries that are made to the
Proposers. Let us explain these things methodically, and in a more serious and
instructing Manner.

There are many Questions which appear very difficult, because they are not
understood, which should rather be taken for Axioms, that need some
Explication, than for true Questions; for some Propositions which are
undeniable, when the Terms that compose them are rightly understood, must not
methinks be ranked in the Number of Questions.

For Instance, It is proposed as a very difficult Question, Whether the Soul be
immortal; because they who propose, or pretend to resolve it, do not distinctly
apprehend the Sense of the Terms. For as the Words Soul and immortal signify
different things, and that they know not how to understand them, so they cannot
tell whether the Soul is immortal, having no distinct Idea, either of what they
ask, or enquire after.

By the Word Soul may be understood a Substance that thinks, wills, feels, etc.
or it may be taken for the Motion or Circulation of the Blood, and the
Configuration of the parts of the Body; and lastly, for the Blood it self, and
the Animal Spirits. Likewise by the Word immortal, we understand what cannot
perish by the ordinary Force of Nature, or what cannot be changed; or lastly,
what cannot be corrupted or dissipated, as a Vapor or Smoke. The Words Soul
and immortal, being supposed thus distinguished into their several
Significations, a very mean Attention of the Mind will be able to judge whether
she is immortal or not.

First, it is plain that the Soul taken in the first Sense, or for a thinking
Substance, is immortal, if you explain immortal in the first Sense, what cannot
perish by the ordinary Force of Nature; since it is not conceivable, that any
Substance should be annihilated, but that to conceive the Possibility of it, we
must have Recourse to the Omnipotence of God.

Secondly, The Soul is immortal, taking immortal in the third Sense, for what
cannot be corrupted, nor resolved into Vapor, or Smoke; since it is evident,
that what cannot be divided into several Parts, cannot be corrupted, nor
resolved into Vapors.

Thirdly, The Soul is not immortal, taking it in the second Sense, for what is
unchangeable; for we have convincing Proofs enough of the Alterations of our
Soul, which feels one while Pain and another Pleasure, which often desires some
things which she afterward ceases to desire; which is united to a Body from
which she may be separated, etc.

If the Word Soul be taken in some other Sense, it will be as easy to
perceive, whether she is immortal, fixing a determined Sense to that Epithet.
And therefore what makes such Questions difficult, is, that they are not
distinctly understood, or that the Words, in which they are expressed are
equivocal; so that they rather need Explication than Proof.

There are some People so dull, and others so fanciful, as that they always
take the Soul for some Configuration of the Parts of the Brain, and for the
Motion of the Spirits. It Is indeed impossible to prove that the Soul is
immortal, and unperishable in that Sense, the contrary being evident: so that
this is not a Question difficult to be resolved, but a Proposition which it is
not easy to make some people apprehend; because they have not the same Ideas
as we, and that they labor all they can not to have them, and to blind
themselves.

When we are asked, whether the Soul is immortal, or any other Question
whatsoever; we must first take off the Equivocation of Words, and know in what
Sense they are understood, that we may distinctly conceive the State of the
Question. If those that propose it are ignorant of the Signification, we must
put Queries to them, in order to illuminate and determine them. If by these
Queries we discover, that their Ideas are not agreeable with ours, it is in vain
to answer them; for to answer one who imagines that a Desire, for instance, is
nothing but the Motion of some small Particles called Spirits; that a Thought
is but a Trace or an Image, which the Objects or those Spirits have left in the
Brain; and that all the Reasonings of Men consist but in the various Situation
of some little Corpuscles, which dispose themselves differently in the Head; to
answer him, I say, that the Soul taken in his Sense is immortal, is to deceive
him, or to appear ridiculous to him; but to tell him that she is mortal, is, in
some Sense, to confirm him in a very dangerous Error: we must then reply
nothing at all, but only endeavor to make him retire into himself, that he may
receive the same Ideas that we have from him who is only able to enlighten him.

It Is likewise a Question which seems pretty difficult, To know whether Beasts
have a Soul; however the Equivocation being taken off, it is so far from being
hard, that those who suppose they have one, and those that think they have
none, are ignorantly at bottom of the same Opinion.

The Soul may be taken for something Corporeal, dispersed through all the Body,
which gives it Life and Motion; or else for something Spiritual. Those that
pretend Beasts have no Soul, understand it in the second Sense; for never any
Man denied that there is in Animals something Corporeal, which is the Principle
of their Life or Motion; since it cannot be denied even of Watches. On the
contrary, Those who assert that Beasts have Souls, understand it in the first
Sense; for few believe them endued with a Spiritual and Indivisible Soul: so
that both Peripateticks and Cartesians believe that Beasts have a Soul, or a
Corporeal Principle of their Motion, and both think they have none, or that
there is nothing in them Spiritual, and Indivisible.

And therefore the Difference betwixt the Paripateticks and Cartesians consists
not in that the former believe Beasts have a Soul, and the latter deny it; but
only in that the Aristotelians think that Beasts are capable of Pain and
Pleasure, of perceiving Colors, hearing Sounds, and of all the other
Sensations and Passions of Men; whereas the Cartesians are of a contrary
Opinion. The latter distinguish the Word Sensation, to take off the
Equivocation. For instance, They say that when one is too near the Fire, the
Parts of Wood strike against his Hand, vibrate the Fibers; which Vibration is
communicated to the Brain, and determines the Animal Spirits contained in it to
disperse through the outward Parts of the Body, in such a manner as is fit to
make them shrink in, or withdraw. They agree that all those things, or the
like, may possibly be found in Animals, and that they actually are, as being
Properties of Bodies: And the Peripateticks dissent not from it.

The Cartesians add, that the Percussion or Vibration of the Fibers of the
Brain in Men, is attended with a Sensation of Heat, and that the course of the
Animal Spirits to the Heart, and other Viscera, is accompanied with a Passion
of Hatred, or Aversion; which Sense and Passion of the Soul they deny to be in
Beasts, whereas the Peripateticks assert, that Brute Animals feel that Heat as
well as we do; that they have, as we, an Aversion to what is uneasy to them;
and generally, that they are capable of all our Sensations and Passions. The
Cartesians do not think that Beasts are sensible of Pleasure or Pain, nor that
they love or hate any thing; because they admit nothing in them but what is
material, and believe not that Sensations and Passions may be Properties of any
Matter whatsoever. On the contrary some Peripateticks esteem Matter capable of
Sensation and Passion, when it is extremely subtle and refined; that Beasts may
feel, by means of the Animal Spirits, that is to say, of a very subtle and fine
Matter; and that our Soul is susceptible of Sensation and Passion, only because
she is united to such a Matter.

And therefore to resolve that Question, Whether Beasts have a Soul, we must
retire within our selves, and consider with all possible Attention our Idea of
Matter: if we can conceive that Matter so and so figured, as square, round,
oval, etc. is some Pain, Pleasure, Heat, Color, Odor, Sound, etc. then we may
assert that the Soul of Beasts, though never so material, is however capable of
Sense; but if we cannot conceive it, we must not assert it; for we must assure
no farther than we can conceive. And likewise if we conceive that Matter tossed
and extremely agitated upwards, downwards, in a Circular, Spiral, Parabolical,
Elliptick Line, etc. is any thing of Love, Hatred, Joy, Sorrow, etc. We may say
that Beasts have the same Passions as we, but if we apprehend it not, we must
not say it, unless we will speak without understanding our selves. But I am
sure no Motion of Matter will ever be mistaken for Love, or Joy, by him that
shall earnestly think upon it: So that to resolve that Question, Whether Beasts
have Sense, we need only take off Equivocation, as those that are called
Cartesians use to do; for then that Question will be made so simple and easy,
as to be resolved with a little Attention.

It Is true that St. Austin supposing, according to the common prejudice of
Mankind, Lib. 4. de Anima and ejus Origin. Cap. 23. de quantitate Animae and
alias.
that Beasts have a Soul; which he never doubted of, as far as I can perceive,
because he never seriously examined it in his Works: this great Man, I say,
perceiving that it is contradictory to say, that a Soul, or a Substance which
thinks, feels desires, etc. is material, believed that the Soul of Beasts was
really spiritual and indivisible. He proves by very evident Reasons, that a
Soul, or whatever has Sense, Imagination, Fear, Desire, etc. must needs be
Spiritual; but I never observed that he produced any Reason to maintain that
Beasts have Souls. He even cares not to prove it, because it is likely that
scarce any body doubted of it in his time.

There being now Men, who endeavor wholly to free themselves of their
Prejudices, and call in Question all Opinions that are not grounded upon clear
demonstrative Reasonings: it has been called into doubt, whether Animals have a
Soul susceptible of the same Sensations and Passions as ours; however there are
still several Defenders of the ancient Prejudices, who pretend to prove that
Beasts feel, will, think, and argue, even as we do, though in a more imperfect
manner.

Dogs, say they, know their Masters, love them, and patiently bear the Blows
they receive from them, as judging it their best interest not to forsake them;
but as to Strangers, they hate them so much as not to away with their
Flatterings. All Animals love their Young; Birds, which build their Nests in
the extremities of the Branches, sufficiently show, that they are afraid lest
some Creature should devour them: They judge those Branches too weak to bear
their Enemies, though strong enough to support both their Young and their
Nests. Even Spiders, and the vilest Insects, give some Intimations of an
Intelligence that animates them: For one cannot but wonder at the conduct of a
little Beast, which though it be blind, yet finds means to trapan in its Nets,
others that have Eyes and Wings, and are so bold as to attack the biggest
Animals we see.

I grant that all the actions that Beasts perform are certain indications of an
Intelligence; for whatever is regular demonstrates it. A Watch shows the same;
for it is impossible Chance should have composed its Wheels, but an
understanding Agent must have ordered its Motions. We plant a Seed inverted,
the Roots that were upward sink down into the Ground of themselves, and the
Seminal Nib that was turned downwards endeavors to alter its Position, to
break out: That intimates an Intelligence. That Plant produces Knots at certain
Distances, to strenghen it self; it covers its Seed with a Skin that preserves
it, and surrounds it with Prickles to defend it: This still denotes an
Intelligence. In short, whatever we see done, either by Plants or by Animals,
undoubtedly denotes an understanding Agent. All the true Cartesians agree to
it, but they make Distinctions, to take away as much as possible, the
Equivocation of Words.

The Motions of Beasts and Plants intimate an Intelligence, but that
Intelligence is not Matter, and is much distinguished from Beasts, as that
which disposes the Wheels of a Watch is distinguished from the Watch it self.
For that Intelligent Being seems infinitely Wise, Powerful, and infinitely the
same who has framed us in our Mother's Womb, and affords us a growth to which
all the attempts of our Mind and Will cannot add so much as a Span. And
therefore there is in Beasts neither Understanding nor Soul, in the sense those
Words are commonly taken. They eat without pleasure, they cry without Pain,
they grow without being conscious of it, they neither desire, nor fear, nor
know any thing; and if they act in such a manner as intimates an Intelligence,
it is because God having made them for a certain time, he has framed their Body
in such a manner as that they machinally, and without Fear, shun whatever is
able to destroy them. Otherwise it must be said, that there is more
Understanding in the smallest Insect, or even in a little Seed, than in the
most Ingenious Man; it being certain that there are in them more different
Parts, and regular Motions, than we are able to know.

But as Men are used to confound all things, and imagine that their Soul
produces in their Bodies most or all the Motions and Changes which befall it,
they fix to the Word Soul the wrong Idea of Former and Preserver of the Body.
So that thinking that their Soul produces in them whatever is absolutely
requisite to the Preservation of their Life, though she knows not so much as
the Contexture of the Body which she animates, they judge that there must needs
be a Soul in Beasts, to produce all the Motions and Changes which befall them,
because they are so like those which occur in us. For Beasts are begot, fed,
strengthened, as our Body: they eat, drink, sleep, as we do; because we are
altogether like them, as to our Body: the only Difference betwixt us and them
consisting in this, that we have a Soul, and they have none. But our Soul
frames not our Body, digests not our Aliments, and gives no Motion and Heat to
our Blood. She feels, wills, argues, and animates the Body, as to the
Sensations and Passions that relate to it: but not by dispersing her self
through our Members, to communicate Sense and Life to them; for our Body can
receive nothing of what belongs to the Mind. Thence it is plain, that the Reason
why we cannot resolve several Questions, proceeds from our not distinguishing,
and even from our not thinking to distinguish the different significations of a
Word.

It Is true, that we distinguish sometimes, but we do it so ill, that instead of
taking off the Equivocation of Words by our Distinctions, we make them more
perplexed and dark. For instance, when we are asked, whether the Body lives,
how it lives, and in what manner the Rational Soul animates it. Whether the
Animal Spirits, the Blood, and other Humors live; whether the Teeth, the Hair,
and the Nails are animated, etc. we distinguish the Words, live and be
animated, in living or being animated with a Rational, with a Sensitive, or
with a Vegetative Soul. But that Distinction is only fit to perplex the
Question; for those Words want an Explanation themselves; and perhaps the two
last, Vegetative and Sensitive, are inexplicable and inconceivable in the Sense
they are commonly understood.

If we desire to fix a clear and distinct Idea to the Word Life, we may say,
That the Life of the Soul is the Knowledge of Truth, and the love of Good; or
rather, that her Thoughts are her Life; and that the Life of the Body consists
in the Circulation of the Blood, and the just Proportion and Mixture of
Humors; or rather, that the Life of the Body is such a Motion of its parts as
is fit for its Preservation. The Ideas fixed to the Word Life being thus made
plain, it will evidently appear, First, That the Soul cannot communicate her
Life to the Body, since she cannot make it think. Secondly, That she cannot
give it the Life by which it is fed, grows, etc. since she knows not so much as
what is requisite to digest our Aliments. Thirdly, That she cannot make it
feel, since Matter is incapable of Sensation, etc. Thus all other Questions
concerning that Subject, may be resolved without Trouble; provided the Words,
in which they are expressed, excite clear Ideas; for if they raise confused and
dark, it is impossible to solve them.

In the mean while, it is not always absolutely necessary to have Ideas that
perfectly represent those things, the Relations of which we desire to examine.
It is often sufficient to have but an initial or imperfect Knowledge of them,
because we seek not always exactly to know their Relations. I shall explain
this more at large.

There are Truths or Relations of two Sorts; some are exactly known, and others
but imperfectly. We exactly know the Relation betwixt such a Square, and such a
Triangle, but have only an imperfect Knowledge of the Relation betwixt London
and York. We know that such a Square is equal to such a Triangle, double or
treble of it, etc. but we only know that London is bigger than York, without
knowing precisely how much.

Moreover there are infinite Degrees of Imperfection in Knowledge; and no
Knowledge is imperfect, but in reference to a more perfect. For Instance, We
know that London is bigger than Lincoln's Inn ^ields, and that Knowledge is
only imperfect, in Relation to another more exact, by which we might accurately
know, how much London is larger than that open place contained in it.

There are therefore several sorts of Questions. First, There are some in which
we seek a perfect Knowledge of all the exact Relations of two or several things
betwixt each other.

Secondly, There are some in which we search after the perfect Knowledge of
some exact Relation betwixt two or several things.

Thirdly, There are some in which we enquire after the perfect Knowledge of
some Relation nearly approaching to the exact Relation, that is betwixt two or
more several things.

Fourthly, There are some in which we are content to find a general and
indefinite Relation.

It Is evident, First, That to resolve the Questions of the First sort, and
perfectly to know all the exact Relations of Magnitude and Quality betwixt two
or more things; we must have distinct Ideas perfectly representing them, and
compare them together in all the possible manners. We may, for Instance,
resolve all the Questions that tend to discover the exact Relations betwixt 2
and 8, because both Numbers being accurately known may be compared together, as
much as is necessary to know the exact Relations of their Magnitude and
Quality. We may know that 8 is 4 times 2, and that 8 and 2 are even, but not
square Numbers.

It Is plain, Secondly, That to resolve Questions of the second sort, and
accurately to know some Relation of Magnitude or Quality, which is betwixt two
or more things; it is necessary and sufficient distinctly to know those Faces by
which they must be compared, to discover the enquired Relation. For Instance,
to resolve such Questions as tend to discover some exact Relations betwixt 4
and 16, as that 4 and 16 are even and square Numbers, it is sufficient exactly
to know that 4 and 16 can be divided into equal parts without Fractions, and
that both are the product of a Number multiplied by it self; and it is to no
purpose to examine what is their true Magnitude: It being plain, that to know
the exact Relations of Quality betwixt things, a distinct Idea of their Quality
is sufficient, without thinking on their Magnitude; and that to know the exact
Relations of Magnitude, we need not search after the true Quality, an accurate
Knowledge of their Magnitude being all that is required.

Thirdly, It clearly appears that to resolve the Questions of the third sort,
or to know some Relation very near approaching the exact Relation that is
betwixt two or several things; it is enough nearly to know the Faces by which
they must be compared, to discover the Relation required, whether it be of
Magnitude or Quality. For Instance, I may evidently know that the 8 is greater
than 2, because I may very near know the true Magnitude of the 8; but I cannot
discover how much the 8 is greater than 2, because I cannot exactly find out
the true Magnitude of the 8.

Lastly, It Is evident that to resolve the Questions of the fourth sort, or to
discover general and undefinite Relations, it is enough to know things in a
manner propotion'd to the need we stand in of comparing them together, to find
out the required Relation. So that it is not necessary to the Solution of all
sorts of Questions, to have very distinct Ideas of their Terms, or perfectly to
know the things expressed by those words. But our knowledge must be the more
exact, as the Relations we search after are more accurate and numerous: For as
we have said in imperfect Questions, imperfect Ideas of the things considered
are sufficient to resolve them perfectly, that is, as far as they reach. And
many Questions may be resolved even without any distinct Idea of their Terms;
as when we are asked whether Fire is capable of melting Salt, hardening Clay,
resolving Lead into Vapors, and the like, we understand perfectly those
Questions, and may very well solve them, though we have no distinct Idea of
Fire, Salt, Clay, etc. Because the Querists only desire to know, whether we are
ascertained by sensible Experiments that Fire produces those Effects. And
therefore may receive a satisfactory Answer, by a knowledge drawn from the
Senses.

CHAP. VIII.
An Application of the other Rules to particular Questions.

QUestions are of two sorts, some are simple and others compound. The former
may be solved by the bare Attention of the Mind to the Ideas of the words, in
which they are expressed: but the Solution of the latter must be performed by
comparing them to a third or to many other Ideas. We cannot find out the
unknown Relations that are expressed in the Terms of a Question, by immediately
comparing the Ideas of those Terms, since they can neither be joined nor
compared. We must then have one or several mean Ideas, that we may make such
Comparisons, as are necessary to discover those Relations; taking a special
Care that those mean Ideas be the more clear and distinct, as the Relations
enquired after are more exact and numerous.

That Rule is but a Consequence of the first, but of an equal importance with
it. For if exactly to know the Relation of the things compared, it is necessary
to have clear and distinct Ideas of them: It plainly follows from the same
Reason, that we must have an accurate knowledge of the mean Ideas, by which we
intend to make our Comparisons; since we must distinctly know the Relation of
measure with each of the things measured, to find out their Relations. I shall
give some Instances of it.

When we put a piece of Cork, or other small and light Vessel, in the Water,
with a Loadstone in it, and offer to the North Pole of that Stone the same Pole
of another Magnet which we keep in our Hands, we presently perceive that the
former Lodestone flies back, as though it were driven by a violent Wind. It Is
required to discover the Cause of that Effect.

It Is plain that to render a Reason of the Motion of that Lodestone, it is not
sufficient to know the Relations it has to the other; for we might perfectly
know them all, and yet not understand how two Bodies could repel each other
without meeting.

We must therefore examine what are the Things which we distinctly conceive
capable, according to the Course of Nature, of moving Bodies; for it is required
to find out the natural Cause of the Motion of a Lodestone, which is certainly
a Body. And therefore we must not have recourse to any Quality, Form, or Being,
which by a clear Knowledge we cannot conceive capable of moving Bodies; neither
must we ascribe their Effect to an understanding Agent, since we are not
assured that Intelligences are the ordinary Causes of the natural Motions of
Bodies, and know not so much as whether they can produce Motion.

We plainly know that it is a natural Law, that Bodies should move each other
when they meet: We must then endeavor to explain the Motion of the Lodestone,
by the Means of some concurrent Body. It Is true that something besides a Body
may move it; but as long as we have no distinct Idea of that Thing, we must not
admit it as a proper Means to discover what is searched after, nor to explain
it to others; for to contrive a Cause which none clearly conceives, is not to
give account of an Effect. We must not then trouble our selves to enquire
whether there is, or is not any other natural Cause of the Motion of Bodies,
besides the mutual Impulse; but rather suppose that there is none, and
attentively consider what Bodies may meet with, and move that Lodestone.

We presently see that it is not moved by the Magnet we keep in our Hands,
since it touches it not; but because it is moved only when that Magnet is
brought near it, and that it moves not of it self* we must infer that it is
moved by some small Effluviums, or little Bodies, that proceed from that
Magnet, and are driven to the other Lodestone.

To discover those Corpuscles, we must not open our Eyes, nor nearly consider
that Magnet; for our Senses might impose upon our Reason, and make us judge
that nothing proceeds out of it, because we perceive it not. Perhaps we should
not reflect that we see not the most impetuous Winds, nor several other Bodies
that produce very surprising Effects: We must then keep close to that clear and
intelligible Means, and carefully examine all the Effects of a Lodestone, to
discover how that Magnet may continually vent so many little Bodies, without
diminishing; for the Experiments we shall make will discover, that the small
Particles that evaporate at one side, immediately re-enter through another; and
will serve to explain all the Difficulties that may be objected against the
Method of solving this Question. But it must be observed, that this Medium must
not be forsaken, though we should not be able to answer some Objections
proceeding from our Ignorance in several things.

If we desire not to examine why Load-stones remove from each other when their
Poles of the same Name are in Opposition to each other, but rather why they
approach and endeavor to unite together when the North Pole of one is opposite
to the South Pole of the other, the Question will be more difficult, and one
Medium alone will not be sufficient to resolve it; for it is not enough exactly
to know the Relations betwixt the Poles of those two Load-stones, nor to have
recourse to the Medium proposed in the foregoing Question; for that Means
seems only fit to hinder the Effect, whereof the Cause is sought for: Neither
must we propose any of those Things that are not clearly known to be the
natural and ordinary Causes of Corporeal Motion; nor evade the Difficulty of
the Question, by the rambling and uncertain Notion of an Occult Quality in
Load-stones, by which they attract each other; for the Mind cannot conceive any
such Attraction in Bodies.

The Impenetrability of Bodies plainly convinces us, that Motion may be
communicated by Impulsion; and Experience evidently proves, that it is
communicated that way: But there is no Reason, nor Experiment, that clearly
demonstrates the Motion of Attraction; for when the true and certain Cause of
the Experiments, which are alleged to prove that sort of Motion, is found out,
it is visible that what appeared to be done by Attraction, is produced by
Impulsion. We must not therefore insist upon any other Communication of Motion
but that effected by Impulsion, since this Way is sure, and undeniable; whereas
all the others imaginable have at least some Obscurity in them. But though it
might be demonstrated, that mere Corporeal Things have some other Principles of
Motion besides the Concourse of Bodies, this might not however be reasonably
rejected, but must rather be insisted upon preferably to all others, it being
the most clear, and most evident; and appearing so undeniable, that we may
confidently assert, that it has always been received by all Nations and Ages in
the World.

Experience shows, that a Lodestone, freely swimming upon the Water, draws
toward that which we keep in our Hands when their different Poles are opposite
to each other; we must then conclude, that the Lodestone upon the Water is
driven to it. But as the Magnet we hold cannot drive the other, seeing this
other approaches it, and that the free Lodestone only moves at the Presence of
the other Magnet, it is plain that to resolve this Question by the received
Principle of the Communication of Motions, we must have recourse to two Means
at least.

The Lodestone c approaches the Magnet C, and therefore the surrounding Air
drives it, since no other Body can do it; that is the first Means. The
Lodestone c moves not, except at the Presence of the Magnet C; and therefore
the Magnet C must needs determine the Air, to drive the Lodestone c; that is
the second Means. It Is evident these two Means are absolutely necessary: So
that now the whole Difficulty consists in joining those two Means together;
which may be done two several Ways; either beginning by something known in the
Air, that encompasses the Lodestone c; or by something known in the Magnet C.

If we know that the Parts of the Air are in perpetual Agitation, as those of
all fluid Bodies use to be, we shall not doubt but they continually strike
against the Lodestone c, which they surround; but because they strike it
equally on all sides, they impel it one way no more than another, as long as
there is an equal Quantity of Air on all sides. It being so, it is easy to
judge that the Magnet C hinders, lest there should be as much Air toward a as
toward b, which cannot be done but by its diffusing some other Corpuscles
betwixt C and c, and therefore there ex^ale such Particles ou^ of both
Load-stones, which filling up that Space, and carrying away the Air about a,
make the Lodestone c less pressed on that side than on the other; and it must
by consequence approach the Magnet C, since all Bodies move toward the side on
which there is the least Pressure or Resistance.

But if in the Lodestone c, about the Pole a, there were not many Pores fit to
receive the small Particles streaming out of the Pole B of the Magnet C, and
too small to admit those of the Air, it is plain that those small Particles
being more agitated than the Air, since they are to chase it from betwixt the
Load-stones, they would drive the Lodestone c, and remove it from the Magnet
C: Therefore, since the Lodestone c approaches to, or removes from the Magnet
C, according as they are opposed by different or the same Poles, we must needs
infer that the Poles a and b of the Lodestone c are full of different Pores;
otherwise, the small Particles issuing out of the Magnet C could not have a
free Passage, without impelling the Lodestone c at the side a, nor would they
repel it at the side b. What I say of one of these Load-stones, must be
understood of the other.

It Is plain that we always learn something by that Method of Arguing from clear
Ideas, and undeniable Principles: For we have discovered that the Air which
environs the Lodestone c, was driven from thence by Corpuscles perpetually
flowing out of the Pores of both Load-stones; which Corpuscles find a free
Passage at one side, but are shut out at the other. If we desired nearly to
discover the Bigness and Figure of the Pores of the Lodestone through which
those Particles pass, we ought to make other Experiments; but that would lead
us to Subjects which we intend not to trea^ of. The Curious may consult des
Cartes's Principles of Philosophy: I only observe, as an Answer to an Objection
which will presently be made against this Hypothesis; that is, Why those small
Particles cannot re-enter through the Pores from whence they came? That besides
that the Pores of the Load-stones may be supposed to be wrought like the
Channelling of a Screw, which may pruduce the proposed Effect; it may be said
likewise, that the small Branches, of which those Pores are made, bend one way
to obey and yield to the Motion of the entering Particles; whereas they stand on
end, and shut them out another way: So that we must not be surpised at this
Difference betwixt the Pores of the Lodestone, for it may be explained in
several manners, and the only Difficulty consists in choosing the best.

If we had endeavored to resolve the forementioned Question, beginning with
the Corpuscles that are supposed to stream out of the Magnet C, we should have
found the same; and likewise discovered that Air is composed of an infinite
Number of Parts that are in a perpetual Motion, without which it would be
impossible that the Lodestone c could approach the Magnet C. I insist not on
the Explication of this, because there is no Difficulty in it.

Here follows a Question more compound and complicate than the foregoing; for
the Solution of which, it is necessary to make use of many Rules. It Is asked,
Which may be the Natural and Mechanical Cause of the Motion of our Members.

The Idea of Natural Cause is clear and distinct when understood, as I have
explained it in the former Question: But the Words, Motion of our Members, are
equivocal and confused, because there are several such Motions; some being
Voluntary, others Natural, and others Convulsive. There are also different
Members in the Humane Body; and therefore, according to the first Rule, I must
ask, Of which of these Motions the Cause is required from me? But if the
Question be left undetermined, and to my Discretion, I examine it after this
manner.

I attentively consider the Properties of those Motions; and discovering at
first that Voluntary Motions are sooner performed than Convulsive, I infer that
their Cause is different, and therefore that I may and must examine the
Question by Parts, for it seems to require a long Discussion.

I restrain then my self to consider only Voluntary Motions; and because
several of our Members are employed about them, I content my self for the
present with the Consideration of the Arm. I observe that it is composed of
several Muscles, which are most or all in Action when we raise so^ething from
the Ground, or remove it from one place to the other: But I only insist upon
one, being willing to suppose that the others are very near fashioned after the
same manner. I inform my self of its Texture and Shape by some Book of Anatomy,
or rather by the sensible Sight of its Fibers and Tendons, which I cause to be
dissected in my presence, by some skilful Anatomist, to whom I put all the
Queries which, in the sequel, may exhibit to my Mind a Medium to find out what
I seek for.

After such a serious Consideration, I cannot doubt but the Principle of the
Motion of my Arm depends on the Contraction of its Muscles which compose it. I
am likewise content, lest I should puzzle my self with too many Difficulties,
to suppose, according to the common Opinion, that this Contraction is performed
by the Animal Spirits, which filling up the Ventricle of those Muscles, may
cause their Extremities to come nearer. Now the whole Question concerning
Voluntary Motion is reduced to this Point; How the small Quantity of Animal
Spirits which are contained in our Arm, may at the Command of the Will, so
suddenly swell the Muscles, as to afford a sufficient Strength to list up an
Hundred Weight, or more.

Upon an attentive Reflection thereupon, the first Means that offers it self to
the Imagination, is commonly that of a quick and violent Fermentation, like to
that of Gunpowder, or of some Liquors filled with Volatile Salt, when they are
mixed with others that are Acid, or full of a fixed Salt. A small quantity of
Gunpowder is able, when kindled, to raise not only an Hundred Weight, but even
a Tower, and a Mountain. Earthquakes, that overthrow Cities, and shake whole
Countries, proceed from Spirits kindling under the Ground, almost as
Gunpowder* So that supposing in the Arm such a Cause of the Fermentation and
Dilatation of the Spirits, it may be looked upon as the Principle of that
Force, by which Men perform so sudden and violent Motions.

But as we ought to mistrust those Means that are offered to the Mind by the
Senses, and of which we have no clear and evident Knowledge, so we must not
easily admit this; for it is not sufficient to give an Account of the Strength
and Quickness of our Motions, by a Comparison: For this is both a confused, and
imperfect Account; because we are here to explain a voluntary Motion, and
Fermentation is not so. The Blood is exceedingly fermented in Fevers, and we
cannot hinder it: The Spirits are inflamed and agitated in the Brain, but we
cannot rule their Agitation, nor lessen it by our Desire. When a Man moves the
Arm several Ways, a Thousand Fermentations, great and small, swift and ^low,
ought to begin, and (what is harder to explain) to end likewise in a Moment, as
often and as soon as it is desired, if this Hypothesis were true. Besides,
Those Fermentations ought not to dissipate all their Matter, but need always be
ready to take Fire. When a Man has walked Twenty Miles, how many Thousand times
must the Muscles, employed in walking, have been filled and emptied; and what a
vast quantity of Spirits would be required, if Fermentation should dissipate
and deaden them so often? And therefore this Supposition is insufficient to
explain such Motions of our Body as entirely depend upon our Will.

It Is plain that the present Question may be reduced to this Problem of
Mechanics, To find ^ut by Pneumatick Engines a Means to overcome such a Force
as an Hundred Weight by another Force, though never so small; as that of an
Ounce Weight: And that the Application of that small Force may produce the
desired Effect, at the Discretion of the Will. The Solution of that Problem is
easy, and the Demonstration of it clear.

It may be solved by a Vessel which has two Orifices, one of which is a little
more than 1600 times larger than the other, in which the Pipes of two equal
Bellows are inserted; and let a Force precisely 1600 times stronger than the
other be applied to the Bellows of the larger Mouth, for then the Force 1600
times weaker shall overcome the stronger. The Demonstration of which is clear
in Mechanics, since the Forces are not exactly in a reciprocal Proportion with
their Mouths; and that the Relation of the weaker Force to the smaller Mouth,
is greater than the Relation of the stronger Force to the larger Mouth.

But to solve this Problem by an Engine which sets better before the Eyes the
Effect of the Muscles, than the Former: We must blow a little in a Football,
and hinder the Air from going out with a Sucker; then put upon that Football,
half full of Wind, a Stone of 5 or 600 weight; or having set it on a Table, lay
on it a Board, and on that Board a huge Stone, or cause a heavy Man to sit upon
the Board, allowing him to hold by something, that he may sit the faster upon
the rising Football; for if you blow again into it only with the Mouth, it
will raise the Stone that compresses it, or the Man that sits upon it. The
Reason of this is, that the Mouth of the Football is so small, or at least
must be supposed so, in comparison to the Capaciousness of the Football that
withstands the Weight of the Stone, that by such means a very small, is able to
overcome a very great Force.

If we also consider that Breath alone is capable of violently driving a Leaden
Ball through a long and strait Trunk, because the Strength of the Breath is not
dissipated, but continually renewed, it will visibly appear, that the necessary
Proportion betwixt the Mouth and the largeness of the Football being supposed,
Breath alone may overcome a very considerable Force.

If we therefore conceive that the whole Muscles, or each of the Fibers of
which they are made, have, as this Football, a competent Capacity to admit
Animal Spirits, that the Pores through which those Spirits flow are yet
proportionably straiter than the Neck of a Bladder, or the Aperture of the
Football; that the Spirits are detained in, or driven through the Nerves,
almost as the Breath through a Trunk; that the Spirits are more agitated than
the Air of the Lungs, and driven with a greater Violence to the Muscles than it
is in a Bladder; we shall perceive that the Motion of the Spirits which are
dispersed through the Muscles, can conquer the Force of the heaviest Weight we
carry; and that if we cannot move other more ponderous, this Want of Strength
proceeds not so much from the Spirits, as from the Fibers and Membranes of
which the Muscles are composed, which would burst should we make too great an
Effort. Besides, If we observe that by the Laws of the Union betwixt Soul and
Body, the Motion of those Spirits, as to their Determination, depends on the
Will of Man, we shall see that the Motion of the Arm must needs be voluntary.

It Is true that we move our Arm so readily, that it seems, at first sight,
incredible that the Course of the Spirits into the Muscles should be so swift
as to effect that Motion. But we ought to consider that those Spirits are
extremely agitated, always ready to pass from one Muscle into another; and that
a small quantity of that Spirituous Liquor may sufficiently swell them up, so
as to move them, or to lift up from the Ground something very light: For we
cannot raise great Weights very readily, because that Effort requires a great
stretching and swelling of the Muscles, which cannot be performed by the
Spirits that are in the neighboring or Antagonist Muscles; and therefore some
Time is required to call in more Spirits to their help, and in such a Quantity,
as that they may be able to withstand the Heaviness of the Weight. Thus we see
that those that are laden cannot run, and that a ponderous thing is not lifted
up from the Ground so readily as a Straw.

If we consider that those that are of a fiery Temper, or heated with Wine, are
quicker than others; that amongst living Creatures, those whose Spirits are
more agitated, as Birds, move swifter than those in which Blood is colder, as
it is in Frogs; and that in some of them, as the Chamelion, the Tortoise, and
some Insects, the Spirits are so little agitated, that their Muscles are not
sooner filled than a Football would be by the Breath of a Man. All these
things being well observed, may probably make our Explication acceptable.

But though that part of the Question proposed which concerns Voluntary Motions
be sufficiently resolved, yet we must not assert that it is fully and
perfectly, or that nothing else in our Body contributes to those Motions
besides what has been mentioned; for most probably there are a Thousand Springs
that facilitate them, which will for ever be unknown, even to those who give a
better Guess upon the Works of God.

The second Part of the Question to be examined concerns the Natural Motions,
or those that have nothing extraordinary in them, as Convulsions have; but are
absolutely necessary to the Preservation of our Machine, and consequently
altogether independent on our Will.

I first consider with all the possible Attention, what Motions have those
Conditions, and whether they are perfectly alike: And as I quickly perceive
that they are for the most part different from each other, lest I should
perplex my self with too many things, I shall only insist upon the Motion of
the Heart; which, of all the inward Parts, is the best known, and its Motions
the most sensible. Whilst I examine its Construction, I observe two Things,
amongst many others: First, That it is composed of Fibers, as the other
Muscles: And Secondly, That there are two remarkable Cavities in it: And
therefore I judge that its Motion may be performed by means of the Animal
Spirits, since it is a Muscle; and that the Blood ferments and dilates in it,
since it has Cavities. The first of these Judgments is founded upon what I have
said before: The second, upon the Heart's being much hotter than any other
Parts of the Body; and that it diffuses Heat, together with Blood, into all our
Members; and that those two Ventricles could neither be formed, nor preserved,
but by the Dilatation of the Blood: So that they are subservient to the Cause
that has produced them. I can then give a sufficient Reason of the Motion of
the Heart, by the Spirits that agitate, and the Blood that dilates it, during
the Fermentation: For though the Cause I allege of its Motion should not be
true, yet I plainly see that it is sufficient to produce it.

It may be, that the Principle of Fermentation or Dilatation of Liquors is not
so well known to all Readers, as that I may pretend to have explained an
Effect, by generally showing that it proceeds from Fermentation: But all
particular Questions are not to be resolved by ascending to the first Cause,
though that may be done too, and a true System on which all particular Effects
depend, discovered, provided we only insist upon clear Ideas. But that Way of
Philosophizing is neither the exactest, nor yet the shortest.

To comprehend this, it must be observed that there are Questions of two sorts;
in the first, it is required to discover the Nature and Properties of some
Thing; in the others, we only desire to know whether a Thing has such or such
Properties; or if we know it has, we desire only to discover what is the Cause
of them.

To solve the Questions of the first sort, we must consider Things in their
Birth and Original, and conceive that they are always produced by the most
simple and natural Ways: But the Solution of the others requires a very
different Method, for they must be resolved by Suppositions; and then we must
examine whether those Suppositions induce into any Absurdity, or whether they
lead to any Truth plainly and clearly known.

For instance, We desire to discover the Properties of the Roulet, or some one
of the Conick Sections: We must consider those Lines in their Generation, and
form them by the most simple and least perplexing Ways; for that is the best
and shortest Means to discover their Nature and Properties. We easily see that
the Sub^endent of the Roulet is equal to the Circle whence it is formed: And if
we discover not many of its Properties that way, it is because the Circular Line
that produces it is not sufficiently known. But as to Lines merely
Mathematical, the Relations of which may be more clearly known, such as are
Conick Sections; it is sufficient for the discovering a vast Number of their
Properties, to consider them in their Generation: Only we must observe, that as
they may be produced by a Regular Motion several Ways, so all sorts of
Generation are not equally proper to enlighten the Mind; that the most simple
are the best; and that it often happens, notwithstanding that some particular
Methods are fitter than others, to demonstrate some particular Properties.

But when it is not required to discover in general the Properties of a Thing,
but to know whether such a Thing has such a Property; then we must suppose that
it actually enjoys it, and carefully examine the Consequences of that
Supposition, whether it induces into a manifest Absurdity, or leads to an
undeniable Truth, that may serve as a Means to find out what is sought for.
That is the Method which Geometricians use to solve their Problems: They
suppose what they seek, and examine what will follow of it; they attentively
consider the Relations that result from the Supposition; they represent all
those Relations that contain the Conditions of the Problem, by Equations, and
then reduce those Equations, according to the usual Rules; so that what is
unknown, is found equal to one or several Things perfectly known.

I say therefore, that when it is required to discover in general the Nature of
Fire, and of the different Fermentations, which are the most universal Causes
of natural Effects, the shortest and surest Way is to examine them in their
Principle. We must consider the Formation of the most agitated Bodies, the
Motion of which is diffused into those that ferment. We must by clear Ideas,
and by the most simple Ways, examine what Motion may produce in Matter. And
because Fire and the various Fermentations are very general Things, and
consequently depending upon few Causes, there will be no need of considering
very long what Matter is able to perform when animated by Motion, to find out
the Nature of Fermentation in its very Principle; and we shall learn withal
several other Things, altogether requisite to the Knowledge of Physics:
Whereas he that would in such a Question argue from Suppositions, so as to
ascend to the first Causes, even to the Laws of Nature, by which all things are
formed, would make a great many of them that should prove false and
unprofitable.

He might perhaps discover that the Cause of the Fermentation is the Motion of
an invisible Matter; communicated to the agitated Parts of Matter: For it is
sufficiently known, that Fire and the various Fermentations of Bodies, consist
in their Agitation; and that by the Laws of Nature, Bodies receive their
immediate Motion only from their meeting with others that are more agitated: So
that he might discover that there is an invisible Matter, the Motion of which
is communicated to visible Bodies by Fermentation. But it is morally impossible
that he should ever, by his Suppositions find out how all that is performed;
which however is not so hard to do, when we examine the Formation of Elements,
or of Bodies, of which there is a greater Number of the same Nature; as is to
be seen in Monsieur des Cartes's System.

The Third Part of the Question concerning Convulsive Motions, will not be very
difficult to solve, if we suppose that there are in our Bodies Animal Spirits
susceptible of Fermentation; and withal, Humors so piercing, as to insinuate
themselves into the Pores of the Nerves, through which the Spirits are di^^us'd
into the Muscles; provided always that we pretend not to determine the true
Texture and Disposition of those invisible Parts that contribute to these
Convulsions.

When we have separated a Muscle from the rest of the Body, and hold it by the
two Ends, we sensibly perceive that it endeavors to contract it self when
pricked in the Middle. It Is likely that this depends on the Construction of the
imperceptible Parts, of which it is made; which are as so many Springs
determined to some certain Motions, by that of Compunction. But who can be sure
he has found out the true Disposition of the Parts employed in the Production
of that Motion; and who can give an uncontroverted Demonstration of it?
Certainly that appears altogether impossible, though perhaps by long thinking
we might imagine such a Construction of Muscles, as would be fit to perform all
the Motions we know them to be capable of; we must not therefore pretend to
determine the true Construction of the Muscles. However, because it cannot be
reasonably doubted, but that there are Spirits susceptible of some
Fermentation, by the Mixture of a very subtle heterogeneous Matter; and that
acriminious and pungent Humors may creep into the Nerves, that Hypothesis may
be supposed.

Now to proceed to the Solution of the Question proposed: We must first examine
how many sorts of Convulsive Motions there are; and because their Number is
indefinite, we must insist on the Principal, the Causes of which seem to be
different: We must consider in what Parts they are made, what Diseases precede
and follow them; whether they are attended with Pain, or free from it; and
above all, what are the Degrees of their Swiftness and Violence; for some are
very swift and violent; others are very swift, but not violent; a third sort
are violent, and not swift; and others again are free from both these Symptoms:
Some finish and begin afresh perpetually, others keep the Parts rigid and
unmovable for some time; and others deprive us of their Use, and altogether
deform them.

All this being well weighed, it will be no hard matter to explain in general,
after what has been said concerning Natural and Voluntary Motions, how the
Convulsive are performed: For if we conceive that some Matter, capable of
fermenting the Spirits, mixes with those contained in a Muscle, it must needs
swell up, and produce in that part a Convulsive Motion.

If that Motion may easily be resisted, it is a sign that the Nerves are not yet
obstructed by any Humor, since we may empty the Muscle of the Spirits that
have entered into it, and determine them to swell up the opposite Muscle. But
if we cannot do it, we must conclude that pungent and piercing Humors have
some part at least in that Motion: Even it may often happen that those Humors
are the only Cause of Convulsions, since they may determine the Course of the
Spirits to some certain Muscles, by opening some Passages that convey them, and
shutting others: Besides, that they may contract the Tendons and Fibers, by
penetrating their Pores.

When a very ponderous Weight hangs at the end of a Rope, it may considerably
be raised by only wetting that Cord; because the Particles of Water penetrating
as so many little Wedges betwixt the Threads of the Rope, shorten it by
dilating it: So the piercing and pungent Humors, insinuating into the Pores of
the Nerves, contract them, stretch the Parts to which they are tied, and
produce in the Body Convulsive Motions, that are extremely slow, violent and
painful, and and often leave the Part sadly distorted for a long time.

As to the Convulsive Motions that are very swift, they are caused by the
Spirits; but it is not necessary that those Spirits should receive any
Fermentation; it is enough that the Conduits, through which they pass, be more
open at one side than at the other.

When all the Parts of the Body are in their natural Situation, the Animal
Spirits diffuse themselves equally and readily through them, according to the
Necessities of the Machine, and faithfully perform the Orders of the Will. But
when Humors disturb the Disposition of the Brain, alter or variously move the
Apertures of the Nerves, or penetrate into the Muscles, they agitate their
Springs; and the Spirits diffusing into those Parts after a new and unusual
manner, produce extraordinary Motions, without the Consent of the Will.

However, we may often, by a strong Resistance, hinder some of those Motions,
and insensibly diminish the Traces that produce them, even when the Habit is
wholly formed. Those that look carefully to themselves, find little Difficulty
in preventing Grimaces, unbecoming Gestures, and a sourish Countenance, though
their Body have a Disposition to them; and may even conquer them when
strengthened by Habit, but with a great deal more Difficulty; for such
Dispositions should always be opposed in their Birth, and before the Spirits
have traced out a Way not easy to be stopped up.

The Cause of those Motions is often in the agitated Muscle, and proceeds from
some pungent Humor, or fermenting Spirits; but we must judge that it is in the
Brain, especially when the Convulsions agitate not one or two parts of the
Body, but most or all; and withal, in several Diseases which alter the natural
Constitution of the Blood and Spirits.

It Is true, that one Nerve often having different Branches, which disperse
through Parts of the Body very remote, as into the Face and Bowels, it
sometimes happens that a Convulsion, the Cause of which lies in a Part to which
some one of those Branches resorts, may have Communication with those to which
other Branches reach, without proceeding from the Brain, and without a
Corruption of the Spirits.

But when the Convulsive Motions are common to most Parts of the Body, we must
needs say, either that the Spirits ferment in a very extraordinary manner, or
that the Order and Disposition of the Parts of the Brain is disturbed, or that
it proceeds from both Causes together. I shall not insist any longer upon this
Question, because it grows so compound, and depending on so many things, when
we enter into Particulars, that it cannot easily be made serviceable to a clear
Explication of the Rules we have given.

There is no Science which may supply us with more Examples, to show the
Usefulness of those Rules, than Geometry, and especially Algebra, since these
two Sciences make a perpetual Use of them. Geometry plainly discovers the
Necessity always to begin with the most simple Things, and which include the
least Number of Relations: It always examines those Relations by Measures that
are clearly known; it takes off whatever is unserviceable to discover them; it
divides into Parts Compound Questions, disposes those Parts, and examines them
in order. In short, The only Fault to be found in this Science is, as I have
observed elsewhere, that it affords no convenient Means to abridge Ideas, and
discovered Relations: So that though it regulates the Imagination, and makes
the Mind exact; yet it increases not its Extent very much, neither does it give
a Capacity to discover very compound Truths.

But Algebra, continually teaching to abridge, and in the shortest Way
imaginable, Ideas and their Relations, extremely improves the Capacity of the
Mind; for nothing so compound can be conce^v'd in the Relations of Magnitudes,
but the Mind may discover it in time by the Means it affords, when we know the
Way that ought to be taken.

The fifth Rule, and the following, which speak of the Method of abridging
Ideas, concern only that Science, for none else has a convenient Way of
abridging them; so that I shall not insist upon their Explication. Those who
have a great Inclination for Mathematics, and desire to give their Mind all
the Force and Extent it is capable of, and to put themselves into a State of
discovering, without a Tutor, an infinite Number of new Truths, will perceive,
if they earnestly apply themselves to Algebra, that the Usefulness of that
Science, as to the Enquiry after Truth, proceeds from its observing the Rules
we have prescribed. But I must advertise, that by Algebra, I especially
understand that which des Carts and some others have made use of.

Before the Conclusion of this Book, I shall set down an Example somewhat at
large, to show the Usefulness of the whole Treatise: I shall represent by it
the Advances of a Man who, in the Discussion of an important Question,
endeavors to free himself from Prejudices; I shall at first make him fall into
some Faults, that they may excite the Remembrance of what has been said
elsewhere: But at last, his Attention leading him to the Truth inquired after,
I induce him speaking positively, and as one who pretends to have solved the
Question he examined.

CHAP. IX.
The last Instance to show the Usefulness of this Treatise, wherein the Cause
of the Union of Parts in Bodies, and withal, the Rules of the Communication of
Motion, are examined.

BOdies are united together three different Ways, by Continuity, Contiguity,
and in a third manner, that has no particular Name; because it seldom happens,
I shall call it by the general Term of Union.

By Continuity, or by the Causes of it, I understand somewhat or other which
causes the Parts of a Body to hold so strongly together, that we must use
violence to separate them; for which Reason they are looked upon as a Whole.

By Contiguity I understand that, whatever it is, which makes me judge that two
Bodies touch one another immediately, so as that there is nothing betwixt them;
though I judge not that they are strictly united, because I may easily separate
them.

By the third Word, Union, I understand something or other which makes two
Glasses, or two Marble-Stones, whose surfaces are well rubbed and polished upon
each other, to adhere together, so as that though they can easily be separated,
by making them glide over one another, yet we find some resistance when we
endeavor to do it in another manner.

Now these two united Glasses, or Marble-stones, cannot be said to be
continuous, because they are not conceived as a Whole, since they may easily be
separated some certain way. Neither is this a Contiguity, though it be
something very like it, because those two pieces of Glass, or Marble, are
strictly enough united, and even more than the Parts of soft and liquid Bodies,
as those of Butter and Water.

These Words being thus explained, we must now enquire after the Cause that
unites Bodies, and the difference betwixt Continuity, Contiguity, and the Union
of Bodies, taken in this particular Sense: I shall first seek the cause of
Continuity, or that, I don't know what, which unites the Parts of a Body, and
links them so strictly together, that violence must be used to separate them,
and that they are looked upon as making together but one Whole. I hope that
this Cause being found out, it will prove no hard task to discover the rest.

It seems now necessary to me, that this, I don't know what, which binds even
the smallest Parts of that piece of Iron I hold in my Hands, should be
something very powerful, since I must use a very great Force to break off a
small Part of it. But am not I extremely mistaken, for may not that difficulty
I find in breaking the least piece of this Iron, come from my Weakness, and not
from the Resistance of the Iron? And indeed, I remember, I have formerly used a
greater violence than I now do, to break a piece of Iron like this; and if I
fell sick, it might happen that my utmost endeavors could not perform it. I
see therefore that I must not judge absolutely of the firmness with which the
Parts of Iron are joined together, by the endeavors I make to dis-unite them,
but only judge that they stick very strictly to each other in relation to my
little Strength, or that they hang more firmly together than the Parts of my
Flesh; since the Sense of Pain I feel in using too much Force advertises me, I
shall sooner disunite the Parts of my Body, than those of the Iron.

Thence I conclude, That as I am not absolutely strong nor weak, so Iron and
other Bodies are not absolutely hard or flexible; but only in reference to the
Cause that acts upon them. And that my Endeavors cannot be a Rule to measure
the Degrees of Force, that must be used to overcome the Resistance and Hardness
of Iron; since Rules must be unvariable; whereas those Endeavors vary,
according to the Time, the plenty of Animal Spirits, and the Hardness of Flesh;
for, after all, I cannot always produce the same Effects by the same Endeavors.

This Consideration frees me from a Prejudice, that made me imagine strong
Bands to unite the Parts of Bodies, which Bands perhaps are not in being, and I
hope it will not be unprofitable hereafter: for I am wonderfully apt to judge
of all things with relation to my self, and to follow the Impressions of my
Senses, of which I shall more carefully beware. But let us proceed.

Having thought some Time, and searched with some Application, the Cause of
this strict Union, without being able to discover it; I find my self inclined
by my own natural Laziness, to judge, as several others do, that it is the Form
of Bodies that preserves the Union betwixt their Parts, or the Friendship and
Inclination they have for such as are alike to them: And to form other
judgments of like nature; nothing being more convenient than sometimes to
suffer our selves to be seduced, and to become Learned on a sudden, with little
Expense.

But I intend to believe nothing but what I know, nor to suffer my self to be
cast down by my own Laziness, nor to yield to bare Glimpses. Let us therefore
lay aside those Forms and Inclinations, of which we have no distinct and
particular, but only confused and general Ideas, which methinks we only frame
with reference to our Nature, and the Existence of which several Persons, and
perhaps whole Nations, do not own. But methinks I see the Cause of this strict
Union of the Parts which make up hard Bodies, without admitting any thing in
it, but what all the World grants; or at least, what all the World distinctly
conceives to be possible. For every one distinctly conceives, that all Bodies
are composed, or may be composed of small Parts: It may then be that some shall
be crooked and branched, and be able, as many little Fetters, strongly to hold
others; or that they shall be so intricated amongst each others Branches, that
it will not be easy to disunite them.

I am so much the apter to yield to this Thought, as I see visible Parts of the
gross Bodies, hold and bind one another this way. But I can scarce sufficiently
mistrust my Prejudices and Impression of my Senses. I must therefore more
strictly examine this Matter, and enquire after the Reason, why even the
minutest and last solid Parts of Bodies, in short, even the Parts of every one
of these little Bands, hang together: For they cannot be united by other
smaller Bands; since I suppose them to be solid. Or if I say they are united in
that Manner, it will reasonably be asked, What unites these others together?
and so in infinitum.

So that the Difficulty of the Question now is, how the Parts of those little
Fetters, or of those branched Parts, can be so strictly united as they are; A,
for instance, with B, which I suppose to be Parts of a little Band: Or, which
is the same thing, (Bodies being so much the more hard, as they are the more
solid and less porous,) the Question at present is, to know how the Parts of a
Column being made of Matter without Pores, can be so strongly joined together,
and compose a very hard Body; since it cannot be said that the Parts of this
Column hang together by small Fetters; for being without Pores, they have no
particular Figure.

I am again extremely apt to say, that this Column is hard by its Nature; or
that the small Fetters, of which hard Bodies are made up, are Attoms, the Parts
of which cannot be divided; as being the Essential and last Parts of Bodies,
and essentially crooked, branched, or of a perplexed Figure. But I freely own
this is not solving the Difficulty, and that laying aside my Prejudices, and
the Illusions of my Senses, I should be in the wrong, to have Recourse to an
abstracted Form, and to embrace a Phantasm of Logic, for the Cause I enquire
after. I mean, I should be in the wrong to conceive, as something real and
distinct, the rambling or indefinite Idea of Nature or Essence; which expresses
nothing but what is known to us; and so to take an abstracted universal Form
for the Physical Cause of a real Effect: for there are Two things which I
cannot too much mistrust. The first is, The Impression of my Senses; and the
other, My Readiness to take abstracted Natures, and general Ideas of Logic,
for real and particular, by which two Principles of Error I remember to have
been often seduced.

For to return to the Difficulty in hand; it is not possible to conceive how
those little Fetters should be indivisible by their own Essence and Nature, nor
consequently how they should be inflexible; since, on the contrary, I conceive
them most divisible, nay, necessarily divisible by their own Essence and
Nature. For the Part A is most certainly a Substance as well as B; and
consequently it is plain that A may exist without B, since Substances may exist
without one another, otherwise they would be no Substances.

It cannot be said that A is no Substance; for it is plain that that is not a
bare Mode, whereas every Being is either a Substance, or the Mode of a
Substance. And therefore since A is not a Mode, it is a Substance, and may
exist without B; and much more the Part A exists separately from B; so that
this Fetter is divisible into A and B.

Moreover, if this Fetter were indivisible or crooked by its own Nature and
Essence, there would happen a thing quite contrary to what we see by
Experience; for not one Body could be broken. Let us suppose, as before, a
Piece of Iron composed of many Fetters perplexed within one another, and A a B
b to be two of them; I say it will not be possible to disintangle them, and
consequently to break the Iron. For to break it, the Fetters that make it up
must be bent, which however are supposed inflexible by their own Nature and
Essence.

If they be not supposed inflexible, but only indivisible by their own Nature,
the Supposition would be unserviceable for solving the Question. For then the
Difficulty will be, Why those little Fetters obey not the Force that is used to
bend a Bar of Iron? Neither must they be supposed indivisible, if they be not
supposed inflexible: For if the Parts of those Fetters could change their
situation in reference to one another, it is visible that they might be
separated; since there is no Reason why, if one part may be somewhat removed
from the other, it could not be entirely removed. And therefore whether these
little Fetters are supposed indivisible or inflexible, the Question cannot be
solved by that means: for if they be only supposed indivisible, a Piece of Iron
must be broken without trouble; and if they be supposed inflexible, it will be
impossible to break it; since the little Fetters that make up the Iron, being
intricated within one another, it will be impossible to disintangle them. Let
us therefore solve the Difficulty by clear and undeniable Principles, and find
the Reason why that little Band has two Parts A B so firmly united to one
another.

It Is needful, I perceive, to divide the Subject of my Meditation into Parts,
that I may examine it the more exactly, and with less Intention of Thought;
since I could not at first, at a single view, and with the whole Attention I am
capable of, discover what I enquired after. This I might have done at the
beginning; for when the Subjects of our Meditation are somewhat abstruse, it is
always the best way to consider them by parts, and not fruitlessly weary our
selves with the vain Hopes of meeting happily with the Truth.

What I enquire after is, The Cause of the strict Union betwixt the minute
Parts, that make up the little Fetter A B. Now I conceive only distinctly three
Things that can be the Cause sought for, viz. The very Parts of that little
Fetter, or the Will of the Author of Nature, or lastly invisible Bodies
surrounding such little Bands. I might yet allege, as the Cause of these
things, the Form of Bodies, the Qualities of Hardness, or some occult Quality,
the Sympathy betwixt Parts of the same Species, etc. but since I have no
distinct Idea of those fine things, I neither must nor can ground my Reasonings
thereupon: so that if I find not the Cause I search after, in those things of
which I have distinct Ideas, I will not fruitlessly trouble my self with the
Contemplation of such rambling and general Notions of Logic; and shall forbear
speaking of what I understand not. But let us examine the first of these
things, that may be the Cause, why the Parts of that small Band are so firmly
joined; viz. the very Parts of which it is made up.

When I only consider the Parts of which hard Bodies are composed, I am
inclined to believe, That no M. Des Carts his Principles, Art. 55. Part. II.
Cement, which unites the Parts of that Fetter, can be imagined besides
themselves and their own Rest: for of what Nature could it be? It cannot be a
thing subsisting of it self, since all those minute Parts being Substances, for
what Reason should they be united by other Substances but themselves? Neither
can it be a Quality different from Rest; because there is no Quality more
contrary to Motion, that may separate those Parts, but their own Rest: but
besides Substances and their Qualities, we know not any other sorts of things.

It Is true, that the Parts of hard Bodies remain united, as long as they are in
Rest one by another; and that when they are once in Rest, they remain of
themselves in the same state, as long as they can; but this is not what I
enquire after, and I know not how too I came to mistake the Subject. I
endeavor here to discover, why the Parts of hard Bodies have so great a
strength, to remain in Rest one by another, that they withstand the Force that
is used to move them.

Art. 43. ibid.
I might however answer my self, that every Body has truly Force of continuing
fixed in its present state, and that this Force is equal whether in Motion or
Rest: But that the Reason why the parts of hard Bodies remain in Rest by one
another, and that we can Art. 63.
difficultly move and separate them, is our not employing sufficient Motion to
overpower the Rest. This is probable, but I am seeking Certainty, if it be to
be found, and not bare Probability. And how can I know with Certainty, and
Evidence, that each Body has this Force to continue in the state it is in, and
that this Force is equal both as to Motion and Rest, since Matter on the
contrary, seems indifferently passive to either, and altogether destitute of
Force. Let us have recourse then with M. des Carts to the Will of the
Creator, which is, it may be, that Force which Bodies seem to have in
themselves, which is the second thing above mentioned, supposed capable of
preserving the Parts of this little Fetter we speak of, so closely linked to
one another.

Certainly, it is possible that God may will every Body should remain in its
present state, and that his Will should be the Force which unites their Parts
to one another, as I otherwise know his Will to be the Moving Force which puts
Bodies in Motion: For since Matter is incapable of moving it self, I have
Reason, methinks, to conclude it is a Spirit, and even the Author of Nature,
which puts it and preserves it in Motion, by preserving it successively in
different places by his bare Will; in as much as an Almighty Being acts not
with Instruments, and his Will is necessarily followed by Effects.

Art. 33. Part. II.
I acknowledge then, it is possible that God may will that every thing remain in
its present state, whether it be Motion or Rest, and that his Will may be the
natural Power, which Bodies have of remaining in the state they once have
obtained. And if so, we must like M. des Carts, measure that Power, conclude
what ought to be the Effects of it, and give Rules for the Force and
Communication of Motions upon the Collision of different Bodies, in proportion
to their Magnitude; since we have no other way of coming to the knowledge of
that general and immutable Will of God, who makes the different Power these
Bodies have of acting upon, and resisting one another, consist in their
different Magnitude and Swiftness.

But however, I have no infallible proof that God wills by a positive Will,
that Bodies remain in Rest, and one would think it sufficient for God to will
the Existence of Matter, not only to cause it to exist, but to exist in Rest.

The case is not the same with Motion, since the Idea of a Matter moved,
certainly includes two Powers to which it is related, viz. that which created,
and also that which moved it. But the Idea of a Matter in Rest, includes only
the Idea of a Power which has created it, whilst there is no necessity of any
other Power to put it in Rest, since if we barely conceive Matter, without
thinking on any Power, we shall necessarily conceive it in Rest. Thus it is I
conceive things: for I am to judge by my Ideas; and my Ideas tell me, Rest is
but the privation of Motion. For God need but cease to will the Motion of a
Body; to make its Motion cease, and to cause it to Rest.

But I remember I have heard from many very ingenious Persons, that Motion
seemed to them as much the privation of Rest, as Rest the privation of Motion.
And some will not doubt to affirm, for Reasons I cannot comprehend, that Motion
seems rather a privation than rest. I do not distinctly call to Mind the
Reasons they allege: however this ought to make me suspicious, lest my Ideas
should be false. For though most Men say what they please upon Subjects that
seem of little moment, yet I have Reason to believe the Persons I speak of,
were pleased to speak what they thought: wherefore I must still examine my
Ideas more carefully.

To me it seems a thing of undoubted Certainty, and the Gentlemen before
mentioned will not deny it, I imagine here only God, my self, and one Bowl.
that it is the Will of God which moves Bodies. The Force then which that Bowl I
see in Motion has, is the Will of God that moves it; what now is God required
to do to stop it? Must he Will, by a positive Will, that it should Rest? or is
it sufficient to cease to will its Motion? It Is plain, that if God but cease to
will the Motion of this Bowl, the cessation of its Motion, and consequently
Rest will succeed the cessation of the Will of God. For the Will of God, which
was the Force that moved the Bowl, desisting, that Force desists, and the Bowl
will be no longer moved. Therefore the cessation of the moving Force produces
Rest: Rest then has no Force to cause it; but is a bare privation that supposes
no positive Will in God. Thus we should admit in God a positive Will without
any Reason or Necessity, if we ascribed to Bodies any Force to remain in Rest.

But to overthrow this Argument if possible, Let us now suppose a Bowl at Rest,
as before we supposed it in Motion, what must God do in order to agitate it? Is
it enough that he ceases to will its repose? if so, I have hitherto made no
advance; for that Motion will be equally the privation of Rest, as Rest of
Motion. I suppose then that God desists to will the Rest of this Bowl; but
supposing it, I see it not put in Motion; and if any others do, I desire them
to inform me with what degree of Motion it is carried. Certainly it is
impossible it should be moved, or have any degree of Motion: and it is
impossible to conceive any degree of Motion in it, barely from our conceiving
that God ceases to will it should be at Rest; because it goes not with Motion
as it does with Rest. Motions are infinitely various, and are susceptible of
more and less; but Rest being nothing, one cannot differ from another. One and
the same Bowl which moves twice as fast at one time as at another, has twice as
much Force, or Motion, at one time as at another. But it cannot be said that
the same Bowl has Rest double at one time to its Rest at another.

There must therefore be a positive Will in God, to put a Bowl in Motion, or to
give it such a Force as it may move it self with: But he need only cease to
will it should be moved, to cause its Motion to desist; that is, to make it
Rest. Just as to the creating a World, it is not enough that God cease to will
its nonexistence, unless he likewise positively will the manner it shall exist
in. But in order to annihilate it, there is no need of God's willing it should
not exist, since God cannot will Nothingness by a positive Will, but barely,
that he cease to will its Being.

I consider not here Motion and Rest, according to their relative Capacity;
(for it is manifest that resting Bodies have as real Relations to those about
them, as Bodies in Motion) I only conceive that Bodies moved have a moving
Force, and that others at Rest have no Force at all to persevere in it; because
the Relations of moved to the circumambient Bodies, perpetually changing, they
need a continual Force to produce these Changes; it being indeed nothing but
these Changes, that cause all that Novelty we observe in Nature; but there is
no need of Force to do nothing. When the Relation of a Body to those
surrounding it is constantly the same, there is nothing done; and the
Continuance of that Relation, I mean the Action of the Will of God, which
preserves it, is not different from that which preserves the Body it self.

If it be true, as I conceive, That Rest is but the Privation of Motion, the
least Motion, or that of the least Body moved, will include a greater Force or
power than the Rest of the greatest Body; and so the least Force, and the least
Body, supposed to be moved By a Body in a Vacuum, I understand one so separate
from others, whether hard or liquid, as that there is none either to aid or
hinder the Communication of Motions.
in a Vacuum, against another never so great and bulky, will be capable of
moving it; since the largest Body at Rest will have no power of resisting the
least Body that shall strike against it. Therefore the Resistance which is made
by the Parts of hard Bodies, to hinder their Separation, necessarily proceeds
from something else than their Repose.

But it is necessary to demonstrate by sensible Experiments, what we have been
proving by abstracted Reasonings, to see whether our Ideas comport with the
Sensations we receive from Effects. For it often happens that such Reasonings
deceive us, at least will not convince others, and especially such as are
prejudiced to the contrary. M. Des Cartes's Authority has such an influence
upon some Men's Reason, that unless we prove all imaginable ways, that great Man
in an Error, we cannot disabuse them. What I have said will be readily
admitted by such as are not prepossessed with a contrary Opinion; and I
perceive that I shall even be blamed by them, for proving things which seem to
them indisputable: However, the Cartesians well deserve our endeavors to
content them. The others may pass over this Discourse, if they think it tedious.

Here then are some Experiments which sensibly demonstrate that Rest has no
power to resist Motion, and which consequently evince, that the Will of the
Author of Nature, which constitutes the Power and Force every Body has to
continue in its present state, respects not Rest, but Motion only; since Bodies
considered in themselves have no Force at all.

We daily see great Ships, whilst floating in the Water, moved with little
Bodies striking against them. From which Experience I conclude, notwithstanding
all the subterfuges of Monsieur des Carts and the Cartesians, that if these
great Bodies were in a Vacuum, they might be moved with much greater facility,
since the Reason of a Vessel's being moved in the Water with some difficulty,
is the resistance the Water makes to the imparted Motion; which in a void space
will not be found. Now that which manifestly shows that Water resists the
Motion impressed on the Vessel, is the cessation of its Motion some time after
the Impulsion, which certainly would not happen, did not the Vessel lose its
Motion, by communicating it to the Water; or if the Water yielded to its
passage without any opposition; or lastly, imparted to it some of its own
Motion. Therefore since a Vessel agitated in the Water, ceases by degrees to
move, it is an infallible sign that the Water, instead of forwarding, as
Monsieur des Carts pretends, withstands its Motion; and consequently it would
be infinitely easier to move a great Body in a Vacuum than in Water, since
there would be no resistance on the part of surrounding Bodies. It Is evident
therefore, that Rest has no Force to resist Motion, and that the least Motion
contains more Power and Force then the greatest Rest; or at least, that we
ought not to measure the Force of Motion and Rest, by the Proportion we find
between the Magnitude of Bodies in those two States, as Monsieur des Carts has
done.

It Is true, there is some reason to believe that the Vessel is moved, whilst in
the Water, by reason of the continual change which happen in the watery parts
about it, though to us it seems not to change its place: And this has been an
inducement to M. Des Carts and some Persons to believe, that it is not the bare
Force of the impelling Agent which makes it advance in Water; but that having
before received a great deal of Motion from the little parts of the surrounding
Liquid, which press it equally on all sides, this Motion is only determined by
the adventitious Motion of the impelling Body; so that what moves a Body in
Water, could not do it in a Vacuum. And thus it is that M. Des Carts and his
Followers defend the Rules of Motion they have given us.

Let us suppose, for Example, a Piece of Wood of a Foot square, placed in a
liquid Body, all the little parts whereof act and move against it; and because
they press it equally on all sides, as well toward A as B, the piece of Wood
stirs neither one way nor another: Now if I drive another Piece of Wood of half
a Foot against the former, on the side A, I see it advance forward; hence I
conclude, that it might be moved in a Vacuum with less Force than that of the
Piece that drives it, for the foregoing Reasons. But the Persons I speak of
deny it, and answer, that the reason of the greater Piece's advancing, when
urged by the little one, is, that the Art. 5.
latter unable to move it singly, being joined with the parts of the agitated
Liquid, determines them to drive it by imparting some of their Motion to it.
But it is manifest that by this Answer, the Piece of Wood, when once moved,
could never diminish its Motion; but must, on the contrary, perpetually
increase it. For according to this Answer, the Piece of Wood is more driven by
the Water to the side of A than B, therefore it must perpetually proceed; and
because this Impulsion is continual, its Motion must constantly increase. But,
as I have said, the Water is so far from facilitating its Motion, that it
continually resists it; which resistance still lessening it more and more, at
last makes it altogether insensible.

But I am now to prove that the Piece of Wood which is equally pushed by the
little parts of the encompassing Water, has no Motion or Force at all, capable
of moving it, though it continually changes its immediate place; and the
Surface of the Water round it is different at different times. For if it be so
that a Body equally pressed on all sides, as a Piece of Wood, be destitute of
Motion, undoubtedly that foreign Force that strikes against it, must
communicate it, since at the time of this Force's urging it on, the Water
resists, and insensibly dissipates the impressed Motion, causing it, by little
and little, at last to cease.

It is certain, at least to those I speak to, that there is no more Motion in
Nature at one time than another; and that Bodies at rest cannot be put in
Motion, but by the Collision of some agitated Bodies, which communicate their
Motion to them. Whence I conclude, that a Body, which I suppose created
perfectly at Rest in the midst of Water, will never receive any degree of
Motion, from the little parts of the Water which surround it, and which strike
continually against it, provided their Force be equal on all sides; because all
these little parts which dash equally against it on all sides, rebounding again
with their whole Motion, communicate none of it; and consequently this Body
ought to be considered as at Rest, and without any moving Force, though it
continually changes its Situation.

Now the proof I have for the rebounding of these little parts, together with
their whole Motion, is this; That otherwise the Water which touches this Body,
must grow very cold, or even congealed, and become almost as hard as the Wood
upon its Surface, since the Motion of the watery parts ought to be equally
diffused into the little parts of the Body they encompass.

But that I may accommodate my self to the Patrons of M. Des Cartes's Opinion,
I am willing to grant that we ought not to consider a Vessel on the Water as at
Rest. I grant likewise, that all the parts of the environing Water are
^ubservient to the new Motion imprinted by the Waterman, though it be but too
visible by the decrease of the Boat's Motion, that they resist it more on the
side where it makes, than on the other whence it is driven: Notwithstanding
which supposition, I say, that of all the Parts of Water in the River,
according to M. Des Carts, there are none which can promote the Motion of the
Vessel, except those which immediately touch it on the side it is driven on.
For Art. 63.
according to that Philosopher, The Water being fluid, all the parts that go to
its Composition, act not conjointly against the Body we would move; but only
those which touching it, conjointly bear upon it. But those which conjointly
bear upon the Vessel, and the Boat's-man together, are twenty times more
inconsiderable than the Boat. It Is plain therefore, from the Explication given
by M. Des Carts in this Article, concerning the difficulty we find to break a
Nail between our Fingers, that a little Body is capable of moving one much
bigger than it self. For in short, our Hands are not so fluid as Water; and
when we would break a Nail, there are more parts that act jointly in our hands,
than in the Water which pushes against a Vessel.

But here is a more sensible Experiment. Take a Plank well smoothed, or any
other very hard Plain, drive in it a Nail half way, and set this Plain in a
somewhat inclining posture; then place a Bar of Iron an hundred times thicker
than the Nail, an Inch or two above it, and letting it slide down, it will not
break it. Mean time it is observable, that, according to Des Carts, all the
parts of the Bar, as being hard and solid, act jointly upon the Nail. If
therefore there were no other C^ment than Rest to unite the parts of the Nail,
the Bar of Iron being an hundred times bigger, ought by the Fifth Rule of M.
Des Carts, and according to Reason, communicate somewhat of its Motion to the
part of the Nail it fell upon; that is, to break it, and pass on, even though
this Bar should slide with a very gentle Motion. Therefore we must seek some
other Cause than the Rest of Bodies, that makes them hard, and capable of
resisting the violence that is offered to break them, since Rest has no Force
to withstand Motion: And I am persuaded these Experiences are sufficient to
evince, that the abstracted Proofs we have given are not false.

We must then examine the third Thing we supposed before might be the cause of
the strict Union found between the Parts of hard Bodies; namely, an invisible
Matter which surrounds them; and which being rapidly moved, pushes most
violently the external and internal Parts of these Bodies, and constringes them
in such a manner as requires greater strength to separate them, than has that
invisible and extremely agitated Matter.

Methinks I might reasonably conclude, that the Union of the constituent Parts
of hard Bodies depends on an invisible Matter which surrounds and compresses
them, since the two other things, supposed possible Causes of this union, have
been discovered not to be truly so. For since I meet with Resistance in
breaking a Piece of Iron, which Resistance proceeds not from the Iron, nor the
Will of God, as I think I have proved, it must necessarily proceed from some
invisible Matter, which can be no other than that which immediately surrounds
and compresses it. Nevertheless, I shall give some positive Proofs of this
Opinion, after I have more largely explained it by some Instance.

Take a Globe of any hard Metal, which is hollow within, and divided in two
Halfs, join them together with a little Bond of Wax at the place of their
Union, and then extract the Air: these two half Globes will be so firmly joined
to one another, that two Teams of Horses fastened to the Rings on the opposite
sides of the Globe, shall not separate them, provided they be large in
proportion to the Number of Horses; when yet if the Air be suffered to enter,
one Man shall separate them with a great deal of Ease. From this Experiment
it is easy to conclude, that what united the two Hemispheres to one another,
was the Pressure of the surrounding Air upon their outward and unequal Surface,
whilst there was no Compression in their concave and inward parts; so that the
Action of the Horses which drew the two Hemispheres on either side, could not
conquer the Resistance made by innumerable little Parts of Air, by their
pressing these two Halfs: But the least Force is capable of dividing them when
the Air entering in the Copper Globe, drives against the Concave and inward
Surfaces, as much as the external Air presses against the outward and unequal.

Take, on the contrary, the Bladder of a Carp, and put it in a Vessel from
which the Air is pumped: this Bladder being full of Air, will crack and burst,
because then there is no exterior Air to resist that within the Bladder. It Is
likewise for the same Reason I have given of the first Experiment, that two
Glass or Marble Plains, ground and polished upon one another, so cling
together, that Violence must be used to separate them one way; because the two
parts of the Marble are pressed and constring'd by the external Air that
surrounds them, and are not so strongly pressed by that between. I might
produce infinite other Experiments to prove that the gross Air which surrounds
Bodies strongly unites their Parts: But what I have said is enough to give a
distinct Explication of my Thoughts upon the present Question.

I say then, that what causes the Parts of hard Bodies and the little Fetters
beforementioned to hang so closely united to each other, is, there being other
little Bodies infinitely more agitated than the course Air we breath, which
bear against them, and compress them; and that which makes it so hard to
separate them, is not their Rest, but the Agitation of these little surrounding
Bodies. So that that which resists Motion is not Rest, (this being but the
Privation of it, and has no Force at all,) but some contrary Motion.

This simple Exposition of my Opinion perhaps seems reasonable; yet I foresee,
that many Persons will not easily be induced to yield to it. Hard Bodies make
so great Impression on the Senses when they strike us, or when we use Violence
to break them, that we are inclined to believe their Parts more strictly united
than they really are. And on the contrary, the little Bodies which I have said
encompass them, and to which I have ascribed the Force of causing this Union,
making no Impression on our Senses, seem too weak to produce so sensible an
Effect.

But to take away this Prejudice, which bottoms on the Impressions of our
Senses, and on the Difficulty we find to imagine Bodies more little and
agitated than those we daily see; it is to be considered, that the Hardness of
Bodies is not to be measured with relation to our Hands, or the Endeavors we
are able to make, which are different at different times. For indeed, if the
greatest Force of Men be nothing in comparison with that of the subtle Matter,
we should be much to blame to believe, that Diamonds, and the hardest Stones,
cannot derive their Hardness from the Compression of those little rapid Bodies
which environ them. Now we may visibly discover how inconsiderably weak is
Humane Force, if it be considered that Man's Power of moving his Body in so
many manners, proceeds from a very moderate Fermentation of the Blood, which
somewhat agitates the smaller Parts of it, and so produces the Animal Spirits.
For it is the Agitation of these Spirits, which makes the Strength of the Body,
and gives us the Power of making those Endeavors which we groundlesly regard,
as something great and mighty.

But it must be observed, that this Fermentation of our Blood, is but a small
Communication of that subtle Matter's Motion we have been speaking of. For all
the Fermentations of visible Bodies are nothing but Communications of Motion
from the Invisible, since every Body receives its Agitation from some other.
It Is not therefore to be wondered if our Force be not so great as that of the
same subtle Matter we receive it from. But if our Blood fermented as much in
our Heart as Gunpowder ferments, and is agitated when Fire is put to it; that
is, if our Blood received as great a Communication of Motion from the subtle
Matter, as Gunpowder receives, we might do extraordinary things with a great
deal of Ease; as break a Bar of Iron, overturn an House, etc. provided we
suppose a competent proportion between our Members and our Blood so violently
agitated. We must therefore rid our selves of our Prejudice, and not, following
the Impression of our Senses, imagine that the Parts of hard Bodies are so
strongly united to one another, because of the Difficulty we find to break them.

But if moreover, we consider the Effects of Fire in Mines, the Gravity of
Bodies, and several other natural Effects, which have no other Cause then the
Commotion of these insensible Corpuscles, as is proved by M. Des Carts in many
places of his Works, we shall manifestly discover, that it does not exceed
their Force, to unite and bind together the Parts of hard Bodies so powerfully
as we find them. For in short, I fear not to affirm, that a Cannon-Bullet,
whose Motion seems so extraordinary, receives not the thousandth part of the
Motion of the subtle Matter which surrounds it.

My Assertion will not be doubted of, if it be considered, First, That the
Gunpowder is not all inflamed, nor at the same instant: Secondly, That though
it were all on Fire in the self-same Moment, yet it floats a very short time,
in the subtle Matter; and Bodies swimming but a little while in others, can
receive no great Motion from them; as may be seen in Boats when riding in a
Stream, which receive their Motion by degrees. Thirdly, and principally, That
each part of the Powder can receive but a collateral Motion, which the subtle
Matter yields to. For Water only communicates to the Vessel the direct Motion
which is common to all the parts of it, which Motion is generally very
inconsiderable in respect of the others.

I might still prove to M. Des Cartes's Followers, the Greatness of the subtle
Matter's Motion, by the Motion of the Earth, and the Heaviness of Bodies; from
whence might be drawn very certain and exact Proofs, if that were necessary to
my Subject. But in order to have one sufficient Proof of the violent Agitation
of the subtle Matter, to which I ascribe the Hardness of Bodies, it suffices
(without seeing Des Cartes's Works) to read attentively what I have written in
the second Chapter of the fourth Book, toward the End.

Being now delivered from our Prejudices, which induced us to believe our
Efforts very potent, and those of the subtle Matter which surrounds and
constringes hard Bodies, very feeble; being likewise satisfied of the vehement
Commotion of this Matter, by what has been said of Gunpowder; 'twill be no
hard Matter to discover, that it is absolutely necessary that this Matter,
acting infinitely more on the Surface, than the Inside of the hard Bodies it
encompasses and compresses, should be the Cause of their Hardness, or of the
Resistance we feel when we endeavor to break them.

But since there are always many Parts of this invisible Matter passing through
the Pores of hard Bodies, they not only render them hard, as I have before
explained; but are also the Causes that some are springing, and elastical, that
others stand bent, and others still are Fluid and liquid; and in short are the
Cause not only of the Force which the Parts of hard Bodies have to remain close
by one another; but of that likewise which the parts of fluid Bodies have to
separate; or, which is the same thing, are the Cause of the Hardness of some
Bodies, and the Fluidity of others.

But whereas it is absolutely necessary to know distinctly the Physics of M.
Des Carts, the Figure of his Elements, and of the parts which constitute
particular Bodies, to account for the stiffness of some and the flexibility of
others, I shall not insist upon explaining it. Such as have read the Works of
that Philosopher, will easily imagine what may be the cause of these things;
whereas it would be a difficult task for me to explain it; and those who are
unaquainted with that Author would have a very confused Notion of the Reasons I
might offer.

Nor shall I stand to resolve a vast number of Difficulties which I foresee
will be urged against what I have been establishing, because if those who
propose them have no knowledge of true natural Philosophy, I should but tire
and confound them instead of satisfying them. But if they were Men of Science,
I could not answer them without a long train of diagrams and reasoning.
Wherefore I think it best to entreat those who shall find any Difficulty in
what I have said, to give this Discourse a more careful perusal; not doubting
but if they read it and consider it as they ought, all their Objections will
fall to the Ground. But after all, if they think my Request inconvenient, let
them sit still, there being no great danger in the Ignorance of the Cause of
the Hardness of Bodies.

I speak not here of contiguity: for it is manifest that contiguous things touch
so little, that there is always a good quantity of subtle Matter passing between
them, which endeavoring to continue its Motion in a right Line hinders them
from uniting.

As to the union found between two Marbles that have been polish't one upon
another, I have already explained it; and it is easy to see, that though the
subtle Matter passes constantly between the two parts, as close as they are yet
the Air cannot get in; and therefore it is that which compresses and constringes
the two parts together, and makes them so difficult to be disunited, unless we
glide them over one another.

For all this it is manifest that the Continuity, Contiguity and Union of two
Marbles would be one and the same thing in a vacuum: for neither have we
different Ideas of them, so that it would be to talk without understanding our
selves to make them differ absolutely, and without any regard to the
surrounding Bodies.

I now come to make some Reflections upon M. Des Cartes's Opinion, and the
Original of his Error: I call his Opinion an Error, because I can find no
sincere way of defending what he has said upon the Rules of Motion, and the
Cause of the Hardness of Bodies toward the end of the second Part of his
Principles in several places; and that he seems to have evidently proved the
Truth of the contrary Opinion.

This great Man most distinctly conceiving that Matter could not naturally move
it self, but that the moving Force of all Bodies was nothing but the general
Will of the Author of Nature; and that therefore the Communications of their
Motion upon their mutual Collision, must come from the same Will, yielded to be
carried away with this Notion, That the Rules of the different Communication of
Motions must be fetched from the Proportion found between the different
Magnitudes of Colliding Bodies; it being impossible to penetrate into the
Designs and Will of God. And whereas he concluded that every thing had the
Force to persevere in its present State, whether it were in Motion, or Rest,
because God, whose Will constituted this Force, acts always in the same manner;
he inferred that Rest had an equal Force with Motion. Thus he measured the
Effects of the Power of Rest by the Greatness of the Body it resided in, as
well as those of Motion: And hence he gave the Rules of the Communication of
Motion which are seen in his Principles, and the Cause of the Hardness of
Bodies, which I have endeavored to refute.

It Is a hard matter not to submit to the Opinion of Monsieur des Carts, when
we contemplate it on the same side: For, once more, since the Communication of
Motions proceeds only from the Will of the Author of Nature, and that we see
all Bodies continue in the State they have once been put in, whether it be
Motion or Rest, it seems that we ought to seek for the Rules of the different
Communications of Motion upon the Concourse of Bodies; not in the Will of God,
which is unknown to us; but in the Proportion that is found between the
Magnitudes of these same Bodies.

I do not therefore admire that Monsieur des Carts should light upon this
Notion; but I only wonder he did not correct it, when having pushed on his
Discoveries, he found out the Existence, and some Effects of the subtle Matter
which surrounds all Bodies.

I am surpised to find him, in the 132d Article of the Fourth Part, attribute
the Elastick Force of certain Bodies to the subtle Matter, and yet not ascribe
to it their Hardness, and the Resistance they make to our Endeavors to bend
and break them; but only to the Rest of their Parts. Art. 55. and 43. of the
second Part, and elsewhere.
For I think it evident, that the Cause of the Elasticity and Stiffness of some
Bodies, is the same with that which impowers them to resist the Violence that
is used to break them: For indeed, the Force which is employed in breaking a
piece of Steel, has but an insensible Difference from that which is used to
bend it.

I mean not to multiply Reasons here, which one might give for the proving
these things; nor to answer some Difficulties possible to be urged about Bodies
which are not sensibly springing, and yet are difficultly bent: For all these
Difficulties vanish, if we consider that the subtle Matter cannot easily make
new Tracks in Bodies which break in bending, as in Glass and tempered Steel;
which it can easier do in such Bodies as are composed of branchy Parts, and
that are not brittle, as in Gold and Lead: And Lastly, that there is no hard
Body; but has some kind of Elaterium.

It Is a hard matter to persuade one's self that Monsieur des Carts did
positively believe the Cause of Hardness to be different from that which makes
the Elasticity; and what looks most likely, is, that he made not sufficient
Reflection on that matter. When a Man has for a long time meditated on any
Subject, and is well satisfied about that of his present Enquiry, he commonly
thinks no farther on it; he believes that the Conceptions he had of it are
undeniable Truths, and that it is needless to examine them any more. But a Man
has so many Things in him which disrelish his Application, provoke him to
precipitate Judgments, and subject him to Error, that though his Mind remains
apparently satisfied, yet it is not always well instructed in the Truth.
Monsieur des Carts was a Man, like us: No greater Solidity, Accuracy, Extent,
and Penetration of Thought is any where to be met with, than in his Works, I
confess; but yet he was not infallible: Therefore it is very probable he
remained so settled in his Opinion, from his not sufficiently reflecting that
he asserted something in the Consequence of his Principles, contrary to it. He
grounded it on very specious and probable Reasons; but such notwithstanding, as
being not capable of themselves to force his Consent, he might still have
suspended his Judgment; and consequently, as a Philosopher, he ought to have
done it. It was not enough to examine in a hard Body, what was in it that might
make it so; but he ought likewise to have thought on the invisible Bodies,
which might give it Hardness; as he did at the End of his Philosophical
Principles, when he ascribed to them the Cause of their Elasticity: He ought to
have made an exact Division, and comprehensive of whatever might contribute to
the Hardness of Bodies. It was not enough to have sought the Causes of it in
the Will of God; he ought also to have thought on the subtle Matter, which
surrounds these Bodies: For though the Existence of that violently agitated
Matter was not yet proved in the place of his Principles where he speaks of
Hardness; it was not however rejected; he ought therefore to have suspended his
Judgment, and have well remembered that what he had written concerning the
Cause of Hardness, and of the Rules of Motion, was fit to be revised; which I
believe was neglected by him; or at least, he has not sufficiently considered
the true Reason of a thing very easy to be discovered, and which yet is of
greatest Consequence in Natural Philosophy. I thus explain my self:

Monsieur des Carts well knew that to the Support of his System, (the Truth of
which he could not reasonably suspect,) it was absolutely necessary that great
Bodies should always communicate some of their Motion to the lesser which they
met with; and that the latter should rebound at the Encounter of the former,
without the like Loss of their own: For otherwise, the first Element would not
have all the Motion that is necessary above the second, nor the second above
the third; and so all his System would be absolutely false, as is manifest to
those who have a little considered it. But in supposing that Rest has Force to
resist Motion, and that a great Body in Rest cannot be moved by another less
than it self, though most violently striking against it, it is plain that great
Bodies must have much less Motion than an equal Mass of little ones, since they
may always by that Supposition communicate their own Motion, but cannot always
receive any from the lesser. Thus this Supposition being not contrary to all
that Monsieur des Carts had laid down in his Principles, from the beginning,
to the Establishment of his Rules of Motion, and according very well with the
Consequence of these same Principles, he thought the Rules of Motion, which he
believed he had demonstrated in their Cause, were sufficiently confirmed by
their Effects.

I agree with Monsieur des Carts in the Bottom of the Thing, that great Bodies
communicate their Motion much easier than the lesser; and that therefore his
first Element is more agitated than the second, and the second than the third;
but the Cause is manifest without recourse to his Supposition. Little and fluid
Bodies, as Water, Air, etc. can but communicate to any great ones an uniform
Motion, which is common to all their Parts. The Water of a River can only
communicate to a Boat a descending Motion, which is common to all the little
Parts the Water is composed of; each of which Particles, besides its common
Motion, has infinite others, which are particular. Which Reason makes it
evident that a Boat, for instance, cannot have so much Motion as an equal
Volume of Water, since the Boat can only receive from the Water a direct
Motion, and common to all the Parts of it. If twenty Parts of a fluid Body
drive against any other Body on one side whilst there are as many urging it on
the other, it remains immovable; and all the Particles of the surrounding
Fluid it swims in, rebound without losing any thing of their Motion. Therefore
gross Bodies, whose Parts are united one to the other, can receive only a
circular and uniform Motion from the Vortex of the encompassing subtle Matter.

This Reason seems sufficient to give us to understand why gross Bodies are not
so much agitated as little ones; and that it is not necessary to the explaining
these things, to suppose any Force in Rest to resist Motion. The Certainty of
Monsieur des Cartes's Philosophical Principles cannot therefore be of Use in
proving or defending his Rules of Motion. And we have Reason to believe that if
Monsieur des Carts himself had, without Prepossession, examined his Principles
afresh, at the same time weighing such Reasons as I have alleged, he would not
have believed the Effects of Nature had corroborated his Rules; nor have fallen
into a Contradiction, in attributing the Hardness of hard Bodies only to the
Rest of their Parts, and their Elasticity to the Effort of the subtle Matter.

I now come to give the Rules of the Communication of Motion in a Vacuum, which
follow upon what I have before established concerning the Nature of Rest.
Bodies being not hard in a Vacuum, since they are only so by the pressure of
the subtle Matter that surrounds them, if two Bodies meet together, they would
flatten without rebounding: We must therefore suppose them hard by their own
Nature, and not by the pressure of the subtle Matter, to give these Rules.

Rest having no Force to resist Motion, and many Bodies being to be considered
but as one at the Instant of their Collision, it is plain they ought not to
rebound, save when they are equal in their Bulk and Swiftness, or that their
Swiftness compensates for the Want of Bulk, or their Bulk the Want of
Swiftness. And it is easy from hence to conclude, that they ought in all other
Cases so to communicate their Motion, as afterward to proceed along together,
with an equal Pace.

General Rules of the Commuication of Motions.
Wherefore, to know what ought to happen in all the different Suppositions of
the Magnitude and Celerity of Colliding Bodies, we need only add together all
the Degrees of Motion of two or more, which ought to be considered but as one
in the Moment of their Concourse, and afterward divide the Sum of the whole
Motion proportionably to the Bulk of each respective Body.

Hence I conclude, that of the Sea M. des Cartes's Rules in the second Part of
his Principles.
seven Rules of Motion, Monsieur des Carts has given, the three first are good.

That the Fourth is false, and that B ought to communicate its Motion to C, in
proportion to the bigness of the same C, and after go along in Company; so as
if C be double to B, and B have three Degrees of Motion, it must give away two
of them: For I have sufficiently proved, that Monsieur des Carts ought not to
have supposed in Rest, a Force to resist Motion.

That the Fifth is true.

That the Sixth is false, and that B ought to communicate half of its Motion to
C.

And that the Seventh is false, and that B ought ever to communicate its Motion
to C, in proportion to the Magnitude and Motion of both B and C. But that if,
according to the Supposition, C be double to B, and have three Degrees of
Motion, whilst C has but two, they must proceed together in Company, C and B
being but one Body at the time of their Collision; and therefore we must add
together the Degrees of Swiftness, which are five, and afterward divide them
in proportion to their bigness, and so distribute 1 3/2 to B, and 3 to C, which
is double to B. But these Rules, though certain, from what I have said, are yet
contrary to Experience, since we are not in a Vacuum.

The chief of those Experiences, which are contrary to what I have said about
the Rules of Motion, is, the constant rebounding of hard Bodies, when they
meet, one one way, and another another; or at least, their not going in Company
after their Encounter.

In Answer to which, we must call to mind what we have formerly said of the
Cause of Elasticity; namely, That there is a Matter, of a strangely-violent
Motion, which continually passes into the Parts of hard Bodies, and makes them
so by its compressing both their outward and inward Parts: For it will be easy
from hence to see, that at the time of Percussion two encountering Bodies drive
and turn off the Current of this Matter from the places nearest to the
stricken; which Matter resisting with great Violence, repells the two Bodies,
which strike against each other, and restores its Passage, which the Percussion
had stopped up.

That which more clearly still proves my Opinion is this, That if two Bowls of
Lead, or of any other less Elastick Matter, meet, they rebound not after their
Collision, but proceed almost according to the Rules before established, which
they keep to so much more exactly as they are less springing. Bodies therefore
rebound after their Percussion, because they are hard; that is, as I have
explained, because there is an extremely agitated Matter, which compresses
them, and which passing through their Pores with an extreme Violence, repel the
Bodies which strike against them. But it ought to be supposed that the
Percutient Bodies break not those which they dash against by a Motion
over-powering the Resistance the little Parts of the subtle Matter are capable
of making; as when we discharge a Musket against a piece of Wood.

It Is true, the subtle Matter compresses soft Bodies, and passes with a rapid
Course through their Pores, no less than through those of hard; and yet these
soft Bodies have no Elasticity: The Reason whereof is this; that the Matter
passing through soft Bodies, can with a great deal of Ease open it self new
Passages, by reason of the Minuteness of the Parts composing them, or of some
other particular Configuration, proper for that Effect; which hard Bodies will
not admit, by reason of the Largeness and Situation of their Parts, which are
contrary to the same.

Thus when a hard Body strikes another that is soft, it alters all the Roads
the subtle Matter used to pass through, which is commonly visible; as in a
Musket-Bullet, which flattens when it is smitten. But when a hard Body strikes
against another like it, it either makes none, or very few new Paths; and the
subtle Matter in its Pores is obliged to return upon the same Ground, or else
must repel the Body which blocks up its little Avenues.

Let A be a hard Body, B a soft one, C the Chanel of the subtle Matter; I say,
that if A strike B in the Point c, the Chanel Cc is shut up, and the subtle
Matter finds out new Ways in the soft Body; and so having an open Road, it
repels not the striking Body, but the Body stricken changes its Figure, and
batters it self a little: And it must be supposed, that in the least Body there
are infinite Passages like Cc. But if the Bodies A and a are both of them hard,
the Passage Cc is straightened; and the subtle Matter included in it continuing
its Motion in a Right Line, for want of new Paths, repels the Body striking it
so much more violently as it finds greater Difficulty in making a new Way; or
else the Parts of the Body A break, and separate from one another, and are
reduced to Dust, or Pieces.

Lastly, It seems evident, that every moved Body, continually endeavoring to
tend in a Right Line, and declining from it as little as is possible when it
meets Resistance, ought never to rebound, since by that Motion it extremely
deviates from a Right. It Is necessary therefore, either that Bodies should grow
flat, or that the stronger should conquer the weaker, and make it bear it
company: But because Bodies are springing, and hard, they cannot go in company,
since if A pushes a, a repels A; and so they must recede from one another.

Notwithstanding, if two Bodies were in a Vacuum, though never so hard, they
would go in company, because having no Body to surround them, they could have
no Elastick Force, the Striker making no Resistance to the Striking; but Air,
Gravitation, etc. resisting the great Motion which the striking Body gives the
stricken, the stricken resists the striking, and hinders it from following: For
Experience teaches us, that Air and Gravity resist Motion; and that this
Resistance is so much greater, as the Motion is more violent. It Is easy to
discover from what I have been saying, how it comes to pass, that in the
Percussion of different Bodies, encompassed with Air or Water, etc. sometimes
the Smiting rebounds, sometimes communicates all its Motion, and remains as it
were unmovable; and sometimes it follows the Smitten, but always with less
Degrees of Swiftness, if one or other of them be not perfectly soft: For all
this depends on the Proportion that is found between the Magnitude, the
Hardness, and the Weight of one and the other, supposing them moved with an
equal Swiftness: If they are very hard, the Smiting rebounds more, because the
Elaterium is stronger. If the Smiting is very little, the Smitten very large
and weighty, the Smiting rebounds still much, because of the Weight and the
great Mass of Air surrounding the Smitten, which withstands the Motion. Last of
all, If the Force of the Hardness is, as it were, abated by the little Volume
of Air answering the Littleness of the stricken Body, or the contrary; it may
happen that the Smiting may remain as immovable after the Percussion. We need
therefore but compare the Hardness of percutient Bodies, and the Air, which the
Percuss'd ought to agitate anew at the time of Percussion, whereby to move, to
give a pretty exact Conjecture concerning what must happen in the Percussion of
different Bodies. I still suppose an equal Swiftness in the striking, for the
Air more resists a great Motion than a little one; and there is as much Motion
in a Body twice as little, as in another, when proceeding twice as fast as that
other. Thus the Smitten being driven as fast again, may be considered as having
a Volume of Air twice as big, to repel, in order to its moving.

But it ought still to be observed, that at the Moment of one Body's striking
another, the Parts of this same Body have two contrary Motions; for those on
the Fore-side have a backward Tendency, by reason of the Collision, when at the
same time those behind tend forwards on the Account of the first Motion; and
it is that Counter-motion which flattens soft Bodies, and is the Cause that some
hard Bodies break in pieces; but when Bodies are very hard, this
Counter-stroke, which vibrates some of the Parts, and makes a sort of
Trepidation in them, as appears from the Sound they give, always produces some
Changes in the Communication of Motion, which are very difficult to be known,
for many Reasons; and it is, in my Mind, to little purpose to examine them in
particular.

Would a Man meditate on all these things, I believe he would easily answer
some Difficulties which might still be raised upon the Subject; but if I
thought that what I have said were insufficient to show that Rest has no Force
to resist Motion, and that the Rules of the Communication of Motions, given by
Monsieur des Carts are in part false, I would here make out that it is
impossible by his Supposition to move our selves in the Air: And that which
makes the Circulation of Motion in Fluid Bodies possible, without recurring to
a Vacuum, is, that the first Element easily divides it self in several
different manners, the Repose of its Parts having no Force to resist Motion.

The CONCLUSION of the Three last BOOKS.
I Have, if I mistake not, sufficiently shown in the Fourth and Fifth Books,
that Men's natural Inclinations and Passions frequently occasion their falling
into Error; because they induce them more to a precipitate Judgment, than a
careful Examination of Things.

I have shown in the Fourth Book, that our Inclination for Good in general, is
the Cause of the Restlesness of the Will; that this Restlesness of the Will
puts the Mind in continual Agitation; and that a Mind continually agitated, is
utterly unfit for the Discovery of any the least intricate and hidden Truths:
That the Love of new and extraordinary Things frequently prepossesses us in
their behalf; and that whatever bears the Character of Infinite, is capable of
confounding our Imagination, and mis-leading us. I have explained how our
Inclination for Greatness, Elevation and Independency insensibly engage us in a
falsly-pretended Learning, or in the Study of all vain and useless Sciences,
which flatter the secret Pride of our Heart; because this is what recommends us
to the Admiration of the Vulgar. I have shown, that the Inclination for
Pleasures constantly throws off the View of the Mind from the Consideration of
abstracted Truths, which are the most simple and exuberant; and permits it not
to consider any thing, with a competent Attention and Impartiality, to judge
well of it: That Pleasures being the Modes of our Souls Existence, they
necessarily divide the Capacity of the Mind; and that a Mind thus divided,
cannot fully comprehend a Subject of any great Extent. Last of all, I have made
appear, that the Relation and Natural Union we have to all those with whom we
live and converse, is the Occasion of many Errors we fall into, and of our
communicating them to others, as others communicate to us the same they were
engaged in.

In the Fifth, where I have endeavored to give some Idea of our Passions, I
have, I think, made it sufficiently evident, that they were ordained to unite
us to all things sensible; and to give us, as we are among them, a due and
necessary Disposition for their Preservation and our own: That as our Senses
unite us to our Body, and expand our Soul into all the composing Parts of it;
so our Commotions carry us, as it were, out of our selves, and diffuse us upon
all things round about us: That, Lastly, they incessantly represent things, not
as they are in themselves, whereby we may form true Judgments; but according to
the Relation they have to us, whereby to form Judgments useful to the
Preservation of our Being, and of those to whom we are either naturally or
voluntarily united.

After having attempted the Discovery of Errors in their Causes, and the
Deliverance of the Mind from the Prejudices it is subject to, I thought it was
time at last to prepare it for the Search of Truth. Wherefore, in the Sixth
Book, I have explained the Means which I thought most natural for the
increasing the Attention, and enlarging the Capacity of the Mind, by showing
the Use that might be made of its Senses, its Passions, and Imagination, to the
giving it all the Force and Penetration it is capable of. After which, I have
established certain Rules, which must of necessity be observed for the
Discovery of any Truth whatever: I have explained them by many Examples, that I
might make them more sensible; and have chosen those which I thought most
useful, or that included more fecund and general Truths; that they might be
read with greater Application, and be made more sensible and familiar.

Possibly it may be acknowledged, by this Essay of Method which I have given,
how necessary it is to reason only about clear and evident Ideas, and in which
we are inwardly convinced that all Nations do agree; and never to proceed to
Compound Things, till having sufficiently examined the Simple, whereon they
depend.

And if it be considered that Aristotle and his Followers have not observed the
Rules I have explained, as we ought to be assured by the Reasons I have
alleged, and by the Correspondence that may be had with the most zealous
Defenders of that Philosopher, it may be we shall despise his Doctrine, in
spite of all the Impressions which persuade such as give way to be amuz'd by
Words they do not understand.

But if we take notice of the manner of Monsieur des Cartes's Philosophizing,
we cannot doubt of the Solidity of his Philosophy: For I have sufficiently
shown that he reasons but upon distinct and evident Ideas; beginning with most
Simple Things, and afterward passing on to the more Compound, which depend on
them. Those who shall read the Works of that Learned Man, will have plenary
Conviction of what I say of him, provided they read them with all the
Application that is necessary to understand them: And they will feel a secret
Joy, for being born in an Age and Country so fortunate, as to free them from
the Trouble of seeking a Master to teach them Truth, among the past Ages of the
Heathens; and in the Extremities of the Earth, among Barbarians and Strangers.

But as we ought not to be very sollicitous to know the Opinions of Men, even
though we were otherwise assured they had found out Truth; so I should be very
sorry if the Esteem I manifest for Monsieur des Carts should prepossess any
Man in his behalf, and make him sit down satisfied with reading and retaining
his Opinions, without caring to be enlightened with the Light of Truth. This
would be preferring Man before GOD, and consulting him in God's stead; and
acquiescing in the obscure Answers of a Philosopher, which do not enlighten us,
to avoid the Trouble of Interrogating by our Meditation Him who answers and
enlightens us both together.

It Is a mean and unworthy thing to become the Partizan of any Sect, and to look
upon the Authors of it as infallible. And thus Monsieur des Carts, choosing
rather to make Men Disciples of Truth, than Opinionated Followers of his
Sentiments, expressly forewarns them, Not to take any thing he writes upon
Trust, and to embrace nothing but what the Force and Evidence of Reason should
constrain them to believe. He desires not, like some Philosophers, to be
credited upon his Word: He ever remembers that he is a Man; and that
disseminating his Light but by Reflection, he ought to direct the Minds of those
who would be illuminated by him, toward Him alone who can make them more
perfect by the Gift of Understanding.

The principal Advantage that can be made of Application to Study, is, the
rendering the Mind more accurate, more illuminated, more penetrating, and fit
for the Discovery of all the Truths we desire to know. But such as read the
Philosophers, with Design of remembering their Opinions, and factoring them to
others, approach not Him who is the Life and Nourishment of the Soul: Their
Mind grows blind and enervate, by their Commerce with such as can neither
strengthen nor enlighten them: They are swelled up with a spurious sort of
Learning, the Weight whereof overwhelms, and the Glittering blinds them; and
fancying to themselves they are hugely learn^d when their Heads are crammed
with the Opinions of the Ancients, they forget that they become their Disciples
who, St. Paul says, became Fools by usurping the Name of Wise. Dicentes se esse
Sapientes, stulti facti sunt.

The Method I have given will, if I mistake not, be highly advantageous to
those who desire to make use of their Reason, or to receive of God the Answers
he gives all those who can faithfully consult Him: For I think I have said what
is chiefly required to corroborate and conduct the Attention of the Mind; which
is, the natural Prayer we make to the true Master of all Men, in order to be
instructed.

But because this Natural Way of Searching out Truth is very painful, and
commonly impracticable, except in the Resolution of Questions of little Use,
the Knowledge whereof commonly more gratifies our Pride, than perfects our
Understanding; I think it my Duty to say, (that I may profitably conclude this
Work,) that the most expeditious and certain Method of discovering Truth, and
uniting our selves to God in the purest and perfectest manner possible, is, to
live as becomes true Christians; to follow exactly the Precepts of Eternal
Truth, which unites it self with us, only to reunite us with it: It Is to
listen rather to the Dictates of our Faith, than Reason; and to tend to God,
not so much by our natural Forces, which, since the Sin, are altogether languid
and inactive; as by the Assistance of Faith, by which alone God purposes to
lead us into that immense Light of Truth which will dissolve and dissipate all
our Darkness: For, in brief, it is much better, as good Men, to spend some Years
in Ignorance of certain Things, and find our selves enlightened in a Moment,
for ever; than by Natural Means, and abundance of Trouble and Application,
purchase a very imperfect Science, that shall leave us in Darkness to all
Eternity.

ILLUSTRATIONS UPON THE FOREGOING BOOKS.
The PREFACE:
Wherein is shown what should be our Opinion of the several Judgments commonly
passed on Books, that encounter Prejudices.

WHen a BOOK is first to appear in the World, one knows not whom to consult to
learn its Destiny: The Stars preside not over its Nativity, their Influences
have no Operation on it; and the most confident Astrologers dare not foretell
the diverse Risks of Fortune it must run: Truth not being of this World,
Celestial Bodies have no power over her; and whereas she is of a most spiritual
Nature, the several Positions or Combinations of Matter can contribute nothing
either to her Establishment or Ruin. Besides, the Judgments of Men are so
different in respect of the same things, that we can never more hazardously and
imprudently play the Prophet, than in presaging the happy or unfortunate
Success of a BOOK. So that every Man who ventures to be an Author, at the same
time throws himself at the Reader's Mercy, to make him or esteem him what he
pleases: But of all Authors, those who encounter Prejudices ought most
infallibly to reckon upon their Condemnation; their Works ^it too uneasy on
most Men's Minds, and if they escape the Passions of their Enemies, they are
obliged to the almighty Force of Truth for their Protection.

It Is a common Miscarriage with all Mankind, to be too precipitate in judging;
for all Men are obnoxious to Error, and only obnoxious upon this account: But
all hasty and rash Judgments are ever consonant to Prejudices; and therefore
Authors who oppugn them, cannot possibly escape Sentence from all their Judges,
who appeal to Ancient Opinions, as the Laws whereby they ought to pronounce.
For indeed most Readers are both Judge and Party, in respect of these Authors.
Their Judges they are, that Quality is incontestable; but they are a Party
likewise, being disturbed by these Authors in the possession of their ancient
Prejudices, for which they have the plea of Prescription, and to which they
have been accustomed many Years.

I confess there is Abundance of Equity, Sincerity, and good Sense in a great
many Readers; and that they sometimes are Judges rational enough to supersede
common Opinions, as not being the infallible Rules of Truth. Many there are who
retire into themselves, and consult that Inward Truth, which ought to be their
Rule to judge of all things; but very Few that consult it upon all Occasions,
and None at all who do it with all that Faithfulness and Attention, that is
necessary to judge infallibly at all times. And thus, though we might suppose
there were nothing blameable in a Treatise, which yet it would be Vanity to
pretend to, I am persuaded it would be impossible to find one single Man to
approve it in every respect; especially if his Prejudices were attacked by it;
since it is not naturally possible, that a Judge constantly provoked, affronted
and outrag'd by a Party, should do him entire Justice; or that he should give
himself the trouble of a strenuous Application to those Reasons, which at first
sight appear to him as extravagant Parodoxes, or ridiculous Parol^gisms.

But though a Man be pleased with many things in a BOOK, if he fortunes to meet
with some that are offensive, he shall seldom be wanting to speak ill of it,
but most commonly forgetful to give it any good Character. Self-love has a
thousand Motives to induce us to condemn what we dislike; and Reason in this
Instance fully justifies these Motives: since Men fancy they condemn Errors,
and defend Truth, when they defend their Prejudices, and censure those that
assault them. So that the most equitable Judges of Books that fight against
Prejudices, pass commonly such a general Sentense as is no way favorable on
their behalf. Perhaps they will say, there is something good in such a Work,
and that the Author justly opposes certain Prejudices; but yet they shall be
sure to condemn him; and as his Judges give an authoritative and grave decision
upon the point, maintaining that he carries things too far on such or such an
occasion. For when an Author is ruining Prejudices which the Reader is not
prepossessed with, whatever he shall say will seem reasonable enough: But the
same Author ever stretches things too far, when he engages the Prejudices
wherewith the Reader is too deeply tinged.

But whereas the Prejudices of different Persons are not constantly the same,
should one carefully gather the several Judgments that are made upon the same
things, it would commonly appear, that according to these Judgments there is
nothing Good; and at the same time nothing Bad, in such kind of Books: There
would be nothing good, because there is no Prejudices, but one or other
espouses; and there would be nothing bad, because there is no Prejudice
whatever but some or other condemn. In which Judgments there is so much Equity,
that should a Man pretend to make use of them to correct his Piece; he must
necessarily strike it all out for fear of leaving any thing that was Condemned,
or not to touch it for fear of expunging something that was approved. So that a
poor Author that studies to be inoffensive, finds himself perplexed on all
hands, by all the various Judgments which are pronounced both for and against
him; and unless he resolve to stand his ground, and to be reckoned obstinate in
his Opinions; he must inevitably contradict himself at every turn, and appear
in as many different Forms as there are different Heads in a whole Nation.

However, Time will do every Man Justice, and Truth which at first seems a
Chimerical and ridiculous Phantasm, by degrees grows sensible and manifest: Men
open their Eyes and contemplate her, they discover her Charms, and fall in love
with her. This Man who condemns an Author for an Opinion that he dislikes, by
chance meets with another that approves it, but condemns other Opinions which
the former receives as undeniable; each of them talk suitably to his Notion,
and each of them contradicts the other. Hence they come to examine both their
own and others Reasons afresh; they dispute, and consider, and hesitate, and
are not so ready to determine upon what they have not examined; and if they are
brought to change their Opinion, and to acknowledge that an Author is more
reasonable than was believed; there rises a secret inclination in their Breast,
which prompts them to speak as well of him for the future as they have formerly
spoken to his dishonor. Thus the Man who sticks resolutely to the Truth,
though at first he move their Spleen or Laughter, need not despair one day to
see Truth, which he defends, triumph over the Prepossession of Men. For there is
that difference between Good and Ill Books, between those which enlighten the
Mind, and those which gratify the Senses and Imagination, that the latter look
charming and delightful at first, but they fade and wither in time; whilst the
former, on the contrary, have something of a strange and discouraging nature,
which troubles and sets the Mind aghast; but in time they are relished, and so
much the better as they are more read and digested, for it is Time generally
that regulates the Price of Things.

The Books that encounter Prejudices leading to Truths through unbeaten Roads,
require much longer time than others, to obtain the Reputation their Authors
expect from them. For because Men are frequently balked in the hopes that such
sort of Performances had raised in them; but Few there are that read them;
Fewer still that approve them; almost All condemn them, whether they read them
or read them not: and though we be well assured that the trite and common Roads
lead not where we design to go, yet the fear of venturing upon such as have no
Footsteps of former Travelers, disheartens us from entering on them. So that
Men cast not so much as their Eye about them to conduct themselves, but blindly
tread in the steps of their Predecessors: Company is diverting and encouraging;
they think not what they are doing, they perceive not where they go, and often
forget the place where they design to arrive.

Men are made for a sociable Life, which to preserve, it is not enough to use
the same Tongue; we must moreover keep to the same way of Expression, and the
same road of Thinking, as other Men. We must live by Opinion, as we act by
Imitation. We then consult advantageously, agreeably, and surely for the Good
of the Body, and the Establishment of our Fortune, when we submit to the
Opinions of others, and give way to be persuaded by the Air, or sensible
Impression of the Imagination of those we hear speak. But we undergo much
Pains, and run the extreme hazard of our Fortune, when we will only hearken to
internal Truth, and reject with Scorn and Abhorrence all the Prejudices of the
Senses, and all the Opinions we have received without Examination.

Thus all those Writers who combat with Prejudices, are much mistaken if they
think by that means to recommend themselves to the Favor and Esteem of others:
Possibly if they have succeeded in their Studies, some few of the Learned will
speak honorably of their Works when they are dead; but while they live, they
must expect to be neglected by most People, and to be despised, reviled, and
persecuted, even by those that go for the wisest and most moderate sort of Men.

And indeed there are so many Reasons, and those so strong and convincing,
which oblige us to do the same as those we live with, that we have commonly
right to condemn, as Men of fantastical and capricious Spirits, such as act
contrary to others. And because Men do not sufficiently distinguish between
Acting and Thinking, they commonly are highly offended that any one should fall
upon their Prejudices. They suppose it not sufficient to the preservation of
the Rules of Civil Society, externally to comport with the received Opinions
and Customs of our Country. They pretend it is Rashness to examine common
Sentiments, and a breach of Charity to enquire after Truth; because Truth is
not so much the Bond of Civil Societies, as Customs and Opinion.

Aristotle is received in the Universities as the Rule of Truth: he is cited as
infallible; and it is a Philosophical Heresy to deny what he maintains: in a
word, he is reverenced as the Genius of Nature: and after all, Those that are
best acquainted with his Physics, cannot account for, nor perhaps are
convinced of any thing: and the Scholars, when they have finished their Course
of Philosophy, dare not declare before Men of Sense, what they have learned of
their Masters. Which, it may be, is enough with Men of Reflection, to teach them
what to think of such sort of Studies: for that Erudition which a Man must
unlearn to become Reasonable, cannot seem very solid. Yet a Man would be
thought rash, and presumptuous, who would attempt to show the Falsity of the
Reasons that Authorize so strange and unacountable a Conduct: and he would
necessarily make himself work with those, who reap advantage by it, though he
were of competent Ability to disabuse the Public.

Is it not evident, that we must make use of things that are known, to learn
what is not known? and that it would be imposing on a Frenchman, to give him a
Grammar in German Verse to teach him the German Tongue? and yet we put into the
hands of Children Despauterius's Latin Verses, to teach them Latin: Verses
intricate on all accounts; to Children that with difficulty comprehend things
that are most easy. Reason and also Experience are visibly against this
Custom: for they spend a great deal of time to learn Latin but by halves; yet
it would be temerity to find fault with it. A Chinese who knew this Custom,
could not help laughing at it; whilst in this part of the World, which we
inhabit, the wisest and most learned cannot forbear approving it.

If Prejudices thus false and palpable, and Customs so irrational, and of so
great Consequence, find so many Patrons and Defenders; how shall they submit to
Reasons that oppose the Prejudices of a purely Speculative Nature? There needs
but a very little Attention to discover that the way taken to instruct Children
is not the best; and yet it is not acknowledged Opinion and Custom carry it
against Reason and Experience. How then can we imagine that the Books which
destroy an infinite number of Prejudices, will not in many things be condemned
by those who pass for the most learned and wisest Part of Men?

It must be observed that those who go for the most understanding and ingenious
in the World, are Men that have read most Books, both good and bad: Men of a
most happy Memory, and of a most lively and comprehensive Imagination. Now this
sort of Persons, commonly judge readily on all things, without Examination.
They consult their Memory, and therein immediately find the Law, or Prejudice
by which they pronounce, without much reflection. As they think their Parts
better than other Men's, they afford little Attention to what they read: Hence
it comes, that Women and Children easily discover the Falsity of some
Prejudices which they see attacked, because they dare not judge without
examining; and that they bring all the Attention they are capable of, to what
they read: whilst Scholars, on the contrary, stick resolutely to their
Opinions, because they will not be at the Trouble of examining those of others,
when quite contrary to their preconceiv'd Notions.

As to the Attendants on the Great Men of the World, they have so many external
Adherencies, that they cannot easily retire into themselves; nor bring a
competent attention to distinguish Truth from Probability. Nevertheless they
are not extremely addicted to any kinds of Prejudices: For strongly to
prosecute a Wordly interest, neither Truth nor Probability must be relied on.
As a seeming Humility, or Civility, and external show of Temper, are Qualities
which all Men admire, and are absolutely necessary to keep up Society amongst
Proud and ambitious Spirits: Men of Worldly Designs, make their Virtue and
Desert to consist in asserting nothing, and believing nothing, as certain and
indisputable. It has ever been, and will ever be the Fashion, to look upon all
things as Problematical, and with a Gentleman-like Freedom to Treat the most
holy Truths, lest they should seem bigoted to any thing. For whereas the
Gentlemen I mention, are neither applicative nor attentive to any thing but
their Fortune; there can be no Disposition more Advantageous, or that seems
more reasonable to them, than that which the Fashion justifies. Thus the
Invaders of Prejudices, whilst they flatter on one hand, the Pride and
Remisness of these Worldly Men, are well accepted by them; but if they pretend
to assert any thing as Undeniable, and to manifest the Truth of Religion and
Christian Morality, they are looked upon as Opinionated, and as Men who avoid
one Precipice to run upon another.

What I have said, is, methinks, sufficient to conclude, what should be
answered to the different Judgments diverse Persons have pronouc'd against The
Treatise concerning the Search after Truth; and I shall make no Application,
which every Man may do himself to good purpose without any trouble. I know
indeed that every Man do will not do it; but perhaps I might seem to be the
Judge in my own Case, if I should defend my self as far as I was able. I
therefore resign up my Right to the Attentive Readers, who are the natural
Judges of Books, and I conjure them to call to Mind, the request I made in the
Preface of the foregoing Treatise, and elsewhere, Not to judge of my Opinions
but by the clear and distinct Answers they shall receive from the only Teacher
of all M^n, after having consulted him by a serious attention. For if they
consult their Prejudices, as the decisive Laws to judge of the Book, Concerning
the search after Truth; I acknowledge it to be a very ill Book, since purposely
wri^ten to detect the Falsity and Injustice of these Laws.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas the following Illustrations were composed to satisfy some particular
Persons, who desired a more special Explication of some important Truths; I
think fit to premise, that cleary to apprehend what I shall say, it will be
requisite to have some Knowledge of the Principles I have offered in the
Treatise concerning the Search after Truth. Therefore it will be the best way
not to meddle with these Observations, till after having carefully read the
whole Work for which they were made; and only to examine them at a second
reading, as they shall be found referred to by the Margin. This Caution however
is not absolutely necessary to be observed by understanding Persons, because I
have endeavored so to write these Elucidations, as that they might be read
without referring to the Book they were composed for; I know that Truth is of
all things in the World that which gives least trouble to acquire it. Men use
not willingly to collate those Passages in a Book, which have Reference to one
another; but commonly read things as they fall in their way, and understand of
them as much as they can: wherefore to accommodate my self to this Temper of
Men, I have tried to make these Remarks intelligible, even to those who have
forgotten the Places of the foregoing Treatise, whereunto they refer.
Nevertheless I desire those who will not be at the trouble of carefully
examining these Illustrations, not to condemn them of false and extravagant
Consequences, which may be deduced from want of understanding them. I have some
Reason to make this Request, not only because I have right to demand of the
Readers, who are my Judges, not to condemn without understanding me, but on
several other Accounts, which it is not necessary for me to declare in this
Place.

ILLUSTRATIONS UPON THE TREATISE Concerning the SEARCH after TRUTH.
THE FIRST ILLUSTRATION UPON THE First CHAPTER of the First BOOK. God works
whatever is real in the Motions of the Mind, and in the Determinations of them;
notwithstanding which, he is not the Author of Sin. He works whatever is real
in the Sensations of Concupiscence, and yet is not the Author of it.
SOME Persons pretend that I relinquish the Comparison of the Mind and Matter
too soon; and fancy the one has no more Power than the other to determine the
Impression which God gives it; and therefore wish me to explain (if I can) what
it is that God works in us, and what we do our selves, when we sin; since in
their Opinion, I shall be obliged by my Explication, either to grant that Man
is capable of giving himself some new Modification, or to acknowledge that God
is actually the Author of Sin.

I answer, That Faith, Reason, and my own inward Consciousness, oblige me to
quit the Comparison where I do; being every way convinced, that I have in my
self a Principle of my own Determinations, and having Reasons to persuade, that
Matter has no such Principle; which shall be proved hereafter: Mean while here
is what God operates in us, and what we do our selves, when we sin.

First, God continually drives us, by an invincible Impression, toward Good in
general. Secondly, He represents to us the Idea of a particular Good, or gives
us the Sensation of it. Lastly, He inclines us to this particular Good.

First, God drives us continually toward Good in general. For God has made us,
and still preserves us for Himself. He wills that we shall love all Good, and
is the first, or rather only Mover. In brief, this is evident from innumerable
things that I have said elsewhere, and those I speak to will not dispute it.

Secondly, God represents to us the Idea of a particular Good, or gives us the
Sensation of it: For it is he alone that enlightens us, and the surrounding
Bodies cannot act upon our Mind. In a word, we are neither our own Light, nor
our own Felicity, as I have proved at large in the Third Book, and elsewhere.

Lastly, God inclines us to this particular Good: For God inducing us to all
that is Good, by a necessary Consequence, inclines us to particular Goods, by
producing the Idea or Sensation of them in our Mind. This therefore is all that
God effects in us when we sin.

But whereas a particular Good includes not in it all Good; and the Mind,
considering it with a clear and distinct View, cannot imagine it concludes all;
God does not necessarily and invinsibly incline us to the love of it. We are
conscious of the Liberty we have to stay this Love, and of our Tendency to
proceed farther: In a word, we feel the Impression we have for Good Universal:
or, to speak as others do, we are sensible that our Will is not under any
constraint or necessity to fix upon this particular Good.

So then this is what the Sinner does: He stops, he rests, he follows not the
Impression of God, he does nothing: For Sin is Nothing. He knows that the grand
Rule he is to observe is to employ his Liberty so far as it will go; and that
he is not to fasten upon any Good, unless he be inwardly convinced it would be
offending against ORDER, to refuse to stay upon it. If he discovers not this
Rule, by the light of his Reason, he learns it at least from the secret
Reproaches of his Conscience. He is obliged then to follow the Impression he
receives for the Universal Good; and to think of other Goods besides what he
enjoys, and what he is only to make use of: For it is by thinking on other Goods
besides what he enjoys, that he can produce in himself new Determinations of
his Love, and make use of his Liberty. Now I prove that by the Impression God
gives him for Good in general, he may think of other Goods, besides that of his
present Enjoyment, it being precisely in this that the Difficulty consists.

See the 6th Chap. of Book 3. and its Illustration.
It Is a Law of Nature, that the Ideas of Objects should offer themselves to our
Mind when we desire to think of them, provided our Capacity of Thought be not
filled up by the lively and confused Sensations we receive occasionally from
the Motions in our Body. Now we can Will the thinking on all things; because
the natural Impression which carries us toward Good, reaches to all possible
Objects of our Thought: And we can at all times think on all things; because we
are united to Him who comprehends the Ideas of all things, as I have formerly
proved.

If it be true then that we can Will the considering nearly, what we already
see as afar off, since we are united with the Universal Being; and if it be
certain that, by virtue of the Laws of Nature, Ideas approach us when we desire
it; we ought thence to infer:

First, That we have a Principle of our Determinations. For it is the actual
Presence of particular Ideas, that positively determines, toward particular
Goods, the Motion we have toward Good in general; and so changes our Natural
Love, into Free and deliberate Loves: Our Consent, or Acquiescence in the
preception of a Particular Good, has nothing real or positive in it on our
Part; as I shall explain by and by.

Secondly, That the Principle of our Determinations is always free in regard to
particular Goods. For we are not invincibly inclined to love them; since we can
examine them in themselves, and compare them with the Idea which we have of the
Sovereign Good, or with other particular Goods. Thus the Principle of our
Liberty consists in this, that being made for God, and united to him, we can
always think on the true Good, or on other Goods besides those which our
Thoughts are actually engaged on.

But this, on supposition that our Sensations do not take up the Capacity of
our Mind. For to the end we may be free with the Liberty forementioned, it is
necessary not only that God should not push us, invincibly, to particular
Goods; but also that we should be able to employ our Impression for Good in
general, to the loving other Objects than those we love at present. But as
those only can be the actual Objects of our Love, which can be of our Thoughts;
and that we cannot actually think, except on those which occasion very lively
Sensations, whilst they occasion them; it is plain, that the dependence we have
upon our Body weakens our Liberty, and in many Junctures, quite destroys the
use of it. So that our Sensations obliterating our Ideas; and the Union we have
with our Body, whereby we discern only our selves, enfeebling that we have with
God, whereby all things are present to us; the Mind ought not to give way to be
shared by confused Sensations, if it would preserve entire the free Principle
of its Determinations.

From all which it is evident, that God is not the Author of Sin, and that Man
endues not himself with any new Modifications: God is not the Author of Sin;
because he continually impresses on the Sinner, who stops at a particular Good,
a Motion to go farther; gives him a Power of thinking on other things, and
tending to other Goods, than those which actually engage his Thoughts and
Affections; and commands him not to love whatever he can refuse to love without
inward Disquiet and Remorse: withal continually recalling him to his God, by
the secret Reproaches of his Reason.

It Is true that in one sense God inclines the Sinner to Love the Object of his
Sin; if this Object appears Good to a Sinner: for as most Divines say, whatever
there is of a positive nature of Act, or Motion in the Sin, proceeds from God.
But it is only by a false Judgment of our Mind that the Creatures seem good to
us; I mean capable of acting in us, and making us happy. But the Sin of a Man
consists not in his loving a particular Good; for every Good, as such, is
amiable; but in his loving only this Good, or loving it as much or more than
another that is greater; or in his loving a Good which God forbids him to
enjoy; for that the Mind being subject to the Body, See the Ilstration upon Chapter
3. Part 2. Book 6. where I explain my meaning more distinctly.
pursuant to the Fall, the Love, or rather the Enjoyment of this Good, would
increase his Concupiscence, and alienate him from the love of the supreme Good.
In a word, the Sin of Man consists in his not referring all particular Goods to
the supreme: or rather in his not considering and loving the supreme Good in
all the particular; and so not regulating his Love by the WILL of GOD, or
according to essential and necessary ORDER, of which all Men have a more or
less perfect Knowledge, as they are stricter or looser united to God; or are
more or less Sensible to the Impressions of their Senses and Passions. For our
Senses import our Soul into our whole Body; and our Passions, as it were,
export it to circumambient Objects; and so remove us from the Divine Light,
which would penetrate and illuminate us.

Nor does Man give himself new Modifications: For the Motion of Love which God
constantly imprints on us, is neither augmented nor diminished; whether we do
or do not actually love; I mean, whether this natural Motion of Love be, or be
not determined by some Idea of our Mind. Nor does this Motion cease by its
Acquiescence in the Possession of Good, as Motion of Bodies ceases by their
Rest. There is great likelihood that God pushes us at all times alike with an
even Force toward him; for he pushes us on toward Good in general, as fast as
we are capable; and we are at all times equally capable, because our Will, or
our natural Capacity of Willing, is always equal to it self. Thus, I say, the
Impression, or natural Motion, which carries us toward Good, never increases
or diminishes.

I confess we have no clear Idea, nor indeed inward Sensation of the Evenness
of that Impression, or natural Motion toward Good: But this comes from our not
knowing it by Idea, (which I have formerly See the 7th Chap. of the 3d Book*
and the Illustration upon it.
proved,) and from our not being conscious of our Faculties, whilst they do not
actually operate. We feel not what is natural and common, and always the same
in us; as the Heat and Beating of the Heart. We are even insensible of our
Habits, and whether we are deserving of the Love, or Wrath of God N^mo scit
utrum amore, vel odio dignus scit. Eccl. 4.1.
. We have perhaps infinite Faculties, which are perfectly unknown to us: For we
are not inwardly conscious of all that we are, but only of all that we feel.
Had we never felt Pain, nor desired particular Goods, we could not by our
Self-Consciousness, have told whether we are capable of feeling Pain, or of
willing those Goods: It being our Memory, and not our internal Sense, which
teaches us we are capable of feeling what we do not feel; or of being moved by
such Passions, as do not actually agitate us. There is nothing therefore that
can hinder our believing, that God draws us toward him with an equal Force,
though in a very different manner; and that he preserves in our Soul an equal
Capacity of willing, or one and the same Will, as he preserves in Matter,
collectively taken, an equal quantity of Motion. But though this should not be
certain, yet I cannot see how it can be said, that the Augmentation or
Diminution of the Natural Motion of our Soul depends on us, since we cannot be
the Cause of the Extent of our own Will.

It is moreover certain, from what I said before, That God produces and
preserves in us all that is real and positive in the particular Determinations
of the Motion of our Soul; namely, our Ideas and Sensations: For this it is
which determines our Motion toward Good in general, to particular Goods, but
not in an irresistible manner, because we have a tendency to go farther. Hence
all that is done on our part when we sin, is our not doing all we yet have the
power to do, by means of our impression toward Him who comprehends all Goods;
for all our Power is derived from our Union with Him who works all in us. Now
the principal cause of our sinning is, that preferring Enjoyment to
Examination, by reason of the Pleasure accruing to our Enjoying, and the Pain
attending our Examining; we desist to employ the Motion which is given us for
the pursuit and disquisition of Good; and we dwell upon the enjoyment of
things, which we should no more than make use of. But if we observe the Matter
nearly, we shall see that in this there is nothing real on our part, but only
an intermission and cessation of Enquiry, which corrupts, as I may say, the
Action of God in us, but yet can never destroy it. So then, when we do not sin,
What is it we do? We do all that God does in us; for we do not confine to a
particular Good, or rather a False one, the Love which God impresses on us for
the True. And when we sin, What do we do then? Nothing. For we love a false
Good, to which God does not carry us by an irresistible impression; we cease to
pursue the true Good, and frustrate the Motion God gives us toward it In some
Editions it is thus: But we love a particular Good: True; but Sin consists not
precisely in that: For all Good is amiable, and ought to be loved. Our Love is
in it self good; and even in our loving that particular Good, we follow the
Impression which God gives us. Our Sin precisely consists in our fastening upon
that particular Good the Impression which God gives us to love all Good, or
universal Good, at the time when we both might, and ought to love it. Therefore
Sin is nothing; and though God does all, he does it not. Now whilst, etc.
. Now whilst we love a particular good only, or against ORDER, we receive as
great an impression of Love from God, as if we did not fix upon it. Moreover
this particular Determination, which is neither necessary nor invincible, is
given us of God; and therefore in sinning, we produce no new Modification in
our selves.

However, I own that when we sin not, but resist Temptation, we may be said in
one sense to give our selves a new Modification; because we choose to think on
other things than the seeming Goods wherewith we are tempted. But all that we
then do, is produced by the Action which God puts in us; that is, either by our
Motion toward Good in general, or by our Will assisted by Grace; I mean,
enlightened by Knowledge, and forwarded by a preventing delectation. For in
fine, If the willing different things be supposed to be giving different
Modifications, I deny not but in this Sense, the Mind may diversely modifie it
self by the Action it receives from God.

But it is always to be observed, that this Action derived into us from God
depends upon our selves, and is not irresistible, with respect to particular
Goods. For upon the presentation of a particular Good, we are inwardly
conscious of our Liberty on its behalf, as we are of our Pleasure and Pain,
when they sensibly affect us: And the same Reason convinces us we are Free,
that convinces us we Exist; for it is the inward consciousness or feeling of our
own Thoughts, that give us to know we have a Being. And, if at the same time
that we are sensible of our Liberty, with respect to a particular Good, we
ought to doubt of it, for want of having a clear Idea thereof; we ought no less
to doubt of our Pain, and our Existence at the time of our Misery, since we
have no clear Idea either of our Soul or Pain.

It goes quite otherwise with our inward Sensation or Conscience, than with our
outward Senses. The latter always deceive us in something, when we follow their
reports: but the former never deceives us. It Is by the outward Senses I see
Colors on the surface of Bodies, that I hear Sound in the Air, that I feel
Pain in my Hand; and their Testimony deceives me, if I rely upon it: But it is
by my inward Sensation that I see Color, that I hear Sound, that I suffer
Pain; and I err not in believing I see when I see, hear when I hear, and suffer
when I suffer; provided I stop and go no farther. These things are too
self-evident to be longer insisted on. Therefore being inwardly conscious of
our Liberty, at the time of a particular Good's being present to the Mind, we
are not to be doubtful of our Freedom on its respect. But whereas this inward
Sensation is sometimes absent from our Mind, and we consult only what confused
remains it has left in our Memory; we may by the consideration of abstracted
reasons, which keep us from an inward feeling, persuade our selves that it is
impossible for Man to be free: Just as a Stoic who in want of nothing, and
Philosophizing at his Case, may imagine that Pain is no Evil, because the
Internal Sense he has of himself, does not actually convince him of the
contrary; and so he may prove, like Seneca, by reasons in one sense most true,
that it is a contradiction for the wise man to be miserable.

But though our Self-consciousness were insufficient to convince us of our
Freedom, yet Reason might evince as much: For since the light of Reason assures
us that God acts only for himself, and that he can give no Motion to us, but
what must tend toward him; the Impression toward Good in general may be
irresistible; but it is plain, that that which we have for particular Goods must
be necessarily free. For if it were invincible, we should have no Motion to
carry us to God, though he gives it only for himself; and we should be
constrained to settle on particular Goods; though GOD, ORDER and REASON, forbid
us. So that Sin could not be laid at our door, and God would be the real Cause
of our Corruptions; forasmuch as we should not be Free, but purely Natural, and
altogether necessary Agents.

Thus though inward Sensation did not teach us we were free, Reason would
discover it was necessary for Man to be created so; if we suppose him capable
of desiring particular Goods, and only capable of desiring them through the
Impression or Motion which God perpetually gives us for himself. Which likewise
may be proved by Reason. But our capacity to suffer Pain cannot be proved this
way; but can only be discovered by Conscience, or inward Sensation; and yet no
Man can doubt but a Man is liable to suffer Pain.

As we know not our Soul by any clear Idea we have of it, as I have before
explained, so it is in vain to try to discover what it is in us that terminates
the Action which God impresses, or that yields to be conquered by a resistible
Determination, and which we may change by our Will, or by our Impression
toward all Good, and our Union with him, who includes the Ideas of all Beings.
For in short, we have no clear Idea of any Modification of our Soul: Nothing
but our Internal Sense can teach us that we are, and what we are: and this only
must be consulted to convince us we are free. And its Answers are clear, and
satisfactory enough upon the Point, when we actually propose to our selves any
particular Good; for no Man whatever can doubt whether he be invinsibly
inclined to eat of a Fruit, or avoid some slight inconsiderable Pain. But if
instead of harkening to our Inward Sensation, we attend to abstracted Reasons,
which throw us off the Contemplation of our selves, possibly losing sight of
them, we may forget that we are in Being; and trying to reconcile the
prescience of God, and his absolute power over us, with our Liberty, we shall
plunge into an Error that will overturn all the Principles of Religion and
Morality.

I produce here an Objection which is usually made against what I have been
saying, which though but very weak and defective, is strong enough to give a
great many trouble to evade. The Hating of God, say they, is an Action which
does not partake of Good; and therefore is all the Sinner's, God having no part
in it: And consequently Man acts and gives himself new Modifications, by an
action which does not come from God.

I Answer, That Sinners hate not God, but because they freely and falsely judge
that he is Evil; for Good, considered as such, cannot be the Object of Hatred.
Therefore they hate God with that very Motion of Love he influences them with
toward Good. Now the Reason why they conclude he is not Good, is their making
an undue use of their Liberty; for being not convinced with irresistible
Evidence that he is not Good, they ought not to believe him Evil, nor
consequently to hate him.

In Hatred two things may be distinguished, viz. the Sensation of the Soul, and
Motion of the Will. This Sensation cannot be Evil; for it is a Modification of
the Soul, and has neither Moral Good nor Ill in it. Nor is the Motion more
corrupt, since it is not distinguishable from that of Love. For External Evil
being only the privation of Good, it is manifest, that to fly Evil, is to fly
the privation of Good, that is, to pursue Good. Wherefore all that is real and
positive, even in our Hatred of God himself, has nothing Evil in it; and the
Sinner cannot hate God, without an abominable abuse of the action which God
incessantly gives to incline him to the Love of Him.

God works whatever is real in the Sensations of Concupiscence, and yet is not
the Author of Concupiscence.
This Illustration relates to the fifth Chapter of the first Book of the Search.
AS the Difficulties that are raised about Concupiscence, are near akin to those
before explained; I think it convenient to show, that God is not the Author of
Concupiscence, though it be he that works all in us, even in the production of
sensible Pleasure.

It ought, I think to be granted for the Reasons produced in the Fifth Chapter
of the First Book of the preceding Treatise, and elsewhere, that by the natural
Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body, Man, even before the Fall, was inclined
by preventing Pleasures to the use of sensible Goods; and that as often as such
and such Traces were delineated in the principal part of his Brain, such and
such Thoughts arose in his Mind. Now those Laws were most Proper and Equitable,
for the Reasons I there have given: Which being supposed, as before the
Trangressions all things were perfectly well ordered, so Man had necessarily
that Power over his Body, as that he could prevent the production of these
Traces when he would; Order requiring that his Mind should have the Dominion
over his Body: Which Power of his Mind precisely consisted in this, that
according to its different Desires and Applications, it stopped the Communication
of Motions which were produced in his own Body by circumambient Objects, over
which his Will had not an immediate and direct Authority, as over his proper
Body: And it cannot, I think, be conceived how he could hinder the Formation of
the Traces in his Brain any other way. Therefore the Will of God, or the
general Law of Nature, which is the true Cause of the Communication of Motions,
depended on some occasions, upon the Will of Adam: For God had that
consideration for him; that he produced not without his consent new Motions in
his Body, or at least in the principal part to which his Soul was immediately
uni^ed.

Such was the Institution of Nature before the Sin. ORDER would have it so; and
consequently HE whose essential and necessary Will is always conformable to
ORDER. Which Will remaining immutably the same, the Established Order was
subverted by the first Man's Disobedience; because for the demerits of his Sin,
it was consonant to Order, that he should be Lord of nothing. It is not
reasonable that the Sinner should suspend the Communication of Motions, that
the Will of God should conform to his; In the Objection to the Article of the
Illustration upon the seventh Chapter of the second Book, I explain what I here
say in general of the loss of Power, Man had over his Body.
or that any exceptions should be made to the Law of Nature on his Behalf: In
so much that Man is subject to Concupiscence, his Mind depends on his Body; he
feels in himself indeliberate Pleasures, and involuntary and rebellious
Motions, pursuant to that most just and exact Law which unites the two Parts of
which he is composed.

Thus the formal Reason of Concupiscence, no less than that of Sin, is nothing
real and positive; being no more in Man, than the loss of the Power he had to
wave, and suspend to the Communication of Motions on some occasions: Nor are we
to admit any positive Will in God to produce it. For this loss which Man has
sustained, was not a consequence of Order, or of the immutable Will of God,
which never swerves from it, and is constantly the same; but only a consequence
of Sin, which has rendered Man unworthy of an Advantage due only to his
Innocence and Uprightness. Wherefore we may say, that not God, but Sin only,
has been the Cause of Concupiscence.

Nevertheless, God Works all that is Real and Positive in the Sensations and
Motions of Concupiscence; for God does every thing: but all that has nothing of
Evil. It Is by the general Law of Nature, that is, by the Will of God, that
sensible Objects produce in Man's Body certain Motions, and that these Motions
raise in the Soul certain Sensations, useful to the preservation of the Body,
or the Porpagation of the Species. Who then dare presume to say these things
are not good in themselves?

I know it is said that Sin is the Cause of certain Pleasures. But do they that
say it, conceive it? Can it be thought that Sin, which is nothing, should
actually produce something? Can nothing be supposed to be a (real) Cause.
However it is so said: but possibly for want of taking due pains of seriously
considering what they say; or because they are unwilling to enter on an
Explication that is contrary to the Discourses they have heard from Men, who,
it may be, talk with more Gravity and Assurance, than Reflection and Knowledge.

Sin is the Cause of Concupiscence, but not of Pleasure; as Free Will is the
Cause of Sin, though not of the natural Motion of the Soul. The Pleasure of the
Soul is good, as well as its Motion or Love: and there is nothing good but what
God does. The Rebellion of the Body, and the guilt of Pleasure, proceed from
Sin: As the Adherency of the Soul to a particular Good, or its Rest, proceeds
from the Sinner: But these are only Privations and Nothings, whereof the
Creature is capable.

Every Pleasure is Good, and likewise in some measure makes happy the
Possessour, at least for the time of the Enjoyment: But it may be said to be
evil; because instead of elevating the Mind to Him that is the true Cause of
it, through the Error of our Intellectual, and corruption of our Moral Part,
it prostrates it before sensible Objects, that only seem to produce it. Again
it is evil, in as much as it is Injustice in us who are Sinners; and
consequently meriting rather to be punished than rewarded, to oblige God
pursuant to his (Primitive) Will, to recompense us with pleasant Sensations. In
a word (not to repeat here what I have said in other places) it is evil,
because God at present forbids it, by Reason of its alienating the Mind from
himself, for whom he has made and preserves it. For that which was ordained by
God to preserve Righteous Man in his Innocence, now fixes sinful Man in his
Sin; and the Sensations of Pleasure, which he wisely established as the easiest
and most obvious Expedients to teach Man, (without calling off his Reason from
his true Good,) whether he ought to unite himself with the invironing Bodies;
at present fill the Capacity of his Mind, and fasten him on Objects incapable
of acting in him, and infinitely below him; because he looks upon these Objects
to be the true Causes of the Happiness he enjoys occasionally from them.

THE SECOND ILLUSTRATION UPON THE First CHAPTER of the First BOOK; Where I say,
That the Will cannot diversely determine its Propensity to Good, but by
commanding the Understanding to represent to it some particular Object.
IT must not be imagined that the Will commands the Understanding any other Way
than by its Desires and Motions, there being no other Action of the Will: nor
must it be believed that the Understanding obeys the Will, by producing in it
self the Ideas of Things which the Soul desires; for the Understanding acts not
at all, but only receives Light, or the Ideas of Things, through its necessary
Union with Him who comprehends all Beings in an intelligible manner, as is
explained in the Sea the Illustration upon the 6 ^h Chapter of Part II. Book
III.
Third Book.

Here then is all the Mystery; Man participates of the Sovereign Reason, and
Truth displays it self to him proportionably to his Application, and his
praying to it. Now the Desire of the Soul is a Natural Prayer, that is always
heard; it being a natural Law, that Ideas should be so much readier, and more
present to the Mind, as the Will is more earnest in desiring them. Thus,
provided our Thinking Capacity, or Understanding, be not clogged and filled up
by the confused Sensations we receive occasionally from the Motions occurring
in our Body, we should no sooner desire to think on any Object, but its Idea
would be always present to our Mind; which Idea, Experience witnessing, is so
much more present and clear, as our Desire is more importunate, and our
confused Sensations, furnished to us by the Body, less forcible and
applicative, as I have said in the foregoing Illustration.

Therefore, in saying that the Will commands the Understanding to represent to
it some particular Object, I meant no more than that the Soul, willing to
consider that Object with Attention, draws near it by her Desire; because this
Desire, consequently to the efficacious Wills of God, which are the inviolable
Laws of Nature, is the Cause of the Presence and Clearness of the Idea that
represents the Object. I could not at that time speak otherwise than I did, nor
explain my self as I do at present, as having not yet proved God the sole
Author of our Ideas, and our particular Volitions only the occasional Causes of
them. I spoke according to the common Opinion, as I have been frequently
obliged to do, because all cannot be said at once: The Reader ought to be
equitable, and give Credit for some time, if he would have Satisfaction; for
none but Geometricians pay always down in hand.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Third CHAPTER of the First BOOK; Where I say, That
Mysteries of Faith being of a Supernatural Order, we need not wonder if we want
the Evidence, since we want the Ideas of them.
WHen I say that we have no Ideas of the Mysteries of Faith, it is visible from
the foregoing and following Discourse, that I speak but of clear Ideas, which
are productive of Light and Evidence, and which give us a Comprehension of the
Object, if we may be allowed so to speak. I grant that a Peasant could not
believe, for Example, that the Son of God was made Man, or that there were
Three Persons in the Godhead, if he had no Idea of the Union of the WORD with
our Humanity, and no Notion of Person. But if these Ideas were clear, we might
by considering them, perfectly comprehend these Mysteries, and explain them to
others; and so they would be no longer ineffable Mysteries. The Word Person
has, as Ne omnino taceremus interrogati quid* tres cum tres esse fateamur; S.
Aust. de Trin. lib. 7. cap. 4. And in another place, Cum quaeritur quid tres?
Magna prorsus inopia humanum laborat Eloquium. Dictum est tamen tres personae
non ut illud diceretur, sed ne taceretur. Ibid. lib. 5. cap. 9.
St. Austin says, been applied to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, not so much
to express distinctly what they are, as not to be silent upon a Mystery whereof
we are obliged to speak.

I say here that we have no Ideas of our Mysteries, as I said elsewhere we have
no Idea of our Soul; because the Idea we have of the latter is no clearer than
those we have of the former: Therefore the Word Idea is equivocal; sometimes I
have taken it for whatever represents to the Mind any Object, whether clearly,
or confused and darkly; sometimes more generally, for whatever is the immediate
Object of the Mind; sometimes likewise for that which represents Things so
clearly to the Mind, that we may with a bare Perception discover whether such
or such Modifications do belong to them. For this Reason I have sometimes said
we Chap. 10. Book I.
had an Idea of the Soul, and sometimes denied it; See Chapter 7. Book III. and its
Illustration.
for it is difficult, and often wearisom and ungrateful to observe a too
vigorous Exactness in one's Expressions.

When an Author contradicts himself but in the Opinion of his Critics, or such
as would fain have him do it, he ought not to be much concerned at it; and if
he would satisfy by tedious Explications whatever the Malice or Ignorance of
Men might object to him, he would not only compose an ill Book, but all his
Readers would be disgusted with the Answers he gave to Objections, either
imaginary, or contrary to that equitable Temper which all the World pretends
to; for a Man cannot endure to be suspected either of Malice or Ignorance; nor
is it allowable to answer weak or invidious Objections for the most part,
except when there are Men that have urged them, and so have skreen'd the Reader
from the Reproach which such Answers seem to asperse on those that demand them.

THE ILLUSTRATION On these Words of the Fifth CHAPTER of the First BOOK, This
being the Case, it ought to be concluded that Adam was not invited to the Love
of God, and the rest of his Duty, by a preventing Pleasure; forasmuch as the
Knowledge which he had of God, as of his Good, and the Joy he was continually
possessed with, necessarily consequent to the View of his Felicity in his
uniting himself with God, were sufficient Motives to recommend his Duty to him,
and to make his Actions more meritorious than if he had been, as it were,
determined by a preventing Pleasure.
IN order to our distinct understanding all this, it must be known that we are
determined to act from only Knowledge and Pleasure; for whenever we begin to
love an Object, it is from our discovering by Reason that it is good, or feeling
by Pleasure that it is agreeable. But there is great difference between
Knowledge and Pleasure: Knowledge enlightens our Mind, and manifests the Good,
but does not actually and efficatiously incline us to the loving it; whereas
Pleasure effectually drives and determines us to love the Object that seems to
cause it. Knowledge, or Light, does not induce us of it self; but leaving us
wholly to our selves, lets us freely determine our own Motion to the Good which
it presents: Pleasure, on the contrary, anticipates our Reason, interrupts us
from consulting it, leaves us not to our own Conduct, and weakens our Liberty.

Therefore, as Adam had before his Fall, a Time appointed to merit Eternal
Happiness, and had a full and perfect Liberty to that intent; and as his Light
was sufficient to hold him closely united to God, whom he already loved by the
natural Tendency of his Soul; he ought not to be carried to his Duty by
preventing Ple^sures, which would have lessened his Merit by lessening his
Liberty. Adam might have had some sort of Right to complain of God, if he had
hindered him from meriting his Reward as he ought to do; that is, by Actions
absolutely free: And it had been a sort of injuring his Free Will, Fortissimo
quippe dimisit atque permisit facere quod vellet. Aug. de Corrupt. and Great.
cap. 12. See the 5th Dialogue of the Christian Conversations, toward the End
of the Brussels Edition.
for God to have given him that kind of Grace which is at present only
necessary to counterpoise the preventing Delights of Concupiscence. Whilst Adam
had all necessary Supplies for his Perseverance, it had been to suspect his
Virtue, and, as it were, to accuse him of Infidelity, to give him any
Prevention: It had been leaving him an Occasion of Glorying in himself, to have
taken away all Sense of the Wants possible to befall him, and Infirmities he
was obnoxious to; for I own that as yet he had neither Want nor Weakness.
Lastly, What is infinitely more considerable, it had been to render the
Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST indifferent; which certainly was the first and
greatest Design of Him who suffered all Men to be involved in Sin, that he
might show them Mercy in JESUS CHRIST, to the end that he who glories might
glory only in the LORD.

To me therefore it seems undeniable that Adam had no Sense of Preventing
Pleasures in his Duty, but it does not seem equally certain that he had a Sense
of Joy, though I suppose it here, as believing it highly probable. But to
explain my self:

There is this Difference between Preventing Pleasure and the Pleasure of Joy,
that the former precedes Reason, and the latter follows it; for Joy naturally
results from the Knowledge one has of his own Happiness or Perfections, because
he cannot consider himself as happy or perfect, but he must instantly thereupon
feel a certain Joy. As we may be conscious of our Happiness by Pleasure, or
discover it by Reason, so Joy is of two sorts; I speak not here of that which
is purely sensible, but of that which Adam might have been possessed with, as
necessarily consequent to the Knowledge he had of his Happiness in uniting
himself with God: And some Reasons there are, which make it doubtful whether he
was actually possessed of it.

The Principal of all is, that his Mind perhaps had been so taken up with it,
that it had robbed him of his Liberty, and invincibly united him to God; for
it is reasonable to believe that this Joy ought to be proportioned to the
Happiness which Adam possessed, and consequently exceeding great.

But in answer to this, I say, First, That purely Intellectual Joy leaves the
Mind to its entire Liberty, and takes up but very little of its Thinking
Capacity; wherein it differs from Sensible Joy, which commonly disturbs the
Reason, and lessens the Liberty.

I answer, Secondly, That the Happiness of Adam at the first Instant of his
Creation, did not consist in a plenary and entire Possession of the Supreme
Good, it being possible for him to lose it, and become miserable: But herein
his Happiness especially consisted, That he suffered no Evil, and was in the
good Favor of Him who must have perfected his Felicity, if he had persever'd
in his State of Innocence. Thus his Joy was not excessive; nay, it was or ought
to have been tempered with an Alloy of Fear, for he ought to have been
diffident of himself.

I answer, Lastly, That Joy does not always intend the Mind upon the true Cause
that produces it: As a Sense of Joy arises upon the Contemplation of one's own
Perfections, it is natural to believe that Prospect is the Cause of it; for
when a Thing constantly follows from another, it is naturally looked upon as one
of its Effects. Thus a Man considers himself as the Author of his own present
Happiness, he finds a secret Complacency in his Natural Perfections, he loves
himself, and thinks not of Him who operates in him in an imperceptible manner.

It Is true, Adam more distinctly knew than the greatest of Philosophers, that
God alone was able to act in him, and produce that Sense of Joy which he felt
upon the Consideration of his Happiness and Perfections. This he knew clearly
by the Light of Reason, when he attended to it, but not by any Sensation;
which, on the contrary, taught him that his Joy was a Consequence of his
Perfection, seeing he had the constant Sense of it, and that without any
Application on his part: And so this Sensation might lead him to consider his
own Perfections, and take pleasure in himself if he either forgot, or any ways
lost sight of Him whose Operations in us are not of a sensible Nature. So far
would this Joy have been from rendering him impeccable, as is pretended, that,
on the contrary, it might probably be the Occasion of his Pride and Fall. And
it is for this Reason that I say in this Chapter, that Adam ought to have taken
care not to have suffered the Capacity of his Mind to be filled with a
presumptuous Joy, kindled in his Soul upon Reflection on his own Natural
Perfections.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Fifth CHAPTER of the First BOOK; Where I say, That
Preventing Delight is the Grace of JESUS CHRIST.
THough I say in this Chapter, that Preventing Delight is the Grace which JESUS
CHRIST has particularly merited for us; and that I term it elsewhere
absolutely, The Grace of our LORD; yet this is not said as if there were no
other Grace besides this, or as if there were any but what He has merited; but
I name it so, to distinguish it from the Grace which GOD gave Adam in his
Creation, which commonly we call the Grace of the Creator: For the Grace by
which Adam might have persever'd in Innocence was chiefly a Grace of Light, or
Knowledge, as I have explained in the foregoing Reflection; because, being free
of Concupiscence, he had no need of Preventing Pleasures to resist it.

But the Grace which is at present necessary to support us in our Duty, and to
beget and keep Charity alive in us, is Preventing Delectation: For as Pleasure
produces and cherishes the Love of the Things that cause, or seem to cause it;
so Preventing Pleasures, which Bodies occasionally administer, produce and
maintain in us our Cupidity. So that Cupidity being entirely opposite to
Charity, if God did not beget and sustain in us the Latter by Preventing
Delectations, it is plain that it would be enfeebled by the Preventing Pleasures
of Concupiscence, proportionably as Concupiscence was corroborated by them.

What I here say, supposes that God leaves our Concupiscence to work in us, and
does not weaken it by an infused Abhorrence to sensible Objects, which (as a
Result from Sin) must necessarily tempt us. I speak of Things according to
ordinary procedure: But supposing that God lessens Concupiscence instead of
increasing Delectable Grace, it comes to the same thing; for it is plain that a
Balance may be put two Ways in aequilibrio, when one of the Scales is too heavy
burdened, either by adding Weight to the opposite Scale, or retrenching the
Excess of the overweighted.

Nor do I suppose it is impossible to do any good Action, without a Preventing
Delectation: Upon which Particular I have explained my self sufficiently in the
Fourth Chapter of the Third Book. And it seems too evident to be doubted, that
a Man having his Heart possessed with the Love of God, may by the Strength of
his Love, unassisted with Preventing Delight, give, for instance, a Penny to a
poor Man, or patiently suffer some little Affront. I am persuaded likewise that
this Delight is not necessary, except when the Temptation is strong, or the
Love for God weak. However, it may be said to be absolutely necessary to a
Righteous Man, whose Faith might (one would think) be resolute, and his Hope
strong enough to conquer very violent Temptations; the Joy or Fore-taste of
Eternal Happiness being capable of resisting the sensible Allurements of
transitory Goods.

It Is true, Delectation, or Actual Grace, is necessary to every good Action, if
by these Words be meant Charity, in which Sense St. Austin commonly took them:
For it is evident, that whatever is done without some Respect or other had to
God, is good for nothing. But clearing the Terms of Equivocations, and taking
Delectation in the Sense I have given, I cannot see how what I have said can be
called in question.

But see wherein the Difficulty consists: Pleasure and Love are supposed to be
one and the same thing, because seldom apart; and St. Austin does not always
distinguish them: And on this Supposition they may reasonably say as they do;
and we may conclude with St. Austin, Quod amplius nos delectat, secundum id
operemur necesse est: For certainly we will what we love; and so likewise it
may be said, that we cannot perform any good or meritorious Action, without
Delectation or Charity. Chap. 3. Book V.
But I hope to make it appear in the Explanation I shall make upon the Tract
concerning the Passions, that there is as much difference between Pleasure and
deliberate or indeliberate Love, as there is between our Knowledge and our
Love, or (to give a sensible Representation of this Difference) between the
Figure of a Body and its Motion.

THE ILLUSTRATION Upon what I have said at the Beginning of the Tenth CHAPTER
of the First BOOK, And in the Sixth CHAPTER of the Second BOOK, CONCERNING
METHOD: That it is very difficult to prove the Existence of Bodies: What we
ought to Esteem of the Proofs which are brought of their Existence.
MEN are commonly perfectly ignorant of what they presume best to understand,
and have a good Knowledge of other things, whilst they imagine they have not so
much as their Ideas. When their Senses have to do in their Judgments, they
submit to what they do not comprehend; at least to what they know but
imperfectly and confusedly. And when their Ideas are purely intellectual, (give
me leave to use such Expressions,) they will hardly admit undeniable
Demonstrations.

What Notion, for Instance, have the generality of Men, when we prove to them
most of Metaphysical Truths; when we demonstrate the Existence of a God, the
Efficacy of his Will, the Immutability of his Decrees: That there is but one
God, or true Cause, that works all in all things; but one Supreme Reason which
all Intelligent Beings participate; but one necessary Love, which is the
Principle of all created Wills? They think we pronounce Words without Sense;
that we have no Ideas of the things advanced; and that we had better say
nothing. Metaphysical Truths and Arguments are not of a sensible Nature; they
have nothing moving and affecting, and consequently leave not Conviction behind
them. Nevertheless, abstract Ideas are certainly the most distinct; and
Metaphysical Truths the most clear and evident of all other.

Men sometimes say they have no Idea of God, nor any Knowledge of his Will, and
commonly believe too what they say; but it is for want of knowing what they
know, it may be, best: For where is the Man that hesitates in answering to the
Question, Whether God is Wise, Just, or Powerful? Whether he is Divisible,
Triangular, Movable, or subject to any kind of Change whatever? Whereas we
cannot answer without scruple, and fear of being mistaken, whether certain
Qualities do or do not belong to a Subject which we have no Idea of. So again,
Who is it dares say, that God acts not by the most simple Means? That he is
irregular in his Designs? That he makes Monsters by a positive, direct, and
particular Will, and not by a kind of Necessity? In a word, That his Will is,
or may be, contrary to ORDER, whereof every Man knows something, more or less:
But if a Man had no Idea of the Will of GOD, he might at least doubt whether he
acted according to certain Laws, which he clearly conceives he is obliged to
follow, on Supposition HE will act.

Men therefore have the Ideas of things purely Intelligible; which Ideas are
much clearer than those of sensible Objects: They are better assured of the
Existence of a God, than of that of Bodies; and when they retire into
themselves, they more clearly discover certain Wills of God, by which he
produces and preserves all Beings, than those of their best Friends, or whom
they have studied all their Lives: For the Union of their Mind with God, and
that of their Will with his, that is, with the Law Eternal, or Immutable Order,
is immediate, direct, and necessary; whereas their Union with sensible Objects,
being founded only for the Preservation of their Life and Health, gives them no
Knowledge of these Objects, but as they relate to that Design.

It Is this immediate and direct Union, which is not known, says St. Austin, but
by those whose Mind is purified; that enlightens our most secret Reason, and
exhorts and moves us in the inmost Recesses of our Heart. By this we learn both
the Thoughts and the Wills of God; that is, Eternal Truths and Laws: For no one
can doubt but we know some of them with Evidence. But our Union with our
choicest Friends teaches us not evidently either what they think, or what they
will. We think we know right well, but we are most commonly mistaken, because
we receive our Information only from their Lips.

Nor can our Union, which we have through our Senses, with circumambient
Bodies, instruct us: For the Testimony of the Senses is never exactly true, but
commonly every way false, as I have made appear in this Treatise; and it is for
that Reason I say it is an harder thing than is believed, to prove positively
the Existence of Bodies, though our Senses tell us they exist; because Reason
does not so readily inform us, as we imagine; and it must be most attentively
consulted to give us a clear Resolve.

But as Men are more Sensible than Reasonable, so they more willingly listen to
the Verdict of the Senses, than the Testimony of internal Truth; and because
they have always consulted their Eyes to be assured of the Existence of Matter,
without troubling their Heads to advise with their Reason; they are surpised
to hear it said, it is hard to demonstrate it. They think they need but open
their Eyes, to see that there are Bodies; but if this does not take away all
suspicion of Illusion, they believe it abundantly sufficient to come near and
handle them; after which they can hardly conceive we can have any possible
Reasons to make us doubt of their Existence.

But if we believe our Eyes, they will tell us, that Colors are laid upon the
surface of Bodies, and Light diffused in the Air and Sun; our Ears make us hear
Sounds as undulated in the Air, and ecchoing from the ringing Bodies; and, if
we credit the Report of the other Senses, Heat will be in the Fire, Sweetness
in the Sugar, Odor in Musk, and all sensible Qualities in the Bodies which
seem to exhale or disperse them. And yet it is certain, from the Reasons I have
given in the First Book, concerning the Search after Truth, that these
Qualities are not out of the Soul that feels them, at least it is not evident
they are in the Bodies that are about us. What Reason therefore is there, from
the Reports of our always-treacherous and delusive Senses; to conclude, there
are actually Bodies without us, and that they are like those we see; I mean
those which are the immediate Object of our Soul, when we behold them with
bodily Eyes? Certainly this does not want Difficulty, whatever may be said of
it.

Farther: If the Existence of any Body may be certainly proved upon the
Testimony of our Senses, none could have better Pretense than That to which the
Soul is immediately united: The liveliest Sensation, and that which seems to
have the most necessary relation to an actually-existing Body, is Pain. And yet
it often happens that those who have lost an Arm feel most violent Pains in it
long after it has been cut off. They know well enough they want it, when they
consult their Memory, or only look upon their Body; but the Sense of Pain
deceives them: And if, as it often happens, they be supposed to have quite
forgotten what formerly they were, and to have no other Senses left them than
that whereby they feel Pain in their imaginary Arm; certainly they could not be
convinced but that they had an Arm in which they felt so violent torment.

There have been those who have believed they had Horns on their Heads; others
who have imagined they were made of Butter, or Glass, or that their Body was
not of the Shape of other Men's, but fashioned like that of a Cock, a Wolf, or
an Ox. But these, you will say, were mad Men; and I readily believe it. But their
Soul was capable of deceiving them about these things, and consequently all
other Men may fall into the same Errors, if they judge of Objects by the
Testimony of their Senses: For it must be observed, that these mad Men actually
feel themselves to be such as they think they are, and their Error consists
not in the Sensation they have, but in the Judgment they make. If they should
only say, they felt or saw themselves like Cocks, they would not be deceived:
But herein only they deceive themselves, in that they believe their Body like
that they feel; I mean, like that which is the immediate Object of their Mind,
when they consider it. And so those who believe themselves such as they really
are, are no more judicious in their Judgments they make of themselves than
these mad Men, if they judge precisely by the Testimony of their Senses; but
are to thank their Fortune more than their Reason, if they are not mistaken.

But at the Bottom, How can we be sure that those who go under the Notion of
mad Men are really what they are taken for? May we not say they are reckoned
crazed, because they have peculiar Sentiments? For it is evident, that a Man is
not reckoned mad for having the Sense of what is not, but only for having a
Sense of things quite contrary to that of others, whether their Sense be true
or false, right or wrong.

A Clown, for Example, having his Eyes so disposed as to see the Moon just such
as she is, or only so as she is beheld, or sometime may be hereafter, with
new-invented Glasses looks on her with Admiration, and cries to his Companions,
What high Mountains and deep Valleys, what Seas, The M^on when beheld with a
Telescope looks much like what is here represented.
and Lakes, and Gulphs, and Rocks, do I behold! See, says he, what a vast Sea
lies all along the East, whilst nothing but Land and Mountains extend from West
to South! Don't you see on the same hand a Mountain higher than ever we beheld?
And don't you wonder to see a Sea all over black, and an huge dreadful Gulf in
the middle of the Planet? What would his Fellows answer to such Exclamations?
Or what would they think of him? Certainly, that he was Mad, or Lunatic, and
distempered by the malign Influences of the Planet he beholds and admires: For
no Man has the same Notions, and that is enough. Thus to be mad in the Opinion
of others, there is no need to be really so, but only to have Thoughts and
Sensation different from them: For if all Men should believe themselves to be
Cocks, he that maintained he had an humane Shape would certainly go for a Fool
or a Mad Man.

But you will say, Has a Man a Beak at the end of his Nose, and a Comb upon his
Head? I suppose not; but I don't know so much, when I judge only by my Senses,
and know not how to put them to their proper use. In vain shall I try by
handling my Head and Face; for I feel my own Body, and those about me, but with
Hands whose length and figure I don't know. Nay I cannot be certainly assured
whether I have truly Hands or not; for that which makes me think I have, is,
that at the time that I seem to move them, there happen some Motions in a
particular part of my Brain, which, in the vulgar Notion, is the Seat of the
Common Sense. But it may be I have not that Part which is so generally talked
of, and so little known; at least I am not sensible of this, though I feel my
Hands; so that I have more right to believe I have Hands than that little Gland
which is still daily disputed against. But, Lastly, I know neither the Figure
nor Motions of this Gland, and yet I am assured, that by them only I can be
instructed in the Figure and Motion of my own Body, and those that are round
about me.

Well then, What are we obliged to conclude from all this? Why, that it is not a
Body that can give Light to Reason; that the Part to which the Soul is
immediately united, is neither visible nor intelligible of it self; that
neither our own nor surrounding Bodies can be the immediate Object of our Mind;
that we cannot learn from our Brain so much, as whether it actually exists,
much less whether there are circumambient Bodies: That therefore we are to fly
to the Existence of some superior Intelligence, who alone is capable of acting
in us, in such a manner as to give a real Representation of external Bodies,
without giving us any Idea of our Brain, though the Motions produced in it
serve as an Occasion to this Intelligent Being, to discover these Bodies to us:
For, in short, we see with Eyes, whose Figure we do not know, what is the
Figure of external Bodies; and though the Colors which appear on Objects, are
no livelier than those which are painted on the Optic Nerve, these are quite
hid from us, whilst we admire the Splendor of the other.

But after all, Under what Obligation is an Intelligent Being to show us Bodies
upon some Motions happening in our Brain? Again, What Necessity is there of
external Bodies for him to stir up these Motions in our Brain? Do not Sleep,
Passions, and Madness, produce these Motions, though external Bodies do not
contribute to them? Is it evident, that Bodies incapable of moving one another,
See Chapter 3. Part II. of Book VI. with the Illustration.
should communicate to those they strike, a moving Force which they have not in
themselves? But grant that Bodies move themselves, and those they strike
against; can we thence infer, that he who gives Being to all things cannot
immediately by himself stir up in our Brain the Motions to which the Ideas of
our Mind are connected? Lastly, Where Is the Contradiction, that our Soul should
receive new Ideas whilst our Brain remains without new Motions; since it is
certain the latter do not produce the former, since we have no Knowledge of
these Motions, and that God alone can represent to us our Ideas, See Chapter 6.
Part II. of Book III. with its Illustration.
as I have elsewhere proved. Therefore it is absolutely necessary (positively to
be assured of the Existence of external Bodies) to know God who gives us the
Sensation of them; and to know, that, because he is infinitely perfect, he
cannot deceive us. For if the Intelligence, who furnishes us with the Ideas of
all things, would, as I may say, divert himself, by representing Bodies as
actually existing, whilst there was nothing of them, it is plain he could
easily do it.

For these, or the like Reasons, M. des Carts, resolving to establish his
Philosophy on immovable Foundations, thought he had no right to suppose the
Existence of Bodies, nor to prove them by sensible Arguments, though highly
convincing with the common part of Mankind. Undoubtedly he knew as well as we,
that he needed but open his Eyes to see Bodies, and to draw near and handle
them, to be satisfied whether his Eyes abused him in their Reports. He well
enough knew the Mind of Man, to judge that such like Proofs had been acceptable
and welcome: But he did not seek for sensible Probabilities, nor vain and
popular Applauses; preferring despised Truth before the Glory of an unmerited
Reputation; and choosing rather to render himself ridiculous to little Souls, by
Doubts, thought by them extravagant, than to assert what he thought not certain
and undeniable.

But though M. des Carts has given the strongest Arguments that bare Reason
could furnish out for the Existence of Bodies; though it be evident, that God
is no Deceiver, and it may be said he would really deceive us, did we deceive
our selves, whilst we made a due use of our Mind, and the other Faculties,
whereof he is the Author; yet it may be affirmed, that the Existence of Matter
is not yet perfectly demonstrated: For, in fine, in point of Philosophy, we are
to believe nothing till the Evidence of it obliges us; but to make use of our
Liberty as much as we can, giving no greater Extent to our Judgments than our
Perceptions. Wherefore, when we see Bodies, we should judge only that we see
them, and that these visible or intelligible Bodies actually exist. But why
must we judge positively there is a Material World without us, like the
Intelligible World we perceive?

But, say you, we see these Bodies without us, and likewise very remote from
that we animate: We may then judge they are without us, and yet our Judgments
reach no farther than our Perceptions. But what? Don't we see Light without us,
and in the Sun, though it be not in it? But be it so: Bodies that we see
without us are really without us; for indeed it is not to be denied. But is it
not evident that there are Outnesses, and Remotenesses, and intelligible Spaces
in the intelligible World, which is the immediate Object of our Mind? The
material Body which we animate (observe it well) is not the same we see when we
behold it, I mean when we turn our corporeal Eyes upon it, but an intelligible
Body; and there are intelligible Spaces between this intelligible Body and the
intelligible Sun we see, as there are material Spaces between our Body and the
Sun which we behold. Certainly God ordained Spaces between Bodies which he
created, but he neither sees these Bodies nor these Spaces by themselves; he
can only see them by Bodies and Spaces intellectual: God derives no Knowledge
but from himself; he sees not the material World, save in the intelligible
World which he comprehends, and in the Knowledge he has of his own Will, which
gives actually Existence and Motion to all things. Therefore there are
intelligible Spaces between the intelligible Bodies which we immediately see,
as there are material Spaces between Bodies which our Eyes behold.

Now it ought to be observed, that as there is none but God who knows his Will
by himself, which produces all Beings; it is impossible to know from any other,
whether there be actually without us ^ material World like that we see; because
the material World is neither Visible, nor Intelligible of it self. Therefore
to be fully convinced of the Existence of Bodies, it is not only necessary to
demonstrate there is a God, and that he is no Deceiver; but also that this God
has assured us there is such a World actually created: Which thing I find
wanting in M* des Cartes's Works.

God speaks to the Mind, and obliges it to assent but two several ways. By
Evidence and Faith. I acknowledge that Faith obliges us to believe the
Existence of Bodies: But as to Evidence, methinks it wants something to be
perfect; and that we are not invincibly carried to believe there is any thing
Existing besides God and our own Mind. It Is true, we have an extreme propension
to believe there are such things, as circumambient Bodies; So far I agree with
M. des Carts. But this Propension however natural, does not evidently force
us; but only perswasively induce us, by the impression. But we ought only to
form our Free Judgments, as Light and Evidence oblige us: for if we leave our
selves to the guidance of sensible Impressions, we shall seldom or ever be
unmistaken.

For how comes it that we err in the Judgments we make about sensible
Qualities, about the Magnitude, Figure, and Motion of Bodies, but from our
following an Impression like that which induces us to believe the Existence of
Bodies? Do not we sensibly perceive the Fire to be hot, Snow to be white, and
the Sun to be all glorious with a radiating Light? Do not we see that sensible
Qualities no less than Bodies are without us? And yet it is certain, that the
former which we see without us are not really so; or if you had rather, there
is no certainty about it. What Reason then have we to judge, that besides
intelligible Bodies which we see there are others that we behold. Or what
Evidence can a Man have, that an Impression, not only delusive, in respect of
sensible Qualities, but also in regard to the Magnitude, Figure, and Motion of
Bodies, should not be as treacherous in respect to the actual Existence of the
Bodies themselves: I ask, what Evidence can a Man have? For as to Probabilities
I grant they are not wanting.

I know very well there is this Difference between sensible Qualities, and
Bodies; that Reason much easier corrects the Impression, or natural Judgments
which relate to sensible Qualities, than those which concern the Existence of
Bodies: and likewise that all the corrections made by Reason, with reference to
sensible Qualities, perfectly comport with Religion, and Christian Morality,
and that we cannot deny the Existence of Bodies, through a Principle of
Religion.

It Is easy to conceive that Pleasure, and Pain, Heat, and even Colors, are
not Modes of corporeal Existence; that sensible Qualities in general are not
contained in the Idea we have of Matter. In a Word, that our Senses do not
represent sensible Objects, as they are in their own nature, but as they are
with reference to the preservation of our Health and Life; which is
conformable, not only to Reason, but much more to Religion, and Christian
Morality; as has been evidenced in several places of this Treatise.

But it is not so easy to be positively ascertained of the Nonexistence of
External Bodies, as it is to be positively convinced, that Pain and Heat are
not in the Bodies which seem to cause them in us. It Is most certain, at least,
that there is a possibility of outward Bodies: We have no Argument to prove
there are none, and we have a very strong inclination to believe there are; and
therefore we have more reason to conclude for the Existence than the
Nonexistence of them; and consequently it seems that we ought to believe they
are. For we are naturally inclined to follow our natural Judgment so long as
it is not positively corrigible by Light and Evidence. For every natural
Judgment coming from God may be rightly seconded by our free Judgments, when
God furnishes us not with means to manifest its falsity; And if on such
occasions we mistake, the Author of our Mind may seem in a manner to be the
Author of our Errors and Delinquencies.

This Reasoning is, possibly, good: though it must be acknowledged that it
ought not to go for an Evident Demonstration of the Existence of Bodies: For
indeed God does not irresistibly force us to consent to it; if we give our
consent, it is a free act, and we may withold it if we please: If this
arguing I have made be just, we are to believe it highly probable, that there
are Bodies; but this bare Argumentation alone ought not to give us a plenary
Conviction and Acquiescence; otherwise, it is we our selves that act, and not
God in us; it being by a free act, and consequently liable to Error, that we
consent, and not by an invincible Impression: for we believe it freely because
we will, and not because we see any obliging Evidence.

Surely nothing but Faith can convince us of the actual Existence of Bodies: We
can have no exact Demonstration of any other Being's Existence, than the
necessary: and if we warily consider it, we shall find it even impossible to
know with perfect Evidence, whether GOD is, or is not the Creator of a
Material, and sensible World; for no such Evidence is to be met with, except in
necessary Relations, which are not to be found betwixt GOD, and such a World as
this. It was possible for him not to have created it: If he has made it, it is
because he willed it, and freely willed it.

The Saints in Heaven see by an evident Light, That the FATHER begets the SON,
and that the HOLY GHOST proceeds from the FATHER and the SON; for these are
necessary Emanations: But the World being no necessary Emanation from GOD;
those who most clearly see his Being, see not evidently his External
Productions. Nevertheless I am persuaded, that the Blessed are certain of the
World's Existence; but it is because GOD assures them of it, by manifesting his
Will to them, in a manner by us unknown; and we on Earth are certain too: but
it is because Faith obliges us to believe, That GOD has created this World; and
that this Faith is conformable to our natural Judgments, or our compound
Sensations, when they are confirmed by all our Senses, corrected by our Memory,
and rectified by our Reason.

I confess, that at first sight the Proof or Principle of our Faith seems to
suppose the Existence of Bodies: Fides ex auditu. It seems to suppose Prophets,
Apostles, Sacred-Writ and Miracles; but if we closely examine it, we shall
find, that in supposing but the Appearances of Men, Prophets, Apostles, Holy
Scripture, Miracles, etc. what we have learned from these supposs'd
Appearances, stands undeniably certain; since, as I have proved in several
places of this Work, GOD only can represent to the Mind these pretended
Appearances; and He is no Deceiver. For Faith supposes all this, Now in the
Appearance of Holy Scripture, and by the Seemingness of Miracles, we learn,
That GOD has created an Heaven and an Earth, that the Word is made Flesh, and
other such like Truths, which suppose the Existence of a created World.
Therefore Faith verifies the Existence of Bodies; and all these Appearances are
actually substantiated by it. It Is needless to insist longer upon answering an
Objection, which seems too abstracted for the common part of Men; and I believe
that this will be enough to satisfy those who pretend not to be over-difficult.

From all which we are to conclude, That we both may, and ought to correct our
Natural Judgments, or compound Perceptions, which relate to the sensible
Qualities, we attribute to the Bodies that surround us, or to That we animate.
But as for natural Judgments, which relate to the actual Existence of Bodies;
though absolutely, we are not obliged to form free ones to accord with them;
yet we ought not to supersede doing it, because these natural Judgments agree
perfectly with Faith.

Finally, I have made this Explanation, chiefly to the intent we may seriously
reflect upon this Truth; That nothing but Eternal Wisdom can enlighten us, and
that all sensible Notices, wherein our Body is concerned, are fallacious; at
least are not attended with that Light, which we feel our selves obliged to
submit to. I am sensible that these Notions will not pass with the common sort
of Men; and that as they are disposed by the Superfluity, or Poverty of their
Animal Spirits, they will either ridicule, or flinch at the Reasonings I have
laid down. For the Imagination cannot endure abstract and un-ordinary Truths:
but either considers them as ghastly Specter, or ridiculous Phantasms; But I
choose rather to be the Subject of Droll, and Raillery for the strong and bold
Imagination, and the Object of Indignation, and Fear to the weak and timorous;
than to be wanting in what I owe to Truth, and to those generous Defenders of
the Mind against the Efforts of the Body, who know how to distinguish the
Responses of illuminating Wisdom, from the confused Noise of the perplexing,
and erroneous Imagination.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Fifth CHAPTER of the Second BOOK. Of the Memory, and
Spiritual Habits.
I Had no mind to speak in this Chapter of the Memory, and spiritual Habits,
for several Reasons; the chief of which is, That we have no clear Idea of our
Soul. For how can we clearly explain what are the Dispositions which the
Operations of the Soul leave in her; (which Dispositions are her Habits) whilst
we have no clear Knowledge of the Nature of our Soul? It Is plain that it is
impossible to know distinctly the Changes, whereof a Being is capable, when we
have no distinct Knowledge of the Nature of that Being. For if, for Instance,
we had no clear Idea of Extension, in vain should we endeavor to discover its
Figures. However, since I am desired to speak of a Matter which I know not in
it self; see what a compass I fetch, that I may only keep to clear Idea's.

I suppose that there is none but God who acts upon the Mind, and represents to
it the Idea's of all things; and that if the Mind perceive any Object by a very
clear and distinct Idea, it is because God represents that Idea in a most
perfect manner.

I farther suppose, that the Will of God being entirely conformable to ORDER,
and Justice, we need but to have a Right to any thing, to obtain it. The
Suppositions being laid down, which are easily conceived, the Spiritual Memory
is readily explained. For Order requiring, that Spirits, which have frequently
thought of any Object, should more easily think again upon it, and have a more
clear and lively Idea of it, that those who have but seldom considered it; The
Will of God, which continually operates by Order, represents to their
Understanding, as often as desired, the clear and lively Idea of that Object.
So that according to this Explication, the Memory, and other Habits of pure
Intelligences, consists not in an Easiness of operating, which results from any
Modifications of their Being; but in the immutable Order of God, and in a Right
the Mind obtains to those things, which have been already submitted to it. And
all the Power of the Mind immediately and solely depends on God alone; the
force or facility of acting, which all Creatures have in their Operations,
being in this Sense but the efficacious Will of the Creator.

Nor do I think we are obliged to give up this Explication, by reason of the
evil Habits of Sinners* and damned Persons. For though God does all that is Real,
and Positive in the Actions of Sinners, it is evident, by what I have said in
the first Illustration, that he is not the Author of Sin.

Nevertheless I believe, as I think I ought, that after the Action of the Soul,
there remain some Changes which dispose it to that same Action again. But as I
know them not, so I cannot explain them; for I have no clear Idea of my own
Mind, wherein to discover all the Modifications it is capable of. I believe by
Theological, and not clear and evident Proofs; See the Illustration upon the
7th Chap. of Part II. Book III.
that the Reason of pure Intelligences seeing the Objects they have before
considered, more distinctly than others, is not merely because God represents
them in a livelier and perfecter manner; but because they are really more
disposed to receive the same Action of God in them. Just as the facility of
playing on an Organ, which some have acquired, proceeds not from any greater
Force and Action, which the Animal Spirits (that are necessary to the Motion of
the Fingers) have in them, than in other Men: but from the Smoothness, and
Glibness which the Passages of the Animal Spirits have gotten by Exercise, as
in this Chapter is explained: But yet I grant the Use of Memory, and the other
Habits is unnecessary in those, who being perfectly united to God, find in his
Light, all sorts of Idea's; and in his Will, all the facility of acting that
can be desired.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Seventh CHAPTER of the Second BOOK. A Reduction of
the Proofs and Explications I have given of Original Sin: Together with the
Answer to the Objections, that I thought most urgent.
IN order to answer methodically to the Difficulties that may arise, touching
Original Sin, and its manner of Derivation from Fathers to Children; I thought
fit to exhibit in few words, what I have said on that Subject, in several
places of the foregoing Treatise. Here follow my principal Proofs, which I have
disposed after a particular fashion, to make them more sensible to those that
will consider them.

I.
God wills Order in his Works. What we clearly conceive to be agreeable to
Order, God wills; and what we conceive clearly to be repugnant to It, God wills
not: which is a Truth, manifest to all those who can consider the infinitely
perfect Being, with a steady and cleared View. Nothing can unfix, or trouble
their prospect of this Truth; whilst they clearly see, that all the
Difficulties that can be raised against this Principle, proceed but from the
Ignorance of those things which are necessary to be known to solve them.

II.
God has no other End in his Operations, than himself; this Order demands.

III.
God creates, and preserves the Mind of Man to be taken up with him, to know
and to love him; as being himself the End of his own Works; Order will have it
so. God cannot will, that a Being should love what is not amiable; or rather,
He cannot will, that what is less amiable, should be more beloved. Therefore
it is evident that Nature is corrupted, and in Disorder, since the Mind loves
Bodies that are not amiable, and that commonly more than God. Original Sin,
then, or the Corruption of Nature, needs no Proof: For every one finds plain
enough in himself a Law, which captivates and disorders him; a Law that is not
given by God, since it is contrary to Order, by which His Will is governed.

IV.
Nevertheless Man before his Fall, was admonished by preventing Sensations; and
not by clear Knowledge, whether he ought to unite to, or separate from the
encompassing Bodies; Order required it. It Is a Disorder, that the Mind should
be obliged to apply it self to them: for though it may be united to them, it is
not made for them. It ought therefore to have Knowledge of God, and Sense of
Bodies. Again; whereas Bodies are incapable of being the Good of the Mind, it
would with Regret and Pain, unite to them, if it knew them to be only what they
are, without being sensible of something in them, which is not. Wherefore the
Counterfeit Good ought to be discerned by a preventing Sensation, that it may
be loved with a Love of Instinct; and the True Good ought to be known by a
clear Knowledge, that it may be loved with a rational Love, and a Love of
Choice. Lastly, Man being made, and preserved by God, to know, and love him;
ought not to have the Capacity of his Mind either possessed, or shared in
spite of him, with the Knowledge of the infinite Figures, and Configurations
of Bodies about him, or of that he animates; and yet to know by a clear
Knowledge, Whether such a Fruit, at such a Season, be fit for Nourishment of
his Body, manifestly requires the Intelligence of so many things, and the
making so many Argumentations, as would quite fill up the most comprehensive of
created Minds.

V.
But though the first Man was advertised by preventing Sensations, Whether he
ought, or ought not to make use of surrounding Bodies, yet he was not moved by
involuntary, and rebellious Passions; and he obliterated out of his Mind the
Idea's of sensible things, when he pleased, whether he used them or not;
because Order would have it so. The Mind may be united to a Body, but it should
command it, and not depend on it. Again, All the Love which God invests us
with, ought to terminate on him, because he produces nothing in us but what is
for himself. Lastly, Bodies are not amiable; but below what within us is
capable of loving. Therefore in the first Institution of Nature, Bodies could
not turn our Mind toward them, nor incline it to consider them, and love them,
as its Goods.

VI.
The Bodies about us act not on our Soul, save when they produce some Motions
in our Body, and that these Motions are communicated to the principal Part of
our Brain. For it is by the Changes which happen in this Part, that the Soul
changes her self, and finds her self moved by sensible Objects. This I have
sufficiently proved, and Experience demonstrates the same. Which being
supposed, it is clear, from the preceding Article, that Adam stopped when he
pleased, the Motions communicated to his Body, at least those communicated to
the principal part of his Brain: Order willed it so; and consequently He whose
Will always conforms to Order, and who can do nothing against It though He be
Almighty. Thus Man might, on certain Occasions, suspend the Natural Law of the
Communication of Motions, seeing he was not tainted with Concupisence, nor did
he feel in himself any involuntary and rebellious Motions.

VII.
But Adam lost that Power by sinning; Order would have it so: for it is not
reasonable, that in Favor of a Sinner, and a Rebel, there should be any other
Exceptions, to the general Law of the Communication of Motions, than what are
absolutely necessary to the Preservation of our Life and Civil Society.
Therefore the Body of Man being continually shaken, by the Action of sensible
Objects, and his Soul agitated by all the Concussions of the principal part of
his Brain, he is become a dependent on the Body, to which he was only united,
and over which he had a Sovereignty before his Fall.

VIII.
Let us see now how the first Man was capable of sinning. It is natural to love
Pleasure, and to taste it; and this was not forbidden Adam. The Case is the same
with Joy: one may rejoice at the sight of his Natural Perfections; That is not
evil in it self. Man was made to be happy, and it is Pleasure and Joy which
actually beatifie and content: Adam therefore tasted Pleasure in the use of
sensible Goods; and he felt a Joy upon viewing his own Perfections: For it is
impossible to consider ones self, as happy, or perfect, and not be possessed
with it. He felt no such Pleasure in his Duty; for though he knew God was his
Good, it was not in a sensible way; as I have proved in several places. So the
Joy he might find in his Duty, was not very sensible; which being supposed, we
conclude, That whereas the first Man had not an infinite Capacity of Mind, his
Pleasure, or his Joy weakened its clear sight, which gave him to know, That God
was his Good, and that he ought only to love him. For Pleasure is in the Soul,
and the Modification of it; and therefore fills up our Capacity of Thought,
proportionably as it affect and works on us: this is a thing which we learn by
Experience, or rather from that inward Sensation we have of our selves. We may
then conceive, That the first Man having insensibly suffered the Capacity of
his Mind, to be possessed, or divided, by the lively Sense of a presumptuous
Joy, or, it may be, some Love, or sensible Pleasure; the Presence of God, and
the Consideration of his Duty were eras'd from his Mind, for neglecting
courageously to pursue his Light in the Search of his True Good: so this
Distraction made him capable of falling. For his principal Grace and strength
was his Light, and the clear Knowledge of his Duty; forasmuch as then he had no
need of preventing Delights, which are now necessary to oppose to Concupisence.

IX.
And it must be observed, that neither the preventing Sense of Pleasure, which
Adam felt in the use of the Goods of the Body, nor the Joy that possessed him,
when reflecting on his own Happiness or Perfection, was the true Cause of his
Fall; for he knew very well, that none but God could give him that Sense of
Pleasure or Joy: and so he in Duty should have loved him only, forasmuch as
none merits our Love, save the true Cause of our Felicity. As nothing
perturbated his Knowledge and Light, whilst he strove to keep it pure and
incorrupt; so he might, and ought to have expunged from his Mind, those
Sensations which divided it, and which endangered its falling off, and losing
sight of him, who strengthened, and enlightened it. He ought to have well
remembered, that if God offered himself not to his Sense, but only his
Understanding, as his Good, it was to afford him a readier way to merit his
Reward, by a continual Exercise of his Liberty.

Supposing then, That Adam and Eve have sinned, and consequently thereupon felt
in themselves involuntary and rebellio^s Motions; I say, That their Children
must needs be born Sinners, and subject, as they were, to Motions of
Concupiscence. See my Reasons for it.

X.
I have proved at large, in the Chapter that occasioned this Discourse, that
there is such a Communication between the Brain of the Mother, and that of the
Child, that all the Motions and Traces excited in the former, are stirred up in
the latter. Therefore as the Soul of the Infant is united to its Body, at the
very instant of its Creation, it being the Conformation of the Body, which
obliges God, in consequence of his general Will, to inform it with a Soul; it is
plain, that at the very moment of this Soul's Creation, it has corrupt
Inclinations, and turns toward the Body: since it has, from that same moment,
^nclinations answerable to the Motions that are actually in the Brain it is
united to.

XI.
But because it is a Disorder, That the Mind should propend to Bodies, and
expend its Love upon them; the Infant is a Sinner, and in Disorder, as soon as
out of the Hands of his Maker. God, who is the Lover of Order, hates him in
this Estate; notwithstanding his Sin is not free and eligible. But his Mother
conceived him in Iniquity, because of the Communication established by the
Order of Nature, betwixt her Brain, and the Brain of her Infant.

XII.
Now this Communication is very good in its Institution, for several Reasons.
First, Because useful, and it may be, necessary to the Conformation of the
Foetus. Secondly, Because the Infant, by this means, might have some
Intercourse with his Parents; it being but reasonable, that he should know, to
whom he was obliged for his Body, which he animated. Lastly, He could not, but
by help of this Communication, know external Occurrences, and think of them, as
he should do. Having a Body, 'twas fit he should have Thoughts relating to it,
and not be hood-winked to the Works of God, amongst which he lived. There are,
likely, many other Reasons for this Communication than those I have given; but
these are sufficient to justify it, and to cover His Conduct from Censure and
Reproach, every Will of whom is necessarily conformable to ORDER.

XIII.
However, there is no Reason, that the Infant, in spite of his Will, should
receive the Traces of sensible Objects. If the Souls of Children were created
but one moment before they were united to their Bodies; if they were but an
instant in a State of Innocence and Order; they would have plenary Right and
Power, from the necessity of Order, or of the Eternal Law, to suspend that
Communication: just as the first Man, before his Sin, stopped when he pleased the
Motions which arose in him; Order requiring, That the Body should be obedient
to the Mind. But whereas the Souls of Children were never well-pleasing to God;
it was never reasonable, that God on their behalf should dispense with the Law
of the Communication of Motions; and so it is just that Infants should be born
Sinners, and in Disorder. And the Order of Nature, which is just, and
equitable, was not the Cause of their Sin; but the Sin of their Progenitors. In
which sense it is not just and reasonable, that a sinful Father should
procreate Children perfecter than himself, or that they should have a Dominion
over their Bodies, which their Mother has not over her own.

XIV.
It Is true, That after the Sin of Adam, which ruined and corrupted all things,
God might by changing something in the Order of Nature, have remedied the
Disorder which that Sin had caused. But God changes not his Will in that
manner: He wills nothing but what is just, and what He once wills, He ever
wills. He never corrects himself, nor repents of what he does; but his Will is
constant and immutable. His Eternal Decrees depends not on the inconstant Will
of Man, nor is it just they should be submitted to it.

XV.
But if it may be permitted to dive into the Councels of the Almighty, and to
speak our Thoughts upon the Motives, which might determine him to establish the
Order now explained, and permit the Sin of Adam; I cannot see how we can
conceive a Notion more worthy the Greatness of God, and more consonant to
Reason and Religion, than to believe his principal Design in his External
Operations, was the Incarnation of his SON, That God established the Order of
Nature, See the 5. Dialogue of Christian Conversation. Aug. in Jul. lib. 6.
cap. 3.
and permitted the Disorder which befell it, to help forward his Great Work;
that He permitted all Men to be subject to Sin, that none might glory in
himself; and suffered Concupiscence in the Perfectest, and Holiest of Men, lest
they should take a vain Complacency in their own Persons. For upon considering
the Perfection of one's Being, it is difficult to despise it, unless, at the
same time, we contemplate, and love the Supreme Good; before whom all our
Perfection and Greatness dissolves, and falls to nothing.

I own, That Concupiscence may be the occasion of our Merit, and that it is most
just the Mind should for a Season follow Order with Pain and Difficulty, that
it may merit to be eternally subject to it with Ease and Pleasure. I grant,
That upon that Prospect God might have permitted Concupiscence, when he foresaw
the Sin. But Concupiscence not being absolutely necessary to our Meriting, if
God permitted it, it was, That Man might be able to do no good, without the
Aids which JESUS CHRIST has merited for him: and that he might not glory in his
own strength. For it is visible, That a Man cannot encounter and conquer
himself, unless animated by the Spirit of Christ, who, as Head of the Faithful,
inspires them with quite opposite Sentiments to those of Concupiscence, derived
to them from the Original Man.

XVI.
Supposing then, That Infants are born with Concupiscence, it is plain they are
effectively Sinners, since their Heart is set upon Bodies as much as it is
capable: there is as yet in their Will but one Love, and that disordered and
corrupt; and so they have nothing in them that can be the Object of the Love of
God, because he cannot love Disorder.

XVII.
But when they have been regenerated in JESUS CHRIST, that is, when their Heart
has been converted to God, either by an actual Motion of Love, or by an
internal Disposition, like that which remains after an Act of Loving God: then
Concupiscence is no more a Sin in them, because it does not solely possess the
Heart, nor domineer any longer in it. Habitual Love, which remain^ in them,
through the Grace of Baptism in our LORD, is more free, or more strong than
that which is in them through the Contagion of Concupiscence derived from Adam.
They are like the Just, who in their Sleep obey the Motions of Concupiscence,
yet lose not the Grace of their Baptism, because their Consent to these Motions
is involuntary.

XVIII.
It should not be thought strange, That I believe it possible for Children to
love God with a Love of Choice, at the time of their Baptism. For since the
Second Adam is contrary to the First, why should he not, at the time of
Regeneration, deliver Children from the Servitude of their Body, whereunto they
are subjected by the First? That being enlightened and quickened by a lively and
efficacious Grace, to the loving of God, they may love him with a free and
rational Love, without being obstructed by the first Adam. You say, it is not
observable, that their Body for a moment leaves acting on the Mind: But is that
such a Wonder, that we cannot see what is not visible? One single Instant is
sufficient for the Exercise of that Act of Love: And as it may be performed in
the Soul, without imprinting any Footsteps in the Brain, it is no more to be
admired, that the Adult in their Baptism do not always mind it; for we have no
Memory of things which are not registered in the Traces of the Brain.

XIX.
St. Paul teaches us, That the Old Man, or Concupiscence, is crucified with
JESUS CHRIST, and that we are dead and buried with him by Baptism. What means
this, but that then we are delivered from the Warring of the Body against the
Mind, and that Concupiscence is as it were Mortified in that moment: It Is true
it revives; but having been destroyed, and thereby left Children in a State of
loving God, it can do them no harm by its reviving. For when there are two
Loves in the Heart, a Natural, and a Free, Order will, that the Free be only
respected. But if Infants in Baptism loved God by an Act in no wise free, and
afterward loved Bodies by many Acts of the same Species; God could not
perhaps, according to Order, have more respect to one single Act, than to many,
which were all natural, and without Liberty. Or rather, if their contrary Love^
were equal in force, he must have respect to that which was last; by the same
Reason, that when there has been successively in an Heart Two Free-Loves
contrary to each other, God has always respect to the Last, since Grace is
destroyed by any one Mortal Sin.

XX.
Nevertheless, it cannot be denied, but God may justify the Infant, without
interrupting the Dominion of his Body over his Mind; or convert his Will
toward him, by depositing in his Soul a Disposition like that, which remains
after an Actual Motion of our Loving God. But that way of acting, I doubt,
seems less Natural than the Other; for it cannot clearly be conceived what
these remaining Dispositions can be. It Is true, that ought not to be much
admired; since having no clear Idea of our Soul, See Chapter 7. Part II. of Book
II. with its Illustration.
as I have elsewhere proved, we need not wonder if we know not all the
Modifications it is capable of. But the Mind cannot be fully satisfied upon
things, which it does not clearly conceive; and without recourse to an
extraordinary Miracle, we cannot see what can give the Soul these Dispositions,
without a preceding Act: surely it cannot be done by ways that seem most plain
and simple. Whereas the second Adam acting on the baptized Infant's Mind for
one moment, the contrary to what the first Adam produced in it before,
Regeneration is performed by the usual ways of acting which God takes in his
sanctifying the Adult: For the Infant, at that moment, being void of Sensations
and Passions, which divide its Thinking and Willing Capacity, has nothing to
encumber it, and prevent its knowing and loving its true Good. This is all I
say at present, because it is not necessary to know precisely, how Regeneration
of Infants is performed; provided we admit in them a true Regeneration, or an
inward and real Justification, caused by Acts, or at least by Habits of Faith,
Hope, and Charity. My offering an Explication, so repugnant to Prejudices, is
designed for the Satisfaction of those, who will not allow of Spiritual Habits,
and to prove to them the Possibility of the Regeneration of Infants: For the
Notion of Imputation seems to me to include a manifest Contradiction; it being
impossible, That God should consider his Creatures as Righteous, and actually
love them, whilst they are actually in Disorder and Corruption. Though he may
for his SON's sake have a Design to re-instate them in ORDER, and love them
when re-instated.

OBJECTIONS Against the Proofs and Explications of Original Sin.
OBJECTION against the first Article.
GOD wills Order, it is true; but it is his Will that makes it: it does not
suppose it: Whatever God wills is in Order purely for this Reason that God
wills it: At every Objection turn to the Article it is made against.
If God wills that Minds should be subject to Bodies, should love and fear
them, there is no disorder in all this. If God willed that two times two should
not be four, we should not speak false, in saying two times two were not four:
For it would be a Truth. God is the Principle of all Truth: and the Master of
all Order: he supposes nothing; neither Truth, nor Order: but makes all.

ANSWER.
Then all is thrown in Confusion. There is no longer any Science nor Morality,
nor undeniable Proofs of our Religion. Which consequence is evident to any Man
who clearly comprehends this false Principle; That God produces Order and Truth
by a Will absolutely Free. But this is not to answer it.

I Answer then that God can neither do nor will any thing without knowledge;
that therefore his Will supposes something; but what it supposes is nothing of
a created nature, Order, Truth, Eternal Wisdom, is the Exemplar of all the
Works of God: which Wisdom is not made; God who makes all things never made it,
though he constantly begets it by the necessity of his Being.

Whatever God wills is in Order, for that sole reason, that he wills it: No
body denies it. But this is because God cannot act against himself, that is,
his Wisdom and his Knowledge. He is at liberty not to produce any External
Work: but supposing he will act; he cannot act otherways than by the immutable
order of his Wisdom, which he necessarily Loves. For Religion and Reason teach
me that he works nothing without his SON, without his WORD, without his WISDOM.
Therefore I fear not to affirm, that God cannot positively will that the mind
should be subject to the Body. Because that Wisdom, whereby God wills, whatever
he wills, makes me clearly understand it is contrary to Order: And I see this
clearly in that same Wisdom; because it is the Sovereign and Universal Reason,
which is participated by all Spirits, for which all Intelligences are created,
and by which all Men are Reasonable. For no Man is his own Reason, Light, and
Wisdom; unless it be when his Reason is Particular, his Light, an Ignis fatuus,
and his Wisdom Folly.

As the Generality of Men know not distinctly that it is only Eternal Wisdom
which enlightens them; and that Intelligible Ideas which are the Immediate
object of their Mind, are not created; so they imagine, that Eternal Laws and
Immutable Truths, receive their Establishment from a free will of God. And this
is what occasioned M. des Carts to say, that God was able to effect that twice
four should not be eight; and that the three Angles of a Triangle should not be
equal to two Rights. Because there is no Order, says he, no Law, no Reason,
Goodness or Truth, but depends on God, and that is he who from all Eternity,
has ordained and established, as supreme Legislator, Eternal Truths. Answer to
the sixth Objection against his Meditations. Art. 6. Art. 8.
This Learned Man did not observe that there was an Order, a Law, a Sovereign
Reason Coeternal with God, and necessarily loved by him, and accordingly to
which he must necessarily act, supposing he will act. For God is indifferent as
to his External Workings, but the manner of his working, though he be perfectly
free, is not indifferent to him. He always acts in the wisest and perfectest
manner possible: he constantly follows immutable, and necessary Order. Thus God
is at liberty not to make either Spirits, or Bodies, but if he creates these
two Kinds of Beings, See the Illustration upon the 6th Chap. of Part II. Book
III.
he must create them by the simplest ways, and situate them in the most perfect
Order. He may for Example unite Spirits to Bodies, but I maintain that he
cannot subject them thereunto, unless in pursuance of the Order which he always
follows, the Sin of Spirits obliges him to use them in that manner: as I have
already explained in the seventh Article, and in the first Explication toward
the end.

To anticipate some instances that might be urged against me, I think it
necessary to say that Men are to blame to consult themselves when they would
know what God can do or will. They are not to judge of his wills by the inward
sense they have of their own Inclinations. For otherwise they would often make
him an unjust, cruel, sinful, instead of an Almighty God. They ought to lay
aside the general Principle of their Prejudices, which disposes them to judge
of all things with reference to themselves, and not to attribute to God what
they do not clearly conceive to be included in the Idea of a Being infinitely
perfect. For they ought not to judge of things save by clear Ideas. And then
the God they worship, will not be like those of Antiquity, Cruel, Adulterous,
Voluptious, as the Persons who have imagined them: nor will he resemble the God
of some Christians, who to make him as powerful as the Sinner wishes him,
ascribe to him an actual power of acting against all Order, of leaving Sin
unpunisht, and of condemning to eternal Torments Persons never so righteous and
Innocent.

Second OBJECTION against the First Article.
If God wills Order, what is it that makes Monsters, I say not amongst Men; for
they have sinned, but amongst Animals and Plants? What is the cause of the
general corruption of the Air which breeds so many Diseases? By what Order is
it that the Seasons are so irregular, and that the Sun and the Frost burn up
and kill the Fruits of the Earth? Is it to act with Wisdom and Order, to
furnis^ an Animal with parts quite useless, and to congeal the Fruits after
they are perfectly formed? Is not this rather because God does what he pleases,
and that his power supersedes all Order and Rule? For to mention things of
greater Importance than the Fruits of the Earth, wherewith he may do as he sees
good: the Clay whereof God makes Vessels of wrath, is the same with that which
he fashions Vessels of Mercy:

ANSWER.
These are the difficulties which serve only to obscure the Truth, as
proceeding from the darkness of the Mind. We know that God is just: we see that
the wicked are Happy: ought we to deny what we see; ought we to doubt of what
we know, because we may possibly be so stupid as not to know, and so Libertine
as not to believe what Religion teaches us of future Torments? So we know that
God is Wise; and all that he does is Good; mean while we see Monsters, or
defective Works. What are we to believe that God is out of his aim, or that
these Monsters are not his handiwork? Certainly if we have sense and constancy
of Mind, we shall believe neither the one nor the other. For it is manifest that
God does all, and that whatever he does is as perfect as possible, with
relation to the simplicity and fewness of the means he imploys, in the
Formation of his Work. We must hold fast to what we see, and not quit our
ground for any difficulties impossible to be resolved; when our Ignorance is
the cause of that Impossibility. If Ignorance must raise Difficulties, and such
like Difficulties overthrow the best established Opinions, what will remain
certain among Men who know not all things? What? Shall not the brightest Lights
be able to disperse the least Darkness; and shall any little shadow Eclipse the
clearest and the liveliest Light?

But though the answering such sort of Difficulties might be dispensed with,
without Prejudice to the fore-establis^t Principle; yet it is not amiss to show
they are not unanswerable. For the Mind of Man is so unjust in its Judgments,
that it may possibly prefer the Opinions which seem to result from these
imaginary Difficulties, before certain Truths, which no Man can doubt of, but
because he will; and with that design ceases to examine them. I say then that
God wills order, though there are Monsters; and it is moreover because God wills
order, that there are Monsters; and this is my reason.

Order requires that the Laws of nature whereby God produces that infinite
Variety, so conspicuous in the World, should be very simple, and very few in
number. Now it is the simplicity of these general Laws, which in some particular
Junctures, and because of the Disposition of the subject, produces irregular
Motions, or rather Monstrous Combinations: and consequently God's willing order
is the cause of these Monsters. Thus God does not positively or directly will
the Existence of Monsters: but he positively wills certain Laws of the
Communication of Motions, whereof Monsters are the necessary consequences;
because these Laws, though of a most simple kind, are nevertheless capable of
producing that variety of forms which cannot be sufficiently admired.

For Example: In consequence of the general Laws of the Communication of
Motions, there are some Bodies which are driven near the Center of the Earth.
The Body of a Man, or an Animal is one of these: that which upholds him in the
Air breaks under his Feet: is it just, or according to Order, that God should
change his general Will, for that particular Case? Surely it seems not
probable. That Animal therefore must necessarily break, or maim its Body. And
thus we ought to argue about the generation of Monsters.

ORDER requires that all Beings should have what is necessary to their
Preservation, and the Propagation of the Species; provided this may be done by
most simple Means, and worthy the Wisdom of God. And so we see that Animals, as
also Plants have general Means to preserve themselves, and to continue their
Species: and if some Animals fail thereof, in some particular Occasions, it is
because these general Laws, whereby they were formed, reach not these private
Emergencies, because they respect not Animals separately, but generally extend
to all Beings; and that the Good of the Public must be preferred before
Particular Advantages.

It Is evident, That if God made but one Animal, it would not be Monstrous: But
Order would require, That he should not make that Animal by the same Laws that
he at present forms all others; for the Action of God must be proportioned to
his Design. By the Laws of Nature he designs not the making one Animal, but a
whole World; and he must make it by the simpliest Means, as Order requires.
It Is enough then that the World be not monstrous, or that the general Effects
be suitable to the general Laws, to vindicate the Work of God from Censure and
Reproach.

If, for all particular Changes, God had instituted so many particular Laws; or
if He had constituted in every Being a particular Nature or Principle, of all
the Motions that arrive in it; I confess it would be hard to ju^tifie his
Wisdom against so visible Disorders. We should perhaps be forced to confess,
either that God wills not Order, or that he knows not how, or is not able to
rectify Disorder. For, in short, it seems to me impossible to ascribe an
almost infinite Number of second Causes, of natural Forces, Virtues, Qualities
and Faculties, to what we call the Sports and Disorders of Nature, with a Salvo
to the infinite Power and Wisdom of the Author of all things.

OBJECTION against the Second Article.
GOD can never act for Himself. A wise Being will do nothing useless; but
whatever God should do for himself, would be useless; because he wants nothing.
God wills nothing for himself, if by the Necessity of his Essence he has all
the Perfection he can desire. And if God desires nothing for himself, he works
nothing for himself, since he works only by the Efficacy of his Will. The
Nature of Good, is to be communicative and diffusive; it is to be useful to
others, and not to it self; it is to seek out; it is, if it be possible, to
create Persons whom it may make happy. Therefore it is a Contradiction, for
God, who is essentially and supremely good, to act for himself.

ANSWER.
GOD may be said to act for himself two ways; either with intent to derive some
Advantage from what he does; or to the end, his Creature may find its Happiness
and Perfection in him. I enquire not, at present, whether God acts for himself,
in the first sense; and whether to receive an Honor worthy of himself, he has
made, and restored all things by his SON, in whom, according to the Scripture,
all things subsist. I only assert, that God cannot create, and preserve
Spirits, in order to know, and love created Beings. It Is an Immutable, Eternal,
and necessary Law. That they should know, and love God; as I have explained in
the Third Article. Thus this Objection does not impugn my Principle, but, on
the contrary, corroborates it: and if it be certain, that it is the Nature of
Good to disseminate, and communicate it self abroad, (for I stand not to
examine that Axiom) it is evident, That God being essentially and supreamly
Good, it is no Contradiction he should act in the Sense I intended.

OBJECTION against the Fourth Article.
Ignorance being a Consequence of Sin, Adam before his Fall had a perfect
Knowledge of the Nature of his own Body, and of those he lived amongst: He
must, for Example, have been perfectly acquainted with the Nature of all
Animals, to give them, as he did, such Names as agreed to them.

ANSWER.
It Is a Mistake: Ignorance is neither an Evil, nor a Consequence of Sin. It Is
Error or Blindness of Mind, which is both one, and the other. None but God
knows all things without any Shadow of Ignorance; Ignorance is incident to the
brightest, and most enlightened Intelligences. Whatever is finite cannot
comprehend Infinity: and thus there is no Spirit that can comprehend only all
the Properties of Triangles; Adam knew, the first minute of his Creation,
whatever was requisite he should know, and nothing more; and it was to no
purpose for him to know exactly the Disposition of all the Parts of his Body,
and of those he made use of: the Reasons are to be seen in this Article, and
elsewhere.

The Imposition of Names, in Scripture, And calls them all by their names Ps.
47.
rather denotes the Authority than the perfect Knowledge of the Imposer. As the
Lord of Heaven had made Adam the Lord of Earth, he conceded him the Privilege
of giving Names to the Animals, as he himself had done to the Stars. It Is
evident, That Sounds, or Words, neither have, nor can have any natural relation
to the things they signify; let the Divine Plato, and the Mysterious
Pythagoras say what they please of it. One might perhaps explain the Nature of
an Horse, or an Ox, in an entire Book, but a Word is not a Book: and it is
ridiculous to imagine, That Monosyllables, as Sus, which in Hebrew signifies a
Horse, and S^bor, which signifies an Ox, should represent the Nature of these
Animals. Notwithstanding there is great probability these Names were imposed by
Adam, since they are found in Genesis: Chap. 1.19.
the Author whereof assures us, That the Names which Adam gave the Creatures
were the same which were in use in his time; for I cannot see what else can be
meant by these Words, Omne quod vocavit Adam animae viventis, ipsum est nomen
ejus. And whatsoever Adam called every living Creature, that was the Name
thereof

But I grant that Adam gave Names to Animals, which have some reference to
their Nature, and I subscribe to the Learned Etymologies that an Author of this
Age gives us of them. I will that he called domestic Animals Behemoth, because
of their keeping silence; the Ram Ajil, because he is strong; the Buck Sair,
because swift; the Hog Chazir, because of his little Eyes; the Ass Chamor,
because in the East Country red Asses are common. But I cannot conceive that any
more is requisite, than to open the Eyes to know if a Buck be swift, an Ass
red, and whether a Hog has little or great Eyes. Adam calls by the Name of Beir
and Behemah, what we term a Brute, or a great domestic Creature, because these
Beasts are mute and stupid. What should we thence conclude? That he knew
perfectly their Nature? That is not evident: I should rather be apprehensive,
lest it should be thence concluded, That Adam, being simple enough to put a
Question to an Ox, as being the largest of domestic Animals, and wondering
that he could not answer him, despised him, and named by a Term of Contempt,
Beir and Behemah.

Second OBJECTION against the Fourth Article.
Some preventing Sensations are incommodious and painful: Adam was just and
innocent, and consequently ought not to feel the smart of them. He ought then
on all occasions to be guided by Reason and Knowledge, and not by preventing
Sensations, like those we have at present.

ANSWER.
I confess there are preventing Sensations, which are disagreeable and painful,
but they never occasioned any Pain in the first Man; because in the instant
they gave him any, he, by an Act of his Will, withstood the Impression, and, in
the very instant of that Volition, he ceased to be touched with it. These
Sensations did only respectfully caution him what ought to be done, or omitted;
and did not incommode his Felicity: They but made him sensible that he was
capable of losing it; and that he who made him Happy, could punish and make him
miserable, if he failed in his Fidelity.

But to persuade our selves, that the first Man was never overtaken with the
Sense of any lively Pain, we need but consider these two things. First, that
Pain is very light, when the Motions it is annexed to are very languid; because
it is always proportioned to the force of the Motions, that are communicated to
the chief part of the Brain. Secondly, That is of the Nature of Motion, to
include a Succession of Time; and it cannot be violent at the first instant of
its Communication. Which being supposed, it is plain, that the first Man never
felt a violent surprising Pain, that was capable to make him miserable; because
he could put a stop to the Motions that caused it. But if so be, he could
effectually stop them, at the first instant of their Action, there is no doubt
but he would do it, since he was always desirous of Happiness; and that
Aversion is naturally conjoined to the Sense of Pain.

Adam therefore never suffered any violent Pain; but I think we are not obliged
to say, that he never felt any light and inconsiderable smart, such as is that
when we taste a sour Fruit, supposing it to be ripe. His Felicity had been very
tender, if so little a thing had been able to disturb it. For such Delicacy is
a sign of Weakness: for how can that Joy and Pleasure be substantial, that such
a Trifle can dissolve and annihilate? Pain never truly molests our Happiness
but when it is involuntary, and possesses us in spite of our Resistance. JESUS
CHRIST was happy, though on the Cross, in the midst of his Groans, and Agonies,
because he suffered nothing, but what he was willing to undergo. Thus Adam
suffering nothing against his will, it cannot be said we make him unhappy
before his Sin, in supposing him admonished by preventing, but respectful, and
submissive Sensations, of what he ought to avoid, for the preservation of his
Life.

OBJECTION against the Fifth Article.
Adam felt preventing Pleasures: But these are involuntary Motions; Therefore
Adam was agitated with involuntary Motions.

ANSWER.
I Answer that Adam's Sensations preceded his Reason, the proofs I have shown
for it in the Fourth Article. But I deny that they preceded his Will; or that
they stirred up in it any particular Motions. For Adam was willingly admonished
by these Sensations, what he ought to do for the preservation of his Life: But
he was never willing to be perturbated by them in spite of his Will. For
that is a Contradiction. Moreover, when he desired to apply himself to the
contemplation of Truth, without any distraction of Thought, his Senses and his
Passions kept an entire Silence. Order would it should be so; for that is a
necessary sequel of that absolute power he had over his Body.

See the Illustration upon the 3d Chap. Book V.
I answer secondly, that it is not true, that the Pleasure of the Soul is the
same thing with its Motion, and its Love. Pleasure and Love are modes of the
Souls Existence. But Pleasure has no necessary relation to the object that
seems to cause it; and Love is necessarily related unto Good. Pleasure is to
the Soul what Figure is to Body: and Motion is to Body what Love is to the
Soul. But the Motion of a Body is very different from its Figure. I grant that
the Soul which has a constant Prope^sity to Good, advances, as I may say, more
readily toward it, when instigated by a sense of Pleasure, that when
discouraged by her suffering Pain; as a Body when driven runs easier along if
it have a Spherical, than if it have a Cubical Figure. But the figure of a Body
differs from its Motion, and it may be Spherical, and yet remain at rest. It Is
true in this case it goes not with Spirits as with Bodies; those cannot feel a
Pleasure but they must be in motion: because God who only makes, and preserves
them for himself, drives them perpetually on toward good. But that does not
prove that the pleasure of the Soul, is the same thing as its Motion: For two
things, though differing from each other, may yet be always found inseparably
together.

I answer lastly, that although pleasure were not different from the Love or
Motion of the Soul, yet that which the first Man felt in the use of the goods
of the Body, did not incline him to the Loving Bodies. It Is true, Pleasure
carries the Soul toward the object, that causes it in her. But it is not the
Fruit that we eat with Pleasure, which causes the Pleasure in us. Not Bodies
but God only can act upon the Soul, and in any manner make it happy. And we are
in an Error to think that Bodies have in them, what we feel occasionally from
their presence. Adam before his Sin, being not so stupid as to imagine, that
Bodies were the causes of his Pleasures, was not carried to the love of them,
by the motions that accompanied his Pleasures. If pleasure contributed to the
fall of the first Man, it was not by working in him what at present it does in
us; But only by filling up or dividing his capacity of Thought, it effaced or
diminished in his Mind the presence of his true good, and of his Duty.

OBJECTION against the sixth Article.
What likelihood is there that the immutable Will of God had a dependence on
the will of Man, and that on Adam's behalf there were exceptions made to the
general Law of the Communication of Motions.

ANSWER.
At least it is not evident but such exception might be made; now it is evident
that immutable order requires the subjection of the Body to the Mind: and it is
a contradiction for God not to love, and will order; In the Illustration about
the nature of Ideas, I shall more particularly explain what is Order, and why
God necessarily loves it.
for God necessarily loves his Son. Therefore it was necessary before the Sin
of the first Man, that exceptions should be made in his favor to the general
Law of the Communication of Motions. This seems it may be of a too abstracted
nature: Here then is somewhat of a more sensible kind.

Man though a Sinner has the power of moving and stopping his Arm when he
pleases. Therefore according to the different Volitions of Man, the Animal
Spirits are determined to the raising, or stopping some Motions in his Body;
which certainly cannot be performed by the general Law of the Communication of
Motions. If then the will of God be still submitted to our own: why might it
not be submitted to the will of Adam? If for the good of the Body, and of civil
Society, God stops the communication of motions in Sinners, why would he not do
the like in favor of a Righteous Man, for the good of his Soul, and for the
preservation of the Union and Society with his God for whom only he was made.
As God will have no Society with Sinners, so after the Sin he deprived them of
the power they had to sequester themselves, as it were, from the Body to unite
themselves with him. But he has left them the Power of stopping or changing the
communication of Motions, with reference to the preservation of Life, and of
Civil Society. Because he was not willing to destroy his Work; having before
the construction of it, decreed according to St. Paul, to re-establish and
renew it in Jesus Christ.

OBJECTION against the Seventh Article.
Man in his present state conveys his Body all manner of ways: he moves at
pleasure all the parts of it, which are necessary to be moved for the
prosecution, and shunning of sensible good and evil: and consequently he stops
or changes every moment the natural communication of motions, not only for
trifles, and things of little importance, but also for things useless to Life
and civil Society, and even for Crimes, which violate Society, shorten Life,
and dishonor God all manner of ways. God wills order, it is true: But will
order have the laws of motions violated for the sake of Evil, and kept
inviolable on the account of Good. Why must Man lose the power of stopping the
motions which sensible objects produce in his Body, since these Motions keep
him from doing good, from repairing to God, and returning to his duty? and yet
retain the power of doing so much evil, by his Tongue and his Arm, and other
parts of his Body, whose motions depend upon his will?

ANSWER.
To the answering this Objection it must be considered, that Man having sinned
ought to have returned to his Original nothing. For being no longer in Order,
nor able to retrieve it, See the Fifth Dialogue of Christian Conversations.
he ought to cease to Exist. God loves only order, the Sinner is not in order,
and therefore not in the Love of God. The Sinner therefore cannot subsist,
since the subsistence of Creatures depends on the will of the Creator; but he
wills not that they should exist if he does not love them. The Sinner cannot by
himself regain lost order, because he cannot justify himself, and all that he
can suffer cannot atone for his offense. He must then be reduced to nothing.
But as it is unreasonable to think that God makes a Work to annihilate it, or
to let it fall into a state worse than annihilation, it is evident that God
would not have made Man, nor permitted his Sin, which he foresaw, unless he had
had in view the Incarnation of his Son; in whom all things subsist, and by whom
the Universe receives a Beauty, a Perfection, and greatness worthy of the
Wisdom and the Power of its Author.

Man* then, may be considered after his Sin without a Restorer, but under the
Expectation of one. In considering him without a Restorer, we plainly see he
ought to have no Society with God; that that he is unable of himself to make
the least approaches to him; that God must needs repel him, and severely use
him, when he offers to leave the Body to unite himself to him: that is to say,
that Man after the Sin must lose the power of getting clear of sensible
impressions, and motions of concupiscence. He ought likewise to be annihilated,
for the forementioned Reasons. But he expects a Restorer, and if we consider
him under that Expectation, we see clearly that he must subsist. He and his
Posterity, whence his Restorer is to arise; and thus it is necessary that Man
after his Sin preserve still the power of diversely moving all those parts of
the Body, whose motion may be serviceable to his Preservation.

It Is true that Men abuse daily the power they have of producing certain
motions; and that their power of moving their tongue for Example, several ways,
is the cause of innumerable Evils. But if it be minded, that power will appear
absolutely necessary to keep up Society, to comfort one another in the
Exigences of thi^ present Life, and to instruct them in Religion, which affords
hope of a Redeemer; for whom the World subsists. If we carefully examine what
are the motions we produce in us, and in what parts of our Body we can affect
them, we shall clearly see that God has left us the power of our Body no
farther than is necessary to the preservation of Life, and the cherishing and
upholding civil Society. For example, the Beating of the Heart, the Dilatation
of the Midriff, the peristaltick motion of the Guts, the Circulation of the
Spirits, and Blood, and the diverse motions of the Nerves in the Passions, are
produced in us without staying for the order of the Soul. As they ought to be
much what the same on all occasions, nothing obliges God to submit them now to
the will of Man. But the motions of the Muscles employed in stirring the
Tongue, the Arms, and Legs, being to change every minute, according to the
almost infinite diversity of good, or evil Objects all about us, it was
necessary these motions should depend on the will of Men.

But we are to remember, That God acts always by the simplest ways: and that
the Laws of Nature ought to be general; and that so, God having given us the
power of moving our Arm and Tongue, he ought not to take away that of striking
a Man unjustly, or of slandering or reproaching him. For if our natural
Faculties depended on our Designs, there would be no Uniformity nor certain
Rule in the Laws of Nature: which however must be most simple and general, to
be answerable to the Wisdom of God, and suitable to Order. So that God, in
pursuance of his Decrees, chooses rather to cause the Materiality of Sin, as say
the Divines, or to make use of the Injustice of Men, as says one of the
Prophets, than by changing his Will to put a stop to the Disorders of Sinners.
But he defers his revenging the injurious Treatment, which they give him, till
the time when it shall be permitted him to do it, without swerving from his
immutable Decrees; that is to say, when Death having corrupted the Body of the
voluptuous, God shall be freed from the necessity he has imposed on himself, of
giving them Sensations and Thoughts relating to it.

OBJECTION against the Eleventh and Twelfth Articles.
Original Sin not only enslaves Man to his Body, and subjects him to the
Motions of Concupiscence, but likewise fills him with Vices wholly Spiritual:
not only the Body of the Infant before Baptism being corrupted, but also his
Soul, and all his Faculties stained and infected with Sin. Though the Rebellion
of the Body be the principle of some grosser Vices, such as Intemperance and
Uncleanness, yet it is not the Cause of Vices purely Spiritual, as are Pride
and Envy. And therefore Original Sin is something very different from
Concupiscence, which is born with us: and is more likely the Privation of
Grace, or of Original Righteousness.

ANSWER.
I acknowledge, That Children are void of Original Righteousness; and I prove
it, in showing, That they are not born upright, and that God hates them. For
methinks one cannot give a clearer Idea of Righteousness and Vprightness, than
to say a Will is upright when it loves God, and that it is crooked and perverse
when it draws toward Bodies. But if by Righteousness, or Original Grace, we
understand some unknown Qualities, like those which God is said to have infused
into the Heart of the first Man, to adorn him, and render him pleasing in his
sight; it is still evident, that the Privation of this is not Original Sin; for
to speak properly, that Privation is not hereditarily transmitted. If Children
have not these Qualities, it is because God does not give 'em them; and if God
does not bestow them, it is because they are unworthy to receive them: and it is
that Vworthiness which is transmitted, and which is the Cause of the Privation
of Original Righteousness: And so that Unworthiness is properly Original Sin.

Now this Unworthiness, (which consists, as I have shown, in this: That the
Inclinations of Children are actually corrupt, and their Heart bent upon the
Love of Bodies;) this, I say, is really in them. It Is not the Imputation of the
Sin of their Father; they are actually themselves in a disordered State. In
like manner as those who are justified by JESUS CHRIST, of whom Adam was the
Type, are not justified by Imputation: But are really restored to Order, by an
inward Righteousness, different from that of our LORD, though it be he that has
merited it for them.

The Soul has but two natural or essential Relations; the one to God, and the
other to her Body. Now it is evident, That the Relation, or Union which she has
with God, cannot vitiate or corrupt her: and therefore she is neither vicious,
nor corrupt, at the first instant of her Creation; but by the relation she has
to her Body. Thus one of the two must needs be said, either that Pride, and
other, which we call Spiritual Vices, can be communicated by the Body, or that
Children are not subject to them at the moment of their Birth: I say at the
moment of their Birth; for I do not deny but these ill Habits are easily
acquired. Though pure Intelligences had no other relation than to God, and at
the instant of their Creation were subject to no Vice, yet they fell into
Disorder. But the Cause of it was their making a wrong use of their Liberty,
whereof Infants have made no use at all: For Original Sin is not of a free
Nature.

But to come to the Point; I am of Opinion, That they err, who think that the
Rebellion of the Body is the Cause but of gross Vices, such as Intemperance and
Uncleanness; and not of those which are called Spiritual, as Pride and Envy:
and I am persuaded there is that Correspondence between the Disposition of our
Brain, and those of our Soul, as that there is not perhaps any corrupt Habit in
the Soul, but what has its Principle in the Body.

St. Paul in several places terms by the Name of the Law, the Wisdom, the
Desires, and the Works of the Flesh; whatever is contrary to the Law of the
Spirit. He speaks not of Spiritual Vices; He reckons amongst the Works of the
Flesh, Idolatry, Heresies, Dissentions, and many other Vices which go by the
Name of Spiritual. To give way to Vainglory, Wrath and Envy is, in his
Doctrine, to follow the Motions of the Flesh. In short, It appears from the
Expressions of that Apostle, That all Sin proceeds from the Flesh: not that the
Flesh commits it, or that the Spirit of Man, without the Grace, or Spirit of
CHRIST, can do good: but because the Flesh acts upon the Spirit in such a
manner, that the latter works no evil without being solicited to it by the
former. Hear what St. Paul says in the Epistle to the Romans, I delight in the
law of the Lord, Romans c. 7.
after the inward Man. But I see another law in my members warring against the
law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in
my members. And a little lower; So then with my mind I my self serve the law of
God, but with the flesh the law of sin: He speaks after the same manner in
several places of his Epistles. So that Concupiscence, or the Rebellion of the
Body, not only disposes us to Carnal of shameful Vices, but likewise to those
which are thought to be Spiritual. I here shall endeavor to prove it by a
sensible manner.

When a Man's in Conversation, it is certain, as I think, that some Tracks are
machinally produced in his Brain, and Motions excited in his Animal Spirits,
that beget in his Soul corrupt Thoughts and Inclinations. Our Thoughts on these
Occasions are not naturally conformable to Truth, nor our Inclinations to
Order, They rise in us for the Good of the Body, and of the present Life,
because it is the Body that exites them: So they obliterate the Presence of God,
and the Thoughts of our Duty out of our Mind; and tend only to recommend us to
other Men, and make them consider us as worth their Affection and Esteem.
Therefore this secret Pride, which kindles in us on such Occasions, is a
Spiritual Vice, whose Principle is the Rebellion of the Body.

For Example; If the Persons, in whose Presence we are, are raised to Honorary
Posts and Titles, the Luster of their Grandeur both dazzles and dejects us. And
as the Traces which their Presence imprints on our Brain are very deep, and the
Motions of the Spirits rapid; they radiate, as I may say, through all the Body;
they spread themselves on the Face, and give a sensible Testimony of our
Reverence and Fear, and our most latent Sentiments. Next, These Traces, by the
sensible Expressions of our inward Motions, work upon the Person that observe
us; whom they dispose to Sentiments of Candor and Civility, by the Traces
which our respectful and timorous Deportment machinally produce in his Brain:
which Traces, rallying on his Face, and disarm him of that Majesty which
appeared in it, and give the rest of his Body such an Air and Posture, as at
length rid us of our Concern, and re-embolden us. Thus by a mutual and frequent
Repercussion of these sensible Expressions, our Air and Behavior at last
settles in that fashion which the governing Person wishes.

But as all the Motions of the Animal Spirits are attended with Motions of the
Soul, and the Traces of the Brain are pursued by Thoughts of the Mind; it is
plain, that since we are deprived of the Power of expunging these Traces, and
stopping these Motions, we find our selves solicited, by the overruling
Presence of the Person, to embrace his Opinions, and submit to his Desires, and
to be wholly devoted to his Pleasure, as he indeed is disposed to study ours,
but in a very different manner. And for this Reason worldly Conversation
quickens and invigorates the Concupiscence of Pride, as dishonest Commerce,
feasting and enjoying sensible Pleasures, strengthen Carnal Concupiscence;
which is a Remark very necessary for Morality.

It Is of great Use and Advantage, that there are Traces in the Brain, which
incessantly represent Man to himself, to make him careful of his Person: and
that there are others, which serve to make and preserve Society, since Men are
not made to live alone. But Man having lost the Power of erasing them when he
pleased, and when convenient, they perpetually provoke him to Evil. As he
cannot hinder their representing him to himself, he is continually solicited
to Motions of Pride and Vanity, to despise others, and center all things in
himself. And as he is not Master of those Traces which importune him, to keep
up Society with others, he is agitated by Motions of Complaisance, Flattery,
Jealousy, and the like Inclinations, as it were in spite of him. Thus all
those, which go by the Name of Spiritual Vices, derive from the Flesh; as well
as Vnchastness and Intemperance.

There are not only in our Brain, Dispositions which excite in us Sensations
and Motions, with reference to the Propagation of the Species, and the
Preservation of Life; but it may be a greater Number that stir up in us
Thoughts and Passions, with respect to Society, to our own private
Advancements, and to those of our Friends. We are by Nature united to all
surrounding Bodies, and by them, to all the things that any way relate to us:
But we cannot be united to them, save by some Dispositions in our Brain. Having
not therefore the Power of withstanding the Action of these natural
Dispositions, our Union turns into Dependence, and we grow subject through our
Body to all kind of Vices.

We are not pure Intelligences: all the Dispositions of our Soul produce
respective Dispositions in our Body: and those in our Body mutually excite
others like them in our Soul. Not that the Soul is absolutely incapable of
receiving any thing, except by the Body; but because, as long as She is united
to It, she cannot admit any Change in her Modifications, without making some
Alteration in the Body. It Is true, she may be enlightened, or receive new Ideas,
and the Body need not have any hand in it; but that is because pure Ideas are
not Modifications of the Soul, as I have proved in another place. I speak not
here of sensible Ideas, because these include a Sensation, and every Sensation
is a mode of the Souls existing.

The Second OBJECTION against the Eleventh and Twelfth Articles.
As by one Man sin entered into the World, etc. Romans 5.12.
If Original Sin descends, by reason of the Communication which is found between
the Brain of the Mother, and that of her Infant, the Mother is the cause of the
Sin; and the Father has no part in it. Yet St. Paul teaches us, that by Man
came sin into the World: He does not so much as speak of the Woman. Therefore,
etc.

ANSWER.
I was shapen in Iniquity, and in sin has my Mother conceived me. Ps. 51.5.
Ec. 25.23. Luke 2.48.
David assures us, that his Mother conceived him in iniquity: and the Son of
Syrach says, Of the Woman came the beginning of Sin, and by her we all die.
Neither of them speak of Man. St. Paul on the contrary says, that by Man, Sin
entered into the World, and speaks not of the Woman. How will these Testimonies
accord, and which of the two is to be justified, if it be necessary to
vindicate either. In discourse we never attribute to the Woman any thing
peculiar to the Man, wherein she has no part: But that is often ascribed to the
Man which is proper to the Woman, because her Husband is her Master and Head.
We see that the Evangelists, and also the Holy Virgin, call Joseph the Father
of Jesus, when she says to her Son, Behold thy Father and I have sought thee
sorrowing. Therefore seeing we are assured by Holy Writ, that Woman has
subjected us to Sin and Death, it is absolutely necessary to believe it; nor
can it be thrown upon the Man; But though it testifies in several places that
it is by Man that Sin enters into the World, yet there is not an equal necessity
to believe it, since what is of the Woman is commonly attributed to the Man.
And if we were obliged by Faith to excuse either the Man, or the Woman, it
would be more reasonable to excuse the former than the latter.

However I believe these forecited passages are to be literally explained, and
that we are to say both the Man and Woman are the true causes of Sin, each in
their own way. The Woman, in that by her, Sin is communicated; it being by her
that the Man begets the Children; and the Man, in that his Sin is the cause of
Concupiscence; as his action is the cause of the fecundity of the Woman, or of
the communication that is between her and her Infant.

It is certain, that it is the Man that impregnates the Woman, and consequently
is the cause of that communication, between her Body and the Child's, since
that communication is the Principle of its Life. Now that Communication not
only gives the Child's Body the dispositions of its Mother's, but also gives
its Mind the dispositions of her Mind: Therefore we may say with St. Paul, that
by one Man sin entered into the world; and nevertheless by reason of that
communication we may say, that Sin came from a Woman, and by her we all dye:
and that our Mother has conceived us in Iniquity, as is said in other places of
Scripture.

It may be said perhaps, that though Man had not sinned, yet Woman had produced
sinful Children; for having her self sinned, she had lost the Power God gave
her over her Body: and thus, though Man had remained Innocent, she had
corrupted the Brain, and consequently the Mind of her Child, by reason of that
communication between them.

But this surely looks not very probable. For Man whilst righteous, knowing
what he does, cannot give the Woman that wretched fecundity of conceiving
sinful Children. If he remains Righteous he wills not any Children but for God,
to whom Infant Sinners cannot be well pleasing; for I suppose not here a
Mediator. I grant however that in that case the Marriage had not been
dissolved, and that the Man had known his Wife. But it is certain, that the
Body of the Woman belonged to her Husband, since it was taken out of his; and
was the same Flesh. Duo in carne una. It is moreover certain, that Children are
as much the Fathers as the Mothers. Which being so, we cannot be persuaded that
the Woman would have lost the Power over her Body, if her Husband had not
sinned as well as she. For if the Woman had been deprived of that Power whilst
the Man remained Innocent, there had been this Disorder in the Universe, that
an upright Man should have a corrupt Body, and sinful Children. Whereas it is
against Order, or rather a contradiction, that a just God should punish a
perfectly Innocent Man. And for this reason Eve feels no involuntary and
rebellious Motions, immediately after her sin; as yet she is not ashamed of her
Nakedness, nor goes to hide her self. On the contrary, she comes to her
Husband, though naked as her self; her Eyes are not yet opened; but she is
still as before, the absolute Comptroller of her own Body. Order required that
immediately after her Sin, her Soul should be disturbed by the rebellion of her
Body, and by the shame of her own and her Husband's nakedness; for there was no
reason that God should any longer suspend on her behalf the Laws of the
Communication of Motions: as I have said in the seventh Article. But because
her Body is her Husband's, who is as yet Innocent; she is not punished in this
Body; but this punishment is deferred till the time that he should eat himself
of the Fruit which she presented him: Then it was they both began to feel the
rebellion of their Body; that they saw they were naked, and that shame obliged
them to cover themselves with Fig Leaves. Thus we must say, that Adam was truly
the cause of Original Sin, and Concupiscence, Genesis c. 3.
since it was his Sin that deprived both himself and his Wife of their power
over their Body; by which defectiveness of power the Woman produces in the
Brain of her Child such tracks as corrupt its Soul at the very instant of its
Creation.

OBJECTION against the Twelfth Article.
It Is but random divining to say the communication between the Mother's and the
Infant's Brain is necessary or useful to the conformation of the foetus. For
there is no such Communication between the Brain of an Hen, and that of her
Chickens, which notwithstanding are perfectly and completely formed.

ANSWER.
I answer that in the seventh Chapter of the Second Book, I have sufficiently
demonstrated, that Communication, by the use I make of it, in explaining the
Generation of Monsters; as also certain natural Marks and Fears derived from
the Mother. For it is evident, that a Man who swoons away at the sight of a
Snake, because his Mother was frighted with one when she bore him in her Womb,
could not be subject to that Infirmity, but because formerly such Traces had
been imprinted on his Brain, as these which open upon seeing a Snake, and that
they were accompanied with a like Accident. And herein I am no Diviner; for I
do not venture to determine wherein that Communication precisely consists. I
might say it was performed by those Fibers which the Foetus shoots into the
Matrix of the Mother, and by the Nerves wherewith that part is, very probably,
filled; and in saying so I should no more divine, than would a Man who had
never seen the Engines called La Samaritaine, in affirming there were Wheels
and Pumps to raise the Water. Nevertheless I cannot see why divining is not
sometimes allowable, provided a Man sets not up for a Prophet, La Samaritaine
upon Pont neuf in Paris.
and speaks not in too positive a strain; I rather think he is permitted to
speak his Thoughts, whilst he pretends not to be Infallible, nor Lords it
unjustly over others by dogmatical Decisions, or by the help of Scientifick
Terms. It Is not always divining to speak of things which are not visible, and
which contradict Prejudices, If so be we speak no more than we easily conceive,
and which readily makes its way into the mind of others who desire to
understand Reason.

I say then, that supposing the general Laws of the Communication of Motions,
such as they are there is great Probability that the particular Communication
of the Mother's Brain, with that of her Infant, is necessary to form its Body,
in a requisite manner; or at least is necessary to give the Brain of the Infant
certain dispositions, which ought to vary according to different Times and
Countries, as I have explained in the same Chapter.

I confess there is no Communication between the Brain of an Hen, and that of a
Chicken, in the Egg, which nevertheless is perfectly well formed. But it ought
to be observed, that the Chicken is farther advanced in the Egg, when the Hen
lays it, than the Foetus when it descends into the Matrix: which may well be
concluded, since there goes less time to the hatching Chickens, than there goes
to the bringing forth Whelps; though the Belly of the Bitch being very hot, and
her Blood in perpetual motion, the Whelps should be sooner formed than the Eggs
hatched, were not the Chickens farther advanced in their Eggs, than the Whelps
in their Cicatricles. Now there is great probability that the formation of the
Chicken in the Egg, before it was laid, was effected by the communication I am
speaking of.

I answer in the second place, that the growth of the Body of Fowls, is
possibly more conformable to the general laws of Motion than that of
four-footed Animals; and that so the communication of the Females Brain, with
that of her young ones, is not so necessary in Fowls as in other Animals: For
the reason that makes that communication necessary, is probably the remedying
the defect of these general Laws, which in some particular Cases, are
insufficient to regulate the Formation and Growth of Animals.

I answer lastly, there is no such necessity, to the preservation of the Life
of Birds, that they should have so many particular Dispositions in their Brain
as other Animals. They have Wings to fly harm, and to secure their feed; and
have no need of all that particular Mechanism which is the principle of the
cunning, and docility of some domestic Creatures. Therefore the old ones need
not instruct their young in many things, as they breed them, nor capacitate
them to be taught many afterward, by giving them a disposition of Brain that is
fit for Docility. Those who breed young Dogs for the Game, sometimes find those
which naturally set, merely from the instruction they received from their Damm,
who often used to set with them in her Belly. There is a great difference
almost always observable in the breed of these Creatures, some of which are
much more Docil and Tractable than others of the same Species. But I do not
think there ever was a Fowl that taught any thing extraordinary to her young;
that a Hen, for Example, ever hatched a Chicken who could do any thing but what
they all do naturally. Birds then are not so tractable or capable of
Instruction as other Animals. The Disposition of their Brain is not ordinarily
capable of many Changes; nor do they act so much by Imitation, as some
domestic Animals. Young Ducks, which follow an Hen, don't stay for her Example
to take the Water; and the Chickens, on the contrary, never betake themselves
to swim, though hatched and led by a Duck, that loves the Water. But there are
Animals that easily and readily imitate the uncommon Motions, which they see
others do. However I do not pretend, that much stress is to be laid on these
last Reflections, since they are not necessary to establish my Opinion.

Second OBJECTION against the Twelfth Article.
It Is likewise divining to affirm, That the Mother before her Sin might have
any intercourse with her Embryo; there being no necessary relation between our
Thoughts and Motions happening in our Brain. And therefore that Communication
between the Mother's and the Infant's Brain is useless.

ANSWER.
It is evident, That without this Communication, the Infant was incapable of
having any Commerce with its Mother, or the Mother with her Infant, without a
particular Miracle. Now before the Sin Order required, That the Mother should
have notice of all the Corporeal wants of her Infant, and that the Infant
should resent its Obligations to its Parents. Therefore since all things were
in Order before the Sin, and that God acts always agreeably to Order, the
Mother and the Child had some Commerce by means of this Communication.

To understand wherein this Commerce may have consisted, it must be remembered,
That the Connection of the Tracks of the Brain, with the Ideas of the Soul, may
be several ways effected, either by Nature, Chap. 2. Part 2.
or by the Institution of Men, or some other way, as I have shown how in the
Second Book.

In beholding a Square, or the Look of a Person suffering any Pain, the Idea of
a Square, or of an afflicted Person, rises in the Mind. This is common to all
Nations, and the Connection between these Ideas and these Traces, is natural.
When an Englishman hears pronounced, or reads the Word Square, he has likewise
the Idea of a Square: but the Connection, which is between the Sound, or the
Letters of that Word, and its Idea, is not natural, nor is it general with all
the World. I say then, That the Mother and her Infant must naturally have had a
Correspondence between them, upon all the things that could be represented to
the Mind by natural Connexions: That if the Mother, for Instance, had seen a
Square, the Infant would have seen one too; and that if the Infant had imagined
any Figure, he would have likewise excited the Traces of the same Figure in the
Imagination of his Mother. But they would have had no Commerce together about
things of a purely Spiritual Nature, nor even about Corporeal things, whenever
they conceived them, without the help of the Senses and Imagination. The Mother
might have thought on GOD, have heard or read the Word Square, or the like; and
yet the Child not have discovered what were her Thoughts thereof, unless in
Tract of Time, she should have settled a new Commerce of intellectual Ideas with
it, much what the same with that of Nurses, when they teach their Children to
speak. I explain and prove these things.

One would think I had sufficiently proved them, by the Explication I gave of
the Cause of Hereditary Aversions, and Marks which Children bring with them
into the World, derived from the Traces of their Mothers. Now these Traces of
corporeal things are inseparable from their Ideas; which makes the Ideas to be
communicated along with them, and the Children to see, feel, imagine the same
things as their Mothers. They have now, whether they will or not, the
Sensations of their Mothers: but were they not Sinners, they would have had the
power of hindering, when they pleased, the Effect of that their Communication
with their Mother. They might likewise have re-excited in their Brain, the
Tracks which they received from their Mothers, by the same reason that we
imagine what we please, when our Sensations are not too vivid and affecting:
which being supposed, it is evident, That the Mother, when considerately
attending to her Infant, might have discovered, by a kind of Repercussion,
whether or no it received the Impression she excited in it, and likewise other
things that it might think upon. For as the Mother could not vibrate the Fibers
of her Brain, but the Fibers of the Infant's Brain must have received the
Impression; so the Infant could not stop that Vibration, or cause any other,
without giving the Mother notice by some light Impression, provided she made
her self very attentive, by the power she had of stifling every other Noise
than that which her Infant caused in her. Thus it must be acknowledged, That
the Mother, and the Infant, would have had some intercourse before the Sin, or
else we must deny all Correspondence between their Brains, or the power of the
Soul over the Body, to be such as I have before maintained. This appears
evident, though the wanton Imagination starts, and Prejudices band against it.
It Is true, this Commerce at first would have reached but to Matters that come
under the Senses and Imagination; it not being absolutely necessary, that the
Child, which had only a Corporeal Dependence on the Mother, should receive from
her any other Ideas than those of sensible Objects. For its Soul being strictly
united to God, whilst in a State of Innocence, would have received immediately
from him all the Ideas which respected not the Body: But whereas in time we may
affix the most abstract Ideas to things sensible, which have no relation to
them, this Commerce between the Mother and her Child, would, very likely, have
quickly extended to things of a more Spiritual Order, if they strove to
correspond about such sort of Matters.

I am sensible, that what I now say will not seem reasonable to very many; and
that even those who resist their Prejudices, and labor against the continual
Tide of sensible Impressions, will admire at the Novelty of this Notion. But if
we seriously reflect on the way that a Master takes to instruct his Disciples,
and observe what different means he is obliged to make use of, to manifest his
own Ideas of things to them; the Comparisons he makes, and the Judgments he
passes about these Ideas, and the other Dispositions of his Mind, in reference
to his Scholars; we shall see it will be a much harder Task for him to discover
his Thoughts and inward Dispositions of Mind to them, than for a Mother to do
it to her Infan^s; provided we only suppose, that the Traces of the Mother's
Brain are imprinted on the Child's, which is evident from all that I have said
before. For, in fine, it is manifest, that the Voice, and all exterior Signs
that we employ to express our Thoughts to others, obtain the desired Effect,
only because they imprint on the Brain of our Hearers, the same Traces, and
raise the same Emotions of the Spirits, as accompany our Ideas, and our inward
Disposition, on their respect.

OBJECTION against the Seventeenth and following Articles.
It Is a rash Assertion to say, Children in Baptism are justified by actual
Motions of their Will toward God. We must not give vent to such New Opinions;
which do no good, but only make a noise.

ANSWER.
I grant, that we ought not positively to affirm, That Children are justified
by formal Acts of their Will: I believe it impossible to know any thing of it;
and that we are not positively to assert any thing but what we know. But
because there are but too many, who are apt to believe, That Justification of
Children is only external, and by Imputation, by reason, say they, they are
incapable of performing any Act of Love toward God; I think it fit to let them
know, that they are brought by Prejudice to that Opinion. For the Prejudices of
Men, in respect of Children, are such, as make them commonly fancy they have
no Thought in their Mother's Womb, and in the beginning of their Age, and even
that they are absolutely incapable of thinking. They believe that they have not
so much as the Ideas of things; that it is their Masters that furnish them with
Discourse; and that if they have any Inclinations, they are of another Nature
from ours, and incompetent to carry them to the Sovereign Good. The greatest
part of Men cannot distinctly conceive, That Childrens Souls are like those of
grown up Persons; And that they don't come to Strength and Perfection by
degrees, like the Body; And that if they were delivered one moment from the
Impression the Body made upon them, and moved by the Delectation of Grace, they
would in that moment be more pure and enlightened than the Souls of the
greatest Saints; who feel always working in their Mind and Heart the Leaven of
Concupiscence.

Concupiscence is commonly looked upon as Natural, and is not always considered
as a consequence of Sin: and this makes Men conclude unawares, that the
Stupidity of Children is a necessary consequence of their Infirmity of Body,
Tenderness of Age, and also incapacity of Mind. Which Conclusion or Prejudice
is constantly represented to the Mind, and prepossess it in such a manner, as
hinders it from examining the thing in its own Nature. Therefore those who have
treated of the Effect of Baptism, in the Ages past, have omitted the explaining
the Regeneration of Infants by the actual Motions of their Heart: Not that they
were induced by strong Reasons to judge it impossible; for their Works do not
show they have ever so much as examined it; but (as is visible) because they
have supposs'd it so; and that it has hardly entered their Heads to doubt of it:
or possibly, because they wa^'d giving an Explication so repugnant to
Prejudices, at a Time when no such Attempts were made, to get rid of them, as
nowadays there are.

But if it be considered how necessary it is to give a closer Explication than
that, for Instance, which St. Austin gives in Lib. 1. de Napt. Cap. 25, 26, 27,
and in Jul. l. 6. c. 19. and alibi.
several places, which looks toward Imputation; though in others he speaks in
a way that does Ep 23. lib. de peccator. meritis, c. 19. and alibi.
not countenance it: If it be considered that Imputation is very commodious,
and likely for that Reason embraced by some Ancient and Innocent. III. in
Decret. 3. de Baptismo and ejus Effectu. Et in Council. Viennensi generali 15.
sub Clement V.
Orthodox Divines; and moreover absolutely necessary for those, who, without
any convincing Proof, deny Spiritual Habits; whom it may be good to satisfy,
if possible. Lastly, If respect be had to natural Equity, which forbids us to
condemn the secret Purposes and Intentions; after all this, I say, what I offer
may possibly appear improbable: But yet I cannot see why it should be taken ill,
that I endeavor to content even the most querelous Minds touching their
Difficulties about Original Sin.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Third CHAPTER of the Third PART of the Second BOOK.
Wherein I speak of the power of Imagination of some Authors, and particularly
of Tertullian.
AS I am well satisfied that the most general and fruitful Principle of Errors
in the Scicences, and especially in Morals, is the Impression made by lively
Imaginations on the Mind of Men, who are managed more by Mechanism than by
Reason; so I thought it lay upon me to set this truth to open view, by all the
ways that might awaken them from their slumber on its account: And because
Examples strike deepest, especially when the Instance is somewhat great, and
uncommon; I thought that the celebrated Names of Tertullian, Seneca, and
Montague, were the most proper to raise their Attention, and give them a
sensible conviction of the contagious Empire of the Imagination over Reason.
For if Words, all-dead, and unanimated by the look and sensible behavior of
these famous Authors, have still more Force than the Reason of a great many
others; if the Turn of Expression, that gives but a faint Id^a of the sensible
action, which the Imagination lively diffuses over the Face, and the rest of
the Body of those who are pierced with what they say; is able to Agitate,
Penetrate, and Convince a great many: certainly it must be granted that nothing
is more dangerous, than a respectful Attention to Men of a strong and lively
Imagination. For their Air and Way is a natural Language, so powerful and
convincing; and they know how to Image things so passionately to the Life, that
they seldom fail of raising the Senses and ^assions against Reason, and
pouring, as I may say, Conviction and Certitude into their Spectators.

I easily foresaw, in alleging these great Examples, that it was impracticable
to cure those who were amazed, and thunderstruck, with the reading of these
three famed Authors. For a little knowledge of the nature of Man will suffice
to teach us, that the wounds of the Brain are harder to be healed than those of
the other parts of the Body, and that it is easier to close up a sore not
exposed to fresh insult from without, than to make a perfect cure of an
inveterate Prejudice that justifies it self each minute by
very-probable-Reasons.

It Is extremely difficult to close up exactly the Traces of the Brain, because
exposed to the course of the Spirits, and liable to be constantly renewed by
infinite other Traces which may be called accessory. These sorts of Wounds
cannot ordinarily be cured, or made up, till the Brain receives others more
deep, which opposing them cause a violent and continual Revulsion in the
Spirits. For we ought not to reckon a Prejudice quite cured, when we fancy it
is, because we are not actually affected with it: then only the cure is
perfected when the Trace is quite shut up; and not when the Spirits desist from
their wanted course for some particular Reason.

I knew then well enough that such as had been prostrated, and overwhelmed by
the Force and Motions of Tertullian, ravished and dazzled by the loftiness and
beauties of Seneca, charmed and corrupted by the gentile, easy and natural
Turns of Montague, would not change their Opinion by reading a few Pages of my
Book. I judged on the contrary I should incur their displeasure, by trying to
dissolve the enchantment which so held them.

But as I hoped these Examples would be useful to my design for the
forementioned Reasons: I thought I was to be more regardful of the Profit of
many who were Free from Prepossession, than of the Spleen of some particulars,
that I concluded would censure the liberty I had taken. I considered there were
very few so strongly prevented with esteem for these Authors, but it was hoped
might return to sound sense again. I concluded lastly, that there being hardly
one, it may be, prepossessed with all Three together, because of the diverse
Characters of their Imagination; the most Opinionated might find I was in the
right in a good many things*

I know what Respect I ought to have for the Works of Tertullian, as well on
account of the Subjects that he treats of, as of the Approbation they have
received from several Persons, who ought to be able to judge of them. And I
have sufficiently manifested that Temper of Mind, by what I have said of him,
and by the Quality of the Book de Pallio, of which alone I have spoke with so
much freedom, though there were others, it may be, fitter for my purpose.

But after all I don't think that Time ought to change and amplify the Ideas
of things; that all Antiquities are venerable; and that illegitimate Reasons,
and extravagant ways are worthy of Respect, because they were a long time in
the World before us. I cannot think that affected Obscurities ought to be
venerated like Sacred Mysteries; Sallies of Imagination to go for shining
Lights of Knowledge; and African Heats, which work in a Mind naturally full of
Fire, to be looked on as Motions of a Prophetic Spirit, which can divulge
nothing but sublime Truths.

I am certain, that even those who defer most to Tertullian's Works, will agree
with me in all this, and that they are too equitable, to justify the Disorders
of Imagination against Reason. But it may be they are akin to those Judicious
Persons, who, though they infinitely love Truth, yet they are not insensible to
outside Manners. For I have oftentime observed some of them so enchanted with
certain strong, lively, great, and pompous Expressions of Tertullian, that
having proved to them that Author was none of the most Judicious and
Reasonable, they would think it enough to convince and surprise me, only to
repeat them.

I own that Tertullian has Expressions extremely strong and bold, which produce
most lively and animated Images in the Mind; and upon that score I justly bring
him for an Example, of the Power which strong Imaginations have to move, and
convince by Impression. Thus those who urge to me these Objections, confirm my
Opinion by opposing it. Their Prepossession and Esteem for Tertullian justifies
my Conduct: the frequent Citations, and the big Words, which they allege,
prove what I say. For they use not in Discourse to produce entire Reasonings;
but often quote strong and lively Expressions, in order to dazzle, perturbate,
and convince by the sensible Impression.

There is no Reason, I think, to imagine, that I set up for a Censor of so many
great Men, who cite Tertullian constantly in the Pulpit, and elsewhere; They
have their Reasons for it: into which I neither do, nor ought to enquire. What
I have said of that Author is methinks evident enough: Let every one deduce his
Consequences according to his Knowledge, without attributing those Thoughts to
me, which I never had. Those who pretend to dive into the Designs of others
frame commonly such Phantasms as resemble but themselves: it being customary
with Men, to taint, and infect others with the Venom of their own Passions. We
are apt to measure all things by our selves, and they would do well to
consider, who condemn me, whether they do not judge themselves un-a-wares, in
doing it. But if they would have me declare my self upon the Citations of
Tertullian, I grant a Man has right to make use of them for several Reasons;
and likewise that they are sometimes most usefully employed, to make some
practical Truths more sensible, which are barren and unfruitful, as long as
they lie dormant in our inward Reasons, and raise in us no contrary Motions to
those which the Goods of the Body excite in us.

Nevertheless I cannot think those Men's Opinions very unreasonable, who believe
we are not to cite Authors by Name, save when they are infallible; and that,
except in things out of Reasons Prerogative, and which Authority ought to take
place, no Quotations are to be made. This formerly was the Custom of the
Fathers: St. Cyprian never cited Tertullian though he has taken a great deal
from him; and if it be true what St. Jerome reports of that Holy Bishop, by
hearsay, viz. That talking of Tertullian he called him his Master; either his
Name must not have been so Authoritave, nor his Expression so forcible as they
are at present upon Men's minds; or else St. Cyprian was wonderfully rigorous in
the Observance of that Custom of his Time: it being very strange such a
Disciple should never have mentioned his Master in any of his Works.

St. Jerome's History is commonly urged in Defense of Tertullian; and I have
been sometimes told, I was too blame to speak so as I did, of a Man, whom St.
Cyprian called his Master. But I question whether St. Jerome would not have
been too easy of belief, in what made for the Honor of Tertullian. To me he
seems to have had somewhat too great an Inclination for him, Invidia postea and
contumetiis Claricorum Romanae Ecclesiae ad Monrani dogma delapsus, in multis
libris novae prophetiae Meminit. Hieron. in Catalogo de Script. Eccles.
since he in some measure excuses his Fall by retorting his Heresy on the Envy
of the Romish Clergy, and the evil Usage he received from them. But if that
Story, which is founded only on what St. Jerome heard one Person say, be true;
I must confess, I know not what to make of that Silence observed by St. Cyprian
in his Writings, with reference to Tertullian. That Silence of a Scholar may be
suspected to conceal some Mystery not advantageous to the Master; and if that
History, as well as Tertullian's own Works, did not give us sufficiently to
understand, that he was not altogether worthy of the great Esteem that is paid
him by very many; yet I question whether St. Cyprian's Conduct, his Silence,
his Style, his Ways, would not be sufficient to lessen it; and to make us
think, That, probably, that Author's Reputation was not so well established in
Africa it self, which ought to have been more favorable to him than a Clime so
temperate as ours.

Our own Country and Africa produce very different Wits: the Genius of the
former, being natural, rational, and irreconcilable to all over-strain'd
Manners, it is strange to find any among them addicted to an Author, who never
studied nor followed Nature: and who instead of consulting his Reason, suffers
himself to be transported by his ungoverned heats into altogether obscure,
monstrous, and extravagant Expressions.

But this probably is owing to the mighty Force of Imagination which disarms
Reason, and even changes Nature. And indeed a Man in the Fury of Passion
perturbates, and even changes the natural situation of our Imagination to adapt
it to his own. And then there is no Motion but what seems Natural, no
Expression but's Agreeable, no Nonsense but's convincing. For we stand to
examine nothing seriously. Now as the Passions vindicate themselves, and
irregular immaginations take delight only in their Irregularity, it is
impossible to judge soberly of things, as long as the Brain preserves the
violent Impression it has received. There is no Man in the Transport of Passion
but is perpetually solicited to justify it; nor any disturbed in Brain, but
is pleased in the disturbance. For if those who fancy themselves Cocks, Wolves,
Oxen, please themselves wonderfully in imitating the actions that are customary
with these Creatures, though quite contrary to the nature of Man: it may easily
be judged that we shall be far from condemning the Behavior of those, who by
the Contagion of their Imagination have made us in a manner like them. For in
condemning them we are conscious we condemn our selves.

There Is a very particular Reason why some of the Learned should glory in
espousing Tertullian, and expressing so extraordinary an esteem for him. Which
is that affected obscurity, which serves as one of the principal Rules of his
Rhetoric.

In these days all empty and senseless Expressions, and all obscure and
perplexed ways of speaking, go under the name of nonsense. But there have been
found such as have looked upon Obscurity, as one of the greatest mysteries in
Eloquence, with whom the Art of persuading consisted partly in being
unintelligible.

If public Haranguers had always the clear and distinct Ideas of the Truths
they went about to persuade, and spoke only to persons that were capable of a
competent Attention to understand them, the precept of affecting obscurity in
discourse, would be the most extravagant in the World. But though this precept
absolutely contradicts all Reason, yet it may be said to be proportionate and
fit for the Genius of most Men: not only because a Mysterious Obscurity
conceals the Ignorance of the Speaker, but also for its raising such a sense in
others as disposes them to yield, and be convinced.

Experience manifests, that most Men esteem what they do not comprehend; that
they reverence, like Mysteries, whatever is above their reach, and think an
Orator has a wonderful Talent, when he dazles them, by the glitterings of
discourse, and by a Language of Imagination, when Reason has nothing to do.

The Inclination Men have for Grandeur exceeds that which they have for Truth:
wherefore Pompous Nonsense which persuades by the Impression, is better
received than pure Argumentation which persuades by force of Evidence: since
Evidence makes way only by Reflections, which always cost the Maker trouble:
but sensible Conviction flows into the Soul, and penetrates it in a most
agreeable manner.

The Good which alone is capable of satisfying our desires, is at once
Infinite, and Inaccessible, and great and obscure Expressions have something of
this Character. So that Obscurity raising our Desires, whilst Greatness
provokes our Admiration, and Esteem; these Expressions win us by the Motions
they produce in us.

When we understand, or think we understand a difficult and obscure Author, we
value our selves above others that do not; and sometimes look upon them, as
Ignorant. The Pains we have taken to master him, interess us in his Defense.
For by venerating this Author, and procuring the Veneration of others, we
justify our own studies: and as we find pleasure in justifying our selves, so
we must not fail to praise and defend him with Earnestness and Zeal, and by
lively and sensible ways.

These Reasons, and some others of less force are sufficient, I think, to let
us know, that the obscurity of Tertullian is no disadvantage to him in the
Opinion of some Persons; and that likely they would have less admired him, if
the Truths which are scattered over his Works were reduced to their more simple
and clear Ideas.

Mathematical Truths and Relations are always Sum'd up in their Exponents, that
is, in the most simple terms that express them; and are disengaged from all
perplexing and obscuring Dependencies. For Geometricians love naked Truth; and
desire not to convince by Impression, but by Light and Evidence. But what would
become of most of Tertullian's Thoughts, were they reduced to their Exponents
by the Rules of Logical Geometricians, and should we see them stripped of all
that sensible Pomp which dazles Reason. Yet if we would judge solidly of this
Author's Reasonings, we ought to make the Experiment.

However I do not pretend that Tertullian ought to have written with
Geometrical Plainness. Figures which express our sentiments and motions, with
respect to the Truths we expose to others, are absolutely necessary; and I
think that more especially in discourse of Religion and Morality we ought to
Employ those Ornaments which procure all the reverence that is due to Truth,
and those Motions which actuate the Soul, and incline her to virtuous Actions.
But we are not to dress up and adorn a Phantasm without substance and reality;
nor excite Motions when there is no occasion; and if we will vigorously impress
on our Hearers Conviction, and Certitude, it is necessary that the Conviction
should relate to something true and solid. We must neither convince, nor be
convinced without knowing evidently, distinctly, precisely, why we do the one,
or suffer the other. We ought to know both what we say, and what we think; and
only to Love Truth, and Knowledge, without putting out the Eyes of others,
after we have made blind our selves.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Nature of IDEAS. Wherein I explain how we see all
things in God, both Truths and Laws Eternal.
I Hoped that what I had said upon the nature of Ideas, was sufficient to have
shown that God only enlightens our understanding. But I have found by
Experience, that there are Persons incapable of a competent Attention to
conceive the Reasons I have given of this Principle. Abstracted reasons are
incomprehensible to the greatest part of Men, but that which is sensible
awakens them, and fixes and keeps open the Eye of their Mind. They cannot
consider, nor, consequently, comprehend what comes not under the Senses, nor
Imagination. Which thing I have often said, nor can I too often repeat.

It Is plain that Bodies are not visible of themselves: that they cannot act
upon our mind, nor represent themselves to it. This has no need of proof; but
is discovered by a bare perception, and is infinitely more certain, than that
Bodies communicate their Motion when they meet. But it is not certain, save
with those who silence their Senses, to listen to their Reason. Therefore all
Mankind believe that Bodies impel each other, because the Senses tell them so,
but they do not believe that Bodies are of themselves absolutely invisible, and
incapable of acting on the Mind, because the Senses do not tell them this, but
seem to say the contrary.

Nevertheless there are some whose reason is so steadfast and resolved, as to
rise up to the most abstract Truths. They contemplate them with attention, and
courageously resist the Impression of their Senses and Imagination. But the
Body insensibly weighing down the Mind, they relapse, these Ideas vanish, and
whilst the Imagination stirs up more sensible and lively, the former are beheld
as Apparitions, that only cause mistrust and fear of delusion.

We are easily apt to distrust those Persons, or things we are not familiar
with, and which have not afforded us any sensible pleasure: For it is Pleasure
that wins the Heart, and Familiarity that cures our Trouble and disquiet of
Mind. Wherefore those who are not used to Metaphysical, and abstract Truths,
are very prone to believe we purpose to seduce them, when we only labor to
instruct them. They look with a suspicious Eye, and a kind of dread, upon Ideas
which have nothing charming and sensible, and the Love they bear to their own
Repose and Felicity, speedily rids them of so vexatious a Contemplation, which
seems incapable of contenting them.

If the Question, before us, were not of the greatest Importance, the Reasons I
have given, and some others not necessary to be produced, would oblige me to
say no more of it; for I foresee that whatever I can say upon this subject will
never enter the Heads of some People. But this Principle, That there is none
but God who enlightens us; and that this illumination is effected by the
manifestation of an immutable, and necessary Reason, or Wisdom; seems to me so
conformable to Religion, that I think my self indispensably obliged to Explain
it, and maintain it to the utmost of my Power. I had rather be called a
Visionist, Enthusiast, and all the fine Names that the Imagination, (which in
little Souls is always Sarcastical) uses to oppose to reasons it cannot
comprehend, or defend it self against; than to grant that Bodies are capable of
instructing me; that I am my own Master, Reason and Light: and that to be
thoroughly informed in all things, I need only consult my self; or other Men,
who perhaps may fill my Ears with a loud noise, but certainly cannot infuse
Light and Knowledge into my Mind. Here then are some farther Reasons for the
Opinion I have established, in the Chapter belonging to this Illustration.

No body will deny that Man is capable of knowing Truth: and the least
intelligent Philosophers acknowledge that he partakes of a certain Reason,
which they don't determine. And therefore they define him animal Rationis
particeps. For there is no body but knows, at least confusedly, that the
essential difference of Man consists in his necessary union with Universal
Reason, though it be not commonly known who it is that includes this Reason,
and little Care is taken to discover it. I see for Example, that two times two
are four, and that a Friend is preferable to a Dog; and I am certain there is
no Man in the World but sees this as well as I. Now I discover not these truths
in the Mind of others, no more than others do in mine: Therefore there is
necessarily an Universal Reason which enligntens me, and all intelligent
Beings. For if the Reason I consult were not the same as that which answers the
Chinese, it is evident, I could not be assured, as I am, Siambo videmus verum
esse quod dicis and am^o videmus verum esse quod di^o, ubi quaeso id videmus?
Nec ego utique in te, nec tu in me; sed ambo in ipsa, quae supra mentes nostras
est, incommutabili veritate. Confess. de S. Aug. l. 12. c. 25. See St. Austin
De libero arbitrio* etc. Book 2. Chap. 8.
that the Chinese see the same Truths as I see. Therefore the Reason we
consult, when we retire into our selves, is an universal Reason: I say when we
retire into our selves, for I speak not here of the Reason which is followed by
a Man in a Passion. When a Man prefers the Life of his Coach-Horse before that
of his Coachman, he has his Reasons for it, but they are particular Reasons
which every rational Man abhors. They are reasons which at Bottom are not
reasonable, because not conformable to Sovereign or universal Reason, which all
Mankind consults.

I am certain that the Ideas of things are immutable, and that Eternal Truths
and Laws are necessary. It Is impossible they should not be what they are. But
in my self I find nothing either immutable, or necessary: It Is possible for me
not to exist: or exist otherwise than I do. There may be Minds that are not
like me: and yet I am certain there can be no mind that sees other Truths, and
Laws than what I see. For every mind necessarily sees that two times two are
four; and that a Friend is to be preferred before a Dog. We must then conclude,
That the Reason which is consulted by all minds is an immutable and necessary
Reason.

Moreover, it is evident, that this same reason is Infinite. The mind of Man
clearly conceives that there either are, or may be an infinite number of
intelligible Triangles, Tetragones, Pentagones, and other such like Figures.
Nor does it only conceive, that the Ideas of figures are inexhaustible, and
that it might still discover new ones, though it should study only these
Figures to all Eternity; but it perceives an Infinity in Extension. The mind
clearly perceives that the number which multiplied by it self produces 5, or
any of the numbers between 4 and 9, between 9 and 16, between 16 and 25* etc.
is a Quantity, a Relation, a Fraction, whose terms contain more figures than
will reach from one Pole of the World to the other. It clearly sees it is such
a Relation as none but God can comprehend, and that it is impossible to express
it exactly, because to express it we need a Fraction whose two terms are
Infinite: I might bring a great many such Examples, from which we might
conclude, not only that the Mind of Man is finite, but that the Reason he
consults is infinite. For in brief, his Mind clearly sees infinite, in this
Reason, though he does not comprehend it, since he can compare incommensurable
numbers together, and know their Relations, though he cannot compare them with
the unite. Or, (that we may stick only to what is sensible,) The Reason which
Man consults is infinite, since it cannot be exhausted, and it has always
something to answer to whatever we demand.

But if it be true, that the Reason whereof all Men participate be universal,
and infinite: if it be true that it is immutable and necessary; it is certain,
that it differs not from that of God himself. For none but the universal and
infinite Being contains in himself universal and infinite Reason. All Creatures
are particular Beings; wherefore Universal Reason is not created. No Creatures
are infinite: Universal Reason therefore is no Creature. But the Reason we
consult is not only Universal and Infinite, but also necessary and independent,
and we conceive it in one sense more independent than God himself. For God
cannot but act by this Reason; on which he in one sense depends; and which he
must needs consult and follow. But God consults only himself: He depends on
nothing. This Reason therefore is not distinct from him; but is coeternal and
consubstantial with him. We see clearly that God cannot punish an innocent
Creature: that he cannot subject minds to Bodies, and that he is obliged to
follow Order. We see therefore the Rule, Order and Reason of God; for what
other Wisdom than that of God can we see, when we fear not to affirm, that God
is obliged to follow it?

But after all, can we conceive any Wisdom which is not the Wisdom of God? Does
Solomon, who speaks so well of Wisdom, distinguish it into two sorts? Does not
he teach us that which is Coeternal with God, that by which he has established
the Order we see in his Works, is the same which presides over all Minds; and
which Legislators consult to make Just and Reasonable Laws. We need only read
the Eighth Chapter of Proverbs, to be persuaded of this Truth. I know that the
Holy Scripture speaks of a certain Wisdom, which it names the Wisdom of the
Age, the Wisdom of Men; but then it speaks only according to appearance, or
ordinary Opinion: For we learn in other places, that that Wisdom is Folly, and
Abomination, not only before God, but before all Men that consult Reason.

Certainly, if Eternal Laws and Truths depended on God, and were established by
a free will of the Creator: in a word, if the Reason we consult were not
necessary and independent: it seems evident to me, that we must bid farewell to
all true Science; and that we might err in affirming that the Arithmetic and
Geometry of the Chinese is the same as ours. For indeed if it were not
absolutely necessary that 2 times 4 should be 8, or the three Angles of a
Triangle equal to two right ones; what proof could we have that these sorts of
Truth were not like those which are received, but in some Universities, and
which continue but a certain Season? Do we clearly conceive that God cannot
desist to will what he willed with a will absolutely free and indifferent? or
rather do we clearly conceive it impossible for God to have willed certain
things, for a determinate time, or place, for some particular Persons, or
certain kinds of Beings; supposing him, as some will have him, entirely free
and indifferent in that Will; For my own part, I cannot conceive any Necessity
in Indifferency, nor reconcile two so opposite things together.

But let it be supposed, that it can be clearly perceived, that God by a Will
entirely indifferent, has established for all times, and for all places, Laws
and Truths Eternal; and that at present they are immutable because of that
Decree. But where do they see this Decree? Has God created any Being
representative of it? Will they say it is a Modification of their Soul? They
see clearly that Decree; for they have learned that Immutability is ascertained
to Eternal Truths and Laws: But where is it that they see it? Certainly if they
see it not in God, they see it not at all. For that Decree can be no where but
in God, nor can it be seen but where he is. The Philosophers cannot then be
certain of any thing, unless they consult God, and are answered by him. It Is in
vain for them to exclaim: and they must either yield or hold their Peace.

But after all, that Decree is an ungrounded Imagination. When we think on
Order and Eternal Laws and Truths, we do not naturally enquire the Cause; for
they have none. We do not clearly see the necessity of this Decree, nor do we
think immediately upon it: On the contrary we perceive evidently by a simple
view, that the nature of numbers, and intelligible Ideas is immutable,
necessary, and independent. We see clearly that it is absolutely necessary for
2 times 4 to be 8, and that the square of the Diagonal of a square is double to
that square. If we doubt of the absolute necessity of these Truths, it is
because we turn our back upon their Light, reason upon a false Principle, and
search for their nature, their Immutability; and independance out of
themselves. Thus the Decree for the Immutability of these Truths is a fiction
of the mind, which supposing it sees not what it sees in the Wisdom of God; and
knowing him to be the cause of all things, thinks it self obliged to imagine a
Decree to ascertain immutability to these Truths, which it cannot choose but
acknowledge to be immutable. But this Supposition is false, and we ought to
beware of it. It Is only in the Wisdom of God, that we see Eternal, immutable,
and necessary Truths: nor can we see any where else the Order which God himself
is obliged to follow, as I have said before: The mind is made for that Wisdom,
and in one sense it can see nothing else. For if it can see the Creatures, it is
because He whom it sees, though in a very imperfect manner, during this life,
comprehends them all in the immensity of his Being, in an intelligible manner,
and proportionate to the mind, as I have shown in another place.

If we had not in our selves the Idea of Infinite, and if we saw not all things
by the natural union of our mind with universal, and infinite Reason, it seems
evident, that we could not have liberty to think on all things: For the mind
cannot desire to consider things except it has some Idea of them, and it is not
in its Power to think actually on any thing but what it may desire to think on.
And so we shall cashier Man of his Liberty of thinking on All, if we separate
his mind from him who comprehends all. Again: since we can love nothing but
what we see, if God should only give us particular Ideas, it is manifest he
would so determine all the Motions of our Will, that it would be necessary for
us to Love only particular Beings. For in brief, if we had not the Idea of
infinite, we could not love it: and if those who positively affirm they have no
Idea of God, speak as they think, I scruple not to affirm they have never loved
God, for nothing seems certainer to me, than that nothing can be the Object of
our Love, which is not of our conception.

Lastly, If Order, and Eternal Laws were not immutable, by the necessity of
their nature, the clearest and strongest proofs of Religion would, I question
not, be destroyed in their Principle, as well as Liberty, and the most certain
Sciences. For it is evident, that the Christian Religion which proposes JESUS
CHRIST as a Mediator, and Restorer, supposes the Corruption of nature, by
original Sin. But what proof can we have of this Corruption? The flesh wars,
you will say, against the Spirit, has brought it into subjection, and
tyrannizes over it. This I grant. But this, says a Libertine, is no Disorder.
This is as it pleased God; who ordained it so; who is the Master of his own
decrees; and who constitutes what Order he thinks fit amongst his Creatures.
How shall it be proved that it is a Disorder for Minds to be subjected to
Bodies, unless we have a clear Idea of Order, and necessity, and know, that God
himself is obliged to follow it, by a necessary Love which he bears to himself?
But farther, supposing that Order depends on a free Decree of God, we must
still have recourse to him to be informed of it: God must nevertheless be
consulted, notwithstanding the aversion which some of the Learned have, to
apply to him; and this truth must still be granted, that we have need of God to
be instructed. But that supposed free Decree which is the cause of Order, is a
mere fiction of mind for the Reasons I have given.

If it be not a necessary Order that Man should be made for his Author, and
that his will should be conformable to Order, or to the essential and necessary
will of God: If it be not true that Actions are good or ill, because agreeable
or repugnant to an immutable and necessary Order, and that this same order
requires that the Good should be rewarded, and the Evil punished: Last of all,
if all Men have not naturally a clear Idea of Order, even of such an one as God
himself cannot will the contrary to what it prescribes, (since God cannot will
Disorder) certainly I can see nothing but Universal Confusion. For what is
there to be blamed in the most infamous and unjust actions of the Heathens, to
whom God has given no Laws? What will be the reason that will dare to judge
them, if there be no supreme reason that condemns them?

There is a Poet who says, it is impossible to distinguish Justice from
Injustice: Nec natura potest justo secernere iniquum. Lucretius, Diogenes*
and a Philosopher that will have it an infirmity, to blush or be ashamed for
infamous actions. These and the like Paradoxes are often asserted in the heat
of Imagination, and in the transport of the Passions. But how can we condemn
these Opinions, if there be not an Universal and Necessary Order, Rule, or
Reason, which is also present to those who can retire into themselves? We fear
not on several occasions to judge others, and also our selves: but by what
Authority should we do it, if the inward Reason that judges, when we seem to
pronounce Sentence against others and our selves, be not supreme, and common to
all men?

But if this Reason were not present to those who retreat into their own
Breast; and if the Heathens too, had not naturally some union with the order we
speak of; upon the score of what Sin or Disobedience could they be reckoned
culpable, and by what Justice could God punish them? This I say, upon a
Prophet's teaching me that God is willing to And now O Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, judge betwixt me and my Vineyard. Isa. 5.3
make Men the Arbiters betwixt him and his People, provided they determine by
the immutable, and necessary order of Justice. Nero killed his Mother, it is
true: But in what has he done amiss? He followed the natural Motion of his
Hatred: God gave him no Precept to the contrary: the Laws of the Jews were not
made for him. You Will say perhaps that such actions are restrained by the
Natural Law, and that was known to him: But what proof can you have of it? For
my own part I agree to it; because indeed this is an irresistible Proof for an
Immutable, and Necessary Order; and for the Knowledge which every Mind has of
it, and that so much more clear, as it is more united to Universal Reason, and
less sensible to the impression of the Senses and Passions; In a word, as it is
more reasonable. But it is requisite that I explain as clearly as possibly I
can, the sense I have about Natural, or Divine Order and Law. For the
difficulty that is found to embrace my Opinion, proceeds, it may be, from the
want of a distinct conception of my meaning.

It Is certain that God comprehends in himself, after an intelligible manner,
the Perfections of all the Beings he has created, or can create; and that by
these intelligible Perfections, he knows the Essence of all things, as by his
own Wills he knows their Existence. Which perfections are likewise the
immediate Object of the Mind of Man, for the Reasons I have given. Therefore
the intelligible Ideas, or the Perfections which are in God, which represent to
us what is external to him, are absolutely necessary and immutable. But Truths
are nothing but relations of Equality, or Inequality, that are found between
these Intelligible Beings, since it is only true that 2 times 2 are 4, or that
2 times 2 are not 5, because there is a Relation of Equality between 2 times 2
and 4, and of Inequality between 2 times 2 and 5. Therefore Truths are as
immutable, and necessary as Ideas. It has ever been a truth, that 2 times 2 are
4, and it is impossible it should ever be false: which is visible, without any
Necessity, that God, as supreme Legislator, should have established these
Truths, so, Art. 6. and 8.
as is said by M. des Carts, in his Answer to the six Objections.

We easily comprehend then what is Truth, but Men find some difficulty to
conceive what is this immutable, and necessary Order: what is this Natural, and
Divine Law which God necessarily wills, and which the Righteous likewise will.
For a Man's Righteousness consists in his Loving Order, and in his conforming
his Will in all things to it: as that which makes a Sinner in his disliking
Order in some things, and willing that it should conform to his Desires. Yet
methinks these things are not so mysterious, as is imagined; and I am persuaded
all the difficulty that is found in them proceeds from the trouble the mind is
at to aspire to abstract, and Metaphysical Thoughts. Here then is in part what
are my Thoughts of Order.

It Is evident that the perfections which are in God representative of created,
or possible Beings, are not all Equal: That those for Example which represent
Bodies, are less noble, than others that represent Spirits; and that even in
those which represent only Bodies, or Spirits, there are degrees of perfection,
greater and lesser ad infinitum. This is clearly, and easily conceived, though
it be hard to reconcile the simplicity of the Divine Essence, with that variety
of Intelligible Ideas, included in his Wisdom. For it is evident, that if all
the Ideas of God were equal, he could see no difference between his Works;
since he cannot see his Creatures, save in that which is in himself,
representing them: And if the Idea of a Watch which shows the Hour, with all
the different Motions of the Planets, were no perfecter than that of another,
which only points to the hour, or than that of a Circle and a Square, a Watch
would be no perfecter than a Circle. For we can judge of the Perfection of
Works, only by the Perfection of the Ideas we have of them: and if there was no
more understanding, or sign of Wisdom, in a Watch, than a Circle, it would be
as easy to conceive the most complicated Machines, as a Square, or a Circle.

If then it be true, that God is the Universal Being, who includes in Himself
all Beings, in an intelligible manner, and that all these intelligible Beings
which have in God a necessary Existence, are not equally perfect; it is evident,
there will be between them an Immutable and Necessary Order, and that as there
are Eternal and necessary Truths, because there are Relations of Magnitude
between intelligible Beings, there must likewise be an immutable and necessary
Order, by reason of the Relations of Perfection, that are between these Beings.
It Is therefore an Immutable Order, that Spirits should be nobler than Bodies,
as it is a necessary Truth, that 2 times 2 should be 4, or that 2 times 2
should not be 5.

But hitherto immutable Order seems rather a Speculative Truth, than a
necessary Law; For if Order be considered but as we have just now done; we see,
for Example, that it is True, that Minds are more noble than Bodies: but we do
not see that this Truth is at the same time an Order, which has the force of a
Law, and that there is an Obligation of preferring Minds before Bodies. It must
then be considered, that God loves himself, by a necessary Love; and therefore
has a greater degree of love for that which in him represents, or includes a
greater degree of perfection, than for that which includes a less. So that if
we will suppose an Intelligible Mind to be a thousand times perfecter, than an
Intelligible Body, the love wherewith God loves Himself, must necessarily be a
thousand times greater for the former, than for the latter. For the Love of God
is necessarily proportioned to the Order which is between the intelligible
Beings, that he includes. Insomuch that the Order which is purely Speculative,
has the force of a Law in respect of God himself, supposing, as is certain,
that God loves himself Necessarily. And God cannot love Intelligible Bodies,
more than Intelligible Minds, though he may love created Bodies better than
created Minds, as I shall show by and by.

Now that immutable Order, which has the force of a Law in regard of God
himself, has visibly the force of a Law in reference to us. For this Order we
know, and our natural love comports with it, when we retire into our selves,
and our Senses and Passions leave us to our Liberty; In a word, when our
Self-love does not corrupt our Natural. Being we are made for God, and that
it is impossible for us to be quite separate from him, we discern in him this
Order, and we are naturally invited to love it. For it is His Light which
enlightens us, and his Love which animates us, though our Senses and Passions
obscure this Light, and determine against Order, the Impression we receive to
love according to it. But in spite of Concupiscence which conceals this Order,
and hinders us from following it, it is still an essential, and indispensable
Law to us; and not only to us, but to all created Intilligences, and even to
the Damned. For I do not believe they are so utterly estranged from God, as not
to have a faint Idea of Order; as not to find still some beauty in it; and even
to be ready to conform to it in some particular Instances, which are not
prejudicial to Self-Love.

Corruption of Heart consists in Opposition to Order. Therefore Malice or
Corruption of Will, being not equal, even among the Damned, it is plain, they
are not all equally opposite to Order, and that they do not hate it in all
cases, unless in consequence of their Hatred to God. For as no one can hate
Good considered barely as such, so no one can hate Order, but when it seems to
thwart his Inclinations. But though it seem contrary to our Inclinations, it
nevertheless retains the force of a Law, which Condemns, and also punishes us,
by a Worm that never dies.

Now then we see what Order is, and how it has the strength of a Law, by that
necessary Love which God has for himself. We conceive how this Law comes to be
general for all Minds, God not excepted, and why it is necessary, and
absolutely indispensible. Lastly, we conceive, or we may easily conceive in
general, that it is the Principle of all Divine and Humane Laws, and that it is
according to this Law that all Intelligences are judged, and all Creatures
disposed in the respective rank that belongs to them.

I acknowledge it is not easy to explain all this in particular, and I venture
not to undertake it. For should I go to show the Connection particular Laws have
with the general, and account for the agreement which certain manners of acting
have to Order, I should be forced to engage in Difficulties, that it may be I
could not resolve, and which would lead me out of sight of my subject.

Nevertheless if it be considered that God neither has, nor can have any other
Law, than his own Wisdom, and the necessary Love he has for it, we shall easily
judge, that all Divine Laws must depend on it: And if it be observed that he
has made the World with reference only to that Wisdom, and Love, since he acts
only for Himself; we shall not doubt but all natural Laws must tend to the
Preservation, and Perfection of this World, according to indispensable Order,
and by their dependence on necessary Love. For the Wisdom and Will of God
regulates all things.

There is no need I should explain at present, this Principle more at large:
what I have already said being sufficient to infer this Consequence, That in
the first institution of Nature it was Impossible for Minds to be subjected to
Bodies. For since God cannot act without Knowledge and against his Will, he has
made the World by his Wisdom, and by the motion of his Love: He has made all
things by his Son, and in his Holy Spirit, as we are taught in Scripture. Now
in the Wisdom of God, Minds are perfecter than Bodies, and by the necessary
Love God has for himself, he prefers what is more perfect to what is less so.
Therefore it is not possible that Minds should be subject to Bodies in the
first institution of Nature. Otherwise it must be said, that God in creating
the World, has not followed the Rules of his Eternal Wisdom, nor the Motions of
his natural and necessary Love: which not only is inconceivable, but involves a
manifest contradiction.

True it is that at present the created Mind is debased below a material and
sensible Body, but that is because Order considered as a necessary Law, will
have it so. It Is because God loving himself by a necessary Love, which is
always his Inviolable Law, cannot love Spirits that are repugnant to him, nor
consequently prefer them to Bodies, in which there is nothing evil, nor in the
hatred of God. For God loves not Sinners in themselves. Nor would they subsist
in the Universe but through JESUS CHRIST. God neither preserves them, nor loves
them, See the Fifth Dialogue of Christian Conversations.
but that they may cease to be Sinners, through the Grace of CHRIST JESUS: or
that, if they remain eternally Sinners, they may be eternally condemned, by
immutable and necessary Order, and by the Judgment of our LORD, by virtue of
whom they subsist for the Glory of the Divine Justice: for without Him they
would be annihilated. This I say by the way, to clear some difficulties that
might remain touching what I said elsewhere about Original Sin, or the general
Corruption of Nature.

It Is, if I mistake not, a very useful reflection to consider that the Mind has
but two ways of knowing Objects. By Light and by Sensation. It sees them by
Light, when it has a clear Idea of them, and when by consulting that Idea it
can discover all the properties whereof they are capable. It sees things by
Sensation, when it finds not in it self their clear Idea to consult it; and so
cannot clearly discover their properties; but only know them by a confused
Sensation without Light and Evidence. It Is by Light and a clear Idea the mind
sees the Essences of things, Numbers and Extension: It Is by a confused Idea, or
Sensation, that it judges of the Existence of Creatures, and knows its own.

What the Mind perceives by Light, or by a clear Idea, it perceives in a most
perfect manner: moreover, it sees clearly that all the Obscurity, or
Imperfection of its Knowledge proceeds from its own Weakness and Limitation, or
from want of Application, and not from the Imperfection of the Idea it
perceives. But what the mind perceives by Sensation is never clearly known: not
for want of any Application on part of the Mind, (for we always are very
applicative to what we feel,) but by the defectiveness of the Idea, which is
extremely obscure and confused.

Hence we may conclude that it is in God, or in an immutable nature, that we
see all that we know by Light, or a clear Idea; not only because we discover by
Light, only numbers Extension, and the Essences of Beings, which depend not on
a free Act of God, as I have already said; but also because we know these
things in a very perfect manner, and we should even know them in an infinitely
perfect manner, if our thinking Capacity were infinite, since nothing is
wanting to the Idea that represents them. We ought likewise to conclude, that
we see in our selves whatever we know by Sensation. However, this is not, as if
we could produce in our selves any new modification, or that the sensations, or
modifications of our Soul could represent the Objects, on occasion whereof God
excites them in us: But only that our Sensations which are not distinguished
from our selves, and consequently cannot represent any thing distinct from us,
may nevertheless represent the existence of Beings, or cause us to judge that
they exist. For God raising Sensations in us upon the presence of Objects, by
an action that has nothing sensible, we fancy we receive from the Object not
only the Idea which represents its essence, but also the Sensation which makes
us judge of its existence: For there is always a pure Idea, and a confused
Sensation in the Knowledge we have of things as actually existing, if we except
that of God, and of our own Soul. I except the Existence of God. For this we
know by a pure Idea, and without Sensation, since it depends not on any cause,
and is included in the Idea of a necessary Being, as the Equality of Diameters
is included in the Idea of a Circle. And I except the Existence of our Soul;
because we are inwardly conscious that we Think, Will, and Feel: and have no
clear Idea of our Soul, as I have sufficiently explained in the seventh Chapter
of the second Part of the third Book, and elsewhere.

These are some of the Reasons which we have to add to those already given, to
prove that all our Light is derived to us from God, and that the immediate and
direct Object of our clear and evident notices is an immutable, and necessary
Nature: Some Objections are usually made against this Opinion; which I shall
now endeavor to solve.

Against what has been said, that none but God enlightens us, and that we see
all things in him. OBJECTION I.
OUR Soul thinks because it is her Nature. God in creating her gave her the
faculty of thinking: and she needs nothing more. But if any thing else is
wanting, let us stick to what Experience teaches us of our senses, which is,
that they are the manifest causes of our Ideas. It Is an ill way of
Philosophizing to argue against Experience.

ANSWER.
I cannot but admire that the Cartesian Gentlemen, who with so much reason
reject and scorn the general Terms of Nature and faculty should so willingly
employ them on this occasion. They cry out against a Man that shall say the
Fire burns by its nature, and converts certain Bodies into Glass by a natural
Faculty: And yet some of them fear not to say that the Humane Mind produces the
Ideas of all things in it self by its nature, and because it has a thinking
faculty. But be it spoken without offense, these words are no more
significative in their Mouths, than in the Peripateticks.

I know very well that the Soul is capable of thinking. But I know likewise
that extension is capable of Figures: The Soul is capable of Will as matter is
of Motion. But as it is false that matter though capable of figure, and motion,
has in it self a force, faculty, or nature by which it can move it self, and
give it self now a round figure, and anon a square one; so though the Soul be
naturally, and essentially capable of Knowledge, and Will, it is false that she
has Faculties whereby she can produce in her Ideas, or motion toward good.
There is a great difference between being Moveable, and self moving. Matter is
by its nature moveable, and capable of Figures; nor can it subsist without a
figure. But it neither moves it self, nor shapes it self, nor has it any
faculty to do it. The Mind is of its nature capable of motion, and Ideas I
acknowledge. But it neither moves, nor enlightens its self. But it is God that
does all in Minds, as well as in Bodies.

Can we say that God effects the changes that happen in matter, and that he
causes not those which occur in the Mind? See the first Illustration.
Is this to give to God the things that are his, to leave these latter sort of
Beings to their own management? Is he not equally Lord of all things? Is he not
the Creator, Preserver, and true mover of Minds as well as Bodies? Certainly he
makes all, both Substances, Accidents, Beings, and Modes of Being. For in
short, he knows all: But he knows nothing but what he does. We therefore
streighten him in his Knowledge, if we limit him in his Action.

But if it must be said that Creatures have such faculties as are commonly
conceived, and that natural Bodies have a Nature which is the Principle of
their Motion and Rest, as says Aristotle and his Followers: This indeed
overthrows all my Ideas; but yet I will rather agree to it, than say the Mind
enlightens it self. Men may say that the Soul has the force of moving diversely
the Limbs of her Body, and of communicating to them Sense and Life: They may
say, if they please, that it is she that gives heat to the Blood, motion to the
Spirits! and to the rest of her Body, its Bulk, Situation and Figure: Only let
them not say that the Mind gives Light and Motion to it self. If God works not
all, let us allow him at least to do what is Noblest and Perfectest in the
World. And if Creatures do any thing, let them move Bodies, and range and
posture them as they think fit: But let them never act upon Minds.

We will say (if that will serve) that Bodies move each other, after they have
been moved themselves or rather will sit down ignorant of the different
Dispositions of matter as not concerning us: But let not our Minds be ignorant
whence proceeds the Light that enlightens them: Let them know from what hand
they receive all that can make them more happy, or more perfect, let them
acknowledge their dependence in its whole extent, and know, that whatever they
actually have, God gives them every moment; for as says a great Father upon
another Subject, Est quippe sup^rb^a* and pecc^^um maximum, uti da^is, ta^quam
innaris.

S Bern. de diligendo Deo.


It Is a very criminal Pride to use the gifts of God, as our own innate
Perfections. Above all let us take heed of imagining that the Senses instruct
Reason, that the Body enlightens the Mind, that the Soul receive of the Body
what it wants it self. We had better believe our selves independent, than to
believe we truly depend on Bodies. It Is much better to be our own Masters, than
to seek for Masters among inferior Creatures. But we had much better submit our
selves to Eternal Truth, which assures us in the Gospel, that none else is our
Instructor; than to believe the Testimony of our Senses, or of some Men, who
presume to talk to us as our Teachers. Experience (whatever may be said,) does
not countenance prejudices. For our Senses, no less than our Teachers after the
Flesh, are only occasional causes of the Instruction which Eternal Wisdom
infuses into our most inward Reason. But because this Wisdom enlightens us by
an insensible Operation, we imagine it is our Eyes, or the words of those that
verberate the Air against our Ears, who produce this Light, or pronounce that
intelligible Voice which instructs us. And for this Reason, as I have said in
another place, our LORD thought it not enough to instruct us in an intellible
manner by his Divinity; unless he condescended also to inform us in a sensible
way by his Humanity, thereby teaching us that he is every way our Master. And
because we cannot easily retire into our selves, to consult him, in Quality of
eternal Truth, immutable Order, intelligible Light, he has rendered Truth
sensible by his Words, Order Amiable by his Example, Light Visible by a Body
which breaks the force of its Luster; and after all we are still so ungrateful,
unjust, stupid and insensible, as to respect as our Masters, and that against
his express prohibition, not only other Men, but it may be the most insensible
and vilest Bodies.

OBJECTION II.
Since the Soul is more perfect than Bodies, how comes it that she cannot
include in her that which represents them? Why may not the Idea of extension be
one of her Modifications; it is true there is none but God who acts in her, and
modifies her? But why must she see Bodies in God if she can see them in her own
Substance, she is not material, it is confessed. But God, though a pure Spirit,
sees Bodies in himself; why then may not the Soul though Spiritual see Bodies
by considering herself?

ANSWER.
Do not we see that there is this difference between God and the Humane Soul,
that God is Being without restriction, Universal, Infinite Being, and the Soul
is a sort of particular Being? This is omitted in some Editions.
[ It Is a property of infinite to be at the same time one, and yet all things;
composed as we may say of infinite perfections, and yet so simple that every
perfection he possesses, includes all the other without any real distinction;
for as every Divine perfection is infinite, it constitutes the whole Divine
Essence; But the Soul since a limited Being cannot have extension in her
without becoming material.] God includes in himself Bodies in an intelligible
manner. He sees their Essences or Ideas, in his Wisdom; and their Existence in
his Love, or in his Wills. This must necessarily be said, since God has made
Bodies; and he knew what he made before any thing was created. But the Soul
cannot see in her self what she does not contain: Nor can she see clearly what
she does contain, but only has a confused Sensation of it. I explain my self.

The Soul does not include Intelligible extension, as one of her modes of
Being: Because this extension is not any mode of Being but a true Being. We can
conceive that Extension separately from any thing else, but we cannot conceive
any modes of Being without perceiving the Subject, or Being whereof they are
the modes. We perceive this extension without thinking on our mind, and we
cannot conceive it to be any modification of our mind. This extension when
circumscribed makes some figure, but the Limits of the mind cannot be figured.
This extension having parts may be divided, at least in one sense, but we see
nothing in the Soul that is divisible. This extension therefore that we see is
no mode of the minds Existence, and therefore the mind cannot see it within it
self. How can we see it in one species of Being all sorts of Beings? In one
particular and finite Being, a Triangle in general, and infinite Triangles? For
in fine, the Soul perceives a Triangle, or a Circle in general, though it be a
Contradiction for the Soul to have a modification in general. The Sensations of
Color which the Soul ascribes to figures make them particular, because no
modification of a particular Being can be general.

Surely we may affirm what we clearly conceive. But we clearly conceive that
the Extension which we see is something distinct from our selves, therefore we
may affirm, that this extension is not a modification of our Being, and that
it is something actually distinct from us. For we must observe, that the Sun for
instance that we see is not that we look upon. The Sun and all we see in the
material World is not visible of it self, as I have formerly proved. The Soul
can only see the Sun to which she is immediately united. But we have a clear
Perception, and a distinct Sensation, that the Sun is something different from
us. Therefore we speak against our Light, and against our Conscience, when we
say the Soul sees all surrounding Bodies in her own modifications.

Pleasure, Pain, Savor, Heat, Color, all our Sensations, and Passions, are
the modifications of our Soul. But though they be so, do we clearly know them?
Can we compare Heat with Savor, Odor with Color? Can we discover what
Relation there is between Red and Green? Or even between Green and Green? It Is
not so with figures, we compare them with one another, we find out exactly
their Proportions: We know precisely that the diagonal of a Square, multiplied
into it self, makes a Square, that is double to the former, what Analogy is
there between these intelligible Figures, which are most clear Ideas, with the
modifications of our Soul, which are only confused Sensations? And why must it
be pretended, that intelligible Figures cannot be perceived by the Soul, unless
they be her modifications, since the Soul knows not any of her modifications by
a clear Idea, but only by Conscience or internal Sense? As I have elsewhere
proved, and shall prove again in the next Illustration. If we could not see the
figures of Bodies, except in our selves, they would be on the contrary
unintelligible to us: For we do not know our selves, but are darkness to our
selves; and we must cast our Eye outward if we would behold our selves! And we
shall never know what we are till we shall contemplate our selves in him who is
our Light, and in whom all things become Light. For no where but in God
material Beings are perfectly intelligible; but out of him the most Spiritual
Substances are utterly invisible. The Idea of Extension, which we see in God,
is most clear. But though we see not in God the Idea of our Soul, we are very
conscious that we exist, and are sensible of what we actually have. But it is
impossible to discover what we are, or any of the modifications we are capable
of.

OBJECTION III.
In God there is nothing moveable: In him there is nothing Figured. If there be
a Sun in the Intelligible World, that Sun is always equal to it self; whereas
the visible Sun appears bigger when near the Horizon, than when remote from it,
therefore it is not the Intelligible Sun we see. The case is the same in
respect of other Creatures. Therefore we see not in God the Works of God.

ANSWER.
To give an Answer to all this we need only consider, that God includes within
himself, an infinite intelligible Extension; For God knows Extension, in as
much as he has made it, and he can know it no otherwise than in himself.
Therefore as the mind may perceive part of that intelligible Extension, which
God includes, it is certain it may perceive in God all Figures; for all finite
Intelligible Extension is necessarily an intelligible Figure, since Figure is
nothing but the termination of Extension. Moreover that Figure of intelligible
and general Extension becomes sensible, and particular, by Color, or some
other sensible Quality, which the Soul ascribes to it; for the Soul almost
always bestows her own Sensation upon a lively and affecting Idea. Thus there
is no necessity, that there should be in God sensible Bodies, or Figures in
Intelligible Extension, in order to our seeing them in God, or that God may see
them himself, though he considers nothing but himself.

So likewise if it be conceived that a Figure of intelligible Extension, made
sensible by Color, should be taken, successively, from the different Parts of
that same infinite Extension; or if it be conceived that a Figure of
Intelligible Extension may turn upon its Center, or successively approach
another, we perceive the motion of a sensible or Intelligible Figure, though
there be no motion in intelligible Extension. For God sees not the motion of
Bodies in his Substance, or in the Idea he has of them in himself. But only by
the knowledge he has of his own Wills relating to them. He sees their Existence
only by that way, because his Will only gives Being to all things. The Wills of
God change nothing in his Substance: nor do they move it: Perhaps Intelligible
Extension is immovable all manner of ways, even intelligibly. But though we
see only this intelligible Extension, immovable or otherwise, it seems
moveable to us, because of the Sensation of Golour, or the confused Image
remaining after the Sensation, which we successively annex to the several parts
of Intelligible Extension, that furnishes us with an Idea, when we see or
imagine the motion of any Body.

From what I have said, we may understand why we see the Intelligible Sun,
sometimes greater and sometimes less, though it be always the same with respect
to God. For all that is required to this, is but to see, one while, a greater
part of Intelligible Extension, and another while a less, and to have a lively
Sensation of Light, to bestow upon that part of Extension. Now as all the Parts
of Intelligible Extension are all of the same nature, they may all
indifferently represent any Body whatever.

It must not be imagined that the Intelligible World has any such relation to
the material and sensible, that there must be for instance an Intelligible Sun,
an intelligible Horse, and an Intelligible Tree destined to represent to us the
Sun, an Horse and a Tree; and that all those who see the Sun necessarily see
this pretended intelligible Sun. All intelligible Extension may be conceived
Circular, or to have an intelligible Figure of an Horse, or a Tree, and so may
serve to represent the Sun, an Horse and Tree, and consequently be a Sun, a
Horse and a Tree in the intelligible World, and likewise to become a sensible
and visible Sun, Horse, and Tree, if the Soul has any Sensation occasion by
Bodies to affix to these Ideas.

Therefore when I said that we saw different Bodies by the knowledge we have of
the Perfections of God which represent them: I did not mean precisely that
there were certain particular Ideas in God to represent each Body in
particular; and that we saw such a particular Idea, in seeing such a particular
Body. For it is certain we could not see this Body sometimes great, and
sometimes small, one while round, and another while square, if we saw it by a
particular Idea, that was always the same. But I say we see all things in God,
by the application God makes of intelligible Extension to our mind, in a
thousand different ways, and that thus intelligible Extension includes in it
all the Perfections, or rather differences, of Bodies; because of the different
Sensations, the Soul bestows upon the Ideas which she receives occasionally
from them. I have discoursed after another manner; but it should be concluded,
that was only to make some of my proofs more forcible and sensible; and it
should not be gathered from what I have here said, that the foundation of those
proofs is ruined. I could give the reasons of the different ways wherein I
explain my self, if I thought it necessary.

I venture not to dive deeper into this Subject for fear of speaking things
either too Abstract, or Uncommon: Or, if that seem better, for fear of
hazarding to speak things which I neither know, nor am capable of discovering:
Only let me produce those passages of Scripture which seem contrary to what I
have now established, which I shall endeavor to Explain.

OBJECTION.
St. John in his Gospel, and in the first of his Epistles, says, No man has
seen God at any time* Chapter 1.18. Chapter 4.^^*
The only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the father he has declared him.

ANSWER.
I answer, that it is not properly to see God, to see the Creatures in him. It Is
not to see his essence to see the essences of Creatures in his Substance; as it
is not to see a Mirror, to view only the Objects it represents.

Not but that we might say with St. Paul, St. Austin, St. Gregory, Cor. 13.
and many other Fathers of the Church, that we see God in this Life, though in
a very imperfect Manner. The Words of St. Gregory in his Morals upon Job, are
these. A luce incorruptibili caligo nos nostrae corruptionis obscurat; L. 31.
c. 20
cumque and videri aliquatenus potest and tamen videri lux ipsa sicuti est non
potest, quam long sit indicat. Quam si men's non cerneret, nec quia long esse
videret. Si autem perfect jam cerneret, profecto hanc quasi per caliginem non
videret. Igitur quia nec omnino cernitur, nec rursum omnino non cernitur, recte
dictum est, quia a long Deus videtur. Though St. Gregory in explaining this
passage of Job, Oculi ejus a long prospiciunt says, that in this Life we only
see God a far of: This is not as if God were not most present to us; but that
the Clouds of our Concupiscence conceal him from us. Caligo nos nostrae
corruptionis obscurat. For in other places, he with St. Austin compares the
light of God, which is God himself, to the Light of the Sun which surrounds us,
and which we see not because we are blind, or shut our Eyes when dazzled with
its Luster. In Sole oculos clausos tenemus.

St. Austin goes farther yet than his faithful Disciple St. Gregory. For though
he confesses that we know God but in a very imperfect manner at present, yet he
affirms, in several places, Propinquior nobis qui fecit, quam multa quae facta
sunt. In illo enim vivimus, movemur, and sumus. Istorum autem pleraque remota
sunt a mente nostra propter dissimilitudinem sui generis. Recte culpantur in
libro sapientia inquisitores* hujus saeculi. Si enim tantum, inquit, potuerunt
valere ut possent aestimare saeculum, quomodo ejus Dominum, non facilius
invenerunt? Ignota enim sunt fundamenta oculis nostris, and qui fundavit ^erram
propinquat mentibus nostris. De Genesis ad litt. l. 5. chapter 16, De Trinitate, lib.
8. chapter 8.
that God is better known to us, than those things we fancy we know best. He
that has made all things, (says he) is nearer us, than his Creatures; For in
him we have Life, and Motion and Being, Most of Created Beings are not
proportionate to our Mind, because they are corporeal, and of a sort
distinguished from it. And lower: The Inquirers into the secrets of Nature, are
justly condemned in the Book of Wisdom; for if they have been able to penetrate
what is most secret and unreveal'd to Men, with how much greater ease might
they have discovered the Author and Sovereign of the Universe; The Foundations
of the Earth are hid from our Eyes: But he that laid the Foundations is present
to our Minds. And for this Reason that Holy Father believes, that he that has
Charity knows God better than he knows his Brother. Ecce (says he) jam potest
Notiorem Deum habere quam Fratrem. Plane Notiorem, quia praesentiorem: Notiorem
quia interiorem: Notiorem quia certiorem. I bring not any other proofs of St.
Austin's Opinion: Those who desire them, may find all sorts in that learned
Collection Ambrosius Victor has made of them, in the second Volume of his
Christian Philosophy.

But to return to the passage of St. John, No man has seen God at any time I
believe the design of the Evangelist, in affirming no Man has seen God, is to
state the difference between the Old and New Testament. Between JESUS CHRIST
and the Patriarchs and Prophets, of whom it is written, that they have seen
God. For Moses, Jacob, Isaiah, and others, saw God only with corporeal Eyes,
and under an unknown Form: They have not seen him in himself, Deum nemo vidit
unquam; But the only Son, who is in the Bosom of the Father, has instructed us
in what He has seen. Vnigenitus qui est in sinu Patris: Ipse enarravit.

OBJECTION.
St. Paul writing to Timothy, says, that God inhabits inaccessible Light which
no man has seen, 1 Timothy 16.16*
nor can see if the Light of God cannot be approached to, we cannot see all
things in it*

ANSWER.
St. Paul cannot be contrary to St. John who assures us, that JESUS CHRIST is
the true Light that lightens all Men who come into the World. For the mind of
Man, which many of the St. Cyrill of Alexandria upon the words of St. John,
Erat lux vera. St. Aug. Tr. 14. upon St. John, St. Greg. c. 27. upon 28 of Job.
Fathers call Illuminated, or Enlightened Light. Lumen Illuminatum, is
Enlightened only with the Light of Eternal Wisdom, which the Fathers therefore
call Illuminating Light, Lumen Illuminations. David advises to approach to God,
and to be englightned by him; Accedite ad eum and illuminamini. But how can we
be enlightened by it, if we cannot see the Light by which we are to be
enlightened? Therefore when St. Paul says, that Light is inaccessible, he means
to Inaccessibilem dixit; sed omni homini ^umana sapienti: Scriptura quippe
sacra omnes carnalium sectatores humanitatis nomine notare solet. St. Greg. in
cap. 28. Job.
Carnal Man who cannot retire into himself to contemplate it: Or if he speaks
of all Men, it is because there are none but are disturbed from the perfect
Contemplation of Truth, because our Body incessantly troubles the attension of
our mind.

OBJECTION.
Ex. 33*20.
God answering Moses when he desired to see him, says, Thou can not see my
Face; for there shall no man see Me and live.

ANSWER.
It is evident that the literal sense of this Passage is not contrary to what I
have said hitherto. For I do not suppose it possible to see God in this life,
as Moses desired to see Him. However, I Answer, that we must die to see God:
For the Soul unites herself to Truth proportionably as she quits her union with
the Body: Which is a Truth that cannot be sufficiently considered. Those who
follow the Motions of their passions; those whose Imagination is defiled, with
the enjoyment of Pleasures; Those who have strengthened the Union, and
Correspondence of their Mind with their Body: Neither is it found in the land
of the living. Job 28.13.
In a word, those who live cannot see God: For they cannot retire into
themselves to consult the Truth. Happy therefore are they who have a pure
Heart, a disengaged Spirit, a clear Imagination, who have no dependence on the
World, and hardly any on the Body. In a word, happy are the Dead, for they
shall see God. Wisdom has published it openly upon the Mountain; and Wisdom
whispers it secretly to those who consult Her by retiring into themselves.

Those who are constantly quickening in them the Concupiscence of Pride, who are
indefatigably forming a thousand Ambitious designs, who unite, and even enslave
their Soul, not only to the Body, but all surrounding Objects: In a word, those
who Live not only the Life of the Body, but also that of the World, cannot see
God: For WISDOM inhabits the most retired and inward Reason, whilst they
perpetually expand themselves abroad.

But such as constantly deaden the Activity of their Senses, who faithfully
preserve the Purity of their Imagination, who courageously resist the Motions
of their Passions; In a word, that break all those Bonds whereby others
continue enchain'd to the Body, and sensible grandeur; may discover infinite
Truths, and see that Wisdom which is bid from the Eyes of all Living. They
after a sort do cease to live when they retire into themselves: Job 28.31.
They relinquish the Body when they draw near to Truth. For the mind of Man
obtains that Site and Position between God and Bodies, that it can never quit
the one but it must approach the other. It cannot draw toward God but it must
remove from Bodies, nor pursue Bodies but it must recede from God: But because
we cannot give an absolute Farewell to the Body, till Death makes the
separation, I confess it impossible, till then, to be perfectly united to God.
We may at present, as says St. Paul, see God confusedly as in a Glass, Now we
see through a Glass darkly, but then face to face. Now I know in part, etc. 1
Cor. 13.2.
but we cannot see him face to face. Non videbit me homo and vivet. Yet we may
see him in part, that is, imperfectly and confusedly.

It must not be imagined, that life is equal in all Men living, or that it
consists in an indivisible point. The Dominion of the Body over the Mind, which
withstands our uniting our selves with God by the Knowledge of Truth, is
susceptible of more and less. The Soul is not equally in all Men united by
Sensations to the Body, which she animates, nor by Passions to those, her
Inclinations carry her to: And there are some who so mortify the Concupiscence
of Pleasure, and of Pride within them, that they scarce retain any Commerce
with their Body, or the World; and so are as it were Dead: St. Paul is a great
instance hereof, who chastis'd his Body, and brought it to subjection; who was
so humbled, and destroyed, that he thought no longer on the World, nor the
World on him: For the World was dead, and crucified to him, as he was dead and
crucified in the World. And on this account it was, says St. Gregory, that he
was so sensible to Truth, and so prepared to receive those Divine Lights which
are included in his Epistles; which however all glorious and splendid, make no
impression save on those who mortify their Senses and Passions by his Example.
The natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him. 1 Cor. c. 2.14. Ad Moysen dicitur, non videbit me homo
and vivet, ac si aperte diceretur: Nullus unquam Deum spiritualiter videt qui
mundo carnaliter vivit. St. Greg. upon the 28. of Job chapter 28.
For as he says himself, the carnal and sensible Man cannot comprehend
Spiritual things: Because Worldly address the taste of the Age, to fineness of
Wit, the Nicety, the Liveliness, the Beauty of Imagination, whereby we live to
the World, and the World to us, infuse into our Mind an incredible stupidity
and a sad insensibility to all those Truths which cannot be perfectly
conceived, unless in the silence and calm of the Senses and Passions.

We must therefore desire that Death which unites us to God, or at least the
image of that Death, that is, the Mysterious Sleep in which all our External
Senses being locked up, we may hear the Voice of internal Truth, which is never
audible but in the silence of the Night, when Darkness involves sensible
Objects, and when the World is as it were dead to us. Thus it is, says St.
Gregory, that the Spouse heard the Voice of her beloved in her sleep, when she
said, I sleep, but my heart wakes; Outwardly I slumber but my heart watches
within: For having no life nor sense with reference to External Objects. I
become extremely sensible to the Voice of inward Truth, which accosts me, in my
inmost reason. Hinc est quod sponsa in canticis canticorum sponsi vocem quasi
per somnium audierat, quae dicebat, Ego dormio, and cor meum vigilat. Ac si
diceret, dum exteriores sensus ab ^ujus vitae sollicitudinibus sopio, vacant
mente, vivacius interna cognosco. Foris dormio, sed intus cor vigilat: quia dum
exteriora quasi non sentio, interiora solerter apprehendo. Been ergo Eliu ait
quod per somnium loquitur Deus. St. Gregory's Morals upon the 33. Chapter of Job.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Seventh CHAPTER of the Second PART of the Third
BOOK. Where I prove, That we have no clear Idea of the Nature, or Modifications
of our Soul.
I Have often said, and think sufficiently proved in the third Book, of the
preceding Treatise, that we have no clear Idea, but only the Conscience, or
inward Sensation of our Soul; and that therefore we have a much more imperfect
knowledge thereof than we have of Extension. Answer to the fifth Objection
against the second Meditation toward the end.
Which to me seemed so evident, that I did not think it necessary to prove it
more at large. But the Authority of M. des Carts, who possitively says, That
the nature of the Mind is better known than that of any other thing, has so
prepossessed some of his Disciples, that what I have said upon that Subject,
serves only to make them think me a weak Person unable to reach to, and hold
fast abstracted Truths, which have nothing in them to welcome and retain the
attention of their Contemplators.

I confess, I am extremely Feeble, Sensible, and Heavy, and my Mind depends on
my Body more ways than I can express. I know it: I feel it: and I continually
labor to increase this knowledge I have of my self. For though we cannot help
our being miserable; we ought at least to have the knowledge, and the sense of
it; we ought at least, to be humbled, upon the sight of our inward Miseries,
and to acknowledge the need we have of being delivered from this Body of Death
which throws trouble and confusion into all the faculties of our Soul.

But yet the Question before us is so well proportioned to the Mind, that I can
see no need of any great Application to resolve it, and for that reason I did
not insist upon it. For I think it may be affirmed, that most Men's ignorance
about the Soul, as of its distinction from the Body, of its Spirituality,
Immortality, of its other properties, is sufficiently demonstrative, that we
have no clear and distinct Idea of it.

It may be said that we have a clear Idea of Body, because we need but consult
the Idea that represents it, to discover what Modifications it is capable of.
We plainly see, that it may be either round or square, in Rest or Motion. We
easily conceive, that a square may be divided into two Triangles, two
Parallelograms, or two Trapezia. We never are at a stand what to answer to the
demand, whether this or that be implied or denied in Extension, because the
Idea of Extension being clear, we may easily, and by a bare perception,
discover what it includes, and what it excludes.

But it does not appear to me that we have any such Idea of our Mind, as can
discover when we consult it, the Modifications it will admit. Had we never felt
either Pleasure or Pain, we could not tell whether our Soul were susceptible of
either. If a Man had never eaten a Melon, felt Smart, or seen Red or Blue, he
might have consulted long enough this pretended Idea of his Soul, before he
could distinctly discover whether it was capable or not, of such Sensations or
Modifications. I say farther, that though a Man actually feel Pain, or sees
Color, he cannot discover by a simple view, whether these Qualities belong to
the Soul. He Will imagine that Pain is in the Body, which occasions him to suffer
it, and that Color is diffused upon the surface of Objects, though it be
clearly conceived, that these Objects are distinguished from the Soul.

To be satisfied whether or no sensible Qualities are Modes of the Mind's
existence, this pretended Idea of the Soul is never consulted. On the contrary,
the Cartesians themselves consult the Idea of Extension, and reason in this
manner: Heat, Pain, Color, cannot be Modifications of Extension: For this is
capable but of different figures and Motions. Now there are but two kinds of
Beings, Bodies and Minds. Therefore Heat, Pain and Color, and all other
sensible Qualities, are the Furniture of the Mind.

Whilst they are obliged to consult their Idea of Extension, to discover
whether sensible Qualities are Modifications of their Soul; is it not evident
they have no clear Idea of it? For otherwise would they ever bethink themselves
of so indirect a Conduct, When a Philosopher would know whether Rotundity
belongs to Extension, does he enquire into the Idea of the Soul, or any other
besides that of Extension? Does he not see clearly in the same Idea of
Extension, that Rotundity is a Modification of it? And would it not be
extravagance in him to argue thus to be instructed? There are only two sorts of
Beings, Minds and Bodies: Roundness is not a Modification of a Mind; therefore
it is a Modification of a Body.

We discover then by a bare perception without Argumentation, and by the mere
Application of the Mind to the Idea of Extension, that Roundness and every
other Figure is a Modification belonging to Body, and that Pleasure, Pain,
Heat, and all other sensible Qualities, are not Modifications of it. There can
be no Question proposed about what does, or does not appertain to Extension,
but may be easily, readily, and boldly answered by the sole consideration of
the Idea that represents it. All Men are agreed, in their notion, and belief
upon this Point. For those who will have Matter capable of Thought, do not
imagine this Faculty is to be attributed to i^ because of Extension, being
persuaded that Extension considered, precisely as such, cannot Think.

But Men are not so well agreed about what they are to think of the Soul, and
her Modifications: for some there are, who fancy, that Pain, and Heat, or at
least that Clour does not belong to her. And a Man would be laughed at among
some Cartesians, that should affirm, the Soul grows actually Blue, Red, Yellow,
and that she is dyed with all the Colors of the Rainbow, when she
contemplates it. There are many who doubt, and more that don't believe, that
the Soul becomes formally stinking upon the smell of carrion; and that the taste
of Sugar, Pepper, and Salt, are properties belonging to her. Where then is the
clear Idea of the Soul that the Cartesians may consult it, and may all agree
about the subject where Colors, Savours, Odours, ought to enter.

But though the Cartesians were agreed upon these difficulties, yet we were not
to conclude from their agreement, that we have a clear Idea of the Soul: For if
they agree at last that it is she which is actually Green, or Red, when a Man
sees these Colors, yet this could not be concluded without a long train of
Reasonings; they could not see it by a simple view, nor ever discover it by
consulting the pretended Idea of the Soul, but rather by consulting that of the
Body. They could not be certain, that sensible Qualities belonged to the Soul,
were it not because they did not belong to Extension, whereof they have a clear
Idea. Nor could they ever convince of it such as, having little thought, are
incapable of complicated Perceptions, or Reasonings; or rather such as cannot
dwell upon the consideration of the clear Idea of Body, and who are apt to
confound all things: And so there would be always, Clowns, Women, Children, and
it may be some Scholars, and Doctors who would doubt of it. But Women, and
Children, Learned and Unlearned, the most Intelligent and most stupid Persons,
easily conceive, by their Idea of Extension, that it is susceptible of all
sorts of Figures; they clearly comprehend that Extension is not capable of
Pain, Savor, Odor, or any other Sensation, when they but faithfully and
attentively consider the Idea only that represents it: For there is no sensible
Quality included in it is representative Idea.

It Is true, they may doubt whether Body is, or is not capable of admitting some
Sensation, or sensible Quality: But then they understand by Body some other
thing than Extension, and have no clear Idea of Body taken in this sense. But
when des Carts, or the Cartesians, whom I am concerned with, maintain that the
Soul is better known than Body, they mean only by Body, bare Extension. Which
makes me admire how they can hold, that the nature of the Soul is clearer known
than that of the Body, since the Idea of Body, or Extension, is so manifest,
that all the World's agreed about what it contains, and what it excludes,
whilst the Idea of the Soul is so confused, that the Cartesians themselves
daily dispute, whether the Modifications of Color appertain to it.

We know, (say these Philosophers, with their Master des Carts) the nature of
a substance so much more distinctly, as we know more of its Attributes. Now
there is nothing whereof we know so many Attributes as of our Mind. Because as
many as we know in other things we may put to the mind's account from its
knowing them; and therefore its Nature is better known than that of any other
thing.

But who is it that sees not a great deal of difference between knowing by a
clear Idea and knowing by Conscience. When I know that 2 times 2 are 4, I know
it very clearly; but I know not clearly what within me it is that knows it. I
feel it, I confess; I know it by consciousness, or internal sense: But I have
no clear Idea of it as I have of Numbers, whose Relations I can distinctly
discover. I can reckon in my mind three properties, one of knowing that 2 times
2 are 4, another of knowing that 3 times 3 are 9, a third of knowing that 4
times 4 are 16. And these Properties, if you please, shall be different from
one another, and so I may count an infinite number of Properties belonging to
me. But I deny that we can clearly know the nature of the things that we can
reckon thus.

It may be said that we have a clear Idea of a Being, and that we know its
Nature, when we can compare it with others, which we likewise have a clear Idea
of, or at least when we can compare together the Modifications incident to it.
We have clear Ideas of Numbers, and of the parts of Extension, because we can
compare these things together. As 2 may be compared with 4, 4 with 16, and
every number, with any other: So likewise a square may be compared with a
Triangle, a Circle with an Ellipsis, a Square and a Triangle with every other
Square and Triangle; and thus a Man may clearly discover the relations these
Figures, and these Numbers have to one another. But we cannot compare our Mind
with other Beings, thereby to discover clearly their Relations; nor can we
compare the Modifications of the Mind together. Can we clearly discover what
Relation, or Proportion there is between Pleasure and Pain, Heat and Color? Or
to keep to Modifications of the same sort; can we determine exactly the
Proportion between Green and Red, Yellow and Purple, or even between Purple and
Purple? We see well enough that one is darker, or brighter than the other. But
we know not evidently how much, nor what it is to be Darker or Brighter. We
have then no clear Idea either of the Soul, or her Modifications; and though I
see or have the sense of Colors, Tastes, Smells; yet I may say as I have done,
that I know them not by a clear Idea, since I cannot clearly discover their
Relations.

It Is true I can discover the exact proportions between sounds: That a Diopason
for instance is Double, that a Fifth is as 3 to 2, and that a Fourth is as 4 to
3. But I cannot know these proportions by the sensation I have of them. If I
know that an Eighth or Diopason is double, it is because I have learned, by
Experience, that the same string sounds an Eighth, when having stricken it
whole, I strike it presently again, dividing it into two equal parts, or
because I know the number of Vibrations is double in equal time, or by some
such way, and this because the Trepidations of the air, the Vibrations of the
strings, and the string it self are things which may be compared by clear
Ideas, and that we distinctly conceive what relations there can be between a
string and it is parts, as likewise between the celerity of different
Vibrations. But we cannot compare sounds betwixt themselves, or as they are
sensible Qualities, and Modifications of the Soul; nor that way are their
Proportions or Relations discoverable. And though Musicians distinguish very
well the different concords, yet they do not distinguish their proportions by
clear Ideas. By the ear only they judge by a clear Idea, or otherwise than by
sensation. Therefore Musicians have no clear Idea of sounds, as they are
sensations or Modifications of the Soul: And consequently we conceive not the
Soul nor her Modifications by a clear Idea, but only by Conscience or internal
sense.

Moreover we know not wherein consist those dispositions of the Soul, which
facilitate her to act and represent Objects to her self. Nay we cannot conceive
wherein such Dispositions might possibly consist. I say farther, that we cannot
be positively assured by Reason, whether the mere Soul separate from the Body,
or considered without relation to it, be capable of Habits or Memory. But how
can we be ignorant of these things, if the nature of the Soul be better known
to us than of the Body. It Is easily discerned wherein that readiness consists,
wherewith the animal Spirits flow into the Nerves, which they have often used
to glide into; at least it is no trouble to discover, that whilst the condui^s
of the Nerves are widened, and the Fibers recumbent after a particular manner,
the Spirits may easily insinuate themselves. But what is it we can conceive
capable of augmenting the Soul's Facility to act or think. For my part, I own,
I cannot comprehend it: And in vain should I interrogate my self what these
dispositions are; For I could give my self no answer, nor light upon the
matter, though I have a most lively sense of that easiness, with which some
Thoughts arise in me. And if I had no particular Reasons to induce me to
believe that I really have such Dispositions, though I know them not in me; I
should judge there neither was spiritual Habit, nor Memory in my Soul. But in
short, seeing there is doubt and scruple about it, we have an infallible
Symptom, that Men are not so enlightened as is pretended. For Doubt can never be
reconciled to Evidence, and clear Ideas.

It Is certain, that a Man of the greatest Understanding, cannot evidently know
whether he deserves Hatred or Love, as speaks the Wiseman. My own consciousness
of my self cannot satisfy me herein. St. Paul says indeed, his Conscience
reproached him with nothing, Eccl. c. 9.1. I judge not mine own self. For I
known nothing by my self, yet I am not hereby justified, but ^e that judges me
is the Lord 1 Cor. ^ 4.4. John 13.37.
yet for all that he does not affirm he is justified; On the contrary he
asserts he is not thereby justified* and that he dares not judge himself, since
he that judges is the Lord. But having a clear Idea of Order, if we had another
as clear of the Soul, from the inward feeling of our selves we should evidently
know, whether she was conformable to Order. We should know whether we were
Righteous or not, and we could exactly discover all our interior Dispositions
to Good and Evil, whenever we were conscious of them. But if we could know our
selves just as we are, we should not be so subject to Presumption; And there is
great likelihood that St. Peter would not have said to his Master whom he was
not long after to deny, Why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life
for thy sake. Animam meam pro te ponam. For being inwardly conscious of his own
Strength and good Will, he might have seen with Evidence, whether he had
Resolution and Courage to conquer Death, or rather the insults of a silly Maid,
and two or three Servants.

If the nature of the Soul be more known than any other. If the Idea we have of
her be as clear as that we have of the Body, I ask only how it comes to pass
that there are so many who confound her with it? Is it possible to confound two
clear Ideas entirely different? Let us do justice to all Mankind: Those who
dissent from our Opinion are as rational as our selves, they have the same
Ideas of things, and are partakers in the same Reason. Why then do they
confound what we distinguish? Do they use on other occasions to confound
things* whereof they have clear Ideas? Do they ever confound two different
numbers, or take a Square for a Circle? And yet the Soul differs more from the
Body, than one of these Figures from the other; For they are two substances
which are in nothing alike, and are confounded notwithstanding. Which must
therefore proceed from some difficulty there is to discover their difference;
from its not being observable by a simple perception; and from the
Impossibility of concluding that one is not the other without Argument and
Reasoning. It must come from hence, viz. That the Idea of Extension must be
cautiously consulted, and Extension discovered to be no Mode of Existence of a
Body, but the Body it self, as being represented a subsisting Thing, and as the
Principle and Foundation of whatever we conceive clearly in Bodies: And that so
the Modes of which Body is capable, having no Proportion of sensible Qualities;
the subject of these Qualities, or rather the Being of which they are Modes
must needs be different from Body: For such like argumentation is requisite to
prevent our confounding the Soul with the Body. But if we had a clear Idea of
the Soul, as we have of Body, certainly we need not take these round-about ways
to distinguish her from it. Since it would be discoverable by a simple view,
and with as great ease as we see a Circle is not a Square.

I insist not longer upon proving that we know not the Soul nor her
Modifications by clear Ideas. Survey our selves on what side soever we will;
this sufficiently appears: And I had not added this to what I have said in the
Search after Truth, if some Cartesians had not found fault with it. If this
will not satisfy them, I shall expect they will make me sensible of this clear
Idea, which I am not able to find in my self, do whatever I can to discover it.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Eighth CHAPTER of the Second PART of the Third BOOK.
Of loose and general terms which signify nothing. How they are distinguished
from others.
IN order to comprehend what I have said in some Places; how that they give not
the reasons of things who explain them by Logical Terms, and General Ideas we
need but consider; that whatever exists is reduced to Being, or Modes of Being;
whatever Term signifies neither of these signifies nothing, and every Term that
signifies not one or other of them distinctly, and in particular, signifies
nothing distinct. This to me seems most clear and evident, but what is evident
in it self, is not so to all the World. Words are the current Coin, wherewith
Men pay themselves, and others. All Terms that are inoffensive to the Ear, have
free Passport amongst them. And Truth comes so rarely into the Commerce of the
World, that those who speak it, or hear it, have commonly no regard for it. The
gift of Speech is the greatest of Talents; the language of Imagination is the
surest of means; and a Memory charged with incomprehensible Terms will always
make a splendid appearance, whatever the Cartesians may say of it.

When Men shall have no addiction but to Truth, they will be Cautious of what
they say, they will carefully examine their own meaning, rejecting with scorn
senseless and insignificant Terms, and closely adhering to clear Ideas. But
when will the time come that Men shall love Truth only? We may say, when they
shall depend no longer on their Body, when they shall have no necessary
relation to sensible Objects, when they shall not any more corrupt one another,
but faithfully consult their Master who instructs them in the recesses of their
Reason. But this will never happen whilst we live on Earth.

However all Men are not equally indifferent for Truth. If there are some who
speak without Reflection, and hear without distinction, and have no attention
but to what affects them: there are others who industriously labor to inform
themselves, and to convince others of the Truth. And to these chiefly I address
my self, for at their Instance I entered on making these Remarks.

I say then that whatever is, whether it actually exists or not, and
consequently whatever is intelligible is either a Being, or a Mode of Being. By
Being I mean something of an absolute Nature, or that may be conceived alone,
as unrelated to any other thing. By Mode of Being I understand something
relative, or that cannot be conceived alone. Now there are two kinds of Modes
of Being. The one consists in the Relation of the Parts of any Whole, to any
Part of the same whole: The other in the Relation of one thing to another which
makes not any Part of the same whole. The Roundness of wax is a Mode of Being
of the former sort, as consisting in the Equality of Distance, which have all
the Superficial parts to the central. The Motion or situation of the wax is a
Mode of Being of the second sort: Which consists in the Relation the wax has to
circumambient Bodies. I speak not of motion taken for the Moving Force; for it
is plain, that that force neither is nor can be a Mode of Bodies existing, for
conceive them Modified how we will, we cannot conceive them as a moving Force.

It being certain that whatever is intelligible, is either a Being, or a Mode
of Being, it is as evident that every Term that signifies not one or other of
these, signifies nothing; and that every Term that signifies not this or that
particular Being, or Mode of Being, is obscure and confused; and consequently
we cannot conceive either what others say to us, or we to others, if we have no
distinct Ideas of Being, or of the Mode of Being, which respectively answer to
the Terms they use, or we employ our selves.

Nevertheless I grant that we may, and even sometimes must employ those words
which do not directly raise distinct Ideas. We may, because it is not always
necessary to put the D^finition instead of the Defined, and that abridg'd
Expressions are to good use employed though confused in themselves. And We
must, when we are obliged to speak of things whereof we have no clear Idea, and
which we cannot conceive, but by our inward Sensation, as when we speak of the
Soul, and her Modifications Only we must take care not to use obscure and
equivocal, when we have clear Terms; or any which may excite false Ideas in
those we speak to. This will be better understood by an instance.

It is more perspicuous to say, that God created the World by his Will, than to
say he created it by his Power. This last word is a Logical Term, which excites
no distinct and particular Idea, but affords Liberty to imagine that the Power
of God is something distinct from the efficacy of his Will. We speak more
clearly when we say God pardons Sinners, in JESUS CHRIST; than in absolutely
saying, he forgives them by his Clemency and Mercy: These Terms are Equivocal;
and administer occasion to think that the Clemency of God, is, it may be
contrary to his Justice: That Sin may be left unpunished; and that the
satisfaction of Our LORD is not necessary, and the like.

These Terms of a Loose and Indefinite sense are often used when we speak of
the Divine Perfections; which is not to be condemned, since Philosophical
accuracy is not at all times necessary. But by a culpable dullness and
negligence such abuse is made of these general Expressions and so many false
consequences are drawn from them, that though all Men have the same Idea of
God, and that they consider him as a Being infinitely Perfect; yet there was
hardly any Imperfection but was attributed to him in Idolatrous times, and Men's
discourses of him were commonly unseemly and unworthy: And all for want of
carefully comparing the things they said of him with the Idea that represents
him, or rather with Himself.

But chiefly in matter of natural Philosophy, these rambling and general Terms
are abused, which excite no distinct Ideas either of Beings or their Modes. For
example when we say that Bodies tend to their Center, that they fall by their
Gravity, that they ascend by their Levity, that they move by their Nature, that
they successively change their Forms, that they act by their Virtues,
Qualities, Faculties, etc. we use such Terms as have no signification, and all
these Propositions are absolutely false, in the sense that most Philosophers
take them. There is no Center in the sense that is commonly understood. These
Terms, Gravity, Form, Nature, and the like, excite no Idea either of a Being or
a mode of Being. They are empty and insignificative Terms, which Wisemen
should avoid. The Knowledge of the unwise is as talk without sense, says the
Son of Sirach. These Terms are good for nothing, but to shelter the Ignorance
of Pretenders to Learning, Eccl. 21.18.
and to make the Ignorant and Libertines believe that God is not the True Cause
of all things.

This methinks is certain, and easy to be conceived: Yet most Men talk freely
of all things, without caring to examine whether the Terms they employ have any
clear and exact signification. And many Authors there are of huge and bulky
Volumes, in which its harder than may be thought, to find any passage where
they have understood what they have written. Therefore those who are great
Readers, and respectful Hearers of the rambling and general Discourses of the
falsely Learned, are in the darkest Ignorance. And I see no way they have to get
free of it, but by constantly making, and renewing their Resolution, of
believing no Man on his word, and before they have annexed very distinct Ideas
to the most common Terms which others use. For these Terms are not clear, as is
commonly imagined; and they seem so only from the common Use that is made of
them: Because Men fancy they well understand what they say or hear, when they
have said or heard the same an hundred times, though they have never examined
it.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Conclusion of the Three First BOOKS. That Physicians
and Casuists are absolutely necessary for us; But that it is dangerous to
consult and follow them in many occasions.
CErtainly Man before his Fall, was possessed of all things necessary to
preserve his Mind and Body in a perfect State. He needed neither Physician, nor
Casuist: He consulted Inward Truth, as the Infallible Rule of his Duty; and his
Senses were so faithful in their Reports, that they never deceived him in the
use he ought to make of encompassing Bodies, for the preservation of his own.

But since the Transgression things are much changed, We consult our Passions
much more than Law or Truth Eternal; and our Senses are so disordered, that in
following them we sometimes destroy our Health and Life. The Casuist and
Physician are become absolutely necessary. And those who pretend to be most
dexterous at Self-management upon all occasions, fall commonly into the
grossest Miscarriages, which teach them a little too late, that they follow a
Master that is not over-wise.

Nevertheless I think I may say that Sin has not so disordered all the
faculties of the Soul, but that we may consult our selves, in many instances,
and that it often fortunes that we lose the Life of our Soul, or Body, by
applying to Physicians, unexpert in their Profession, and unacquainted with the
constitution of our Body, or to Casuists unskilled in Religion and Morality,
who pierce not to the bottom of the conscience, to discover the Engagements and
Dispositions of those who come to be resolved.

When I have said in the Conclusion of the Three first Books of The Search
after Truth, has given occasion to some Persons, to imagine I pretended that in
Order to preserve life and health, we ought to follow our Senses and Passions
in all things; and that to be guided in our Duty it was needless to consult
other Men, since Eternal Wisdom is our Teacher that speaks intelligibly to us
in the recesses of our Reason. And though I never said nor thought that
Physicians and Casuists were useless, some Persons expedite at judging and
concluding, are persuaded it was my Opinion, because, it may be, it was theirs:
And that they do not so much consider Man as he is at present, as what he was
before the Fall. Here then in a great part are my Thoughts upon the question.

Man may be considered in two States of Body, Health and Sickness. If he be
considered in perfect Health, it cannot I think be doubted but his senses are
much more useful to preserve it, than the Reason and Experience of the ablest
Physicians. There Is no need of advising with the Doctor to know what Weight a
man may bear, whether Wood and Stones are to be eaten, whether he may throw
himself from a Precipice. His senses teaching him, in the readiest and most
undoubted manner, what ought to be done in the like ordinary occasions. Which
is, one would think, sufficient, to justify what I have said in the conclusion
of the three first Books.

But that will not serve turn to justify my Thoughts, and even my Words in
another place. viz. That our senses acquit themselves of their Duty so
excellently well, and conduct us in that just and faithful manner to their End,
Book 1.
that they seem to be injuriously charged with Corruptness and Irregularity.
For I have always been persuaded that the Justness, Exactness and admirable
Order which is found in our Sensations with reference to the preservation of
Life, was no Consequence of Sin, but the first Institution of Nature.

It Is objected that at present this Order is disordered, and that if we were
led by our senses, we should not only eat Poison, but should almost always
receive in, much more Nutriment than we could digest.

But as to Poisons I don't believe our senses would ever invite us to eat them;
but that if our Eyes should by chance provoke us to taste them, we should not
find in them a relish that would induce us to swallow them, supposing these
Poisons were in their Natural State. For there is great difference between
Poisons, as they are Naturally produced, and empoison'd Food; between crude
Pepper, and Peppered Meats. Our senses I grant invite us to eat Poisoned
Victuals. But they do not incline us to eat Poisons, or it may be, not so much
as to taste them, provided these Poisons remain in the capacity wherein God has
produced them. For our senses reach but to the Natural Order of things as
constituted by their Maker.

I grant likewise that our senses at present induce us to eat certain Meats to
excess and surfeiting, but that is because these Meats are not in their Natural
State. We should never perhaps overcharge our selves with Wheat, if we ground
it with Teeth, made for that purpose; But it is ground, and sifted, and
kneaded, and baked; Sophisticated too sometimes with Milk, with Butter, and
Sugar, it is eaten also with preserves, and with Ragoos of several sorts which
provoke appetite. And so we need not wonder if our senses incline us to excess,
when Reason and Experience lend both their assistance to impose on them.

So it is in respect of flesh, which the senses abhor when Raw and Full of
Blood, when beheld after the Animal died of it self. But Men have bethought
themselves to kill the Beasts, to drain out the Blood, to concoct the flesh
with Fire, to Season, and Disguise it, and after this accuse their Senses of
Corruption and disorder; since they Employ their Reason in preparing other
sorts of Diet than Nature supplies to them, I must own there is need of the
same Reason to Moderate their Appetite, in their Eating: And if the Cooks have
found out the art of making us eat Old Shoes in their High Seasoned Dishes, it
lies upon us to make as much use of our reason in mistrusting these Adulterated
meats which are not such as God has made them: For he has given us our senses
only with Relation to the Natural Order of things.

It must farther be observed that our Imagination, and senses are mistrustful
and suspicious when we take unusual Aliments. For if a Men had never Eaten, nor
seen Eaten a particular Fruit he met with, he would have some aversion and
sense of fear upon the tasting it: His ^magination and senses would be
naturally arrect and attentive to the relish it afforded; though never so
hungry he would eat but little the first time, and if this Fruit had any
dangerous quality it would be sure to create in him some dread or abhorrence.
Thus his Machine would be so disposed as to decline it another time; and the
Odium which he had to it sensibly discovering it self in his Looks, would
prevent others from eating it. All this would be performed, or might be
performed in him, whilst Reason had no share in it: For I speak not here of
those supplies which Reason, and Experience may administer. But seeing our
Friends take corrupt nutriment, we do the same: For we live by Opinion; and
Example emboldens us.

We examine not the effects these Aliments may produce in us, and we fear not
to eat them to excess. But our senses are not so great abettors of the
Intemperance as is believed. It Is true there possibly are in the World such
Fruits as that their Tastes may impose on Persons never so attentive to the
Reports of their senses: But this certainly is very rare: And we ought not to
conclude from these particular instances, that our senses are all corrupt, and
that they commonly deceive us, in things relating to the good of the Body. It
may be, these Fruits deceive our Taste, because we have altered, and corrupted
our Organ by the frequent use of unnatural Nourishment. For it is certain that
the High Seasoned Dishes, we feed upon, by their too Poignant, and penetrating
Particles, hurt the Fibers of the Tongue, and deprive it of it is Niceness and
Sagacity. The Example of those who can find no relish except in Ragoos, proves
my assertion; for if we find no savor in Corn, and in crude Flesh, it is
because our Tongue is grown insensible to those Particles, whose motions are
Moderate.

But though we suppose there are some Fruits whose savor is capable of
deceiving the most curious senses, and which still retain their Natural
perfection; yet we ought not to believe this proceeded from Sin: But only that
from the great simplicity of Natural Laws, (by virtue of which the sense of
Taste is formed and perfected) 'twas impossible for it to have sufficient
Niceness and Sagacity for all sorts of Eatables. Besides, that defect of sense
would not be remediless, because when the Mother had an aversion to dangerous
Fruits, she would communicate it to her Children, not only when unborn, but
also when come into the World. For Children only Eat what is given them by
their Mothers, and they Machinally, and by the Air of their Countenance infuse
into them an abhorrence for Fruits that are dangerous to be Eaten. So that God
has made sufficient Provision by our senses for the preservation of our Life,
and nothing can be better Ordered. For as Order requires, that the Laws of
Union of our Soul and Body should be most Simple; they must be of a very
General Nature: And God ought not to establish particular Laws for such
instancess and emergences, as most rarely happen, Reason on such occasions must
Help out the Senses: For Reason may be employed in all things. But the senses
are determined to some Natural Judgments, which are the most advantageous
^maginable, as I have proved in the first Book. Yet even these Judgments are
sometimes fallacious; because it is impossible it should be otherwise without
multiplying the most simple Laws of Union of the Body with the Soul.

If we consider Man as now he is, under a State of Sickness, we must confess
his senses often deceive him, even in things that relate to the preservation of
his Life. For the Economy of his Machine being disturbed in Proportion to it is
disturbance, irregular motions must unavoidably be excited in his Brain.
Nevertheless his senses are not so corrupted, as is Ordinarily believed: And
God has so wisely provided for the preservation of Life by the Laws of Union of
the Soul and Body, that though these laws are extremely simple, they often
suffice to restore us to our Health; and it is much the surer way to follow
them, than to employ our Reason, or certain Physicians that do not carefully
study the disposition of their Patients. For as a wound closes and heals up of
its self when constantly cleans'd and licked, as is done by Animals when
wounded: So Ordinary diseases are speedily dispersed, when we let them alone,
and exactly observe that course of Life, which these Diseases, as it were by
instinct, and Sensation, put us upon.

Wine, for example; seems bitter to a Man in a Fever, and likewise is
prejudicial to him in that Condition: This same Man finds it agreeable to the
Palate, when he is in Health, and then too it is Wholesome for him. It
sometimes even happens that Wine is most useful to the Sick that relish it,
provided their taste be not an effect of the Habit of drinking it, and that
their desire of it proceed from the present disposition of their Body: That it
cannot be doubted but that we are to consult our senses in Sickness for the way
we are to take to the recovery of our Health. Here follows my Opinion about
what we ought to do.

It Is requisite that the distempered Person should be extremely attentive to
those secret desires which sometimes arise in him on occasion of the actual
disposition of his Body; but above all, take heed lest these desires should be
the consequence of some preceding Habit. He must, to that intent, slacken, as I
may say, the bent of Imagination, or, thinking on nothing that may determine
it, observe to what he is inclined, and examine whether his present Inclination
proceeds from the actual disposition of his Body: Which done, he ought to
follow it, but with much caution and reserve; it being extremely difficult to
be assured whether these secret Inclinations are owing to the present State of
Body; and it is sometimes good to have the advice of some Experienced Person
upon it. But if the Sick Person thus giving a loose to his Imagination, as I
have been saying, finds nothing offer it self to his Mind, he must remain
quiet, and use abstinence, for this likely will quicken him to some desire, or
spend the humors that distemper him. But if the disease increase,
notwithstanding his Abstinence and Rest, it is then necessary to have recourse
to experience and the Physician. He must give then an exact account of all to a
Skillful one that knows, if possible, the Constitution of his Body; He must
clearly explain to Him the beginnings, and progress of his Disease, and the
State of Body he was in, before he fell into it, that He may consult his
Experience and Reason with reference to the Person to be cured by him. And then
though the Physician prescribe bitter Medicines, and which are really sorts of
Poison, yet they must be taken because we Experimentally know that these
Poisons stay not in the Body, but drive out sometimes along with them the
corrupt humors which are the cause of the Disease. Here it is that Reason, or
rather Experience, must overruled the Senses; provided the abhorrence of the
recommended Potion be not of a fresh date. For if this Aversion was Cotemporary
with the disease, it would rather be a Symptom of the Medicine's being of the
same Nature with the ill humors that caused the distemper, and so perhaps
would be augment and strengthen it.

Nevertheless I think it advisable before we venture upon strong Medicines, and
which we are much averse to, to begin with those that are more gentle and
natural: As by Drinking a good quantity of Water, or taking an easy Emetick,
if we have lost our Appetite, and are not very hard to Vomit. Water may
attenuate the too condensed humors, and Facilitate the Circulation of the
Blood into all the Parts of the Body: And Vomitives cleansing the Stomach,
hinder the Nourishment we take in, from corrupting, and feeding any longer
intermittent Fevers. But I ought not to insist upon these things. I am
therefore of Opinion that we ought to follow the advice of the wise Physicians,
who are not too hasty and expeditious, who are not too presumptuous upon the
Recipe's, nor too easy to give their Nostrums and Prescriptions. For where one
remedy does a Sick Man good, there are a great many that do him harm. As the
suffering Persons are impatient, and as it makes not for the Honor of the
Physicians, nor the profit of the Apothecary, to visit the sick without
prescribing to them, so they visit too seldom, and prescribe too often. When
therefore a Man is Sick, he ought to request of his Physician, that he would
^azard nothing; but follow Nature, and strengthen it i^ he can: He ought to let
him know that he has more Reason, and Patience, than to take it ill that he
visits him often without giving him relief: For on these occasions he sometimes
does a great deal, who does no mischief.

I conclude then that we must have recourse to Physicians, and refuse not to
obey them, if we would preserve our Life. For though they cannot be assured of
restoring our Health, yet sometimes they may contribute much for it, by reason
of the continual Experiments, they make upon different Diseases. They know
indeed very little, with any exactness, yet still they know much more than our
selves; and provided they will give themselves the trouble of studying our
constitution, of carefully observing all the Symptoms of the Disease, and
diligently attending to our own inward Feeling; we may hope from them all the
Assistances that we may reasonably expect from Men.

What we have said of Physicians may in a manner be applied to Casuists, whom
it is absolutely necessary to consult on some occasions; and commonly useful.
But it sometimes happens not only to be most useless, but highly dangerous, to
advise with them; which I explain and prove.

It Is commonly said that humane Reason is subject to Error; but herein there is
an equivocal sense, which we are not sufficiently aware of. For it must not be
imagined that the Reason which Man consults is corrupted, or that it ever
misleads, when faithfully consulted. I have said it, and I say it again, that
none but the Sovereign Reason makes us Rational: None but the Supreme Truth
enlightens us, nor any but God, that speaks clearly, and knows how to instruct
us. We have but one True Master, even JESUS CHRIST Our LORD, Eternal WISDOM,
the WORD of the Father, in whom are all the Treasures of Wisdom, and the
Knowledge of God: And it is Blasphemy to say, this Universal Reason, whereof all
Men participate, and by which alone they are reasonable, is subject to Error,
and capable of deceiving us. It Is not Man's Reason but his Heart that betrays
him; It Is not his Light, but his Darkness that hinders him from seeing. It Is
not the Union he has with God, which seduces him, no^ in one sense, his Union
with the Body: But it is the dependence he has on his Body, or rather, it is
because he will deceive himself; and enjoy the Pleasure of Judging, before he
has been at the Pains of Examining; it is because he will rest, before he
arrives to the place of the Rest of Truth. I have more exactly explained the
cause of our Errors, in many places of the preceding Book, and I here suppose
what I there have said.

Which being laid down, I affirm it is needless to consult Casuists when it is
certain, that Truth speaks to us; which we are sure it does when Evidence
displays it self in the Answers that are made to our Enquiries, that is, to the
attention of our Mind. Therefore when we retire into our own Breast, and in the
silence of our Senses, and Passions, hear a Voice so clear, and intelligible,
that we cannot be doubtful of the Truth of it, we must submit to it, let the
World think of us what they please: We must have no regard to custom, nor
listen to our secret Inclinations, nor defer too much to the resolves of those
who go for the Learned part of Men. We must not give way to be misguided by the
false show of a pretended Piety; nor be humbled by the oppositions of those who
know not the Soul which animates them: But we must bear patiently their proud
Insults, without condemning their Intentions, or despising their Persons. We
must, with simplicity of heart, rejoice in the Light of Truth, which
illuminates us; and though its Answers condemn us, yet ought we to prefer them,
before all the subtle Distinctions the Imagination invents, for the
justification of the Passions.

Every Man, for Example, that can enter into himself, and still the confused
noise of the Senses and Passions, clearly discovers that every motion of Love,
which is given us by God, must Center upon him, and that God himself cannot
dispense with the Obligation we have to Love him, in all things. It Is evident,
that God cannot supersede acting for Himself, cannot create, or preserve our
Will, to will any thing besides him, or to will any thing but what he Wills
Himself. For I cannot see how it is conceivable, that God can Will a Creature
should have more Love for what is less lovely, or should Love Soveraignly, as
its end, what is not Supreamly amiable.

I know well that Men who interrogate their Passions, instead of consulting
Order, may easily imagine that God has no other Rule of his Will than his will
it self, and that if God observes Order, it is merely because he willed it, and
has made this same Order by a Will absolutely Free and Indifferent. There are
those who think there is no Order immutable and necessary by its Nature: And
and that the Order or Wisdom of God, whereby he has made all things, though the
first of Creatures, is yet it self a Creature, made by a Free Will of God, and
not begotten of his Substance by the necessity of his Essence. But this Opinion
which shakes all the Foundations of Morality by robbing Order, and the Eternal
Laws, depending on it, of their Immutability, and overturns the entire Edifice
of the Christian Religion, by divesting JESUS CHRIST, or the WORD of God, of
his Divinity, does not yet so perfectly benight the Mind, as to hide from it
this Truth: That God Wills Order. Thus whether the Will of God Makes Order, or
Supposes it, we clearly see when we retire into our selves, that the God we
Worship cannot do what plainly appears to us to be contrary to Order. So that
Order Willing that our Time, or the Duration of our Being, should be for him
that preserves us, that the Motion of our Heart should continually tend toward
him, who continually impresses it in us; that all the Powers of our Souls
should labor only for him, by virtue of whom they act. Mark 12.30.
God cannot dispense with the Commandment he gave by Moses in the Law, and
repeated by his Son in the Gospel, Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all
thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, and with all thy
Strength.

But because Order requires that every Righteous Person should be happy, and
every Sinner miserable, and that every Action conformable to Order, and every
Motion of Love to God should be rewarded, and every other contrary to Order, or
that tends not to him, punished: It is evident, that whoever will be happy must
constantly tend toward God; and reject with abhorrence whatever stops or
retards him in his course, or Weakens his propension to the true good: And for
this he need not consult any Casuists; For when God speaks, it is fit that Men
should be silent: And when we are absolutely certain, that our Senses, and
Passions, have no Voice in those resolves we hear, in our most Secret and
inward Reason, we ought always respectfully to attend and submit to them.

Would we be resolved whether we may go to a Ball or a Play: Whether we may in
Conscience spend a great part of the Day in Sports, and vain Conversation,
whether certain Conversations, Studies, and Employs, are conformable to our
Obligations. Let us retire into our selves; and hush our Senses and Passions,
and then see in the Light of God, whether we can do for him any such Action:
Let us interrogate him who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, to know if the
Road we pursue will not lead us to the Gates of Death: And whether (God being
Essentially Just, and necessarily obliged to punish what is not agreeable to
Order, and to reward all conformity to it) we have reason to believe we are
going to augment, or ensure our Felicity, by the Action we intend to do.

If it be our Love to God that leads us to the Ball, let us go: If Heaven is to
be gained by playing, let us play Day and Night: If we have in prospect the
Glory of God in our Employment, let us exercise it; Let us do all things with
Joy, for our Recompense shall be great in Heaven. But if after having carefully
examined our Essential Obligations, we clearly discover that neither our Being,
nor the Time that measures it, is at our own disposal, and that we do an unjust
thing, which it necessarily lies upon God to punish, when our only study is how
to spend our time in Mirth and Pleasure, If our Lord and Master CHRIST, who has
purchased us by his Blood, ^eproaches our In^idelity and Ingratitude in a most
clear and intelligible manner, for living after the Flesh and the World, for
Leading an Effeminate, and Voluptuous Life, and following Opinion and Custom:
Let us yield to his Voice, and not harden our Hearts, nor seek out such
Spiritual, Guides, as comfort us under these Reproaches, and secure us against
these Menaces, and involve in delightful Clouds that Light which strikes, and
pierces our very Soul.

When the Blind leads the Blind they both fall into the Ditch, says the
Evangelist. But if God excuses not the Blind who commits himself to the Conduct
of a Blind Leader, will he excuse him who seeing clearly will yet willingly be
guided by the Blind, because he leads him pleasantly, and entertains him by the
way, according to his Inclinations? These voluntary Blind Men ought to know,
that God who never deceives, frequently permits these Seducers in punishment to
the corrupt Affections of those that seek them. That Blindness is a penalty of
Sin, though it be often the cause of it; and that it is just, that he who cared
not to hear Eternal Wisdom, who spoke only for his good, should at last suffer
himself to be corrupted by Men, whose deception is so much more dangerous, as
their Flatteries are more pleasing.

It Is true it is no easy thing to retire into our selves, to silence our
Senses, and Passions, and to distinguish the Voice of God, from that of our
Body: For we most commonly take sensible Proofs for evident Reasons; and on
that account it is necessary to consult the Casuists. But it is not always
needful: For we see our Duty on many occasions, with the clearest Evidence, and
an undoubted certainty. And then it is even dangerous to consult them, unless
it be done with the greatest Sincerity, and by a Spirit of Humility, and
Obedience. For these dispositions oblige God to prevent our deception, or at
least to keep us from deceiving our selves in any hurtful manner.

When it is convenient to advise with a Spiritual Guide, such an one is to be
chosen as understands Religion, and reverences the Gospel, and is acquainted
with humane Nature. We must take heed least the converse of the World has
corrupted him, least Friendship should make him too Gentle and Complaisant,
least he should be Bribed by his hopes or fears of us; We must choose one in a
thousand, says St. Theresia, who, as she relates her self, had like to have
lost her way to Heaven, by the means of an Ignorant Guide.

The World is full of Deceivers, I say of Well-Meaning Deceivers; no less than
others. Those who Love us, seduce us by their Complaisance: Those who are below
us, flatter us; out of Respect or Fear: Those above us out of Contempt, or
Negligence, overlook our necessities. Besides, all Men give us Counsel,
agreeable to the Breviates we give of our own Condition, and we never fail to
make the best of our Case, insensibly laying our hand upon our sore when we are
ashamed of it. We often deceive our Counselors, that we may deceive our
selves: For we fancy our selves secure, whilst we follow their Directions. They
do but conduct us whither we designed to go; and yet we would fain persuade our
selves, in spite of our Light, and the Secret reproofs of our Reason, that it is
our Obedience which determines us. We seduce our selves, and God permits us;
but we can never deceive him who Penetrates the Bottom of our Hearts. And
though we deafen our selves never so much to the Voice of Internal Truth, we
are sufficiently made sensible by the inward Reproaches, we receive, from the
Supreme Truth, leaving us to our selves, that it enlightens our Darkness, and
discovers all the Wiles and Stratagems of Self-Love.

It Is therefore evident, that our Reason must be consulted for the Health of
our Soul, as our Senses are to be advised with for the Health of our Body; and
that when the former cannot clearly resolve us, we must apply to the Casuist,
as we must have recourse to the Physician, when the latter are defective: But
this is to be done with Judgment, since Ignorant Casuists may Murder our Soul,
as Unskillful Physicians may Poison our Body.

Whereas I explain not in particular the Rules which may be given about the
choice and use that is to be made of Physicians and Casuists. I desire my
Sentiments may be heartily interpreted, and that it may not be imagined I am
against drawing all possible supplies from other Men. I know that a particular
Blessing attends our submission to the Opinions of the Wise and Understanding:
And I am willing to believe this general Rule, that it is requisite to die in
the usual Forms, is surer for the common sort of Men; than any I could
establish for the Preservation of Life.

But because it is of perpetual use to retire into our selves, to consult the
Gospel; and to listen to JESUS CHRIST, whether he speaks immediately to our
Mind and Heart, or by Faith declares himself to our Ears and Eyes; I thought I
might be allowed to say what I have said. For our Casuists deceive us when they
go contrary to the Doctrine of our Faith and Reason. And as we give Honor to
God by believing that his Works have what is necessary to their preservation, I
thought I could make Men sensible their Machine was so admirably contrived,
that it is own Nature can better furnish it with what is necessary to it is
safety, than Science and even the Experience of the ablest Physicians.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Third CHAPTER of the Fifth BOOK. That Love is
different from Pleasure and Joy.
THE Mind commonly confounds things that are very different, when they happen
at the same time, and are not contrary to each other. As I have shown by many
Instances in this Work; because herein chiefly consist our Errors, in Respect
of what passes within us. Being we have no clear Idea of that constitutes the
Nature or Essence of our Mind, nor of any of the Modification it can receive,
it often falls out, that to our confounding different things, they need but
happen in us at the same time. For we easily confound what we know not, by a
clear and distinct Ide^.

It is not only impossible clearly to conceive wherein consists the difference
of our Internal Motions; it is even difficult to discover any difference
between them: For to do this we must turn our Eyes inward, and retire into our
selves; not to consider them with reference to Good and Evil, which we do
willingly enough: But to contemplate our selves with an abstract and barren
consideration, which costs us great trouble, and distraction of Thought.

We easily conceive, that the Roundness of a Body differs from its Motion; and
though we know by Experience, that a Bowl on a plane cannot be pressed without
being moved, and so Motion and Roundness are found together: Yet we use not to
confound them with one another, because we conceive Motion and Figure by clear
and distinct Ideas. But it is not so with Pleasure and Love, which we almost
always confound together. Our Mind grows, as it were Moveable by Pleasure, as a
Bowl by it is roundness, and because it is never void of an impression toward
Good, it immediately puts it self in Motion toward the Objects which causes,
or seems to cause the Pleasure. So that the Motion of Love happening in the
Soul at the very time of it is feeling this Pleasure, is sufficient to make her
undistinguish or confound them, because she has no clear Idea of her Love and
Pleasure as she has of Figure and Motion. And for this Reason some are
persuaded, that Pleasure and Love are not different, and that I distinguish too
many things in each of our Passions.

But that it may clearly appear, that Pleasure and Love are two very different
things: I divide Pleasures into two sorts, the one sort precedes Reason, as are
agreeable Sensations, and go commonly by the Name of the Pleasures of the Body.
The other sort neither precede Reason, nor the senses, and are generally called
the Pleasures of the Soul. Such is the Joy that arise in us, in pursuance of a
clear knowledge of confused sensation we have of some Good, that either does,
or shall accrue to us.

For Example, a Man in tasting a Fruit, which he does not know, finds pleasure
in eating it, if it be good for Nourishment. Which is a preceding or preventing
Pleasure; for since he feels it before he knows whether the Fruit be good, it is
evident it prevents his Reason. An Huntsman when hungry expects to find, or
actually finds something Eatable; which gives him an actual sense of Joy. Now
this Joy is a Pleasure which follows the knowledge of his present or future
good.

It is perhaps evident by this distinction of Pleasure into that which follows,
and that which prevents Reason; that neither of them but differs from Love. For
preventing pleasure undoubtedly precedes Love, since it precedes all Knowledge,
which some way or other is always supposed by Love. On the contrary, Joy, or
the Pleasure which supposes foregoing Knowledge, presupposes likewise Love;
since Joy supposes either a confused Sensation, or a clear Knowledge of the
present or future Possession of what we Love: For if we possessed a thing for
which we have no Love, we should receive no Joy from it. Therefore Pleasure is
very different from Love, since that which prevents Reason; prevent and causes
Love, and that which follows Reason, necessarily supposes Love; as an Effect
supposes the Cause.

Moreover, if Pleasure and Love were the same thing, there could be no Pleasure
without Love, nor Love without Pleasure, otherwise a thing could be without it
self. Nevertheless a Christian Loves his Enemy, and a well-educated Child his
Father, though never so irrational and unkind. The Sight of their Duty, the
Fear of God, the Love of Order and Justice causes them to Love, not only
without Pleasure, but even with a sort of Horror, those Persons that are no
ways delightful. I own they sometimes have the Sense of Pleasure or Joy, upon
the Reflection, that they perform their Duty; or upon the Hopes of being
rewarded as they do deserve. But besides, that this Pleasure is very manifestly
different from the Love they bear to their Father, and Enemy; though perhaps it
may be the Motive of it, it sometimes is not so much as the Motive of their
acting; but it is only an abstract View of Order, or a Notion of Fear, which
preserves their Love. In one sense it may be truly said, they have a Love for
these Persons, even whilst they do not think of them. For Love remains in us
during the Avocations of Thought, and in Sleep: But I conceive that Pleasure
has no longer a Substance in the Soul, than she is aware of it. Thus Love or
Charity remaining in us without Pleasure or Delectation, cannot be maintained
to be the very same thing.

Since Pleasure and Pain are two contraries; if Pleasure were the same with
Love, Pain would not differ from Hatred. But it is evident, that Pain is
different from Hatred; because it often subsists without it. A Man, for
Instance, who is wounded unawares, suffers a most real and cutting Pain, whilst
he is free from Hatred. For he knows not even the Cause of his Pain, or the
Object of his Hatred, or rather the Cause of his Pain not deserving his Hatred,
cannot raise it. Thus he Hates not that Cause of his Pain, though his Pain
moves or disposes him to Hatred. It Is true, he deservedly Hates Pain; but the
Hatred of Pain is not Pain, but supposes it. Hatred of Pain does not Merit our
Hatred, as does Pain: For the former is, on the contrary, very agreeable; in
that we are pleased in Hating it, as we are displeased in Suffering it. Pain
therefore not being Hatred, the Pleasure which is contrary to Pain is not Love,
which is contrary to Hatred, and consequently the Pleasure which is
precedaneous to Reason, is not the same thing as Love. I prove likewise that
Joy, or the Pleasure which pursues Reason, is distinguished from Love.

Joy and Sorrow being contraries; if Joy were the same thing with Love, Sorrow
and Hatred would be all one. But it is evident, that Sorrow differs from
Hatred, because it sometimes has a separate Subsistence. A Man, for Example, by
chance finds himself deprived of things that he has need of; this is enough to
make him sorrowful: But it cannot provoke him to Hatred; Either because he
knows not what it was that deprived him of this necessary thing; or because,
being unworthy of his Hatred, it could not excite it. It Is true, this Man Hates
the Privation of the Good which he Loves; But it is manifest, that this kind of
Hatred is really Love: For he Hates the Privation of Good, merely because he
Loves Good; and since to fly the Privation of Good, is to tend toward Good; Is
is evident, that the Motion of his Hatred is not different from that of his
Love. Therefore his Hatred, if he have any, being not contrary to his Love, and
Sorrow being always contrary to Joy, it is evident, that his Sorrow is not his
Hatred: and consequently Joy is different from Love. Lastly, It is evident,
that Sorrow proceeds from the Presence of something which we hate, or rather
from the Absence of something which we Love. Therefore Sorrow supposes Hatred,
or rather Love, but it is very different from them both.

I know St. Austin defines Pain to be an Aversion the Soul conceives from the
Bodies being disposed otherwise than she would have it; and that he often
confounds Delectation with Charity, Pleasure with Joy, Pain with Sorrow;
Pleasure and Joy with Love; Pain and Sorrow, with Aversion or Hatred. But
there is great Probability this Holy Father in all this followed the common way
of speaking of the Vulgar, who confound most of those things which occur in
them at one and the same time: Or, it may be, did not examine these things in
so Nice and Philosophical a manner as he might have done. Yet I think I both
may and ought to say, that to me it seems necessary exactly to distinguish
these things, if we would explain our selves clearly and without Equivocation
upon most of the Questions handled by him. For even Men of a quite opposite
Opinion use to build upon the Authority of this great Man, because of the
various Senses and Constructions his Speech will afford; which is not always
Nice and accurate enough to reconcile Persons, who are perhaps more eager to
dispute, than desirous to agree.

THE ILLUSTRATION UPON THE Third CHAPTER of the Second PART of the Sixth BOOK.
Concerning the Efficacy ascribed to Second Causes.
EVER since the Transgression of our first Parent, the Mind rambling constantly
abroad, forgets both it self, and Him who pierces and enlightens it; and is so
absurdly pliant to the Seducements of its Body, and those about it, as to
imagine its own Happiness and Perfection is to be found in them. He that alone
is able to act in us, is at present hidden from our Eyes: His Operations are of
an insensible kind; and though he produces and preserves all Beings, yet the
Mind whilst the earnest Enquirer of the Cause of all things, cannot easily know
him, though it meets him every moment. Some Philosophers choose rather to
imagine a Nature and particular Faculties, as the Causes of those which we term
Natural Effects, than to render to God all the Honor that is due to his Power.
And though they have no Proof, nor even clear Idea of this pretended Nature and
Faculties, as I hope to make appear, they had rather talk without knowing what
they say, and reverence a purely imaginary Power, than by any Essay of Thought
to discover that Invisible Hand which works all in all things.

It Is unavoidable for me to believe that one of the most deplorable
Consequences of Original Sin, is our having no Taste nor Sense for God; or our
Incapacity of Tasting or Meeting him without a sort of Dread and Abhorrence. We
ought to see God in all things, to be sensible of his Power and Force in all
Natural Effects; to admire his Wisdom in the wonderful Order of his Creatures:
In a word, to Worship, to Fear, to Love Him only in all his Works. But in our
present State there is a Secret Opposition between Man and GOD; Man, conscious
of his being a Sinner, hides himself, flies the Light, and is afraid to meet
his Maker; and therefore had rather imagine in surrounding Bodies, a blind
Power or Nature with which he can be familiar, than find in them the terrible
Power of an Holy and Just GOD, who knows and Operates all in all.

I confess there are very many Persons, who from another Principle than that of
the Heathen Philosophers, follow their Opinion about Nature, and Second Causes:
But I hope to convince them in the Process of this Discourse, that they fall
into this Sentiment, out of a Prejudice which it is impossible to shake off,
without those Succors which are furnished by the Principles of a Philosophy,
that has not always been sufficiently known. For in all likelihood, this is
what has kept them from declaring for an Opinion, which I think my self obliged
to espouse.

I have a great many Reasons which will not let me attribute to Second or
Natural Causes, a Force, Power, or Efficacy, to produce any thing whatever. The
chief whereof is, That this Opinion is to me utterly inconceivable. Though I
use all possible Endeavors to comprehend it, I cannot find in my self the Idea
to represent to me, what can be that Force or Power ascribed to the Creatures.
And I need not fear passing a rash Judgment, in affirming that those who hold
that the Creatures are endued with a Force and Power, advance what they do not
clearly conceive. For, in short, if the Philosophers clearly conceive, that
Second Causes have a true Force to act and produce their Like; I being a Man as
well as they, and participating of the same Sovereign Reason, might in all
probability discover the Idea which represent to them that Force. But, all the
efforts that my Mind can make can discover no other Force, Efficacy or Power,
than in the Will of the Infinitely perfect Being.

Besides, when I think upon the different Opinions of Philosophers upon this
subject, I can no longer doubt of my assertion. For if they saw clearly what
this Power of Creatures was, or what was in them truly powerful, they would
agree in their Opinion about it. When Men cannot accord, though they have no
private Interest to hinder them, it is a certain Sign they have no clear Idea of
what they say, and that they understand not one another, especially if they
dispute on subjects that are not of a Complex Nature, and of difficult
discussion; like this before us. For there would be no difficulty to resolve
it, if Men had a clear Idea of a created Force or Power. Here then follow some
of their Opinions, that we may see how little agreement there is among them.

For the most extraordinary of these Opinions. See Suarez Metaphysics. Disp.
18. Sect. 2. Assert. 2. and 3.

Scot. in 4. Sent. Did. 12.1. D. 37.2. D. 17.

Palaudan. in 4. Sent. D. 12. Q. 1 Art. 1. Perer. 8. Phys. Chapter 3. Conimbr. upon
Aristotle's Physics, and many others cited by Suarez. See Eonseca's Metaphys.
qu. 13. Sect. 3. and Soncin. and Javell. upon the same Question.


There are Philosophers who maintain that second Causes act by their Matter,
Figure and Motion, and these in one sense are right enough: Others by their
substantial form. Many by Accidents or Qualities, some by Matter and Form;
others by Form and Accidents, and others still by certain virtues, or faculties
distinct from all this. There are of them who affirm that the substantial Form
produces Forms; and the Accidental Form, Accidents: Others say that the Forms
produce both other Forms and Accidents: Others, still that bare Accidents are
not only capable of producing Accidents, but even Forms. But it must not be
imagined that those for instance, who say, that Accidents can produce Forms by
virtue of the Form they are joined to, understand it the same way. For one part
of them will have Accidents to be the very Force, or Virtue of the Substantial
Form: Another that they imbibe into them the Influence of the Form, and only
act so by virtue of it: A Third lastly will have them to be but Instrumental
Causes. But neither are these latter sort altogether agreed about what is meant
by Instrumental Cause, and the virtue they receive from the Principal. Nor can
the Philosophers compromise about the Action whereby second Causes produce
their Effects. For some of them pretend that Causality ought not to be
produced, since it is this which produces. Others will that they truly act by
their own Action. But they are involved in so many Labyrinths in explaining
precisely wherein this Action consists, and there are so many different
Opinions about it, that I cannot find in my Heart to recite them.

Such is the strange variety of Opinions, though I have not produced those of
the Ancient Philosophers, or that were born in very remote Countries. But we
have sufficient Reason to conclude, that they are no more agreed upon the
subject of second Causes, than those before alleged. Avicenna, for instance,
is of Opinion that Corporeal Substances cannot produce any thing but Accidents:
Ruvio lib. 2. Ph. Tract. 4. qu. 2.
This, according to Ruvio, is his Hypothesis. He supposes that God produces
immediately a most perfect Spiritual Substance: That this produces another less
perfect, and this a third, and so on to the last, which produces all Corporeal
Substances; and Corporeal Substances, Accidents. But Avicembrom not able to
comprehend how Corporeal Substances; which cannot penetrate each other, should
cause alterations in them, See Suarez Disp. 18. Sect. 1.
supposes that there are Spirits which are capable of acting on Bodies, because
they alone can penetrate them. For these Gentlemen not admitting the Vacuum,
nor the Atoms of Democritus, nor having sufficient knowledge of the subtle
matter of M. des Carts, could not with the Gassendists and Cartesians, think
of Bodies which were little enough to insinuate into the pores of those that
are hardest, and most solid.

Methinks this diversity of Opinions justifies this thought of ours, that Men
often talk of things which they understand not; and that the Power of
Creatures, being a Fiction of Mind, of which we have naturally no Idea, every
Man makes it, and imagines it what he pleases.

It Is true, this Power has been acknowledged for a Real and True, by most Men
in all Ages; but it has never yet been proved, I say not demonstratively, but
in any wise so, as to make an impression upon an Attentive, thinking Man. For
the confused Proofs which are built only upon the fallacious Testimony of the
Senses, and Passions, are to be rejected by those who know how to exercise
their Reason.

Chapter 1. of the second Book of his Physics.
Aristotle, speaking of what they call Nature, says it is Ridiculous to go
about to prove that Natural Bodies have an inward Principle of Motion and Rest;
because says he, it is a thing that is Self-Evident. He likewise does not doubt
but a Bowl which strikes another, has the force of putting it in Motion. This
is witnessed by his Eyes, and that is enough for him, who seldom follows any
other Testimony than of the Senses, (very rarely that of his Reason) and is
very indifferent whether it be intelligible or not.

Those who impugn the Opinion of some Divines, who have written against Second
Causes, say, like Aristotle, that the Senses convince us of their Efficacy: And
this is their first and principal Proof. It Is evident, say they, that the Fire
burns, that the Sun shines, that Water cools, and he must be out of his Senses
who can doubt of it. See Fonsesa, Suarez, and others before cited.
The Authors of the other Opinion, says the great Averroes, are out of their
Wits. We must, say almost all the Peripateticks, use sensible Proofs for their
Conviction, who deny this Efficacy, and so oblige them to confess we are
capable of acting on them, and wounding them. It Is a judgment which Book 1. of
his Topics. C. 1.
Aristotle has already pronounced against them, and it ought to be put in
Execution.

But this pretended Demonstration cannot but create Pity: For it gives us to
know the Weakness of an Humane Mind: And that the Philosophers themselves are
infinitely more sensible than Reasonable. It evinces that those who glory in
being the Inquirers of Truth, know not even whom they are to consult to hear
any News of it: Whether Sovereign Reason, which never deceives, but always
speaks things as they are in themselves, or the Body which speaks only out of
Interest, and with reference to the preservation and convenience of Life. For
in fine what prejudices will not be justified if we set up our Senses for
Judges, to which most of them owe their Birth? As I have shown in The Search
after Truth.

When I see a Bowl shock another, my Eyes tell me, or seem to tell me, that it
is the True Cause of the motion it impresses; for the true cause that moves
Bodies, is not visible to my Eyes. But if I interrogate my Reason, I evidently
see, that Bodies having no Power to move themselves, and their moving force
being nothing but the Will of God, which preserves them successively in
different places, they cannot communicate a Power which they have not, nor
could communicate, if they had it. For it is plain that there must be Wisdom,
and that Infinite, to regulate the communication of motions, with that
exactness, Proportion, and Uniformity which we see. A Body cannot know that
infinite multitude of impuls'd Bodies round about it; and though we should
suppose it to have knowledge, yet it would not have enough so proportionably to
regulate and distribute, at the instant of protrusion, the moving force it self
is carried with.

When I open my Eyes, the Sun appears to me splendidly glorious in Light: And
it seems not only to be visible it self, but to make all the World so too.
Methinks it is he that arrays the Earth with flowers, and enriches it with
Fruits. That gives Life to Animals and striking by His Heat into the very Womb
of the Earth, impregnates Her with Stones Marbles and Metalls. But in
consulting my Reason I see nothing of all this: And if I faithfully consult it,
I plainly discover the seducement of my Senses, and find that God Works all in
all. For knowing that all the changes which accrue to Bodies, have no other
principle than the different Communications of Motions, which occur in visible
and invisible Bodies: I see that God does all; since it is his Will that causes,
and his Wisdom that regulates all these Communications.

I suppose that Local Motion is the principle of Generations, Corruptions,
Alterations, and Universally of all the changes incident to the Corporeal
World; which is an Opinion sufficiently now received among Men of Letters. But
let their Opinion about it be what it will, that matters not much; since it
seems much easier to conceive, that a Body drives another when it strikes it,
than to comprehend how Fire can produce Heat and Light, and educe from the
power of matter a substance that was not in it before. And if it be necessary
to acknowledge that God is the True Cause of the different Communications of
Motion, by a much stronger reason we should conclude, that none but He can
Create, and Annihilate real Qualities, and substantial Forms. I say Create and
Annihilate: For it seems to me at least as difficult to educe from matter a
substance that was not in it, or to reduce it into it again, whilst yet there
nothing remains of it, as to create it, or Annihilate it. But I stick not to
the Terms: And I make use of those, because there are no other that I know of,
which express without Obscurity and Ambiguity, the changes supposed by the
Philosophers to arrive every moment by the force of second Causes.

I had some scruple to set down here, the other Arguments which are commonly
urged, for the Force and Efficacy of natural Causes; For they appear so weak
and trifling to those who withstand Prejudices, and prefer their Reason before
their Senses, that I can scarce believe, methinks, that Reasonable Men could be
persuaded by them. However I produce, and answer them, since there are many
Philosophers who urge them.

ARGUMENT I.
If second Causes did not Operate, say In his Metaph. Disp. 18. Sect. 1.
Assert. 1.
Suarez, In Metaph. Arist. qu. 7. Sect. 2.
Fonseca, and some others, Animate things could not be distinguished from
Inanimate, since neither one, nor the other, would have an inward principle of
their Actions.

ANSWER.
I answer, that Men would have the same sensible proofs that have convinced
them of the distinction they make between things Animate and Inanimate. They
would still see Animals do the same Actions, as eat, grow, cry, run, bound,
etc. and would discern nothing like this in Stones: See Book 4. Chapter 11. toward
the end, and Book 6. Part 2. Chapter 7.
And this one thing makes the vulgar Philosophers believe, that Beasts live,
and that Stones do not. For we are not to fancy that they know by a clear and
distinct view of Mind, what is the Life of a Dog. It Is their Senses which
regulate their Decisions upon this Question.

If it were necessary, I could prove here that the principle of the Life of a
Dog differs not from the principle of the Motion of a Watch. For the Life of
Bodies whatever they be, can consist but in the Motion of their Parts: And we
may easily judge that the same subtle matter, which causes the Fermentation of
the Blood, and Animal Spirits, in a Dog, and which is the principle of his
Life, is no perfecter than that which gives Motion to the Spring of a Watch, or
which causes the Gravitation in the Weights of a Clock, which is the principle
of their Life, or to speak as others do, of their Motion.

It behooves the Peripateticks to give those whom they style Cartesians a clear
Idea of what they call the Life of Beasts, Corporeal Soul, Body which
Perceives, and Desires, Sees, Feels, Wills, and then we shall clearly resolve
their Difficulties, if after that they shall persist in raising them.

ARGUMENT II.
It were impossible to discover the Differences, or Powers of the Elements: So
that Fire might refrigerate as Water, and nothing would be of a settled and
fixed Nature.

ANSWER.
I answer, That whilst Nature remains as it is, that is to say, whilst the Laws
of the Communication of Motions remain constantly the same; it is a
Contradiction, that Fire should not burn, or separate the Parts of certain
Bodies. Fire cannot refrigerate like Water, unless it becomes Water; for Fire
being only Fuel, See Chapter 2. Book IV.
whose Parts have been violently agitated by an invisible surrounding Matter,
as is easy to demonstrate; it is impossible its Parts should not Communicate
some of their Motion to approaching Bodies: Now as these Laws are constant, the
Nature of Fire, its Virtues and Qualities are unchangeable. But this Nature,
and these Virtues, are only Consequences of the General and Efficacious Will of
GOD, who does all in all things. Therefore the Study of Nature, is in all
respects false and vain, when we look for other true Causes than the Wills of
the ALMIGHTY.

I confess that we are not to have recourse to God, or the Universal Cause,
when we require the Reason of particular Effects. For we should be ridiculous
to assert, for Instance, That GOD dries the Ways, or Freezes the Water in the
River. We must say, The Air dries the Earth, because it moves, and bears off
the Water with it that dilutes it: Or that the Air, or the subtle Matter
Freezes the River in Winter, because at that time it communicates not
sufficient Motion to the Parts that constitute the Water. In a Word, we must,
if we can, assign the Natural and particular Cause of the Effects proposed, to
Examination. But because the Action of these Causes consists in the moving
Force, which actuates them, which moving Force is the Will of GOD, ( which
create them), we ought not to say they have in themselves a Force or Power to
produce any Effects. And when in Reasoning we are at last arrived to a general
Effect, of which we seek the Cause; it is no good Philosophy to imagine any
other than the general. And to feign a certain Nature, a first Moveable, and
universal Soul, or some such Chimera, whereof we have no clear and distinct
Idea, would be to argue like an Heathen Philosopher. For Example, when we are
asked, whence it comes that some Bodies are in motion, or that the agitated Air
communicates its Motion to the Water, or rather whence proceeds the mutual
Protrusion of Bodies: Motion and its Communication being a general Effect, on
which all others depend; we cannot answer, I do'nt say like Christians, but
Philosophers, without ascending to God who is the Universal Cause: Since it is
His Will that is the moving Force of Bodies, and that regulates the
Communication of their Motions. Had he willed there should be no new Production
in the World, he would not have put its Parts in motion: And if hereafter He
shall will the Incorruptibility of some of the Beings he had made, he shall
cease to will the Communication of Motions in point of those Beings.

ARGUMENT III.
It Is needless to Plow, to Water, and give several preparatory Dispositions to
Bodies, to fit them for what we desire from them. For GOD has no need of
preparing the Subjects on which he Works. Suarez. ib.


ANSWER.
I answer; That GOD may do absolutely all he pleases, without finding any
Dispositions in the Subjects he works upon. But he cannot do it without a
Miracle, or by Natural ways; that is, by the General Laws of the Communication
of Motions, which he has constituted, and which he almost always follows in his
Actings. GOD never multiplies his Wills without Reason; but acts always by the
simplest Ways; and for that Reason he makes use of the Collision of Bodies, in
giving them Motion. Not that this Collision is absolutely necessary to it, as
our Senses tell us, but that being the Occasion of the Communication of
Motions, there need be but very few Natural Laws to produce all the admirable
Effects we see. For by this means we may reduce all the Laws of the
Communication of Motions to one: Viz. That percutient Bodies being considered
as but one, at the Moment of their Contact, See Chap. the last of The Search.
or Collision, the moving Force is divided between them at their Separation,
according to the Proportion of their Magnitude. But whereas concurrent Bodies
are surrounded with infinite others, which act upon them, by Virtue and
Efficacy of this Law; however constant and uniform this Law be, it produces a
World of quite different Communications, because it acts upon infinite Bodies,
which are all related to one another.

It is necessary to Water a Plant to make it grow; because by the Laws of the
Communication of Motions, hardly any other than Watery Particles can by their
Motion, and by reason of their Figure, insinuate and Wind up themselves into
the Fibers of Plants, and by variously fastening and combining together, take
the Figure that is necessary to their Nourishment. The subtle Matter which is
constantly flowing from the Sun, may, by its agitating the Water, lift it into
the Plants; but it has not a competent Motion to raise gross Earthy Particles.
Yet Earth and Air too are necessary to the Growth of Plants; Earth to preserve
the Water at their Root, and Air to give this Water a Moderate Fermentation.
But the Action of the Sun, the Air, and Water, consisting but in the Motion of
their Parts, in proper speaking, GOD is the only Agent. For as I have said,
there is none but He that can by the efficacy of his Will, and by the Infinite
Extent of his Knowledge cause and regulate those infinitely infinite
Communications of Motions, which are made every moment, and in a Proportion
infinitely exact, and regular.

ARGUMENT IV.
Can God resist, and Fight against Himself? Bodies justle, strike, and resist
one another, therefore Gods Acts not in them, unless it be by his concourse.
For if it were he only that produced, and preserved Motion in Bodies, he would
take care to divert them before the Collision, as knowing well that they are
impenetrable. To what purpose are Bodies driven to be beaten back again, why
must they proceed to recoil? Or what signifies it to produce and Preserve
useless Motions; Is it not an Absurdity to say that God impugns himself, and
that He destroys his Works, when a Bull fights with a Lion, when a Wolf devours
a Sheep, and a Sheep eats the Grass which God makes to grow? Therefore there
are Second Causes.

ANSWER.
Therefore Second Causes do all, and God does nothing at all. For God cannot
act against himself, but Concourse is Action. The concurring to contrary
Actions is giving contrary Concourse, and consequently doing contrary Actions.
To concur with the Action of Creatures that resist each other, is to Act
against himself. To concur to useless Motions, is to Act in vain. But God does
nothing needless or in vain; he does no contrary Actions, and therefore concurs
not to the Action of Creatures that often destroy one another, and makes
useless Actions and Motions. See where this proof of Second Causes leads us.
But let us see what Reason says to it.

God Works all in every thing, and nothing resists him. He Works all in all
things, in as much as his Will both makes, and regulates all Motions: And
nothing resists him, because he does what ever he Wills. But let us see how
this is to be conceived. Having resolved to produce by the simplest ways, as
most conformable to Order that infinite Variety of Creatures which we admire,
he willed that Bodies should move in a right line, because that is the most
simple. But Bodies being impenetrable, and their Motions tending in Lines that
oppose, or intersect one another, they must necessarily fall foul together, and
consequently cease moving in the same manner. God foresaw this, yet
notwithstanding positively willed the Collision, or shock of Bodies; not that
he is delighted in impugning himself, but because he designed to make use of
this Collision as an Occasion for his establishing the General Law of the
Communication of Motions; by which he foresaw he must produce an infinite
Variety of admirable Effects. For I am persuaded that these two Natural Laws
which are the simplest of all others: Namely, that All Motion tends to make it
self in a right line; and that in the Collision, Motions are Communicated
proportionably to the magnitude of the Colliding Bodies; are sufficient to
produce such a World as we see: That is, the Heaven and Stars, and Planets, and
Comets, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire: In a Word, the Elements, and all
Unorganiz'd, and inanimate Bodies. For Organized Bodies depend on many other
Natural Laws, which are perfectly unknown. It may be living Bodies are not
formed like others by a determinate number of Natural Laws. For there is great
probability, they were all formed at the Creation of the World, and that Time
only gives them a necessary Growth, to make them Visible to our Eyes;
Nevertheless, it is certain, they receive that Growth by the General Laws of
Nature, whereby all other Bodies are formed which is the Reason, that their
Increase is not always Regular.

I say then that God by the first of Natural Laws positively Wills, and
consequently Causes the Collision of Bodies; and afterward imploys this
Collision as an Occasion of establishing the Second Natural Law; which
regulates the Communication of Motions; and that thus the actual Collision, is
the Natural, or Occasional Cause of the Actual Communication of Motions.

If this be well considered, it will be evidently acknowledged that nothing can
be better Ordered. But supposing that God had not so Ordained it, and that he
had diverted Bodies, when ready to encounter, as if there were a Vacuum to
receive them, First they would not be subject to that perpetual Vicissitude
which makes the Beauty of the Universe: For the Generation of some Bodies is
performed by the Corruption of Others; and it is the contrariety of their Motion
which produces their Variety. Secondly God would not act in the most simple
manner: For if Bodies ready to meet should continue on their Motion, without
touching, they must needs describe Lines curv'd in a thousand different
Fashions; and consequently different Wills must be admitted in God to determine
their Motions. Lastly, if there were no Uniformity in the Action of Natural
Bodies, and that their Motion were not made in a right Line, we should have no
certain Principle for our Reasonings in natural Philosophy, nor for our conduct
in many Actions of our Life.

It Is not a disorder that Lions eat Wolves, and that Wolves eat Sheep, and
Sheep grass, of which God has had so special a regard, as to give it all things
necessary to its preservation, and likewise a Seed for perpetuating it is kind.
This proves second causes no more, than the Plurality of Causes, of contrary
Principles of Good, and Evil, which the Manichees imagined to account for these
effects: But it is a certain Sign of the Grandeur, Wisdom and Magnificence of
God. For God does no works unbecoming an infinite Wisdom, and he does them with
that profusion as is a manifest proof of his Power, and Greatness. Whatever is
destroyed, is repaired again by the same Law that destroyed it: So great is the
Wisdom, Power and Fecundity of that Law. God prevents not the destruction of
Beings by any new Will: not only because the first suffices to restore them;
but especially because his Wills are of much greater value than the Reparation
of these Beings. They are far more valuable than all that they produce. And God
had never made this World, since not worthy of the Action by which it was
produced, unless he had other prospects than are known by the Philosophers, and
knew how to honor himself in JESUS CHRIST, with an honor which the Creatures
are not capable of giving him.

When a House falls, and crushes an Honest Man to death: a greater Evil
happens, than when one Beast devours another, or when a Body is forced to
rebound by the shock it receives from the Encounter of another. But God does
not multiply his Wills, to redress either the true or apparent Disorders which
are the necessary Consequences of natural Laws. God ought not to correct nor
change these Laws, though they sometimes produce Monsters. He is not to
confound the Order, and simplicity of his Ways. He must neglect mean and little
things: I would say, he must not have particular Wills to produce effects,
which are not equivalent to, or worthy of the Action of the Producer. God works
not Miracles save when Order which he constantly follows requires it: which
Order requires that he should act by the most simple ways; and make no
exceptions to his general Wills, but when it is absolutely necessary to his
designs, or on particular occasions, which we are absolutely ignorant of.
Though we are all united to Order, or the Wisdom of God, yet we know not all
the Rules of it. We see in it what we ought to do, but we cannot discover in it
what God ought to Will, nor is it our business to be very sollicitous to know
it.

A great instance of what I have said, we have in the Damnation of an infinite
number of Persons, whom God suffered to perish in times of Ignorance* and
Error: God is infinitely Good: He loves all his Works; He wills that all Men
should be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth, for he has made them
to enjoy him. And yet the greatest number are Damned. They live and die in
blindness, and will remain in it to all Eternity. Comes not this from his
acting by the simplest means, and his following Order? See the Illustration
upon the Fourth Chapter of the second Part concerning Method.
We have shown, that according to Order, God ought not to prevent by
Indeliberate Pleasures the Sea the first Illustration upon the Fifth Chapter.
will of the first Man, whose Fall has disordered Nature. It was requisite that
all Men should descend from one, not only because that is the most simple way,
but for several too Theological and abstract Reasons to be here explained. In
fine we ought to believe this conformable to the Order which God follows, and
to the Wisdom he always consults in the intention, and execution of his
designs. The first Man's Sin has produced infinite Evils, I confess, but
certainly Order required that God should permit it, and that he should instate
Man in a peccable condition.

God minded to repair his lapsed Work, seldom gives Victorious Graces that
prevail over the malice of the greatest Sinners. Sometimes he gives Graces
useless to the conversion of the Receiver, though he foresees their inutility,
and sometimes sheds them in great Plenty, yet with little effect: Commonly he
acts as it were by degrees, giving Men secret inspirations of Self-denial and
Repentance, as formerly he gave them Counsels in his Gospel. Thus he prepares
them for the grace of Conversion, and last of all bestows it. Why all these
round-about Methods and ways indirect? Would it not have been enough for him to
have positively Willed the Conversion of a Sinner, to have effected it in an
efficacious and irresistible manner? But is not it visible that this proceeds
from his acting by the simplest Methods, and Orders willing it, though we do
not always see it? For God must necessarily follow Order, and Wisdom in his
actings, though these are Unfathomable Abysses to the Mind of Man. There are
certain most simple Laws in the Order of Grace, by which God for the most part
acts: For this Order has its Rules as well as that of Nature, though we know
them not, as we see those of the Communications of Motions. Only let us follow
the Counsels which are given us in the Gospel by him, who perfectly knows the
Laws of Grace.

This I say to pacify the unjust Complaints of Sinners, who despise the
Counsels of JESUS CHRIST, and charge their Malignity and disorders upon God.
They would have God show Miracles in their behalf, and dispense with the
general Laws of Grace. They lead their Life in Pleasures, they seek out for
Honors, and daily renew those wounds which sensible Objects have given their
Brain, and add more to them, and after this expect God should cure them by a
Miracle. Not unlike wounded Men, who in the excess of their Pain tear their
Clothes, renovate their Wounds, and when in the sight of approaching Death,
complain of the cruelty of their Surgeons. They would have God to save them,
because say they, God is Good, Wise, Powerful, and needs but determine it, to
make us happy. Why did he make us to damn and destroy us? They ought to know
that God Wills they should be saved, and to that intent has done all that could
be done by Order, and Wisdom, which he consults. We cannot believe that he
deserts us, whilst he gives us his own Son to be our Mediator, and Sacrifice.
Yes, God is willing that all Mankind should be saved; but by ways that we ought
to study with care, and follow with caution and weariness. God is not to
consult our Passions, in the Execution of his designs: He can have no regard
but to his Eternal Wisdom, nor follow any other rule than the Divine Order,
which Order will have us imitate JESUS CHRIST, and obey his Counsels, for our
Sanctification and Salvation. But if God has not predestined all Men to be
conformable to the Image of his Son, who is the Model, and Exemplar of the
Elect: It Is because herein God acts by the most simple means, with reference to
his designs, which all make for his Glory: It Is because God is an universal
Cause, which ought not to act like particular Causes, which have particular
Volitions for all they do. It Is because his Wisdom, which in this respect, is
an Abyss to our apprehensions, Wills it so. Lastly, it is because this Conduct
is more worthy of God than could be any other more favorable for the
Reprobate. For even they are condemned hy an Order as worthy our Adorations, as
that whereby the Elect are sanctified and saved: And nothing but our Ignorance
of Order, and our Self-love, make us blame a Conduct which the Angels and
Saints eternally admire. But let us return to the proofs of the efficacy of
second Causes.

ARGUMENT V.
If Bodies had not a certain Nature or Force to act with, and if God did all
things, there would be nothing but what was Supernatural, in the most ordinary
effects. The distinction of Natural, and Supernatural, which has been so well
received in the World, and established by the universal approbation of the
Learned, would be Chimerical and Extravagant.

ANSWER.
I answer that distinction is absurd in the Mouth of Aristotle, since the
Nature he has established is a mere Chimera. I say that distinction is not clear
in the mouth of the Vulgar part of Men, who judge of things by the Impression
they make upon their Senses. For they know not precisely what they mean when
they say, the Fire burns by it is Nature. I say that this distinction may pass
in the mouth of a Divine, if he means by natural Effects, the consequences of
the General Laws which God has settled for the production and preservation of
all things: And by supernatural Effects those which are independent on these
Laws. In this sense the Distinction is true. But the Philosophy of Aristotle
together with the Impression of the senses, makes it, as I think, dangerous,
because it may divert from God the too respectful admirers of the Opinions of
that wretched Philosopher; or such as consult their senses instead of retiring
into themselves to consult the Truth. And therefore that distinction is not to
be made use of without an Explication, St. Austin having used the word fortune,
retracted it, though there are few that could be deceived by it. Lib. 1. de
Retract. 1 Cor. 10.19.
St. Paul speaking of meats offered to Idols, advertises that an Idol is
nothing. If the Nature of the Heathen Philosophy be a fiction, if that nature
be nothing, it should be precaution'd, for that there are many who are abused
by it: And more than we suppose who inconsiderately attribute to it the Works
of God, who are taken up with this Idol, or fiction of the Humane mind, and pay
it those Honors which are only due to the Divinity. They are willing to let
God be Author of Miracles, and some Extraordinary effects, which in one sense,
are little worthy of his Greatness and Wisdom, and they refer to the Power of
their Imaginary nature those constant and regular Effects, which none but the
Wise know how to admire. They suppose too that this so wonderful disposition
which all living Bodies have to preserve themselves, and beget their like, is a
production of their Nature: For according to these Philosophers the Sun and Man
beget a Man.

We may still distinguish between supernatural and natural Order, several ways.
For we may say that the supernatural relates to future Goods; that it is
established, upon consideration of the merits of CHRIST; that it is the first
and principal in the designs of God; and other things enough to preserve a
distinction, which they are vainly apprehensive should fall to the ground.

ARGUMENT VI.
The main proof which is brought by the Philosophers for the Efficacy of second
Causes, is drawn from the will and liberty of Man, Man wills, and determines of
himself. But to Will and Determine is to Act. It Is certainly Man who commits
Sin, God not being the Author of it, any more than of Concupiscence and Error.
Therefore Man acts.

ANSWER.
I have sufficiently explained in several Places of the Treatise about the
Search of Truth, what is the Will, and Liberty of Man, and especially in the
first Chapter of the first Book, and in the first Illustration upon it; so that
it is needless to repeat it again. I acknowledge Man Wills, and Determines
himself, in as much as God causes him to Will; incessantly carries him toward
good, and gives him all the Idea's and Sensations, by which he determines his
Impression. I know likewise that Man alone commits Sin. But I deny that therein
he does any thing; For Sin, Error, and even Concupiscence are nothing. I have
explained my self upon this Point in the first Illustration.

Man wills, but his Volitions are impotent in themselves; they produce nothing,
and God works all notwithstanding them. For it is even God that makes our Will,
by the Impression he gives us toward Good. All that Man has from himself are
Nemo habet de suo nisi mendacium and peccatum, Council. Araus. 2. Can. 22.
Error and Sin, which are nothing.

There is a great difference between our Minds and Bodies that are about us; I
grant, Our Mind in one sense Wills, Acts, and Determines it self. Our own
inward Consciousness is an evident Conviction. If we were destitute of Liberty,
there could be no future Recompense and Punishment, for it is our Liberty that
makes our Actions good or bad; and without it Religion would be but a Phantasm,
and a Dream. But that which we cannot see clearly is, That Bodies have a force
of Acting. This it is we cannot comprehend, and this we deny, when we deny the
Efficacy of Second Causes.

Even the Mind acts not in that measure which is imagined. I know that I will,
and that I Will freely; I have no Reason to doubt of it; which is stronger than
that inward feeling I have of my self. Nor do I deny it, but I deny that my
Will is the In the Sense explained in the Chapter belonging to this
Illustration.
true Cause of the Motion of my Arm, of the Idea's of my Mind, and of other
things which accompany my Volitions. For I see no Relation between so different
things: Nay, I most clearly see there can be no Analogy between my Will to move
my Arm, and the Agitation of some little Bodies, whose Motion and Figure I do
not know, which make choice of certain Nervous Canals, amongst a Million of
others unknown to me, in Order to cause in me the Motion I desire, by a World
of Motions, which I desire not. I deny that my Will produces in me my Idea's: I
cannot see how it is possible it should; for since it cannot Act or Will without
Knowledge, it supposes my Idea's, but does not make them. (Nay, I do not so
much as know precisely what an Idea is.) I cannot tell, whether we produce them
out of nothing, and send them back to the same nothing, when we cease to
perceive them. I speak after the Notion of some Persons.

I produce, you will say, my Idea's by the Faculty, which God gives me of
Thinking. I move my Arm, because of the Union which God has established between
my Mind and Body. Faculty, Union, are Logical Terms, of loose and indeterminate
Signification. There is no particular Being, nor Mode of Being, which is either
Faculty or Union. Therefore these Terms ought to be explained. If, you will say,
that the Union of my Mind and Body consists, in God's willing, That, upon my
Desire to move my Arm, the Animal Spirits should betake themselves to the
Muscles it is composed of, to move it in the manner desired: I clearly
understand this Explication, and receive it: But this is exactly my own
Assertion. For if my Will determine that of God, it is evident, that my Arm is
moved, not by my Will, which is impotent of it self, but by the Will of God,
which never fails of its Effect.

But if it be said, The Union of my Mind and Body consists in God's giving me a
I still mean a true and efficacious Force.
Force to move my Arm, as he has given my Body likewise a Force of making me
feel Pleasure and Pain; to the end I may be sollicitous for this Body, and be
concerned for its Preservation; certainly this is to suppose the thing in
dispute, and to make a Circle. No Man has a clear Idea of that Force which the
Soul has over the Body, or the Body over the Soul; nor knows very well what he
says when he positively asserts it. That Opinion has been embraced through
Prejudice, has been learned in Infancy, and in the Age of Sense. But
Understanding, Reason, and Reflection have no part in it; which is manifest
enough from what I have said in the foregoing Treatise.

But you will say, I know by my inward Conscience of my Action, that I really
have this Force; and therefore am not mistaken in believing it. I answer, That
when I move my Arm, I am conscious to my self of the Actual Volition by which I
move it; and I err not in believing I have that Volition. I have moreover an
inward Sense of a certain Effort or Endeavor, which accompanies this Volition,
and it is to believed that I make this Endeavor. Last of all, I grant that It
seems evident to me that the Mind knows not by internal Sensation, or
Conscience, the motion of the Arm she Animates. She knows by Conscience only
what she feels, or thinks. By inward Sensation, or Conscience, we know the
sense we have of the Motion of our Arm. But Conscience does not notify the
Motion of our Arm, or the pain we suffer in it, any more than the Colors we
see upon Objects. Or if this will not be granted, I say, that inward Sensation
is not infallible, for Error is generally found in the Sensations when they are
composed. I have sufficiently proved it in the first Book of the Search after
Truth.
I have an inward feeling of the Motion of my Arm, at the instant of this
Effort; which supposed, I agree to what is said, That the Motion of the Arm is
performed at the instant a Man feels this Effort, or has a practical Volition
of moving his Arm. But I deny that this Effort, which is no more than a
Modification, or Sensation of the Soul, which is given us to make us understand
our Weakness, and to afford us a confused and obscure Sensation of our
Strength, can be capable of moving, and determining the Spirits. I deny there
is any Analogy or Proportion between our Thoughts, and the Motions of Matter. I
deny that the Soul has the least Knowledge of the Animal Spirits, which she
imploys to move the Body Animated by her. Last of all, Though the Soul exactly
knew the Animal Spirits, and were capable of moving them, or determining their
Motions, yet I deny that with all this she could make choice of these Ductus of
the Nerves, of which she has no Knowledge, so as to drive the Spirits into
them, and thereby move the Body with that Readiness, Exactness, and Force; as
is observable even in those who are the least acquainted with the Structure of
their Body.

For supposing that our Volitions are truly the moving Force of Bodies,
(howbeit that seems inconceivable) how can we conceive the Soul moves her Body?
The Arm for Example is moved by means of an inflation or contraction caused by
the Spirits in some of the Muscles, that compose it. But to the end the Motion
imprinted by the Soul on the Spirits in the Brain may be Communicated to those
in the Nerves, and from thence to others in the Muscles of the Arm, the
Volitions of the Soul must needs multiply, or change in proportion to those
almost infinite shocks or Collisions, that are made by the little Bodies that
constitute the Spirits. But this is inconceivable, without admitting in the
Soul, an infinite number of Volitions, upon the least Motion of the Body, since
the moving it would necessarily demand an innumerable multitude of
Communications of Motions. For in short, the Soul being but a particular Cause;
and not able to know exactly the degrees of agitation, and the dimensions of
infinite little Corpuscles, which encounter, upon the dispersion of the Spirits
into the Muscles; she could not settle a General Law for the Communication of
these Spirits Motion, nor follow it exactly, if she had established it. Thus it
is evident, the Soul could not move her Arm, although she had the Power of
determining the Motion of the Animal Spirits. These things are too clear to be
longer insisted on.

The case is the same with our Thinking Faculty. We are inwardly conscious that
we Will the Thinking on something; that we make an effort to that purpose, and
that in the Moment of our desire and effort, the Idea of the thing presents it
self to our Mind, but our inward Sensation does not tell us, that our Will or
Effort produces our Idea. Reason does not assure us that it is possible; and
only prejudice makes us believe that our desires are the causes of our Ideas,
whilst we experiment an hundred times a Day, that the latter accompany or
pursue the former. As God and his Operations have nothing sensible in them, and
as we are not conscious of any thing but our desires that precede the presence
of our Ideas, so we do not think our Ideas can have any other cause than these
desires. But view the thing closely, and we shall see no force in us to produce
them; neither Reason nor Conscience giving us any information thereupon.

I don't think my self obliged to transcribe all the other proofs employed by
the patrons for the Efficacy of Second Causes. Because they seem so trifling
that I might be thoughts to design to render them Ridiculous: And I should make
my self so, if I gave them a Serious Answer. An Author, for Example, very
gravely asserts in behalf of his Opinion: Created Beings are true Material,
Formal, Final Causes, why must not they likewise, be Efficient or Efficacious?
I fancy I should give the World little satisfaction, if to answer this
Gentleman's Question, I should stand to explain so gross an Ambiguity, and show
the difference between an Efficacious cause and that which the Philosophers are
pleased to call material. Therefore I leave such arguments as these to come to
those which are drawn from Holy-Writ.

ARGUMENT VII.
The Defenders of the Efficacay of Second Causes, commonly allege the
following Passages to support their Opinion. Let the Earth bring forth Grass:
Genesis 1.
Let the Waters bring forth the moving Creature that has Life, and Fowl that
may fly, etc. Therefore the Earth and Water, by the Word of God, received the
Power of producing Plants, and Animals. Afterward God Commanded the Fowls and
Fishes to multiply, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the Waters in the Seas,
and let Fowl multiply in the Earth. Therefore he gave them a Power of begetting
their like.

Our Savior in the fourth Chapter of St. Mark says, the Seed which falls on
good Ground, brings forth Fruit an Hundredfold, and that the Earth brings
forth Fruits of her self, first the blade then the Ear, after that the full
Corn in the Ear. Lastly, it is written in the Book of Wisdom, that the Fire had
as it were forgotten it is strength to Burn, in favor of the People of God. It
is therefore certain from the Old and New Testament, that Second Causes have an
Active Force.

ANSWER.
I answer, that in Holy-Writ there are many Passages which ascribe to God the
pretended Efficacy of Second Causes, some of which are these. I am the Lord
that makes ALL THINGS, Isa. 44.24. Job 10.8.
that stretches forth the Heavens ALONE, that spreads abroad the Earth by MY
SELF. Thine hands have made me and fashioned me Vulg. totum. 2 Macc. Chapter 7. v*
22, 23. Acts 17*25. Psalm. 104, 14.
together round about.

I cannot tell how you came into my Womb. -- It was not I that formed the
Members of every one of you. But doubtless the Creator of the World who form^d
the Generation of Man, etc. Seeing he gives to Life, and breath, and all
things. He causes Grass to grow for the Cattle, and Herb for the service of
Men, that he may bring forth food out of the Earth. There are infinite such
like Passages, but let these suffice.

When an Author seems to Contradict himself: And Natural Equity, or a stronger
Reason obliges us to reconcile him to himself; methinks we have an infallible
Rule to discover his true Opinion. For we need but observe, when he speaks
according to his own Light, and when after Common Opinion. When a Man
Accommodates himself to the vulgar way of speaking, that is no sure sign he is
of their Opinion. But when he says positively the contrary to what Custom
Authorizes, though he say it but once, we have Reason to conclude it his
judgment, provided we know he speaks seriously and with Mature deliberattion.

For instance, when an Author speaking of the properties of Animals, shall say
an hundred times over, that Beasts have sense, that Dogs know their Master,
that they Love and Fear him; and but in two or three places shall affirm that
Beasts are insensible, that Dogs are incapable of Knowledge, and that they
neither Love nor Fear any thing; how shall we reconcile this Author to himself?
Must we make a Collection of all his passages for and against it; and judge of
his Opinion by the greater number? If so, I conceive there is no Man to whom,
for example, may be attributed this Opinion, That Animals have no Soul. For
even the Cartesians most frequently say, that a Dogs feels when he is beaten,
and rarely it is that they affirm he does not feel. And although I my self
encounter a vast multitude of prejudices in this Treatise, yet many passages
may be gathered from it, by which, unless this present Rule be admitted, it may
be proved that I confirm them all, and even that I hold the Opinion of the
Efficacy of Second Causes, which I am now refuting; or it may be it might be
concluded that the Search after Truth abounds with gross and palpable
contradictions, as do some Persons who I fear have not Equity, and penetration
enough, to set up for judges of the Works of others.

Holy Scripture, and Fathers, and most Religious Men, speak oftener of sensible
Goods, Riches, and Honors, in the vulgar Opinion, than by the true Ideas they
have of them. Our LORD brings in Abraham saying to the Wicked Rich Man, Son,
thou have received thy GOOD things in thy Life time; that is, to say, Riches
and Honor. What we by prejudice call Good, our Good, that is Gold and Silver,
is styled in Scripture, in an hundred places our Sustenance, and Substance, and
even our honesty, or that which Honors us, Paupertas and Honestas a Deo sunt.
Engl. Poverty and Riches. Eccl. 11.14.
Must these ways of speaking used by the Holy Scripture, and the most Religious
Persons, make us believe that they contradict themselves, or that Riches and
Honors are truly our goods, and worthy our Love and our Researches? No,
doubtless; Because the Modes of Speech, suiting with prejudices, signify
nothing: And that we see elsewhere that Our SAVIOR has compared Riches to
Thorns, has told us, we must renounce them; that they are deceitful, and that
all that is great and glorious in the World is an abomination in the sight of
God. Therefore we must not heap together the Passages of Scripture or the
Fathers, to judge of their Opinions by the greater number, unless we will
attribute to them every Moment, the most irrational prejudices in the World.

This being supposed, it is plain that Holy Scripture says positively, it is God
that makes all even to the Grass of the Field, that arrays the Lillies with
such Ornaments as CHRIST prefers before those of Solomon in all his Glory. It Is
not only two or three, but innumerable Passages, that Attribute to God the
pretended Efficacy of Second Causes; and overthrow the Nature of the
Peripateticks.

Besides, we are inclined as it were by a kind of Natural prejudice not to
think on God, in Ordinary Effects. And to attribute force and Efficacy to
Second Causes, for the generality none but Miraculous Effects can make us think
on God as the Author; and the sensible impression engages us in the Opinion of
Second Causes. The Philosophers hold this Opinion, because, say they, the
Senses evince it. Which is their mightiest Argument. Lastly, this Opinion is
received by all that follow the judgment of their Senses. The Language is
accommodated to this prejudice, and it is as commonly said, That Fire has a
Power to Burn, as that Silver and Gold are a Man's Goods. Wherefore those
Passages which the Scripture or Fathers afford us for the Efficacy of Second
Causes, prove no more than those; That an Ambitious or Covetous Person would
choose for the vindication of his Behavior. But we are not to say so of those
Expressions that may be brought for the proof of God's Working all in all. For
since this Opinion is repugnant to prejudice, the Passages that assert it, are
to be interpreted in their utmost Rigor: For the same Reason that we are to
conclude it the Sentiment of a Cartesian, that Beasts are Insensible, though he
should say it but now and then, and should constantly in common Discourse say
the contrary; as that they Feel, See, and Hear.

In the first Chapter of Genesis, God Commands the Earth to produce Plants, and
Animals, and Orders the Waters to bring forth Fish, and Consequently say the
Peripateticks the Water and Earth, were indu'd with a competent Virtue, to
produce these Effects.

I cannot see the certainty of this conclusion; nor any necessity of admitting
this consequence, though we were obliged to explain this Chapter by it self,
without recourse to other passages of Scripture. This method of expounding the
Creation, is adapted to our way of conceiving things, and so there is no
necessity of our taking it Literally, nor ought we to lay it as a Foundation to
our prejudices. Since we see Animals, and Plants on the Earth, Fowls inhabiting
the Air, and Fishes living in the Water, God, to let us understand, that his
Order constituted them in these Places, produced them therein. From the Earth
he formed Animals, and Plants, not that the Earth was capable of Generating, or
as if God had to that intent given it a force, and Virtue which it retains till
now; (For we are sufficiently agreed that the Earth does not Procreate Horses
and Oxen) but because out of the Earth the Bodies of Animals were formed, as is
said in the following Chapter. Out of the ground the Lord formed every Beast of
the field, and every Fowl of the Air. The Animals were formed out of the gound,
Genesis 2.19.
(formatis de humo animantibus, says the Vulgar Latin) and not produced by it.
Therefore when Moses had related how Beasts and Fish were produced by Virtue of
the Command which God gave the Earth and Water to produce them, he adds that it
was God that made them, Chapter 1.21.
lest we should attribute their Production to the Earth and Water. And God
CREATED great Whales, and every living Creature that moves, which the WATERS
BROVGHT FORTH abundantly after their kind, and every winged Fowl after his
kind, and a little lower, after he had spoken of the formation of Animals, he
adjoyns, And GOD MADE the Beast of the Earth after his kind, and Cattle after
their kind, and every thing that creeps on the Earth after his kind.

But it is observable, by the way, That what the Vulgar Translates, Producant
aquae reptile animae viventis, and volatile super terram, and our English, Let
the Water bring forth abundantly the moving Creature that has Life, and Fowl
that may fly above the Earth, the Hebrew has it Volatile VOLITET, Let the Fowl
fly above the Earth: Which distinction shows, as is evident from the forecited
passage of the next Chapter, that Fowls were not produced from the Water, and
that it was not Moses's design to prove that the Waters were truly empowered to
produce Fish and Fowl, but only to denote the respective place designed for
each, by the Order of God, whether to live, or to be produced in; Et volatile
VOLITET super Terram. For commonly when we say that the Earth produces Trees,
and Plants, we only mean to signify that it furnishes Water, and Salts, which
are necessary to the Germination, and increase of Seeds. But I dwell no longer
on the Explication of these Scripture Passages, which Literally taken, make for
Second Causes: For we are so far from being obliged, that it is sometimes
dangerous to take Expressions in the Letter, which are founded on common
Opinion, by which the Language is formed. For the vulgar part of Men speak of
all things according to the Impressions of Sense, and the Prejudices of Infancy.

The same Reason which constrains us to interpret Literally such Scripture
Passages, as directly oppose Prejudices, gives us Reason to believe the Fathers
never designed ex proposito, to maintain the Efficacy of Second Causes, or the
Nature of Aristotle. For though they often speak in a manner that countenances
Prejudices, and the Judgments of Sense, yet they sometimes so explain
themselves, as to manifest the disposition of their Mind and Heart. St. Austin,
for instance, gives us sufficiently to understand, That he believed the Will of
God, to be the Force and Nature of every thing, Omnia quippe portenta contra
naturam dicimus esse, sed non sunt. Quomodo enim est contra naturam, quod Dei
fit voluntate? Cum voluntas tanti utique creatoris conditae rei cujusque natura
sit? Portentum ergo fit non contra naturam, sed contra quam est nota natura. S.
Aug. de Civita. De*i l. 21. c. 8.
when he speaks thus, We are wont to say, but not truly, that Prodigies are
against Nature; For the Nature of every Creature being but the Will of the
Creator; How can that which is done by the Will of God be contrary to Nature?
Miracles therefore and Prodigies are not against Nature, but against what we
know of it.

It Is true, St. Austin speaks in several places according to Prejudices: But I
affirm that that is no Argument; for we are not Literally to explain, but those
Expressions which are contrary to them; for which I have given the Reasons.

If St. Austin in his Works, had said nothing against the Efficacy of Second
Causes, but had always favored this Opinion, his Authority might be made use
of to confirm it. But if it should not appear that he had industriously
examined that Question, we might still have reason to think he had no settled
and resolved Opinion about the Subject, but was, it may be, drawn by the
Impression of the Senses inconsiderately to believe a thing which no Man would
doubt of, before he had carefully examined it.

It Is certain for example that St. Austin always speaks of Beasts, as if they
had a Soul, I say not a Corporeal Soul; for that Holy Father too well knew the
distinction of the Soul and Body, to think there were Corporeal Souls; I say a
Spiritual Soul, for Matter is incapable of Sense. And yet it would seem,
methinks, more reasonable, to employ the Authority of St. Austin to prove that
Beasts have not a Soul, than to prove they have. Some of St. Austin's
Principles are these. What has never sinned, can not suffer evil. But according
to him, Pain is the greatest Evil, and Beasts suffer it. That the more Noble
cannot have the less Noble for its end. But with him the Soul of Beasts is
Spiritual, and more Noble than the Body, and yet has no other End. That what is
Spiritual is Immortal, yet the Soul of Beasts, though Spiritual, is subject to
Death. Many such like Principles there are in his Works, whereby it may be
concluded, That Beasts have no such Spiritual Soul as he admits in them.
For from the Principles which he has carefully examined, and strongly
established, it manifestly follows they have none, as is shown by Ambrosius
Victor, in his Sixth Volume of Christian Philosophy. But the Opinion that
Beasts have a Soul, and are sensible of Pain when we strike them, being
consonant to Prejudices, (for there is no Child but believes it;) we have still
reason to believe that he speaks according to Custom and Vulgar Opinion; and
that if he had seriously examined the Question, and once began to doubt and
make reflection, he would never have said a thing so contrary to his Principles.

And thus, though all the Fathers had constantly favored the Efficacy of
Second Causes, yet, it may be, no regard were due to their Opinion, unless it
appeared that they had carefully Examined the Question, and that their
Assertions, were not the results of common Speech, which is formed and founded
upon Prejudices. But the case is certainly quite contrary; for the Fathers, and
such as were most Holy, and best acquainted with Religion, have commonly
manifested in some places or other of their Works, what was their Disposition
of Mind and Heart, in reference to the present Question.

The most Understanding, and indeed the greatest number of Divines, seeing that
on one hand the Holy Scripture was repugnant to the Efficacy of Second Causes,
and on the other, that the Impression of the Senses, the public Vote, and
especially Aristotle's Philosophy, which was had in veneration by the Learned,
establish it: For Aristotle believed God unconcerned in the particulars of
Sublunary Transactions; That that change was below his Majesty, and that Nature
which he supposes in all Bodies, sufficed to produce all that was done below.
The Divines, I say, have so equally balanced these Two, as to reconcile Faith
with Heathen Philosophy, Reason with Sense, and to make Second Causes
ineffective without the additional concourse of God Almighty. But because that
immediate concourse, whereby God acts jointly with Second Causes includes great
difficulties, some Philosophers have rejected it, pretending that in Order to
their Acting, there needs no more than that God should continue to them their
Virtue he endowed them with in their Creation. And since this Opinion is
exactly agreeable with Prejudice, because of the insensible Operation of God,
in Second Causes, it is commonly embraced by the vulgar sort of Men, and such
as have more studied Ancient Naturalists and Physicians, than Theology and
Truth. Most are of Opinion that God created all things at first, and gave them
all the Qualities and Faculties that were necessary to their preservation; that
he has, for example, given the first Motion of Matter, and left it afterward
to it self, to produce, by the Communication of its Motions that admirable
variety of Forms we see. It Is Ordinarily supposed that Bodies can move one
another; and this is said to be Mr. des Cartes's Opinion, though he speaks
expressly against it, in the Thirty Sixth and Seventh Articles of the Second
Part of his Philosophical Principles. Since Men must unavoidably acknowledge
that the Creatures depend on God, they lessen and abridge, as much as possible,
that dependence, whether out of a secret Aversion to God, or a strange and
wretched stupidity and insensibility to his Operation. But whereas this Opinion
is received but by those who have not much studied Religion, and have preferred
their Senses to their Reason, and Aristotle's Authority to that of Holy Writ,
we have no reason to fear its making way into the Mind of those, who have any
Love for Truth and Religion; for provided a Man seriously examined it, he must
needs discover its falsity. But the Opinion of God's Immediate Concourse to
every Action of Second Causes, seems to accord with those Passages of
Scripture, which often attribute the same Effect, both to GOD and the Creature.

We must consider then, that there are places in Scripture, where it is said
that God is the only Agent: I am the Lord that makes all things, that
stretches forth the Heavens alone, Chapter 44.24. 2 Mac. 7.22, and 23.
that spreads abroad the Earth by my self. Ego sum Dominus, says Isaiah,
faciens OMNIA, Extendens coelos SOLVS, stabiliens Terram, and NVLLVS Mecum. A
Mother Animated with the Spirit of God, tells her Children, it was not her that
formed them, I cannot tell how you came into my Womb: For I neither gave you
Breath nor Life, neither was it I that formed the Members of every one of you:
But doubtless the Creator of the World, etc. Nescio qualiter in utero meo
apparuistis, singulorum membra NON EGO IPSA COMPEGI, sed mundi Creator. Sol and
homo generant ^ominem. Arist. Phy. Ausc. l. 2. c. 2.
She does not say with Aristotle, and the School of the Peripateticks that to
her, and the Sun, they owed their Birth; but to the Creator of the Universe.
Which Opinion that God only Works, and forms Children in their Mothers Womb,
not being conformable to Prejudice and Common Opinion; These Sentences
according to the pre-establish'd Principle, See St. Th. upon the Text.
must be explained in the Literal Sense. But on the contrary, the Notion of
Second Causes falling in with the vulgar Opinion, and being Suited to the
sensible impression; the Passages which expressly make for the separate Efficacy
of Second Causes, must be reckoned invalid when compared with the former.
Concourse therefore is insufficient to reconcile the different Texts of
Scripture; and all Force, Power and Efficacy must be ascribed to God.

But though the immediate concurrence of God with Second Causes, were fit to
accommodate the disagreeing passages of Holy Writ, yet after all it is a
question whether it ought to be admitted. For the Sacred Books were not
composed for the Theologists of these times, but for the People of the Jews. So
that if this People had not understanding, or Subtilty enough, to imagine a
Concourse, such as is admitted in School Divinity, and to agree to a thing
which the greatest Divines are hard put to, to explain, it follows, if I
mistake not, that the Holy Scripture which Attributes to God, and even to God
alone, the production and preservation of all things, would have betrayed them
into Error. And the Holy Penmen had stood chargeable with writing not only in
an unintelligible, but deceitful Language. For in saying that God Worked all,
they would have designed no more than that God assisted to all things with his
concourse, which was not probably so much as thought on by the Jews; Those
amongst them, who were not very great Philosophers, believing, that God Worked
all, and not that he concurred to all.

But that we may pass a more certain judgment about this Concourse, it would
be requisite to explain with care the different Hypotheses of the Schoolmen
upon it. For besides, those impenetrable Clouds, and Obscurities which involve
all the Opinions, that cannot be explained and defended without loose and
indefinite Terms; there are upon this Matter so great a variety of Opinions,
that it would be no hard Matter to discover the cause of them. But I design not
to engage in a discussion that would be so wearisom to my self as well as the
greatest part of Readers: On the contrary, I had rather try to show that my
Opinions may in some thing accord with those of the greater number of
Scholastic Divines, though I cannot but say their Language looks very
Ambiguous and confused. To explain my self.

I am of Opinion, as I have said elsewhere, that Bodies for example have no
Force to move themselves, and that therefore their moving force is nothing but
the Action of God; or not to make use of a Term which has no distinct import,
their moving force is nothing but the Will of God, always necessarily
Efficacious, which successively preserves them in different Places. For I
believe not that God Creates any particular Beings, to make the moving force of
Bodies; not only because I have no Idea of such a kind of Being, nor see how
they could move Bodies: But also because these Beings themselves would have
need of others to move them, and so in infinitum. For none but God is truly
Immovable, and Mover altogether.

Which being so, when a Body strikes, and moves another, I may say that it Acts
by the Concurrence of God, and that this Concurrence is not distinct from its
own Action. For a Body meeting another moves it, by its Action, or its moving
force, which at bottom is nothing but the Will of God preserving the Body
successively in different Places, the translation of a Body being not it is
Action, or moving force, but the Effect of it. Almost all Divines say too, that
the Action of Second Causes is not different from that of God's Concurrence
with them. For though they have a various Meaning, yet they suppose that God
Acts in the Creatures by the same Action as the Creatures. And they are
obliged, if I mistake not, thus to speak: For if the Creatures Acted by an
Action which God Worked not in them, their Action, considered as such, would no
doubt, be independent. But they acknowledge, as it becomes them, that the
Creatures depend immediately on God, not only as to their Being, but likewise
as to their Operation.

So likewise, in point of free Causes, I believe that God incessantly gives the
Mind an Impression toward Good in General, and that he moreover determines
this Impression toward particular Goods, by the Idea's or Sensations that he
gives us, as I have explained in the first Illustration; which is the same with
what the Divines intend, by affirming, That God moves, and prevents our Wills.
Thus the Force which puts our Minds in Motion, is the Will of God, which
Animates us, and inclines us toward Good. For God Creates not Beings to
constitute the moving force of Minds, for the same Reason that he Creates none
to be the moving force of Bodies. The Wills of God being of themselves
Efficacious, He need but Will, to do. And we ought not to multiply Beings
without necessity. Besides, whatever is real in the determinations of our
Motions, proceeds likewise from the Action of God in us, as appears from the
first Illustration. But all we Act or produce, is by our Wills, that is, by the
Impression of the Will of God, which is our moving force. For our Wills are
Efficacious no farther than they are of God, as moved Bodies impel not others,
but in as much as they have a moving force that translates them; which is no
other than the Will of God, which Creates or preserves them successively in
different places. Therefore we Act no otherwise than by the Concourse of God;
V. Suarez l. 1. de concursu Dei cum voluntate.
and our Action considered as Efficacious, and capable of producing any Effect,
differs not from his, but is, as say most Divines, the self same Action, eadem
numero actio.

Now all the Changes which arrive in the World have no other Natural Cause,
than the Motions of Bodies, and Volitions of Minds. For, First, by the General
Laws of the Communications of Motions, the invisible Bodies which surround the
visible, produce, by their various Motions, all these diverse Changes, whose
Cause is not apparent. And, Secondly, by the Laws of Union of our Soul and
Body, when circumambient Bodies Act upon our own, they produce in our Soul a
multiplicity of Sensations, Idea's, and Passions. Thirdly, Our Mind, by its
Volitions, produces in it self infinite different Idea's; for they are our
Volitions, which as Natural Causes intend, and Modifie our Mind: Their
Efficacy, nevertheless, proceeds from the Laws which God has established. And,
Lastly, when our Soul acts upon our Body, she produces several Changes in it,
by virtue of the Laws of her Union with it; and by means of our Body she
effects in those about it abundance of Changes, by virtue of the Laws of
Communication of Motions. So that the Motions of Bodies and the Volitions of
Minds, are the only Natural, or Occasional Causes of Natural Effects, which no
Man will deny who uses any Attention; supposing only, he be not prepossest by
those who understand not what they say, who fancy perpetually to themselves
such Beings as they have no clear Idea's of, and who offer to explain things
which they do not understand, by others absolutely incomprehensible. Thus
having shown that God by his Concourse, or rather by his Efficacious Will,
performs whatever is done by the Motions of Bodies, and the Wills of Minds, as
Natural or Occasional Causes, it appears that God does every thing by the same
Action of the Creature. Not that the Creatures have of themselves any
Efficacious Action, but that the Power of God is in a manner Communicated to
them, by the Natural Laws which God has established on their account.

This then is all that I can do to reconcile my Thoughts to the Opinion of
those Divines, who defend the necessity of immediate Concourse, and hold that
God does All in all things by an Action no ways differing from the Creatures.
For, as to the rest of the Divines, Durand. in 2 did. Qu. 5. and Did. 37. De
Genesi ad li^eram l. 5. c. 20.
I think their Opinions utterly indefensible, and especially that of Durandus,
together with the Sentiments of some of the Ancients, refuted by St. Austin,
who absolutely deni^d the necessity of God's Concurrence, pretending, that
Second Causes did all things by the Power which God in their Creation gave
them. For though this Opinion be less intricate and perplexed, than that of
other Divines, yet to me it seems so repugnant to Scripture, and so suitable to
Prejudices, to say no worse of it, that I think it altogether unwarrantable*

I confess that the Schoolmen, who make God's immediate concourse to be the
same Action with that of the Creatures, do not perfectly agree with my
Explication; and all those that I have read, In 4 Sent. Did. 1. q. 1. D Aliaco
ibid.
except Biel and Cardinal d' Ailly, are of Opinion, That the Efficacy which
produces Effects proceeds from the Second Cause as well as the First. But as I
make it indispensable for me to speak nothing but what I clearly conceive, and
always to take the side that best comports with Religion, I think I am not
liable to blame, for deserting an Opinion which to many Men seems still more
inconceiveable, as they strive more to comprehend it; and for establishing
another, which agrees perfectly not only with Reason, but also with the
Sacredness of our Religion, and Christian Morality, which is a Truth already
proved in the Chapter that is the Subject of these Reflections. However it is not
inconvenient to say something to it, that I may fully verify what I have said
upon the present Question.

Both Reason and Religion evince, That God will be Loved, and revered by his
Creatures: Loved as Good, and Revered as Power. Which is such a Truth as it
would be Impiety and Madness to doubt of. To love God, as he requires and
deserves, we must, according to the First Commandment, both of the Law and
Gospel, and by Reason it self, as I have Book 4. c. 1.
somewhere shown, Love Him with all our Strength, or with the whole extent of
our Loving Capacity. It Is not sufficient to prefer Him before all things,
unless we moreover Love Him in all things. For otherwise our Love is not so
perfect as it ought to be, and we return not to God all the Love that he gives
us, and gives us only for Himself, in whom every one of His Actions Center.

So to render to God all the Reverence that is due to Him; it is not enough to
adore Him, as the Supreme Power, and fear Him more than His Creatures; we must
likewise fear and adore Him in all His Creatures; all our respects must
perpetually tend toward Him, to whom alone Honor and Glory are to be
ascribed: Which is what God Commands us in these Words: Deuteronomy. c. 6.
Thou shall Love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Strength. And in these: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and
Him only shall thou serve. Thus the Philosophy that convinces us that the
Efficacy of Second Causes is a Fiction of the Mind, that the Nature of
Aristotle, and some other Philosophers, is a Chimera, that none but God is
Strong and Powerful enough, not only to Act on our Soul, but even to give the
least Motion to Matter. This Philosophy, I say, perfectly Accommodates with
Religion, whose end is to Unite us to God in the strictest Bonds.

It Is Customary with us to Love only those things which are capable of doing us
some Good. This Philosophy therefore Authorizes only the Love of God, and
Condemns the Love of every thing else. We ought to fear nothing but what is
able to do us some Evil. Therefore this Philosophy approves the fear of God,
and absolutely Condemns all other: Thus it justifies all the just and
Reasonable Motions of our Soul, and Condemns all those that are contrary to
Reason and Religion: For we can never justify the Love of Riches, the desire
of Greatness, the Extravagance of Debauchery by this Philosophy, by the
Principles whereof, the Love for Bodies is absurd and ridiculous.

It Is an indisputable Truth, it is a Natural Opinion, it is even a Common Notion
that we ought to Love the cause of our Pleasure, and to Love it proportionably
to the Felicity it either Actually does, or is able to possess us with. It Is
not only just, but as it were necessary that the cause of our happiness, should
be the Object of our Love. Therefore this Philosophy will teach us to Love God
only, as being the only Cause of our Felicity: That surrounding Bodies cannot
Act upon that we Animate; and consequently much less upon our Mind. That it is
not the Sun which enlightens us, and gives us Life and Motion: Nor that fills
the Earth with Fruits, and Beautifies it with Flowers, and supplies us with
Food and Nourishment. This Philosophy seconding the Scripture, Acts 14.15.16.
teaches that it is God alone who gives us Rain, and Regulates the Seasons, that
fills our Bodies with Food, and our hearts with Joy, that he alone is able to
do us good; and thereby has given a perpetual Testimony of what he is; though
in the ages passed he suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. According
to the Language of this Philosophy, we must not say that it is Nature that fills
us with good; nor that it is Ergo nihil agis, ingratissime mortalium, qui te
negas Deo debere, sed naturae: quia nec naturae Deo est, nec Deus sine natura,
sed idem est utrumque, nec distat. Officium si quod a Seneca accepisses, Annaeo
diceres te debere, vel Lucio: Non creditorem mutares, sed nomen. Sen. l. 4. de
Benef.
God and Nature together: But that it is God alone, speaking thus without
Ambiguity, for fear of deceiving the Ignorant. For we must distinctly
acknowledge one cause of our happiness, if we we make it the only Object of our
Love.

It Is likewise an undeniable Truth, That we ought to fear things that are able
to harm us, and to fear them, in Proportion to the Evil they can do us. But
this Philosophy teaches us that God only can do us evil; that it is he, as says
Isaiah, who forms the Light and creates Darkness, who makes Peace and creates
Evil; Isa. 45.7. Amos. 3.6.
and there is no Evil but what he does, as says the Prophet Amos. Therefore it
is he only that is to be feared. We must not fear either Plague or War, or
Famine, or our Enemies, or even Devils themselves: But God alone. We ought to
shun the Sword, when we see a Blow a coming, we are to fly the Fire, and avoid
a ruinous House that is ready to crush us; but we must not fear these things. We
may fly from those Bodies which are the Occasional or Natural Causes of Evil,
but we must fear God as the true Cause of all the misfortunes of Sinners; and
hate only Sin which necessarily provokes the cause of our Happiness to become
the Cause of our Misery: In a Word all the Motions of our Mind, must center
upon God, since he alone's above it, and the Motions of our Body may relate to
the Bodies round it. This is what we learn from that Philosophy that admits not
the Efficacy of Second Causes.

But this Efficacy being supposed, I cannot see but we have reason to fear and
Love Bodies; and that to regulate our Love by Reason, we need but prefer God
before all things; the First and Universal, to every Second and Particular
Cause. We can see no need of Loving him with all our Strength; Ex tota mente,
ex toto cord, ex tota anima, ex totis viribus, as says the Scripture.

Yet when a Man contents himself in preferring God to all things, and adoring
him with a Worship, and a Love of Preference, without making a continual Effort
to Love and Honor him in all things: It often fortunes that he deceives
himself, that his Charity vanishes, and is lost: And that he is more taken up
with sensible than the supreme Good. For should it be demanded of the greatest
Sinners, and even Idolaters, whether they preferred the universal to particular
Causes, they would make no scruple to answer amidst their Debauches, Errors
and Extravagance; that they are not wanting to their essential Duty, and that
they are very sensible of what they owe to God. It Is acknowledged that they are
deceived. But take away the Efficacy of Second Causes, and they have no
probable Pretext left to justify their Conduct and Behavior; whilst if it be
granted them, they will think and Discourse with themselves in the following
manner, when blinded by their Passions, and attentive to the Testimony of their
Senses.

I am made for Happiness: Neitheir can I, nor indeed ought I, to supersede my
Love and Respect, for whatever can be the Cause of my Felicity: Why then must
not I Love and respect sensible Objects, if they be the true Causes of the
Happiness I find in their Enjoyment? I acknowledge the Sovereign Being as only
worthy of Sovereign Worship, and I prefer Him before all the World, But since I
see not that He requires any thing from me, I enjoy the Goods he affords by
Means of Second Causes, to which he has subjected me: And I pay not my
Gratitude to him, which perhaps would be to his Dishonor. As he gives me no
Blessing, immediately and by himself, or at least without the Assistance of his
Creatures, it is a Sign he requires not the immediate Application of my Mind and
Heart; at least, that he desires the Creatures should partake with him, in the
Acknowledgments and Resentments of my Heart and Mind. Seeing he has
communicated Part of his Power and Glory to the Sun, has environed him with
Splendor and Majesty, and has given him the Supremacy in all his Works; and
seeing from the Influence of this great Luminary, we receive all the necessary
Blessings of Life; Why should we not employ a part of this indebted Life, in
rejoicing in his Light, and testifying the Sense we have of his Greatness and
his Benefits? Would it not be the most shameful Ingratitude, to receive from
that excellent Creature abundance of all things, and yet to show no Sense of
Gratitude to him for them? And should we not be unspeakably blind and stupid,
to be unmoved with Fear and Veneration in Respect of him, whose Absence freezes
us to Death, and whose too near Approach can burn and destroy us? I say it
again, that God is preferable to all things, and infinitely more estimable than
his Creatures: But we are to fear and Love his Creatures also. For hereby we
pay Legitimate Honor to their Creator; Merit his good Graces, and oblige him
to shower new Benefits upon us. It Is manifest, he approves of the Honor that
is given to his Creatures; since they partake of his Power, and all Power
deserves to be honored. But because Honor ought to be Proportioned to Power,
and that the Power of the Sun, and all other sensible Objects, is such, as
derives to us all sorts of Goods, it is reasonable we should Honor them with
all our Strength, and, next to God, Consecrate to them all our Being.

These are the Natural Reasonings a Man would fall into, that should ground
upon the Prejudice of the Efficacy of Second Causes; and probably such was the
Arguing of the first Founders of Idolatry. Take here his Sense of it, who
passes for the most Learned of all the Jews: He Prefaces a a Treatise he wrote
about Idolatry with these Words. In the days of Enos Men fell into strange
Illusions, ^. Moses Maimonid.
and the Wise Men of that Age quite lost their Sense and Reason. Enos himself
was one of those deluded Persons, whose Errors were these. Since God, said
they, has created the Heavens and Stars to govern the World, has constituted
them on ^igh, and invested them with Glory and Luster, and employs them in
executing his Commands, it is just that we should honor them, and pay them our
Deference and Homage. It Is the Will of our God, that Honor should be given to
those whom he has exalted and enthroned in Glory; as a Prince requires that his
Ministers should be ^onour'd in his Presence, because the Honor which is given
to them redounds to himself. Vide Vossium, lib. 2. de Idololatri^.
When once this Notion had entered their Head, they fell to building Temples in
Honor of the Stars, gave them Sacrifice and Praises, and even prostrated
themselves before them; thereby imagining to purchase the favor of Him that
created them: And this was the Original of Idolatry.

It is so Natural and just to have grateful Resentments in Proportion to the
Goods we receive, that almost all Nations have adored the Sun, because they all
concluded him the Cause of the Blessings they enjoyed. And if the Egyptians
adored not only the Sun and Moon, and River Nile, Ipsi qui irridentur Aegyptii,
nul^am belluam nisi ob aliquam (...) quam ex ea caperent, consecr^v^rant. Cic.
l. 1. de N^tura Deorum.
because its overflowing caused the Fertility of their Country, but even the
vilest of Animals: 'Twas (as Cicero relates) from the Emolument they received
from them. Therefore, as we cannot, and indeed ought not to Extirpate from
Men's Minds, their Natural Inclination for the true Causes of their Happiness,
it is evident there is at least some danger in ascribing Efficacy to Second
Causes, though we conjoyn the necessity of an immediate Concourse, which has,
methinks, I know not what of incomprehensible purport, and which strikes in as
an after-game to justify our imbibed Prejudices, and Aristotle's Philosophy.

But there is no danger in speaking only what we see, and of Attributing only to
God Efficacy and Power, since we see nothing but His Wills, which have an
absolutely necessary and indispensible connection with Natural Effects* I own
that now adays, Men are Wise enough to avoid those gross Errors of Heathens and
Idolaters; but I fear not to say, our Mind is still disposed, or rather our
Heart is often bent like that of the Heathens; and that there will ever be in
the World some kind of Idolatry, until the Day in which JESUS CHRIST shall
restore up His Kingdom to God his Father, having first destroyed all Empire
Dominion and Power, that God may be All in all. For is it not a kind of
Idolatry, to make a God of ones Belly, as speaks S. Paul? Phil. 3.9.
No Whoremonger nor unclean Person, nor covetous Man, who is an Idolater, Ephesians.
5.5.
Is not he an Idolater to the God of Riches, who labors Night and Day to
acquire them? Is this to render to God the Worship we owe Him? Is this to adore
Him in Spirit and in Truth, to have our Hearts filled with some sensible
Beauty, and our Mind struck and dazzled with the Luster of some imaginary
Grandeur? They that worship him, must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, Joh.
4.24.


Men fancying to themselves, that Circumambient Bodies afford the pleasures
they enjoy in the use of them, Unite to them with all the Powers of their Soul;
and thus the Principle of their Corruption lies in the sensible Conviction of
the Efficacy of Second Causes. It Is only Reason that assures them none but God
Acts in them. But besides that, this Reason speaks so low that it is scarce
Audible, and that the Contradicting Senses cry so loud, that their Clamor
Stunns and Stupefies them, they are yet farther confirmed in their Prejudice,
by Reasons and Arguments that are so much dangerous, as they have more External
Characters and sensible marks of Truth.

The Philosophers, but especially the Christian Philosophers, ought to wage an
uninterrupted War with Prejudices, or the Judgments of their Senses, and
particularly those of so dangerous importance, as that of the Efficacy of
Second Causes. And yet there are Men, whom I extremely honor, (as I have just
Reason) who from I know not what Principle endeavor to confirm this Prejudice,
and to make so holy, so pure and solid a Doctrine as this, which owns no other
true Cause than God, pass for Superstitious and Extravagant Opinion. They will
not have us to Love and Fear God in all things, but to Love and Fear all things
with reference to God. We ought, say they, Nos si hominem patrem vocamus
honorem a^a^i deferimus, non Authorem vitae nostrae ostendimus. Hier. in c. 33.
Matthew. 1 Cor. 9.22. and 10.33. Ephesians. 6.6. Col. 3.22.
to Love the Creatures, since they are good; to Love and respect our Father* to
give Honor to our Prince and Superiors, since God Commands it. Nor do I deny
it; but I deny that we are to Love the Creatures as our Goods, though they be
good or perfect in themselves. I deny that we are to pay service and respect to
Men as to our Masters. Or, to explain my self more clearly, I say, we must not
serve our Master, obey our Father, or Prince, with any other design than to
serve and obey God. S. Paul, who became all things to all Men, and was
complaisant in all things; for the Salvation of those he Preached to, speaks
thus: Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters, according to the
flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your Heart, as unto CHRIST;
not with Eye-Service, as Men pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the
Will of God from the Heart, with good Will doing Service, AS TO THE LORD, AND
NOT TO MEN. And in another Epistle. Not with Eye-Service, as to MEN, but in
singleness of Heart, fearing GOD. And whatever ye do, do it Heartily, AS TO THE
LORD, and NOT UNTO MEN. We must therefore obey our Father, serve our Prince,
and Honor our Superiors, AS UNTO GOD AND NOT UNTO MEN. This is manifest, and
can have no Evil consequences: For hereby Superiors would always be more
honored, and better served. But I think it may be said, That a Master, who
would be honored and served, as having in himself another Power than that of
God, would be a Devil; and that those who served him under that apprehension
would be Idolaters; for I cannot refrain from believing that all Honor and
Love, that have not God for their End, are Species of Idolatry.

Soli Deo honor and gloria. THE ILLUSTRATION UPON WHAT I have said in the
Fourth Chapter of the Second Part, concerning Method, and elsewhere. That God
Acts always with Order, and by the simplest ways.
IT IS thought by some Persons to be too rash, and venturous conjecturing, and
abusing loose and General Terms, To say that God always Acts with Order, and by
ways that are most simple and easy for the Execution of his designs. Wherefore
it will not be an useless undertaking to prove and explain this Truth, since
it is of the greatest consequence, not only to the knowledge of Nature, but much
more for the knowledge of Religion and Morality.

By the Word [ God] we understand an infinitely perfect Being, whose Wisdom and
Knowledge have no bounds, and who consequently knows all the means by which he
can execute his Designs. Which supposed, I say, that God Acts always by the
shortest means, and by the simplest ways.

To make my meaning better understood, I take a sensible Example. I suppose
that God Wills the Body A should strike the Body B. Since God knows all, He
perfectly knows that A may tend to strike against B by innumerable crooked
Lines, and by but one right. Now God Wills only the impulsion of B by A; and we
suppose that he only Wills the Translation of A to B, to effect this impulsion.
A then must be conveyed to B by the shortest way, that is, by a right Line. For
if the Body A were conveyed to B by a crooked Line, that would show either that
the conveyer knew no other way, or that he purposed not only the Collision of
these Bodies, but also the means of making it, otherwise than by Relation to
it, which is against the Supposition.

There is required so much more Action to convey a Body from A to B, by a
curv'd than by a right Line, as the curv'd is longer than the right. If
therefore, God translated A to B by a curv'd Line, double to the interjacent
right, half of the Action of God would be entirely useless, and so half his
Action would be produced without design and end, as well as without effect;
therefore,

Again, Action in God is Will; therefore more Will is required in God, to cause
A to be circulary than directly translated. But we suppose that God had no Will
in respect of the Motion of A, but as it relates to the Collision; therefore
there is not Will enough in God to move A by a crooked Line; and consequently
it is a Contradiction for A to be so moved. Thus it is a Contradiction, that God
should not Act by the most simple ways, unless we suppose that God, in the
choice of means he imploys for the executing his designs, has something else in
view than these designs, which is a Contradiction in our Supposition.

When I say there is more Will in God to translate a Body from A to B, by a
crooked Line than by a strait; it is not to be thence concluded, against the
simplicity of God's Essence and Action. For it must be acknowledged, That it is
not comprehensible, how either the simplicity of an Infinite Being, includes
all the different perfections of Finite Beings; or how his Will continuing ever
the same, and always conformable to Order, varies with reference to the
different Beings it produces, and preserves. I speak but according to our way
of conceiving things: Now, methinks, I have a most clear Conception, That when
God Wills, and Creates, for Example, one cubical foot of Matter, He Wills
another thing than when He Creates two. For nothing is plainer than that God
could not Create two different things, nor know whether he Created one or two
Cube-feet of Matter, or whether he conveyed a Body circularly or directly, if
there were not in His Wills some difference, in regard to Matter and its
Motion, since God sees no otherwise than in Himself, and in his own Wills, all
the differences of His Creatures. Now whatever that Action is in God, which
relates to the different Beings produced, or preserved by Him, I call the
Differences, or Augmentations and Diminutions of Will in God. And in this way
of conceiving things, I say that God cannot employ more Will than is necessary
to the executing his Designs, and therefore Acts always by the simplest ways
with reference to them.

However I deny not, but it is possible for God to have a great number of ways
equally simple for the producing the same effects, or that He may produce them
by different means: But this I say, that He always brings them to pass, by the
ways that are most simple, provided they be all of the same kind; it being a
Contradiction that an Infinitely Wise Being, should have useless or disorderly
Wills.

Now if we bring home this Principle to Morality, we shall see that those
ensure their Salvation, who so prepare themselves for Grace, by Self-denial and
Repentance, and an exact Obedience to the Precepts of our LORD, as that God
Acting by the simplest ways, that is, in giving them but little additional
Grace, may Operate much in them. For though God would have all Men saved, yet
he shall save none but those that can be saved by the most simple means, which
have reference to his great design of Sanctifying through JESUS CHRIST, a
determinate number of Elect unto his Glory; and he will multiply the Children
of Eve, till that number be fulfilled. For God's design of Sanctifying us by
the simplest ways, made it necessary for him, after the Sin, to multiply the
Children of Men, that he might fill up the number of the Elect; since there are
a great many Persons who Damn themselves, by withdrawing from the Order of God.

But whereas God does not Work like a Particular Cause, we ought not to imagine
that He has, like us, particular Volitions for every thing He produces: For if
it were so, it seems evident to me, That the Generation of Monsters would be
impossible, and it would never happen that one of God's Works should destroy
another. And since God cannot have contrary Wills, we must have had recourse
with the Manichees, to a Principle of Evil, to freeze, for Example, the Fruits
which God made to grow: Which being so, there is, methinks, a necessity to
conclude the establishment of some General Laws, by which God Predestines and
Sanctifies his Elect in JESUS CHRIST; which Laws are what we call the Order of
Grace, as God's General Wills, whereby he produces, and preserves all things in
the World, are the Order of Nature.

I know not but I may be mistaken, yet I doubt not but from this Principle
might be directly drawn a great many Consequences, which might resove those
difficulties that have been the Controverted Subjects of several Years. But I
do not think my self obliged to deduce them; let every one do it according to
his Light and Abilities; it is more to the purpose to say nothing, than to say
such things as are unnecessary to be known, and which, it may be, would be
easier agreed to some time hereafter than at present. Only this I would have
well understood, That the simplest ways to our Sanctification are Self-denial
and Repentance; or at least that it be well considered, that since JESUS CHRIST
distinctly knows the Laws of the Order of Grace, we run continual dangers, in
not following the ways he has marked us out, not only by his Words, but all the
Actions of his Life.

Yet since we meet with such particular Occurrences in the course of Life, as
make us dubious which way to determine, because of the contrary Reasons that
may be brought for and against certain Opinions; it will perhaps be time well
spent to show here, by some particular Example, that much use may be made of
the foregoing Principle, viz. That God Acts always by the simplest ways.

Let us suppose, for instance, that I desired to be resolved, whether I ought
every day to set apart some Constant Times for Retiring into my self, for
setting my own Weakness and Miseries before me, and for considering my
Obligations in the presence of God, and praying for his Assistance, in
Conquering my Passions; or on the other hand, whether I ought to wait for the
Spirit of God, which blows where, and when it pleases, to call me from my self,
and my Ordinary Employments, to apply me unto Him. For probable Reasons may be
given both for and against each of these Opinions; and Men frequently take up
with probability on such Occasions, which is the Reason that Religious Persons
follow sometimes a quite different Conduct, and not always that which is the
safest.

I consider then, That if I stay for the particular Motions of the Spirit of
God, I shall never pray unless I receive particular Illuminations, or
preventing Delights for that intent. Now these Illuminations or Delectations,
being produced of God by Wills more particular than are those General Wills,
which constitute the Order of Nature, are sorts of Miracles. Therefore to rely
upon God's Graces, which are not always necessary, is to suppose that He
induces me to pray by means that are not the most simple, and in some measure
to tempt God,

But if I use my self to a Custom of appearing, or endeavoring to appear in
the presence of God at particular Hours, the sound of the Clock will suffice to
remind me of my Duty, and there is no need that God should by a particular will
inspire me with the Thoughts of Prayer. The General Laws of Union of my Body
and Soul, will make me think of my Duty, when the time I have appointed for it,
by some sensible Notice makes it self remarkable.

But as Self-Examination and Prayer are necessary, and as we cannot pray
without having at least the Thoughts of it; and as we cannot have the Thoughts
of it, unless God gives them, it is some advance to Salvation to have these
Thoughts without obliging God to give them us by particular Wills, or kinds of
Miracles. It is possibly the want of this first Thought of praying and
considering their Obligation before God, which is the Origin of the Blindness
and Delusion of many Men, and consequently of their Eternal Damnation. For God
Acting always by the simplest means, ought not by particular Wills to give them
those Thoughts which they might have obtained by virtue of his general Wills,
if they had once accustomed themselves, to pray regularly at particular Hours.
Therefore, as God Wills the Saving all Men by the simplest ways, it is evident
we ought, as much as possible, to make the Order of Nature subservient to that
of Grace, and to reconcile, as I may say, God's Wills together, by regulating a
time which may supply us at least with the Thoughts of Prayer.

For these Reasons, probably, God Commanded, heretofore, the Jews to write His
Commandments upon the Doors of their Houses, and constantly to carry some
sensible Marks that might put them in Mind of them; which remitted God his
particular Will, if I may so speak, of inspiring them with these Thoughts. For
Miracles of Grace were extremely rare among the Jews, the time being not yet
fullfill'd when God was to engrave his Law, and infuse his Spirit, and his
Charity in the heart of Men.

I acknowledge that all things we can do, by mere Natural strength, are
insufficient to fit us meritoriously for Grace, without which all the exterior
show of Religion can but feed and cherish our Pride and Self-Love. The
Pharisees were Vainglorious upon their carrying the sensible signs and
memoratives of the Law of God, as our Savior reproves them; and Christians
often make use of Crosses and Images, out of Curiosity, of Hypocrisy, or some
other Motive of Self-Love: Yet, since these things may put us in Mind of God,
they may be to good purpose employed; because we ought to make Nature, as far
as possible, instrumental to Grace, that God may serve us by the simplest ways.

For though we cannot naturally fit and dispose our selves for Grace, yet we
may often contribute to make it effectual, in as much as we can curb the
eagerness of a Passion, by removing from the Objects that cause it, or by
urging contrary Reasons to those of its Suggestion. Those who Watch more
carefully than others over the purity of their Imagination, or give not so much
way to be corrupted by the continual enjoyment of sensible Pleasures, and
Wordly Commerce, make Grace efficacious, by taking away that impediment and
resistance which it finds in others. In which sense a Disease, a shower of
Rain, or any other accident, that keeps us at home, may render Grace
Efficacious: For such a degree of Grace as would have been too weak and
ineffectual for our resisting the sensible impression of a present and
agreeable Object, is strong enough to make us reject and detest the impure
Thought, or Imagination of the same Object.

This is all we need to say to make it manifest, That the Counsels of the
Gospel are necessary, in Order to God's Saving us by the simplest means. For
it is advantageous to follow them, not only because when we follow them by the
Motion of God's Spirit, they determine it by virtue of immutable Order, or of
the General Laws of the Order of Grace, to increase in us our Love of Him; but
also, because the practicing these Counsels, may frequently render Grace
Efficacious, though Self-Love be the Motive, as it may be, on many Occasions.

FINIS.
THE DEFENSE OF THE AUTHOR OF THE TREATISE Concerning the Search after Truth,
Against the Accusation of Monsieur de la VILLE.
In which is shown, That if Particular Persons be allowed to call in Question
the FAITH of others, upon Consequences well or ill drawn from their Principles,
no Man could be secure from the Imputation of Heresy.
SOME time ago came forth a Treatise, whose very Title scared a great many, and
raised much Commotion in their Minds. Many Persons wished I would engage in the
Quarrel, which the Author made with the Cartesians. For as, on one hand,
Monsieur de la Ville, that was his Name, had done me the Honor to list me
among these Philosophers, with what Design I know not; and, on the other hand,
found himself Diversion, by turning me into Ridicule, they assured me, that if
I was willing to pass for a Rash, Foolish and Extravagant Person, for a
Visionist, and, in fine, an Heretic, yet I could not in Conscience desert the
Cause of Truth, and leave the Enemies of our Faith, the Advantages he gave them.

I must do these Gentlemen Justice, in confessing their Reasons were very
solid: But beg they would believe, that if I have not submitted to them, it is
because, there were others of a very different Opinion; which to me seemed
likewise highly reasonable, and for which indeed I had greater Inclination; for
I will not determine about the Weightiness of their Reasons. Besides, as
Monsieur de la Ville is not very tender of Integrity, I foresaw that his Work
would make a greater Flash and Report, than it would do Injury to Truth. And as
to my own Particular, I did not think he injured me by despising me: For, I can
assure him, I despise my self much more than he desires. It Is true my
Self-Contempt is not grounded on the same Ideas, as induced him to treat me so
fastuously, as he does. But I would grant that the Reasons I had for despising
my self, were not true; and would willingly consent, that all my ill Qualities
were converted into those he is pleased to give me, provided he will except that
one of Heretic, or of a Person whose Faith deserves to be suspected.

Since I know that it is of most dangerous Consequence, to stir up the Passions
of Men, especially on such Subjects as seem to cover from the Reproofs of
Reason, the most violent and irrational: I thought my self obliged to continue
silent, for fear of supplying with fresh Fuel those Heats I perceived in their
Minds. But now that this Fervency is abated, and that I cannot see any more
mischievous Events to be feared: I think I am bound to satisfy my Friends, and
content my self. I am not willing to affect an insolent and contemptuous
Silence, in Regard to Monsieur de la Ville. I sincerely confess, he has
sensibly offended me: For I am neither Stoic, nor Stupid; I feel when I hurt,
and am not ashamed to own it. The public Accusation of Heresy is not easy to
be born, especially by Ecclesiastics: Which though never so unjust, fails not
to make the Faith of the accused suspected, in this Age, more than any other:
And no Man may be prodigal of this sort of Reputation, unless Charity oblige
him to it, which seldom or never happens.

I have nothing, then, to answer to the Calumnies, where with this Author tries
to blacken me. I shall not bring him before the Common Magistrate, to have
public Reparation made me; nor will I use any other ways permitted by Natural
Law, for the Restitution of that which I can in Conscience give up. I am all
that he will have me, a Fool, a Visionist, only I am no Heretic; nor am I
suspected of Heresy at least by those that know me. But, I confess, I cannot
avoid having my Faith suspected, if a Stranger may be allowed to brand me with
the Name of Heretic, for Consequences he is pleased to draw from my
Principles; for it is not possible but Monsieur de la Ville's Book must have
deceived some one or other. If at present I am suspected of Heresy, it is a
Misfortune I cannot help.

But if it be a Crime, it is not I that have committed it, but rather he that
draws consequences from a Principle not including them. For my part I disown
these consequences: I believe them false, and Heretical; and if I clearly saw
they were directly inferred from any one of my Principles, I would forsake it:
For that Principle would be false, Truths being not contrary to one another.

But be it granted that Monsieur de la Ville's Reasonings were just, and that
Heretical Consequences were perfectly well deduced from their Principle; yet
neither I, nor many others, that he ill-uses, saw before he wrote his Book,
that they were contained in it. So that his Conduct is indefensible, which way
soever we examine it. For in fine the Articles of Faith depend not on the
Quickness and Reach of thought of any Particular Divine, as I endeavor to
show; and though we should be certain that some principles included impious
Consequences, yet no Man has right to treat the Maintainers of these principles
as Heretics.

I have seen in the Fathers, and chiefly in St. Austin, the Ep. 3. Chapter 2.28.
Chapter 2.57. Chapter 6. contra Epist. Manichei. Chapter 16. de Tran. l. 10. and alibi.
principle I have advanced, but never observed Monsieur de la Ville's there. To
me it appeared a common Notion, that if God had Annihilated all the extension
in the World, all the matter, the World is made up of, would be Annihilated. I
had consulted several Persons about it, to know whether they had the same Idea
as my self of the matter, whose answers confirmed me in my Opinion. I
concluded, for the Reasons I shall give anon, that we could no longer have any
direct and Natural Demonstration, that the Soul is distinguished from the Body,
or that she is Immortal, if that principle be laid aside. I said in the Search
after Truth that I did not believe any consequence could be inferred from this
principle repugnant to Faith, which same thing was defended in the Sorbon,
before my maintaining it, in the public Theses. Nay, I proceeded to say, That
if it were requisite, I would explain how this Opinion might be reconciled with
what the Fathers, and Councils have left us touching our Faith, about the
mystery of Transubstantiation. Lastly, I renounced all Heretical Consequences,
and even the Principle, if it contained them, which I could not believe, nor
can I to this hour.

What ought I to say more, to clear my Faith from the suspicion of Heresy,
even to the malicious? Could I imagine any Man would have the boldness to rank
St. Austin, and other Fathers, among the Calvinists, by condemning in the
Person of the Cartesians and Gassendists, the Sentiment of that Holy Doctor, as
contrary to Transubstantiation? No, doubtless. For either Monsieur de la Ville
durst do it, save in a collateral manner. St. Austian in an hundred places
advances as undeniable, the principle now in dispute. He never goes to prove
it, because it does not appear that any Man in his time doubted of it. For
indeed it is a principle that ought to be looked on as a common Notion with all
those, whose mind is not prepossessed with false studies. Whence this Father
concludes, That the Soul is immortal; That she is more noble than the Body;
That she is a distinct substance from it; with many other like Truths of the
utmost importance. And yet Monsieur de la Ville, under Ambiguous Terms, Part 2.
Chapter 3. Art. 6.
advances that this Principle is not to be found in St. Austin: He answers but
one single passage of that Father's Works, and to explain it, makes that
learned Man argue at an Extravagant rate. Lastly, he opposes to his constant
Doctrine, only the Book of Categories, as if he knew not that Book to be none
of St. Austin's, and that it belongs rather to Logic, than to Physics.

I will not stand to prove this in particular; for I see no necessity of
answering Monsieur de la Ville's Book: And I design to keep inviolably to the
resolution I made, and have declared at the end of the Preface to the Second
Vol. of the Search after Truth, viz. That I would answer none of those who
opposed me before they understand me, or whose Discourses gave occasion to
believe, they were made from some other motive than the Love of Truth. As for
the rest, I shall endeavor to content them. I have no delight in disquieting
Men's Minds, and troubling my own repose by contentious Books, or Works
absolutely useless to the discovery of Truth; and only proper to violate
Charity, and scandalize our Neighbors. And if I now put Pen to Paper, it is
because I ought not to suffer my Faith to be called in Question, and that I
desire to make it clearly understood, That no Man is permitted to charge me
with Heresy for consequences deducible from the Principles I have established.

Which is not as if I thought it possible to infer directly, any Heresy, or
even Error from the Book concerning the Search after Truth. I am ready to
answer with Charity and Respect, all those who shall do me the honor to make
their Animadversions without Passion; and I shall always be glad to follow
Truth, as soon as any Man can discover it to me. I disown all principles from
which may be concluded any falsehood. But I offer to prove, That we cannot
justly treat as Heretics, even obstinate Defenders of such Principles, as
Divines may infer impious Conclusions from, (provided the Embracers of these
Principles disown the consequences:) Since, if it might be allowed, no Writer
whatever could escape the Imputation of Heresy. My proofs of my assertion are
as follow: Which I do not deduce from that which is least Reasonable in the
common Opinions of Phisophers, with design to make them Odious, or Ridiculous;
but choose to take for the subject of what I offer to prove, universally
received Opinions, upon which the Peripateticks are so bold and presuming, as
to insult perpetually over their Adversaries.

ARGUMENT I.
The Peripateticks, and almost all Men, believe that Beasts have Souls, and
that these Souls are nobler than the Bodies which they Animate. It Is an Opinion
received in all times, and in all Nations, that a Dog suffers Pain when he is
beaten; That he is susceptible of all the Motions of the Passions, Fear,
Desire, Envy, Hatred, Joy, Sorrow, and even that he knows and loves his Master.
Yet from this Opinion consequences may be drawn directly opposite to what we
are Taught by Faith.

The first Consequence opposite to Faith. That God is Unjust.
Beasts suffer Pain, and some of them are more miserable than others. Now they
never sinned, or made an ill use of their Libirty, since they have none:
Therefore God's Unjust, in Punishing them, and making them Miserable; and
unequally Miserable, since they are equally Innocent. Therefore this Principle
is false, That under a Righteous God, a Creature can be miserable without
deserving it, a Principle nevertheless employed by St. Austin, to Demonstrate
Original Sin against the Pelagians.

Moreover there is this difference between the condition of Men and Beasts,
that Men after Death may receive an Happiness which may countervail the Pains
endured in Life. But Beasts at Death lose all; they have been miserable, and
innocent, and have no Future Retribution. Therefore, though God be Just, yet
Man may suffer in Order to Merit; but if a Beast suffers, God is not Just.

It may be said, perhaps, that God may do with the Beast as he thinks fit,
provided he observes the Rules of Justice, with respect to Man. But if an Angel
should think in like manner, that God could not punish him without some
Demerits; and that he was not obliged to do justice unto Man, should we like
that thought? Certainly God renders Justice to all his Creatures; and if the
meanest of them are liable to Misery, they must needs be capable of being
Criminal.

The second Consequence contrary to Faith. That God Wills Disorder, and that
Nature is not corrupted.
The Soul of a Dog is substance more noble than the Body Animated by it. For
according to St. Austin De Quantitate animae, Chapter 31, 32. etc. Lib. 4. de
anima, and ejus origin, Chapter 12. and alibi.
, it is a spiritual Substance more noble than the noblest Body. Besides which,
reason demonstrates that Bodies can neither Know, nor Love; and that Pleasure,
Pain, Joy, Sorrow, and the other Passions, cannot be Modifications of Bodies.
Now it is believed that Dogs know, and Love their Masters, and that they are
susceptible of Passions, as of Fear, Desire, Joy and Sorrow, and many others:
The Soul of a Dog therefore is not a Body, but a Substance nobler than Bodies.
But the Soul of a Dog is made for his Body, and has no other End, or Felicity,
than the enjoyment of Bodies: Therefore God makes the more noble for the less
noble: Therefore God Wills disorder: Therefore Man's Nature is not corrupted:
Concupiscence is no disorder. God might make Man for the enjoyment of Bodies,
and subject him to the Motions of Concupiscence, etc.

It may be still said perhaps that the Soul of Beasts is made for Man: but it is
hard to escape by this subterfuge. For whether my Dog, or my Horse, has, or has
not a Soul, is indifferent to me. It Is not my Horse's Soul, which carries, or
draws me, but his Body. It Is not the Soul of a Chicken which nourishes me, but
its flesh. Now God might, and ought consequently to create Horses, to perform
all their functions which we need, without a Soul, if it be true that he has
made them only for our use. Again, the Soul of an Horse is more valuable than
the noblest Body: God therefore ought not to create it for the Body of Man.
Lastly, God ought not to have given Souls to Flies which Swallows feed upon.
Swallows are of very little use to Man, and they might have fed upon grain, as
other Birds.

What need then of so innumerable a number of Souls to be Annihilated, to
preserve the Bodies of these Birds, since the Soul of a Fly is more worth than
the Body of the perfectest Animal? Wherefore in affirming that Beasts have
Souls, that is to say, substances, more noble than Bodies, we deprive God of
Wisdom, make him act without Order, destroy Original Sin, and consequently
overthrow Religion, by taking away the necessity of a Mediator.

The third Consequence contrary to Faith. The Soul of Man is Mortal, or at
least the Souls of Beasts pass from one Body to another.
The Soul of a Beast is a Substance distinct from its Body. This Soul is
Annihilated, and therefore Substances may naturally be Annihilated. Therefore
though the Soul of Man be a Substance distinct from his Body, it may be
Annihilated, when the Body is destroyed: And thus the Immortality of the Humane
Soul cannot be Demonstrated by Reason. But if it be owned to be most certain,
That no Substance can be naturally reduced to nothing, the Soul of Beasts will
subsist after Death; and since they have no reward to hope for, and are made
for Bodies, they must at least pass out of one to another, that they may not
remain useless in Nature: Which seems to be the most reasonable Inference,

Now it is Matter of Faith, That God is just and Wise, That he Loves not
Disorder, That Nature is corrupted, That the Soul of Man is Immortal and that
That of Beasts is Mortal: Because indeed it is not a distinct Substance from
their Body, nor consequently capable of Knowledge and Love, or of any Passions
and Sensations like ours. Therefore in the Style of Monsieur de la Ville, who
condemns Men upon Consequences that he draws from their Principles, the
Cartesians may justly charge him with a Crime, and all Mindkind besides, for
believing Beasts have Souls.

What would Monsieur de la Ville say, if in his way of proceeding we should tax
him of Impiety, for entertaining Opinions, from whence it might be concluded,
That God is not Just, Wise, or Powerful; Opinions that overthrow Religion, that
are opposite to Original Sin, that take away the only Demonstration Reason can
give of the Immortality of the Soul? What would he say, if we should charge him
with Injustice and Cruelty for making innocent Souls to suffer, and even for
Annihilating them, to feed upon the Bodies which they Animate? He is a Sinner,
but they are Innocent; and yet for the Nourishment of his Body he kills
Animals, and Annihilates their Souls, which are of greater Worth than his Body.
Yet if his Body could not subsist without the Flesh of Animals, or if the
Annihilation of a Soul should render his Body for ever Immortal; this Cruelty,
as unjust as it is, might perhaps be excusable: But with what Pretense can he
Annihilate Substances altogether innocent, to sustain but a few days a Body
justly condemned to Death because of Sin,

Would he be so little a Philosopher, as to excuse himself upon the Custom of
the Place he lives in? But what if his Zeal should carry him into the Indies,
where the Inhabitants found Hospitals for Beasts; and the Philosophers, and the
better and more gentile Part of them, are so charitable to to the smallest
Flies, Lins. c. 37.
that, for fear of killing them, by Breathing, and Walking, they wear a fine
Cloth before their Mouths, and fan the Ways through which they pass? Would he
then fear to make innocent Souls to suffer, or to Annihilate them for the
Preservation of a Sinner's Body? Would he not rather choose to subscribe to
their Opinion, who give not Beasts a Soul more Noble than their Body, or
distinct from it; and by publishing this Opinion acquit himself of the Crimes
of Cruelty and Injustice, which these People would charge upon him; if having
the same Principles he followed not their Custom?

This Example may suffice to show, that we are not permitted to treat Men as
Heretics, and dangerous Persons, because of Irreligious Consequences that may
be deduced from their Principles, when these Consequences are disowned by them.
For though I think it would be an infinitely harder Task, to answer the
aforesaid Difficulties, than those of M. de la Ville's, yet the Cartesians
would be very Ridiculous, if they should accuse Monsieur de la Ville, and
others, that were not of their Opinion, of Impiety and Heresy. It Is only the
Authority of the Church, that may decide about Matters of Faith; and the Church
has not obliged us, and probably whatever Consequence may be drawn from common
Principles, never will oblige us to believe, that Dogs have not a Soul more
Noble than their Body, that they know not their Masters; that they neither
fear, nor desire, nor suffer any thing, because it is not necessary that
Christians should be instructed in these Truths.

ARGUMENT II.
Almost all Men are persuaded, That sensible Objects are the true Causes of
Pleasure, and Pain, which we feel, upon their Presence. They believe, that the
Fire sends forth that agreeable Heat which rejoices us; and that our Aliments
Act in us, and give us the Welcome Sensations of Tastes. They doubt not but it is
the Sun which makes the Fruits necessary for Life, to thrive; and that all
sensible Objects have a peculiar Virtue, by which they can do us a great deal
of Good and Evil. Let us see, if from these Principles we cannot draw
Consequences contrary to Religion and Points of Faith.

A Consequence opposite to the first Principle of Morality, which obliges us to
love God with all our Strength, and to fear none but Him.
It Is a common Notion, by which all Men Order their Behavior, That we ought to
love, and fear what has Power to do us Good and Harm, to make us feel Pleasure
and Pain, to render us happy or miserable; and that this Cause is to be loved*
or feared, proportionably to its Power of Acting on us. But the Fire, the Sun,
the Objects of our Senses, can truly Act on us, and make us in some manner
happy or miserable. This is the Principle supposed; we may therefore Love and
Fear them. This is the Conclusion which every one naturally makes, and is the
general Principle of the corruption of Manners.

It Is evident by Reason, and by the First of God's Commandments, That all the
motions of our Soul, of Love or Fear, Desire or Joy, ought to tend to God; and
that all the Motions of our Body may be Regulated and Determined, by
encompassing Objects. By the Motion of our Body we may approach a Fruit, avoid
a Blow, fly a Beast that is ready to devour us. But we ought to Love and Fear
none but God; all the Motions of our Soul ought to tend to Him only; we are to
Love Him with all our strength; this is an indispensible Law. We can neither
Love or Fear what is below us, without disorder and corruption: Freely to fear
a Beast ready to devour us, or to fear the Devil, is to give them some honor;
to Love a Fruit, to desire Riches, to rejoice in the light of the Sun, as if he
were the true cause of it; to Love even our Father, our Protector, our Friend,
as if they were capable of doing us good, is to pay them an Honor which is due
to none but God, in which sense it is lawful to Love none. But we may, and
ought to Love our Neighbor, by wis^ing and procuring him, as Natural or
Occasional Cause, all that may make him happy, and no otherwise. For we to Love
our Brothers, not as if able to do us good, but as capable to enjoy together
with us the true Good. These Truths seem evident to me; but Men strangely
obscure them, by supposing that the surrounding Bodies can Act on us as True
Causes.

Indeed, most Christian Philosophers acknowledge, That the Creatures can do
nothing, unless God concur to their Action; and that so, sensible Objects being
unable to Act on us without the Efficacy of the First Cause, must not be loved
or feared by us, but God only, on whom they depend.

Which Explication makes it manifest, That they condemn the consequences, which
I have now deduced from the Principle they receive: But if in imitation of
Monsieur de la Ville's Conduct, I should say 'twas a slight and subterfuge of
the Philosophers, to Cloak their Impiety* if I should urge them with the Crime
of supporting Aristotle's Opinions, and the prejudices of Sense, at the expense
of their Religion; if piercing too into the inmost recesses of their Heart, I
should impute to them the secret desire, of debauching Men's Morals by the
defense of a Principle, which serves to justify all sorts of disorders, and
which by the consequences I have drawn from it, overthrows the first Principle
of Christian Morality. Should I be thought in my Senses whilst I went to
condemn most Men as impious upon the strength of the inferences I had deduced
from their Premises?

Monsieur de la Ville will no doubt pretend that my Consequences are not
rightly inferred; but I pretend the same of his; and to ruin them all, I need
but explicate some Equivocal Terms, which I shall sometime do, if I find it
necessary.

But how will Monsieur de la Ville justify the common Opinion of the Efficacy
of Second Causes, and by what sort of concourse will he ascribe to God all that
is due to Him? Will he make it clearly appear, that one individual Action is
all of God, and all of the Creature? Will he demonstrate that the Power of the
Creature is not useless, though without its Efficacy, the sole Action of God
would produce the same effect? Will he prove that Minds neither ought to Love
nor Fear Bodies, though the latter have a true Power of Acting on the former;
and will he make multitudes of Converts hereupon, among those whose Mind and
Heart are taken up with sensible Objects, from a confused Judgment they make
that these Objects are capable of making them Happy or Miserable? Let him
confess then, That if we might treat as Heretics, and profane Persons, all
that hold Principles, from which Heretical and Impious Consequences may be
drawn, no Man what ever could secure his Faith from being suspected.

ARGUMENT III. The Consequence of the Principle proposed by Monsieur de la
Ville, as a Point of Faith, viz. That the Essence of Body consists not in
Extension. This negative Principle overthrows the only demonstrative and direct
Proof we have of the Soul's being a distinct Substance from the Body, and
consequently of her Immortality.
When this truth is received, which I presume, with many other Persons, to have
demonstrated; which Monsieur de la Ville impugns as contrary to the decisions
of the Church, viz. That the Essence of matter consists in Extension in Length,
Breadth, and Thickness. It is easy to comprehend that the Soul, or that which
is capable of Thought, is a distinct substance from the Body. For it is manifest
that Extension, whatever Division and Motion be conceived in it, can never
arrive to Reason, Will or Sense. Wherefore that thinking thing which is in us,
is necessarily a substance distinct from our Body.

Intellectual Notices, Volitions, and Actual Sensations, are Actually Modes of
some substances Existence. But all the Divisions incidental to Extension can
produce nothing but Figures: Nor all its various Motions, any thing but
Relations of Distance: Therefore Extension is not capable of other
Modifications. Therefore our Thought, Desire, Sensations of Pleasure, and Pain,
are Modes of a Substances Existence, which is not a Body. Therefore the Soul is
distinct from the Body, which being conceded, we thus demonstrate her
Immortality.

No substance can be Annihilated by the Ordinary strength of Nature. For as
nature cannot produce something out of nothing: So she cannot reduce something
into nothing. Modifications of Beings may be Annihilated; Rotundity of a Body
may be destroyed; for that which is round may become square. But this roundness
is not a Being, a Thing, a Substance; but only a Relation of Equality of
distance, between the terminating parts of the Body, and that which is in the
Center. Which relation changing, the Roundness is destroyed, but the substance
cannot be reduced to nothing. Now for the forementioned Reasons the Soul is not
a Mode of a Body's Existing. Therefore she is immortal; and though the Body be
dissolved into a Thousand parts of a different Nature, and the structure of its
Organs broke to pieces, since the Soul consists not in that structure, nor in
any other Modification of matter, it is evident that the dissolution, and even
the Annihilation of the substance of an humane Body, were that Annihilation
true, could not Annihilate the substance of our Soul. Let us add to this
another proof of the immortality of the Soul, grounded upon the same Principle.

Though the Body cannot be reduced to nothing, because it is a substance, it
may notwithstanding die, and all its parts may be dissolved: Because Extension
is divisible. But the Soul being a substance distinct from Extension, cannot be
divided. For we cannot divide a Thought, a Desire, a Sensation of Pain, or
Pleasure, as we may divide a square into two or four Triangles. Therefore the
substance of the Soul is indissoluble, incorruptible, and consequently
immortal, because unextended.

But if Monsieur de la Ville supposes that the Essence of Body consists in
something besides Extension, how will he convince the Libertines that she is
neither material nor mortal. They will maintain, that something wherein the
Essence of Body consists, is capable of thinking, and that the substance which
thinks is the same with that which is extended. If Monsieur de la Ville denies
it, they will show that he does it, without Reason, since according to his
Principle, Body being something else than Extension; he has no distinct Idea of
what that can be, and consequently cannot tell but that unknown thing may be
capable of Thought. Does he think to convince them, by saying as he does in his
Book, that the Essence of Body is to have Parts without Extension? Certainly
they will not take his Word for it; for finding it as hard to conceive parts
without Extension, as indivisible Atoms, or Circles, without two Semi-circles,
they must have more deference for him, than he has for God himself. For
Monsieur de la Ville, in the last part of his Book, pretends that God himself
cannot oblige us to belive contradictory things, such as are the Parts of a
Body, without any Actual extension.

But the Libertines on their part would not fail of probable Reasons to
confound the Soul with the Body. Experience, they will say, teaches us, That the
Body is capable of Feeling, Thinking, and Reasoning. It Is the Body which is
sensible of Pleasure, and Pain. It Is the Brain which thinks and reasons. The
weight of the Body makes heavy the Mind. Madness is a true distemper; and those
who have most Wisdom lose it, when that part of the Brain, where it resides, is
diseased. The Essences of Beings are unknown to us, and therefore Reason cannot
discover of what they are susceptible. So that reason refers us to Experience,
and Experience confounds the Soul with the Body, and teaches us, that this is
capable of thinking: Such would be their Reasons.

And in Truth those who assure us, That the Essences of Being are unknown; and
make it Criminal for Philosophers to demonstrate Extension no Modification of
Being, but the very Essence of Matter; would do well to consider the
mischievous Consequences, deducible from their Principles; and not go to
overthrow the only Demonstration we have, for the Distinction between the Soul
and Body. For, in fine, the Distinction of these two Parts of our Selves,
proved by clear Ideas, is the most Fruitful and necessary of all Truths in
point of Philosophy, and perhaps of Divinity, and Christian Morality. But this
Distinction is likewise exactly demonstrated in many Places of the Search after
Truth Book IV. Chap. 2. Book VI. Part II. Chap. 7. Book III. Part II. Chap. 8.
. And I undertake to Monsieur de la Ville, notwithstanding his Answer fraught
with Ambiguities, Figures, and Contradictions; or rather, I undertake to the
Libertines, for as for him, I believe him so settled in his Faith, as not to
want such sort of Proofs. I undertake, I say to the Libertines, That they will
never find any Sophism in my Demonstration, That it is impossible to conceive it
clearly and distinctly, without embracing it; and that all the Proofs they
offer, to confound the Soul with the Body, are drawn from Senses; that they are
obscure and confused, and can never persuade such as Judge of things by clear
and distinct Ideas.

From this Principal, That the Essence of Body consists not in Extension, and
that the Essences of things are unknown; I could still draw many other
Consequences opposite to Faith: But that is not necessary; and I would rather,
if it were possible, reconcile all false as well as true Philosophies with
Religion. However impious and Heretical would be the Consequences I could
deduce from the Opinions of Philosophers, I should think I wanted the Charity
which I owe them, if I endeavored to make their Faith suspected. So far am I
from imitating the Conduct of Monsieur de la Ville, who leaving a Principle
demonstrated in all its Strength, and received by all Ages, lays out himself in
drawing Heretical Consequences from it; though of no use but to strengthen the
Calvinists, and increase their Number, and to disturb the Faith of the
Orthodox: I would, on the contrary, that no one should think on these
Consequences; or disown them as false, and wrong-inferr'd from the Principal.

All Truths hang in a Chain together; and no false Principle can be held, but
those who are any thing versed in the Art of Reasoning, may infer from it
abundance of Consequences repugnant to Religion. So that if it were permitted
to blacken the Faith of others, upon Consequences drawn from Principles
believed by them, since there is no Man but Errs in something, we might treat
all the World, as Heretical. Wherefore the allowing Men to Dogmatize, and to
make others Faith suspected, who are not of their Opinion, would be opening a
Gap to infinite Quarrels, Schisms, Disturbances, and even Civil Wars; and all
Mankind is concerned to look upon the Abettors of such a Conduct, as Slanderers
and Disturbers of the public Peace. For, in short, the different Parties in
Religion, which are almost always formed from such like Consequences, produce
strange Events in a State; which all Histories abound with. But the Liberty to
Philosophize, or to reason upon Common Notions, is not to be denied Men; it
being a Right which is as natural to them as to breath. Divines ought to
distinguish Theology from Philosophy, Articles of our Faith from Opinions of
Men. Truths, which GOD imparts to all Christians by a visible Authority, from
those which he bestows on some particular Persons, in Recompense of their
Attention and Industry. They should not confound things that depend on so
different Principles. No Question Humane Sciences ought to be made subservient
to Religion; but with a Spirit of Peace and Charity; without condemning one
another, so long as we agree about Truths which the Church has determined: For
this is the way for Truth to shine out, and all Sciences to be brought to
greater and greater Perfection, by the Addition of New Discoveries to the
Ancient.

But the Imaginations of most Men cannot be reconciled to New Discoveries, but
even Novelty in Opinions, never so advantageous to Religion, frights them;
whilst they easily inure themselves to the falsest and obscurest Principles,
provided some Ancient has advanced them. But when once these Principles are
grown familiar, they find them evident, though never so obscure: They believe
them most useful, though extremely dangerous; And they are so well used to say
and hear what they do not conceive, and to slurr a real Difficulty by an
imaginary Distinction, that they are ever well satisfied with their false
Idea's, and cannot endure to be talked to in a clear and distinct Language; like
Men coming out of a dark Room, they are fearful of the Light, which strikes too
violently on their Eyes, and they imagine we go to blind them, when we try to
dissipate the involving Darkness.

Thus though I have shown by many Consequences, that it is dangerous, for
Example, to maintain that Beasts have a Soul more noble than the Body; yet
since this Opinion is ancient, and most Men are accustomed to Believe it,
whilst the contrary bears the Character of Novelty; Those who judge of the
Harshness of Opinions rather by the Fear they produce in the Imagination, than
by the Evidence and Light they shed in the Mind, will be sure to vote the
Cartesians Opinion dangerous; and will condemn these Philosophers, as rash and
presumptuous, rather than those who make Beasts capable of Reasoning.

Let a Man but say in Company, with an Air of Gravity, or rather with a Look,
into which the Imagination, scared with something extraordinary, forms the
Face: Really the Cartesians are strange People; They maintain, That Beasts have
no Soul. I am afraid in a little time they will say as much of Man: And this
will be enough to persuade a great many, that this is a dangerous Opinion. No
Reasons can prevent the Effect of this Discourse upon weak Imaginations; and
unless there happen to be some brisk Wit, that with the gayety of Carriage,
shall re-embolden the Company from the Fear they had conceived, the Cartesians
might tire themselves to Death, before they could by their Reasonings
obliterate the Character that had been given of their Persons.

And yet it is but placing the definition instead of the thing defined, to show
the extravagance of this Discourse. For if a Man should say seriously, the
Cartesians are strange sort of Men, they affirm, That Beasts have neither
Thought nor Sense; I fear, in a short time, they will say as much of us.
Certainly we should conclude this Man's apprehensions but ill-grounded. But the
generality of Men are unable to extricate the least Ambiguity, especially when
their Imagination is frighted with the Notion of Novelty, which some represent
to them as dangerous. Besides that the Air and exterior Manners easily
persuade, but Truth is not discovered without some application of Thought,
whereof the greatest part of Mankind is incapable.

Certainly Men that have most Light and Understanding, whose Opinions are
implicitly embraced by the Vulgar, ought not to be so easy to condemn their
Brethren, at least before they have examined their Sentiments with a serious
Attention; nor ought they to possess their respectful Hearers with
disadvantageous Notions of their Neighbor, this being contrary to the Rules of
Charity and Justice.

But the Cartesians, you will say, admit Principles which have mischievous
Consequences; and I grant it, since you will have it so. But they disown these
Consequences: They, it may be, are so gross and stupid, as not to see these
Consequences are included in their Principles. They think they can separate one
from the other, and do not suppose other Philosophers are to be believed upon
their bare Word: They break not their Charity with those who hold Principles
which they think big with impious Consequences, and as contrary to Religion, as
sound Sense. For it may be concluded from the dangerous Consequences I have
drawn from those very Principles, which flush the Peripateticks even to the
triumphing over their Adversaries; How many, and how much worse than these I
might infer, if I should give my self liberty to choose out of the Body of
their Philosophy that which was most exceptionable? But whatever the advantage
is in Theological Disputes, as well as in Field-Battles, to be the Aggressors;
I had rather defend my self weakly, than conquer and triumph by assaulting.
For, in short, I do not conceive how Men delight in making Heretics, and
profane Persons of those who submit to all^the decisions of the Church, upon
Consequences which they disavow. The Victory methinks is very fatal, which
spills but the Blood of our own Countrymen.

Nevertheless, I do not believe I have advanced in the Search after Truth, any
Principle of Philosophy productive of dangerous Consequences; on the contrary,
I have left M. des Carts in some places, and Aristotle almost in all; because
I could not reconcile the Former with Truth, nor the Latter with Truth or
Religion; this I leave to Men of more Wit and Invention than my self. I said
that the Essence of Matter consisted in Extension, because I thought I had,
evidently, demonstrated it, and thereby given clear and uncontroverted proofs
of the Immortality of the Soul, and her distinction from the Body: A Truth
which is essential to Religion, and which the Philosophers are Sess. 8.
obliged by the last Lateran Council to prove. But I never thought this
Principle so fecund with Truths advantageous to Religion, was contrary to the
Council of Trent: Monsieur de la Ville ought not to affirm it, for that will do
but mischief. This is the Conduct of the Protestants in Holland, Th. Pac. chapter 4.
Vitichius, L. 3. chapter 13. Cog. Not.
Poiret, and several others. I say not this to make his Faith suspected, but I
am under strong apprehensions, least his Conduct may give them occasion to
affirm, That we own in France a Man cannot be a Catholic without believing
that the parts of a Body may be without any Actual Extension, since a Book
Dedicated to the Bishops, published with all the Ceremonies, with Approbation
and Privilege, treats the Cartesians as Heretics on that particular: I fear,
least by his probabilities, he may shake the Faith of several Persons, who know
not precisely what is necessary to make an Article of Faith. But I am still
more apprehensive least the Libertines should strengthen themselves in their
Opinions, That the Soul is Corporeal, and consequently Mortal; That a thinking
Substance is the same with an extended One, because Extension with them, and
Monsieur de la Ville, being but the Mode of a Being, whose Essence is unknown
to us, we have no Argument from Reason, that this Being is not capable of
Thinking; and we have many Arguments from Sense which, though never so false,
are yet convincing, and even Demonstrative with those who will not be at the
pains of Reasoning.

And upon these grounds I think I am obliged to affirm, with all the confidence
afforded me by the view of the Truth I have Demonstrated That Extension is not
a Mode of Being; but a Being, a Thing, a Substance, in a Word, Matter or Body,
and that many Answers are to be seen in the Search after Truth, to those proofs
of Sense by which the Libertines confound the two Substances, that Man's
composed of. I maintain farther, That Monsieur de la Ville has not shown that
Opinion of the Essence of Matter to be contray to Transubstantiation; that he
has proposed only those Answers which are easy to be resolved, That we may
more easily triumph over his Adversaries: That he has not impugned mine, and
probably not so much as known them, and that in the Humor I see him, I think
not my self obliged to acquaint him with them; Lastly, That he has added to the
Council of Trent, more Articles of Faith, or Explications, than any private
Person has Right to give after express Prohibitions contained in the Bull,
which confirms the said Council By that Bull it is forbidden under Pain of
Excommunication, to give any Explication of the Decrees of the Council. Vlium
omnino interpretationis genus super ipsius Concilii decretis quocunque modo
edere, etc. That Power is reserved to the Pope.
.

As to what regards my own Particular, I desire the Reader not to believe
Monsieur de la Ville, upon his Word, but to examine with Caution and Distrust,
even those Matters of Fact which he vouches with the greatest Confidence. He
boasts himself upon his Sincerity and Ingenuousness, and I am far from
disputing him those Qualities, which are indispensable to every honest Man; but
I cannot help saying in the Defense of Truth, and my own Justification, that he
has often forgotten himself in his Book; of which here follows a sufficient
Proof.

In the Frontispiece of his Work he has inserted an Advertisement, which has a
Look of Integrity; for it is composed only to make a kind of Reparation: These
are his Words; He says, He met with a Copy of the Search after Truth, of the
Strasbourgh-Edition, in the Year 1677. which obliges him to signify to his
dear Reader, that I have in the Impression retracted and Error, which I had
advanced in the First. But it is so true, that I am either little skilled in
Divinity, or very daring, that I could not recant that Error, without
advancing Two others. His whole Advertisement is only to make me a charitable
Reparation.

However it is false, First, That I have retracted that pretended Error about
Original Sin: The same Proposition being found in the same Words, in the
Eddition he Edit. Strasb. p. 190. Par. Edit. 1. p. 172. in the second, p. 190.
in the third, 187* in the fourth 95.
cites, and in all those that are Printed at Paris.

Secondly, That Proposition is not my peculiar Opinion; since it is the common
Doctrine of the Schools. But though it were not at present taught, yet it is
certainly no Error, much less a most pernicious one, as he elsewhere styles it
Page 90.
.

The two Errors he supposes me to substitute, in the Room of this recanted
one, are Two things I never said; and which he puts upon me. It Is but reading
his own Words relating to the Question, to discover the Truth of what I say;
and therefore I shall not stand to prove it; especially since it is done
sufficiently by an unknown Hand. I could only wish this unknown Person had
alleged the Reasons which I had for saying, That an Infant at the time of
Baptism was justified by an Actual Love, and which I have given in the
Illustration upon Original Sin.

Let a Man judge then, after he has examined the candid and sincere
Advertisement of Monsieur de la Ville, whether I have not reason to require the
Equitable Readers not to credit him, on his bare Word. For if we believe him,
he is the most sincere and courteous Man in the World; but we cannot find all
the Marks of Sincerity and Candor, when we carefully examine him. At the End
of his Advertisement, he protests, he has endeavored, as much as possible, to
observe all the Moderation which he ought, that he has no ill Will but to the
Errors of his Adversaries, and for their Persons all Esteem and Respect:
Whilst yet one cannot consider that Advertisement, without discovering at least
the Symptoms of a disingenuous Spirit, and a Malign Temper, which surprises and
irritates Men's Minds. I pray God to pardon him his Outrages, to Regulate his
Zeal, and to inspire him with the Spirit of Meekness, Charity and Peace toward
his Brethren. I know not whether he finds Pleasure in abusing me so hainously
as he does; but I desire to assure him, That it is Matter of much Sorrow, and
Trouble to me, That I am forced in the Defense of Truth, to give some Suspicion
of his Probity; and that I should, on the contrary, be extremely joyful, if he
could know how sincerely I honor, respect, and love him, in Him in whom we all
are Brethren. Noverit quam eu^ non contemnam, and quantum in illo Deum timeam,
and cogitem caput nostrum in cujus corpore fratres sumus. Aug. ad Fortunianum,
Epist. 3.

FINIS.
F. MALEBRANCHE's TREATISE CONCERNING Light and Colors. BEING AN ILLUSTRATION
OF THE Fourth CHAPTER of his Sixth BOOK. Never before Printed.
IN order to explain my Thoughts concerning the Natural Causes of Light and
Colors, let us conceive a great Football externally pressed by a Force, in a
manner infinite; and that the fluid Matter contained in it, has so rapid a
Motion, as not only to turn all, after one and the same Fashion, with a mighty
Swiftness; but that each Part of it, to employ all its Motion, (that is, to
move it self equally to its Force,) is still obliged either to turn upon the
Center of an infinite Number of little Vortices, or else to glide between them,
and all this with a prodigious Celerity; insomuch that the Force of the Matter
contained in the Football, shall make an equal Poize with that external Force
which compresses it. In a word, let us conceive the Matter contained in the
Football to be like that with which M. Des Carts furnishes our Vortex,
excepting only that the little Bowls of his second Element, which he supposes
hard, be nothing but little Vortices themselves; or at least, that they have no
Hardness but what is occasioned by the Pressure of those which surround them:
For if these little Bowls were hard by their own Nature, (as I think I have
demonstrated the contrary,) it were impossible for them to transmit Light and
Colors, In the last Chapter of the Search, where I treat of the Hardness of
Bodies.
as we shall see by and by. But if this Supposition be difficultly conceived,
let us only suppose a Football filled with Water, or rather with a Matter
infinitely more fluid, and receiving an extreme Pressure from without. The
Circle ABC is the Section through the Center of the Football.

This being supposed, let there be imagined a small Hole to be made at the
Point A; I say, that all the Parts of the Water, as RSTV, contained therein,
will tend toward the Point A by the right Lines, RA, SA, etc. For all the
Parts which were equally pressed before, cease to be so on that side which
answers to the Hole. They must therefore tend toward it, since every Body that
is pressed, must tend to move it self that way where it finds the least
Resistance.

But if a Stopple be put in the Orifice A, and it be hastily thrust inwards,
the same Parts, RS TV, etc. will all tend to remove themselves from the Hole,
directly by the same Lines, AR, AS, etc. Because, upon the advancing in of the
Stopple, they are more pressed on the Side wherein it enters.

Lastly, If we conceive the Stopple moved hastily backwards and forwards, all
the Parts of the subtle Matter (which exactly fills the Football, whose
Elasticity is very great, and which difficultly contracts or extends it self)*
will receive infinite Vibrations from the Pressure.

Let us now suppose an Eye at T, or elsewhere, directed toward a Torch at A;
the Parts of the Torch being in continual Motion, will constantly press the
subtle Matter on all sides, and consequently quite from A to the Fund of the
Eye: And the Optic Nerve, being vehemently pressed and shaken by very quick
Vibrations, will excite in the Soul the Sensation of Light, or of a lively and
glittering Whiteness.

If we suppose at S a dark Body M, the subtle Matter being not reflected
toward the Eye that way directed, nor vibrating the Optic Nerve, the Body
will appear black; as when we look into the Mouth of a Cave, or the Hole of the
Pupil of the Eye.

If the Body M be such, as that the subtle Matter vibrated by the Torch, be
reflected toward the Eye, without any Diminution of the Quickness of the
Vibrations, the Body M will appear White, and so much the more White as there
shall be more Rays reflected. It will likewise appear Luminous, as Flame, if
the Body M being polished shall reflect all, or almost all the Rays in the same
order.

But if the Body M be such, as that the subtle Matter reflected has its
Vibrations less quick, in certain Degrees that cannot be exactly determined,
the Result will be one of the primitive Colors, Yellow, Red, Blue, provided
all the Parts of the Body M diminish equally the Vibrations caused by the Flame
in the subtle Matter; and all the rest of the Colors made up of a Mixture of
the primitive, will arise according as the Parts of the Body M shall unequally
diminish the Quickness of the said Vibrations. This is what I meant, when I
advanced in some Places of my Book, that Light and Colors consisted only in
the Vibrations of Pressure, as they were more or less quick, produced by the
subtle Matter on the Retina.

This simple Exposition of my Opinion will, perhaps, make it seem probable
enough, to those at least who are acquainted with M. Des Cartes's Philosophy,
and who are not satisfied with the Explication which that Learned Man gives of
Colors: But that a more solid Judgment may be made on my Opinion, it is not
enough to have barely proposed it; it is requisite to produce some Arguments to
confirm it.

To that End, it is necessary to observe, First, That Sound is rendered Sensible
only by the Vibrations of the Air, which shake the Ear; for upon the Air's
being drawn out of the Air-Pump, Sound is no longer heard.

Secondly, That the Difference of Tones proceeds not from the Strength of these
Vibrations of the Air, but from their Quickness, as it is more or less.

Thirdly, That though the Impressions which Objects make upon the Organs of our
Senses, differ sometimes, but according to more or less, the Sensations which
the Soul receives from them differ essentially. There are no Sensations more
opposite than Pleasure and Pain; and yet a Man that scratches himself with
Pleasure, feels Pain, if he scratches a little harder than ordinary. There is
great probability that Bitter and Sweet, which cause Sensations essentially
different, differ only by more and less: For there are those who taste that
Bitter which others taste Sweet. There are Fruits which to Day are Sweet, and
to Morrow Bitter. A little Difference in Bodies makes them capable of causing
very opposite Sensations; a sign that the Laws of Union of the Soul and Body
are arbitrary, and an undoubted Proof that we receive not from Objects the
Sensations we have of them.

Fourthly, If the Vibrations of the Air, as they are quicker or slower, produce
very different Tones, we should not admire that the Vibrations of the subtle
Matter, which presses perpetually the Optic Nerve, should cause us to see
Colors altogether different, though the Celerity of these Vibrations differ
only by more or less. When a Man has beheld the Sun, and his Optic Nerve has
been strongly struck by the Luster of its Light, because that Nerve is situate
in the Focus of the Eye, if at that time he shut his Eyes, or enters with them
open into a dark Place, the Concussion of the Optic Nerve, or of the Animal
Spirits contained in the Nerve, diminishing by unequal Degrees, he sees
successively Colors essentially different, first White, then Yellow, Red,
Blue, and at last Black. Whence can this come, except that the Vibrations or
Concussions of the Optic Nerve, which at first are very quick, become by
Degrees more slow? (For we must not judge of the Concussions of the Optic
Nerve, as of those of the Strings of Instruments, which are stretched in the
Air, and fastened at both Ends, and the Celerity of whose Vibrations diminish
not.) And might not one from thence alone conclude, that the Vibrations of the
Retina, which cause Yellow, are quicker than those which cause Red; and those
of Red, quicker than those of Blue; so of other Colors successively.

As the Pressure of the Air is only from the Weight of the Atmosphere, its
Elasticity is but moderate, and some time is required that each part of Air may
impell its Neighbor: And thus Sound is transmitted but leasurely, it making
but about an Hundred and eighty Fathom in a Second. But the Case is different
with Light, because all the Parts of the other, or subtle Matter, are
contiguous, rapidly moved; and especially because they are compressed with the
Weight, as I may say, of all the Vortices. So that the Vibrations of Pressure,
or the Action of a luminous Body, must be communicated to the greatest Distance
in the shortest Time; and if the Pressure of the Parts constituting our Vortex,
were actually infinite, the Vibrations of Pressure must undoubtedly be made in
an Instant. Monsieur Hugens, in his Treatise of Light, pretends, from
Observations made on the Eclipses of Jupiter's Satellites, that Light is
transmitted about Six hundred thousand times faster than Sound. The Weight
therefore of all the other, or the Compression of its Parts, Search after
Truth, Chapter ult.
is much greater than that of the Atmosphere. I think I have sufficiently
proved, that the Hardness of Bodies can proceed only from the Pressure caused
by this Weight; and if so, it must needs be extraordinary great, since there
are Bodies so hard, as demand a very great Force to separate the least part of
them.

Let us suppose then that all the Parts of the other, or of the subtle and
invisible Matter of our Vortex, are compressed with a kind of infinite Force,
and that each of these Parts is very fluid, having its Hardness only from the
Motion of those which incompass and compress it on all sides; and let us see
how it is possible for the Impressions of infinite different Colors to be
communicated without Confusion; how Ten thousand Rays which cut one another, in
one physical or sensible Point, transmit, through the same Point, all their
different Impulsions: For, probably, the System which can explain that great
Difficulty, will be consonant to the Truth.

Let APEM be a Chamber painted with a great Variety of Colors, and let them be
as opposite as may be; that is, let there be White at A next to Black at n,
Blue at b next to Red at r, Yellow at i next to Purple at v. From all these
Points, A nbriv, let right Lines be drawn, all cutting in one common Point O,
and let an Eye be placed beyond it, as in E cdfgh, all these different Colors
will be seen through the same Point of Intersection O. And since this Figure
represents only one row of Colors, whereas we must imagine as many as there
are visible Points in a Sphere, the Point of Intersection O, must receive and
transmit an infinite Number of different Impressions, without destroying one
another.

I say then, that if the Physical Point, or the Globule O, be an hard Body, as
M. Des Carts supposes it, it is impossible that an Eye at E should see White
at A, and that another Eye at c should see Black at n. For a Body being hard,
if any part of it tends directly from A, for Example, toward E, (that is, if
it proceeds any whit to compress the Optic Nerve) all the other parts must
necessarily tend thither also: and therefore Black and White cannot be seen at
the same time, by the Interposition of the Globule O. M. Des Carts pretends
farther, that Red is made by the turning of the little Globules, which is
communicated from one to another quite along the whole Ray, from the Object to
the Eye. That Opinion is indefensible for many Reasons: but there needs no more
to ruin it, than to consider that if the Globule O turn upon the axis P M from
r, where there is Red, toward f where the Eye is placed, it cannot at the same
time turn upon the axis r f from M, where I likewise suppose Red, toward P
where I suppose another Eye. For the rest: When I say that the Rays cut
themselves in the Globule O, I do not assert that the visual Rays have no
greater density than that of a Globule of the second Element. I do not
determine what thickness of these Rays is sufficient so to strike the Optic
Nerve, as to cause it to see Colors. But what I have said of a single Globule,
must be understood of an Hundred or a Thousand, if so many be required to make
a Ray sensible.

It is not therefore possible that the little Globule O, or its fellows, should
transmit the Action of infinite different Colors, if these Globules are hard:
But if they be conceived infinitely soft, as the simple Idea of Matter
represents them (since Rest has no Force, and it is indifferent to each part to
be or not to be near another;) I say, if these Globules be conceived very soft,
or rather as exquisitely little Vortices composed of an infinitely fluid
Matter, they will be susceptible of infinite different Impressions, which they
can communicate to others upon which they lean, and with which they are as it
were infinitely compressed. I will endeavor to explain and prove this.

In order to which, it is necessary well to understand, that Re-action is here
necessarily equal to Action, for these Reasons, That naturally Force is never
destroyed, that our Vortex is as it were infinitely compressed, and that there
is no Vacuum; and lastly, because the Ethereal Matter is in vehement Motion.
If, for Example, a Man thrust his Cane against an immovable Wall, it will be
repelled with the same Force that it is pushed. The Re-action will be equal to
the Action. Now though the Rays are not hard like Sticks, yet very near the
same thing will happen in regard of Re-action, because of the compression and
plenitude of our Vortex.

For if we suppose a Cask exactly full of Water, and a Pipe being fitted to it,
a Stopple be thrust into this Pipe, it will meet with a Resistance within,
equal to the driving Force without. And if a little Hole be made in the middle
of the Stopple, through which the Water may pass from the Vessel; and then the
Stopple be thrust in, all the Water which shall be compressed by it, will tend
at the same time, by reason of its fluidity, both to recede from every point of
the Stopple, and also to approach the Hole in the middle of it. For if the
Stopple be forced in with violence enough, the Vessel will burst in the weakest
part of it, let it be where it will; a certain sign that the Water presses the
Vessel every where; and if the Stopple be pushed in, the Water will immediately
thereupon fly out by the little Orifice. All this, because Re-action is equal
to Action in a plenum, and that Water, or the subtle Matter, is soft or fluid
enough for every part of it, so to figure it self as to suffice for all sorts
of Impressions. It must also be observed, That the more violently the Stopple
is forced into the Vessel, the more forcibly the Water, whilst it is driven
toward the Concave Surface of the Vessel, returns toward the Stopple, and
leaps through the Hole.

Hence it is easy to perceive that a Black Point on White Paper must be more
visible than upon Blue; because White repelling the light stronger than any
other Color, it must by its Re-action tend more forcibly toward the Black
Point. But if the Ethereal Matter were not infinitely soft and fluid, it is
plain that the little Globules which transmit the impression of White, being
hard, would hinder that of Black, because these Globules supporting one
another, could not tend toward the Black Point: And if that Ethereal Matter
were not pressed, there would be no Re-action.

What I have been saying of White and Black, ought to be applied to other
Colors, though it would be difficult to do it in particular, and to answer the
Objections which many would make upon that Subject: For it is easy to raise
Objections, in matters that are obscure. But all those who are able to make
Objections, are not always capable of comprehending the Principles on which the
Resolution of them depend. To me it seems easy enough, to conceive how it is
possible for a sensible point of Matter, infinitely fluid, and compressed on
all sides, to receive at the same time infinite different Impressions, if we
attend to these two things: First, That Matter is divisible in infinitum:
Secondly, That each part necessarily tends and advances that way where it meets
with least resistance; and thus, that every soft and unequally pressed Body,
receives all the Sculptures of the Mould, as I may say, that surrounds it, and
receives them so much more readily as it is more fluid and more compressed. I
omit the enumeration of Consequences which follow from the Principles I have
been explaining; by which Consequences, I think, may be removed that surprising
Difficulty, how the Rays of different Colors may cross each other without
Confusion; which appears to me so great a Difficulty, as that none but the true
System of the World can entirely dissipate and resolve it.

As for the rest, it must not be imagined that what I have said of the Globules
of the second Element (which I am so far from believing hard, as that I
consider them as little Vortices) can injure M. Des Cartes's Physics: On the
contrary, my Opinion, if true, perfects his System in General. For if my
Sentiment may be useful to the Explication of Light and Colors, it seems much
more proper to resolve other General Questions of Natural Philosophy; as for
Example, how to explain the surprising Effects of Fire.

As Bodies cannot naturally acquire any Motion, unless it be communicated to
them, it is manifest that Fire cannot be made but by the Communication of the
Motion of the subtle Matter. M. Des Carts, as is known, pretends that it is
only the first Element which communicates its Motion to the third, of which
gross Bodies are composed, and which sets it on fire. According to him, when
one strikes fire, one forcibly dissevers a little part of the Flint: (I rather
should believe it to be a part broke off from the Steel, which is kindled: For
when we behold with a Microscope the Sparks of Fire which are collected, it
appears to be the Iron which has been melted and reduced into Globules, or
little long and round Figures. I have not observed any Change to have happened
in the little parts broken from the Flint, but that makes nothing at the
bottom.) That little part broken off from the Iron, spinning then round with
force, drives the little Globules, or the second Element, and consequently
causes that first to flow toward the Particle of Steel, which surrounding it
on all sides, communicates its Motion to it, and sets it on fire. This is
pretty nearly the Opinion of M. Des Carts. It may be seen more at large in the
Fourth Part of his Principles, in the 80th. and following Numbers. But if these
Globules are hard, and all contiguous, it is difficult to conceive how the
first Element could flow toward the separated part of the Iron, and that with
a sufficient Quantity to encompass and set it on fire, not only that, but all
the Powder of a Cannon or a Mine, since the first Element is but a very small
Portion of the Ethereal Matter, as fitting only the little triangular or
concave Spaces, which the contiguous Globules leave between them. This then is
the Way that I explain Fire, upon Supposition that the little Globules of the
second Element are only little Vortices of a violently agitated Matter.

Though the Air be not absolutely necessary to excite some Spark of Fire, yet
for want of Air, Fire immediately goes out, and cannot so much as communicate
it self to Gunpowder, though very easy to be inflamed. Experience shows, that
if a Pistol well primed have its Cock struck down in an Air-Pump, when the Air
is exhausted, the Priming never takes fire, and it is very difficult to observe
the Sparks. Lastly, Every Body knows that Fire goes out for want of Air, and
that it is kindled by blowing: This being supposed, see how I explain the
Production of Fire.

When a Man strikes Fire in a Vacuum, he breaks off, by the force of the Blow,
a little part of the Steel, or of the Flint; this little part whirling about,
and striking rudely upon some little Vortices, breaks them; and consequently
determines their Parts to follow its Determination, and to surround it in an
Instant, and set it on fire. But the Matter of these little Vortices, after
having made abundance of irregular Motions, re-places it self partly in new
Vortices, and partly escapes between the Intervals of the surrounding Vortices,
which approach the dissever'd part of Iron. And these new Vortices are not
easily broken, because they follow pretty exactly the Motion of the part of
Iron; which being perhaps either circular or cylindrous, and turning nearly,
either upon its Center, or its Axis, strikes no more the Vortices in a manner
capable of breaking them. All this is performed as in an Instant, when the
Flint strikes the Steel in a Place void of Air, and the Spark then is hardly
visible.

But when the Steel is stricken in full Air, the part broken off from it, as it
whirls, meets and vibrates a good deal of Air, whose Parts, probably branchy,
meet with it, and break many more of the Vortices than the Iron alone. So that
the subtle Matter of these Vortices, coming to surround the Iron and the Air,
affords them plenty enough of different Motions, strongly to repel the other
Vortices. Thus the Sparks must be much more glittering in the Air than in a
Vacuum, they must remain much longer, and have sufficient force to fire
Gunpowder; which cannot want subtle Matter to set it on fire, whatever
Quantity of Powder there is; since it is not only the first Element, but much
more the second, which produces its extraordinary Motion. If one make Reflection
on what happens to Fire, when it is clear, that is, when a great deal of Air is
driven against it, we shall not doubt but that the Parts of the Air are very
proper to determine the subtle Matter, to communicate a part of its Motion to
the Fire since it is only from this Matter that the Fire can derive its Motion;
no Body being capable of moving it self, but by the Action of those which
environ it, or which strike against it.

The END.
A TREATISE CONCERNING Nature and Grace.

BY Father MALEBRANCHE, Of the ORATORY.

Done into English out of French.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I Entreat those into whose Hands this Tract shall come, to believe I
principally undertook it to satisfy the Difficulties of some Philosophers,
who, methoughts, had not all that due Sense Religion teaches us to have of the
Goodness of GOD, nor were sufficiently acquainted with the Obligations we are
under to JESUS CHRIST. I desire it may be looked on only as an Essay, and not
judged of before it be attentively examined; and that the Reader would not let
himself be surpised by the Motions of Fear and Mistrust, which naturally arise
in us from any thing that bears the Character of Novelty. Having written for
Philosophers, who stand upon a great Accuracy and rigorous Exactness, I have
been obliged to avoid the General Terms in Ordinary Use; since I could not
content them without using such Terms as raise distinct and particular Ideas in
the Mind, as far as the Subject will permit. I question not but equitable
Persons will conclude I had no other Design than to prove in all possible
manners the Truths we are taught by Faith; and that I am not so Inconsiderate
as to call in question what the Church entertains as certain, and Religion
obliges us to believe. But it has ever been allowed Men to give New Proofs of
Ancient Truths, to endear GOD to the Affections of Men, and to show that there
is nothing harsh or unjust in the Conduct He takes for the Establishment of His
Church.

This Piece is divided into Three Discourses: In the First I represent GOD as
working for his Creatures all the Good His Wisdom will permit. In the Second I
explain how the SON of GOD, as Incarnate Wisdom, and Head of the Church, sheds
on His Members the Graces He could not bestow, as Eternal Wisdom, and they
could not receive from His Father. And I likewise endeavor to make Men
sensible of the Obligations and Relations they are under to JESUS CHRIST.
Lastly, in the Third Discourse, I show what is Liberty, and how Grace works in
us with a Salvo to it. Since there are Persons of so little Equity as to draw
dangerous Consequences from Principles most Advantageous to Religion; I desire
I may not be condemned upon their bare Word, but that, before I am judged, I
may have the Justice done me of being understood. Surely there ought to be no
Necessity of my making this Petition.

CONCERNING Nature and Grace. DISCOURSE I. Of the Necessity of the General Laws
of NATURE and of GRACE.
PART I. Of the Necessity of the General Laws of Nature.
I. SINCE GOD can act only for his own Glory, and can find this no where but in
Himself, He could have no other Design in the Creation of the World than the
Establishment of His Church.

II. JESUS CHRIST, who is the Head of it, Prove. 8.22. Eccl. 24.5, 14. Ephesians.
14.21, 22, 23.2.10, 21, 22.4.13, 16. Coll. 1.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Ps. 72.17.
Joh. 17*15.24. Romans 8.29. 1 Pe^. 1.2^. Ap^c. 13.8.1.8, etc.
is the Beginning of the Ways of the LORD; is the First Born of the Creatures;
and though sent among Men in the Fullness of Time, was their Exemplar in the
Eternal Designs of his Father: After his Image all Men were created, as well
those that preceded as we that succeed His Temporal Birth. In a word, it is He
in whom the Universe subsists, there being none besides that could make the
Work of GOD perfectly worthy of its Author.

III. Some Proportion there ought to be between the World and the Action that
produced it. But the Action that educ'd it out of Nothing is that of GOD, of an
infinite Worth; whilst the World, though never so perfect, is not infinitely
Amiable, nor can render to its Author an Honor worthy of Him. Thus separate
JESUS CHRIST from the rest of the Creatures, and see if He, who acts but for
his own Glory, and whose Wisdom has no Bounds, can purpose the Production of
any External Work.

But joining JESUS CHRIST to His Church, and the Church to the rest of the
World it is taken from, you raise to the Glory of GOD a Temple so majestic,
magnificent, and holy, that you will wonder perhaps he laid the Foundations of it
so late.

IV. Yet if you observe, that the Glory which redounds to GOD from His Work, is
not essential to Him; if you are persuaded, that the World cannot be a
necessary Emanation of Deity, you will evidently see that it must not have been
Eternal, though it ought to have no End. Eternity is the Character of
Independency. The World therefore must have a Beginning: Annihilation of
Substances is a Sign of Inconstancy in Him that produced them; therefore they
will have no End.

V. If it be true then, that the World must have begun, and that the
Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST could not have been so ancient as the Eternal
Generation of his Divine Person: An Eternity must necessarily have preceded
Time. Think not therefore that GOD delayed the Production of His Work: He has a
greater Love for the Glory He receives from it in JESUS CHRIST. In one Sense it
may be most truly affirmed, that He made it as soon as possible: For though to
us he might have created it Ten thousand Years before the Beginning of Ages,
yet, Ten thousand Years having no proportion to Eternity, He could neither do
it sooner nor later, since an Eternity must have gone before.

VI. It Is manifest that Soon and Late are Properties of Time; and though we
suppose that GOD had created the World as many Millions of Years as there are
Grain of Sand on the Seashore, before He did, it might still be inquired, why
GOD, who so loves the Glory he receives in the Establishment of His Church, had
not begun it many Ages before? Thus it suffices to say, That an Eternity ought
to forego the Incarnation of the WORD, to manifest why this Great Mystery was
accomplished neither sooner nor later. GOD then must have created the Universe
for the Church, and the Church for JESUS CHRIST; and JESUS CHRIST, that He
might find in Him a Sacrifice and High Priest worthy of the Divine Majesty. We
shall not doubt of this Order of the Designs of GOD, if it be observed that He
can have no other End of his Actions than Himself. And if it be conceived that
Eternity does not belong to Creatures, we shall acknowledge they were produced
when 'twas requisite they should be: Which Truths supposed, let us try to
discover something in the Method GOD takes for the Execution of His Grand
Design.

VII. Were I not persuaded that all Men are no farther Reasonable than
enlightened by Eternal Wisdom, it would, no doubt, be great Temerity to speak of
the Designs of GOD, and offer to discover any of His Ways, in the Production of
His Work. But whereas it is certain that the word Eternal is the Universal
Reason of Minds, and that by the Light which he continually sheds in us, we may
have some Communication with GOD, I ought not to be blamed for consulting that
Light, which, though Consubstantial with GOD Himself, fails not to answer those
who know how to enquire of it by a serious Attention.

VIII. However, I confess that Faith teaches a great many Truths not
discoverable by the natural Union of the Mind with Reason. Eternal Truth
answers not to all we ask, since we ask sometimes more than we can receive. But
this must not serve for a Pretense to justify our Laziness and Inapplication.

IX. Vulgar Heads are soon wearied with the Natural Prayer, the Mind by its
Attention ought to make to inward Truth, in order to receive Light and
Understanding from it; and thus fatigued by that painful Exercise, they talk of
it in a contemptuous manner. They dishearten one another, and cover their
Weakness and Ignorance under the delusive Appearances of a counterfeit Humility.

X. But their Example is not to infuse into us that agreeable Virtue which
cherishes Carelessness and Negligence in the Mind, and comforts it under its
Ignorance of most necessary Truths. We must pray constantly to Him who
enlightens all Men, That he will bestow His Light upon us, recompense our Faith
with the Gift of Understanding; and especially, to prevent us from mistaking
Probability and confused Sensations, which precipitate proud Minds into
Darkness and Error, for the Evidence which accompanies His Resolves.

XI. When we design to speak of GOD with any exactness, we must not consult our
selves, nor the vulgar part of Men; but elevate our Thoughts above all
Creatures, and with great Reverence and Attention consult the vast and immense
Idea of a Being infinitely perfect; which representing the true GOD very
different from what the Vulgar fancy Him to themselves, we are not to treat of
Him in popular Language. Every Body is allowed to say with the Scripture, that
GOD Repented Him that He created Man; that He was Angry with his People; that
he delivered Israel from Captivity by the Strength of His Arm. But these or the
like Expressions are not permitted Divines, when they should speak accurately
and justly. Therefore it is not to be wondered if in the Sequel of Discourse my
Expression shall be found uncommon. It ought rather to be carefully observed
whether they be clear, and perfectly adapted to the Idea which all Men have of
an Infinitely Perfect Being.

XII. This Idea of a Being infinitely perfect includes two Attributes
absolutely necessary to the Creation of the World; an unlimited Wisdom, and an
irresistible Power. The Wisdom of GOD affords infinite Ideas of different
Works, and all possible Ways for the executing His Designs; and His Power
renders Him so absolutely Master of all things, and so independent of all
Assistances whatever, that He need but Will to execute what he Wills. For we
must above all take notice, that GOD needs no Instruments to work with; that
His Wills are necessarily efficacious; in a Word, that as His Wisdom is His own
Understanding, His Power is no other than His Will. Among these innumerable
Ways whereby GOD might have executed His Design, let us see which was
preferable to all other; and let us begin with the Creation of this Visible
World, from which, and in which He forms the Invisible, which is the Eternal
Object of His Love.

XIII. An excellent Artist ought to proportion his Action to his Work; he does
not that by Ways compound, which may be performed by more simple; he acts not
without End, and never makes insignificant Essays. Whence we are to conclude,
that GOD discovering in the infinite Treasures of His Wisdom an Infinity of
possible Worlds, as necessary Consequences of the Laws of Motion, which he
could establish, was determined to the Creation of that which might be produced
and preserved by the simplest Laws, or which should be the perfectest that
could be, considering the simplicity of the Ways necessary to its Production
and Preservation.

XIV. GOD might, doubtless, have made a perfecter World than that we inhabit.
He might, for Instance, have caused the Rain, which fecundates the Earth, to
have fallen more regularly on Plowed Lands than in the Sea, where it is not
necessary. But in order to this, He must have changed the Simplicity of His
Ways, and have multiplied the Laws of the Communications of Motions, by which
our World subsists; and so there would not have been that Proportion between
the Action of GOD and His Work, which is necessary to determine an infinitely
wise Being to act; or, at least, there would not have been the same Proportion
between the Action of GOD and this so perfect World, as there is between the
Laws of Nature, and the World we inhabit: For our World, imagine it as
imperfect as you will, is sounded on so Simple and Natural Laws of Motion, as
make it perfectly worthy of the infinite Wisdom of its Author.

And indeed I am of Opinion, that the Laws of Motion, necessary to the
Production and Preservation of the Earth, and all the Stars in the Heavens, are
reduced to these Two: First, That moved Bodies tend to continue their Motion in
a right line: Secondly, That when two Bodies meet, their Motion is distributed
to each, in proportion to their Magnitude; so that after the Collision they
ought to move with equal degrees of Celerity. These two Laws are the Cause of
all those Motions which produce that variety of Forms which we admire in Nature.

XVI. It Is owned notwithstanding, that the second is ^ever manifestly
observable in the Experiments that can be made upon the Subject; but that comes
from our seeing only what happens in visible Bodies, and our not thinking on
the invisible that surround them, which by the Efficacy of the same Law, giving
the Elasticity to visible Bodies, oblige them to rebound, and hinder them from
observing it. But this I ought not to explain more at length.

XVII. Now these two Laws are so Simple, so Natural, and at the same time so
Fruitful, that though we had no other Reason to conclude they are observed in
Nature, we should be induced to believe them established by Him who works
always by the simplest Ways, in whose Action there is nothing but what is so
justly uniform, and wisely proportioned to his Work, that He does infinite
Wonders by a very small Number of Wills.

XVIII. It fares not so with the General Cause, as with the Particular; with
infinite Wisdom, as with limited Understandings. GOD foreseeing, before the
Establishment of Natural Laws, all that could follow from them, ought not to
have constituted them, if He was to disannul them. The Laws of Nature are
constant and immutable, and general for all Times and Places. Two Bodies of
such degrees of Magnitude and Swiftness, meeting, rebound so now as they did
heretofore. If the Rain falls upon some Grounds, and the Sun scorches others;
if a seasonable Time for Harvest is followed by a destructive Hail; if an
Infant comes into the World with a monstrous and useless Head growing from his
Breast, that makes him wretched; this proceeds not from the particular Wills of
GOD, but from the Settlement of the Laws of Communication of Motions, whereof
these Effects are necessary Consequences: Laws at once so simple and so
fruitful, that they serve to produce all we see Noble in the World, and even to
repair in a little time the most general Barrenness and Mortality.

XIX. He that having built an House, throws one Wing of it down, that he may
rebuild it, betrays his Ignorance; and he who having planted a Vine, plucks it
up as soon as it has taken root, manifests his Levity; because he that wills
and unwills, wants either Knowledge or Resolution of Mind. But it cannot be
said that GOD acts either by this Freakishness, or Ignorance, when a Child
comes into the World with superfluous Members that make him leave it again; or
that an Hail-stone breaks off a Fruit half ripe. If he causes this, it is not
because he wills and unwills; for GOD acts not like particular Causes, by
particular Wills; nor has he established the Laws of the Communications of
Motions, with design to produce Monsters, or to make Fruit fall before
Maturity; it not being their Sterility but Fecundity, for which He willed these
Laws. Therefore what He once willed, He still wills, and the World in general,
for which these Laws were constituted, will eternally subsist.

XX. It Is here to be observed, That the Essential Rule of the Will of GOD is
Order; and that if Man, for example, had not sinned, (a Supposition which had
quite changed the Designs,) then Order not suffering him to be punished, the
Natural Laws of the Communications of Motions would never have been capable to
incommodate his Felicity. For the Law of Order, which requires that a righteous
Person should suffer nothing against his Will, being Essential to GOD, the
Arbitrary Law of the Communication of Motions must have been necessarily
subservient to it.

XXI. There are still some uncommon Instances where these General Laws of
Motions ought to cease to produce their Effect; not that GOD changes or
corrects His Laws, but that some Miracles must happen on particular Occasions,
by the Order of Grace, which ought to supersede the Order of Nature. Besides,
it is fit Men should know that GOD is so Master of Nature, that if He submits it
to His Laws established, it is rather because He wills it so, than by an
absolute Necessity.

XXII. If then it be true, that the General Cause ought not to produce His Work
by particular Wills, and that GOD ought to settle certain constant and
invariable Laws of the Communication of Motions, by the Efficacy whereof He
foresaw the World might subsist in the State we find it; in one Sense it may be
most truly said, that GOD desires all his Creatures should be perfect; that He
wills not the Abortion of Children; nor loves monstrous Productions; nor has
made the Laws of Nature with design of causing them; and that if it were
possible by ways so simple to make and preserve a perfecter World, He would
never have established those Laws, whereof so great a Number of Monsters are
the necessary Results: But that it would have been unworthy His Wisdom to
multiply His Wills to prevent some particular Disorders, which by their
Diversity make a kind of Beauty in the Universe.

XXIII. GOD has given to every Seed a Cicatricle, which contains in Miniature
the Plant and Fruit; another Cicatricle adjoining to the former, which contains
the Root of the Plant; which Root contains another Root still, whose
imperceptible Branches expand themselves into the two Lobes or Meal of the
Seed. Does not this manifest, that in one most real Sense He designs all Seeds
should produce their like? For why should He have given to those Grains of Corn
He designed should be barren, all the Parts requisite to render them Fecund?
Nevertheless, Rain being necessary to make them thrive, and this falling on the
Earth by General Laws, which distribute it not precisely on well manured
Grounds, and in the fittest Seasons, all these Grains come not to good; or, if
they do, the Hail, or some other mischievous Accident, which is a Necessary
Consequence of these same Natural Laws, prevents their earing. Now GOD having
constituted these Laws, might be said to will the Fecundity of some Seeds
rather than others, if we did not otherwise know that, it not becoming a
General Cause to work by Particular Wills, nor an infinitely wise Being by
Complicated Ways; GOD ought not to take other Measures than He has done for the
Regulating the Rains according to Time and Place, or by the Desire of the
Husbandman. Thus much is suffi^ient for the Order of Nature: Let us explain
that of Grace a little more at large, and especially remember that it is the
same Wisdom, and the same Will; in a word, the same GOD who has established
them both.

PART II. Of the Necessity of the General Laws of GRACE.
XXIV. GOD loving Himself by the Necessity of His Being, and willing to procure
an Infinite Glory, and Honor on all Hands worthy of himself, consults His
Wisdom for the accomplishing His Desires. This Divine Wisdom, filled with Love
for Him from whom He receives His Being, by an Eternal and Ineffable
Generation, seeing nothing in all possible Creatures worthy of the Majesty of
His Father, offers Himself, to establish to His Honor an Eternal Worship, and
to present Him, as High Priest, a Sacrifice which through the Dignity of His
Person, should be capable of contenting Him. He represents to Him infinite
Models, for the Temple to be raised to His Glory; and at the same time all
possible Ways to execute His Designs. Amongst all which, that which instantly
appears Greatest, and most Magnificent, most Uniform, and Comprehensive, is
that whereof all the Parts have most Symmetry with the Person who constitutes
the whole Glory and Sanctity of it: And the wisest way of executing that
Design, is the Establishing certain most simple and fruitful Laws to bring it
to its Perfection. This is what Reason seems to answer to all those who consult
it with Attention, when following the Principles which Faith teaches us. Let us
examine the Circumstances of this Great Design, and then endeavor to discover
the Ways of executing it.

XXV. The Holy Scripture teaches us, That it is Jesus Christ who ought to make
all the Beauty, the Sanctity, the Grandeur, and Magnificence of this Work. If
Holy Writ compare it to a City, it is Jesus Christ who makes all the Luster; it
not being the Sun and the Moon, but the Glory of God, Apoc. 21.23. Col.
1.18.2.20. Ephesians. 1.^2.
and the Light of the Lamb that shine upon it. When representing it as a Living
Body, whereof all the Parts have a wonderful Proportion, it is Jesus Christ who
is the Head of it. It Is from Him the Spirit and Life are communicated into all
the Members that compose it. Speaking of it as a Temple, Jesus Christ is the
Chief Cornerstone, which is the Foundation of the Building. It Is He who is the
High Priest, and Sacrifice of it. All the Faithful are Priests; but as they
participate of his Priesthood, they are Victims, only as par^aking of His
Holiness; it being in Him and through Him alone they continually offer
themselves to the Majesty of God. In fine, it is only from the Analogy they bear
to Him, that they contribute to the Beauty of this August and Venerable Temple,
which has always been, and will eternally continue, the Object of the good
Pleasure of God.

XXVI. Reason likewise evinces these same Truths* For what Proportion is there
between Creatures, how perfect soever we suppose them, and the Action that
produces them? How can any Creatures which are finite, be equivalent to the
Action of God of infinite Worth? Can God receive any thing from a mere Creature
that determines him to act? But be it so, that God made Man with Hopes of being
honored by him; whence comes it, that those who dishonor Him make the
greatest Number? Is not this a sufficient Indication that God is very negligent
of His pretended Glory, which He receives from His Work, if separated from His
Well-beloved Son; that it was in Jesus Christ that He resolved to produce it,
and that without Him it would not subsist a moment.

XXVII. A Man resolves upon a Work, because he has need of it, or has a Mind to
see what Effect it will have; or, lastly, because by this Essay of his Strength
he learns what he is able to produce. But God has no need of his Creatures; nor
is He like Men who receive new Impressions from the Presence of Objects. His
Ideas are Eternal and Immutable. He saw the World before it was formed, as well
as he sees it now. Lastly, Knowing that His Wills are efficacious, he perfectly
knows, without making trial of his Strength, all that He Is capable of
producing. Thus Scripture and Reason assure us, that by Reason of Jesus Christ
the World subsists, and through the Dignity of his Divine Person receives an
additional Beauty, which renders it well pleasing in the Sight of God.

XXVIII. From which Principle, methinks, it follows, that Jesus Christ is the
Model by which we are made; that we were framed after His Image and Similitude,
and have nothing comely in us any farther than we are the Draught and Ectypon
of Him; that He is the End of the Law, and the Archetype of the Ceremonies and
Sacrifices of the Jews. That to determine that Succession of Generations
preceding His Birth, they must needs have had some certain Agreements with Him,
whereby they became more pleasing to God than any other. That since Jesus
Christ was to be the Head and Husband of the Church, 'twas requisite he should
be typified by the Propagation of Mankind from one Person; as related by Moses,
and explained by St. Paul. In a word, from this Principle it follows, that the
present World ought to be the Figure of the future; and that as far as the
Simplicity of General Laws will permit, all the Inhabitants of it have been or
shall ^e the Figures and Resemblances of the Only Son of God, quite from Abel,
in whom he was sacrificed, to the last Member that shall constitute His Church.

XXIX. We judge of the Perfection of a Work by its Conformity with the Idea
afforded us by Eternal Wisdom: For there is nothing Beautiful or Amiable, but
as related to Essential, Necessary, and Independent Beauty. Now that
Intelligible Beauty, being made sensible, becomes even in this Capacity the
Rule of Beauty and Perfection. Therefore all Corporeal Creatures ought to
receive from it all their Excellency and Luster. All Minds ought to have the
same Thoughts and the same Inclinations as the Soul of Jesus, if they would be
agreeable to those who see nothing Beautiful, nothing Amiable, save in what is
conformable to Wisdom and Truth. Since therefore we are obliged to believe the
Work of GOD to have an absolute Conformity with Eternal Wisdom, we have all
Reason to believe, that the same Work has infinite Correspondencies with Him
who is the Head, the Principle, the Pattern, and the End of it. But who can
explain all these Agreements?

XXX. That which makes the Beauty of a Temple, is the Order and Variety of
Ornaments that are found in it. Thus, to render the Living Temple of the Divine
Majesty worthy of its Inhabitant, and proportionate to the Wisdom and infinite
Love of its Author, all possible Beauties are to make it up. But it is not so
with this Temple raised to the Glory of God, as with Material ones. For that
which constitutes the Beauty of the Spiritual Edifice of the Church, is the
infinite Diversity of Graces, communicated from Him, who is the Head of it, to
all the constituent Parts. It Is the Order and admirable Proportions settled
among them, it is the various Degrees of Glory shining and reflecting on all
sides round about it.

XXXI. It follows from this Principle, that to the establishing that Variety of
Rewards, which make up the Beauty of the Heavenly Jerusalem, Men ought to be
subject upon Earth, not only to Purgative Afflictions, but also to the Motions
of Concupiscence, which make them gain so many Victories by administering such a
multitude of various Combats.

XXXII. The Blessed in Heaven, no doubt, will be endowed with a Sanctity, and
Variety of Gifts, perfectly corresponding to the Diversity of their Good Works.
Those continual Sacrifices, whereby the Old Man is destroyed and annihilated,
will enrich the Spiritual Substance of the New Man with Graces and Beauties.
And if it were necessary that Jesus Christ should suffer all sorts of
Afflictions before He entered on the Possession of His Glory; Sin, which
introduced into the World the Miseries of Life; and Death, which follows it,
were necessary, that Men after their Trial upon Earth might be legitimately
crowned with that Glory, the Variety and Order whereof shall make the Beauty of
the future World.

XXXIII. It Is true, that Concupiscence which we feel in us is not necessary to
our Meriting: For Jesus Christ, whose Merits are infinite, was not subject to
it. But though He absolutely controlled it, He was willing to admit in Himself
the most vexatious Motions and Sensations, that He might merit all the Glory
that was prepared for Him. Of all Sensations, that which is most repugnant to a
Soul willing, and deserving to be happy, is Pain; wbich yet He was willing to
suffer in the most excessive degree. Pleasure makes actually Happy the Person
that actually enjoys it, which yet he willingly denied Himself. Thus he has
offered, like us, innumerable Sacrifices, through a Body which he took like
ours: But these Sacrifices were of a different kind from those of the greatest
Saints; because he voluntarily raised in Himself all those painful Sensations,
which in the rest of Men are the necessary Consequences of Sin; which being
thus perfectly voluntary, were therefore more pure and meritorious.

XXXIV. If I had a clear Idea of the Blessed Spirits, who are not embodied, I
perhaps could clearly resolve a Difficulty that arises from their
Consideration. For it may be objected, either that there is very little Variety
in the Merits or Rewards of Angels, or that it was to ill purpose for God to
unite Bodies to Spirits, which are, whilst united, so dependant on them. I
confess I do not see any great Diversity in the Rewards answering the Merits of
purely intelligible Substances, especially if they have merited their
Recompense by one sole Act of Love. For being not united to a Body, which might
be an Occasion to God's giving them, by most Simple and General Laws, a Train
of different Thoughts and Sensations, I see no Variety in their Combats, or
Victories? But possibly another Order has been established, which is unknown to
me; and therefore I ought not to speak of it. And it is sufficient that I have
established a Principle, from whence may be concluded, that God ought to create
Bodies, and unite Minds to them, that by the most simple Laws of Union of these
two Substances, He might give us in a general, constant, and uniform manner,
that great Variety of Sensations and Motions, which is the Principle of the
Diversity of our Merits and Rewards.

XXXV. Lastly, 'twas requisite that God alone should have all the Glory of the
Beauty and Perfection of the future World. This Work, which infinitely excels
all others, ought to be a Work of pure Mercy. It was not for Creatures to glory
in having any other part in it, Romans 11.32. Gal. 3.22*
than that the Grace of Jesus Christ had given them. In a word, 'twas fit that
God should suffer all Men to be involved in Sin, that He might show them Mercy
in Jesus Christ.

XXXVI. Thus the first Man, being empowered by the Strength of His Charity, to
persevere in Original Righteousness, God ought not to have fixed him to his
Duty, by preventing Pleasures; for having no Concupiscence to conquer, God
ought not to prevent his Free Will by the Delectation of His Grace. In short,
having all in general that was necessary to his meriting his Reward, God, who
works nothing in vain, ought to leave him to himself, though He foresaw His
Fall, since He designed to raise him up in Jesus Christ, put Free Will to
confusion, and manifest the Greatness of His Mercy. Let us now endeavor to
discover the Ways whereby God executes His Eternal Purpose of the
Sanctification of His Church.

XXXVII. Though God in the Establishment of the future World acts in Ways very
different from those by which He preserves the present; yet it ought not to be
imagined that difference is so great as to take from the Laws of Grace the
Character of the Cause that made them. As it is the same God, who is the Author
both of the Order of Grace and Nature; these two Orders must agree in all those
included Symptoms, which discover the Wisdom and Power of their ^ounder.
Therefore since God is a General Cause, whose Wisdom has no Bounds, He must
needs, for the Reasons before given, act as such in the Order of Grace, as well
as in that of Nature; and His own Glory being His End, in the Construction of
His Church; He must establish most Simple and General Laws, and which have the
greatest Proportion of Wisdom, and Fertility with their designed Effect.

XXXVIII. The more wise an Agent is, the more comprehensive are his Wills. A
very limited Understanding is constantly taking fresh Designs, and in the
Execution of any one of them employs more Means than are useful. In a word. a
straightened Capacity does not sufficiently compare the Means with the End; the
Force and the Action, with the Effect to be produced by them.

On the contrary, a Mind of great Reach and Penetration collates and weighs all
things; forms not Designs, except upon the Knowledge of the Means to dispatch
them; and when it has observed in these Means a certain Proportion of Wisdom
with their Effects, he puts them in practice. The more simple are the Machines,
and more different their Effects, the more Marks they bear of an intelligent
Workman, and more worthy they are to be esteemed. The great Number of Laws in a
State, are commonly a Proof of the want of Insight and Extent of Thought in
their ^ounders; it being rather the Experience of their Exigency, than a wise
Foresight that established them. God therefore, whose Wisdom is infinite,
ought to employ the simplest and most comprehensive Means in the Formation of a
future World, as well as in the Preservation of the present. He ought not to
multiply His Wills, which are the executive Laws of His Designs, save when
Necessity obliges Him to it; but must act by General Wills, and so settle a
Constant and Regular Order, by which He foresees, through the infinite
Comprehension of His Wisdom, that a Work so admirable as His must needs be
formed. Let us see the Consequences of this Principle, and the Application we
may make of it in the Explication of those Difficulties which seem very
puzzling and perplexed.

XXXIX. Holy Writ on one hand teaches us, that God wills all Men should be
saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth; and on the other, that He does
whatever He wills; and yet Faith is not given to all Men; and the Number of
those that perish is greater than that of the Predestinate. How can this be
reconciled with His Power?

XL. God foresaw from all Eternity Original Sin, and the Infinite Number of
those whom Sin should cast into Hell; and nevertheless created the First Man in
a State from whence He knew He must fall; and likewise has appointed such
Relations betwixt this Man and his Posterity, as must communicate his Sin, and
render them all worthy His Aversion and His Anger. How is this to be reconciled
with His Goodness?

God often sheds abroad His Graces, without having the Effect for which His
Goodness obliges us to believe He gives them. He increases Piety in Persons
till toward the End of their Days, and Sin triumphs over them at Death, and
throws them headlong into Hell. He makes the Rain of His Grace to fall on
hardened Hearts as well as on prepared Grounds, which Men resist and render
ineffectual. In a word, God continually does and undoes; and seems to will and
nill again. How shall this be reconciled with His Wisdom?

Lo here great Difficulties. And the whole economy of Religion; the Idea we
have of a Good, Wise, Powerful God, constant in His Designs, regular in His
Action; and a thousand places in Scripture furnish us with several others,
contrary to what we experimentally find every Day in the Order of Grace; and
though very Learned Men have answered them, to me they seem incapable of a
satisfactory and clear Resolution, without the fore-establish'd Principle.

XLII. For my own part, I always believed that God would have all Men saved.
Reason and Scripture will not suffer me to doubt it. And though the Authors
whom I honor with a very profound Reverence, have in the preceding Ages given
out various Explications of this Truth, I have ever been uneasy to receive
such, as without any Necessity seemed to me to give Bounds to the Extent of
God's Goodness and Mercy. Therefore consulting the Idea which all Men have of
God, I entered on this Opinion, which I now expose to the Censure of all those
who shall be willing to examine it attentively, and pass an equitable Judgment
on it.

XLIII. God being obliged to act always in a manner that becomes Him, by ways
Simple, General, Constant, and Uniform: In a word, suitable to the Idea we have
of a General Cause, whose Wisdom has no Bounds; ought to settle certain Laws in
the Order of Grace, as I have proved He has done in the Order of Nature. Which
Laws, by Reason of their Simplicity, must necessarily have unhappy Consequences
in reference to us. But these Consequences are not of such Account, as should
cause God to change these Laws for more compounded; as having a greater
Proportion of Wisdom, and Fecundity to the Work they produce, than all that
could be established for the same Design; since he always acts in the wisest
and perfectest manner. It Is true, God could redress these unhappy Consequences
by an infinite Number of particular Wills: But Order will not suffer him. The
Effect producible by each Will would not countervail the Action that should
produce it. And consequently God is not to be blamed for not disturbing the
Order and Simplicity of his Laws by Miracles, which would be very welcome to
our Exigencies, but very repugnant to the Wisdom of God, whom it is not lawful
to tempt.

XLIV. Therefore, as 'twould be unreasonable in us to be angry at the Rain's
falling in the Sea, where it is useless, and escaping Seeded Grounds where it is
necessary; since the Laws of Communication of Motions are most Simple, most
Exuberant, and perfectly worthy of their Author's Wisdom; and that by these
Laws it is impossible the Rain should fall rather on the Earth than Sea, so we
ought not to complain of the seeming Irregularity, by which Grace is given to
Men. It Is the Regularity wherewith God works; it is the Simplicity of the Laws
he observes; it is the Wisdom, and Uniformity of his Conduct, which is the Cause
of that seeming Irregularity. It Is necessary by the Laws of Grace established
by God in favor of his Elect, and for the Construction of his Church, that
Celestial Rain should fall as well on hardn'd as prepared Hearts; and if it be
shed in vain, it is not because God acts without Design; much less with Design
of making Men more culpable by the Abuse of his Favors: But because the
Simplicity of General Laws permits not that Grace which is lost in a corrupt
Heart, to fall upon another where it would have been effectual. Since this
Grace is not given by a particular Will, but in pursuance of the Immutability
of the General Order of Grace; if this Order produces a Work proportioned to
the Simplicity of its Laws, it suffices to render it worthy of the Wisdom of
its Author. For, in short, the Order of Grace would be less perfect, less
admirable, and amiable, if it were more complex'd.

XLV. If God gave Grace by particular Wills, doubtless he would never go to
convert a Sinner, who had four Degrees of Concupiscence, by giving him three
Degrees of Spiritual Election, supposing these Degrees insufficient for his
Conversion. He would defer his Liberality till the Sinner was absent from the
tempting Object, or rather would bestow the same Grace of three Degrees
Strength to him whose Concupiscence was less lively. For to what Purpose is it
to give three Degrees of Spiritual Delectation to one that wants four, and to
deny them him whom they were sufficient to convert? Is this suitable to the
Idea we have of the Wisdom and Goodness of God? Is this to love Men, to will
they should be saved, and to do for them all he can? Nevertheless, God cries
out by his Prophet: O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Men of Judah, Isaiah 5.3, 4.
judge, I pray ye, betwixt me and my Vineyard. What could have been done more
to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it: Wherefore, when I looked that it
should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? What Wisdom is there
in giving by particular Wills so many fruitless Graces to Sinners, if we
suppose God wills their Conversion, as we are taught by Scripture, and has no
fatal Design of rendering them more culpable and criminal by his Gifts?

XLVI. But if Grace be bestowed on Men by most Simple and General Laws, all
these great Difficulties vanish. The settled Order of Grace having a greater
proportion of Wisdom and Fecundity to the Work which God produces than any
other, ought to be chosen for the Establishment of His Church. Thus we may
affirm, That God truly wills the Salvation of all Men; that He does for them
all that is possible, whilst he acts as becomes him; that if there were any
Order of Grace as simple, but more fecund, as worthy of his Wisdom, and more
advantageous to Men, he would have chosen it; and that therefore he saves as
many as it is possible to save, whilst acting by the adorable Rules prescribed
by his Wisdom.

XLVII. Let Men therefore love and adore not only the Good Will of God, by
which the Elect are sanctified; but also the secret Judgments of his Justice,
by which so great a Number are rejected. It Is the same Order of Wisdom; they
are the same Laws of Grace which produce these so different Effects. God is
equally adorable and amiable in all he does; his Conduct always abounds with
Wisdom and Goodness. Woe to the Wicked, who condemn it without understanding it,
and who would have the immutable Order of Divine Wisdom to stoop and
accommodate it self to their Passions and Interests!

XLVIII. The wise and industrious Husbandmen plow, dung, and sow their Lands
with great Labor and Cost. They carefully observe the fittest Seasons, for the
different Agriculture, and tax not God with the Success of their Labors. They
leave their Work to the Order of Nature, well knowing it is in vain to tempt
God, and to fancy that on our behalf he will change the Order which his Wisdom
prescribes.

XLIX. Jesus Christ came to teach us to imitate their Conduct, who having for
us an immense Charity, and desiring to save us, as much as the Simplicity of
the General Laws of Nature and Grace will permit, has forgotten nothing that
might bring us into the ways that lead to Heaven. That which most withstands
the Efficacy of Grace, are sensible Pleasures, and Sensations of Pride; there
being nothing which so much corrupts the Mind, and hardens the Heart, more than
these. But has not Jesus Christ sacrificed and annihilated in his Person all
Grandeurs and Pleasures sensible? Was not his Life to us a continual Example of
Humility and Repentance? How was he born? how did he die? what was his
Conversation in the World? every Body knows. To what likewise is his Doctrine
reducible, and whither tend all his Counsels? Is it not to Humility and
Repentance, to a General Self-denial of all that gratifies the Senses, of all
that corrupts the Purity of the Imagination, of all that cherishes and
strengthens the Concupiscence of Pride? Therefore whatever he has said,
whatever he has done, whatever he has suffered, was to prepare us by his
Doctrine, his Example, and Merits, to receive the Celestial Rain of Grace, and
to render it efficacious. Since he could not, or ought not to alter the Laws of
Nature, tempt God, or trouble the Order and Simplicity of his Ways; He has done
all for Men that could inspire them with the most Extensive, Industrious, and
Ardent Charity.

L. I fear not, after what the Scripture has said of it, to affirm that the
Charity of Jesus Christ is Immense and Incomprehensible; and though all Men
receive not the Effects of it, it would be presumptuous Rashness to go to set
Bounds to it. 1 Cor. 8.11.
He died for all Men, even for those who perish everlastingly. Why do not
Sinners enter into the Order of Grace? Why do they not follow the Counsels of
Jesus Christ, and prepare themselves for the Reception of the Rain of Heaven?
They cannot merit it, but they may increase its Efficacy on their Account.
Cannot they from a Principle of Self-love, through the Fear of Hell; or if you
will, by General Graces, avoid many Occasions of sinning? deny themselves
Pleasures, at least those they have not yet tasted, and consequently are not
enslaved to? Thus they may take away some Le^ts and Impediments to the Efficacy
of Grace, and prepare the Earth of their Heart, so as to make it fruitful when
God shall pour his Rain upon them, by the General Laws he has prescribed
himself. But they would have God to save them, without any trouble on their
part; like those lazy and senseless Laborers, who, without giving their Fields
the ordinary Improvements, pretend that God ought to shower-down so
impregnating and abundant Rains, as may save them their Trouble. False and vain
Confidence* God causes it to rain as well on Fallow as Cultivated Lands. But
let the Proud and Voluptuous know, that the Rain of Grace shall fall much less
on them than on other Men, whilst yet they put themselves in such a Condition
as requires much more to convert them.

LI. Since God ordinarily diffuses his Graces by General Laws, we clearly see
the Necessity of the Counsels of Jesus Christ. We see that they ought to be
followed, that God may save us by the simplest ways; whilst giving us but
little Grace, he operates a great deal in us. We see clearly that it lies on us
to labor and to cultivate our Field, before the Heats of Concupiscence have
dried and hardened it; or at least when the Rain has diluted and softened it;
that we must diligently observe the moments in which our Passions leave us some
Liberty, that we may seize the Advantage that is offered: That we must
extirpate, as much as possible, whatever may suffocate the Seed of the Word;
and not foolishly imagine we shall repent, when we have made our Fortune in the
World, or are ready to leave it. For besides that, it depends not on the
Husbandmen to make it rain when their Occasions call for it; when a Field has
lain long fallow, the Brambles and Thorns strike their Roots so deep, that
those who are most used to labor, have neither strength nor desire to
cultivate it.

LII. But if God acted in the Order of Grace by particular Wills, and
efficaciously caused in all Men all their good Motions, and Operations, with a
particular Design; I see not how it might be justified, that he acts by the
most simple Laws; when I consider all those indirect ways by which Men arrive
to the Place where God conducts them. For I doubt not but God sometimes gives a
Man no more than an hundred good Thoughts in a whole Day. Nor can I any more
conceive how it is possible to reconcile his Wisdom and Goodness, with all the
ineffectual Graces the Malice of Men resists. For God being Good and Wise,
ought he not to proportion his Supplies to our Needs, if he afforded them with
a particular Design of comforting us?

LIII. God makes the Weeds to grow with the Corn till the time of Harvest; he
causes it to rain on the Just and Unjust; because Grace falling on Men by
General Laws, is often given to such as make no use of it; whereas if others
had received it, they would have been converted. If Jesus Christ had preached
to the Syrians and Sydonians, as well as to the Inhabitants of Bethsaida and
Chorazin, they would have repented in Sackcloth and Ashes. If the Rain which
falls on the Sands had been shower'd upon prepared Fields, it would have made
them fruitful. But what is regulated by General Laws, is not suited to
particular Designs; and it suffices to justify the wise Establishment of these
Laws, that being extremely simple, they carry to its Perfection the Grand Work
for which they were enacted.

But though I do not believe that God has innumerable particular Designs for
every of his Elect, or that he daily gives them multiplicity of good Thoughts
and Motions by particular Wills; yet I deny not but they are predestined by a
bounteous Will of God had to them, for which they ought to pay their Eternal
Gratitude and Acknowledgments. Which things I explain as follows.

LIVE. God discovers in the infinite Treasures of his Wisdom an Infinity of
possible Works; and at once the perfectest way of producing each of them.
Amongst which he considers his Church: Jesus Christ who is the Head of it, and
all the Persons which in consequence of some General Laws established, ought to
compose it. In brief, upon Consideration of Jesus Christ and all his Members,
he constitutes Laws for his own Glory. Which being so, is it not evident that
Jesus Christ, who is the Principle of all the Glory redounding to God from his
Work, is the first of the Predestinate? and that all the Elect are likewise
truly loved, and predestined gratis in Jesus Christ, because they may honor
God in his Son? That, lastly, they are all under infinite Obligations to God,
who without regard to their Merit, has settled the General Laws of Grace, which
ought to sanctify them, and conduct them to the Glory they shall eternally
possess.

LV. You Will say, perhaps, that these Laws are so simple and exuberant, that God
must prefer them to all other; and that since he only loves his own Glory, his
Son ought to become incarnate; and so has done nothing purely for his Elect. I
confess God has done nothing purely for his Elect: For St. Paul teaches us,
that he has made his Elect for Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ for himself. If
God cannot be rendered amiable to Men, unless we make him act purely for them,
or not in the wisest manner, I had rather be silent. Reason teaches me, that we
render God amiable by showing him to be infinitely perfect, and by representing
him so full of Love for his Creatures, as not to produce any one with Design of
making him miserable. For if all are not so happy as to enjoy his Presence,
it is because Order requiring that so great a Good should be merited; all do not
deserve it, for the Reasons I have given. Surely this is to make God lovely, to
represent him such as even the Reprobate cannot choose but adore his Conduct,
and repent them of their Negligence.

LVI. Yet for their Satisfaction, who will have God to predestine every of his
Elect by a particular Will, it may be said with a Salvo to the foregoing
Hypothesis, That God, before he created Souls to unite them to Bodies, foresaw
all that could befall them by the General Laws of Nature and Grace, and all
that they should do in all possible Circumstances: Therefore being able to
create, as is supposed, the Soul of Paul, or of Peter, and to unite it to a
Body which he foresaw should be that of a Predestinate Person; he resolved,
from all Eternity, to create the Soul of Paul by a Benevolent Will had for him,
and to predestine him by this Choice to Life Eternal; whereas he creates the
Soul of Peter, not for any Benevolent Will had to him, but by a kind of
Necessity, by Reason of the Laws of Union which he has most wisely established
betwixt Souls and Bodies, by which he is obliged, as soon as Bodies are formed,
to unite Souls to them; which would have been advantageous to all, if Man had
not sinned. But the Body of Peter being begotten of an Heathen Father, or of
one that is careless of his Children's Education; or, Lastly, Peter being
engaged by the Fortune of his Birth, Places, Times, Employments, which induce
him to Evil, will infallibly be one of the Reprobate. Yet Peter shall be useful
to the Designs of God. For though he himself shall not enter into the Number of
the Predestinate; yet he shall by some of his Posterity: He shall be
subservient to the Beauty and Grandeur of the Church of Jesus Christ, by the
infinite Relations he shall have to the Elect. Furthermore, he shall not be
miserable, but in proportion to the wrong use he has made of his Liberty, since
God punishes with Pain only voluntary Disorders. This is what may be offered
for the Satisfaction of some Persons Inclination; though I cannot clearly see
how it can be altogether relied on.

LVII. Such as ascribe to God particular Designs and Wills, for all the
particular Effects produced in Consequence of General Laws, commonly employ the
Authority of Scripture to justify their Opinion. But being the Scripture is
made for all the World, for the Simple as well as the Intelligent, it abounds
with Anthropologies. It not only ascribes to God a Body, a Throne, a Chariot,
and Equipage; Passions of Joy, Sorrow, Wrath, Repentance, and other Motions of
the Soul; but also attributes to him the customary Ways of humane Actings, that
it may speak to the Simple in a more sensible manner. If Jesus Christ became
Man, 'twas in part to satisfy the Inclination of Men, who love what is like
them, and are studious of what affects them. 'Twas by this real and true kind
of Anthropology to persuade Men of those Truths they were incapable to
comprehend any other way. Thus St. Paul, to accommodate himself to the World,
speaks of the Sanctification and Predestination of the Saints, as if God
continually worked in them by particular Wills; and even Jesus Christ speaks of
his Father, as if he took care by such like Wills to adorn the Lilies, and to
preserve every Hair of the Head of his Disciples: Because, in truth, the
Goodness of God to his Creatures being extreme, these Expressions afford a
great Idea of it, and recommend God to the Affections of the grossest Souls,
and such as are most infected with Self-love. Yet as by the Idea we have of
God, and by the Passages of Scripture conformable to that Idea, we correct the
Sense of other Texts which attribute to God Members and Passions like ours; so
when we would speak with Exactness of the manner of God's acting in the Order
of Grace, or Nature, we ought to explain those Passages which make him act as a
Man, or a particular Cause, by the Idea we have of his Wisdom and Goodness, and
other Scripture Passages comporting with that Idea. For, in fine, if we may
say, or rather if we are obliged to say, from the Idea we have of God, that he
causes not every drop of Rain to fall by particular Wills, though the natural
Sense of some Scripture Passages authorizes that Opinion; there is the same
Necessity to think, notwithstanding some Authorities of the Scripture, that God
gives not by particular Wills to some Sinners all those good Motions which are
useless to them, and which would be useful to several others: For otherwise I
see not how it is possible to reconcile the Holy Scripture either with Reason,
or it self, as I think I have proved.

If I thought what I have said insufficient to convince attentive Persons, that
God acts not by particular Wills, like particular Causes, and finite
Understandings, I would proceed to show that there were very few Truths that
would admit of greater Probation; on Supposition that God governs the World,
and that the Nature of the Heathen Philosophers is nothing. For indeed every
thing in Nature proves this Opinion, except Miracles; which yet would not be
Miracles, or different from those we call Natural Effects, if it were true that
God acted by particular Wills, since Miracles are such only from their not
happening by General Laws. Therefore Miracles suppose these Laws, and prove the
Opinion I have established. But as to ordinary Effects, they clearly and
directly demonstrate General Laws or Wills. If, for Instance, a Stone be
dropped upon the Head of Passengers, it will continually fall with equal speed,
not distinguishing the Piety or Quality, or Good or Ill Disposition of those
that pass. If we examine any other Effect, we shall see the same Constancy in
the Action of the Cause of it: But no Effect proves that God acts by particular
Wills; though Men commonly fancy God is constantly working Miracles in their
Favor. That way they would have God to act in, being consonant to their own,
and indulgent to Self-love, which centers all things on themselves; and very
proportionate to their Ignorance of the Complication of Occasional Causes,
which produce extraordinary Effects, naturally falls into Men's Thoughts, when
but greenly studied in Nature, and consult not with sufficient Attention the
abstract Idea of an Infinite Wisdom, of an Universal Cause, of a Being
Infinitely Perfect.

CONCERNING Nature and Grace. DISCOURSE II. Of the Laws of GRACE in particular,
and of the Occasional Causes, which regulate and determine their Efficacy.
PART I. Of the Grace of JESUS CHRIST.
I. SINCE none but GOD can act immediately and by himself on Minds, and produce
in them all the various Motions they are capable of: It Is he alone who sheds
his Light within us, and inspires us with certain Sensations, which determine
our diverse Volitions. And therefore none but he can, as a By True Cause, I
understand that which acts by its own Force.
True Cause, produce Grace in our Souls. For Grace, or that which is the
Principle or Motive of all the Regular Motions of our Love, is necessarily
either a Light which instructs us, or a confused Sensation that convinces us,
that God is our Good; since we never begin to love an Object, unless we see
clearly by the Light of Reason, or feel confusedly by the taste of Pleasure,
that this Object is good; I mean capable of making us happier than we are.

II. But since all Men are involved in Original Sin, and even by their Nature
infinitely beneath the Majesty of God. It Is Jesus Christ alone that can by the
Dignity of his Person, and the Holiness of his Sacrifice, have access to his
Father, reconcile him to us, and merit his Favors for us; and consequently be
the meritorious Cause of Grace. These Truths are certain: But we are not
seeking the Cause which produces Grace by its own Efficacy; nor that which
merits it by its Sacrifice and Good Works. We enquire for that which regulates
and determines the Efficacy of the General Cause, and which we may term the
Second, Particular, and Occasional.

III. For to the end the General Cause may act by General Laws, or Wills; and
that his Action may be regular, constant, and uniform, it is absolutely
necessary there should be some Occasional Cause to determine the Efficacy of
these Laws, and to help to fix them. If the Collision of Bodies, or something
of like Nature, did not determine the Efficacy of the General Laws of the
Communication of Motions, it would be necessary for God to move Bodies by
particular Wills. The Laws of Union of the Soul and Body become efficacious
only from the Changes befalling one or other of these two Substances. For if
God made the Soul feel the Pain of pricking, though the Body were not pricked, or
though the same thing did not happen in the Brain, as if it were, he would not
act by the General Laws of Union of the Soul and Body, but by a particular
Will. If Rain fell on the Earth otherwise than by a necessary Consequence of
the General Laws of Communication of Motions, the Rain, and the Fall of every
Drop that composes it, would be the Effect of a particular Will. So that unless
Order required it should rain, that Will would be absolutely unworthy of God.
It Is necessary therefore that in the Order of Grace there should be some
Occasional Cause, which serves to fix these Laws, and to determine their
Efficacy. And this is the Cause we must endeavor to discover.

IV. Provided we consult the Idea of intelligible Order, or consider the
sensible Order, which appears in the Works of God, we shall easily discover
that Occasional Causes, which determine the Efficacy of General Laws, and are
of use in fixing them, must necessarily be related to the Design for which God
has established them.

For Example: Experience evidences, that God has not made, and Reason certifies
that he ought not to make the Courses of the Planets the Occasional Causes of
the Union of our Soul and Body. He ought not to will that our Arm should be
moved in such or such a manner; or that our Soul should feel the Tooth-ake,
when the Moon shall be in conjunction with the Sun, if so be this Conjunction
acts not on the Body. God's Design being to unite our Soul to our Body, he
cannot, in prosecuting that Design, give the Soul Sensations of Pain, save when
there happen some Changes in the Body repugnant to it. Wherefore we are not to
seek out of our Soul or Body the Occasional Causes of their Union.

V. Hence it follows, that God designing to form his Church by Jesus Christ,
could not, according to that Design, seek the Occasional Causes, which serve to
settle the General Laws of Grace, (by which the Spirit of Jesus, diffused
through his Members, communicates Life and Holiness to them) except in Jesus
Christ, and in the Creatures united to him by Reason. Thus the Rain of Grace is
not derived to our Hearts, by the diverse situations of the Stars, nor by the
Collision of certain Bodies, nor even according to the different Courses of the
animal Spirits, which give us Motion and Life. All that Bodies can do, is to
excite in us Motions and Sensations purely Natural. For whatever arrives to the
Soul, through the Body, is only for the Body.

VI. Yet, as Grace is not given to all that desire it, nor as soon as they
desire it, and is granted to those who do not ask it; it thence follows, that
even our Desires are not the Occasional Causes of Grace: For this sort of
Causes have constantly and most readily their Effect; and without them the
Effect is not produced. For Instance, the Collision of Bodies being the
Occasional Cause of the Change which happens in their Motion; if two Bodies did
not meet, their Motions would not alter; and if they altered, we may be assured
they met. The general Laws which shed Grace upon our Hearts, find nothing
therefore in our Wills to determine their Efficacy; as the general Laws which
regulate the Rains are not founded on the Dispositions of the Places rained
upon. For it indifferently rains upon all Places, on hollow and manured
Grounds, even on the Sands, and the Sea it self.

VII. We are therefore reduced to confess, that as Jesus Christ alone can merit
Grace for us, so it is he alone that can administer Occasions to the General
Laws by which it is distributed to Men. For the Principle or Foundation of
these General Laws, or that which determines their Efficacy, being necessarily
either in us, or in Jesus Christ, since it is certain that it is not in us, it
must needs be found in him.

VIII. Besides, when Man had sinned, did it behoove God to have any more regard
to his Desires? Being we are all in a disordered State, we can no longer be an
Occasion of God's showing us Favor. But a Mediator was needful, not only to
give us Access toward God, but to be the Occasional Cause of the Favors we
hope from him.

IX. Whereas God had a Design of making his Son the Head of his Church, it was
requisite he should constitute him the Occasional or Natural Cause of the Grace
which sanctifies it. For it is the Head which communicates Life and Motion to
the Limbs; and with that Prospect God permitted Sin. For if Man had continued
in Innocence; as his Will had been meritorious of Grace, and even of Glory; so
the inviolable Laws of Order would have required that God should have appointed
in Man the Occasional Cause of his Perfection and his Happiness: In so much
that Jesus Christ would not have been the Head of the Church; or, at most, had
been but the Head of those Influences which all the Members might have easily
dispensed with.

X. If our Soul were in our Body before it was formed, and if by her diverse
Volitions all the Parts which compose it were ranged and postur'd; with how
many various Sensations and different Motions would she be touched, upon
consideration of all the Effects which were to follow her Volitions: Especially
if she were extremely desirous of forming the most vigorous and best made Body
pobssile?

XI. Now Holy Scripture does not only say, that Jesus Christ is the Head of the
Church; but also that he begets it, and fashions it, and gives it increase;
that he suffers, merits, Ephesians. 1.22, 23.4.16. Col. 1.24.2.19. 1 Cor. 12.27. Acts
1.24, etc.
acts and influences continually in it. The Zeal which Jesus Christ has for his
Father's Glory, and the Love he bears to his Church, constantly suggest to him
the Desire of making it the most ample, the most magnificent, and the
perfectest that can be. Therefore, as the Soul of Jesus has not an infinite
Capacity, and yet would endow his Church with infinite Beauties and Ornaments,
we have all reason to believe, that there is in his holy Soul a continual Chain
of Thoughts and Desires, with reference to the mystical Body which he
constantly forms.

XII. Now they are these continual Desires of the Soul of Jesus that tend to
sanctify his Church, and render it worthy of his Father's Majesty, which God
has established the Occasional Causes of the Efficacy of the general Laws of
Grace. For we are taught by Faith, that God has given his Son an absolute
Power over Men, in constituting him Head of his Church; which yet cannot be
conceived, unless the several Volitions of Jesus Christ are followed by their
Effects. For it is manifest I should have no Power over my Arm, if it moved when
I would not have it, and remained dead and motionless when I desired to move it.

XIII. This Sovereign Power Jesus Christ has merited over Men, as also that
Quality of Head of the Church, by the Sacrifice he offered upon Earth, on full
Possession of which Right he entered after his Resurrection. It Is now that he is
High Priest of future Goods, Joh. 7.39. Heb. 7.25. Romans 8.34. 1 John 2.1.
and that He by his diverse Desires prays indefatigably for Men to the Father.
And since his Desires are Occasional Causes, his Prayers are always heard. His
Father denies him nothing, as the Scripture assures us; and yet his Prayers and
Desires are necessary to obtain: Because Occasional, Physical, Natural Causes
(for these three Terms have here the same Signification) have no Power of
themselves, and all the Creatures, even Jesus Christ, considered as Man, are in
themselves but Weakness and Impotence.

XIV. Therefore the Soul of Jesus, having a Succession of various Thoughts,
with reference to the diverse Dispositions whereof Souls in general are
capable, has these Thoughts attended with certain Desires relating to the
Sanctification of these Souls. Which Desires being Occasional Causes of Grace,
ought to shed it on those Persons in particular, whose Dispositions resemble
that which the Soul of Jesus Christ actually thinks on; and this Grace ought to
be so much stronger, and more abundant, as his Desires are more strong and
lasting.

XV. When a Person considers any Part of his Body that is not formed as it
ought to be, he naturally has certain Desires relating to it, and to the Use he
would make of it in a sociable Life; which Desires are prosecuted with certain
insensible Motions of the Animal Spirits, and tend to the posturing or
proportioning it in a due manner. When the Body is quite formed, and the Flesh
is grown solid and consistent, these Motions cannot change the Contexture of
the Parts, but only give them certain Dispositions, which we call Corporeal
Habits. But when the Body is not completely formed, and the Flesh is extremely
soft and tender, these Motions which accompany the Desires of the Soul, not
only give the Body particular Dispositions, but also change its Construction.
Which is sufficiently manifest in Children unborn: For they are not only moved
with the same Passions as their Mothers; but also receive on their Bodies the
Marks of these Passions, from which their Mothers are always exempt.

Ephesians. 4.13.
XVI. The Mystical Body of Jesus Christ is not yet grown into a Perfect Man, nor
will be till the Accomplishment of Ages; but he continually is forming it. For
he is the Head, which gives all the Members their increase by the Efficacy of
his Influence, according to the proportion convenient for each, to the end it
may be formed and edified by Charity. Which are Truths we are taught by St.
Paul. Ibid. 15, and 16.
Now since Jesus Christ has no other Action than the diverse Motions of his
Will, it is necessary that his Desires should be followed with the Influence of
Grace, which only can form him in his Members, and give them that Beauty and
Proportion which ought to be the Eternal Object of Divine Love.

XVII. The diverse Motions of the Soul of Jesus, being the Occasional Causes of
Grace, we need not wonder if it be sometimes given to the greatest Sinners, or
to Persons that make no use of it. For the Soul of Jesus desiring to raise a
Temple of a vast Extent, and of infinite Beauty, may wish that Grace may be
given to the greatest Sinners; and if in that Moment Jesus Christ thinks
actually on the Covetous, for Instance, the Covetous shall receive Grace. Or
Jesus Christ wanting, for the Construction of his Church, Minds of a certain
Character, commonly not attainable, but by those who suffer certain
Persecutions, whereof the Passions of Men are the natural Principle: In a word,
Jesus Christ needing Minds of particular Dispositions, for the causing
particular Effects, may in general apply to them; and by that Application
infuse into them sanctifying Grace: As the Mind of a Projector thinks in
general of square Stones, when these Stones are actually necessary to his
Building.

XVIII. But the Soul of Jesus being not a general Cause, we have reason to
think it has often particular Desires, in regard to particular Persons. When we
intend to speak of God, we must not consult our selves, and make him act like
us; but consider the Idea of a Being infinitely perfect, and make God act
according to that Idea. But in speaking of the Action of the Soul of Jesus, we
may look into our selves, and make him act like particular Causes. For Example:
We have reason to believe that the Conversion of St. Paul was owing to the
Efficacy of a particular Desire of Jesus Christ. And we are to look upon the
Desires of the Soul of Jesus, which have a general respect to Minds of a
certain Character, as particular Desires, though they comprehend many Persons,
because these Desires change daily like those of particular Causes. But the
general Laws by which God acts, are always the same, because the Wills of God
ought to be firm and constant, by reason that his Wisdom is infinite.

XIX. The diverse Desires of the Soul of Jesus distributing Grace, we clearly
conceive why it is not equally dispersed to all Men, and why bestowed on some
more abundantly at one time than another. For his Soul not thinking on all Men
at once, cannot at the same time have all the Desires whereof it is capable: So
that he acts not on his Members in a particular manner, except by successive
Influences; as the Soul moves not at once all the Muscles of our Body: For the
Animal Spirits are unequally and successively distributed into our Members,
according to the various Impressions of Objects, the diverse Motions of our
Passions, and the several Desires we freely excite within us

XX. True it is, that all the Righteous constantly receive the Influence of
their Head, which gives them Life; and that when they act by the Spirit of
Jesus Christ, they merit and receive new Graces, though it be not necessary
that the Soul of Jesus should have any particular Desires as the occasional
Causes of them. For Order, which requires that every Desert should be rewarded,
is not an arbitrary but a necessary Law, and independent from any occasional
Cause. But though he who performs a meritorious Action may be rewarded for it,
whilst the Soul of Jesus has no actual Desires relating to him, yet it is
certain that he merited not this Grace but by the Dignity and Sanctity of the
Spirit which Christ has communicated to him. Joh. 5.4, 5.
For Men are not well-pleasing to God, nor able to do good, but in as much as
they are united to his Son by Charity.

XXI. It must be farther acknowledged, that those who observe the Counsels of
Jesus Christ out of an Esteem they have for them, and through the Fear of
future Punishment, solicit, as I may say, by their Obedience, the Charity of
Christ to think on them, though they act from a Principle of Self-love. But
their Actions are not the Occasional Causes either of Grace, since it does not
infallibly follow them; or even of the Motions of the Soul of Jesus in their
Favor, since these Motions never fail to communicate it. Thus only the Desires
of Jesus Christ, as Occasional Causes, have infallibly their Effect; because
God having constituted him Head of the Church, ought by him only to communicate
his sanctifying Grace to his Elect.

XXII. Now we may consider in the Soul of Jesus Christ Desires of two sorts;
viz. Actual, Transitory and Particular, that have but a short-lived Efficacy;
and Stable and Permanent, which consist in a settled and constant Disposition of
the Soul of Jesus Christ, with relation to certain Effects which tend to the
Execution of his Design in general.

If our Soul by its various Motions communicated to our Body all that was
necessary to its Formation and Growth, we might distinguish in her two kinds of
Desire. For it would be by the actual and transitory Desires, that she would
drive into the Muscles of the Body the Spirits which gave it a certain
Disposition with reference to present Objects, or to the actual Thoughts of the
Mind. But it would be by stable and permanent Desires, that she would give to
the Heart and Lungs the natural Motions by which Respiration and the
Circulation of the Blood were performed. By these Desires she would digest the
Aliments; and distribute them to all the Parts that needed them, in as much as
that sort of Action is at all times necessary to the Preservation of the Body.

XXIII. By the actual transitory and particular Desires of the Soul of Jesus,
Grace is derived to unprepared Persons in a manner somewhat singular and
extraordinary. But it is by his permanent Desires that it is given regularly to
those who receive the Sacraments with the necessary Dispositions. For the Grace
we receive by the Sacraments is not given us precisely because of the Merit of
our Action, though we receive them in Grace; but because of the Merits of Jesus
Christ, which are freely applied to us in consequence of his permanent Desires.
We receive in the Sacraments much more Grace than our Preparation deserves; and
it suffices to our receiving some Influence from them, that we do not oppose
and resist it. But it is abusing what is most Sacred in Religion to receive them
unworthily.

XXIV. Amongst the actual and transitory Desires of the Soul of Jesus, there
are certainly some more durable and frequent than others; and the Knowledge of
these Desires is of greatest Consequence in Point of Morality. Doubtless he
thinks oftener on those who observe his Counsels, than on other Men. His Motions
of Charity for Believers are more frequent and lasting than those for
Libertines and Atheists. And as all Believers are not equally prepared to enter
into the Church of the Predestinate, the Desires of the Soul of Jesus are not
equally lively, frequent, and durable, on the account of them all.

Man more earnestly desires the Fruits that are fittest for the Nourishment of
his Body; he (...) oftener on Bread and Wine than on Meats of difficult
Digestion. So Jesus Christ designing the Formation of his Church, ought to be
more taken up with those who can most easily enter, than on others which are
extremely remote.

The Scripture likewise teaches us, that the Humble, the Poor, the Penitent,
receive greater Graces than other Men; because the Despisers of Honors,
Riches, and Pleasures, are the fittest for the Kingdom of Heaven.

Those, for Example, who have learned of Jesus Christ to be meek and humble in
Heart, shall find Rest to their Souls. The Yoke of Christ, which is
insupportable to the Proud, will become easy and light by the Assistances of
Grace. For God hears the Prayers of the Humble, he will comfort them, justfie
them, and save them; he will fill them with Blessings, and will debase the high
Mind of the Proud. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven; but woe to the Rich, ^or they have their Consolation in this World. How
hard is it, says our Savior, for those that have much Wealth to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven? It Is harder for a Camel to pass through the Eye of a Needle;
which cannot be done without a Miracle.

As for those, who, like David, humble their Souls with Fasting, change their
Garments for Sackcloth; in a word, afflict themselves upon sight of their
Sins, and the Holiness of God; they are the worthy Objects of the Compassion of
Jesus. For God despises not a broken and contrite Heart. We constantly disarm
the Anger of God, when we take his Part against our selves, and revenge his
Quarrel.

The Will of Jesus Christ being entirely conformable to Order, whereof all Men
have naturally some Idea, we might still discover by Reason, that he has more
Thoughts and Desires in regard to some Persons than others. For Order requires
that more Graces should be shed on those, for Example, who are called to Holy
Orders, than on others whose Employment necessarily engages them in Worldly
Commerce; in a word, On those who constitute the Principal Parts of the Church
Militant, than on such as have no regard to any body, or that meddle in the
Ecclesiastical State, or raise themselves above others out of Ambition or
Interest. For though it be requisite that Jesus Christ should give them Graces
in relation to their Charge, they merit not the Gift of that Grace which may
sanctify them in the Station they have chosen out of Self-love. They may have
the Gift of Prophecy, whilst they may want Charity, as we are taught by
Scripture. 2 Cor. 13.2*


XXVI. But though we may discover by the Light of Reason, and the Authority of
Holy Writ, something of the diverse Wills of the Soul of Jesus, yet that Order
and Process of Desires, which accomplish the Predestination of the Saints, and
which tend only to the honoring God in the Establishment of his Church, is an
unfathomable Abyss to the Mind of Man. For if St. Paul had not taught us, that
God would that all Men should be included in Unbelief, that he might exercise
his Mercy toward them; should we ever have thought that the Jews were to fall
into a wilful Blindness, not only that the multitude of the Nations might enter
into the Church, but that they themselves might receive Mercy at the
Accomplishment of Ages? The future World being to be a Work of pure Mercy, and
to have infinite Ornaments, whereof we have no Idea; since the Substance of
Spirits is unknown to us, it is plain we can discover very little in the
different Desires of the Soul of Jesus, these Desires being related to Designs
we are ignorant of. Thus in the Distribution God makes of his Graces, we ought
to cry out with St. Paul, O the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding
out!

XXVII. We have proved that the diverse Designs of the Soul of Jesus are the
Occasional Causes of Grace; and we have endeavored to discover something of
these Desires. Let us now see of what sort of Grace they are the Occasional
Causes. For though Jesus Christ be the meritorious Cause of all Graces, it is
not necessary he should be the Occasional Cause of the Graces of Light, and of
certain external Graces, which are Preparatory to the Conversion of the Heart,
and which do not opperate. For Jesus Christ is always the Occasional, or
Necessary Cause, according to the Established Order of God, in point of all
those Graces which opperate Salvation.

XXVIII. In order to our distinct understanding what this Grace is which Jesus
Christ, as Head of the Church, diffuses in his Members, we ought to know what
is that Concupiscence which the First Man has communicated to all his
Posterity. For the Second Adam came to remedy the Disorders which the First
Adam was the Cause of. And there is such an Affinity between the Sinful and
Earthly, Romans 5.14.17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 15.48.
and the Innocent and Heavenly Adam, that St. Paul looks upon the former
communicating Sin to his Children by his Disobedience, as the Type and Figure
of the latter infusing Justice and Holiness into Christians by his Obedience.

XXIX. Order requires that the Mind should have the Supremacy over the Body,
and not be divided against its Will by all those Sensations and Motions which
apply it to sensible Objects. Therefore the First Man, before his Sin, was so
absolute over his Senses and Passions, that they were mute and silent as soon
as he desired it; nothing could give him an involuntary Diversion from his
Duty; and all the Pleasures, which at present precede Reason, did only
respectfully caution him, in a ready and easy manner, of what ought to be done
for the Preservation of his Life. But after his Sin, he lost on a sudden that
Power over his Body. So that not being able to stop the Motions, nor obliterate
the Traces which sensible Objects produced in the principal Part of his Brai^;
his Soul, by the Order of Nature, and in Punishment of his Disobedience, found
her self miserably enslaved to the Law of Concupiscence; to that Carnal Law
which constantly wars against the Mind, inspiring it with the Love of sensible
Goods; and so ruling it by strong and lively, and at once soft and agreeable
Passions, that it cannot, and indeed will not make the necessary Struggles for
its breaking the captivating Bonds. For the Contagion of Sin is spread through
the Children of Adam by an unavoidable Consequence of the Order of Nature, as I
have explained in another place.

XXX. The Heart of Man is the constant Slave of Pleasure; and when Reason
teaches us, that it is not convenient to enjoy it, we put it off but with Design
of finding it more delicate and solid. We willingly sacrifice little Pleasures
to the greater; but the invincible Impression we are under for Happiness, will
not permit us to deny our selves all our Life the Satisfaction we enjoy, when
we give our selves up to follow our Passions.

XXXI. It Is certain that Pleasure makes happy the Possessour, at least whilst
he enjoys it. Therefore Men being made to be Happy, Pleasure always gives the
Will the first shock, and puts it constantly in Motion toward the Good that
causes or seems to cause it. The contrary is to be said of Pain. Now
Concupiscence consisting only in a continual train of Sensations and Motions
antecedent to Reason, and not subject to it; of Pleasures which seeming to flow
from surrounding Objects, inspire into us the Love of them; and of Pains, which
rendering the Exercise of Virtue rough and painful, make us hate it: The Second
Adam, to remedy the Disorders of the First, ought to produce in us contrary
Pleasures and Aversions to those of Concupiscence: Pleasures for the True, and
Aversions or Dislikes for sensible Goods. Thus the Grace, whereof Jesus Christ
is the Occasional Cause, and which he incessantly sheds on us as Head of the
Church, is not a Grace of Light, though he has merited that Grace likewise for
us; and sometimes may communicate it, as I shall say by and by: But it is a
Grace of Sensation, it is the preventing Delectation, which begets and nurses
Charity in our Hearts. For Pleasure naturally produces and cherishes the Love
of those Objects which cause or seem to cause it. It Is likewise the Disgust
which sometimes sensible Objects give us, which create an Aversion to them, and
capacitate us to guide the Motions of our Love by Light or Knowledge.

XXXII. We must oppose the Grace of Sensation to Concupiscence, Pleasure to
Pleasure, Dislike to Dislike, that the Influence of Jesus Christ may be
directly opposite to the Influence of the First Man. The Remedy must be
contrary to the Disease, that it may cure it. For illuminating Grace cannot
heat an Heart that is wounded by Pleasure; this Pleasure must cease, or another
succeed it. Pleasure is the Weight of the Soul, and naturally bears it along
with it, and sensible Pleasures weigh it down to Earth. In order to her
determining her self, these Pleasures must vanish, or delectable Grace must
raise her up toward Heaven, and instate her well-nigh in Equilibrio. Thus it
is the New Man may war against the Old; the Influence of our Head may resist
that of our Progenitor, and Jesus Christ may conquer in us all our Domestic
Enemies.

The First Man being free from Concupiscence before his Sin, needed not to be
invited to the Love of the True Good, by preventing Delectation. He knew
clearly that God was his Good; and there was no Necessity he should have the
Sense of it. 'Twas not fit he should be allured by Pleasure to the Love of him,
since nothing withstood this Love, and he knew him perfectly deserving it. But
after the Sin, the Grace of Delectation was necessary to counterpoize the
continual Struggle of Concupiscence, Therefore Light is the Grace of the
Creator, Delectation is that of the Restorer. Light is communicated by Jesus
Christ as Eternal Wisdom; Delectation is given by him, as Wisdom Incarnate.
Light, in its Original, was mere Nature. Delectation has ever been Pure Grace.
Light, after the Sin, was granted us only for the Merits of Jesus Christ.
Delectation is granted both for the Merits, and by the Efficacy of the same
Jesus. Lastly, Light is shed into our Souls, according to our own several
Volitions and various Applications, as I shall explain by and by: But the
Delectation of Grace is infused into our Hearts, according to the diverse
Desires of the Soul of Jesus Christ.

XXXIII. It Is true, Pleasure produces Light, because the Soul is more attentive
to Objects that give her Pleasure. Since most Men despise or neglect the Truths
of Religion; because abstract or unaffecting, it may be said that the
Delectation of Grace instructs them: For that rendering these Truths more
sensible, they more easily learn them by the Attention they afford. And for
this Reason St. John says, That the Unction we receive from Jesus Christ
teaches all things; and that those who have received it, have need of no
Instructor. 1 John 2.27.


XXXIV. Yet it must be observed, That this Unction does not produce Light
immediately, and by its self; it only excites our Attention, which is the
Natural or Occasional Cause of our Knowledge. So we see that Men of the
greatest Charity are not always the most Understanding. All Men being not
equally capable of Attention, all the Receivers of the same Unction are not
equally instructed by it. Therefore, though Light may be shed on the Soul by a
supernatural Infusion, and Charity often produces it; yet we are always to look
upon this kind of Grace but as a Natural Effect: For ordinarily Charity
produces not Light in the Mind, save in proportion to the Inducement it gives
the Soul to desire the Knowledge of what she loves. For, in fine, the diverse
Desires of the Soul are the Natural or Occasional Causes of the Discoveries we
make on any Subject whatsoever. But these things we must explain more at large
in the Second Part of this Discourse.

PART II. Of the Grace of the CREATOR.
XXXV. I Know but two Principles that directly and of themselves determine the
Motion of our Love: Light and Pleasure. Light, to discover our several Goods;
and Pleasure, to make us taste them. But there is a great difference betwixt
Light and Pleasure; the former leaves us absolutely to our selves, and makes no
Intrenchment on our Liberty. It does not efficaciously carry us to Love, nor
produce in us Natural or Necessary Love; but only induces us to carry our
selves to the loving, with a Love of choice, the Objects it discovers; or,
which is the same thing, only causes us to determine to particular Goods the
general Impression of Love, God constantly gives us for the General. But
Pleasure effectually determines our Will, and as it were conveys us to the
Object which causes or seems to cause it. It produces in us a Natural and
Necessary Love; weakens our Liberty, divides our Reason, and leaves us not
perfectly to our own Conduct. An indifferent Attention to the Sense we have of
our internal Motions, will convince us of these Differences.

Thus Man, before the Sin, being perfectly free, and having no Concupiscence to
hinder him from prosecuting his Light in the Motions of his Love, and knowing
clearly that God was infinitely amiable, ought not to be determined by
preventing Delight, as I have already said, or by any other Graces of
Sensation, which might have lessened his Merit, and induced him to love by
Instinct the Good which should only be loved by Reason. But after he had
sinned, he, besides the Grace of Light, had need of that of Sensation to resist
the Motions of Concupiscence. For Man, having an invincible Desire for
Happiness, cannot possibly sacrifice his Pleasure to his Light; his Pleasure
which makes him actually Happy, and subsists in him in spite of his Resistance
to his Light; which subsists but by a painful Application of Thought, and dies
at the presence of the least actual Pleasure; and lastly, which promises no
solid Happiness, till after Death, which to the Imagination seems a perfect
Annihilation.

Light therefore is due to Man, to conduct him in the quest of Happiness, and
belongs to Natural Order, and supposes neither Corruption nor Reparation in
Nature. But Pleasure, which relates to the true Good, is pure Grace. For
naturally the true Good ought not to be beloved otherwise than by Reason.
Therefore the Occasional Causes of the Graces of Sensation, ought to be found
in Jesus Christ, because he is the Author of this Grace. But the Occasional
Causes of Light ought to be ordinarily found in the Order of Nature, because
Light is the Grace of the Creator.

XXXVI. In the established Order of Nature I can see but two Occasional Causes
which shed Light on Minds, and so determine the General Laws of the Grace of
the Creator; one which is in us, and depends in some measure on us; the other
which is found in the Relation we have with surrounding Objects. The former is
nothing but the diverse Motions of our Will; the second is the Occurrence of
sensible Objects which act on our Mind, in consequence of the Laws of Union of
our Soul with our Body.

XXXVII. We are taught by our own inward Consciousness, That the Love of Light
produces it; and that Attention of Mind is a Natural Prayer, by which we obtain
Instruction of God; for all the Enquirers of Truth, who apply themselves to
Truth, discover it in proportion to their Application. And if our Prayer were
not interrupted, nor our Attention disturbed, if we had any Idea of what we
ask, and should ask it with a competent Perseverance, we should not fail to
obtain, whilst we were capable of receiving it. But our Prayers are continually
interrupted, unless Self-interess'd; our Senses and Imagination muddy, and
confound all our Ideas. And though the Truth we consult answers our Enquiries,
the confused Noise of our Passions deafens us to its Answers, or makes us
speedily forget them.

XXXVIII. If it be considered, that Man, before the Fall, was animated with
Charity, and possessed with all that was requisite to his Perseverance in
Innocence; and that by his Perseverance and Application, he ought to merit his
Reward, 'twill easily be conceived that the several Desires of his Will were
established the Occasional Causes of the Light received in his Understanding;
otherwise his Distraction had not been voluntary, nor his Attention
meritorious. But Nature, however corrupted, is not destroyed: God has not
desisted to will what he once willed. And the same Laws still subsist.
Therefore our manifold Volitions are still the Occasional or Natural Causes of
the Presence of Ideas to our Mind. But because the Union of the Soul with the
Body is changed into a Dependence on it by a Natural Consequence of Sin, and
the immutable Will of God, as I have explained elsewhere; our Body at present
disturbs our Ideas, and speaks so loud in favor of its respective Goods, that
the Mind but seldom consults, and distractedly listens to Internal Truth.

XXXIX. Moreover, Experience daily teaches us that our Conversation with
Understanding Persons, is capable of instructing us by raising our Attention;
that Preaching, Reading, Converse, a thousand Occurrences of all sorts, may
raise some Ideas in us, and likewise inspire us with good Thoughts. The Death
of a Friend is, doubtless, capable of putting us in Mind of Death; unless some
great Passion takes us up. And when a Preacher of great Natural Endowments
undertakes to demonstrate a most simple Truth, and convince others of it; it
must be owned that he may persuade his Hearers, and even move their Conscience,
give them Fear and Hope, and raise in them such other Passions as put them in a
less State of Opposition to the Influence of the Grace of Jesus Christ.

Men being made for a sociable Life, 'twas requisite they should mutually
communicate their Thoughts and Motions. 'Twas fit they should be united in Mind
as well as Body; and that speaking by the Voice to their Ears, and by Writing
to their Eyes, they should infuse Light and Understanding into one another
Minds.

XL. But Light, whatever way produced in us, whether by particular Desires, or
fortuitous Instances, as the Occasional Causes of it, may be called Grace;
especially when it nearly relates to Salvation; though it be but a Consequence
of the Order of Nature; because since Sin, God owes us nothing, and all the
Good we have is merited for us by Jesus Christ, in whom our very Being
subsists. But this kind of Grace, though merited for us by Jesus Christ, is not
the Grace of our Lord, but that of the Creator; since Jesus Christ is not
usually the Occasional Cause of it, but the Cause of it is discoverable in the
Order of Nature.

XLI. There are still several other Natural Effects which we might reasonably
look upon as Graces. For Example: Two Persons have at the same time two Desires
of Curiosity. The one to go see an Opera, the other to hear a celebrated
Preacher. If they satisfy their Curiosity, he that goes to the Opera shall
find such Objects, as, according to his present Disposition of Mind, shall
raise in him Passions that will damn him; whilst the other shall find in the
Preacher so great Force and Light, that the Grace of Conversion working in him
at that moment, shall be able to save him. Which supposed, Let but a shower of
Rain, or any other Accident happen, that may stay them at home. Though the Rain
be a Natural Effect, as depending on the Natural Laws of the Communication of
Motions; yet it may be said to be a Grace, in respect of him whose Damnation it
prevents, and a Punishment to him whose Conversion it hinders.

XLII. Grace being conjoined to Nature, all the Motions of our Soul and Body
have some relation to Salvation. This Man is saved, by having in a State of
Grace made a false Step, which happily broke his Neck; and another is damned,
by having on some Occasion misfortunately avoided the Ruins of a falling
House. We know not what is for our Advantage, but we well know there is nothing
of it self so indifferent but has some reference to our Salvation, because of
the Mixture and Combination of Effects depending on the General Laws of Nature,
with others that depend on the General Laws of Grace.

XLIII. As therefore Light points out to us the True Good, the Means to obtain
it, our Duties to God; in a word, the Ways we are to follow; it is sufficient
to cause those who are animated with Charity, to do good, to merit new Graces,
and to conquer some Temptations, as I shall explain in another Place; so I
think we may lawfully give it the Name of Grace, though Jesus Christ be only
the Meritorious Cause of it. And whereas External Graces, which have no
immediate Influence on the Mind, come nevertheless into the Order of
Predestination of Saints, I consider them also as True Graces. In a word, I see
not why we may not give the Name of Grace to all Natural Effects, when relating
to Salvation, subservient to the Grace of Jesus Christ, and delivering us from
some Hindrances to his Efficacy. Yet if others will not agree with me, I shall
not contend with them about Words.

XLIV. All these Graces, if we may be allowed to call them so, being those of
the Creator, the General Laws of these Graces are the General Laws of Nature.
For we must still observe, that Sin has not destroyed Nature, though it has
corrupted it. The General Laws of the Communications of Motions are always the
same; and those of the Union of the Soul and Body are changed no otherwise than
that the Union of the former is grown into a Dependence, for the Reasons I have
given elsewhere. For at present we depend on that Body, to which, before Sin,
we were only united.

XLV. Now the Laws of Nature are always most Simple and General: For God acts
not by particular Wills, unless Order requires a Miracle. Which Truth I have
sufficiently proved in the First Discourse. Thus when a Stone falls on the Head
of a good Man, and rids him of his Life, it falls in consequence of the Laws of
Motions; and not because that Man is Just, and God designs to recompense him.
When a like Accident destroys a Sinner, it is not because God will actually
punish him: For God, on the contrary, would have all Men saved. But he is not
to change the Simplicity of his Laws, to suspend the Punishment of a Criminal.
So likewise, when Light breaks into our Understanding, it is because our Desires
are the Natural or Occasional Causes of it; it is because we hear some
understanding Person, and because our Brain is disposed to receive the
Impressions of the Speaker: And not that God has a particular Will on our
behalf, but that he follows the General Laws of Nature, to which he has obliged
himself. I can see nothing Mysterious in the Distribution of these kinds of
Graces, and I stand not to draw Consequences deducible from these Truths.

XLVI. It Is to be observed, that Jesus Christ, who is the sole Meritorious
Cause of the Goods we receive from God, by the Order of Nature, is sometimes
the Occasional Cause of the Grace of Light as well as of that of Sensation; yet
I am of Opinion, that this but rarely happens; because indeed it is not
necessary it should. Jesus Christ, as much as possible, makes the Order of
Nature subservient to that of Grace. For besides that, Reason evinces that
Order will have it so; because that Method is most simple, it is sufficiently
manifest by the Conduct he takes on Earth, and the Order he has established,
and still preserves in his Church. Jesus Christ made use of Speech for the
Instruction of the World, and likewise sent his Disciples, two by two, Luke 10.
Ephesians. 11.12.
to prepare the People to receive him. He has settled Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Doctors, Bishops, and Priests, to labor in the Edification of the
Church. Is not this to make Nature Handmaid to Grace; and to propagate the
Light of Faith in Men's Minds by ways most Simple and Natural; And indeed Jesus
Christ on Earth was not to instruct Men by particular Wills, since he might
instruct them as Interior Truth and Eternal Wisdom, by the most simple and
exuberant Laws of Nature.

XLVII. That which lies most hidden and unreveal'd in the Order God has
followed for the Establishment of his Church, is, doubtless, the Time, Place,
and other Circumstances of the Incarnation of his Son, and the Preaching of the
Gospel. For why should Jesus Christ, for whom the World was created, become Man
Four thousand Years after its Creation? Why must he be born among the Jews, he
that was to reject that wretched Nation? Why must he choose to be the Son of
David, when the Family of David was obscured; and not rather to be born from
Emperors, who have commanded the whole World, since he came to Convert and
Enlighten all the Earth? Why to elect his Apostles and Disciples out of the
Ignorant and Illeterate, to preach to the Inhabitants of Bethsaida and Corazin,
who remain in Incredulity; and to leave Tire and Sidon, who would have been
converted by the like Grace afforded them; to hinder St. Paul from preaching
the Word of God in Asia, and to appoint him to pass into Macedonia? A thousand
other Circumstances, which have accompanied the Preaching of the Gospel, are,
no doubt, such Mysteries as admit not clear and evident Reasons; nor is it my
Design to give them. My Purpose is only to establish some Principles that may
afford some Light to these and the like Difficulties; or at least, give us to
understand that nothing can be thence concluded against what I have said of the
Order of Nature and Grace.

XLVIII. It Is certain that Natural Effects are complicated and mixed a thousand
ways with the Effects of Grace; and that the Order of Nature strengthens or
weakens the Efficacy or Effects of the Orders of Grace, according as these two
Orders variously combine together. Death, which by the General Laws of Nature,
at a particular Juncture befalls a good or ill Prince, or Bishop, occasions a
great deal of Good or Evil in the Church; because such kind of Accidents cause
a great Diversity in the Sequel of Effects, which depend on the Order of Grace.
But God would have all Men saved by the simplest ways. Therefore we may and
ought to say in general, That He has chosen the Time, the Place and Manners,
which in the process of Time, and by the General Laws of Nature and Grace,
must, all things considered, introduce a greater Number of the Predestinate
into the Church. God does all things for his Glory: Therefore, among all the
possible Combination of Nature and Grace, he has from the infinite Extent of
his Knowledge made choice of that which could form the perfectest Church, and
most suitable to his Majesty and Wisdom.

XLIX. This, one would think, were sufficient to answer all the Difficulties
that can arise about the Circumstances of our Mysteries: For if it be said,
that Jesus Christ ought to be born to a Roman Emperor, and to perform his
Miracles in the Metropolis of the World, that the Gospel might spread it self
with greater Ease into the remotest Countries: It may be boldly answered, That
though this seems so to Men, yet that Combination of Nature and Grace had not
been so worthy of the Wisdom of God as that which he has chosen. I confess
Religion had been propagated with greater ease; but its Establishment had not
been so Divine and Extraordinary, nor consequently an invincible Proof of its
Reality and Truth. So that, according to that Combination, Religion would at
this Day have been destroyed, at least less disseminated abroad in the World.
Besides, when we say that God acts by the simplest ways, we ever suppose an
Equality in the rest, and especially in the Glory that ought to redound to God
from his Work. But the Church had not been so perfect, nor so worthy of the
Greatness and Holiness of God, if it had been formed with so much ease. For the
Beauty of the Heavenly Jerusalem consisting in the Variety of Rewards accruing
upon the several Combats of Christians, 'twas requisite the Martyrs should lay
down their Lives as well as Jesus Christ, to enter into the Possession of their
present Glory. In a word, this Principle, That of all the infinite Combinations
of Nature and Grace, God has chosen that which ought to produce an Effect most
worthy of his Greatness and Wisdom, suffices for a General Answer to all the
Difficulties that can be started about the Circumstances of our Mysteries; like
as, to vindicate the Orders of Nature and Grace in themselves, we need but
know, That God, being infinitely wi^e, frames no Design but upon the admirable
Proportion of Wisdom and Fecundity, discovered in the ways capable to bring it
to pass, as I have explained in the First Discourse.

L. Most Men judging of God by measure of themselves, imagines that he first
forms a Design, and afterward consults his Wisdom about Ways to execute it.
For our Volitions generally prevent our Reason, and our Designs are hardly ever
perfectly Rational. But God's Ways are not like those of Men, who acts in the
following manner, if I have well consulted the Idea of a Being infinitely
perfect. God, by the infinite Light of his Wisdom, knows all possible Works,
and at once all the respective Ways of producing them. He sees all the
Proportions between Means and their End. He compares all things by one Eternal,
Immutable and Necessary View; and by the Comparison he makes of the Proportions
of Wisdom and Fecundity, which he discovers between the Designs and Ways of
executing them, he freely forms a Design. But the Design being formed, he
necessarily chooses the general Ways most worthy of his Wisdom, Greatness and
Goodness. For since he forms no Design, but through the Knowledge of the Means
of executing it, the Choice of the Design includes the Choice of Means.

LI. When I say, That God forms his Design freely, I would not be thought to
mean that he may make choice of another less worthy, and reject that which is
more worthy of his Wisdom. For supposing that God wills the Production of an
external Work worthy of him, he is not indifferent in the Choice, but must
produce the perfectest possible, with reference to the Simplicity of the Ways
he acts by. This God owes to himself, from following the Rules of his Wisdom,
and he must always act in the wisest and perfectest manner. But I say, that God
forms his Design freely; because he does not invincibly and necessarily love
any thing besides his own Substance. Neither the Incarnation of the Word, nor
for a much stronger Reason, the Creation of the World, are necessary Emanations
of his Nature. God is fully Self-sufficient: For the Being infinitely perfect
may be conceived alone, and without necessary Relation to any of his Creatures.

LII. As God necessarily loves himself, he necessarily follows the Rules of his
Wisdom. But whereas his Creatures constitute no part of his Being, he is so
full and sufficient in himself, that nothing obliges him to produce them; and
he is absolutely indifferent or free on their Account. And therefore it is that
he has made the World in Time: For that Circumstance sufficiently shows that
the Creatures are not necessary Emanations of the Divinity, but essentially
depending on the Free Will of the Creator.

LIII. Lo! however an Objection that offers it self immediately to the Mind. If
it were true, that God necessarily followed the Rules of his Wisdom, the World
would not have been created in Time: For either the World is worthy or unworthy
of God. If it were better that the World should not be produced from Nothing,
it ought to be Eternal; if on the contrary, that it should remain in
Nothingness, it ought not to be created. Therefore God is not obliged to stick
to Rules which his Wisdom prescribes, since the World was created in Time.

But this Objection is easily answered. It Is better for the World to be, than
not to be; but it had better not be at all than be Eternal. The Creature ought
to carry the Essential Character of Dependency. If Spirits were Eternal, they
might have some reason to consider themselves as Gods, or necessary Beings; or
at least, as capable of contributing to the Greatness or Felicity of God;
whilst imagining he could not forego producing them. They might in a manner
compare themselves with the Persons in the Deity, while believing themselves
produced like them by a necessary Emanation. Thus God ought by the Rules of his
Wisdom to leave Creatures the Mark of their Dependence; and yet give them
Assurance that he made them not to annihilate them; and that being constant in
his Purposes, by reason of his unlimited Wisdom, they shall eternally subsist.

LIVE. This Difficulty may still be driven farther in this manner. God
necessarily follows the Rules of his Wisdom, and necessarily does what is best.
But it was at least better for the World to be created in Time, than not to be
at all. And certainly it was fit, by the Rules of the Wisdom of God, that the
World should be produced in the Circumstances in which he produced it.
Therefore the Creation of the World in Time is absolutely necessary, God was
not at Liberty on its account, nor capable of hindering its temporary Production.

For the Resolution of this Difficulty, it must be observed, That though God
follows the Rules prescribed by his Wisdom, yet he does not necessarily what is
best; because, being Master of his Action, he may choose to do any thing. To
act, and not to follow the Rules of his Wisdom, is a Fault: Therefore, on
supposition that God acts, he necessarily acts in the wisest manner
conceivable. But his Liberty in the Production of the World, is a Sign of his
Abundance, Fullness, and Self-sufficiency. It Is better for the World to be, than
not to be; the Incarnation of Jesus Christ renders the Work of God worthy of
its Author, I acknowledge: But whereas God is essentially happy and perfect,
and as nothing is good on his Consideration, but himself, or the Cause of his
Perfection and his Happiness, he loves nothing invincibly besides his own
Substance; and whatever is exterior to him, ought to be produced by an Action
really eternal and immutable, but that derives its Necessity from Supposition
of the Divine Decrees.

LV. I offer another Principle, which I have already mentioned, which may
afford some Light to the Difficulties that may arise about the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ, and the Creation of the World. Reason and Authority of Holy Writ
teach us, that the First and Principal of the Designs of God, is the
Constitution of his Church in Jesus Christ. The present World is not created to
remain as it is: The Falsehood and Error, the Injustice and Disorder, that are
seen in it, give us sufficiently to understand it ought to have an end. The
future World, which Truth and Justice shall inhabit, is the Earth which God has
settled on inviolable Foundations; and which being the Object of Divine Love,
shall eternally subsist. God has not created this Visible World with other
Design than to raise by degrees that invisible City, whereof St. John speaks so
many Wonders; and as Jesus Christ shall be the principal Beauty of it, he was
always had in View by God in the Production of his Work. He has made all for
Man, and with reference to him, as the Scripture teaches: But he for whom,
according to St. Paul, God has made all things, Heb. 2.
is the Man Jesus Christ. It Is to teach Men that they are created, and that
they subsist in Jesus Christ; it is to unite them straightly to him; it is to
induce them to make themselves like him, that God has figured Jesus Christ and
his Church, in the principal of his Creatures. For it is necessary that Jesus
Christ should be found in the whole Work of God, that it might be the worthy
Object of his Love, and of the Action that produced it.

LVI. If we consider the manner of the First Man's Creation, as related by Holy
Scripture, how his Wife was formed out of his Flesh and Bone; his Love to her,
and the Circumstances of their Sin, we shall doubtless judge that God thought
on the Second Adam in the Formation of the First; that he considered the Father
of the future World, in creating the Father of the present; and that he
designed the First Man and Woman for express Types of Jesus Christ and his
Church. 1 Cor. 12.27. Ephesians. 5.30* etc.
St. Paul permits us not to doubt of this Truth, when he assures us we are
formed of the Flesh and Bone of Jesus Christ, that we are his Members; and that
the Marriage of Adam and Eve is the Figure of Jesus Christ and his Church.

LVII. God might perhaps form Men and Animals by ways as simple as common
Generation. But since this way typified Jesus Christ and his Church, since it
wore the Impress of the principal of God's Designs, and represented, as I may
say, the well-belov'd Son to his Father, that Son in whom alone the whole Work
of the Creation subsists, God ought to prefer it before all other; thereby
likewise to teach us, that as intelligible Beauties consist in their Relation
to Eternal Wisdom, so sensible Beauties must, though in a manner little known
to us, relate to Incarnate Truth.

LVIII. Doubtless there are many Analogies and Agreements betwixt the most
principal of the Creatures, and Jesus Christ, who is their Pattern and their
End. For all is full of Jesus Christ; every thing represents and typifies him,
as much as the Simplicity of the Laws of Nature will permit. But I shall not
venture to enter on the Particulars of this Subject. For besides that I am
fearful of mistaking, and have not a competent Knowledge either of Nature or
Grace, of the present World, or the future, to discover their Relations; I know
that the Imagination of Men is so sarcastical and nice, that we cannot by
Reason lead them to God, much less to Jesus Christ, without tiring their
Patience, or provoking their Railery. Most Christians are accustomed to a
Philosophy that had rather have recourse to Fictions, as extravagant as those
of the Poets, than to God; and some of them are so little acquainted with Jesus
Christ, that a Man would perhaps be reckoned a Visionist, if he said the same
things with St. Paul, without using his Words. For it is rather that great Name
which persuades them than the View of Truth. The Authority of Scripture keeps
them from blaspheming what they do not understand; but whereas they are but
little conversant with it, it cannot much enlighten them.

LIX. It Is certain that the Jewish People was the Figure of the Church, and
that the most Holy and Remarkable Persons among the Kings, Prophets, and
Patriarchs of that Nation, were the Types of the Messiah, our Savior Jesus
Christ; which is a Truth not deniable, without undermining the Foundations of
the Christian Religion, and making the most Learned of the Apostles pass for
the most Ignorant of Men. Jesus Christ being not yet come, ought at least to be
typified. For he ought to be expected, he ought to be desired, and by his Types
he ought to strew some sort of Beauty over the Universe, to make it acceptable
to his Father. Thus it was necessary he should in some manner be as ancient as
the World, and that he should die presently after the Sin in the Person of
Abel. The Lamb that was slain from the Foundation of the World: The Beginning
and End: Alpha and Omega: Yesterday and to Day: He is, was, and is to come.
These are the Qualifications St. John attributes to the Savior of Men.

LX. But supposing that Jesus Christ ought to be typified, 'twas necessary it
should be done by his Ancestors especially; and that their History, dictated by
the Holy Spirit, should be handed down to future Ages, to the end we might
still compare Jesus Christ with his Figures, and acknowledge him for the true
Messiah. Of all Nations God loving that most which had nearest Relation to his
Son, ought to make the Jews the Fathers of Jesus Christ, according to the
Flesh, since they had been the most lively and express Figures of his Son.

LXI. But, if driving this Difficulty up higher, the Reason be demanded of the
Choice God made of the Jews to be the principal Figures of Jesus Christ, I
think I may and ought affirm, that God acting always by the simplest ways, and
discovering in the infinite Treasures of his Wisdom all the Combinations of
Nature with Grace, chose that which was to make the Church the most ample, most
perfect, and most worthy of his own Greatness and Holiness, as I have said
before. Secondly, I think I ought to answer, that God foreseeing that what was
to happen to the Jewish People by a necessary Consequence of Natural Laws,
would have more Analogy to his Design of typifying Jesus Christ and his Church,
than all that could befall other Nations, thought fit to choose that People
rather than any other. For, in brief, Predestination to the Law is not like
Predestination to Grace; and though there be nothing in Nature that can oblige
God to shed his Grace equally on a whole People, yet methinks Nature may merit
the Law in the Sense I here understand it.

LXII. It Is true, that all that befell the Jews, who represented Jesus Christ,
was not a necessary Consequence of the Order of Nature: There was need of
Miracles to make the Jews lively, and express Figures of the Church. But Nature
at least furnished Groundwork, and Materials, and possibly the principal
Strokes in most Instances, and Miracles finished the rest. Whereas no other
Nation would have been so proper for so just and accomplished a Design.

LXIII. If I mistake not, we are obliged to think that God, having a Wisdom
prescious of all the Events and Consequences of all possible Orders, and all
their Combinations, never works Miracles when Nature is sufficient; and that
therefore he must choose that Combination of Natural Effects, which, as it
were, remitting him the Expense of Miracles, nevertheless most faithfully
executes his Designs.

For Example: It Is necessary that all Sin should be punished. But that is not
always done in this World. Yet supposing it was requisite for the Glory of
Jesus Christ, and the Establishment of Religion, that the Jews should be
punished in the Face of the whole World, for the Crime they had committed in
murdering our Savior; it was fit that Jesus Christ should come into the
World, about the Reign of Herod; supposing that People, by the necessary
Consequence of the Order of Nature, was to be divided about that time; that
Civil Wars and perpetual Seditions were to weaken them; and that, lastly, the
Romans were to ruin and disperse them, with the total Destruction of their
City and Temple. It Is true, there seems to be something extraordinary in the
Desolation of the Jews: But as it shows greater Wisdom in God, to produce so
surprising Effects, by the most simple and general Laws of Nature, than by
particular Wills, which are always Miracles; I question whether on that
Occasion we are to fly unto a Miracle. But, for my part, I dispute it not here;
since it is a Fact that we cannot easily nor need we explain our selves upon:
And I produce this Instance only to make some Application of my Principles, and
to make them more easily intelligible to others.

I have, I think, said enough of Nature and Grace, to satisfy all equitable
and moderate Persons about an infinite Number of Difficulties, which disturb
only their Minds who must needs judge of God by themselves. For if Men would
consult the Idea of an Infinitely Perfect Being, of a General Cause, of an
Infinite Wisdom; and if they would consent to the Principles I have established
conformable to that Idea, I believe they would neither be surpised nor
offended at the Conduct of GOD, and that they would change their Murmurs and
Censures into Wonder and Adoration.

CONCERNING Nature and Grace. DISCOURSE III. Of the Manner of GRACE's acting in
us.
PART I. Concerning Liberty.
I. THERE is nothing more rude and unformed than the Substance of Spirits, if
we separate it from God. For what is a Mind void of Understanding and Reason,
destitute of Motion and Love? Yet it is the Word and Wisdom of God which is the
universal Reason of Minds; and it is the Love whereby God loves himself, that
gives the Soul the Motion she has toward Good. If the Mind knows Truth, it is
by its Natural and Necessary Union with Truth it self: If it is reasonable,
it is so through supreme Reason: Lastly, If it be a Spirit, or Intelligence,
it is in one sense, because its Substance is enlightened, penetrated, and
perfected by the Light of God himself. These Truths I have explained in another
Place. So likewise the Substance of the Soul is not capable of loving Good,
save by its Natural and Necessary Union with the Eternal and Substantial Love
of the Supreme Good; it advances not toward Good any farther than conveyed by
God; it is volent only from the Motion it continually receives from him; it
lives only through Charity, and wills merely through the Love of Good, which
God makes it participate, though it abuses it. For, in fine, God making and
preserving Minds only for himself, inclines them toward him as long as he
preserves their Being, and communicates the Love of Good to them whilst they
are capable of receiving it. Now that natural and continual Motion of the Soul
toward Good in general, toward Good indefinite, toward God, is what I here
call Will: Since it is that Motion which capacitates the Substance of the Soul
to love different Goods.

II. This Natural Motion of the Soul toward Good in general, is invincible;
for it is not in our Power not to will to be happy. We necessarily love what we
clearly know and lively feel to be our Good. All Minds love God by the
Necessity of their Nature; and if they love any thing else by a Free Choice of
their Will, it is not because they seek not God, or the Cause of their Felicity,
but because they are deceived. It Is because, perceiving by a confused
Sensation, that surrounding Bodies make them happy, they consider them as good,
and by an Ordinary and Natural Consequence, love them, and unite to them.

III. But the Love of all these particular Goods is not naturally invincible.
Man considered in his Original State, might supersede loving those Goods that
filled not the whole Capacity of his Affection. There being but one Good which
includes all others, he might sacrifice every other Love to the Love of this.
For God having made Minds only for himself, cannot invincibly carry them to the
loving any thing besides him, or without relation to him. Lastly, our own
inward Consciousness informs us, that we can reject a Fruit, though we are
inclined to take it. Now that Power of loving, or not loving particular Goods,
the Non-invincibility which is found in the Motion, which carries Minds to the
loving what does not seem every way inclusive of all Goods. That Power, or
Non-invincibility, is what I call Liberty. Thus placing the Definition instead
of the thing defined, that Expression, our Will is free, signifies, that the
Natural Motion of the Soul toward Good in general, is not invincible in point
of Good in particular. To the Word Free, the Idea of Volu^tary is commonly
annexed; but in the Sequel of this Discourse, I shall take the Word in the
Sense I have observed, as being the most Natural and Ordinary.

IV. The Word Good is equivocal, and may signify either Pleasure which makes
formally happy, or the true, or seeming Cause of Pleasure. In this Discourse I
shall constantly take the Word Good in the second Sense; because indeed
Pleasure is imprinted on the Soul, that she may love the Cause that makes her
happy, that she may advance toward it by the Motion of her Love, and may
strictly unite to it, to be perpetually happy. When the Soul loves nothing but
her own Pleasure, she in effect loves nothing distinct from her self. For
Pleasure is only a Condition or Modification of the Soul, which renders her
actually happy and content. But whilst the Soul cannot be the Cause of her own
Pleasure, she is unjust, ungrateful, and blind, if she loves her Pleasure, and
forgets to pay the Love and Devotion which is due to the true Cause that
produces it in her. As none but God can act immediately and by himself on the
Soul, and make her sensible of Pleasure by the actual Efficacy of his
all-potent Will; so he alone is truly Good. However I term the Creatures Good,
which are the seeming Causes of the Pleasures we feel occasionally from them.
For I am unwilling to deviate from the customary way of Speaking, any farther
than is necessary to explain my self clearly. All Creatures, though Good in
themselves, or Perfect, with reference to the Designs of God, are not Good,
with reference to us. They are not our Good, nor the true Cause of our Pleasure
or Felicity.

V. The natural Motion which God constantly imprints on the Soul to carry it to
love him, or (to make use of a Term which is the Abridgement of several Ideas,
and can be no longer equivocal or confused after the Definition I have given of
it,) the Will is determined toward particular Goods, either by a clear and
evident Knowledge, or by a confused Sensation which points these Goods out to
us. Whilst the Mind perceives or tastes not any particular Good, the Motion of
the Soul remains as it were undetermined, it tends toward Good in general. But
this Motion receives a particular Determination, as soon as the Mind has the
Idea or Sensation of some particular Good: For the Soul being continually bent
toward Good undetermined, ought to move when the Good appears.

VI. But when the Good, which is present to the Mind and Senses fills not these
two Faculties; when it is discovered under the Idea of a particular Good, of a
Good that comprehends not all Goods; and when it is tasted by a Sensation that
takes not up the whole Capacity of the Soul, she may still desire the
Perception and Fruition of some other Good; she may suspend the Judgment of her
Love. She may refuse to acquiesce in the actual Enjoyment, and by her Desires
seek out some novel Object. And as her Desires are the Occasional Causes of her
Light and Knowledge, she may, by the natural and necessary Union of all Minds
with him, who includes the Ideas of all Goods, discover the True Good, and in
the True, many other particular Goods different from that she perceived and
enjoyed before.

Therefore having some Knowledge of the Emptiness and Vanity of sensible Goods,
and attending to the secret Reproaches of her Reason, to the Remorses of her
Conscience, to the Complaints and Menaces of the True Good, who will not that
she should sacrifice to seeming and imaginary Goods; may, by the Motion which
God continually imprints on her for Good in general, Sovereign Good, that is,
for himself, check her self in her Course toward any particular Good. She may
resist the sensible Allurements, search and find out other Objects, compare
them together, and with the indelible Idea of the Supreme Good, and love none
of them with a determinate Love. And if the Sovereign Good comes to be somewhat
relished, she may prefer it to all particular Goods, though the Pleasure and
Satisfaction they seem to infuse into the Soul be extremely great and very
agreeable. But these Truths require a larger Explication.

VII. The Soul is constantly driven toward Good in general; she desires the
Possession of all Goods, and will never limit her Love; there being no Good
that appears such that she refuses to love. Therefore when she actually enjoys
a particular Good, she has a Tendency to proceed, farther; she still desires
something more by the natural and invincible Impression which God gives her;
and to change or divide her Love, it suffices to present her another Good
besides that of her present Enjoyment, and to give her a Taste of the Pleasure
it affords. Now the Soul may ordinarily seek and discover new Goods: She may
likewise approach and enjoy them. For, in fine, her Desires are the Natural or
Occasional Causes of her Knowledge; and Objects appear and draw toward her in
proportion to her Earnestness to know them. A Man of Ambition, who considers
the Luster of a Dignity, may likewise think on the Slavery, Constraint, and the
true Evils that accompany Humane Grandeur; he may sum up the Account, weigh
and compare all together, if his Passion does not blind him: For I confess
there are Moments in which Passion takes away all Liberty from the Mind, and
that it always lessens it. Thus as a Dignity, however great it appears, cannot
be taken by a perfectly free and rational Man, for universal and infinite Good,
whilst the Will extends to all Goods: This perfectly free and perfectly
rational Man, may enquire after and find out others, in as much as he can
desire them; it being his Desires which discover and present them to him. He
may then examine them and compare them with that which he enjoys. But whereas
he can find only particular Goods on Earth, he may, and ought, whilst he lives
here below, to examine them, and perpetually seek, and never acquiesce. Or
rather, that he may not be constantly following a fresh Chase, he ought in
general to neglect all transitory Goods, and desire only such as are Immutable
and Eternal.

VIII. But whereas we love not to seek, but to enjoy, and that the Labor of
Examination is at present very painful, but Repose and Enjoyment always very
agreeable the Soul commonly rests when she has found any Good; she stops at it
to enjoy it; she deceives her self, because by her mistaking and judging she
has found what she looks for, her Desire is changed into Pleasure, and Pleasure
makes her happier than Desire. But her Happiness cannot last long: Her Pleasure
being ill-grounded, unjust, and deceitful, immediately disquiets and molests
her, because she desires to be solidly and truly happy. Thus the natural Love
of Good quickens her, and produces in her new Desires. These confused Desires
represent new Objects. The Love of Pleasure puts her on the Pursuit of those
which afford or seem to afford it, and the Love of her Repose fastens her upon
them. She does not immediately examine the Defects of the present Good, when
prepossessed with its Sweetness; but rather contemplates it on its best side,
applies to that which charms her, and thinks only of enjoying it. But the more
she enjoys, the more she loves it, and the closer she approaches, the more
curiously she considers it. But the more she considers it, the more
Imperfections she spies in it; and since she desires to be truly happy, she
cannot for ever be mistaken. When she is thirsty, and hungry, and weary with
seeking, she presently inebriates and fills her self with the first Good she
finds; but she is presently disgusted with a Nourishment which was not made for
Man. Thus the Love of the True Good excites in her new Desires for fresh Goods;
and whilst she constantly changes her Pursuit, all her Life, and her whole
Happiness on Earth, consists in a continual Circulation of Thoughts, Desires,
and Pleasures. Such is the Soul which makes no use of her Liberty, but leaves
her self to the Conduct of Chance, to be guided by the obtaining Motion, and
the fortuitous Concourse of determining Objects. But this is the State of a Man
whose Understanding is so weak as daily to mistake the false for the true Good;
and whose Heart is so corrupt as to betray and sell it self to every thing it
is touched with, to the Good which gives it an actual Sense of the most sweet
and agreeable Pleasures.

IX. But a Man perfectly free, such as we conceive Adam immediately after his
Creation, knows clearly that none but God is his Good, or the true Cause of the
Pleasures he enjoys. Though he feels Satisfaction upon the approach of
circumambient Bodies, he loves them not; God only he loves, and if God forbid
him to unite to Bodies, he is ready to forsake them, what Pleasure soever he
finds in them. He resolves to fix only in the Enjoyment of the supreme Good,
and to sacrifice all others to it; and though never so desirous of Happiness,
or the Enjoyment of Pleasures, no Pleasure is stronger than his Light. Not but
that Pleasures can blind him, perturbate his Reason, and fill up his thinking
Capacity. (For the Mind being finite, all Pleasure is capable of dividing and
distracting it:) But that Pleasures being subjected to his Will, he is too
cautious to be intoxicated by them. For the sole invincible Pleasure is that of
the Blessed, or that which the First Man had found in God, if God should have
prevented and hindered his Fall; not only because this Pleasure fills all the
Faculties of the Soul, without disturbing her Reason, or carrying her to the
Love of a pretended Good; but also because nothing withstands the Enjoyment of
this Pleasure; neither the Desire of Perfection, nor that of Felicity. For when
we love God we are perfect; when we enjoy him we are happy; and when we love
him with Pleasure, we are happy and perfect all at once. Thus the perfectest
Liberty is that of Minds, which can at all times overcome the greatest
Pleasures; of Minds, to which no Motion toward particular Goods is ever
irresistible: It Is that of a Man before the Sin, before Concupiscence troubled
his Mind and corrupted his Heart. And the most imperfect Liberty is that of
those to whom no Motion toward a particular Good, though never so little, but
is invincible in all sorts of Circumstances.

X. Now betwixt these two sorts of Liberty there are more and less Perfect to
an Infinity of Degrees, which is a thing not sufficiently minded. It Is commonly
imagined that Liberty is equal in all Men, and that it is an Essential Faculty
of the Mind, the Nature whereof remains constantly the same, though its Action
varies according to the diversity of Objects. For we regardlesly suppose a
perfect Equality in all things, wherein no sensible Inequality appears. Men
indulge their Mind, and rid it of all tedious Application, by giving things an
abstract Form, consisting in a sort of indivisible Essence. But this is an
Error, Liberty being no such Faculty as is imagined. There are not two Persons
equally free in respect of the same Objects. Children have less Liberty than
Men arrived to the perfect Exercise of their Reason. Nor are there two Men
whose Reason is equally clear, constant, and certain, in regard of the same
Objects. Those whose Passions are unruly, and who have been unaccustomed to
resist them, are less free than others who have courageously impugn'd them, and
who are naturally Men of Temper; and there are not two Men equally moderate,
equally sensible to the same Objects, and who have equally fought for the
Preservation of their Liberty. Some Persons there are so sold to Sin, that they
less resist, or think of resisting it when awake, than pious Men in their
Sleep; since we are taught by the Word of Truth, that he who commits Sin
becomes a Slave to it.

XI. 'True it is, that by the Institution of Nature all Men are equally free:
For God does not invincibly determine Men to the Love of any particular Good.
But Concupiscence corrupts the Moral and Intellectual Part; and since Man has
lost the Power of obliterating the Tracts of sensible Pleasures, and stopping
the Motions of Concupiscence: That Liberty which had been equal in all Men, if
they had not sinned, grows unequal, according to their different degrees of
Light, and as variously worked on by Concupiscence. For Concupiscence it self,
which is equal in all Men, in as much as they have lost their Power over their
Body, is a thousand ways unequal, because of the Diversity that is found in the
Construction of the Body, in the Multiplicity and Motion of the Spirits, and
those almost infinite Alliances and Relations obtained through the Commerce of
the World.

XII. To our distincter understanding the Inequality which is found in the
Liberty of different Persons, we must observe, that every Man perfectly
reasonable, perfectly free, and who would be truly happy, may, and ought, upon
the Presence of any Object which gives him the sense of Pleasure, suspend his
Love, and carefully examine whether this Object be the true Good, or whether
the Motion which carries him toward it exactly comport with that which leads
him to the true Good: Otherwise he would love by Instinct, and not by Reason;
and if he could not suspend the Judgment of his Love, before he had examined
it, he would not be perfectly free. But if he clearly discovers that this
Object, which gives him the Sense of Pleasure, is truly good to him; and if the
Evidence in conjunction with the Sensation be such as will not permit him to
suspend his Judgment, then, though perfectly free, he is no longer free in
respect of that Good; but he invincibly loves it, because Pleasure agrees with
Evidence. But being that God alone can act in us, as our Good, and the Motion
which byasses us toward the Creatures is repugnant to that which carries us
toward God; every Man, perfectly reasonable, and entirely free, may and must
forbear to judge that sensible Objects are his Goods. He may and ought to
suspend the Judgment which regulates, or should regulate his Love. For he can
never evidently see that sensible Goods are true Goods, since that can never be
evidently seen which is not.

XIII. This Power of suspending the Judgment, which is the actual Rule of Love;
this Power, which is the Principle of our Liberty, and by which Pleasures are
not always invincible, is very much weakened since the Sin, though not quite
destroyed. And that we may have actually this Power, when we are tempted by an
Object, it is necessary, besides the Love of Order, to have a thoughtful Mind,
and to be sensible to the Remorse of Conscience; for a Child or a Man asleep
have not actually this Power. But all Men are not equally enlightened; the Mind
of Sinners is full of Darkness: Consciences are not equally tender, the Heart
of Sinners is hardened: The Love of Order, actual Graces are unequal in all Men:
Therefore they are not equally free, nor have equal Power of suspending their
Judgment: Pleasure determines them, and moves some rather than others. This Man
can suspend his Judgment, and wave his Consent, when a present Object gives him
the Taste of a most quickening and sensible Pleasure; and another is of so narrow
a Mind, and corrupt an Heart, that the least Pleasure is irresistible, and the
least Pain insupportable: Being not wont to fight against sensible Allurements,
he becomes so disposed as not even to think of resisting them: Thus he has not
then the Power of deferring his Consent, since he even wants the Power of
making a Reflection; and in regard to that Object, he is like a Man asleep or
out of his Wits.

XIV. The more weak is Reason, the more sensible grows the Soul, and more
readily and falsely she judges of sensible Good and Evil. If a Leaf pricks, or
even tickles a Man when asleep, he wakes in a start, frighted, as if bitten by
a Serpent. He perceives this little Evil, and judges of it as of the greatest
Misfortunes; so intolerable it appears to him. His Reason fainting by the
Slumber, incapacitates him from suspending his Judgment. To him the least Goods
as well as Evils, are almost always insuperable. For it is the Senses which
judge in him, and these are hasty Deciders; which must be so for several
Reasons. When Reason is less disabled, little Pleasures are not invincible, nor
little Evils intolerable; and Men are not always bound where most Pleasure is
to be found. For some Pleasures are so little, that they are despicable to
Reason, which is never quite destitute of the Love of Order. The presence of
little Evils is not very frightful: A Man, for Example, resolves to be let
Blood, and suffers it; he judges not so hastily, but suspends and examines; and
the stronger is Reason, the longer is its Suspense, against sensible
Invitations and Discouragements. Now there is nothing more certain, than that
all Men who partake of the same Reason, partake not of it equally; that all are
not equally sensible, at least to the same Objects; that they are not all
equally well born, equally well bred, equally a^^isted by the Grace of Jesus
Christ; and therefore not equally free, or capable of suspending the Judgment
of their Love in point of the same Objects.

XV. But we are to take notice, that the chief Duty of Minds is to preserve and
increase their Liberty, since it is by the good use possible to be made of it
they may merit their Felicity, if succored by the Grace of Jesus Christ; at
least lessen their Misery, if left to themselves. That which weakens our
Liberty, or makes most Pleasures irresistible to us, is the Eclipse of our
Reason, and the Loss of Power we ought to have over our Body. Reason therefore
must be instructed by continual Meditations; we must consider our Duties, that
we may perform them; and our Infirmities, that we may have recourse to him who
is our Strength. And since we have lost the Power of stopping the Impressions
made by the Presence of Objects on the Body, which thence corrupt the Mind and
Heart, we ought to avoid these Objects, and make use of the Power that is left
us. We ought to watch constantly over the Purity of our Imagination, and labor
with all our Powers to efface the adulterate Traces imprinted by false Goods,
since they kindle Desires in us, which divide our Mind, and weaken our Liberty.
By this means the Man whose Liberty is just expiring, who cannot conquer the
least of Pleasures, may obtain such a Strength, and such a Freedom, as not to
yield to the greatest Souls, their Succors being supposed equal. For, at
least, at the time whilst these Pleasures do not importune us to Evil, we may
lay in to avoid them. We may fortify our selves by some Reason, that may,
through future Pleasures, countervail those we don't actually enjoy. For as
every one has some Love of Order, there is no Man but may vanquish a feeble and
light Pleasure by a strong and solid Reason; by a reasonable Fear of some Evil,
or by the Hope of some great Good. Lastly, there is no one but may, by the
Ordinary Supplies of Grace, vanquish some Pleasures and avoid others: Which
Pleasures, formerly invincible or studied, being vanquished or avoided, are a
Preparatory to our assaulting others, at least before they tempt us. For the
Satisfaction we find in the Victory provokes us again to Battle; and the Joy of
a good Conscience, and the Grace of Jesus Christ administer Courage: And even
the Fear of a Defeat is not useless, since it makes us fly to him who can do
all things; and make us discreet in avoiding perilous Occasions. Thus we are
always Gainers in this sort of Exercise; for if we are worsted, we become more
humble, wise, and circumspect, and sometimes more earnest for the Combat, and
more capable of Conquering or Resisting.

XVI. As in the study of the Sciences, those who submit not to the false
Glimpses of Probabilities, and who are wont to suspend their Judgment till the
Light of Truth breaks into them, fall rarely into Error; whereas the vulgar
part of Men are daily deceived by their precipitate Judgments. So in Moral
Discipline, those who use to sacrifice their Pleasures to the Love of Orders,
and who continually mortify their Senses and Passions; especially in things
which seem of little moment, which every one may do, will in things important
obtain a great Facility of suspending the Judgment which regulates their Love.
Pleasure does not surprise them, like other Men, at least does not drag them
along unawares. It seems, on the contrary, that whilst it sensibly affects
them, it cautions them to take care of themselves, and to consult Reason, or
the Rules of the Gospel. Their Conscience is more nice and tender than that of
others, who, in the Scripture Phrase, drink Sin like Water. They are sensible
to the secret Reproaches of Reason, and the wholesome Precautions of inward
Truth. So that the acquired Habit of resisting feeble and light Pleasures,
makes way for the conquering the more violent; at least for the suffering some
Regret and Shame, when a Man is conquered, which creates forthwith Dislike and
Abhorrence. Liberty thus insensibly increasing, and perfecting it self by
Exercise, and the Assistance of Grace, we may at last put our selves in a
Capacity of performing the most difficult Commandments; in as much as by the
ordinary Graces which are constantly afforded Christians, we may overcome
common Temptations, and for the most part avoid the greatest; and by the
Assistance of the Grace of Jesus Christ there is none but may be vanquished.

XVII. It Is true, that a Sinner so disposed, as not able so much as to think of
resisting a surprising Pleasure, cannot actually accomplish the Commandment
that orders him not to enjoy it. For the Pleasure is insuperable to him in that
Estate. And if we but suppose this Person in this State of Impotence, through a
Natural Necessity, his Sin not being free, could not make him more culpable; I
mean, more worthy of the Punishment of Pain, than if he were inordinate in his
Sleep. Nay, if this Impotency were a necessary Consequence of the free
Disorders which had preceded his Conversion, it would not be imputed to him, by
reason of his Charity. But since he was both able and obliged to use himself to
resisting Pleasure, and combating for the Preservation and Augmentation of his
Liberty; this Sin, though actually committed by a kind of Necessity, renders
him guilty and punishable; if not by reason of his Sin, at least because of his
Negligence, which is the Principle of it. The Commandment of God is not
absolutely impossible; but the Sinner may and ought, for the foregoing Reasons,
to put himself into a Condition of observing it; since Men are obliged, as well
as able, to labor constantly to augment and perfect their Liberty; not only by
the Helps reached to them by Jesus Christ, but also by natural Forces, or
ordinary Graces. For, in brief, Nature may be made subservient to Grace in a
thousand Instances.

PART II. Of GRACE.
XVIII. THE Inequality which is found in the Liberty of different Persons being
clearly known, it will be no hard Matter, methinks, to discover how Grace works
in us; if we but affix to the Word Grace distinct and particular Ideas, and
remember the Difference between the Grace of the Creator and Renovator. I said,
in the preceding Discourse, that there is this difference between Light and
Pleasure, That the former leaves us entirely to our selves, whilst the latter
incroaches upon our Liberty. For Light is something extraneous to us; it does
not affect and modifie our Soul; it does not drive us to the Objects it
discovers; but only disposes us to move our selves, and to consent freely, and
by Reason to the Impression God gives us toward Good. The Knowledge of our
Duty, the clear Idea of Order, separate from all Sensation, the Contemplation
of naked, abstract, wholly pure, and intelligible Good, that is, Good without
Taste or Fore-tast, leaves the Soul to her entire Liberty. But Pleasure is an
Inmate to the Soul, it touches and modifies her. And so it diminishes our
Liberty, makes us love Good, rather by a Love of Instinct and Passion, than of
Choice and Reason. And it transports us, as I may say, to sensible Objects: Not
that Pleasure is the same thing as Love, or the Motion of the Soul toward
Good; but that it causes this Love, or determines this Motion toward the
Object that makes us happy. But because no Truths are demonstrable, save those
whereof we have clear Ideas, which we have not of our own inward Motions, it is
not possible for me to demonstrate what I advance, as we demonstrate the
Conclusions depending on common Notions. Every one therefore must consult his
own inward feeling of what passes in his Soul, if he would be convinced of the
difference between Light and Pleasure; and must carefully observe, that
commonly Light is attended with Pleasure, which yet he must separate to judge
soundly of it. But of this I have said enough.

XIX. If then it be true, that Pleasure naturally produces Love, and is like a
Weight which gives the Soul a Propensity to the Good that causes or seems to
cause it; it is visible that the Grace of Jesus Christ, or the Grace of
Sensation, is of it self efficacious. For though preventing Delectation, when
but weak, works not an entire Conversion in the Heart of those whose Passions
are too lively; yet it never fails of its Effect, in as much as it always
inclines them toward God. It is in some measure always efficacious, but it has
not always all possible Effect, because of the Resistance of Concupiscence.

XX. Put, for Example, in one Scale of a Balance ten pound weight, and in the
other only six; this latter weight shall truly gravitate; for adding but so
much more weight to this, or taking it from the opposite Scale, or lastly,
hanging the Balance nearer the over-weighted, and the six pounds shall carry
it. But though this weight gravitates, it is visible its effect depends still on
the resisting weight, and the manner of its resisting. Thus the Grace of
Sensation is always of it self efficacious; it constantly weakens the Effort of
Concupiscence, since Pleasure naturally creates Love, for the Cause which
produces, or seems to produce it. But though this Grace be always
Self-efficacious, yet it depends, or rather its Effect depends on the actual
Dispositions of the Receiver. The weight of Concupiscence resists it, and
sensible Pleasures, which draw us to the Creatures that seem to produce it in
us, hinder the Pleasures of Grace from uniting us strictly to him, who alone
can act in us, and make us happy.

XXI. But the case is otherwise with the Grace of Light, or the Grace of the
Creator. It is not of it self efficacious. It does not move or convey the Soul,
but leaves her perfectly to her self. But though it be not efficacious of it
self, it nevertheless is persued by many Effects, when it is great, and animated
by some delectable Grace, which gives it Force and Vigor; or when it meets
with no contrary Pleasure that greatly resists it. Such is the difference
between the Grace of the Creator and that of the Restorer; between Light and
Pleasure; between the Grace which supposes not Concupiscence, and the Grace
which is given us to counterpoize the Pleasures of it. The one is sufficient to
a Man perfectly Free and Fortified with Charity; the other is efficacious to a
Man Infirm, to whom Pleasure is necessary to draw him to the Love of the True
Good.

XXII. But the Force and Efficacy of Grace ought always to be compared with the
Action of Concupiscence, with the Light of Reason; and especially with the
degree of Liberty the Person is endued with. And we must not imagine that God
bestows it by particular Wills, with design to produce certain Effects by it,
and nothing more. For when it is said that Grace always works in the Heart the
Effect for which it is given, we err if we suppose God acts like Men, with
particular Considerations. God diffuses his Grace with a General Design of
sanctifying all that receive it, or according as the Occasional Cause
determines him to refuse it. Mean while he knows very well that it will not
have so much Effect in some, as in others; not only because of the Inequality
of Force on the part of Grace, but also of the Inequality of Resistance on the
part of Concupiscence.

XXIII. Since Concupiscence has not utterly destroyed the Liberty of Man, the
Grace of Jesus Christ, as efficacious as it is, is not absolutely irresistible.
A sensible Pleasure is superable, when weak; and a Man may suspend the Judgment
of his Love, when he is not hurried by a too violent Passion: And when he
stoops to the Lure of an adulterate Pleasure, he is culpable through the Abuse
of his Liberty. So likewise the Delectation of Grace is not ordinarily
invincible. A Man may decline following the good Motions it inspires, which
remove us from the false Objects of our Love. This Grace fills not the Soul in
such a manner as to hurry her to the True Good, without Cho^ce, Judgment, and
Free Consent. Thus when we resign up our selves to its Motion, and advance
farther, as I may say, than it irresistibly carries us; when we sacrifice the
Pleasures of Concupiscence, which weaken its Efficacy; or, lastly, when we act
by Reason, or love the true Good as we ought, we merit through the good use we
make of our Liberty.

XXIV. It Is true, that Delectable Grace, considered in it self, and separate
from the Pleasures of Concupiscence, which are contrary to it, is always
invincible. Because this holy Pleasure being conformable to the Light of
Reason, nothing can withstand its Effect in a Man perfectly free. When the Mind
sees clearly, by the Light of Reason, that God is its Good; and has a lively
Sense of him by the Taste of Pleasure, it is not possible to avoid loving him.
For the Mind desires Happiness, and then nothing hinders it from following the
agreeable Motions of its Love. It feels no Remorses which oppose its present
Felicity; nor is it withheld by Pleasures contrary to that which it enjoys. The
Delight of Grace is then invincible; nor is the Love it produces meritorious,
unless it be greater than its Cause. I say, that the Love which is merely a
Natural or Necessary Effect of the Delectation of Grace, has nothing
meritorious, though it be good in it self. For whilst we move no farther than
we are driven, or rather, when we advance no longer than we are paid in hand,
we have no Claim to any Recompense. When we love God but so far as we are
attracted, or because we are attracted, we love him not by Reason, but by
Instinct; we love him not on Earth as he requires and deserves from us. But we
merit only when we love God by Choice, by Reason, by the Knowledge we have of
his being amiable. We merit in proceeding on, as I may say, toward Good, when
Pleasure has determined the Motion of Love.

XXV. This sole Reason demonstrates either that the first Man was not invited
to the Love of God, by the blind Instinct of Pleasure; or at least, that this
Pleasure was not so lively as what he felt in reflecting on his own Natural
Perfections, or in the actual use of sensible Goods. For it is evident such a
Pleasure would have made him impeccable; it would have put him in a State like
that of the Blessed; which merit no longer: Not because they are out of a
Wayfaring State; (for Merit always follows from meritorious Actions; and God,
being Just, must necessarily reward them:) But they merit not, because the
Pleasure they find in God is equal to their Love, that they are thoroughly
imbued with it, and that being freed from all sort of Pain, and all Motions of
Concupiscence, they have nothing left to sacrifice to God.

XXVI. For that which makes us impeccable is not precisely that which
incapacitates us to merit. Jesus Christ was impeccable, and yet he merited his
Glory, and that of the Church, whereof he is the Head. Being perfectly free, he
loved his Father, not by the Instinct of Pleasure, but by Choice and Reason. He
loved him, because he intuitively saw how amiable he was. For the most perfect
Liberty is that of a Mind, which has all possible Light, and is not determined
by any Pleasure; because all Pleasure, preventing or other, naturally produces
some Love; and unless we resist it, it efficaciously determines toward the
agreeable Object, the Natural Motion of the Soul. But Light, though conceived
never so great, leaves the Mind perfectly free, supposing this Light be
considered alone, and separate from Pleasure.

XXVII. As Jesus Christ is nothing but the Word, or Reason Incarnate, certainly
he ought not to love Good with a blind Love, with the Love of Instinct, with
the Love of Sensation, but by Reason. He ought not to love an infinitely
amiable Good, and which he knew perfectly worthy of his Love, as we love Goods
that are not amiable, and which we cannot know as worthy of Love. He ought not
to love his Father by a Love in any respect like that wherewith we love the
vilest Creatures, wherewith we love Bodies: His Love to be pure, at least, to
be perfectly meritorious, ought to be no wise produced by preventing Pleasures.

For Pleasure may and must be the Recompense of a Legitimate Love, as in effect
it is in the Saints, and Jesus Christ himself. But it cannot be the Principle
of Merit, nor ought it to precede Reason, unless debilitated. But Reason in
Jesus Christ was no ways weakened. Supreme Reason supported the Created. Jesus
Christ, who was free from the Motions of Concupiscence, had no need of
preventing Delight to counterbalance sensible Pleasures which surprise us. Nay,
it may be he refused to taste the Pleasure of Joy, which was a natural Result of
the Knowledge he had of his Virtue and Perfections, that, being deprived of all
sorts of Pleasures, his Sacrifice might be more holy, more pure, and more
disinteress'd. Lastly, Beside the Privation of all Pleasures, preventing and
others; it is likely he inwardly suffered unspeakable Droughts, not better
expressible by Souls filled with Charity, than by the Dereliction of God,
according to these Words of our Savior on the Cross; My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? But if we will absolutely have it, that Jesus Christ was
carried by preventing Pleasures to the Love of his Father, it is necessary to
say, according to the Principles I have laid down, either that his Love was
more intense than his Pleasure; since Natural Love, produced by the Instinct of
Pleasure is no ways meritorious; or at least, we must say he merited by
sensible Pains, by the continual Sacrifice, which he freely and voluntarily
offered to his Father. For 'twas necessary he should suffer to enter in
Possession of his Glory; as we are taught by Scripture.

XXVIII. Though the Delectation of Grace, without relation to any contrary
Pleasure, infallibly gains the Consent of the Will; yet it is not so with the
Pleasures of Concupiscence. These Pleasures, considered in themselves, without
respect to other actual Pleasures, are not always insurmountable. The Light of
Reason condemns them; the Remorse of Conscience makes us abhor them; and we may
commonly suspend our Consent. Therefore the Grace of Jesus Christ is stronger
than Concupiscence; and we may call it Victorious, since the former always
masters the Heart, when equal to the latter. For when the Balance of our Heart
is perfectly in Equilibrio, by the even Weights of contrary Pleasures, that
which is most solid and reasonable, has the Advantage; because Light adds some
Grains to its efficacy, and the Remorses of Conscience withstand the Influence
of a counterfeit Pleasure.

XXIX. We must conclude, from what we have said, that we always merit when we
love the true Good by Reason; and that we merit not at all, when we love it by
Instinct. We merit always when we love the true Good by Reason, because Order
will have the true Good loved in that manner, and that mere Light does not
convey us, or invincibly determine us to the Good discovered by it. We merit
not when we love the true Good by Instinct, or as much as we are invincibly
moved and determined by Pleasure: Because Order requires that the true Good, or
the Good of the Mind, should be loved by Reason, by a free Love, a Love of
Choice and Judgment; whilst the Love which is produced by Pleasure, is a Blind,
Natural, and Necessary Love. I own, that when we advance farther than Pleasure
forces us, we merit. But that is because we therein act by Reason, and in the
way that Order would have us. For Love, so much as it exceeds Pleasure, is a
pure and reasonable Love.

XXX. So likewise we must conclude, that we always demerit when we love a false
Good, by the Instinct of Pleasure, provided we love it more than we are
invincibly forced. For when our Liberty is naturally so straightened, and our
Capacity of Mind so little, that we are carried in an irresistible manner, then
though we are corrupt, and our Love be evil, and against Order; yet we don't
demerit: To demerit, I mean to deserve to be punished, we must pursue false
Goods with more ardency, or tend farther than Pleasure irresistibly carries us.
For we must observe, that there is great difference between a Good and a
Meritorious Action; between a Corrupt and a Demeritoous. The Love of the
Blessed is Good, but it is not Meritorious: The Love of a Righteous Person is
often depraved in his Sleep; but it is not Demeritorious. Whatever is
conformable to Order, is good; and whatever is contrary to it is naught. But
there is nothing of Merit or Demerit, save in the good or ill use of our
Liberty, save in that in which we are the Factors. But we make a good use of
our Liberty, when we follow Light; when we unconstrained, and of our selves,
advance to the true Good, or were at first determined by preventing
Delectation, or the Light of Reason; when we sacrifice sensible Pleasures to
our Duty, and surmount Pain by the Love of Order. On the contrary, we make an
ill use of our Liberty, when we make Pleasure our Reason, when we sacrifice our
Duty to our Passions, our Perfection to present Felicity, the Love of Order to
the Love of our selves; and all this at a time, when we might really have
prevented it* But I proceed to explain this still more clearly.

XXXI. When two Objects are offered to the Mind, and it determines it self
about them, I confess it never fails to take that side where most Reason and
Pleasure appears; or, all things considered, where most Good is to be found.
For the Soul not being able to will, or love, but through the Love of Good,
since the Will is nothing but the Love of Good, or the Natural Motion of the
Soul toward it, she unavoidably loves what has most conformity with what she
loves invincibly. But it is certain, that when sensible Pleasure, or something
of like nature, does not perturbate the Mind, we may ever suspend the Judgment
of our Love, and not determine, especially in point of false Good. For the Soul
can have no Evidence that false Goods are the true, or that the Love of the
former agrees perfectly with the Motion which carries us to the latter.
Therefore when a Man loves false Goods, whilst his Senses and Passions leave
his Reason entirely free, he demerits: Because then he may and ought to suspend
the Judgment of his Love. For if he stood any time to examine what was speedily
to be done, the false Good would appear in its own Colors, the Pleasure which
it seems to infuse into the Soul would vanish, the Idea of some other Good
would present it self to the Mind; the Remorse of Conscience, and perhaps the
Delectation of Grace, would change all the Dispositions of his Mind and Heart:
For the State of a Traveller has nothing certain. A thousand different Objects
are continually offered to the Mind, and the Life of Man on Earth is nothing
but a continual train of Thoughts and Desires.

XXXII. At first Sight it seems that, in point of the true Good, we cannot
suspend the Judgment of our Love; for we cannot suspend our Judgment, save when
Evidence is not perfect. Now we may see with the clearest Evidence, that God is
the true Good; and that none but he can be good to us: We know that he is
infinitely more amiable than we can conceive. But it is observable, that though
we cannot suspend the Judgment of Reason, in respect of Speculative Truths,
when the Evidence is entire; yet we may suspend the Judgment of our Love in
point of Goods, whatever Evidence there is in our Ideas. For when Sense fights
against Reason, when Taste opposes Light, when that is found sensibly bitter and
disagreeable, which Reason clearly represents as sweet and delectable, we may
suspend our Choice, and follow either Reason, or the Senses. We may act, and
commonly do act against our Light; because, when we attend to the Sensation,
Light disappears, unless we strive to retain it: And because we are ordinarily
more attentive to Sensation than to Light, because Sensation is always more
lively and agreeable than the most evident Knowledge.

XXXIII. It Is Pleasure which makes Minds actually happy. Therefore we ought to
enjoy Pleasure, when we love the true Good. Yet a Mind thinks on God, draws
nigh him by its Love, and tastes no Satisfaction. On the contrary, God fills it
sometimes with Bitterness and Drought, he deserts it, and repels it, as I may
say; not that it may cease to love him, but rather that its Love may be more
humble, more pure, and meritorious: Lastly, he prescribes it certain things
which render it actually miserable. But if it approaches Bodies, it finds it
self happy in proportion to the Strictness of its Union to them. Certainly,
this is perplexing to a Man never so intelligent, since we are invincibly
passionate for Happiness. Therefore we merit much, if, following our Light, we
renounce our selves; notwithstanding those discomforting Droughts, if we
sacrifice our actual Happiness to the Love of the true Good; if living by
Faith, and relying on the Promises of God, we remain inviolably bent upon our
Duty. Hence we clearly understand, that Jesus Christ might merit his Glory,
though he knew the true Good in the highest Evidence; because, having an
extreme Love for his Father, he was entirely conformable to his Orders, without
being carried by preventing Pleasures; because, being steadily guided by his
Light, he suffered most violent Pains, and sacrificed the most lively and
sensible Pleasures to his Charity. For he took on him a Body like to ours, that
he might have a Victim to offer to God, and that duly receiving through this
Body, as the Occasional or Natural Cause, an abundance of various Sensations,
he might accomplish a perfect Holocaust, to the Honor of the true Good, by the
enduring Pain, and the Privation of sensible Pleasures.

XXXIV. To the end every one may have a most perfect Idea of the Grace of Jesus
Christ, I think it requisite to add, that it consists not in Delectation alone:
For all Grace of Sensation is the Grace of Jesus Christ. But of this Grace
there are many Species, and of every Species infinite degrees. God sometimes
casts Distaste and Bitterness on the Objects of our Passions, he weakens their
sensible Charms, or makes us hate or abhor them. And this kind of Grace of
Sensation makes the same Effect as preventing Delight. It restores and
fortifies our Liberty, reinstates us almost in Equilibrio, and thereby puts us
in a Capacity of following our Light in the Motion of our Love. For to restore
a Balance to an even poize, or to change its propension, we need not augment
the lesser Weight, but only retract from the over-loaden Scale. Thus there are
Graces of Sensation of several sorts, and every sort is capable of infinite
degrees. For there are Pleasures, Aversions, and Dislikes, greater and lesser
ad infinitum. What I have hitherto said of Delectation, may be easily applied
to other Species of the Grace of Sensation. I only made choice of Pleasure or
Delectation, as a particular Example, to explain my self clearly, and without
Ambiguity.

If there be any other Principle of our Determinations to Good besides the
Grace of Sensation, and that of Light, I confess I am utterly ignorant of it;
and therefore I have resolved to explain the Effects of Grace, necessary to the
Conversion of Heart; but by these two Principles, for fear of incurring the
blame of discoursing in general Terms, that of themselves excite only confused
Ideas; which thing I avoid with all possible Care. But though I have explained
my self in Terms understood by all Mankind; since there is no body but knows,
that the Knowledge and Sense of Good are Principles of our Determinations; yet
I presume not to impugn those, who, sticking not to these clear Ideas, say in
general, that God operates the Conversion of our Souls by a particular Action,
different, it may be, from all I have here and elsewhere said; that God
Illustrations upon the Search after Truth.
works in us. Experiencing in my self no other Motion than toward Good in
general, and that determined by Knowledge or Sensation, I ought to suppose
nothing more; if by this alone I can account for all that the Scripture and
Councils have determined about the present Subject. In a word, I am well
assured that Light and Sensation are the Principles of our Determinations; but
I declare that I cannot tell but there may be some other whereof I have no
Knowledge.

XXXV. Besides Grace of it self efficacious, and that the Effect whereof
entirely depends on the good Dispositions of the Mind; besides the Grace of
Sensation and the Grace of Light, the Righteous have moreover an Habitual
Grace, which makes them agreeable to God, and capacitates them to work Actions
meritorious of Salvation. This Grace is Charity, the Love of God, or the Love
of Order; a Love which is not properly Charity, unless it be stronger and
greater than every other Love. As it is commonly Pleasure which produces the
Love of the Object that is the true or apparent Cause of it; so it is the
Delectation of Grace which produces the Love of God. It Is the Enjoyment of
Sensible Pleasures which heightens Concupiscence; and it is the Grace of
Sensation which increases Charity. Concupiscence diminishes by the deprivation
of Sensible Pleasures, and then Charity is easily preserved and nourished. And
whilst Charity faints by the privation of the actual Grace of Jesus Christ,
Concupiscence speedily thrives and grows upon it. For these two Loves, Charity
and Cupidity, constantly war with one another, and gather Strength from the
Weakness of their Enemy.

XXXVI. Whatever participates of Charity, is well-pleasing to God; but Charity
is not always active in the Just themselves. In order to its working, it is
necessary at least it be Illuminate: For Knowledge is needful to determine the
Motion of Love. Thus the Grace necessary to every Good Work relating to
Salvation, is that of Sensation, in those who begin their Conversion; is that
of Light, at least, or some Motion of Faith or Hope, in those who are animated
with Charity. For though the Righteous may do Good Works without the Grace of
Delectation, they have always need of some actual Assistance to determine the
Motion of their Charity. But although Charity without Delectation is sufficient
to conquer many Temptations, yet the Grace of Sensation is necessary on many
Occasions. For Men cannot, without the continual Help of the Second Adam,
resist the continual Action of the First. They cannot persevere in
Righteousness, unless frequently assisted with the particular Grace of Jesus
Christ, which produces, augments, and maintains Charity against the continual
Efforts of Concupiscence.

XXXVII. The Effects of Pleasure, and of all the Sensations of the Soul, have a
thousand several Dependencies on the actual Dispositions of the Mind. The very
same Weight has not always the same Effects: It depends in its Action on the
Structure of the Machine by which it is applied to the contrary Weight. If a
Balance be unequally suspended, the force of the Weights being unequally
applied, the lighter may overweigh the heavier. So it fares with the Weight of
Pleasures: They act one on another, and determine the Motion of the Soul,
according as they are diversely applied. Pleasure ought to have a greater
Influence on the Person who has already a Love for the Object which causes it,
than on another who has an Aversion, or that loves opposite Goods. Pleasure
forcibly determines a Person who clearly knows, or vividly imagines the
Advantages of Good, which seems to cause it; and acts feebly on the Mind of him
who knows this Good but confusedly, and is distrustful of it. Lastly, It acts
with its whole Force on him who blindly follows all that gratifies
Concupiscence; and perhaps will have no Effect on him who has acquired some
Habit of suspending the Judgment of his Love.

Now since the different degrees of Light, Charity, Concupiscence, and the
different degrees of Liberty, are perpetually combining infinite ways, with the
different degrees of actual Pleasures; which Pleasures are operative, but
according to their relation to the Dispositions of the Mind and Heart; it is
manifest that no finite Mind can with any certainty pronounce of the Effect a
particular Grace ought to produce in us. For besides that, there is an infinite
Combination in the things concurring to the Efficacy of Grace, or the
Production of its Effect, this Combination is not like that of moving Springs
and Forces, which have always infallible and necessary Effects. Therefore it is
impossible for any finite Mind to discover what passes in the Heart of Man.

XXXVIII. But whereas God has an infinite Wisdom, it is visible that he clearly
knows all the Effects that can result from the Mixture and Combination of all
these things; and that penetrating the Heart of Man, he infallibly discovers
even the Effects, which depend on an Act, or rather on a free Consent of our
Wills. Nevertheless I confess I cannot conceive how God can discover the
Consequences of Actions which derive not their Infallibility from his absolute
Decrees. But I have no Mind to insist on Metaphysics, at the Expense of
Morality, and to affirm as undeniable Truths, Opinions that are contrary to my
own inward Consciousness of my self; or in fine, to speak to the Ears a certain
Language which affords no clear Idea to the Mind. I know well that such
Objections may be made as would be too hard for me to answer satisfactorily and
clearly: But it may be these Objections are naturally full of Obscurity and
Darkness; are founded on the Ignorance we are in of the Properties of our Soul.
It Is from our having (as I have elsewhere proved) no clear Idea of our Being,
and that what is in us, First Illustration on the 7 th. Chapter of the 2 d. Part of
the 3 d. Book of the Search. Second Illustration.
which gives way to be conquered by a Determination not invincible, is
absolutely unknown to us. Furthermore, if I cannot clearly answer these
Objections, I can answer by others, which to me seem more incapable of
Solution: I can, from Principles opposed to mine, deduce more harsh and unlucky
Consequences than those which are presumed to follow from Liberty, such as I
have supposed in us. But I engage not on the Particulars of all this, as taking
no delight to walk in the dark, and to lead others upon Precipices.

THE ILLUSTRATION OR CONTINUATION OF THE TREATISE CONCERNING Nature and Grace.
What is meant by acting by General and Particular Wills.
I. I Say that God acts by General Wills when he acts in consequence of the
General Laws which he has established. For Example: I say that God acts in me
by General Wills, when he gives me the Sense of Pain when I am pricked; since
in pursuance of the General and Efficacious Laws of Union of my Soul and Body
which he has constituted, he makes me suffer Pain when my Body's ill disposed.

So when a Bowl strikes another, I say God moves the stricken by a General
Will, because he moves it in pursuance of the General and Efficacious Laws of
the Communications of Motions; God having generally Ordained, that at the
Instant of Collision of two Bodies, the Motion should be distributed between
them, according to certain Proportions; and it is by the Efficacy of that
General Will, that Bodies have the force of moving one another.

II. I say, on the contrary, that God acts by Particular Wills, when the
Efficacy of his Will is not determined by some General Law, to the producing
any Effect. Thus supposing God should make me feel the Pain of pricking, whilst
there happened no Change in my Body, or in any Creature whatsover, which
determines him to act in me by some General Law; I say that then God acts by
Particular Wills.

So again supposing a Body begins to move without being stricken by another, or
without any Alteration happening in the Will of Spirits, or in any other
Creature which determines the Efficacy of some General Laws; I say that God
would move that Body by a Particular Will.

III. According to these Definitions, it plainly appears, that, so far from
denying Providence, I suppose on the contrary, that God works all in all
things; that the Nature of the Heathen Philosophers is a Chimera; and that, to
speak properly, Nature is nothing but the General Laws which God has
established for the Construction or Preservation of his Work, by the simplest
ways, by an Action always uniform, constant, perfectly worthy of an infinite
Wisdom, and an universal Cause. But that which I here suppose, though certain,
for the Reasons I have given in The Search after Truth, is not absolutely
necessary to what I design to prove. For if it be supposed, that God had
communicated his Power to the Creatures in such a manner, as that surrounding
Bodies had a real and true Force, by which they might act on our Soul, and make
her happy and miserable by Pleasure and Pain; and that Bodies in Motion had in
themselves a certain Entity, which they call Impressed Quality; that they can
communicate it to those about them, and with that Celerity and Uniformity we
observe; it would be still equally easy to prove what I intend: For then the
Efficacy of the concurrent Action of the General Cause would be necessarily
determined by the Action of the Particular Cause. God, for Instance, would be
obliged, by these Principles, to afford his Concourse to a Body at the Instant
of Collision, that it might communicate its Motion to others; which is still to
act by virtue of a General Law. Yet I do not argue upon that Supposition, as
believing it utterly false, as I have shown in the Third Chapter and Second
Part of the Sixth Book of The Search after Truth, in the Illustration of the
same Chapter, and elsewhere.

Which Truths supposed, here follow the Notes by which we may discover whether
an Effect be produced by a General or Particular Will.

MARKS by which we may judge whether an Effect be produced by a General or
Particular Will.
IV. When we see an Effect immediately produced after the Action of an
Occasionl Cause, we ought to judge it produced by the Efficacy of a General
Will. A Body moves immediately after the Collision; the Collision of Bodies is
the Action of an Occasional Cause: Therefore this Body moves by a General Will.
A Stone falls on the Head of a Man, and kills him; and this Stone falls like
all others, that is, continues its Motion almost in Arithmetical Proportion, 1,
3, 5, 7, 9, etc. Which supposed, I say it moves by the Efficacy of a General
Will, or by the Laws of the Communications of Motions, as is easy to
demonstrate.

V. When we see an Effect produced without the Mediation of the known
Occasional Cause, we have reason to think it produced by a Particular Will;
supposing this Effect be not manifestly unworthy of its Cause, as I shall say
hereafter.

For Example: When a Body's moved without being smitten by another, there is
great Probability it was moved by a Particular Will; but yet we cannot be
confident of it. For on Supposition of a General Law, that Bodies should move
according to the several Volitions of Angels, or the like, it is visible this
Body might be put in Motion without Impulsion; the particular Will of some
Angel being in this case able to determine the Will of the general Cause to
move it. Thus we may be often positive, that God acts by general Wills, but we
cannot have the like Assurance that he acts by particular Wills, even in the
most averred Miracles.

VI. Since we have not a competent Knowledge of the various Combinations of
Occasional Causes, to discover whether such and such Effects arrive in
consequence of their Action; and are not sufficiently Intelligent to discover,
for Instance, whether such a Rain be Natural or Miraculous, produced by a
necessary Consequence of the Communication of Motions, or by a particular Will;
we must judge an Effect is produced by a General Will, when it is visible the
Cause did not propose it self a particular End. For the Wills of Intelligences
have necessarily an End; general Wills a general End, and particular Wills a
particular Design. Nothing can be more plain and evident.

For Example: Though I cannot discover whether a Shower of Rain which falls on
a Meadow, falls in consequence of general Laws, or by a particular Will of God,
I have reason to think it falls by a general Will, if I see it fall as well on
the neighboring Grounds, or on the River which bounds the Meadow, no less than
on the Meadow it self. For if God caused it to rain on this Meadow by a
particular Benevolence to the Owner, this Rain would not fall on the River
where it is insignificant; since it could not fall there without a Cause or Will
in God which has necessarily some End.

VII. But we have still more Reason to think an Effect is produced by a general
Will, when this Effect is contrary or even useless to the Design, which we are
taught by Faith, or Reason, the Cause proposed.

For Instance: The End which God proposes in the various Sensations he affords
the Soul, in our tasting different Fruits, is, that we may eat those which are
fit for Nourishment, and reject the rest. I suppose thus: Therefore when God
gives a grateful Sensation at the Instant of our eating Poisons, or empoison'd
Fruits, he acts not in us by particular Wills. So we ought to conclude, since
that agreeable Sensation is the Cause of our Death, whilst the End of God's
giving us diverse Sensations is to preserve our Life by a convenient
Nourishment; for I once more suppose thus. For I speak only with reference to
the Grace which God gives us, doubtless to convert us; so that it is visible God
showers it not on Men by particular Wills, since it frequently renders them
more Culpable and Criminal: For God cannot have so Fatal a Design. God gives us
not therefore agreeable Sensations by particular Wills, when we eat poisonous
Fruits. But because a poisonous Fruit excites in our Brain Motions like those
produced by wholesome Fruits, God gives us the same Sensations, by reason of the
general Laws which unite the Soul to the Body, that she might be wakeful for
its Preservation.

So likewise God gives not those who have lost an Arm Sensations of Pain
relating to it, but by a general Will: For it is useless to the Body of this
Man, that his Soul should suffer Pain relating to an Arm that is lost. It Is the
same case with Motions produced in the Body of a Man, in the Commission of a
Crime.

Finally, supposing we are obliged to think that God scatters his Rain upon the
Earth, wit^ Intent to make it fruitful; we cannot believe he distributes it by
particular Wills, since it falls upon the Sands, and in the Sea, as well as on
plowed Lands, and is often so excessive on seeded Ground, as to extirpate the
Corn, and frustrate the Labors of the Husbandman.

Thus it is certain, that Rains which are useless or noxious to the Fruits of
the Earth, are necessary Consequences of the general Laws of the Communications
of Motions, which God has established for the producing better Effects in the
World; supposing, (which I again repeat) that God cannot will, by a particular
Volition, that Rain should cause the Barrenness of the Earth.

VIII. Lastly, When an Effect happens which has something extraordinary, it is
reasonable to believe it is not produced by a general Will.

Nevertheless, it is impossible to be sure of it. If, for Example, in the
Procession of the Holy Sacrament, it rains on the Assistants, save on the
Priests, and those which carry it, we have reason to think this proceeds from a
particular Will of the universal Cause; yet we cannot be certain, because an
occasional intelligent Cause may have this particular Design, and so determine
the Efficacy of the general Law to execute it.

IX. When the preceding Marks are not sufficient for us to judge whether a
certain Effect is or is not produced by a general Will, we are to believe it
is, if it be certain there is an Occasional Cause established for the like
Effects.

For Example: We see it rain to some Purpose in a Field; we do not examine
whether this Rain falls or not in the great Roads, we know not whether it be
noxious to the bordering Grounds; nay we suppose it only does good, and that
all the attending Circumstances are perfectly accommodated to the Design for
which we are obliged to believe that God would have it rain: Nevertheless, I
say that we ought to judge this Rain is produced by a general Will, if we know
that God has settled an Occasional Cause for the like Effects. For we must not
have recourse to Miracles without Necessity. We ought to suppose that God acts
herein by the simplest ways; and though the Lord of the Field ought to return
Thanks to God for the Bounty, yet he ought not to imagine it was caused in a
miraculous manner by a particular Will.

The Owner of the Field ought to thank God for the Good he receives, since God
saw and willed the good Effect of the Rain, when he established the general
Laws whereof it is a necessary Consequence, and that it was for the like
Effects they were established. On the contrary, if the Rains are sometimes
hurtful to the Earth, as it was not to render them unfruitful, that God
established the Laws which make it rain, since Drought suffices to make them
barren; it is plain we ought to thank God, and to adore the Wisdom of his
Providence, even when we do not ^eel the Effects of the Laws established in our
Favor.

X. But, to conclude, when we cannot be certified by the Circumstances which
accompany certain Effects, that there is an Occasional Cause established to
produce them, it is sufficient to know they are very common, and relate to the
principal Design of the general Cause, in order to judge they are produced by a
general Will.

For Example: The Springs which water the Surface of the Earth, are subservient
to the principal Design of God, which is, that M^n should not want things
necessary to Life; I suppose so. Besides, these Fountains are very common,
therefore we ought to conclude they are fo^m'd by some General Laws. For as
there is much more Wisdom in executing his Designs by Simple and General Means,
than by Complicated and Particular, as I think I have sufficiently proved
elsewhere. We owe that Honor to God, as to believe his way of acting is
general, uniform, constant, and proportioned to the Idea we have of an infinite
Wisdom. These are the Marks by which we are to judge whether an Effect be
produced by a general Will. I now come to prove, that God bestows his Grace on
Men by general Laws, and that Jesus Christ has been establish^d the Occasional
Cause to determine their Efficacy. I begin by the Proofs of Holy Scripture.

XI. St. Paul teaches us, That Jesus Christ is the Head of the Church: That he
constantly influences it with Spirit and Life: Col. 2.19.
That he forms the Members, and animates them as the Soul animates the Body,
or, to speak still more clearly, the Holy Scripture teaches us two things: The
first, Heb. 7.25.9.24. Joh. 11.42.
that Jesus Christ prays continually for his Members. The second, that his
Prayers or Desires are always heard. Whence I conclude, that he was constituted
by God the Occasional Cause of Grace; and likewise, that Grace is never given
to Sinners, but through his Means.

The Occasional Causes have constantly and readily their Effect. The Prayers
and diverse Desires of Jesus Christ, with reference to the Formation of his
Body, have likewise most constantly and speedily their Accomplishment. God
denies his Son nothing, as we learn from Jesus Christ himself.

Occasional Causes produce not their Effect by their own Efficacy, but by the
Efficacy of the General Cause. It Is likewise by the Efficacy of the Power of
God, that the Soul of Jesus Christ operates in us, and not by the Efficacy of
Man's Will. It Is for this Reason that St. Paul represents Jesus Christ as
praying to his Father without Intermission: For he is obl^g^d to Pray, in order
to Obtain.

Occasional Causes have been established by God for the determining the
Efficacy of his General Wills; and Jesus Christ, according to the Scripture,
has been appointed by God, after his Resurrection, to govern the Church which
he had purchased by his Blood. For Jesus Christ became the Meritorious Cause of
all Graces by his Sacrifice: But, after his Resurrection, he entered (...) the
Holy of Holies, as High Priest of future Goods, to appear in the Presence of
God, and to endue us with the Graces which he has merited for us. Therefore he
himself applies and distributes his Gifts as Occasional Cause, he disposes of
all things in the House of God, as a well-beloved Son in the House of his
Father.

I think I have demonstrated, in the Search after Truth, that there is none but
God who is the true Cause, and who acts by his own Efficacy; and that he
communicates his Power to Creatures only, in establishing them Occasional
Causes, for the producing some Effects. I have proved, for Example, That Men
have no Power to produce any Motion in their Bodies, but because God has
established their Wills the Occasional Causes of these Motions: That Fire has
no power to make me feel Pain, but because God has established the Collision of
Bodies the Occasional Cause of the Communication of Motions, and the violent
Vibration of the Fibers of my Flesh the Occasional Cause of my Pain. I may here
suppose a Truth which I have proved at large in the Third Chapter of the Second
Part of the Sixth Book, and in the Illustration upon the same Chapter, and
which those, for whom it was principally written, don't contest. Now Faith
assures us, that all Power is given to Jesus Christ, to form his Church: Mat.
28.18*
All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. Which cannot be understood
of Jesus Christ, as to his Divinity; for as God he has never received any
thing: And therefore it is certain, that Jesus Christ, as to his Humanity, is
the Occasional Cause of Grace; supposing I have well proved, that God only can
act on Minds, and that Second Causes have no Efficacy of their own: Which those
ought first to examine who would understand my Sentiments, and give a Judgment
of them.

XII. I say farther, that no one is sanctified but through the Efficacy of the
Power which God has communicated to Jesus Christ, in constituting him the
Occasional Cause of Grace. For if any Sinner were converted by a Grace, whereof
Jesus Christ was not the Occasional, but only the Meritorious Cause, that
Sinner not receiving his New Life through the Efficacy of Jesus Christ, would
not be a Member of the Body of which Jesus Christ is the Head; in that manner
explained by St. Paul, by these Words of the Epistle to the Ephesians; That we
may grow up into him in all things who is the Head, even Christ; from whom the
whole Body fitly joined together, Chap. 4 13, 15, 16. Col. 2.19.
and compacted by that which every Joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every Part, makes increase of the Body unto the
edifying it self in Love: Which Words not only say Jesus Christ is the
Meritorious Cause of all Graces; but likewise distinctly signify that
Christians are the Members of the Body whereof Jesus Christ is the Head; that
it is in him we increase and live with an entire new Life; that it is by his
inward Operation, (...), that his Church is formed, and that thus he has been
constituted by God the sole Occasional Cause, who, by his several Desires and
Applications, distributes the Graces which God, as the True Cause, showers down
on Men.

It Is on this Account St. Paul says Christians are united to Jesus Christ as
their Root; Rooted and built up in him. It Is for the same Reason that Jesus
Christ compares himself to a Vine, Col. 2.7.
and his Disciples to the Branches, that derive their Life from him; I am the
Vine, ye are the Branches. On the same Grounds St. Paul affirms, that Jesus
Christ lives in us, and that we live in him; that we are raised up in our Head;
that our Life is hidden with Jesus Christ in God; in a word, that we have
already Life Eternal in Jesus Christ. All these, and many other Expressions of
like nature, clearly manifest, that Jesus Christ is not only the Meritorious,
but also the Occasional, Physical or Natural Cause of Grace; and that as the
Soul informs, animates, and consummates the Body, so Jesus Christ diffuses
through his Members, as Occasional Cause, the Graces he has merited to his
Church by his Sacrifice.

For my part, I cannot see how these Reasons can be called in question, or upon
what Grounds a most edifying Truth, and as ancient as the Religion of Jesus
Christ, can be treated as a dangerous Novelty. I grant my Expressions are
novel, but that is because they seem to me the fittest of all others distinctly
to explain a Truth, which can be but confusedly demonstrated by Terms very
loose and general. These words, Occasional Causes, and Natural Laws, seem
necessary to give the Philosophers, for whom I wrote this Treatise of Nature
and Grace, a distinct Understanding of what most Men are content to know
confusedly. New Expressions being no farther dangerous than involving
Ambiguity, or breeding in the Mind some Notion contrary to Religion; I do not
believe that Equitable Persons, and conversant in the Theology of St. Paul,
will blame me for explaining my self in a particular manner, when it only tends
to make us Adore the Wisdom of God, and strictly to unite us with Jesus Christ.

First OBJECTION.
XIII. It Is Objected against what I have established, That neither Angels nor
Saints, of the Old Testament, received Grace pursuant to the Desires of the
Soul of Jesus, since that Holy Soul was not then in Being; and therefore,
though Jesus Christ be the meritorious Cause of all Graces, he is not the
Occasional Cause which distributes them to Men.

As to Angels, I Answer, That it is very probable Grace was given them but once:
So that if we consider things on that side, I grant, there is nothing can
oblige the Wisdom of God to constitute an Occasional Cause for the
Sanctification of Angels. But if we consider these blessed Spirits as Members
of the Body whereof Jesus Christ is the Head, or suppose them unequally
supplied; there is all Reason to believe the Diversity of their Graces must
proceed from him who is the Chief of Angels as well as Men, and who under that
Character has merited by his Sacrifice all the Graces which God has given his
Creatures, but has variously applied them by his different Desires.

It being undeniable, that Jesus Christ, long before his Birth, or Meriting,
might be the Meritorious Cause of the Graces given to the Angels, and Saints of
the Old Testament; it ought, methinks, be granted, that by his Prayers he might
be the Occasional Cause of the same Graces, long before they were demanded. For
indeed there is no necessary Relation between Occasional Causes, and the Time
of Production of their Effects; and though commonly these sort of Causes are
followed by their Effects at the Time of their Action, yet their Action being
not of it self efficacious, since its Efficacy depends on the Will of the
universal Cause, there is no necessity of their actual Existence for the
producing their Effect.

For Instance: Suppose Jesus Christ at this present time should desire of his
Father, that such a Person might receive such a Supply of Grace, at certain
Moments of his Life, that Prayer of Jesus Christ would infallibly determine the
Efficacy of the General Will God has of saving all Men in his Son. This Person
will receive these Assistances, though the Prayer of Jesus Christ be passed,
and his Soul actually think on another thing, and never think again on that
which he required for him. But the past Prayer of Jesus Christ is no more
present to his Father than a future. For all that must happen in all Times, is
equally present to God. Thus God loving his Son, and knowing he shall have such
Desires, with respect to his Ancestors, and those of his own Nation; and
likewise to the Angels which must enter into the Spiritual Edifice of his
Church, and constitute the Body whereof he is the Head, ought to accomplish the
Desires of his Son, before they were made, that the Elect which preceded his
Nativity, and which he purchased by the Merit of his Sacrifice, might as
peculiarly belong to him as others, and that he might be their Head, as really
as he is ours. I acknowledge it is fit that Meritorious and Occasional Causes
should rather precede their Effects, than follow them, and that Order would
have Causes and their Effects exist together: For it is plain that all Merit
ought to be instantly recompensed, and every Occasional Cause actually to
produce its Effect, provided nothing hinders b^t it may or ought be done. But
Grace being absolutely necessary to Angels and Patriarchs, could not be
deferred. But as for the Glory and Reward of the Saints of the Old Testament,
since that might be deferred, 'twas fit that God should suspend its
Accomplishment till Jesus Christ should ascend into Heaven, be constituted High
Priest over the House of God, and begin to exercise the Sovereign Power of
Occasional Cause of all Graces merited by his Labors upon Earth. Therefore we
are to believe that the Patriarchs entered not Heaven, till after Jesus Christ
their Head, Mediator, and Forerunner.

But though it should be granted, that God had not appointed an Occasional
Cause for all the Graces afforded the Angels and Patriarchs, I see not how it
can be thence concluded, that Jesus Christ does not at present endue the Church
with the Spirit which gives it Increase and Life* that he does not pray for it,
or that his Prayers or Desires are not effectually heard; in a word, that he is
not the Occasional Cause which applies to Men the Graces he has merited. I
grant, if you will have it so, that God, before Jesus Christ gave Grace by
particular Wills; the Necessity of Order requiring it. Whilst by Order, the
Occasional Cause could not be so soon established, and the Elect were very few
in Number. But now, when the Rain of Grace falls, not as heretofore on a small
Number of Men, but is shower'd on all the Earth, and Jesus Christ may, or
ought, be constituted the Occasional Cause of the Goods which he has merited
for his Church, what reason is there to believe God works so many Miracles as
he gives us good Thoughts? For, in short, all that is done by particular Wills,
is certainly a Miracle, as not being a Result of the General Laws he has
ordained, whose Efficacy are determined by Occasional Causes. But how can we
imagine, that, in order to save Men, he works so many Miracles useless to their
Salvation? I would say, affords them all these Graces which they resist,
because not proportioned to the actual Force of their Concupiscence.

St. John teaches us, That Christians receive from the Fullness of Jesus Christ
Graces in abundance: Joh. 1.17.
For, says he, the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ. For indeed, the Graces which preceded him were not comparable to those
he distributed after his Triumph: If they were Miraculous, we are to suppose
they were extremely rare. Even the Grace of the Apostles, before the Holy
Spirit was given them, could not come in comparison with those they received
when the High Priest of future Goods, having entered by his Blood into the Holy
of Holies, had obtained by the Force of his Prayers, and sent, through the
Dignity of his Person, the Holy Spirit, to animate and sanctify his Church.
The unaccountable Blindness of the Jews, their gross and carnal Notions, their
frequent Relapses into Idolatry, after so many Miracles, sufficiently manifest
their disregard for true Goods; and the dispiritedness of the Apostles, before
they had received the Holy Ghost, is a sensible Proof of their Weakness. So
that Grace in those Days was extremely rare, because our Nature in Jesus Christ
was not yet established the Occasional Cause of Graces: Hebr. 4. Hebr. 7.16, 17.
Jesus Christ was not yet fully consecrated Priest, after the Order of
Melchisedech; nor had his Father given him that Immortal and Glorious Life,
which is the particular Character of his Priesthood. For 'twas necessary that
Jesus Christ should enter the Heavens, and receive the Glory and Power of
Occasional Cause of true Goods, before he sent the Holy Spirit, according to
the Words of St. John, The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was
not yet glorified: Joh. 16.7.
And according to others of Jesus Christ himself, It is expedient for you that
I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I
go, I will send him unto you.

Now it cannot be imagined, that Jesus Christ, considered as God, is the Head
of the Church; as Man, he has obtained that Quality. The Head and Members of a
Body must be of the same nature. Jesus Christ, as Man, intercedes for Men; as
Man, he received from God a Sovereign Power over his Church: For as he is God,
he intercedes not; as God, he has not received a Name, which is above every
Name; but he is equal to the Father, and absolute Lord of all things by right
of Generation. These Truths are evident, as we are assured by Jesus Christ
himself, who says, that his Father has given him power to judge Men, because he
is the Son of Man. So we ought not to think, that Scripture Expressions, which
make Jesus Christ the Author of Grace, must be understood of him, considered in
his Divine Person: For if so, I confess I should not have proved him the
Occasional Cause, since he would be the True Cause of it. But whereas it is
certain, that the Three Persons of the Trinity are equally the True Cause of
Grace, because all the External Operations of God are common to them all, my
Proofs are undeniable, since Holy Scripture says of the Son, and not of the
Father, or the Holy Spirit, that he is the Head of the Church; and that in this
Capacity he communicates Life to the constituent Members of it.

Second OBJECTION.
XIV. It Is God who gives the Soul of Jesus Christ all the Thoughts and Motions
relating to the Formation of his Mystical Body. So that if on one hand the
Wills of Jesus Christ, as Occasional or Natural Causes, determine the Efficacy
of the General Wills of God; on the other, it is God himself who determines the
several Wills of Jesus Christ. And thus it comes to the same thing: For, in
brief, the Volitions of Jesus Christ are always conformable to those of his
Father.

I grant that the particular Volitions of the Soul of Jesus Christ are always
conformable to the Wills of his Father; not as if there were any particular
Wills in the Father, which answer to those in the Son, and determine them; but
only, that the Volitions of the Son are always conformed to Order in general,
which is the necessary Rule of the Will of God, and of all those who love him.
For to love Order, is to love God; it is to will what he wills; it is to be Just,
Wise, Regular, in our Love. The Soul of Jesus desires to form, to the Glory of
his Father, the largest, most sumptuous, and accomplished Temple possible.
Order demands this, since nothing can be made too great for God: All the
several Thoughts of this Soul, perpetually intent on the Execution of its
Design, proceed likewise from God, or the Word, to which it is united: But its
various Desires are certainly the Occasional Cause of these various Thoughts;
for it thinks on what it wills.

Now these diverse Desires are sometimes entirely free; and probably the
Thoughts which excite them, do not invincibly determine the Soul of Jesus
Christ, to apply her self to the Means of executing them. For, in brief, it is
equally advantageous to the Design of Jesus Christ, whether it be Peter or John
that causes the Effect which the Regularity of his Work requires. It Is true,
the Soul of Jesus is not indifferent in any thing that relates to his Father's
Glory, or that Order necessarily demands, but is entirely free in all the rest;
there is nothing extraneous to God, which invincibly determines his Love. Thus
we ought not to wonder if Jesus have particular Wills, though there be not the
like Wills in God to determine them.

But let it be granted, that the Volitions of Jesus Christ are not free, and
that his Light invincibly carries him to will, and to will always in a
determinate manner, in the Construction of his Church: But it is Eternal Wisdom
to which his Soul is united, that must determine his Volitions. We must not for
that Effect suppose Particular Wills in God: But all the Wills of Jesus Christ
are Particular, or have no Occasional Cause to determine their Efficacy, as
have those of God.

For the Soul of Jesus Christ having not an infinite Capacity of Thinking, his
Notices, and consequently his Volitions, are limited. Therefore his Wills must
needs be Particular, since they change according to his diverse Thoughts and
Applications: For probably the Soul of Jesus Christ, otherwise employed in
Contemplating, and tasting the infinite Satisfactions of the True Good,
methinks, ought not, according to Order, desire at once to think on all the
Ornaments and Beauties he would bestow upon his Church, nor on the different
Ways of executing each of his Designs. For Jesus Christ desiring to render the
Church worthy of the infinite Majesty of his Father, would gladly perfect it
with infinite Beauties, by Ways most conformable to Order. He must then
constantly change his Desires; there being but one infinite Wisdom, who can
foresee all, and prescribe himself General Laws for the executing his Designs.

But the future World being to subsist eternally, and to be infinitely more
perfect than the present, it was requisite that God should establish an
Occasional Cause, Intelligent, and Enlightened by Eternal Wisdom, to remedy the
Defects which should unavoidably happen in the Works that were formed by
General Laws. The Collision of Bodies, which determines the Efficacy of the
General Laws of Nature, is an Occasional Cause, without Understanding and
Liberty; and therefore it is impossible but there must be Imperfections in the
World, and Monsters produced, which are not of such account as that the Wisdom
of God should descend to remedy them by Particular Wills. But Jesus Christ
being an Intelligent Occasional Cause, illuminate with the Wisdom of the Word,
and susceptible of Particular Wills, according to the particular Exigencies of
the Work he forms; it is plain that the future World will be infinitely more
perfect than the present, that the Church will be without Spot or Wrinkle, as
we are taught by Scripture; and that it will be a Work most worthy of the
Complacency of God himself.

To the Intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers in Heavenly Places
might be known by the Church, the manifold Wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10.
It Is in this manner that Eternal Wisdom renders, as I may say, to his Father
what he had taken from him. For not permitting him to act by Particular Wills,
he seemed to disable his Almighty Arm: But becoming incarnate, he so brings it
to pass, that God acting in a manner worthy of him, by most Simple and General
Laws, produces a Work, wherein the most Illuminate Intelligences cannot observe
the least Imperfection.

PROOFS founded on REASON.
XV. Having demonstrated, by the Authority of Scripture, that the diverse
Motions of the Soul of Jesus Christ are the Occasional Causes which determine
the Efficacy of the General Law of Grace, by which God would have all Men saved
in his Son; it is necessary to show in general, by Reason, that we are not to
believe God acts in the Order of Grace by Particular Wills. For though by
Reason, separate from Faith, it cannot be demonstrated, that God has
constituted the Wills of Man-God the Occasional Causes of his Gifts; yet it
may, without Faith, be shown, that he distributes them not to Men by Particular
Wills; and that in two manners, a priori, and a posteriori; that is, by the
Idea we have of God, and by the Effects of Grace: For there is nothing but
serves to prove this Truth. First, then, for the Proof of a priori.

A wise Being ought to act wisely. God cannot deny himself: His Ways of acting
ought to bear the Character of his Attributes. Now God knows all, and foresees
all; his Understanding has no Bounds: Therefore his manner of acting ought to
bear the Character of an Infinite Intelligence. But to make Choice of
Occasional, and to establish General Laws, for the executing any work,
manifests a Knowledge infinitely more comprehensive, than to change Volitions
every moment, or to act by Particular Wills. Therefore God executes his Designs
by General Laws, whose Efficacy is determined by Occasional Causes. Certainly
there is a greater Extent of Thought required to make a Watch, which, according
to the Rules of Mechanics, goes regularly of it self, whether it be carried
about with us, or hung up, or shaken, as we please, than to make one which can
go well no longer than he that made it is continually changing something in it,
according to the Situations it is put in: For when there is a greater Number of
Relations to be compared and combined together, there is required a greater
Understanding. An infinite Prescience is requisite to foresee all the Effects
which will happen in consequence of a General Law; and there is nothing of all
this to be foreseen, when the Wills are changed every moment. Therefore, to
establish General Laws, and to choose the most simple, and at the same time the
most exuberant, is a manner of acting worthy of him whose Wisdom has no Bounds.
And, on the contrary, to act by Particular Wills, shows a straightened
Understanding, and which cannot compare the Consequences or Effects of the
least fruitful Causes. The same Truth might farther be demonstrated a priori,
by some other Attributes of God, as by his Immutability; by which M. Des Carts
proves, That every Body tends to move in a right Line, that there is always the
same Quantity of Motion in the World, and other Truths. But these Truths a
priori, are too abstract to convince the Generality of Men of the Truth
advanced. It is more to the Purpose to prove it by the Marks I have given
before, to distinguish Effects produced by Particular Wills from those which
are the necessary Consequences of some General Law.

God, being infinitely Wise, neither wills nor does any thing without Design or
End. But Grace falls often on Hearts so disposed, as to frustrate his
Operation; and therefore falls not on them by a Particular Will, but only by a
necessary Consequence of General Laws, for the same Reason that Rain falls on
the Sands and in the Sea, no less than on Seed-Grounds.

XVI. Though God may punish Sinners, or make them more miserable than they are,
he can have no Design of making them more culpable and criminal; which yet is
an Effect of Grace, and God knows certainly, that, according to their actual
Dispositions, the Graces he bestows will have that calamitous Event. Therefore
Graces are not shed on corrupt Hearts by a Particular Will of God, but by a
necessary Consequence of General Laws, established for the Production of the
best Effects; by the same Reason that on some Occasions too abundant Rains
corrupt and putrify the Fruits of the Earth, though God by his General Will
causes it to rain, to make them thrive.

XVII. If God was minded that some Lands should continue barren, he need but
have ceased to will that the Rain should water them. So if God purposed that
the Hearts of some Sinners should remain hardened, as it would be sufficient for
the Rain of Grace not to water them, he need but leave them to themselves, and
they would corrupt fast enough. Why must we attribute a Particular Will to God,
to make so cruel and unhappy use of the Price of his Son's Blood? But many
others will say, God, in giving Grace to Sinners, has never that Design; and
this, doubtless, seems more reasonable. But if God gives his Grace by a
Particular Will, he has some Particular Design; and whereas Grace has that sad
Effect, God is frustrated in his Expectation, since he gave it with a Design,
and that a particular one, of doing good to a Sinner. For I speak not here of
the Graces, or rather Gifts, explained by St. Paul, in the 12th. Chapter of his
First Epistle to the Corinthians: I speak of the Grace which God gives for the
Conversion of him it is given to, and not of those Gifts God bestows on some
for the Profit of others; such as are the Gifts of Prophecy, of Discernment of
Spirits, of Speaking diverse Tongues, of Healing the Sick, and the like.

XVIII. When the Rain falls in such excess, that the Floods extirpate the
Fruits of the Earth, we ought to conclude this Rain comes by a necessary
Consequence of the General Laws God has established for better Effects. Yet it
is certain God may have appointed it by a Particular Will. For God, for the
Punishment of Men, may will, that the Rains ordained to fecundate the Earth,
may make it barren, on some Occasions. But it is not so with the Rain of Grace,
since God cannot dispense it with Design of punishing Men, much less of making
them more culpable and criminal. Thus it is much more certain that the Rain of
Grace falls by General Wills, than that the common Rains do so; yet most Men
can easily believe, that Rains are the necessary Consequences of the General
Laws of the Communication of Motions; whilst there are few but find some
Reluctance in believing God gives us by General Wills all these Motions of
Graces, whose Effects we our selves prevent.

There Is great likelihood this Disposition of Mind naturally grows from our
thinking God acts almost like our selves, and that he has on all Occasions
Particular Wills for all Men, in something resembling those Desires we have for
our Friends. For though we outwardly confess, that there is an infinite
Difference between God's way of acting, and our own; yet since we ordinarily
judge of others, with relation to our selves, without considering; few Persons
seriously consult the Idea of an Infinitely Perfect Being, when they would
speak of God. And because there is some Air of Novelty in what I say, it
creates a sort of Pain in the Mind, which is reasonably mistrustful of what is
not common and ordinary.

I have a particular Honor and Esteem for all those who, in Matter of
Religion, have a secret Aversion for all Novelties: When this is the Motive
which induces them to oppose my Opinions, they give me no Offense; and whilst
their Prejudices are legitimate, though they should give me heinous
Provocations, I should preserve a Respect for them. For their Disposition of
Mind is infinitely more reasonable than that of others, who fall foul upon all
that bears the Character of Novelty. Nevertheless, as I believe that we are
bound to love and search out Truth with all our Strength, and communicate it to
others, when we believe we have found it; I think that, supposing the Doctrines
of Faith undeniable, we may, and even ought endeavor, to confirm them, and
recommend them to the Reception of all Men. I might vindicate this Opinion, by
the Conduct of the Fathers, and by the Authority of St. Austin, who frequently
exhorts to the clear Discovery and Understanding of those Truths, which we
already believe in the Obscurity of Faith. But I don't suppose there are any so
irrational as to find fault with my Conduct, however prejudiced against my
Opinions. Wherefore I entreat those, who will be at the Pains of reading what I
have written, not to suppose me in an Error, but to suspend their Judgment,
till they have well understood my Opinion; and not to condemn me in General
Terms, nor draw too hastily from my Principles unwarrantable Conclusions.

In Matters so obscure as those of Grace, the Advantage is always on the side
of the Aggressor; and it is not just to make use of it to the Defendant's
Prejudice: He should judge equitably, and without Prepossession compare all the
Consequences deducible from the several Opinions, that he may embrace that
which seems most agreeable to the Goodness and Wisdom of God. For it is
unreasonable to condemn an Opinion unexamin'd, for some unhappy Consequences,
which Men never fail to infer from it when the Imagination is scared, and the
Mind possessed with contrary Notions.

XIX. I know, for Example, that some Persons have said, I make all Prayers
useless, and rob Men of the Confidence they ought to have in God; since, in
their Notions, God acting by General Wills, we must not expect particular
Supplies from Heaven. I confess, if this sole Consequence were included in my
Principles, they would be false, heretical, and impious: For we overturn
Religion, if we take from Men their due Hope and Confidence in God; and it is
partly on that very account I cannot admit of those Men's Opinions which are
most opposite to my manner of Reconciling Grace with Liberty. But so far are my
Principles from leading to Despair, that, on the contrary, they give the
Righteous, and even Sinners, Consolation, in showing them the Means of
obtaining of God the things they stand in need of.

For, if we are Righteous, our Prayers are meritorious; and if meritorious,
Order requires that they should be heard; and Order being with God a Law,
infinitely more inviolable than any other established for the Construction of
his Work, he never fails to do what Order prescribes him. Therefore the Prayers
of the Righteous are never ineffectual; which is what I have established in the
XIX. Section of the Second Discourse.

But if we are Sinners, it is certain our Prayers are of themselves in vain; for
God hears not Sinners, 1 John 2.1. Mat. 9.15. Joh. 11.42.
Order will have it so: Nevertheless we must not despair: We have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. He came into the World to save
Sinners: His Prayers are constantly and most readily heard. Let us pray in his
Name, or address our selves to him. Our Prayers will solicit him to form some
Desires relating to us; and his Desires are the Occasional Causes which
infallibly determine the General Law of Grace, by which God wills the Salvation
of all Men in his Son. This is what I have maintained at large in the Second
Discourse. Thus I am so far from depriving Men of the Confidence they ought to
have in God, that, on the contrary, I precisely show, by the Authority of
Scripture, the way we ought to take for the obtaining of God the Graces that we
want. Therefore I pray my Readers to do me the Justice of Examining my
Opinions, without Prevention; and I am willing they should afterward judge of
them according to their Light and Knowledge. For I submit all my Thoughts, not
only to the Censure of the Church, which has Right to make me quit them by an
Authority, which I shall be ever ready to defer to; but also to the Judgments
of all Particular Persons, by whose Admonitions I shall endavour to profit.

The END.

