A PROPOSAL Humbly Presented to the Right Honorable the HOUSE of COMMONS, by
which it is Reasonable to Suppose a Million may be Raised (and as it is hoped
much more) without Oppressing any Person, every one being at their Liberty to
Pay, or not to Pay.
IF this Honorable Assembly think good to Enact, That no Person of any Rank,
Quality, or Condition whatever, shall in their Wearing Apparel, use or wear any
thing that is not of the true Growth, Product, and Manufactury of this Kingdom;
for and during one whole year, to Commence from the 25th of March next, except
they take out Lisences for the same at a certain Rate; some Rates being
hereafter specified, which are Humbly Submitted to the Candid Censure of this
August Assembly to Judge of the Equality of.

That every Duke, Duchess, Marquis and Marchioness, Earl and Countess, pay for
such Lisence Five Pounds each, and for their Children under their Tuition, Two
Pounds each; that all Persons under the Degree of an Earl and Countess, to a
Knight and his Lady inclusive, do pay for such Lisence Four Pounds each, and
for their Children, One Pound Ten Shillings each; That all Esquires by Birth or
Place, all Gentlemen, all Clergy Men, all Lawyers, all Merchants and Wholesale
Trades Men, and all Officers either in His Majesty's Customs or elsewhere,
whose Salaries are Forty Pound a Year, or above, and their Wives to pay for
such Lisence Two Pounds Ten Shillings each, and for their Children One Pound
each; That all Yeoman Men and Rich Farmers, all Servants, or Men that have any
Place whose Wages or Sallary is Twenty Pounds a Year or upward, and under
Forty; all Retale Tradesmen (except such Handy-Craft Trades that get their
Living only by their Work) and their Wives, do pay for such Lisence one Pound
each, and for their Children Ten Shllings each; That all other, be they
Handy-Craft Trades or Servants, or any other Person not before mentioned, and
their Wives that take such Lisence, shall pay for each Ten Shillings, and for
their Children Five Shillings each.

And it is Humbly Supposed, That at the Rates before specified, it may rise to
a far greater Sum than is first mentioned; but if it should fall short of such
a Sum (as in all probability it will not) yet whatever Money it does raise,
will be present Money, and therefore much better than any that will be longer
in raising; and for the better Effecting the same, Books with Blank Lisences
may be Printed and Numbered, and room left in the said Books where the Lisence
is cut out, to insert the Person's Name, Quality, and Place of Abode that has
such Lisence: And other Cautions are ready to be Proposed, that will be
sufficicnt to secure the Act for being Evaded, or any Person Wronged, if this
most Honorable and August Assembly shall think fit to make such Act, and to
Rectify the Rates before Proposed, if found in any part unequal: And it is
Humbly Supposed, That such Act can be no hindrance or disadvantage to any Trade
whatever, for it may reasonably be conjectured, that most People will take out
such Lisences rather than lay by the Clothes they have already, and buy others
conformable to the Act, which will cost more than the Lisence by much; and it
is hoped, that such Act in one years time may discover such Advantages for the
Public good, as may induce it hereafter to be turned into a perpetual Law; All
which is Humbly Submitted to the Wisdom and Candid Censure of this Honorable
Assembly, by a Real Lover of the present Government, and the Liberty and
Property of the Subject, and is Your Honors most Dutiful, Obedient, and Humble
Servant,

Gilbert Malkin.


