TRUTHS In a true LIGHT. OR, A Pastoral LETTER, to the Reformed Protestants, IN
BARBADOS

Vindicating the Non-Conformists, from the Misrepresentations, commonly made of
them, in that Island, and in other places: AND, Demonstrating, That they are
indeed the truest and soundest part of the Church of ENGLAND.

From, Francis Mackemie, Minister of the Gospel.

2 Pet. 3.17. Beloved, Seeing ye know these things before, beware -- Lest ye
fall from your own stedfastness.

EDINBVRGH. Printed by the Successors of Andrew Anderson, 1699.

Truths in a true Light.
An Epistle, To the Reformed PROTESTANTS of Barbados.
Gentlemen;
IT has been too notorious, what Diabolical Designs, and base Plots the
Emissaries of Rome, have contrived, promoted, and attempted, to over throw that
Glorious work, and cause of Reformation, or to lead or cajole us back into our
antichristian Slavery, Idolatry, and Supersttion; and for Effectuating thereof,
they have not been wanting, neither have stuck at any thing, to widen our
breaches, augment our Differences, hinder our mutual Condescentions, and our
endeavored Accommodations, raising implacable heats, and keeping us asunder by
Distinguishing Characters, and Discriminating Names; setting up contrary
Interests; and often raising violent Storms of bitter Persecutions, instigating
the Ascendent Party, still to trample upon the Non-Con's, and by all means to
render them black, and odious; and all this, and much more, to ruin
Protestants, and weaken the Protestant Interest. And it deserves to be
bewailed, that in all their Jesuitical Intrigues and evil designs, they soon
found too many Protestant Tools, unadvisedly to concur with such sworn Enemies
of the Reformation; too much whereof appeared in the late Reigns; and I wish
there may not be found among us still, too many Incendiaries, to raise
Dissentions, and stir up unchristian Heats, among Reformed Protestants, that we
may become a prey still to the Common Enemy.

But blessed be God, for our seasonable, and happy Revolution, that has in a
great measure broke the deep projects, of that Jesuitical Party; and by an
Established Liberty, to all Dissenting Protestants, has bound the Hands of
former Persecutors. I wish the Persecuting Spirit, and Inclination, were gone
too; and that many unawares were not promoting, and encouraging again, the old
Malice, and grand Designs of the common Enemy, by their Tongues, in railing,
reproaching, and decrying, a great part of the purest Reformation, under the
Discriminating names of Presbyterian, Puritan, Fanatic, Calvinist, and what
not? And how many are simply led away, by a hot, violent party, and suffer
themselves to be imposed upon, who know not the matters of our lesser
Differences, and say little against Intolerable Popery, and the most dangerous
Haereticks, but all their Industrious Venom, is spewed out and levelled against
their Protestant Brethren, of the same Reformation, and of the same Kingdom;
and yet seem to be in Charity with the same particular Profession in other
parts of the World.

All who study Histories of the Protestant Reformation, may be assured, that
the Reformed Church of England, consisted all along of two sorts of men; first,
many Sober, Moderate, Sound, and Tender men, who never were for Persecution of
Protestants, and would willingly have parted with many unscriptural Ceremonies
for the Churches Peace, and gaining Dissenters; and the Seed or Root of these
have been from the Original of the Reformation, and abounded in the Reigns of
Q. Eliz. and K J I. of England; and were Anti-arminian, and faithful to the
first Doctrine, and Protestant Articles of the Church of England, and continued
the prevailing party, until the Reign of Chapter the I. There was also another,
hot, and Violent party, who were ready to brand the Sober, and Serious of their
own Church, as Puritans, Precisians, and Fanatics, betrayed their own
Articles, embraced Arminianism, and grew more zealou^ for Rites, and
Ceremonies, than for the Essentials, and Substantials of Religion; crying up
Uniformity and Conformity, more than true Christianity; acting Supra-Canon, and
instead of coming farther from Rome, by a further Reformation, which our first
Reformers designed, and the moderate party desired; they both in Doctrine,
Practice and Ceremonies, made several advances toward Rome, as Dr. Du Moulin,
sometimes History-Professor of Oxford, relates in his Short History thereof;
which advances gave Popes and Papists no small hopes of Englands return to
Rome, as a Jesuit affirms, showing the changes in the Church of England, and
its affinity to Rome, for, he says, The Doctrine is altered in many things;
The Pope is no longer Anti christ: Images are tolerated* Praedestination on
fore seen works: Universal Grace: Inherent Righteousness, are all granted:
Free Will is Preached up: they have given to the 39. Articles a Catholic
sense: they acknowledge the Authority of the Church in deciding Controversies,
about matters of Faith, and interpretation of Scripture: they make frequent use
of the more venerable Names of Priests and Altars; and to be a Calvinist in
England, is to be a Traitor, and a Heretic, or worse; to which may be added,
bowing to the East, and Altar; and setting up unlighted Candles in Churches,
which Dr Warmestry, one of their own spoke against, and said, That they were a
fit Emblem of our Ignorant, and unprofitable Clergy, which filled up the
Candlesticks of the Churches, but gave no Light. And this party was Rampant in
Lauds time, who had a party of Monstrous tools, as Montague, Heilin, Poc^nton,
Dow, Couzins, Shelford, Beel, Stafford, Watts, and Fedder, of no small figures;
with many more, who under their own hands, Published Arminian, and downright
Popish Doctrines, and Tyrannical and enslaving Maxims of State, and were so
countenanced, and protected by the King, and some of the Court, that they
carried all before them, and it was no small Crime for any to speak against
their Romish Innovations, and Intolerable Usurpations, both in Church and
State, as in the Cruel unchristian, and Illegal punishments inflicted on some
of their own Communion, until their Designs were seasonably opposed and
checked, by such of their Church who were sincere, and uncorrupted, when backed
by Lords and Commons Ass^mbled in Parliament, in the year 1640 complaining in
bold speeches of those that went after the Romish Way: and though Laud had
justly meted to him what he measured out to others, which gave a considerable
blow to his party, and by that Revolution of Affairs, greatly frustrated the
hopes of Rome, who were filled with great Expectations of Changes, by their
Agents and Deputies in England; and though many suffer of almost Twenty years
abducation from the Pulpits, during the Civil Wars; yet it is to be feared the
Seed and Spawn of this faction, has been growing since in the Church, and so
prevailing a party, as were able to obstruct that Union, accommodation and
Comprehension, designed between the Church of England and Dissenters, first by
a Commission from our most Gracious KING, and late Gracious QUEEN, and next by
a Convocation, who had but very small regard to their Majesty's Supremacy in
Ecclesiastics, and who so vigorously opposed what they had so lately addressed
their Majesty's for.

I should gladly embrace an opportunity to inform such of you, as have never
been in Europe, what Presbyterians and Dissenters are; who suffer your selves
to be strangely imposed on, and know little more of them, but
misrepresentations and calumnies thrown upon them, by malicious Ignorant and
ill-minded men, as if they were Monsters, and most insufferable in Church and
State; though they are a considerable part of the Protestant Reformation,
agreeing in all points of Faith, and Divine Ordinances, or parts of Worship,
with the Established Church of England; and the likest to them of any
Protestants, differing only in Ceremonies, Government and Discipline, of which
I shall hint a little in this Epistle. Therefore in Scotland, they were the
first Reformers of that Kingdom from Popery, though originally by mean and
inconsiderable men, and in opposition to a strong Court party, and not only
without, but against the Authority of the State, which demonstrated the more of
the hand of Divine Providence therein. And notwithstanding all their
strugglings with Popery and Praelacy; which in the late Reigns have been
obtruded upon them, contrary to Oaths, Laws, and repeated Establishments of
that Kingdom; yet they went a greater length in Reformation, than their
Neighbors in England, who upon prudential Considerations retained some
Ceremonies, least it should be dangerous to Reform all at once, as Scotland
did. And in that Kingdom Presbyterians are now the Established Church, and
those of the Church of England there, are the Dissenters, and have far less
Reason for it, than we in England.

As to those of England, they were from the beginning a part of the English
Reformation; for the best Histories inform us, those who chiefly had the first
managment of the Reformation, were divided into two Classes, much what equal in
number, and quality of Interest. Some of them, as Bishop Hooper, Coverdale,
John Fox, John Rogers, and Peter Martyr appeared vigorously for an absolute and
thorough Reformation, according to the Model Calvin had given of it, and so it
would have been a Presbyterian Reformation; but others, as Cranmer, Ridley,
Cox, and others were peremptorily of the Judgment, that a Reformation in all
points at first, would be of dangerous consequence, and that at once to reform
all, would be to reform none at all; and though the Judgment of the latter
prevailed, yet all approved of the former as best, though some approved not the
juncture as seasonable, until the People who were almost all Papists, were
better instructed and disposed to receive the impressions of this entire, and
perfect Reformation; therefore they were left not without hopes of a further
Reformation, from their Posterity and Successors, which we were assured of by a
sentence in the Preface to old Common Prayer Books, but left out of the new.
And so it was for that time agreed on, that for the better gaining of Papists,
some Ceremonies, and a great part of the Roman Service, were to be kept. Thus
both parties concurred and united in hopes of a further Reformation, until the
bloody Marian Persecution under which some of both Classes fell and dyed
Martyrs, others became Refugees abroad; and upon their return, instead of a
further Reformation, Uniformity Acts were promoted, and passed in the first of
Eliz. Yet during the Lives of some good Bishops, and for several years, no
Subscription, nor use of all the Common Prayer, nor an exact observance of the
Ceremonies was urged; until Whitgift ascended the Chair, whose zeal for
Ceremonies was boldly impugned by Learned Cartwright. And now, Subscription and
Conformity was required, under penalty of Suspension and Deprivation, and John
Fex the Martyrologer, required to Subscribe, who refused, pulling out of his
Pocket his Greek Testament, and told the Archbishop, He would subscribe
nothing but That: Yet his gravity and good Service to the Church protected him,
that he dyed quietly in a low Station in the Church. But when he perceived the
retaining the Ceremonies did not attain the first Design of the Reformers, in
gaining Papists, and saw the mischief, the imposing of them on Protestants, was
like to do, he afterward said of them, God take them from us, or us from them!
Harder things were soon contrived and imposed, to the casting out of many able
and godly Ministers, followed by multitudes of People; and these being cast
out, and kept out to this day, are Non conformists and Dissenters, and the most
considerable part Presbyterians; and those of Ireland are partly from England,
partly from Scotland, who since the Conquest joined with others in Settling
that Kingdom.

And as to the Protestant and foreign Churches, they are either Calvinists or
Lutherans: But all the Calvinist Churches as lately of France, Geneva, Holland,
Piedmont, and many other places of high and low Germany, are Presbyterians: The
Lutherans differ from us both in many things, and indeed are much degenerated
from Luthers primitive though imperfect Reformation: So that by all
computation, Presbyterians and Calvinists, with such as are in full Communion
with them, are the greater part, and from the Judgment of our first Reformers,
are the better part of the Reformation; the Church of England not excepted,
whose Reformation is not yet entire and perfect, as you may learn from the
Preface to the Common Prayer, and from the K. and Qs. Commission for a further
Reformation.

But that you may more fully and distinctly know them, and not suffer your
selves for the future to be imposed upon; I shall as one of the meanest of
them, show what at this day they believe and do; or wherein they agree, and are
the same, with the Established Church of England; and next what they dissent
from, and neither will nor dare do, without Sin; and all this only for your
Information, without the least design or intention, of raising any new debate,
on beginning any Controversy on those differences, sufficiently Controverted by
many hands on both sides.

And first, I shall inform you, what they believe and do, in Unity with the
Church of England, whereby every serious and intelligent Reader, may readily
perceive two things 1. That we are Protestant Brethren, and in Unity with them
in the main, great and Substantial points of the Christian and Protestant
Religion; and therefore deserve not to be treated, as many Ignorantly do, and
particularly in this Island. 2. That of all Protestants that differ from them,
we differ in the least and smallest matters. Therefore,

1. They receive and believe the Bible, the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of
God, from the immediate inspiration of Heaven, and in its original, and its
Orthodox Translations, they universally embrace it, as the complete and full
Rule of their Faith and Manners, and the only Directory in all matters of
Religion.

2. They believe and receive, as agreeable to their Confession of Faith, the 39
Articles, in all the Doctrinal Articles, except such as relate to Ceremonies
and Government, which the Establishment of that Kingdom obliges them not to
Subscribe, receiving the 3d Article in a Ptotestant sense; and this so
qual^ifyed most, if not all their Ministers, have Subscribed as a condition of
their Established Liberties and Tolleration.

3. They believe, own, maintain and perform all Ordinances, and parts of Gods
Instituted Service and Worship in Public, Private and Secret, that are
mentained and professed by any Reformed Protestants, as Preaching, Praying,
Reading, Hearing, Meditation, Singing of Psalms, Baptism, and the Lords Supper,
etc.

4. They firmly believe, and strenuously hold, a fixed and standing Ministry to
be always in the Church, to the End of the World; and Churches to be furnished
with all Officers warranted in the Scriptures, duly qualifyed and orderly set
apart, according to the Word of God; and after a long and most strict
Examination and trial, some are allowed first to Preach only as Probationers,
or Expectants for a proof of their Preaching gifts, and Praying abilities, and
of a Holy Conversation; and when called to the Pastoral Charge, submitting to a
second Examination, they are orderly set apart or Ordained to the whole Work of
the Ministry; according to the Apostles phrase, by the Imposition of the hands
of the Presbytery.

5. They abhor, renounce and abjure Popery, Idolatry, Superstition and Haeresy,
with every Error, they are convinced and persuaded is contrary to the Word of
God; universally believing the Popes of Rome, to be the Grand Antichrist.

6. They hold and maintain an Authoritative Government, Order, Discipline and
Censure, committed by Jesus Christ the Head of the Universal Church, unto
Church Officers appointed by him, consisting in Admonition, Suspension and
Excommunication; and this Government specifically distinct from all Civil
Government.

7. They Baptize both Adult Persons, and Children of believing Parents,
professing the Truth of the Gospel.

8. They believe, and always maintain the morallity of the Fourth Commandment,
and perpetuity of a Sabbath, with the strict observation of the Lords Day,
wholly to be employed and spent in the Public, Private and Secret Service, and
Worship of God, allowing works of absolute necessity, and necessary Mercy.

9. They conscientiously and faithfully keep and observe, all Solemn Days, and
occasional Times, set apart upon extraordinary, and emergent Providence of
God, for Humiliation, Fasting and Prayer.

10. Though they abhor as much as any, all vain Swearing and Cursing, yet they
maintain and allow the Lawfulness, of Witnessing to Truth, or Conviction of
Falsehood by a Solemn Oath, when called thereunto by a Lawful Magistrate, in
matters of moment; though they rather like to do it, after the Scripture Pattern,
with a Solemn lifting up of the Hand to Heaven.

11. They hold and maintain Magistracy and Civil Government, to be an Ordinance
of God; and many of them highly Zealous for Monarchy, as in Scotland, England,
France and Ireland, though others in Geneva, Holland and Germany, are for
Aristocracy, as the Government of those places.

12. They are highly for School-Education and Learning, and Academical
accomplishments, for fitting and preparing men in an ordinary way, for
Ministerial Offices in the Church; not excluding, but including particular
Gifts, and Qualifications, and a Call from God to that great Work.

Reader, They are the same in these, and most things material, with the
Established Church of England; therefore beware of Reproaching Presbyterians as
the worst; as bad if not worse than Papists; least ye wound and reflect upon
your selves; unto whom they are likest of any other Dissenters, that are
Protestants. Now though we agree in all these things and more, yet we differ or
dissent in three or four Things, to all which I shall speak, branching out the
particulars, as far as an Epistolary Dedication will allow of. 1. In Common
Prayer and Ceremonies. 2 In your Canons. 3. In your Government or Praelacy. 4.
In your Discipline and Censures.

I I shall begin with Common Prayer and Ceremonies; and concerning them, we
differ in these particulars, waving many of our Reasons, to avoid Offense.

1. We dare not receive nor comply with stinted Composed and Imposed Forms, or
Lyturgies of Worship, because not Commanded nor Warranted by the Word of God,
nor known in the purest and Original Centuries of the Gospel Churches, but
composed without Divine Commission, and required merely by Men, in the
Degenerate and latter Ages of the Gospel.

2. Though we deny not altogether, but allow many Forms of Prayer on many
Cases, as studied Forms for ones-self, and Composed easy and plain Forms for
the Ignorant and Vnskillful, as young ones, early Converts, as Crutches for the
Weak and Lame; yet we cannot nor dare not, Ordain and call any man to be a
Minister of the Gospel, and to take Charge of Souls, that has not given
sufficient proof, and demonstration of their Praying and Preaching Gifts and
Abilities at all Times, and suitably or pertinently for all occasions and
conditions, without prescribed Forms read in a Book; and we never denied the
Lawfulness of joining with the sound Words of others in Prayer.

3. Such Ministers as have received of God, and have given sufficient Proof to
many, of their Praying Gifts and Abilities, dare not ordinarily, and in their
ordinary Administrations, tie themselves to, and only use these prescribed and
Book Forms, least they should be guilty of not using and improving, but hiding
or burying their Gifts and Talents, and so incur the Character of Unlawful
Servants

4. We dare not read as a part of Public Worship, the Aphocrypha Books, which
are enjoined and read, seeing they are acknowledged by all, not to be Canonical
Scripture, and owned by many, and in many things false and fabulous;
especially, while we have the Scripture by us, that Perfect Rule of Faith and
manners.

5. We cannot nor dare not allow in Public Worship, which (should be for the
Edification of all) that inarticulate, and unintelligible way and noise, of the
People, all or most confusedly speak together, one man's voice drowning the
accent of another, which seems to be so far from Order, that it appears
confusion, as Service in an unknown Tongue. Hickeringill tells us, he suffers
no such babbling in his Church at All Saints in Colchester, as is made by
alternate Responses.

6. We cannot allow Women to speak in the Church, as many of yours, in your
whole Service, talk more in a Day, than some Quaker-Women, condemned by most
for that practice.

7. We dare not add to the Sacrament of Baptism, an airy Sign of the Cross that
perishes with the using, more than Spittle, Oil and Salt; nor allow the
Spiritual Signification imposed by men, and explained in the 30th. Canon;
Seeing Baptism signifies all that and more; and you own in the Form for private
Baptism, that it is valid and sufficient without it. And further it is abused
at this Day to Idolatry in Romish Churches; Cranmers great Argument for
abolishing Images out of the Churches, though some are got in again; and most
of them into their Book of Devotion.

8. We cannot comply with that Popish posture (not our Saviors posture) of
Kneeling at the Lords Supper, which cannot be more Reverent, nor so suitable to
a Table Feast, as his was; and notwithstanding the Rubric, was originally a
consequence of Transubstantiation, and came in with it 1200. years after our
Savior, and was a stumbling block to many Reformed Protestants, highly
resented by Beza, and many more, and proved so grateful to Papists, that Bonner
having learned that Cranmer and Ridley had kept this, (and other Ceremonies)
said, that he doubted not, since their Broth went down with them so well, that
er'e long they should eat of their Beef too.

9. We cannot, we dare not in Baptism, exclude the Parents from engaging and
promising in behalf of their own Children, and take in other Sureties, whom all
know, and none expect, they will endeavor to perform what they promise and
undertake; which indeed is impossible for any to perform, especially when more
Ignorant, and more Irreligius Sureties are called in than the excluded Parents,
as Papists, Ignorant and profane Persons, Strangers, and sometimes Young
Children, which we apprehend to be a willful promoting of known perfidiousness,
and a downright mocking of God.

10 Because we find the Common Prayer Book in its several parts translated out
of several Popish Books; the Frayers are taken out of the Breviary, the
Administration of Sacraments, Burial, Matrimonies, and Visiting of the Sick,
are taken out of the Romish Rituall; the Consecration of the Lords Supper,
Collects, Epistles and Gospels, are taken out of the Mass Book; (though some
things are left out, as Prayers to the Virgin Mary, Saints and Angels:) This is
to us, one just prejudice against the use of it.

11. We cannot away with, nor dare we assent to, nor believe, many things and
sayings in the Common Prayer, nor use that Corrupt Translation of the Psalms,
while God has provided us with a better, we dare not pretend the imitation of
our Saviors Miraculous Feast by that Popish and Mock-Feast of Lent, consisting
not in abstinence but in choosing of Meats In, Te Deum, we dare not say, all
the Earth worship thee, while we are assured the greatest part are Infidels to
this Day, and neither Worship nor know the true God; we dare not assent to the
Damning Sentence of Athenasius's Creed which many of the Eldersons of your
Church wished it never had been in Common Prayer. We dare not say, Every person
Baptized is immediately Regenerated; for so all Baptized should be Saved. We
dare not alter, add to, and diminish from the Scriptures, the Word of God, as
the Common Prayer, and the corrupt Translation of the Psalms does;
particularly, we cannot consent to the taking away of the Scripture Titles of
the Psalms, given from Immediate Inspiration, and putting Popish and Lattine
Titles in their Room; In the Burial of the Dead, we dare not call every one,
whether we know them or not, our dear Sister or Brother, and as a part of
Public Worship say, We have a sure and certain Hope of their Resurrection,
unto eternal Life; and to make no difference between the Wicked and Godly; a
Protestant and a Papist; an Atheist once Baptized, and a serious Christian;
allowing them the same Charity and Character, seems an encouragement to
ungodliness, and a discouragement to Holiness.

12. Though we are for Visiting, Instructing, convincing, admonishing, praying
for, and comforting the Sick, according as we find their state and condition,
various and different, Yet we apprehend the Burial Service to be Symbolizing
with Rome, and no part of God's Public Worship, or any Commanded part of a
Ministers Work, and though it is said, It has no relation to the dead at all,
but only for the Edification of the Living, why was it denied to the Living at
the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Henry Vaughan? why is it denied to the Living
at the Funeral of Unbaptized, and Excommunicated persons? Why is it read often
times when the People are gone, except two that remain to cover the Corpse? Why
do the deceased persons pay for it? and lately there was a poor man, to whom it
was denied, because unbaptised? Actions with vulgar People, are more
demonstrative, than Words. And what Edification does that afford to the Living,
that is read at the entry of the Church yard, of which few or none hear one
Word? and why is not all either read in the Desk, or at the Grave?

II. The Second thing wherein we dissent from you is, your Canons, which few of
your selves obey and observe, no, not such as have Sworn Obedience to them.
They are most Arbitrary Decrees, (when not ratifyed by Authority;) not at all
suitable to the state of the Church; neither dare we take the Oath of Assent
and Consent, that they contain nothing contrary to the Word of God, while both
you and we are otherwise persuaded.

III. A Third thing wherein we dissent, is concerning the Government of the
Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Chauncellors, Commissaries, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, Arch Deacons, etc. as not having foundation in the Scriptures, nor
the Government of the Gospel-Churches, nor agreeable to the Government of the
first Centuries after our Savior. And though we are for Scripture Bishops both
name and office, and wish with Dr. Wild in his poetical flight, Where there is
one, there were ten; neither would refuse the Government of the first two or
three hundred years after our Savior; and it is known most of the
Presbyterians in England ostered to embrace Dr. Usher, his model of Church
Government; yet there are several things in which we dissent, and which many of
yours dislike in English or Diocesan Bishops, or Praelacy; as,

1. Creating and Erecting new Offices and Officers, besides what Christ gave to
and Instituted in his Church, the Names whereof are not so much as known or
mentioned in the Scriptures.

2. Promoting Praeeminence, and destroying that Ministerial Parity, our Savior
Commanded, and Inoustriously maintained in his days, for bidding all Mastery
and Dominion over one another.

3. Their asseming high and Lordly Titles, and Temporal Dignities, and Civil
places, being advanced above most Peers and States men: This was offensive to
good Old Latimer, who in a Sermon advised King Ed. 6 to untord all the Lordly
Bishops, and remove them from all their Temporal Offices and Employments, that
they might follow their Spiritual Plough Tail.

4. Their frequenting the Court, attending the Council Table, and sitting in
Parliaments, to the great neglect of their Charge and Work, being above
Preaching, Praying and Administering of Sacraments, and Church Government too;
therefore a Non Preaching Bishop, called a Preaching Bishop, a Preaching
Coxcomb. And what prejudice would it be to the State, but what a great
advantage to the Church, if the Government saw it meet to revive again, that
old vote of a Church of England Parliament, recorded in Bakers Chronicles, That
no Bishop should have any Vote in Parliament, nor any Judicial power, in the
Star Chamber, nor bear any sway in Temporal Affairs, and that no Clergy man
should be in the Commission of the Peace.

5. Their Grasping at a larger Charge over many great Congregations of a Vast
Diocese, whereby an Episcopal Charge, and care can no more be performed, or
Discharged in the sight of God, (As over the Diocese of London, and all English
Plantations; while so much Time is spent at Court, and in secular affairs,)
than the Italian Bishop can be Metropolitan of the Christian World.

6 Though they have Forms prescribed for many things, yet no Forms nor
Directions, for trial and examination of Candidates or Expectants, for
Ordination to the Ministry; For turning one of the 39 Articles into Latin, and
proving it from Scripture, is already done to their hands; so that any
Grammarian or School Boy may do it.

IV Lastly, We diss^nt from the Discipline and Censures of the Church of
England; and though they are without all Church Discipline and Censure in every
Plantation of America; yet as it is managed in England, many of your own Sons
dislike it, as well as we; especially in these particulars.

1. Its absoluteness; being exercised by a sole Authority in the breast of a
particular Diocesan, acting all in his own name, without Commission or Warrant
from any other; and Sir Francis Bacon who was highly for the Church of England,
tells us, the Bishop gives orders alone, excommunicates alone, and affirms it
to be without Example in all good Government; for Kings and Monarchs have their
Councillors, the Courts of Kings bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, have many
Judges; and the Chancellor has the assistance of 12 Masters of Chauncery. And
I am assured, the Scripture warrant is directed to a number, Dic Ecclesiae,
tell the Church.

2. The Authority and Power of Discipline is generally managed by Delegation,
or Deputation of Lay Persons, as Chauncellours, Officials, Registers, Sumners,
Canonists etc. choosing such as helps in Government, rather than the Clergy,
which the Lord Verulam affirms to be contrary to all rules of good Government;
for Offices of confidence and skill, cannot be exercised by Deputies; the
confidence and trust being Personal and Inhaerent, cannot be transposed to an
ignorant, and unqualifyed Lay-Person, more than such can be deputed, to Preach
the Word, and Administer the Sacraments.

3. The English Church Discipline is turned into a mere Money matter, and the
use of Christ's Keys is made Mercenary, punishing the Purses, and not
afflicting the Consciences of the Delinquents; as a great man of the Church, in
a Sermon Preached at one of the Universities, told them, Claves Christi pulsant
crumenas, non verberant Conscientias And Hickringale assures us from his
certain knowledge, that Guinea's will procure Absolutions from Drs Commons,
without any Confession or show of Repentance; yea, without a sight of the
guilty party; a more barefaced practice than of the Romish Churches, who
always use Confession, and Penance for a Cloak.

I hope these things will engage you to be more favorable and charitable to
Dissenters, until you more rationally weigh and confider the grounds and
reasons of their Dissent, for they may sometimes and in some cases be the purer
and better part of a Nation; as the Church of Israel in Egypt, and in all their
other Captivities were Dissenters: The three worthies in Daniel were Dissenters
in Babylon; and Daniel under Darius, was a Dissenter. Our Savior, all his
Disciples and Apostles, with their Christian followers, were Dissenters, until
Constantines Reign; and all Christians in Mohammedan Dominions, and Pagan
Countries all Protestants in Popish Countries; and your selves in Scotland, and
all foreign parts, are Dissenters; and it were hard and uncharitable to
condemn all these as Traitors and Schismatics. In favor of some Dissenters, I
shall only lay down one saying from your Hale of Schism, All pious assemblies
in times of persecution and corruption, are the only lawful Congregations, and
the public Assemblies, though according to form of Law, are indeed nothing but
Riots and Conventicles, if stained with Corruption and Superstition

Therefore let us still value and esteem unity in Doctrine, and Worship, and
the greater and more weighty matters, preferring it before an exact and
accurate Uniformity, in every Punctilio of Circumstance, and Ceremony, which no
Nation has hitherto attained, the Church of England not excepted; for what
uniformity is between your Cathedral and Parochial Worship? between such
Churches as have Organs, and those that want them? between such as Sing, or
Chant the Service, and such as do not? between such as read the whole Service,
and others that Mince it, and read but a part? between those that begin with a
free Prayer, and such as do not? And in the same Congregations, what Uniformity
is between such as use Responses, and such as do not? between such as Bow to
the East, or the Altar, and such as do not? between such as bow the knee, and
those that only bow the head, at the Name or Word, Jesus. What uniformity
between such as Sing Psalms, and most that do not? And I find many of the Sons
of the Church, break uniformity, and Canons, as well as their Neighbors: what
uniformity-act, or Common Prayer, allows any to begin with a Prayer of their
own, as the greatest and best have done, though others call it a Geneva trick?
What uniformity-act enjoins Organs, and Singing Boys: and where is bowing to
the East and Altar, with all other Church Honors, commanded? What warrants the
use of the public Form for private Baptism? why is the burial Service read
over any Dissenters, that are all excommunicated by your Canons?

Let me humbly and earnestly, with all Submission address the conformable
Clergy, in this Island, to instruct their People, that they and we profess the
same Christian and Protestant Religion, only with some alterations in external
Ceremonies and circumstances; that we may unite in affection and strength,
against the common Enemy of our Reformation, and concur in the great work of
the Gospel, for the manifestation of Gods Glory, and the Conviction, Conversion
and Salvation of Souls in this Island, instructing such as are Ignorant, in the
principal and great things of Religion, promoting virtue and true holiness, and
Preaching down and reproving all Atheism, irreligion, and profanity, sealing
and confirming all by an universal Copy, pattern and example, of a holy, and
Ministerial Life and Conversation.

I have often done it, and I continue to Pray for the zealous concurrence of
the Secular power, and Civil Magistrate, to whom the Sword of Justice is
committed, for the terror of the Evil doers, and praise of those that do well,
that for promoting a visible Reformation in this Island, from the Evils that
have long exposed us to the heavy Judgments of a Righteous God, they would
first reform their own Lives, and impartially execute these Good Laws,
according to their Oaths, against all Blaspheming, Cursing, Swearing, Whoredom,
Sabbath breaking, all Prophanity, Impiety and Irreligion, that our Land may be
exalted by Righteousness, and Sin may no longer be our Reproach.

Candid Reader, They frequently charge Dissenters that when others are the
Ascendent, they cry out against Persecution, and for Moderation; but when they
are uppermost, they are as severe as any; The former is natural for all men,
that when they are mastered, or like to be conquered, they cry out for Quarter,
and plead moderation, as we find the Church of England, showed as much of it as
any, when there was occasion, and ground for it. What condescensions and fair
promises did they allow K. Charles II. to make, yea, and to take the Coronation
Oath of Scotland, to maintain Presbyterian Government there, and also to give
Solemn Protestations at Breda, to Dissenters of England, confirmed by a
Declaration for Liberty to all tender Consciences? but soon after the
Restoration, all was violated and soon forgot. The next time they were under
any fears, was at the Discovery of the Grand Popish Plot, and fresh pretenses
for moderation were then Published; but continued not long, ending in a Sham
plot, and a new Persecution And the next trouble the Church of England was in,
was when the Seven Bishops were in the Tower, only for refusing to engage upon
their Honors to answer at the K Bench, to what should be objected against
them; and then in their Petition to the late K they professed a great deal of
tenderness to Dissenters; and about the time of the Prince of O. his landing,
all their Discourse was of Union, and Comprehension; and afterward confirmed
it by an Address, and their Majesty's promised to endeavor an Agreement,
between the Church of England and Protestant Dissenters; and in adhering to his
Royal Promise and design, first secured to Dissenters an established Liberty,
and soon after issued forth a Commission, founded on the Preface to the Common
Prayer; which the Convocation, after they were secured and safe from their late
fears and troubles, took no further notice of, but in opposition to all their
lately professed tenderness, refused to part with one indifferent Ceremony, in
obedience to their Majesty's Authority, or for Union with Dissenters.

That the God of all Grace, would bless the World with a better Spirit, is the
Prayer of,

Sirs, Your devoted Servant in all Civility, FRANCIS MACKEMIE.
Barbades, December 28. 1697.
POSTSCRIPT.
AMong the misrepresentadons of the principles and practices of the
Presbyterians in this Island. I cannot for bear taking special notice of one;
because it strikes so very deep into the Vitals of Religion: It Is, that the
Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, as taught by the rigid Presbyterians of
the Ki^k of Scotland, is contrary to the Word of God, and a great
discouragement to Piety. Though I owe not my birth, but a part of my Education
only to that Kingdom, yet having read many of their Books, heard several of
their Ministers, for several years, on all Doctrines of the Christian Religion,
and having always with me, their Confession of Faith, their Catechisms, with
many found and excellent Treatises; I do profess my self fully of their
Sentiments in this, and all other Doctrines of Faith, and in Gods strength
shall never swerve nor prevaricate: And in their behalf do profess and declare,
they hold no Predestination, but what is maintained in all the Calvinist,
Reformed Churches abroad, and by all the Presbyterians in England and Ireland;
and further, the same which is held and maintained by the Estabeished Church of
England. If I prove this, I hope you will own they have been palpably
misrepresented; And that I may effectually and undenyably do it, I shall first
lay down the Doctrine of the Church of Scotland, both from their Catechisms,
and Confession of Faith* In their Shorter Catechism, learned and taught by many
in the Church of England, they teach, That the Decrees of God, are the eternal
Counsel of his will, whereby for his own Glory he has foreordained whatsoever
comes to pass. In their larger Catechism, they are somewhat fuller, and teach,
that the Decrees of God are the wise, free and holy acts of the Counsel of his
Will, whereby from all Eternity, he has for his own Glory, unchangeably
foreordained whatsoever comes to pass in time, especially concerning Angels and
Men: And in the following Q they further teach, That God by an eternal and
immutable Decree, out of his mere Love, for the Praise of his Glorious Grace,
to be manifested in due time, has Elected some Angels to Glory, and in Christ
has chosen some men unto Eternal Life, and the means thereof, and according to
his Sovereign power, and the unsearcheable Counsel of his Will, whereby he
extends or with holds favor as he pleases, has passed by and
foreordained the rest to dishonor and wrath, to be for their Sin inflicted,
to the praise of his Justice. And what is for our purpose in their Confession
of Faith, is this: -- 3d. Parag. By the Decrees of God, for the manifestation
of his Glory, some Men and Angels are Predestined unto everlasting Life, and
others sore-ordained to everlasting Death. 4. Those Angels and Men thus
predestined and fore ordained to everlasting Life, are particularly and
unchangeably designed, and their number so certain, and definite, that it
cannot be either increased or diminished. 5. Those of mankind that are
predestined unto Life, God before the Foundation of the World was laid,
according to his eternal and immutable purpose, and the secret Counsel and good
pleasure of his Will, has chosen in Christ unto everlasting Glory, out of his
mere free grace and love, without any foresight of Faith or good Works, or
perseverance in either of them, or any other thing in the Creature, as Causes
or Conditions moving him thereunto, and all to the praise of his glorious
Grace. 6 As God has appointed the Elect unto Glory, so has he by the Eternal
and most free purpose of his Will, foreordained all the means thereunto;
wherefore they who are Elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed by Christ,
are effectually called unto Faith in Christ by his Spirit working in due
season, are Justified, Adopted and Sanctified, and kept by his power through
Faith unto Salvation: neither are any other redeemed by Christ, Effectually,
Justified, Adopted, Sanctified and Saved, but the Elect only. 7. The rest of
mankind God was pleased according to the unsearchable Counsel of his own Will,
whereby he extends or with holds mercy as he pleases, for the glory of his
Sovereign power over his Creatures, to pass by and ordain them to Dishonor and
Wrath for their Sin, to the praise of his glorious Justice. 8. The Doctrine of
this high Mystery of Predestination, is to be handled with special prudence and
care, that men attending the will of God revealed in his Word, and yielding
obedience thereunto, may from the certainty of their Effectual Vocation, be
assured of their Eternal Election. So shall this Doctrine afford matter of
Praise, Reverence and Admiration, and of humility, diligence, and abundance of
consolation to all that sincerely obey the Gospel. Let any man make it appear
that this is not the unanimous Doctrine of the Church of Scotland, and that
they teach any other Doctrine disagreeing hereunto, Et erit mihi magnus Apollo.

I must confess I have often heard, how some upon all occasions, have bitterly
run at the Doctrine of Predestination, as if none maintained such a Doctrine
but we; And a Minister of your Island, called it, A damnable Doctrine: and I
now justly wonder to receive such a Character of Predestination from some, that
it is contrary to the word of God, and a great discouragement to Piety.
Therefore I am now to produce the received and approved Doctrine of the Church
of England, concerning Predestination, since the Reformation to this Day; and
shall begin with the 39 Articles agreed upon in a Convocation, held at London
1552, in the Reign of Edw 6 and requently renewed and ratifyed in the following
Reigns, and continued the established Doctrine of the Church to this day, which
Dissenters with some allowed exceptions subscribe as their own Doctrine, as a
legal qualification for our Liberty. I wish you would read and consider again
the 17th. Article, Viz. Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of
God, whereby before the foundations of the World were laid, he has constantly
decreed by his Counsel, secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation,
those, whom he has chosen in Christ Jesus out of mankind, and to bring them by
Christ to everlasting Salvation, as vessels made to honor; wherefore they that
be endued with so Excellent a benefit of God, be called according to Gods
purpose, by his Spirit working in due season, they through Grace obey the
calling, they be Justified freely, they be made Sons of God by Adoption, they
be made like the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, they walk
religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy they attain to
everlasting felicity. As the Godly consideration of Predestination, and our
Election in Christ, is full of sweet, pleasant and unspeakable comfort to Godly
persons, and such as feel in themselves the workings of the Spirit of Christ,
mortifying the works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up
their mind to high and heavenly things, as well because it does establish and
confirm their Faith of eternal Salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as
because it does frequently kindle their Love toward God, so for curious and
carnal persons, lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their
eyes, the sentence of Gods Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall,
whereby the Devil does thrust them either to desperation, or into
wretchlessness of most unclean living, no less perilous than desperation.
Furthermore we must receive Gods promises in such wise, as they be generally
set forth to us in the holy Scriptures, and and in our doings that will of God
is to be followed, which we have expressly declared to us in the word of God
And as to the sense of this Article, take it from the Learned of the Church of
England, Dr. Whitaker, in his Cygne a Cantio, page 16, 17. ( Dr. Bridges styles
this, The chiefest Article of the Church in Doctrine.) Mr Thomas Rogers in his
Analysis, bound up formerly with the Articles. Dr. Thysins in his Commentary on
Lambeth Articles, sully explain this Article, and raise these conclusions from
it. 1. That there is a Predestination of certain men to eternal Life, a
preterition, predestination, or Reprobation of certain men unto Death. 2. That
this Predestination is no manifest, no open Decree, into the grounds and causes
of which every mean capacity may dive, but a hidden purpose, counsel or decree
of God, which is kept secret from us. 3. That this Predestination to life is
from Eternity. 4. That it is altogether immutable and unchangeable as God
himself. This is the established Doctrine which all the Clergy of the Church of
England, subscribe or assent unto at Ordination.

The next demonstration and discovery of the Doctrine of the Church in this
point, is from the Lambeth Articles, agreed upon at Lambeth House, by John
Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of London, Richard Bishop of Bangor,
D^ Tindall, Dean of Elie, Dr. Whitaker professor of Divinity at Cambridge, with
several learned Divines of the Church; with the approbation of Matthew
Archbishop of York, composed at first in Latin and sent to the University of
Cambridge, to prevent and crush some Arminian Controversies that were beginning
to be raised there: yet I shall give you in English Four of Nine, that relate
to Predestination, never yet impeached or rejected by the Church, as
inconsistent with the 39 Articles, but inserted in the Ireland Articles, and
allowed of in the conference at Hampton. Court. 1. God from eternity has
Predestined, certain men unto Life, certain men he has Predestined, or
reprobated unto Death. 2. The moving and efficient cause of Predestination unto
Life, is not the fore sight of Faith or Perseverance, or good works, or of any
thing in the persons Predestined, but only in the good will and pleasure of
God. 3. There is a Predestinate number of Predestinate, which can neither be
augmented nor diminished. 4. Those who are not Predestined unto Salvation are
necessarily damned for their Sins. This is more plain and particular, than any
thing I have heard taught by Presbyterians, and yet it is the Doctrine of the
Church of England.

The next Testimony from that Church for Predestination, is the Articles of
Ireland, agreed upon by the Archbishops, Bishops, and the Clergy of that
Kingdom in a Convocation, held at Dublin, 1615. and seeing they were English
Divines, and a part of the English Church, under one King, they were received,
approved and licensed by the Government, as agreeable to the 39. Articles, and
also those of Lambeth; therefore I shall record out of them what concerns
Predestination, or the Decrees of God.

Art. 11 God from all eternity did by his unchangeable Counsel, ordain
whatsoever in time should come to pass, yet so as thereby no violence is
offered to the wills of the reasonable Creatures, and neither the Liberty nor
Contingency of Second causes is taken away; but established rather.

12. By the same eternal Counsel, God has Predestined some unto Life, and
Reprobated some unto Death, of both which there is a certain number, known only
to God, which can neither he increased nor diminished.

13. Predestination unto Life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby
before the foundations of the World were laid, he has constantly decreed in
his Secret Counsel, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has
chosen in Christ, out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting
Salvation, as vessels made unto honor.

14. The cause moving God to Predestinate, is not the foreseeing of Faith, or
Perseverance, or Good Works, or of any thing in the persons Predestined, but
only the good pleasure of God himself, for all things being ordained for the
manifestation of his Glory, and his Glory being to appear, both in the works of
his Mercy and Justice, it seemed good unto his heavenly wisdom, to choose out a
certain number toward whom he would extend his undeserved Mercy, leaving the
rest to be Spectacles of his Justice.

15 Such as are Predestined unto Life, be called according to Gods purpose,
his Spirit working in due season, and through Grace they obey the calling, they
be Justified freely, they be made Sons of God by Adoption, they be made like
the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, they walk religiously in good
Work, and at length b^ Gods Mercy they attain to everlasting felicity; but such
as are not Predestined to Salvation, shall finally be condemned for their
Sins.

16. The Godly consideration of Predestination, and our Election in Christ, is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to Godly persons, and such as
feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of
the flesh and their earthly members, and drawing up their minds to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly confirm and establish their
faith, of eternal Salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
servently kindle their Love toward God; and on the contrary side for curious
and carnal persons, lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before
their Eyes, the Sentence of Gods Predestination, is very dangerous.

This is the Doctrine of the Church of Ireland, and so exactly agreeable to the
39 Articles, and those of Lambeth, that I need say no more of them.

Another discovery of the Doctrine of Predestination is from the Suffrages of
the five Representatives of the Church of England, at the Synod of Dort, Dr.
Carleton Bishop of Chichester, Dr. Samuel Ward public Divinity professor at
Cambridge, Dr. Davenant Bishop of Satisbury, Dr. Balcanquel Dean of Richester,
and Dr. Thomas Goad, who were called and assembled to nip Arminianism in the
bud: and they being Commissionated and sent by the Supreme Authority in the
Nation; their Suffrages as recorded in the public Acts of that Synod, and by
Dr. Ward, in his Suffragium Britannorum, are to be found and were then received
and approved, at the Doctrine of the Church of England.

And should it not appear a wonder and be a surprise to the hearers, though the
Preachers cannot be Ignorant of it; that the Common Prayer Book, the ordinary
and universal Book of their Devotion should give its Suffrage and bear its
testimony for Predestination, or Election, which upon a more strict observation
all shall find? In the Collect for All Saints Day, it begins, Almighty God, who
have knit together thine Elect in one communion, and fellowship in the mystical
Body of Christ Jesus our Lord. If God has an Elected people, there must some be
left out and passed by, otherwise there can be no Election or Choice. In the
Catechism generally taught unto Children, in Answer to Q. 6. It is replied in
the third place, In God the Holy Ghost, who Sanctified me, and all the Elect
people of God; which plainly instructs us, that God chooses to Sanctification,
and holiness as well as to Salvation, and that all Elect ones shall be
Sanctified and consequently Saved. In the burial of the Dead, in the first
prayer after the Lords Prayer; Beseeching thee, that it may please thee of thy
gracious Goodness, shortly to accomplish the number of thine Elect. Here is not
only an Elect, but a definite and certain Number determined with God, which are
not yet accomprished, and the number of such as are left out and passed by, is
also certain and determined. In (...) Godly prayer at all times, which is added
to some old Bibles, there is this passage; In that it has pleased thee freely
and of thine own accord, to Elect and choose us to Salvation before the
beginning of the World This is plain language, and in the Books of Devotion,
and even those who little thought Common Prayer favored Predestination, which
they often called a Damnable Doctrine, and is so particular, for a Doctrine, some
of your Neighbors have asserted, contrary to the word of God, and a great
discouragement to Piety; So that I wonder how the Oxford Oath of Assent and
Consent shall relish for the future, wherein men Swear, That nothing is
contained in the Book of Cannons, Ordination of Bishops, and Common Prayer,
contrary to the word of God, seeing Predestination is found in one of them.

We call in also to witness for us, the Homilies of the Church, which appear to
be principally the established Doctrine thereof, for the most part composed by
the Archbishop Cranmer, who sealed among many more, this and other truths,
with his Blood. It were too tedious to transcribe all here, but I shall give a
passage or two, to engage Readers to be more attentive and observant for the
suture. Therefore in the 2d part about p. 160. God of his mercy and special
favor, toward them whom he has appointed to everlasting Salvation, has so
offered his Grace especially, and they have so received it fruitfully, that
although by reason of their sinful living out wardly, they seemed before to have
been the Children of wrath and perdition, yet now the Spirit of God mightily
working in them unto the obedience of Gods will, that they are the undoubted
Children of God, appointed unto everlasting Life: for the Good fruit is not the
cause the tree is good: but the tree must first be good, before it can bring
forth good fruit. This and much more may be found in both parts for
confirmation of this Doctrine of Predestination.

I refer you also to a Church of England Catechism, enjoined by K Edw. 6. to
all Schoolmasters, for instruction of Children throughout the Kingdom, wherein
it is asserted, That the faithful were sorechosen, Predestined, and appointed
to everlasting life, before the world was made, and that the cause of our
Justification and Salvation, is the goodness and love of God, whereby he chose
us, before he made the world.

I cannot omit certain Questions and Answers concerning Predestination,
published by Robert Parker, and continued to be bound in with your Bibles,
until the year 1615. I shall give you a hint thereof in two or three Questions,
relating to Predestination. Q Are not all ordained to eternal Life? A. Some are
Vessels of Wrath, ordained to Destruction, as others are Vessels of Mercy,
prepared for Glory. Q How stands it with Gods Justice, that some are
appointed to Damnation? A. Very well, because all men have in themselves Sin,
which deserves no less, and therefore the mercy of God is wonderful, in that
he Vouched to save some of that sinful race, and to bring them to the knowledge
of the Truth Q. But how shall I know I am ordained to eternal life? A. By the
motions of Spiritual Life, which belongs only to the Children of God. I might
enlarge with variety of Testimonies in favor of this Doctrine, from the
Learned and Godly in all the past Reigns, from the Reformation down ward; and
shall conclude with that honorable, and venerable Suffrage of Primate Usher,
in his Sum and substance of Christian Religion, which for the Satisfaction of
all, I shall deliver in his own words. Q What are the parts of Predestination?
A Election and Reprobation Q. What is Election? A. It Is the everlasting
Predestination or fore appointment of certain Angels and men unto everlasting
life and blessedness, for the praise of Gods glorious Grace and Goodness. Q
What is Reprobation? A. It is the eternal fore-appointment of certain Angels
and men unto everlasting Dishonor and Destruction, God of his own free will
determining to pass them by, refuse, and cast them off, and for sin condemn and
punish them, with eternal Death. And to these you may add most Church of
England Books common among us; as also that common Book almost in every Family,
The Practice of Piety, So it is to be hoped you will not adventure to say, the
Church of Scotland holds any other Predestination, than what is the Doctrine of
the Church of England; or that it is contrary to the word of God, and a great
discouragement to Piety.

I am very unwilling to engage in a further controversy about this Doctrine, so
fully handled, and sufficiently vindicated already, lest I should engage some
of your Island in a most unnatural War, against their own Mother Church: and
should it not be a Paradox to Barbados, to hear of a Presbyterian taking up the
Cudgels, in defense of a fundamental established Doctrine, against a Son, a
Member, and a Minister of the English Church? And seeing one has been pleased
to run upon Quaeries on this occasion, I am obliged to entertain you with a
few, concerning the controverted Doctrine, in behalf both of Dissenters and the
Church of England. The Quaeries are these.

1. Whether God be not an absolute and Sovereign power and being, having
infinitely a greater and more illimited and boundless Authority, over the
highest and best of his creatures, without being controuled by, or accountable
to them; I say, more than the Potter has over the clay, he frames at his
pleasure, for honorable and dishonorable uses and services?

2. Whether God from an infinite and eternal knowledge knows infallibly, the
certain and determined number of them that shall be Saved, and shall be Damned,
which number shall never be increased, neither can be diminished?

3. Whether it is God of his own will, free grace and goodness, that makes the
difference between Believers and Unbelievers?

4. Whether the immutable and unchangeable Decrees of God, in the execution of
them, rob the creature of its liberty, in acting or doing?

5. Whether a Sinner without the special and entire Grace of God, can repent,
believe, regenerate, and save himself?

6. Whether God can be accounted unjust for damning a part, while he might
justly have damned the whore World for their Sir?

7 Whether God designed the Salvation of any without holiness, faith and
repentance, or the damnation of any without fore-running Sin, final unbelief,
and impenitence?

8 Whether God absolutely and unchangeably determined with himself the period
and end of our days in this life?

9. Whether God the Father determined from all eternity, to send his own Son
our Savior, into the World. and all his particular Sufferings in the World?

10 Whether we should decry or disown, those great and transcending Mysteries
of God's Counsel, because we cannot reach, nor comprehend them with our shallow
and narrow Capacities, or carnal apprehensions?

If any intend to give any resolution to these ten Quaeries, I hope I need not
caution them against such things, as in^ringe, and may tend to impeach the
absolute Sovereignty, and Prerogative of Heaven, or condemn their own Church.
And I assure my self, they will not revive again those groundless, silly and
inconsequential Allegations, vulgarly heaped up against this Doctrine; which
have been long since unswered, confuted, and overthrown.

FINIS.

