THE Egyptian HISTORY, Treating of the PYRAMIDS, The Inundation of the Nile,
and other PRODIGIES of EGYPT, According to the Opinions and Traditions of the
ARABIANS.

Written Originally in the Arabian Tongue by Murtadi the Son of Gaphiphus.

Rendered into French by Monsieur Vattier, Arabic Professor to the King of
France.

And thence faithfully done into English by J. DAVIES of Kidwelly.

London, Printed by R. B. for Thomas Basset, at the George, near Cliffords-Inn
in Fleet Street. 1672.

To my Honored Uncle, Mr. JOHN GRIFFITH Of Llangwendraeth in the County of
Carmarthen.
Dear Uncle,
WHen I was upon the Translation of this Piece, I often entertained you with
several Stories of it, and you thought them not unpleasant. You now have them
all together; and what must needs add to your satisfaction and diversion, you
will find a strange account (according to the Arabians) of a Country, which
affords matter of Admiration to those who travel thither even in our days. You
know how often I have bemoaned your loss of diverse excellent Manuscripts,
Prophecies, Poetry, and other Subjects, relating to our own Country; for
certainly nothing so pleasant as to survey the Genius and Humors of our
earliest Predecessors. But since it is vain to call Time to an account for all
the excellent things it has devoured, and to fasten on its Envy what is justly
attributed to Humane Negligence, give me leave to recommend this Prodigious
Treatise (which has had the Fortune to escape its Teeth) to your perusal; and
when I consider, with what complacency you quote and reflect on the Actions and
Apophthegmes of those who have Inhabited the World many Centuries of years
before us, I cannot doubt but you will approve the public acknowledgment I
make, by the present address, of my being,

Honored Uncle, Your most affectionate Nephew, and humble Servant, J. DAVIES.

A TABLE Of the most remarkable things in the ensuing History of Egypt.
THe Priests of Egypt. Page 4 The Cater. 5 The Magic of the Egyptian Priests.
7 Gancam King and Priest commands Spirits to build him a Palace. 8 The
Priestess Borsa, and her Acts. 10, etc. The Brazen Tree. 14 The Maritime
Pyramid. 16 Diverse Kings of Egypt. 17, etc. The City of the Black Eagle. 21 The
Pyramids built by Aclimon. 24, 25 Saurid's Mirror. 26 Pyramids built before
the Deluge. 29 The Brothers Annals. 30 The three Pyramids. 34 The Guards of the
Pyramids. 39 Stories of the Pyramids, I, II, III, IV, V. 42, etc. Predictions
made to King Saurid. 51 Nebuchodonozor. 53 The Spirits of the Pyramids. 54
History of the Deluge. 59 King Darmasel. 64 The Ark. 71 The Deluge. 73
Different opinions of the Deluge. 76 The History of Noah, according to an
Ancient Book found by the Author. 77 Noah's Wife. 82 The time from Adam to the
Deluge. 86 The Elephant and Lion in the Ark. 87 What part the Devil has in the
Vine. 89 The Scorpion and the Serpent. 91 Kings of Egypt before the Deluge. 92,
etc. Moncatam's Chemistry. 101 The Pharaos of Alexandria. 102 Noah's Prayer for
Masar. 104 Masar's Tomb. 106 Kings of Egypt after the Deluge. 108 The History
of Abraham and Totis King of Egypt. 109 Charoba, Totis's Daughter. 112
Abraham's Prayer for Charoba. 114 Charoba poisoning her Father reigns after
him. 117 The History of Gebirus and Charoba. 119 The Nymph Marina. 123 Painters
in the bottom of the Sea. 126 The seven Tombs. 128 Charoba's Nurse defeats
Gebirus and his Army. 131 Charoba's death. 135 Dalica Queen of Egypt. 136 Kings
of Egypt after her. 137 Words of Mahumet advantageous to Egypt. 139
Augmentation of the Nile. 142 A Virgin Sacrificed to that end. 443 Pharao. 146
Sources of the Nile. 150 Causes of its overflowing. 151 Qualities of Egypt. 158
The History of the Egyptian Slave. 159 Other qualities of Egypt. 163 Gamra and
Zephta. 173 Omar. 174 The Land of Alphiom. 177 The Mamunus. 178 The Rajan,
Joseph's Pharao. 181 The Acts of Joseph in Egypt. 185 A second story of
Alphiom. Ibid. The Nilemeter. 188 A third story of Alphiom. 190 A fourth story
of it. 194 Joseph's Prison. 195 The place of Jacob's Camel. 198 Zelicha,
Joseph's Mistress. 199 Caphor's Prayer. 200 Joseph's Prayer. 202 The Pyramids.
206 Macherir the Blind man. 207 Mussulman Demons. 211 The Pyramids. 212
Quisias the son of Caltham. 214 The Front of a Mosquey. 220 The augmentations
of the Mosquey of Masre. 226 History read in the Mosquey. 229 The green Tables
of the Mosquey of Masre. 230 Pharao's Castle. 234 Caron the Wealthy, who is
Corah. 236 Moses's Chemistry. 239 Omars Letter to Gamrou. 245 Gamrou's answer
to Omar. 246 A Statue of Mahumet at Masre. 254 Another Statue of Mahumet. 256
Mary of Egypt. 258 The last words of Mahumet. 259 Other words of Mahumet. 261
The words of a Sage of Egypt. 262 The Prophets and devout Persons lived by
their Labor. 263 The cries of a Devote at the Mosquey Gate of Masre: 265
THE French Author's Preface Rendered into English, Giving an account of the
design of this Treatise, and its publishing.
EGypt is a Province so pregnant in prodigies, that, from the earliest times,
those, whose curiosity excited them to the knowledge of excellent things, have
made it one of the principal objects of their considerations. Pliny names
thirteen famous Authors, who had written before him of the Pyramids, which are
one of the things admired therein; and Herodotus desirous to say something of
that Country in general, before he came to the particular Narration of the
expedition which Cambyses King of Persia had made into it, and whereto the
design of his History led him, spent in that digression all his Euterpe, that
is to say, one of the nine Books, wherein it was his intention to comprehend
whatever had been remarkable in the World to this time. All the Authors who
have since written in Greek or Latin, or any other Language known in Europe,
have not omitted treating of the same subjects, according to the occasions they
have had to do it, as being likely to prove the noblest Ornaments of their
Works.

As concerning the Arabians, though the Treatise whereof I here publish the
Translation be short enough, yet have they discoursed very amply of it in
several Books: and it is not long since I saw in the Lord Chancellors Library
two Manuscripts in Folio of great bulk, and close written, which treat only of
the rarities and singularities of Egypt; at least, if the Titles, which have
been put thereto, by such as have examined them, be true; for I have not yet
had the opportunity to consider them at leisure. And therefore I shall not give
any punctual account of them, calling to mind that at the beginning of this
very Manuscript, out of which I have made this Translation, some Italian had
written these words as it were for its Title, De Negromanzia, e dell' origin
de ^i Negromanti; which had obliged me at first to slight it, and diverted me
from looking more narrowly into it, if the beauty of the Original, and the Gold
glittering in the two first pages, after the manner of other Books cu^iously
written in the East, had not engaged my longer consideration of them, whereby I
was satisfied, that the Italian Inscription was not answerable to the Arabian
Art, and could not forbear crying out, O soeculum infelix^! as Erasmus did upon
a like occasion, having found, as he says, Commentaries on Mimus Publianus;
Qui neque coelum; neque ^er^^m attingerent, and tamen accuratissime depictos,
ceu rem sacram. This impertinent title had no doubt been given our Manuscript
by a person who had casually cast his eye on some passages, where it mentions
the Enchanters of Egypt; and the same injury might happily have be done, by a
like precipitation, to the Sacred Books of Genesis and Exodus, wherein there is
also mention made of those Magicians, and the wonderful effects of their
Magic, which they had the impudence to compare with the Divine miracles of
Moses and Aaron. These Enchanters then are part of the subject of this Book,
but not all, as being one of the things, which many ages since had raised
admiration in those who considered Egypt, but not the only one, nor the
principal in a Country, where the Earth, the Waters, and the Air out-vy one the
other, in affording extraordinary subjects of Meditation to Philosophers upon
natural things, and whose Inhabitants have signalized themselves by their
prodigious structures, and by the invention even of Philosophy it self.

The Land of Egypt is it self a stranger in the place of its situation, if we
credit the conjectures of it of Philosophers, who have attentively viewed and
considered it; it came thither from a Country so remote, that the industry of
men could never settle any Commerce for the importation of fruits from those
places, whence nature conveys them the very soil whereby they are produced. The
air there is in a perpetual serenity, never disturbed at any Season of the Year
with Snow, Hail, Rain, Lightning, or Thunder. The Waters there rise to a
prodigious height during the greatest heats of Summer, when they are elsewhere
lowest, or dried up; and in Winter, when they are every where either frozen up,
or over-flown, they there g^id gently below their ordinary course. The surface
of the Earth is spread with a pleasant verdure, with so sweet a temperature of
the Air, that the fairest Springs of other Countries come not near it. In the
Month of March, the Harvest ready to be cut down, guilds the pregnant Fields,
which are divested thereof before the Month of April. And in the Months of
July and August the same Fields are changed into so many Seas, and the Cities
and Villages into so many Islands, by a fortunate inundation, which spares the
Inhabitants the trouble of tilling and manuring them, as must of necessity be
done elsewhere; for the Egyptians have no more to do but to Sow the Seeds
therein, when the Waters are fallen away, and slightly to stir the slime which
is spread thereon, that they may be covered, which they did heretofore, as
Herodotus relates by driving Herds of Swine after the Sowers. Thus do they get
the Fruits of the most fertile piece of earth in the Universe, (...), to use
the terms of the same Author, most easily, and without any trouble; after they
have gathered the productions of the Waters, by a yet more easy fishing, or
rather as Aelian expresses it, by an Harvest of Fish, (...), which lie
scattered on the slime in the midst of the Fields.

These natural prodigies have always engaged the greatest wits in an enquiry
into their causes, which are reducible only to two heads. For the serenity of
the Air proceeds no doubt from the nature of the adjacent and neighboring
Countries and Waters, which are not apt to send thither any vapors, which
might be condensed into Rain, Hail, or Snow; nor yet any mineral exhalations,
which might cause thunder and lightning: and the other Miracles, which are seen
by the Rays of that delightful Sun, are the effects of that admirable River,
which keeps the Inhabitants of that Country in such quiet, after it has
brought them the soil which is to sustain and nourish them.

For the better understanding of this, it is to be observed that Egypt is only
a Plain, or rather a spacious Valley, reaching in length from South to North
from the Tropic of Cancer, or a little beyond it, to the Mediterranean Sea,
for the space of about two hundred and thirty Leagues; and in breadth, from
East to West, between two Mountains, which are its limits, one toward Arabia,
and the other toward Africa, but not always at an equal distance one from the
other. For at the Northern extremity, along the Shore of the Mediterranean Sea,
that distance is about six score leagues; above the places where Heliopolis
heretofore stood, and where now Cairo is, about fifty leagues distant from the
Sea, it diminishes so for the space of about seventy leagues, that the two
Mountains are not above six or seven leagues distant one from the other. Above
that space they dilate again, and the Country grows wider, even to its
Meridional extremity, which makes the upper Egypt, otherwise called Thebais.
Thus is Egypt naturally divided into three parts, which may be called Upper,
the Lower, and the Middle. In the Middle, which is much narrower then the
others, and which our Author calls Gize, as much as to say the passage was the
City of Memphis, near the Western Mountain, on which not far thence there are
several Pyramids, and those of the most sumptuous. In the upper Egypt was
heretofore the famous City Thebes, which had a hundred Gates, and was
afterward called Diospolis; and Syene seated directly under the Tropic of
Cancer; so that the day of the Summer Solstice the Sun at noon shined to the
bottoms of Wells, and straight and perpendicular Pillars made not any shade;
and Elephantina, beyond which presently began Ethiopia; and Copta, whence there
was a way to the Red Sea, the shortest and easiest of any along that Coast, by
which there were brought on Camels abundance of Indian Commodities, which were
afterward embarked on the Nile; and the little Cataract, where Strabo says
the Mariners fell down from the top to the bottom with their Boats, in the
presence of the Governor of Egypt, to make him sport; and the Lake of Maeris,
with two Pyramids in the midst of it, each six hundred foot in height, three
hundred under water, and three hundred above; and the Labyrinth yet more
prodigious then the Pyramids. In the Lower Egypt are the mouths of the Nile,
whereof the two most distant one from the other make the Delta, which is a
Triangular Island, the Basis whereof is the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, and
the two sides the two arms of the Nile, which come to those mouths. Cairo is
above the Delta, toward Arabia, near the place where heretofore Heliopolis
stood. The Arabians now call it Masre, a name common to all Egypt, and which
we have several times rendered the ancient Metropolis of Egypt, in the
Mahumetan History. Alexandria is on the Seaside near the Western mouth. The
Nile flows in one single Chanel through the midst of the plain, from
Eliphantina to the point of the Delta, which is about fifty leagues from the
Sea; there it is divided into two, afterward into several branches, before it
falls into it.

Their conjecture, who held Egypt to be a new Land, and come from some remote
part, was that heretofore the space between the two Mountains from Elephantina,
or a little below it, to Alexandria had been a gulf of the Sea, like, and in a
manner parallel in its situation to that which is called the Red Sea, and
entered into the Countries from the North toward the South, as the Red Sea
enters into them from South to North; and that in process of time the
abundance of slime, which the Nile brings down when it is overflown, had filled
that space, and framed therein the land which is now seen there, and which had
no resemblance to those of Arabia and Africa, which are adjoining thereto;
whence they imagined it a stranger, and come from far. Herodotus was of
opinion, that that collection of slime might have been made in less then twenty
thousand years; taking happily his conjecture according to the increase of it
from Homer's time to his own. For Homer affirms, that the Island of Pharos was
in his time at a far greater distance from the Continent then it has been
since, as Pliny has observed; inferring consequently thence, that Egypt was
augmented and advanced nearer the Sea.

What I think miraculous in this, is, that the Inhabitants of a Country which
in appearance began not till a long time after the rest, should count the Years
of their Antiquities in a far greater number then other Nations their
Neighbors, and should make in their Country sumptuous Structures, which yet
could not preserve the memory of their Authors to a time, when other Nations
were but in a manner beginning to entertain thoughts of doing somewhat of that
kind, though they have lasted a long time after the ruin of those which were
made much later. And yet all this methinks depends on the same cause, which is
the excellency of the soil of that Province, and the facility of cultivating
it; in as much as having always been able to maintain a far greater number of
men then were requisite about the culture of it, the Princes, who were
possessed thereof, were obliged to find out other employments for the greatest
part of their Subjects; and this occasioned the early invention of Philosophy
by those who were inclined to meditate on the wonderful things of nature, and
to spend the rest allowed their bodies in employing the intellectual faculties
of their souls in those noble labors. Aristotle speaks thus of it, when he
says that they studied Philosophy in Egypt sooner then any where else, because
there they soonest permitted the Priests to live in a commendable exemption
from labor; (...). As for others, who could only work with their hands, in
regard the mild temperature of the Air dispensed with their employing
themselves in many professions necessary elsewhere, to secure men's bodies from
its injuries, it was requisite they should be employed in such works as might
declare the powerfulness and magnificence of their Kings. Whence I conceive
Pliny justly blameable for the character he gives these Miracles of the World,
when he says they are Regum pecuniae stulta ostentatio; and that after he had
said that those who had written of them before him differed about the Names of
the Kings who built them, he should add these words, Justissimo casu
obliteratis tantae vanitatis authoribus. For if all the works which contribute
nothing to the supply of the necessities of humane life are follies. Pliny
himself is in hazard to be esteemed to have done many; and this conceit of his
is in my judgment much different from that of Pythagoras, who (as Cicero
relates) affirms, that among the several sorts of persons who met ordinarily at
the great general Assembly of all Greece, those who came not thither upon any
business, nor out of design to get any thing, but only to see what passed, were
the honester people; Genus vel maxim ingenuum: whom he therefore compared to
the Philosophers.

These great Princes therefore are methinks rather to be bemoaned, that their
Names were already forgotten above fifteen hundred years since, after they had
made for the eternization thereof the Works which are to this day seen and
admired, rather then they are to be blamed for having done such noble things.
And this oblivion also no doubt proceeds from the excellency of their Country,
which having been envyed by all Foreiners who have known it, has always been
one of the first preys of the Conquerours, and by that means so often changed
Masters, that it is no wonder the memory of the most Ancient should be lost;
whereas the Princes, who once settled themselves therein, were well satisfied
with that possession, and thought not of disturbing their Neighbors. True it
is, that Strabo affirms, that in Thebais above Diospolis, and Memnon's Temple,
he saw on the magnificent Tombs of forty Kings, Obelisks, on which there were
writings graven, which mentioned great Conquests made by those Kings, as far as
Scythia, Bactriana, and the Indies. Herodotus affirms the same of Ses^stris;
but it may be doubted whether these great Conquerours were natural Egyptians or
Strangers, who among other Countries had subdued Egypt; for Alexander the
Great was no Egyptian, though he had his Tomb at Alexandria, and had been the
Founder of that great City.

However it were yet this is certain, that the inclination of the Kings of
Egypt for great Structures is very ancient, since the Pharao's who Reigned in
the times of Joseph and Moses, and who probably are comprehended by Herodotus
under the single name of Pheron, had it, as may be seen by the complaints of
the Israelites against them, when they made them work hard in the making of
Brick, and paid them ill. That Pheron of Herodotus was such a Person as the
Pharao's are represented to us; for he was no Conqueror, but an insolent and
impious Prince, and the Pharao's were such as the Arabian expression at this
day affirms it, who say, To play the Pharao; that is, to demean himself
insolently and tyrannically: whence happily comes the French word, Fair le
Fanfaron.

As to the Antiquity of the Sciences in Egypt there is no doubt to be made of
it, since Plato and Eudoxus learned Astronomy there in a School, where they
studied thirteen years, and which was showed at Heliopolis as a rarity in
Strabo's time, who affirms he saw it there; and adds, that the Grecians never
knew exactly of how many Days, Hours, and Minutes the Year consisted, till they
had read thereupon the Books of the Priests of Egypt, which to that end were
translated out of the Egyptian Tongue into the Greek; which argues (by the
way) that even at that time there were Greek Versions made of Books writ in
other Languages, contrary to the opinion which some Learned Men seem to have
lately taken up.

That ancient Language of the Egyptians was written from the right hand to the
left, after the manner of the Oriental Tongues, as Herodotus has observed:
wherefore the Coptick writing now used from the left to the right seems rather
to have come from the Greek, then the Greek from it, whatever J. Kircher tells
us of it, in his Prodromus Copticus. As to the ancient Religion of the
Egyptians, though the Book we here Translate in several places mentions their
Idols, Strabo affirms, that in his time there was not any Figure in their
Temples, at least any representing a Man's body, (...): whence it might be
suspected that our Author took the Images of Christian Churches for Idols,
since it may be particularly observed, that he seems in some places to put the
Crosses into the same rank; which be it said without derogation from the
approved Worship due to both. The same Strabo, (and before him Herodotus) would
make us believe that Circumcision, and what they call Excision, which is the
circumcision of Women, were ever used in Egypt, and that the other Nations who
observed it, as the Colchi, the Ethiopians, the Phoenicians, the Syrians, nay
the Jews themselves took it from them; which is not without some ground; For
Circumcision was not enjoined Abraham till after his traveling into Egypt.
Strabo observes it as a singularity, that the Egyptians brought up all the
children that were born to them, which was not done by the Greeks, who exposed
some, nay sometimes killed some of them, as we have it from Terence in his
Heautontimorumenos. This commendable and indulgent custom, no doubt proceeded
also from the goodness and fertility of their Country, which was such, that
the children were no great charge to their Parents, and which endowed its
Inhabitants with greater mildness of disposition, and tenderness toward such
as were so nearly related to them, then the Greeks had upon the like occasions.

The same Authors relate diverse other remarkable things of the ancient Religion
of Egypt, and the manners of its inhabitants; all which have met with several
changes by the Conquests which have been made of that Province at several
times, since that at the very first, which is come to our knowledge, to wit,
that of the Persians, it is questionless the Ceremonies of their Superstitions
were very much altered by the persecution of Cambyses, which came to that
height as to kill Ox Apis, which passed for a God at Memphis, as some other
Creatures did elsewhere; though all those which were reverenced by the
Egyptians in several places, were not adored in the quality of Gods, but many
of them only in the quality of Sacred Animals, whom it was not lawful to
injure. And it is very probable, according to Cicero's conjecture, that at
first they were all accounted only such, in as much as those who then governed
the People thought fit for some reasons to preserve such Beasts as much as
might be, as being advantageous for something; and that in process of time the
Superstition and Ignorance of those who comprehended not the true cause why
they were spared, came to imagine something Divine in them; which in my
judgment proceeded from the demeanor of the Priests toward other men, whom
they blinded what they could, especially seeing the Priesthood belonged to
certain Families, and was not communicable to all, no more then the other
principal Functions of the Commonwealth, as Arms, Arts, and Agriculture; for
that made every one absolutely ignorant of those things which belonged not to
him, and whereto he never had any right to aspire; and occasioned their being
many times exercised by such as had not any natural disposition thereto, and
consequently were not much capable thereof.

This Mysterious Carriage of the Egyptian Priests extended not only to things
concerning Religion, but even to such as were indifferent, which they
communicated not without much trouble. For Strabo affirms, that the 13 Years,
during which Plato and Eudoxus continued at Heliopolis, were not simply spent
by them in learning Astronomy, but in courting the favor and friendship of
the Priests, that they might be thereby induced to teach them something of what
they knew in that Science. If they were so shie in communicating to others what
they had observed in the Heavens, and which any others might have seen as well
as they; it may well be imagined they much more carefully concealed the
History of their Country: so that it is not to be admired there is so little
come to our knowledge of what passed there before the Conquest made by the
Persians. Nay, if the Ethiopions had commanded there before, and that for a
long tract of time, as Herodotus mentions, it is likely that even then the
Sources of the Nile were not unknown, nor the causes of its Inundation. And who
knows whether in the time of Herodotus the Priests knew not more of those
things then they would communicate to him? For if they had relations of a
Voyage of 4 Months, that is, above 1200 Leagues, continually ascending, partly
upon the Nile, partly on the sides of it beyond the Tropic of Cancer, those
who had made it must have passed all the Torrid Zone, and found the source and
origin of the Nile. But they said, that in those Countries the Nile flowed
from West to East, and not from South to North, as it did in Egypt; which is
not consonant to the reason given by Herodotus himself of the overflux of that
River; nor the Modern Geographies, according to which the Sources of the Nile
are far beyond the Equinoctial Line.

This then passing for certain, with a length of the course of the Nile equal
to that attributed thereto by Herodotus, methinks there might be a reason found
out of its overflowing in Egypt more probable then those which many have
hitherto given thereof. For what makes the overflux miraculous is, that it
happens, as we have already said during the great heats of Summer, when all
other Rivers are at the lowest or dried up: which occasioned a persuasion, that
it proceeds from a cause different from that of others, which manifestly depend
on the Rains which fall, and the Snow which ordinarily melts in great abundance
toward the end of Winter, at which time the Nile is at the lowest. Some
therefore have been of opinion, as Herodotus relates, that the Nile overflows
in Summer, because then there come into Egypt continually certain Winds called
the Etesian from the Northern Coast, which obstruct its course, and so crowd up
its Waters, depriving them of the freedom of falling into the Sea, as they
ordinarily do, as the reflux of the Ocean daily does the Rivers which fall into
it. Others attributed the cause of it to the Ocean, out of which they affirmed
the Nile to take its origin; but they explicated not after what manner this
was done. Others affirmed, that this overflux proceeded from the Snow, which
they pretended was dissolved in Summer upon the sides of the Nile. Herodotus
refutes all these conjectures, and then gives his own opinion, which is, that
the Nile coming from some very remote parts of the South, that is, from a
Country from which the Sun is far distant in Summer, when it is very near
Egypt its course, which at its coming out of the source is always equally big,
comes then quite to Egypt without losing any thing of its fullness, in regard
the Sun consumes nothing or very little of it: whereas in Winter it decreases
much by the way, for the contrary reason; which is that the Sun being then
directly upon its waters devours a great part thereof. Strabo, who thought not
this reason of Herodotus more probable then the others, recurs to that which he
says had been observed by Homer, when he called Egypt (that is to say the Nile
in Homerical terms) a River falling from Heaven, -- (...).
He would therefore have the overflux of the Nile proceed from the
Summer-rains, which (says he) are frequent in Ethiopia, according to their
Relation who have sailed on the Red Sea as far as the Country which produces
Cinnamon, as also of those who have been at the Hunting of Elephants. The
Relation of the Monk Cosmas, inserted by the most Learned and Ingeniously
curious person Monsieur Thevenot in the First Part of his Collections, says
methinks the same thing. But, besides that the sources of the Nile are at a far
greater distance then is supposed by that reason alleged also by our Author in
its proper place, there is no great likelihood that the rains should be so
frequent in Summer in a Country next adjoining to Egypt, where it never
rains, and more Southerly then it. Whence it comes that at this time the ablest
Philosophers endeavors to find out some other cause of so considerable an
effect, and Monsieur de la Chamber among others by an extraordinary sagacity
has found out one, for it in the Bowels of the Land of Egypt, whose Nitrous
qualities stirred by the heats of Summer are in his judgment capable of
causing the Waters of that River to rise up to so great an overflux, as we see
by experience that it does. This opinion, when we shall have comprehended the
subtle Discourses, and considered the excellent remarks whereby that great
great person confirms it, will doubtless be found the most likely to be true.

Monsieur Chapelain, to whom most of the Virtuosi do now give an account, not
only of their works, but also of their designs, out of the confidence they
have of his excellent judgment and sincere advice, told me not long since, that
the most Learned and most Eloquent Monsieur Vossius has a Treatise ready on
the same Subject, wherein we are like to meet with many things yet unknown to
us.

To make it appear then that I have also made some reflections on this Miracle,
I shall here set down the reason I have imagined to my self for it, which does
not contradict Homer, though it agrees not with Strabo; for it will happily
suffice those who may not have the leisure to examine such as are more subtle.
I observe then in the first place, that to my thinking it is affirmed by
Macinus, that the risings of the Nile are framed above Egypt. For toward the
end of his forty eighth Chaliph, he says that the Nile being very low in the
time of Michael Patriarch of Alexandria, that Prelate was sent by the
Mustanser, Choliph of Egypt, to the King of the Abyssines, who upon his
entreaty having cleared the passage of the Water, it rose in Egypt three
Cubits in one night, and came to its height. I suppose next the two
propositions by me already alleged, That the sources of the Nile are far
beyond the Equinoctial Line; and, That its course thence into Egypt is in
length above twelve hundred leagues, that is fourteen of fifteen hundred: I
suppose further, that at the Sources of the Nile, as in many other places, the
Waters are higher in Winter then in Summer, according to what is affirmed by F.
Maffaeus in his first Book of the History of the Indies, where he has this
passage; Processit ad ostium ingentis Fluvii, qui exipsis Nili fontibus
originem trahens, Zaires ab incolis dicitur; actanta aquarum vi, praesertim
hyeme, sese in Oceanum infert, ut prodatur in octaginta millia passuum ab eo
vinci mare. I suppose moreover, that the Waters of the Nile, when they are
high, advance within the Chanel wherein they flow at about the rate of four
leagues a day, according to what observation I have made upon the like
occasion. For those who have seen the Nile overflown in Egypt have assured me,
that its course is about the same rate of swiftness as that of the Seine when
it is in the same condition at Paris. Now the waters of the Seine, and the
Rivers falling into it, according to my computation, when they are risen, make
about the same measure of way every day. For at Montereul in Normandy, where I
writ this, we have a small River which is of that number, and into which there
come Waters, when it is high, from about four leagues distance, though its
ordinary current comes but from the Spring of Ternant, distant from it but a
league and a half. When this little River rises of a sudden by a storm, as it
happens often, and that sometimes even in Summer the Waters are up but one day
at Montereul; which argues that those which come last are a day in running the
four leagues whence they come. There passes by Cernieres, which is but half a
league from the same place, another small River, into which there come Waters
from a distance double to the other; whence it comes that they are up two days,
whereas they are but one at Montereul. In the last Inundation of the Seine,
which was great and sudden enough at the end of Winter in the Year 1665, by
reason of the abundance of Snow which was dissolved in a short time, I
observed, being then at Paris, that the Waters began to rise the 18th. day of
February, and continued till the end of that Month; after which they notably
decreased till the 10th. of March; which discovers that the last-arrived were
twenty days coming from the places where the Snow was dissolved. Those places I
conceive to be about fourscore leagues from Paris, and consequently those
Waters had advanced about four leagues a day.

All this supposed, I say for example, that the Waters which cause the
overflowing of the Nile this day being the first of August in Egypt, were got
together in the places where its course began about a Year before, whether
occasioned by Rain or Snow melted. Wherein there is nothing Miraculous or
extraordinary. For at that time it was Summer in Egypt, as it is this day; and
consequently at the same time it was Winter in those Places, where the current
of the Nile begins; since the Sources of it are at a great distance beyond the
Equinoctial Line, where the Seasons are directly contrary to those which are on
this side it. The Waters therefore were then about those Sources higher then at
any other Season: but having fourteen or fifteen hundred leagues to advance ere
they got to Egypt, after the rate of about four leagues a day, they were about
a year by the way; and consequently there could not be an overflux of the Nile
in that Province sooner then now. And if it be true that the Ganges overflows
also in Summer, as Pliny and Modern Relations seem to affirm, and that
consequently it is now in the same condition in the Indies as the Nile is in
Egypt, the cause may happily be the same. For its course being but half the
length of that of the Nile, there needs but six Months for the Waters to get
from the Sources to their Mouths, it being supposed those of the Nile take up a
whole Year. Now it was Winter six Months before at the Sources of the Ganges,
which are on this side the Equinoctial Line; as it was a Year ago at the
Sources of the Nile, which are beyond it. The same is to be said of the River
Menam.

As to the long continuance of the overflux of the Nile, which is a hundred
days according to Herodotus, or rather six Months according to the same Author
in another passage, where he says that in his time the water flowed out of the
Nile into the Lake Myris or Moeris during the space of six Months, and
returned out of the same Lake into the Nile at the same place whereat it had
entered into it, during the other six Months of the Year; this continuance (I
say) has no other cause according to this position, but that which prolongs
the Inundations of other Rivers. For it proceeds partly from the length of time
that the Snow is dissolving, or the Waters falling, and partly from the
different distance of the place from which they come into the Chanel of the
Nile after the dissolving or falling. For thence it comes, that some get a long
time after others from the place of their Rendezvous, and consequently they
come in like manner into Egypt.

We see also in all other Rivers something like the overflowings of the Nile.
For many times the Seine for example is high and overflows at Paris, when no
rain has fallen thereabouts, nor any Snow dissolved; and it is ordinarily some
days after the Rain is past, or the Snow dissolved, when the weather is fair
and clear, that its overflux is in its greatest force and height.

Moreover, That the Waters which cause the augmentations of the Nile, and its
Inundations in Egypt, come from the Torrents, the sl^me which they bring along
with them, and which has made some conjecture, that it is called (...) seem to
testify it. For the Waters which come from running Springs by ordinary Channels
are not muddy. It may also methinks be inferred from the same slime, that those
Torrents force their way through cultivated and manured Lands; for the Waters
which fall from the Sky upon Desert and Untilled places are pure and clear in
their descent thence. If this be true, with the conjectures we have mentioned
before, it must follow that the Meridional parts of Africa were inhabited and
cultivated before Egypt was in the World; and that being granted, if the Nitre
of Egypt be of the nature of our Saltpeter, which is framed of old Manure
amassed, and fermented a long time together, it might seem to be rather an
effect then a cause of the overflowing of the Nile.

But happily we have said too much of the Nile and Egypt in a Preface, which was
to serve only for an Introduction to what is said thereof by our Author, of
whom the Reader might expect we should give some account, though we have
nothing to say of him, but only what may be conjectured by the Reading of his
Book; according to which he was (as I conceive) of Cairo, that is to say, of
Masre; for thus is that Famous City called to this day by its Inhabitants, as
we have already observed: and the name of Cairo, under which it is known in
Europe, came to it from that which the Mugazzoldinil, after he had conquered
Egypt, caused to be built near it for the Quartering of his Militia; and,
which he called Cahire or Cah^re, that is to say, the Victorious or Conqueress,
either for the reason given thereof by Macinus in the Year 362, or in regard
that being the Habitation of the Soldiery, it subdued in effect, and caused its
Commands to be obeyed, not only by the Neighboring City, but also by the whole
Empire of the Phatimite Chaliphs, as the Camp near Rome in the time of the
Roman Emperors, Commanded both the City and the Empire, and many times the
Emperor himself. Our Author then, as far as I can conjecture, was of the same
Country with Macinus, and lived about the same time, that is above four
hundred Years since. For methinks he speaks of the Sultan the Macolcamel, the
Son of Abubeker, the Son of Job, as of a Prince Reigning in his time; and he
mentions not any other that Reigned since, though he speaks of diverse who had
Reigned before.

The esteem which the Arabians have at this day for his work sufficiently
appears in my judgment by the beauty of the Copy, out of which we have made
this Translation, and which was communicated to us by the late Cardinal
Mazarine's Librarykeeper, by the favor of Monsieur Colbert, who amidst his
infinite cares for what concerns the Glory of his Majesty, and the happiness of
his Subjects, is some times pleased to think on our Arabian Muses, and forgets
not our labors in the distribution of the Favors which he obtains from his
Majesty, for those who seriously apply themselves to the noblest kind of
Learning. The Manuscript of the Onirocrit Mussulman, whereof we have lately
published the Translation, was put into our hands by Monsieur de Montmor,
principal Master of Requests, a Person as Eminent for his great Wit and rare
Learning, as his Quality. I am glad to make this Discovery, for their
satisfaction who were desirous to know whence I had it, and that it might be an
acknowledgement of the kindnesses I have received from that Person upon that
and diverse other occasions.

But to return to our Egypt: Were there nothing butthe History, or rather the
Fable, of Gebirus and Charoba, and the Nymph Marina, which is about the middle
of this Work, I should not repent me of the Translation of it; for I little
imagined to find in a Mussulman. Author any thing so much allied to the witty
Fables of the ancient Greek and Latin Poets, as that Narration is, which made
me reflect at the Translation of it on the midst of the fourth Book of the
Odysses, and the end of the fourth Book of the Georgicks. I have made the Title
to my Translation according to the proposal of the Author, for it is not in the
Arabian Manuscript. Nor is the name of the Author in the first Page of it, but
I meet it in some other places, as the Reader may observe.

The Pyramids several times mentioned in it are expressed in the Arabian Tongue
by two Names, to wit Birba, which I have used in several places; and Haram. The
word Birba, and in the plural Barabi, is happily a corruption of Pyramid. Whether
it be so or not, our Author calls so either the Pyramids in general, or only
the least of them exclusively from the greatest, to which he particularly gives
the other name, which is Haram, and in the Arabian signifies an Old Structure.
Monsieur The venot has given us in the first part of his Collections a most
exact Description of those great Pyramids made by an Englishman, who has seen
them in our time, and considered them at leisure; according to which those
Structures consist of a certain number of square Foundations or Platforms set
one upon another, all equal in thickness, but the upper Platform perpetually
somewhat less in length and breadth then that which is under it, and set just
up on the midst of it; the differences of length and breadth being every where
equal between them, as also the depth or thickness: so that the whole Pyramid
is only a square blunt point, the four sides whereof are Stairs, and the upper
extremity is the least in length and breadth of all the Platforms whereof it
confists. Which argues in my judgment, that heretofore there were some
Colosses or Obelisks placed on them, as it were on their Pedestals, according
to what Herodotus expressly affirms of the two built in the midst of the Lake
Moeris. The height of every Pyramid is equal to the side of its Basis,
according to the same Herodotus, who assigns that of Cheops eight hundred foot
in length, as many in breadth, and as many in height, so that it is as 'twere
in the form of a Cube, and covers with its Basis near seven Acres of ground,
according to our measure of Normandy, that is to say, above thirteen furlongs;
being all built of Freestone, the least piece whereof was thirteen foot.

As to the City of the Black Eagle, whereof our Author promises to speak, I
know not which it is, if it be not that Outiratis, in the Description of of
which he makes mention of the Figure of a Black Eagle set up on one of its
Gates. If the name of the City of Gainosamses, that is to say, the Eye or
Fountain of the Sun, be not understood of the Fountain of Ammon, or of the Lake
called the Fountain of the Sun, Fons So is, it seems to express that of
Heliopolis, whose situation is answerable to that of Masre, and not to that of
Memphis. Masre was also called Fustata in the time of Gamrou, the Son of Gasus,
for the reason given thereof by Macinus in the Year Twenty. The Danae seems to
be the Labyrinth. Alphiom is one of those Islands in the Continent, which
Strabo calls Anases, (...), and which are cultivated places, but surrounded on
all sides by great Deserts. There are many of these Anases in Africa, and three
particularly in Egypt, in one whereof was heretofore the Oracle of Jupiter
Ammon.

THE PRODIGIES OF EGYPT According to the ARABIANS.
IN the Name of God, gracious The Author's Prayer.
and merciful, I have learned a good word (says the Author of this Book, to
whom God be merciful) of our Master the Prelate, the Guardian, Abutachar
Achamed the Son of Mahumet, the Son of Achamed, the Son of Abrahim, the Son of
Solpha the Solphian, the Ispahanian, God grant him mercy; who affirmed that he
had it from the mouth of the Apostle of God himself, whose memory be blessed,
by Tradition from many great persons whom he named, as having received it The
Arabian has 20. Proper names, which for brevity's jake are omitted.
one from another; Every man who has a design, and begins not the prosecution
of it with the praise of God, is either dumb, or incapable of compassing his
Enterprise.

Let us therefore praise the great, eternal, immortal, and most wise God, who
has created all things by hill omnipotence, to be an experiment and
demonstration of his Supreme Authority, to express his Unity, and conduct them
to the knowledge of himself. There is not any thing like him; he understands
all things, he sees all things. I would acknowledge that there is no other God
then that great God alone, who has no companion, in the same manner as they
acknowledge who serve their Lord sincerely, not imagining any thing equal to
him. I shall also acknowledge that Mahumet is Servant and Apostle, sent by him
at a time when the World wanted some to be sent, and such Masters as should
teach it the Rules of Religion, according to the footsteps of the Apostles, to
persuade Nations. God favor him with his benedictions as also those of his
House, who are holy and pure, and generally all those of his Party.

As to this Book, I have set down in it The Author's Design.
the Excellencies of the City of Alexandria, its Prodigies and Advantages. I
make mention in it of the City of the Black Eagle, the cause of its building,
and whatever there is miraculoas in it. I declare in it the Excellencies of
Egypt, and her Coptites, and her Nile, and the Aliments she produces, as well
by Land as by Sea; and of her Fruits, and the use made of them in every month
of the year; and of the Extent thereof. I pray God that he would graciously
enable me to relate what miraculous things her Sages, and Kings, and her
Pharaoh's, and her Magicians, and her Priests, have wrought; and what
Talismans, and what rare and extraordinary things they have set up: to treat of
their Habitations, how they lived in them; and of their Wealth, how they
acquired it, and secured it in their Pyramids built over it, and how they died,
and left it behind them. To the end that they who are desirous to be instructed
by Examples, may meet with some in their tracks; and that such as teach others
may find Advertisements to give them, since this is it which is recommended to
us by God, when he speaks thus in his Book; Have they not sojourned upon earth,
and seen the end of those who were before them, more powerful then they, who
tilled the ground, and cultivated it more then they, and who have seen their
Apostles come to them with evident signs? and in several other the like
passages of the Alcoran.

It is affirmed that the most learned Priests, who excelled in the noblest The
Priests of Egypt.
knowledge of Divination, and were most illuminated in that Art, were the
Priests and Sages of Egypt. The Wise men of Greece are of that opinion, and
affirm on their behalf, that in their Divinations they were inclined to
Astrology, that they invented the occult Sciences, and knew hidden Secrets,
that they made famous Talismans, and noble Laws; that they were the Authors of
speaking Works and moving Figures; that they raised high Structures, and engraved
their Sciences on the hardest stones, which were then soft, like Earth watered,
or Paste; that they particularly excelled in the Structure of Pyramids exactly
built, on which they made exquisite Talismans, by means whereof they kept their
Enemies from entering into their Cities and Provinces, by that means giving a
clear demonstration of the Prodigies of their Science, and discovering the
effects of their Wisdom. Egypt was then (they say) divided into fourscore and
five Provinces, whereof there were forty five in the lower part, and forty in
the upper. And in every Province there was a Governor taken from among the
Princes of the Priests, who are they of whom God speaks in the History of
Pharaoh, when he says, Send Heralds through the cities, to bring unto thee all
the learned Magicians: he means those Governors. They say that the Cities of
the Princes of the Magicians were built by Busiris. The Priest who served the
Stars was seven years in that Employment; and when he was come to that degree,
they called him Cater, as much as to say, Master The Cater.
of the Influences; and then he sat in the same Seat with the King, and the
King led his Beasts to the Watering-place, and brought them back; that is, did
all his business according to his counsel. When he saw him coming, he rose up
to receive him, went to meet him, and made him sit down. Then the Priests
approached, and with them the Masters of the Arts, who stood beneath the Cater.
Every Priest served one particular Star, and was not permitted to serve any
other; and he was called the Servant of such a Star, as the Arabians served
every one his own God, and were called Gabdosamse, Gabdiagoth, Gabdolgasi; that
is, Servant of Samse, or the Sun, Servant of Jagoth, Servant of Gasi. The Cater
said to the Priest, Where is now the Star which thou servest? The Priest
replied, It is in such a Sign, such a Degree, such a Minute. Then he put the
same question to another; and when all had answered, and that he knew the
Position of all the Stars, he addressed himself to the King, and said thus to
him; It is requisite that you do such a thing to day, that you send an Army to
such a place, that you clothe your self after such a manner, that you speak at
such a time; and so of all he thought fit to be done in all the Kings Affairs,
and in all the Government of the Kingdom. The King writ down all the Cater
said, and whatever he disapproved. Then he turned to the Artists, and said thus
to them; Grave thou such a Figure on such a Stone; and, Plant thou such a Tree;
and to another, Make thou a Geometrical Draught of such a Work: and so to all
from the first to the last. Immediately they all went every one to his Shop,
and beset themselves to do the works enjoined them, exactly following the
design proposed to them by the Cater. They set down that day in a Register the
Works performed therein; and the Register was folded up, and kept in the Kings
Treasury. Their Affairs were dispatched according to this order: then the King
(when he had any Affair) assembled the Priests without the City Memphis, and
the People met together in the Streets of the said City. Then they made their
entrance one after another in order, the Drum Effects of of the Magic of the
Egyptian Priests.
beating before them to bring the people together; and every one made some
miraculous discovery of his Magic and Wisdom. One had, to their thinking who
looked on him, his Face surrounded with a light like that of the Sun, so that
none could look earnestly upon him. Another seemed clad with a Robe beset with
Precious stones of diverse colors, green, red or yellow, or wrought with gold.
Another came mounted on a Lion, compassed with Serpents like Girdles. Another
came in covered with a Canopy or Pavilion of light. Another appeared surrounded
with Fire, turning about him so as that no body durst come near him. Another
was seen with dreadful Birds perching about his Head, and shaking their wings
like black Eagles and Vultures. Another made appear before him in the air
dreadful and terrible persons, and winged Serpents. In fine, every one did what
was taught him by the Star he served; yet all was but Apparition and Illusion
without any reality: insomuch that when they came up to the King they spoke
thus to him; You imagined that it was so or so, but the truth is that it was
such or such a thing.

There was heretofore in ancient Gancam King and Priest.
Masre (which is Emsos) a King-Priest named Gancam, of the race of Gariac the
Son of Aram, of whom the ancient Egyptians tell several stories, part whereof
are beyond all likelihood. He lived before the Deluge, which he by his Science
foresaw; whereupon he commanded the Doemons who accompanied A Castle built by
Spirit.
him to build him a Palace beyond the Equinoctial Line, which the ruins of
this Universe could not reach. They built the Castle seated on the descent of
the mountain of the Moon, which is the Castle of Brass, where are the Brazen
Statues, in number LXXXV; out of the Throats whereof issues the Water of the
Nile, Sources of the Nile.
which falls into a Fen full of Gravel, whence the water of the Nile flows into
Egypt and other Climats, distributed and proportionably compassed; for were it
not for that it would spread over the greatest part of the Earth. The Spirits
having built him that Castle, he had the curiosity to see it, and make his
abode therein. To that end he sat in a Pavilion made purposely with much
artifice, and the Spirits carried him on their shoulders to the Castle; where
having considered the excellency of the Structure, and beauty of its Walls,
with the Sculptures and the Paintings that were about it, and the Figures of
the Celestial Bodies, and diverse other wonderful things; for in the greatest
obscurity of the night people saw clearly without Torches. There were Tables
set and spread with all sorts of Meat, yet none perceived to set them there; so
all sorts of Drinks in vessels of Marble, Gold, and Silver, which he made use
of; yet were they not increased or diminished. In the midst of the Castle
there was a Cistern of Water congealed into Ice, whereof the motion might be
perceived through that part which was frozen; as one sees through a Glass what
is contained in it. Having considered all this, he was astonished thereat, and
immediately returned into Egypt; where he left for his Lieutenant and
Successor his Son Gariac, recommending his Subjects to him, and the Government
of the Kingdom; and then he returned to the Castle, and continued there till he
died. He is thought to be Author of the Books of the Coptites, out of which
they take their stories, and all that is to happen till the end of the World.

In these Books of the Coptites there The Priestess Borsa.
is mention made among other Princes of the Priestess Borsa, who administered
justice to the people sitting in a Throne of Fire; so that when any one came
for justice, if his cause were just, and he spoke the truth, the Fire returned
to her; if on the contrary he were a liar and deceiver, and came near the Fire,
he was presently burnt thereby. This Princess appeared to men in diverse forms
as she pleased her self. She afterward caused a Castle to be built on the side
of the Roman Sea, to which she retired, and kept out of the sight of men. In
the Her Pipes.
Walls of this Castle she caused to be put Pipes of Brass, the ends whereof
came out and were hollow, having each written on them a representation of the
several differences which ordinarily happen between men, and upon which they
were went to desire Justice of her. When therefore any one was at difference
with another, he came along with his Adversary to the Pipe on which was written
the species of their difference, and spoke to it concerning his business very
low, alleging all he could, then putting his Ear thereto he received an
answer, which would be fully to all he desired. This custom continued
constantly among them, till Nabuchodonozor overran Egypt. This Princess caused
also to be made a Ram of a hard red Stone, and to be placed on a Pedestal of
the Her Ram.
same. Then she caused to be put on the Pedestal an Iron Pivot, and the upper
stone to be pierced, on which was placed the Figure of the Ram, so that the
Pivot appeared above; and she caused to be set on the top of the Pivot a Brazen
Boat, the fore part whereof was made like the head of a Cock, and the
hinderpart like the tail of the same Bird. This Millstone as it were turned
with the Ram by regular and just motions. She caused this to be set on the
descent of the Mountain, on which was afterward built the great Mosquey of the
Son of Toulon, to whom God show mercy whence it is still called the Mountain of
the Ram, and it will ever be called so. When therefore any enemy came to
assault Egypt this Ram turned as the Millstone, and stopped toward that side
that the Enemy was coming, and at the same time that Cock crew. She also caused
to be built in the midst of the City a House of Adamant, wherein House of
Adamant.
she put the Figures of all the Kings of the Earth which surround Egppt. She
caused the Gates of that House to be Fortified, and set Guards at them, which
were relieved in their turns, yet did not any but they enter into it or come
near it. When therefore the Ram stopped of any side, and that they were assured
that the King of that Country was in the Field, they opened the Gate of that
House, and went to look for the Figure of that King, which immediately fell a
shaking; whence they inferred that he had a design to attaque Egypt. Then those
Guards took the Halberds they had with them, and Swords made by Magic, and
kept in that House, and fell a pricking that Figure with those Halberds, and to
cut it with those Swords, and thereupon the Army of that King which came to
spoil the Land of Egypt fell into such disorder, that the Soldiers killed one
another, so that not one remained, and the King was forced to return without
doing any thing. For that reason did the Kings respect and fear the Land of
Egpyt, for not any did attempt the attaquing of it, but he came off with loss
and disorder. Thus they were governed till the King of the Greeks,
Nabuchodonozor, engaged Nabuchodonozor.
in a War against Egypt for the Reasons which we shall mention hereafter, if
Almighty God give us the grace to do it. Dissension arose among his Soldiery,
so that they all destroyed one another; and he was forced to return from Egypt
without doing any thing. He afterward continued many years using all manner of
Artifices, and making great expenses, till he put a stop to those motions;
after which he returned into the Land of Egypt, destroyed the Inhabitants of
it, and so ruined it, that the marks of it will continue to the end of the
world.

Gariac the Son of King Gancam Ga iac Son of Gancam. His Braz^n Tr^e.
made himself also a Priest after his Father, and did many wonderful things:
and among others he made a Brazen Tree, which had branches of Iron, with sharp
Hooks at the ends of them; which Tree when any unjust or lying person
approached, those Hooks immediately flew at him, and fastened on his body, and
could not by any means be gotten thence, till such time as he said the truth of
his own accord, confessed his injustice, and ceased injuring his Adversary. He
also made an Idol of an hard black stone, which he named Gabdopharouis, that
is, Servant of Saturn. Men came to declare their differences to that Idol, and
demand justice of it; whereupon he who was in the wrong was staid in the place
where he was, and could not get thence till he had done justice of himself;
which if he did not, he would die in the place. When any one had some business
or affair of great importance, he went to the Idol, and burnt about it certain
Perfumes which they knew, then he lifted up his eyes to the Stars and named
King Gariac, entreating and crying out, and immediately the Doemons did the
business for him. Sometimes Gariac was carried in the air by great Birds, and
passed before his Subjects, who saw him with their eyes. When he was incensed
against any Nation which gave him any trouble in his Kingdom, he secretly sent
among them some people, who cast into the water they drank certain things,
which made it as bitter as the water of the Salt Sea, so that they could not
taste of it. Sometimes by his Magic he gave the Beasts of the earth power over
them, as Lions and Reptiles, which tore them to pieces.

Philemon also was one of the most considerable Priests of Egypt, whose
Philemo^.
story we shall relate in its proper place with that of Noah, if Almighty God
give us the grace to do it.

Among the Priests of Egypt there was also the Priest Saiouph, who was Saiouph.
he to whom they kindled the dreadful Fire, which he came near and spoke over
it; then there came forth a great and terrible Figure, which acquainted them
with whatever was necessary for them. This Priest Saiouph lived till the time
of King Pharaa^, in whose Reign the Deluge happened. He made his abode in the
Maritime Pyramid, which Pyramid A Maritrine Pyramid.
was a Temple of the Stars, where there was a Figure of the Sun, and one of the
Moon, both which spoke. The foremost or Meridional Pyramid was the Sepulcher of
the Bodies of the Kings, to which Saurid was translated. There were within it
several other admirable things, Statues, and Books, and among others the
Laughing Statue, which was made of a green Precious Stone. They had disposed
all these things within that place for fear of the Inundation and spoil.

As to the Priests who were in Egypt after the Deluge, there were a great
number of them. The first who then followed that Profession was the Son of
Philemon, who was imbarqu'd in the Ship with his Father and Sister, whom Noah
married to Bansar the Son of Cham, which happened thus: King Pharaan sent the
Priest Philemon to the Pharaan King of Egypt.
Prophet of God Noah, to dispute with him about the Worship of the Idols; but
Philemon by the grace and conduct of God believed in Noah, and confirmed his
Mission. He afterward imbarqued with him in the Ship, he and his Children, and
seven of his Disciples, and after that gave his Daughter in Marriage to Bansar
the Son of Cham, the Son of Noah. After they were come out of the Ship Philemon
carried Bansar his Son in Law into Egypt, where his Daughter had by the said
Bansar her Husband a Son, whom he named Masar, who was since King of Egypt, and
caused it to be called Masre Masar King of Egypt.
from his own Name, always worshipping one only God, according to the Religion
of Noah. The name of Priest was not then a reproach among them; for the Priest
was then looked upon as a Judge, who does not oppose the Laws prescribed unto
him.

The first who made an absolute Eardesir King and Priest.
profession of Priesthood in Egypt, who brought Religion into esteem, and
applied himself to the Worship of the Stars, was Bardesir the Son of Cophtarim,
the Son of Masar, the Son of Bansar, the Son of Cham, for he was King after his
Father; and it is reported that he made the great Laws, build the Pyramids, and
set up for Idols the Figures of the Stars. The Coptites affirm that the Stars
spoke to him, and many Miracles are attrited to him. Among other things it is
said, he kept himself out of the sight of Men for several years of his Reign,
appearing only from time to time, that is to say once a year, when the Sun
entered into Aries. Then People came in to him, and he spoke to them, but they
saw him not; afterward he absented himself from them till the like time again,
and then he gave them Commands and Prohibitions, yet so as that they saw him
not with their Eyes. After a long time thus passed, he ordered to be built a
Tower of Silver Gilt, and to be embellished with several Ornanaments; then he
began to sit on it in a most Magnificent and Magestical form, and to speak to
them. After that he went and sat before them in the Clouds in a Humane form;
then he absented himself from them, save only when he discovered to them his
Figure in the Temple of the Sun when the Sun entered in Aries, and ordered them
to take for their King Garim the Son of Cophtarim, acquainting them that he
would not return any more to them; wherein they obeyed him.

As to the Priestess Bedoura, she was The Priestess Bedoura.
a strong Woman, and as they say the Sister of Bardesir, and that he gave her
his Art of Priesthood and Divination, whereupon she made most of the Talismans
in the Pyramids. She also made the speaking Idols in Memphis. The Priesthood
continued in her Family and Posterity, who received it successively one of
another, and enjoyed its advantages. The Egyptians affirm that in her time the
wild Beasts and the Birds hindered them from drinking the Water of the Nile, so
that most of them dyed of Thirst, and that she sent against these Animals an
Angel, who made so great a cry amongst them, that the Earth shook, and the
Mountains were cleft. It is said, that by her Magic she fled in the Air, and
that the Angels smote her with their Wings.

As for Savan the Asmounian, who Hermes.
they say was the ancient Hermes; he it was that built the House of the
Statues, by which the measures of the Nile are know, and built to the Sun a
Temple in the Province named Basta; and also ordered the building of Asmounia;
and in the like manner that of the City of Basre in Egypt, which was twelve
miles in length, above which he caused a Castle to be made. He also built
Danae, where he established the Schools and the Recreations, The Danae.
It Is also said that he built the Pyramids of Behansa, where the women were in
favor of his Daughter, and that he there erected Pillars, on which he raised a
Tower of fine Glass, which might be seen from the City of Gainosamse. He also
built on the descent of the Eastern Mountain in Egypt a City which he named
Outiratis, that is in Outiratis.
the Coptick Language, The King's Favorite, and put into it abundance of
miraculous things. Among others he ordered four Pyramids to be made on the four
sides of each Gate, and caused to be set on the Eastern Gate a Tower in the
form of a Turret or Steeple, on which there was the Figure of a Black Eagle;
and on the The City of the Black Eagle.
Western Gate another Tower like the former, with the Figure of a Bull; on the
Maritime Gate the like Tower, with the Figure of a Lion; and on the outer or
Southern Gate another such Tower, with the Figure of a Dog. He sent into these
Figures Spirits that spoke; so that when any Stranger came into that City, at
what Gate soever he entered, the Figure upon it made a noise, and the
Inhabitants knew thereby that a stranger was come into their City, and
immediately they seized on him wherever he were. He planted there also a Tree
which shaded the whole City, and bore all sorts of Fruits. He also raised in
the midst of the City a high Watchtower, the height whereof was fourscore
Cubits, according to the measure of that time; and on the top of it a little
Turret, which every day assumed a different color till the seventh day, after
which it reassumed its first color, wherewith it filled the whole City. About
this Watchtower he disposed a great quantity of Water, wherein there was bred
abundance of Fish. All about the City he set Talismans, which diverted all
inconveniences from the Inhabitants; and he called it the City of the Jovians,
that is, Enchanters. There was in it for him a great Tower for the exercise of
the Sciences of Magic, wherein he caused Assemblies to be made. It was seated
on a mountain opposite to the City. God smote the Inhabitants of it with the
Pestilence, so that they all died, and so ruined it, that there is not any
track of it to be seen.

As to the time when the Pyramids Saurid the Son of Sahaloc.
were first built in Egypt, Historians relate, that there was a King named
Saurid, the Son of Sahaloc, three hundred years before the Deluge, who dreamt
one night that he saw the Earth overturned with its Inhabitants, the Men cast
down on their faces, the Stars falling out of the Heavens, and striking one
against the other, and making horrid and dreadful cries as they fell. He
thereupon awoke much troubled, and related not his Dream to any body, and was
satisfied in himself that some great accident would happen in the World. A year
after he dreamt again that he saw the Fixed Stars come down to the earth in the
form of white Birds, which carried men away, and cast them between two great
Mountains, which almost joined together, and covered them; and then the bright
shining Stars became dark and were eclipsed: he thereupon awaked extremely
astonished, and entered into the Temple of the Sun, and beset himself to bathe
his cheeks and to weep. Next morning he ordered all the Princes of the Priests
and Magicians of all the Provinces of Egypt to meet together, which they did,
to the number of a hundred and thirty Priests and Southsayers, with whom he
went aside and related to them his Dream, which they found very important and
of very great consequence, and the interpetation they gave of it was that some
great accident would happen in the World. Among others the Priest Aclimon
Aclimon.
who was the greatest of all, and resided always in the Kings Court, said thus
to him: Sir, your Dream is admirable, and I my self saw another about a Year
since, which frightened me very much, and which I have not revealed to any one.
Tell me what it was, said the King. I dreamt, said the Priest, that I was with
your Majesty on the top of the Mountain of Fire, which is in the midst of
Emsos, and that I saw the Heaven sunk down below its ordinary Situation, so
that it was near the Crowns of our Heads, covering and surrounding us, like a
great Basin turned upside down; that the Stars were intermingled amongst Men in
diverse Figures, that the people implored your Majesty's succor, and ran to
you in multitudes as to their refuge; that you lifted up your hands above your
head, and endeavored to thrust back the Heaven, and to keep it from coming
down so low; and that I seeing what your Majesty did, did also the same. While
we were in that posture extremely affrighted, methought we saw a certain part
of Heaven opening, and a bright light coming out of it; that afterward the Sun
rose over us out of the same place, and we began to implore his assistance,
whereupon he said thus to us, The Heaven will return to its ordinary situation,
when I shall have performed three hundred courses. I thereupon awaked extremely
affrighted. The Priest having thus spoken, the King commanded them to take the
heights of the Stars, and to consider what accident they portended. Whereupon
they declared that they promised first the Deluge, and after that Fire. Then he
commanded that Pyramids should be Pyramids.
built, that they might remove and secure in them what was of most esteem in
their Treasuries, with the bodies of their Kings and their Wealth, and the
Aromatic Roots which served them; and that they should write their wisdom upon
them, that the violence of the Water might not destroy it: wherein they
presently set themselves at work. The Egyptians relate in their Annals, that
Saurid is he who himself caused the Pyramids to be built; and that inasmuch as
after the death of his Father he followed his steps, causing the Provinces to
be inhabited and cultivated, and Governing them well, administering Justice to
the People, even to his own prejudice and that of his Domestics, causing
Temples to be built, and Statues, and Talismans to be erected, so that the
People had a great love for him. In the Upper-Egypt he built three Cities, and
did so many wonders therein, that it is not possible to relate them. He first
regulated the Tribute in Egypt, and enjoined works on Artists according to
their power. He also was the first who ordered Pensions out of hi Treasuries
for maimed and sick people. He caused to be made a Mirror of all sorts of
Minerals, wherein they saw all the Sauria's Mirror.
Climats, where there was abundance of Provisions or Sterility, and what new
accident happened in any of the Coasts of Egypt. This Mirror was upon a high
Turret of Brass in the midst of ancient Masre, which is Emsos. He also first
ordered Registers to be made, wherein was set down every day's receipts and
expenses, and the augmentation or diminution thereof, and kept them in the
Royal Treasuries; then when a Month was passed he caused all to be reduced
into one total sum, which he also had kept in the Royal Treasuries, sealed with
the Royal Seal; causing moreover to be graved on Stone what was to be graved
thereon. He made very liberal gratifications to the Masters of Arts, and those
who deserved something should be given them. He also set up in the midst of the
City the Figure of a Woman sitting, made of green stone, with a little Child in
her lap sucking. All women who were The Nurse Idol.
troubled with any disease came to that Idol, and set their hands on the
breasts of it, and presently they were cured of their indisposition. When a
Woman was in very hard labor, as soon as she set her hand on the little Child's
head, she was immediately brought to bed with ease. If an unchaste Woman set
her hand on the same Child's head, all her members shook so that she was not
able to speak. He made also several other works, which were destroyed by the
Deluge. Yet the Coptites affirm, that they were found again after the Deluge,
and used and adored as Idols, that their Figures are represented in all the
Pyramids of Egypt, and their diverse names; that those who taught them were
Disciples of the Priest Aclimon, who also showed them all the other works in
Egypt. We shall speak of them in their proper place with the assistance of
Almighty God. Saurid did also other prodigious things in his time, and among
others The Idol Becres.
he made an Idol named Becres, consisting of a mixture of diverse Medicinal
drugs, which had a mavelous virtue in securing Men's bodies from all sorts of
diseases and inconveniences. By means hereof they knew who should escape and
who should die of their sickness, by certain signs which appeared in the Idol;
so that they gave over using remedies to some, and endeavored the curing of
others. They washed the members of that Idol, and gave the washings thereof to
the sick to drink, who were thereupon immediately eased of their pain. 'Twas he
also built the two great Pyramids so famous in all Nations. For a great part of
the The two great Pyramids.
Sages affirm they were built by Sedad the Son of Gad, and that he was interred
in one of the two; but the Ancients of the Coptites and their Sages deny the
Gadites ever entered into the Land of Egypt. They deny also the same thing of
the Amalekites, and say that Egypt was always inaccessible to them, by reason
of its Enchanters and their Artifices and Stratagems. The Learned relate in the
Lives and Histories, that the Pyramids Pyramids built before the Deluge.
Armelius. Abum.
were built three hundred years before the Deluge. So speaks of them Armelius,
Author of the Book of Illustrious Men. Abumasar the Astrologer, in his Book of
Thousans, says that the reason of building the Pyramids was the Dream which
Saurid the Son of Sahaloc saw. He confirms it in his Book of Miraculous Dreams,
where he adds that he sent for the Priests and Southsayers of his time, and the
Astrologers, and related to them what he had seen of the descent of the Moon
upon Earth in the form of a Woman; of the overturning of the Earth with its
Inhabitants, and of the total Eclipse of the Sun; and the dream he had after
that: and that the Priests declared to him the coming of the Deluge, whereof
mention is made in the Book of the Annals, which the Egyptians attribute The
Annals of two Brothers, Coptites.
to two Brothers Coptites, saying that those two Brothers interpreted an
ancient Book, which had been found in some one of their Sepulchers on the
breast of a man. They say these two Brothers were the Children of a certain man
of the Race of the ancient Egyptians, to wit, those who escaped the Deluge, and
were embarked with the Prophet of God Noah. We shall with the help of God say
somewhat hereafter of the History of these two Brothers. It was found therefore
in the Book they Translated, that Saurid the Son of Sahaloc, King of Egypt,
after he had seen his dreams and related them to the Priests, and that Aclimon
had also related his to him, commanded the Priests to see what remarkable
events the influences of the Stars portended to the World; and that the Priests
having exactly erected a Celestial Figure for the hour of his question, found
that it signified a great mischief which was to descend from Heaven, and issue
out of the Earth, which they declared unto him; whereupon he caused Pyramids
and great Structures to be built, to serve for refuges to him and his
Domestics, and Sepulchers for the conservation of their Bodies; as also that
they might engrave and mark on their Roofs, their Walls, and their Pillars, all
the obscure and difficult Sciences, whereof the Egyptians made profession,
learning them and treasuring them up as Illustrious Inheritances from those who
were grown famous in all Nations: and that they should also represent on them
the Figures of the Stars in their Signs, with their effects and significations,
and the secrets of Nature, and the productions of Arts, and the great Laws, and
the beneficial Drugs, and the Talismans, and Medicine, and Geometry, and all
the other things that might be advantageous to men, as well for the public as
for private persons, clearly and intelligibly to those who were acquainted with
their Books, their Language, and their Writings. King Saurid knew certainly
that the calamity was to be general to all Countries in the World, or come very
near it. Then he said to them, When shall this great evil happen wherewith we
are threatened? Whereto they replied thus: When the heart of the Lion shall come
to the first Minute of Cancer's head, and the Plants shall be in their Houses,
in those places of the Sphere, the Sun and Moon in the first minute of Aries;
Pharouis, who is Saturn, in the first degree; Raouis, which is Jupiter in
Pisces at 27 degrees 3 minutes; Mars in Libra, and Venus in Leo at 5 degrees
and some minutes. Then he said to them, See whether after this great evil there
will happen any other accident in Egypt. They considered and saw that the Stars
portended another great misfortune, which was to descend from Heaven, contrary
to the former, that is, a Fire that should consume the Universe. Whereupon he
said to them; When is that to happen? They replied, we have made our
Observation, and found that it is to hap, when the heart of the Lion shall be
at the end of the fifteenth degree of Leo, and that the Sun shall be with him
in one minute joining that of Saturn; Jupiter is direct in the Lion, and with
him Mars, changing the minute; and the Moon in Aquarius near the Dragons Tail,
at twelve parts. There will be at that time an Eclipse of the greatest
congruence, Venus shall be at the greatest distance from the Sun, and Mercury
the like. Then Saurid said unto them, Is there yet any other great accident
that you can foresee besides those two remarkable evils? They looked and found
that when the heart of the Lion shall have completed two thirds of his circle,
there would not remain any Animal moving on the Earth, which should not be
destroyed; and that when he should complete his revolution, the knots of the
Sphere would be dissolved. The King was very much astonished at that, and
commanded the great Pillars to be cut down, and that the great Pavement should
be melted: he caused Tin to be brought out of the Western parts, then he made
them take black stones, which he caused to be laid for the foundations of the
Pyramids about Syene. They were brought from the Nile upon Engines, and they
had certain particular impressions and marks, and upon them painted Billets,
which the Sages had set there: so that when they had smitten the stone, it
advanced of it self the space of a Flight-shot. These stones were set in the
foundations of the Pyramids, to wit, of the first, The three Pyramids.
which is the Eastern, and of the Western, and of the Colored. They put in the
midst of every piece an Iron Bar like a Pivot standing up, then they set on
that another piece after they had made a hole through the middle of it, that
the Iron Pivot might enter into it, and fasten it to that which was under;
after which they melted Lead, and it was poured all about the piece, after they
had adjusted the Writing which was above. He caused Gates to be made under
ground, at four Cubits depth, according to their measure; which Gates had
Sallies into vaulted Casemates built of stone, and fortified with much
Artifice, and whereof the Situation was concealed, every Vault being fifty
Cubits in length. The Gate of the Eastern Pyramid was on the South Side a
hundred Cubits distant from the midst of the Western wall on the Western side.
They measur d also from the Western wall, that is, from the midst of it a
hundred Cubits, and they dug till they got down to the door of the vaulted
Casemate, through which they entered into it. As to the Colored Pyramid, The
colored Pyramid.
made of stones of two colors, the Gate of it was on the Maritime or
North-side, and they measured also from the midst of the Maritime wall a
hundred Cubits, which made five hundred, according to the Mussulman measure. He
built it perpendicularly into the ground, to the depth of forty Cubits, then he
raised it as much, though what is above ground of the Pyramids do not exceed
the third part, so that this last is the highest, built after the manner of the
raised Floors and high Rooms of our present time. They built them in the time
of their good fortune, while all their Worldly concerns came according to their
wishes. King Saurid having completed the Structure, covered them with Silks of
several colors from the top to the bottom, and caused a great Feast to be
celebrated for them, whereto all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom came, not so
much as one being wanting from all the Coasts of Egypt. Then he commanded them
to make thirty Gernes or great Vessels of colored stone, which they
excellently cast. He also ordered covers to be made of the same. Every Vessel
held a hundred Mules load. He caused them to be set in the lowest Story of the
Eastern Pyramid, and had brought thither precious Stones and Jacinths, till the
Floor was full thereof. He caused the Vessels to be covered with their Covers,
and Lead to be melted thereon; then he caused pieces of Gold and Silver to be
scattered, as much as might divert their sight who should look on them. Then he
caused to be brought thither all he could of his Treasures, and the most
precious of his Wealth, Jewels, Plate, Precious Stones, cast and colored
Pearls, Vessels of Emerald, Vessels of Gold and Silver, Statues excellently
wrought, Artificial Waters, Talismans, precious Iron that would twine about
like Cloth, Philosophical Laws, the Nurses of Wisdom, diverse sorts of
Medicinal Drugs, exquisite Tables of Brass, on which diverse Sciences were
written; as also Poisons and Mortal drinks, which Kings have ready by them, and
wholesome Preservatives and Antidotes; and several other things, which it is
impossible to describe. But all this could not secure them from the evils
wherewith God afflicted them for their Infidelity. In the mean time they
imagined that their Fortresses would defend them against God; but God came to
them on the side they were not aware of, and destroyed their great Flocks by
the Deluge and other misfortunes: Praise be to him, he is the only and the
Almighty God. All is perishable save only his Majesty; to him belongs Wisdom,
and to him you will return. After that, says the Author, King Saurid caused to
be brought into the second Pyramid the Idols of the Stars, and the Tabernacles
of the Celestial Bodies, and what Statues and Perfumes his Ancestors had caused
to be made, by means whereof men had access to him, and their Books, and what
Annals and Histories they had caused to be made for themselves of what had
passed in their time, and of the predictions of what was to happen after them,
to the Kings who should govern Egypt to the last times, and the state of the
fixed Stars, and what was to happen by their repose and motions from time to
time. Then he caused to be put into the third Pyramid the Bodies of the Kings
and Priests in Gernes, or great Vessels of hard black Stone; and by every
Priest his Book, and the Miracles of his Art and Life. He also caused to be set
along the walls of the Pyramids Idols, which held in their hands all the Arts
according to their ranks and measures, the description of each Art, and the
manner of exercising it, and what was necessary for that, and in like manner
the Caters: For the Priests were distinguished into seven Orders; the first
Seven Orders of Priests.
whereof was that of the Caters, who were they that served all the seven
Planets, every Planet seven Years. With the Cater was the Universal Doctor. The
second Order was theirs who served six Planets, and immediately followed after
the first degree. After that they named that which served five of them, and
under, the following and inferior. Then he caused also to be brought into the
third Pyramid the Bodies of the Masters of the Laws, with those of the Priests,
and the wealth of the Houses of the Stars and their Ornaments, which they had
had by Offerings, and the goods of the Priests. After that he appointed one of
them for a Guard to each Pyramid. The Guard Guards of the Pyramids.
therefore of the Eastern Pyramid was an Idol of Jamanick shell, black and
white, which had both eyes open, and sat on a Throne, having near it as it
were a Halberd, on which if any one cast his eye, he heard on that side a
dreadful noise, which made his heart faint, and he who heard that noise dyed.
There was a Spirit appointed to serve that Guard, which Spirit never went from
before it. The Guard of the Western Pyramid was an Idol of hard Red stone,
having in like manner in his hand somewhat like a Halberd, and on his head a
wreathed Serpent, which flew at those who came near him, clung about their
necks and killed them. There was appointed to serve him an ugly deformed
Spirit, which parted not from him. For Guard to the third Pyramid he had placed
a small Idol of Baby stone, on a Basis of the same; which Idol drew to it those
who looked on it, and stuck to them till it had destroyed them, or made them
distracted. There was also a Spirit appointed to serve it, which parted not
from it. Saurid having finished the building of the Pyramids, and compassed
them with the bodies of Spiritual substances, he offered Sacrifices to them,
and presented them with the Offerings chosen for them. The Spirits appointed
for the service of each Star knew the Ascendant of the Stars they served, and
they served them according to their rank one after another. He distributed and
appointed the names under which should be divided the Works that should be
presented to them. The Coptites affirm, that King Saurid's Name was written
upon the first Pyramid, with the time spent in the building of it. Some say he
had it built in six months, and that he defied those that came after him to
demolish it in 600 years; though it be certain it is more easy to pull down
then to build. He said also speaking to them themselves, I have covered them
with Silk, do you cover them if you can with Linen cloth. But those who have
reigned after him at several times, have seen that they were nothing in
comparison of him, and that they could not cover them so much as with Mat, and
with much ado should they have covered them with any thing else.

As to the miraculous stories related Stories of the Pyramids.
of the Pyramids, the Author of that Book (God show him mercy) says, that in
the Annals contained in the Books of the Egyptians, and their Miracles, there
is such plenty of admirable Histories, that it is impossible to relate them
all: I shall only (adds he) relate some of them, and among others this; The
Commander of the Faithful, the Mamunus, God show him mercy, being come into the
Land Story I.
of Egypt, and having seen ^he Pyramids, had a desire to demolish them, or at
least some one of them, to se what was within it. Whereupon it was thus said to
him; You desire a thing which it is not possible for you to have. If you
attempt it and fail, it will be a dishonor to the Commander of the Faithful
Whereto he replied, I cannot for bear but I must discover something. He
therefore put them to work at the breach, which was already begun, and made
great expenses therein. For they kindled fire on the stone, then they cast
Vinegar on it, and afterward battered the place with Engines. The breadth of
the wall was 20 Cubits, according to the Geometrical measure. Being come to the
upper story of the Pyramid, they found behind the breach a green Basin, wherein
there were pieces of Gold weighing each of them an ounce, according to our
ordinary Weights; and of those pieces there was just 1000. The Demolishers
wondered at it, and brought the Gold to the Mamunus, not knowing what it meant.
The Mamunus was also astonished at it, admiring the excellent Workmanship and
good Alloy of the Gold. Then he said to them, Compute what expense you have
made in the breach. They computed, and found that the expense equaled the
value of the Gold which they had found, so as that there was not a Farthing
more or less. The Mamunus was yet more astonished at that, and said to those
who kept his Accounts; Consider the foresight of this Nation, and the greatness
of their Science. Their Sages had told them that there would arise some one
that should in some place open one of these Pyramids: they examined that, and
computed what expense he should make who attempted that work, and set the sum
at the place; that he who got thither, finding his account, and seeing he had
not gained any thing, should not begin any such work again. They say the Basin
was made of a green Emerald, and that the Mamunus had it carried to Gueraca,
where it was one of the noblest pieces of his Treasury.

Another History relates, that after Story II.
the Pyramid was opened people went in out of curiosity for some years, many
entering into it, and some returning thence without any inconvenience, others
perishing in it. One day it happened that a company of Young men (above 20 in
number) swore that they would go into it, provided nothing hindered them, and
to force their way to the end of it. They therefore took along with them meat
and drink for two months: they also took Plates of Iron and Bars, Wax-candles
and Lanterns, Match and Oil, Hatchets, Hooks, and other sharp Instruments, and
entered into the Pyramid: most of them got down from the first Descent and the
second, and passed along the ground of the Pyramid, where they saw Bats as big
as black Eagles, which began to beat their Faces with much violence. But they
generously endured that inconvenience, and advanced still till they came to a
Narrow passage, through which came an impetuous wind, and extra ordinary cold;
yet so as they could not perceive whence it came, nor whither it went. They
advanced to get into the Narrow place, and then their Candles began to go out,
which obliged them to put them into their Lanterns. Then they entered, but the
place seemed to be joined and close before them: whereupon one of them said to
the rest, Tie me by the wast with a cord, and I will venture to advance,
conditionally that if any accident happen to me, you immediately draw me back.
At the entrance of the Narrow place there were great empty vessels made like
Coffins, with their lids by them; whence they inferred, that those who set them
there had prepared them for their death; and that to get to their Treasures and
Wealth there was a necessity of passing through that Narrow place. They bound
their Companion with cords, that he might venture to get through that passage;
but immediately the passage closed upon him, and they heard the noise of the
crushing of his bones: they drew the cords to them, but they could not get him
back. Then there came to them a dreadful voice out of that Cave, which startled
and blinded them so that they fell down, having neither motion nor sense. They
came to themselves awhile after, and endeavored to get out, being much at a
loss what to do. At last after much trouble they returned, save only some of
them who fell under the Descent. Being come out into the Plain they sat down
together, all astonished at what they had seen, and reflecting on what had
happened to them; whereupon the Earth cleft before them, and cast up their dead
Companion, who was at first immovable, but two hours after began to move, and
spoke to them in a Language they understood not, for it was not the Arabian.
But some time after one of the Inhabitants of the Upper Egypt interpreted it to
them, and told them his meaning was this; This is the reward of those who
endeavor to seize what belongs to another. After these words their Companion
seemed dead as before, whereupon they buried him in that place. Some of them
died also in the Pyramid. Since that, he who commanded in those parts, having
heard of their adventure, they were brought to him, and they related all this
to him, which he much wondered at.

Another History relates, that some entered into the Pyramid, and came Story
III.
to the lowest part of it, where they turned round about. There appeared to
them a Hollow place, wherein there was a beaten path, in which they began to
go. And then they found a Basin, out of which distilled fresh water, which fell
into several Pits which were under the Basin, so as they knew not whence it
came, nor whether it went. After that they found a square Hall, the walls
whereof were of strange stones of several colors. One of the company took a
little stone and put into his mouth, and immediately his ears were deafened.
Afterward they came to a place made like a Cistern full of coined Gold, like a
large sort of Cakes that are made; for every piece was of the weight of 1000
Drams. They took some of them, but could not get out of the place till they had
returned them into the place whence they had taken them. They afterward found
another place with a great Bench, such as is ordinarily before houses for
people to sit on; and on the Bench a Figure of green stone, representing a tall
ancient Man sitting, having a large Garment about him, and little Statues
before him, as if they were Children whom he taught: they took some of those
Figures, but could not get out of the place till they had left them behind
them. They passed on along the same way, and heard a dreadful noise and great
hurly-burly, which they durst not approach. Then having advanced further, they
found a square place, as if it were for some great Assembly, where there were
many Statues, and among others the Figure of a Cock made of red Gold: that
Figure was dreadful, enamelled with Jacinths, whereof there were two great ones
in both eyes, which shined like two great Torches: they went near it, and
immediately it crew terribly, and began to beat its two wings, and thereupon
they heard several voices which came to them on all sides. They kept on their
way, and found afterward an Idol of white stone, with the Figure of a Woman
standing on her head, and two Lions of wh^te stone lying on each side of her,
which seemed to roar and endeavor to bite. They recommended themselves to God
and went on, and kept on their way till they saw a Light; after which going out
at an open place, they perceived they were in a great Sandy Desert. At the
passage out of that open place there were two Statues of black stone, having
Half Pikes in their hands. They were extremely astonished, whereupon they began
to return toward the East, till they came near the Pyramids on the out side.
This happened in the time of Jezid, the Son of Gabdolmelic, the Son of Gabdol,
Governor of Egypt, who having heard of it sent some persons with those before
spoken of to observe the open place of the Pyramid. They sought it several
days, but could never find it again, whereupon they were accounted fools. But
they showed him the head of a Ring which one of them had taken in the
Assembly-place, which they had found in the Pyramid; which obliged him to
believe what they said. That head was valued at a great sum of money.

It is further related, that other persons Story IV.
in the time of the Commander Achemed, the Son of Toulon (God show him mercy)
entered in like manner into the Pyramid, and found there a Cruse of red Glass,
which they brought away. As they came out they lost one of their Men, which
obliged them to go in again to look for him. They found him stark naked
laughing continually, and saying to them, Trouble not your selves to look for
me. After which he got away from them, and returned into the Pyramid. Whence
they inferred that the Spirits had distracted him, whereupon they went out and
left him there. Upon which they were accused before the Judge, who condemned
them to exemplary punishment, and took away from them the Cruse, which had in
it four pound of glass. A certain person said thereupon, that that Cruse had
not been set in that place for nothing. Which occasioned the filling of it with
water, and then being weighed again, it weighed as much as when it was empty,
and no more. They afterward took off some of that water several times, but the
Vessel came still to the same weight. Whence they conjectured that it was one
of the Winevessels whereof the Ancients had made use, and had been made to that
purpose by their Sages, and placed there. For the use of Wine was permitted
among them. This was a strange Miracle.

They relate further several Stories Story V.
of this kind, and among others that some entered into the Pyramid with a Child
to abuse it; and that having committed that sin, there came out against them a
black young Man, with a Cudgel in his hand, who beat them furiously, so that
they fled leaving there their Meat and their Clothes. The same thing happened
to others in the Pyramid of Achemima. There entered also into the Pyramid of
Achemima a Man and a Woman to commit Adultery therein; but they were
immediately cast along on the ground, and dyed in a Frenzy.

When the Priests (says the Author) Predictions made to King Saurid.
had told King Saurid of the great conflagration, which was to happen by Fire,
and that that Fire should come out of the Sign Leo; he caused to be made in the
Pyramids certain windings, which abutted upon narrow Vaults, which drew the
Winds into the Pyramids with a dreadful noise. He also caused Channels to be
made therein, by which the Water of the Nile came in at the same place, then it
retreated of it self, and returned into the Nile by another passage, after the
manner of the Cisterns which are made for the reception of Rainwater. He also
caused certain Channels to be made therein, which reached to certain places of
the Land of the West, and to certain places of the Land of Upper Egypt. He
filled those Subterraneous places with prodigious things, Statues, speaking
Idols, and Talismans. Some Coptites affirm, that after the coming of the
Deluge, and the Conflagration had been predicted to him, he said to the
Astrologers; Shall our Country suffer some part of these misfortunes? It shall
(replied they) be afflicted with a desolation which shall continue so many
years, that the Dragons and Vipers shall be so exceedingly multiplied therein,
that none shall dare to pass through it. And whence shall this desolation come?
said Saurid. From the King of a remote Country, said they, who shall destroy
its Inhabitants, and so ruin it, that the marks thereof shall remain
eternally, clearly carrying away all its Wealth. But after that it shall be
repeopled by his Son, born of one of his Bondwomen. This King was
Nahuchodonozor, who destroyed Egypt, and Nabuchodonozor.
whose Son Balsas (born of a Captive Coptess) repeopled it, and built there the
Castle and the Church Mugalleca, or Suspended. What shall happen after that?
said Saurid to the Priests. There will come into Egypt, replied they, a Nation
of ugly and deformed People, from the Coast of the Nile, that is, from the
Country whence it comes, which Nation shall possess it self of the greatest
part thereof. After that, said he again, what shall happen? Its Nile shall fail
it, replied they, and its Inhabitants shall forsake it. Then it shall be
possessed first by a Barbarous Nation, whose language shall be unknown, and
which shall come from the Eastern Coast; afterward by another coming from the
Western Coast, which shall be the last. He commanded all this to be writ down,
and that it should be graved on the Pyramids and Obelisks. One of the things
which confirm this discourse by their consonancy is, that Abucabil, the
Mogapherian, the Pacifier, related this to Achamed, the Son of Toulon, (God
show him mercy) when he entered into Egypt. With the help of God we shall speak
of him hereafter.

As to the Spirits which are met in The Spirits of the Pyramids.
the Pyramids, and the like Structures, and the forms under which they appear,
the Author (to whom God show mercy) speaks of them briefly thus in a Chapter he
has expressly made of them: They relate, says he, several things of the
Pyramids, which would be long to declare; but as to the Spirits which reign
over them, and such other Structures, named Birba's, they say that the Spirit
of the Meridional Pyramid never appears out of it, but in the form of a naked
Woman, who has not even her privy parts covered, beautiful as to all other
parts, and whereof the behavior is such, as when she would provoke any one to
love and make him distracted, she laughs on him, and presently he approches
her, and she draws him to her, and besots him with love, so that he immediately
grows mad, and wanders like a Vagabond up and down the Country. Diverse persons
have seen her walking about the Pyramid about Noon, and about Sunset. One day
she distracted one of the People of the Chacambermille, who was afterward seen
running stark naked through the streets without fear or wit. The Spirit of the
second Pyramid, which is the Colored, is an ancient Nubian, having a Basket on
his head, and in his hands a Censer like those used in Churches, wherewith he
incenses about it at all the Obelisks. As to the Birba of Achemima, its Spirit
is a Young Man, Beardless and Naked, sufficiently known among the Inhabitants
of the place. The Spirit of the Birba of Semir is a black swarthy Old Man, of
high Stature, and having a short Beard. The Spirit of the Birba of of Phacat
appears in the form of a black young Woman, having in her arm a little black
Infant deformed, showing his Dogs teeth, and having his eyes all white. The
Spirit of the Birba of Ridousa appears in the form of a Man, having the head of
a Lion with two long Horns. The Spirit of the Birba of Busira appears in the
form of an old white Monk carrying a Book. The Spirit of the Birba of Gaphi
appears in the form of a Shepherd, clad in a black Robe, with a Staff in his
hand. As to the Pyramids of Dehasoura, their Spirits are seen in the form of
two black old Men. The Spirit of the Birba of Samnos appears in the form of a
Monk, who comes out of the Sea, and views himself in it as in a Lookingglass.
All these Spirits are manifestly seen by such as come near them, and the places
of their retirement, and frequent there abouts along time. There are for all of
them certain particular Offerings, by means whereof it is possible the
Treasures of the Birbas and the Pyramids may appear, and that there may be a
friendship and familiarity between Men and Spirits, according to what the Sages
have established.

Saurid the Son of Sahaloc, says the Saurid's Death.
Author, continued King of Egypt a hundred and seven years. His Astrologers
told him the time he should die, whereupon he made his last Will to his Son
Hargib, told him whatever was necessary for him, and ordered him to have him
carried into the Pyramid, and to have him disposed into the Tomb which he
himself had caused to be made, that he should cover the bottom of it with
Camphire and Santal-wood, and that he should enbalm his body with the drugs
which prevent corruption, and that he should leave by him the richest of his
Armor, and the most precious of his Housholdstuff. His Son performed Hargib
Saurid's Son.
all this after his death, and then Hargib Reigned after his Father in the Land
of Egppt, and followed his footsteps, being careful as he had been to
administer Justice to the People, to have the Country cultivated and
inhabited, and to procure the welfare of his Subjects, which obliged them to
have a great affection for him. He afterward caused to be built the first of
the Pyramids of Dehasoura, and to be brought thither abundance of Wealth, and
precious Stones of great value. Hargib was particularly addicted to Chemistry,
to Addicted to Chemistry.
get Metals out of the Mines, and to gather money; he afterward enterred every
year a great quantity thereof* and minded not the putting of Statue and
speaking Idols into his Pyramid He a long time continued that exercise, during
which he had a Daughter, who being grown up suffered herself to be debauched by
one of hi^ people, which obliged him to sent her away into the West, where he
had a City built for her in the Country of Barca. This City being built they
gave it the name of that Princess, which was as they say* Domeria. For he
caused a Pilory t^ Domeria.
be built in the midst of the City, and her name to be engraved on it: then he
sent to live there with her all the old Women of his House. He continued King
ninety nine years, then dyed: and was interred in the Pyramids. His Son Menaos
Reigned after him in Egypt, and was a proud and Menaos.
hauty Prince, who spilt much blood, ill treated his Subjects, Ravished many
Women, and squandered away a great part of the Treasures of his Ancestors. For
he built Palaces of Gold and Silver, into which he brought Channels of the Nile,
the bottom whereof he caused to be covered with Jacinths and other precious
stones instead of Sand. He tormented Men, and took away their goods and Cattle
by force. This got him the hatred of the People, and at last the Beast he rid
on threw him and broke his neck; (Gods curse go with him.) So God delivered the
Egyptians of him.

As to the History of the Deluge, and History of the Deluge and Noah.
the adventures of Noah, to whom God grant peace and mercy, take in few words
what is said thereof. They relate that Adam, (Gods peace be with Adam.
him) after God had descended from Paradise, and been merciful to him after his
Sin, was by God himself appointed King of the Earth, and Mankind descended of
his Race. He was the first that Prayed to God, Fasted, and knew how to Read and
Write. He was Beardless and Hairless, comely and well made. There was
afterward sent him one and twenty pages of Writings; then he dyed aged nine
hundred and fifty years. His li(...) should have been a thousand years but he
bestowed fifty of them on hi^ Son David. His Successor and L(...) gatee was his
Son Seth, to whom a(...) Seth.
to whose Children continued the Prophecy, with the true Religion and the
Superintendency of Divine Laws God afterward sent Seth twenty nine sheets. He
lived on the Mountain and Cabel built in the bottom of the Valley. Seth lived
nine hundred and twelve years, and had for Successor his Son Enos, who lived
nine hundred Enos.
and fifty years, and appointed for hi^ Successor after his death his Son
Cainan, in whose favor he made his last Cainan.
Will, and afterward distributed the Earth among the Sons of his Sons. Cainan
died aged nine hundred and twenty years, and made his last Testament in favor
of his Son Mahalel. In his time the square Temple was Mahalel.
built. He died aged nine hundred seventy five years, and appointed for
Successor his Son Jared, whom he Jared.
taught all the Sciences, and told all that was to happen in the World. He
considered the Stars, and read the Book of the secrets of the Kingdom, which
was sent from Heaven to Adam: Edrisus.
then he had to his son Enoch, who is Edrisus, Gods peace be with him. There
was then King in the World Mechavel the son of Cabel. The Devil (Gods curse
with him) went to him, seduced him by his deceits, and made him fall into
error; then he told him that there was born to Jared the son of Mahalel a son
who should be an enemy to theie Gods, and come to great reputation. Whereto
Jared answered, Can not thou destroy him? I Will endeavor to do it, said the
Devil. Whereupon God gave Edrisus (Gods peace be with him) Angels to guard him
from the Devil, and from his Progeny and Artifices. When he was grown up to
adolescency, his Father made him Guardian of the Temple, and taught him the
sheets of Seth and Adam, Gods peace be with them. He was very diligent in the
reading and studying of them, and in observing the precepts thereof. Being come
to forty years of age, God gave him the gift of Prophecy, and sent him from
Heaven thirty sheets. His Father made him his Successor by Will, gave him the
Sciences he was possessed of, and sent him to King Darael, whom he taught
Writing and Astrology. For he is the first who writ in the Syriac after Seth,
and who described the state of the Stars. The Nations of Writing affirm he was
the first who made Slaves and Servants, and established Weights and Measures.
He led Captive the Children of Cabel; he was skilled in Medicine and the
Astronomical Tables, according to a supputation different from the Indian. God
showed him after he had prayed for it the sublime Figures. Spirits spoke to
him; he knew the names of the Ascent and Descent, and Ascended and Descended,
and turned the Sphere, and knew the significations of the Stars, and all that
was to happen, and graved all Sciences upon Stones and upon Bricks. He had a
long adventure with the Angel of Death, which it would be too long for us to
relate. To speak briefly of him, he died, and God raised him up again; he saw
Hell, and entered into Paradise, where he still is, being not come out of it.

They relate (says the Author, Gods mercy on him) that King Mechavel Mechavel
King.
sent to desire Jared to send Edrisus to him, for he desired to see him. But he
would by no means do it, whereupon Mechavel sent an Army against him, which yet
could not come at him, in regard his Uncles, and all the progeny of Seth,
secured him against it; for after Seth there was no other Prophet but Edrisus.
Jared died, aged The name Edrisus.
750 years. Edrisus was called Edrisus (that is, Reader) because he had much
read and studied the sheets. He was raised up into Paradise at the complete age
of 300 years; God grant him peace and mercy. He was also called Hermes, which
is the name Hermes.
of Mercury. He taught Sabi to write, and after Edrisus all who could write
were called Sabi. He it was who foretold the coming of the Deluge, and the
destruction of the world by water, which was to come over the Earth. Edrisus
(before he was raised up) had made his Will in favor of his Son Matusalech,
and had put the Matusalech.
sheets into his hands. He had also recommended Sabi to assist him. Sabi was a
man taught by Edrisus, and one who had made a great progress in the Sciences.
They say Edrisus was the first who ordered the waging of war for the Faith; and
that he did it himself against the sons of Cabel. Matusalech lived 932 years,
after which the Testament passed to Malec his Malec.
Son, who took possession of the sheets, and joined the Sciences together. He
confederated with the Children of his father, and assembled them together, and
hindered their holding any correspondence with the children of Cabel. 'Twas he
who saw as it were a Fire issuing out of his mouth, and burning the world;
after which he had to his Son the Prophet Noah, Noah.
Gods peace and mercy be with him; Darmasel (the Son of Mechavel, the Son of
Enoch, the Son of Gabod, the Son of Cabel, the Son of Adam, Gods peace be with
him) then reigning. This Darmasel had lifted up himself, and King Darmasel.
was grown great, and had subdued Kings, which had happened because the Devil
(whom God curse) had called him to the worship of the Stars, and to the
Religion of the Sabaeans; insomuch that he had made Idols, and had built
Temples to them, wherein he served them. They say no man got out of the bowels
of the Earth so many Precious stones, Pearls, and other Minerals, as this King
did. He was very severe to the Prophet of God Noah, and endeavored much to do
him harm; but God prevented him, and preserved the Prophet. Darmasel had lived
300 years when God sent Noah, who was then 150 years of age. He lived in his
Nation according to what God had revealed to him 1000 years wanting 50; then he
lived after the Deluge 200 years. He was the first Prophet that came after
Edrisus, to whom God grant peace. His Law was to profess the Unity of God, to
pray, to pay the Sacred Tribute, to observe Abstinence, and to fight in the way
of God against the Children of Cabel. After that he called his Nation to God,
and made them fear his chastisements. But they began presently to ill-treat
him. Yet was it long ere they discovered his enterprise to King Darmasel,
during which Noah was continually in the houses of their Idols and in their
Temples. And when he said unto them, My Friends, say there is no other God then
the true God, and that I am his Servant and Apostle. h Tey put their fingers
into their Ears, and their Heads into their Mantles, so displeasing was the
discourse to them. Then when he came to say, there is no other God then the
true God, the Idols fell down with their faces to the ground; and then the
People fell upon him and beat him till he fell down. After that King Darmasel
heard of his carriage, and ordered him to be brought into his presence,
accompanied by his own people, who held a Poniard to his Throat, and to whom
the King spoke thus: Is this he who you say speaks reproachfully of the Gods,
and would destroy Religion? Yea, replied they. Then he said to Noah; O Noah,
what do they here tell me of thee, that thou opposest my Religion, and what thy
Fathers Children believe? what Magic is this whereby thou have made the Idols
tumble out of their places? who taught thee this Doctrine? Great King, replied
Noah, were they Gods as you imagine, my discourses could not hurt them, and
they would not have fallen out of their places. For my part, I am the Servant
of God and his Apostle. Honor the true God, and imagine nothing equal to him,
for he sees you. Thereupon Darmasel put Noah into Prison till the Feast of the
Idols came, to the end he should offer Sacrifice to them. He also caused the
Idols to be returned into their places on their Thrones, and made Oblations to
them. Then when the time of the Idol-Feast drew near, he commanded a Herald to
assemble all the the People, that they might see what he did to Noah. Then Noah
implored the assistance of God against him, and he was immediately troubled
with a great Headache and a Frenzy, which continued a week, after which he
died. He was put into a golden Coffin, wherewith a Procession was made in the
Temple of the Idols, his Subjects weeping about him, and cursing and railing at
Noah. Then they carried him (I mean the King) into the Pyramids, and disposed
him into a Tomb which had been prepared for him. He had appointed his Son to
Mechavel Son of Darmasel.
be King after him. He brought Noah out of Prison, esteeming him a distracted
person, and forbid under great penalties, his relapsing into the faults
wherewith he was charged. Noah, Gods mercy to him, expected till the day of one
of their great Festivals, on which they assembled themselves to serve their
Idols. He then came to them and said thus, Say there is no other God then the
true God, and that I am his Servant and Apostle. With those words the Idols
fell down of all sides, and the people fell upon Noah, cruelly beating him,
making several wounds in his head, and dragging him along the ground with his
Face downwards. Then the Heavens and the Earth, the Mountains and the Seas
cried vengeance to God, saying, O Lord, do you not see the cruel treatment made
to your Prophet Noah? The Almighty and All-good God made them sensible that
that cruelty was exercised on himself, that he would punish those Rebels, and
do right to Noah. They afterward carried Noah before the King, who spoke thus
to him, Have not I already pardoned thee, and opened my Fathers Prisons,
conditionally thou should not return to thy faults? I am (replied. Noah) a
Servant, who does what he is commanded. Who has given thee that command? said
the King. My God, replied Noah. Who is that God? said the King. The Lord of the
Heavens and the Earth, said Noah, the Lord of all Creatures. And what has he
commanded thee? said the King. He has commanded me (replied Noah) to call you
to his service, and he commands you and your Subjects to forsake the Worship of
Idols, and to follow the ordinances of Prayer, payment of the Sacred Tribute,
and the observance of Fasting. And if we do it not, said the King, what will be
the issue? If he please (replied Noah) he will immediately destroy you; and if
he please he will give you time to reflect on your ways till a certain term.
Let thy God alone (said the King) and what he desires of us, and do thou thy
self give over importuning us. How can I give over (replied Noah) when I am a
Servant who does what is commanded him, and cannot disobey his All-good and
Almighty Master? Then the King (says the Author) caused Noah to be imprisoned,
to make an oblation of him to the Idols, as his Father had done before.
Presently after, Saudib who was a powerful Lord and a Priest, rebelled against
Saudib.
the King, and attempted to deprive him of his Crown. The Wars which the King
was engaged in against him diverted him from thinking on the business of the
Prophet of God Noah, and obliged him to put him out of Prison, till he had the
leisure to have him brought before him. He afterward agreed with Saudib, by
granting him a portion of the upper part of Egypt, and returned to his Royal
Palace. The Devil (Gods curse on him) soon began to solicit him to put the
Prophet of God Noah to death, but Almighty God diverted him, so that the
affairs of Noah were in different postures. The Son of Darmasel sent thereupon
to all the Kings of the Earth, desiring them to send him all the Priests and
Doctors, that they might dispute against Noah. They came to him from all parts,
and disputed against the Prophet; but he baffled them all. Among others came to
him the Egyptian Priest Philemon, of whom we have Philemon.
already spoken, God show him mercy. He disputed against him, and Philemon
acknowledged the Unity of God, who directed him so that he became faithful, and
embarked with Noah in the Ship. After that God revealed his will to Noah in
these terms: Make the Ark, and the rest of the Verse. The Ark.
How shall I make it? said Noah. Then Gabriel came to him, and showed him the
Model of it, ordering him to give him the Figure of a Gondola of glass. He was
ten years a building of it, and he made it of the Indian Plane Tree, a hundred
Cubits in length, according to the measure of his time, and fifty Cubits in
height, and divided it into three Stories. The people of his Country in the
mean time passed by him, and laughed and scoffed at what he did. Some brought
to him their little Children, and charged them to beware of him. And sometimes
the Children seeing him, endeavored to hurt and disturb him. When Noah had
completed the Ship, he made the entrance on the side, and it continued lying
on the ground seven Months, till they had offered up to their Idols three
companies of those who had believed Noah. Then was the Decree of their
chastisement confirmed, and God commanded Noah to put into the Ship two pairs
of every species. Whence shall I be able to get all that? said Noah.
Immediately God commanded the four Winds to bring together about him all he had
ordered to be put into the Ark; which they did. He took in at the first door
the Wild and Tame Beasts, the Reptiles and the Birds; at the second (which was
that of the middle) he took in Meat and Drink, and the Body of Adam, which was
in a Shrine. Then he entered himself at the highest door with his children, and
those who had believed in him. Relations agree not about the number of the
Faithful who entered into the Ark; most affirm they were forty Men, and forty
Women. When Noah and his Companions were got into the Ship, the news of it came
to the King, who began to laugh at it, saying, Where is the water on which that
Vessel is to Sail? They knew well enough that the Deluge was to come, but had
no notice of the time of its coming, that the will of God might be fulfilled
upon them. Upon that Mechavel the Son of Darmasel got on Horseback, with a
party of his People, and went first to the Temple of his Idols, where he stayed
a while, then went toward the place where the Ship was, with an intention to
fire it. Being come near it he called Noah with a loud voice, and Noah having
answered him, Where (said he) is the water which is to bear thee in this Ship?
It will be immediately with you replied Noah, before you go out of this place.
Come down (O Noah) said the King, and also those who are with thee. O unhappy
Man! said Noah, turn to God, for behold his Chastisements are ready to fall
upon you. These words incensed the King, so that he commanded fire to be cast
into the Mechavel would fire the Ark.
Ship, upon him and upon his Companions. But immediately there comes a
Messenger in great haste, telling him for news that a Woman heating the Oven to
bake her Bread, water rushed The Deluge.
out of it as out of a great Torrent. Unfortunate Man! replied the King; how
could water come out of a hot Oven? Unfortunate King! replied Noah; it is one of
the signs of my Lords wrath, which is descending on you and yours, according to
what he has revealed to me to threaten you withal. Another sign of the same
thing is, that the Earth is going to shake and to stagger, that the water is
going to overflow it on all sides, and that it is going to spring up under the
Horse's feet on which you are mounted, even in the place where you now are.
Immediately the King was obliged to put back his Horse from the place where he
was, seeing the water springing up under his Feet by the permission of God. As
soon as he was got to another place, behold his Messengers returning to him,
tell him that the water was very much risen and augmented, which forced him to
a sudden departure, to return with all speed to his Castle, that he might take
his Servants and his Children, and dispose them into the Fortresses which he
had prepared on the tops of the Mountains, and where he had put in provisions
as much as he imagined would be necessary. But presently the Earth began to
open, and the Feet of the Horses to enter into it, so that they could not get
them out, which obliged them to get off, and to leave them there. In like
manner the doors of Heaven were opened and let fall a great Rain, as if water
had been poured out of great Earthen Pots, so that the waters overtook them ere
they could recover the Mountains, and hindered their getting up to them. They
justled and thrust one another, and knew not which side to turn by reason of
the violence of the Thunder and Lightning, and the greatness of the evil which
was come upon them. The Women carried their Children at their backs, then when
the water was come up to their mouths they cast them under their feet, and
endeavored to save themselves. Had God been disposed to have compassion on the
Unbelievers, he would have been merciful to the Mother and the Child. One of
Noah's Sons was with the King, the Son of Darmasel, when he came to fire the
Ship. His Father cried out to him, O my dear Son, Embarque thy self with us. I
will retire (said he) into a Mountain, which shall secure me from the water.
Noah answered him according to what God had taught him, I(...) only the mercy
of God which c(...) this day preserve any body from (...) chastisements. He was
destined misery and destruction, and he w(...) one of those who were drowned.
T(...) water rose above the Earth 40 C(...) bits, and above the Mountains (...)
Cubits. All that was upon the (...) face of the Earth perished, the Math(...)
and Signs therefore were defaced; (...) the permission of God there remain(...)
only the Ark and those within (...) Those who adore the Stars affi(...)
Different O inious of the Deluge.
nevertheless that there rema(...)ed some places upon the Ea(...) which the
waters of the Delu(...) reached not: but the Mussulmans de(...) it. The
Persians (whom God curs(...) say, the History of the Deluge is n(...) true, and
make no mention of th(...) Prophecy of Noah, in regard they a(...) Magi by
Religion, and adore the Fir(...) The Indians affirm in like manner that there
happened nothing of it i(...) their Country, and so also the Inhabitants of
the Maritime Countries and of most of the Indian Islands They say the Ark
continued on the water six Months, that it Sailed by all the Countries of the
Earth, in the East, and in the West, and that one week it compassed about the
place of the square Temple. They had with them a large Sea-Pearl put on a
Thread, by means whereof they in the Ship distinguished between Day and Night,
and the hours of Prayer. They had also their Cock which Crew, to call up the
People to Divine Service. It is written in the Law of Moses, that God swore by
himself that he would not punish any Nation by the Deluge after the Nation of
Noah.

I found (says the Author of this History of Noah, according to an ancient Book
found by the Author.
Book, Murtadi the Son of Gaphiphus, on whom God have mercy) in a Book (the
greatest part whereof was torn out) the History of Noah, with considerable
Additions and Augmentations, which I will fully set down here, to the end this
Book may want no advantage which may raise its value with those who shall read
it, or hear it read, with the direction and assistance of God. These
Augmentations then relate, that the Patriarch, the Father of Noah, (Gods peace
be with him) dreamt that he saw issuing out of his Mouth a fire, which burnt
the whole Terrestrial World. He thereupon awaked much astonished. Some days
after he dreamt again, that he was upon a Tree in the midst of a great Sea
without Shores, which also astonished him very much. After that there being
born to him a Son, the Prophet of God Noah, the good tidings of it spread over
the whole Earth; and the Priest Galoumas related it immediately to Mechavel the
Son of Darmasel, assuring him further that the Terrestrial world should perish
in his time, that is, in the time of Noah, whose life was to be very long. The
Priests knew also by their Sciences, that there would happen a Deluge, which
should drown the Earth and its Inhabitants; but they always hoped to secure
themselves from what should happen with King Darmasel. The King therefore
commanded that there should be strong Castles built on the tops of the
Mountains, that they might retire thither and be safe as they imagined. They
built seven Castles of that kind, according to the number of their Idols,
whereof they gave them the names, and graved thereon their Sciences. After that
Noah being grown up, (God grant him peace and mercy) God sent him to them for
an Apostle, and there happened to him what God himself relates in his Book.
Noah was of delicate complexion, his Head was somewhat long, his Arms very
large, as also his Legs, his Thighs very fleshy, his Beard long and broad: he
was large and thick. He was the first Prophet that came after Edrisus, and he
is numbered among the famous Envoys for their constancy and resolution. He
lived 1250 years. The Philosophers will not have him live so long, as differing
among themselves about long lives. His law prescribed the profession of the
Unity of God, and the Sacred Combat against those who opposed the establishment
of his Religion, commanding the good and forbidding the evil, ordered the
following of things permitted, and the avoiding of things forbidden, and the
observance of purity and cleanliness. Almighty God had commanded him to induce
his Nation to the proefession of his Unity, to mind them of the good things
they had received of him, and to raise in them a fear of his indignation. The
History relates, that Noah was born in the Reign of Mechavel, the Son of
Darmasel, and that being two hundred years of age Mechavel died, and had for
Successor his son Darmasel, who was much addicted to the worship of the Idols,
exalting them as much as lay in his power, and commanding the People to serve
them well. In the mean time Noah began to Preach the Religion of Almighty God,
going through the Marketplaces, the Assemblies, the Temples, the Inns, and
calling the people to God. They kept his Preaching secret, and discovered
nothing of it to King Darmasel, till such time as his enterprise having been
observed, Men bewared of him, and the King heard of him. They say that Mechavel
(God curse him) imprisoned Noah 3 years before he died; and that after his
death his son Darmasel (who was his Successor) brought Noah out of Prison, and
commanded him to forbear corrupting Religion, and exclaming against the Gods.
There was among them for their seven great Idols a Feast which they celebrated
every year, during which they assembled to offer Sacrifices, and make
Processions about the Idols. The time of that Feast being come, which is also
the Feast of Jagoth, the people came together from all parts, and then Noah
came to that Assembly, and having passed through the midst of the People, and
cried with a loud voice; O Friends, say as I do; There is no other God then the
great God. The people put their fingers into their Ears, and their Heads into
their garments, but the Idols fell at Noah's cry; which obliged the men to fall
upon him, and to beat him cruelly, giving him several wounds in the head, then
dragging him along the ground, with his face toward the Kings Palace, into
which they made him enter, and brought him before him. Have not I done thee a
favor (said the King) in taking thee out of Prison, though thou have spoken
against our Religion, railed at our Gods, and forsaken the footsteps of thy
Fathers and Grandfathers? Mean time thou come again to exercise thy Magic
against the Gods, so as thou have made them to fall from their thrones, torn
from their stations, and the places of their honor and their glory. What has
forced thee to this extremity? If these Idols (replied Noah) were Gods as you
imagine, they would not have fallen at my voice. Fear God, unhappy Prince; turn
to him, and believe nothing equal to him; for he sees you. Who is he (said the
King) who has made thee so confident as to speak to me in these terms? I will
sacrifice thy Blood to the Idols. He thereupon commanded him to be kept in
prison till the day of the Feast of Jagoth, that he might be sacrificed to him;
and that the Idols might at the same time be exalted to their thrones. But he
saw afterward a Dream which startled him, and obliged him to order Noah to be
put out of prison, giving out among the people that he was distracted.

Noah being afterward 500 years of age, had his son Sem, and after him Cham,
and after him Jam, then Japhet. Their mother was named Nouba^he, Noah's Wife.
the Daughter of Enos, the son of Enoch. Noah was afterward a long time
preaching to hi^ Nation, yet could convert to the profession of the Unity of
God but a small company of the meaner sort of people; wherefore they made this
reproach to him, according to what God himself said to him, Thou have been
followed by the dr^gs of the people. Noah was a Carpenter, and those who
believed in him were of his own profession. He spent afterward three Ages in
preaching always to the people the Religion of Almighty God, without other
effect save that they grew the more impious and insolent. Nay, they killed some
of those who believed in him, and rifled their honses; and then God revealed to
him, that of his Nation there would be no other Believers save only those who
had already embraced the Faith. Noah despairing of their Conversion began to
pray to God against them, and to say, O my Lord, suffer not upon earth any
habitation of the Unbelievers. Then Almighty God commanded him to build the
Ship; then he smote them with Sterility, as well to the Fruits of the earth, as
the Procreation of children, making their women unable to bring forth, and in
like manner the Females of their Cattle incapable of generation, and
withdrawing his benedictions from their Orchards and Agriculture. They invoked
their Idols, but it did bestead them nothing with God. Then Noah began to build
the Ship, and spent three years in cutting down Indian Plane-trees and
polishing them, in making Nails and Pins, and providing whatever was necessary;
then he set it together in the month of Regebe. Those of his Nation would
needs pass by him as he was at work, laughing and making sport at him. After he
had finished it, God commanded him to put into it two pairs of every species.
Those who embarked with him of the sons of Adam and his own were Sem, Cham,
and Japhet, and the others who belonged to him and were of his family. The
Angels brought to him Adams Shrine, which was in the Country of Tehama, which
is the Septentrional Territory of Meca. There was also with him in the Ark the
Egyptian Priest Philemon, with his family and his daughters. The rest were of
the children of his Father, and of his Grandfather Edrisus. After the
chastisement was completed by the destruction of the Inhabitants of the Earth,
that the Heaven had given a check to the Rains, that the Earth by the
permission of her Lord had drunk up the waters, and that the Ark rested on
Mount G^edis, they went out and built a City, which they called The Match of
Fourscore, and which is at this day famous in its place, under the name of
Themanine, which signifies (...).
Fourscore. They say that the several Nations, though they were not ignorant of
the Deluge, and that they knew well enough it was to come, yet could not learn
of their Priests precisely the time of its coming; because it was the will of
the Almighty and All-good God to punish them. The Mountains cast stones at
them, and they knew not which way to turn to avoid the falling of the Rain and
the Stones. They say also that the water which fell was hot and corrupted, as
if i had come out of a boiling Pool of Sand. Some affirm, that the Ship
continued on the water a hundred and fifty days; others, that it continued 11
Months; God knows how it was. Some affirm also that the Deluge happened in the
Month of Regebe, and that the Ark nested on Mount Geudis the tenth day of the
Month of Mucharram. There were between the descent of Adam and the Deluge two
thousand one hundred fifty six years. When God would 2156 Years from Adam to
the Deluge.
restore the Earth to a good condition, he sent a wind upon the water which
dried it, and put a stop to the Springs. The ordinary light returned to the
World, and the Sun and the Moon, and the Night, and the Day. Forty days after
God commanded Noah to open the Ark. He opened it, and let out the Raven to see
how low the water was. The Raven went out, and stayed to feed on the Carrions
of the dead, and returned no more. Whereupon Noah made imprecations against
her, that she might always be a Stranger, and never a domestic Bird, and that
it should feed on Carrions. Then he let out the Dove after her. She soon
returned with her feet died with the slime of the Earth, which was grown hot.
Wherefore Noah prayed God to preserve her swiftness to her, and that she might
be a domestic Bird, and beloved of Men. He prayed him also to give her
patience to endure the loss of her young ones, and gave her his benediction;
her feet have been red from that very time. He let her go seven days after, and
she returned bringing an Olive-leaf in her Beak; and told him for news, that
there was not remaining on the surface of the Earth any Tree but the
Olive Tree. They say, the Earth was dry the 27th. day of the 11th. Month of
the year. After that God revealed to Noah, that he should let out the Beasts
and the Reptiles out of the Ark. Noah cried out so violently at it, that he
fell into a Fever.

They say, those who were in the The Elephant sneezes out a Swine, the Lion a
Cat.
Ark were incommodated with the dung of the Creatures, which obliged Noah to
give a cuff o'th'Ear to the Elephant, by virtue of which cuff the Elephant
sneez'd and cast out a Hog, which took away that ordure. They say also that the
Rats troubling them, Noah gave a box o'th'Ear to the Lion, who sneez'd out a
Cat, which devoured the Rats. Others say these stories were invented for
pleasure sake, and that they are not of faith, as having no grounds. Noah came
afterward out of the Ark with his four Sons, Sem, Cham, Japhet, and Jacheton,
which is he whom God gave him in the Ship. Then God said thus to them;
Multiply, fill the Earth, and cultivate it; I give you my benediction, and take
my curse from the Earth, permitting it to bring forth its good things, its
fruits and productions. Then he added speaking to them; Eat that which is
permitted and good, and shun what is impure, as Beasts sacrificed to Idols, or
naturally dead, and Swine's Flesh, and whatever has been Sacrificed to any
other then God. Kill no man, for God forbids the doing of it, unless it be by
the way of Justice. It is written in the Law of Moses, that after they were
come out of the Ark and settled in the Earth, God spoke thus to them; Multiply
and fill the Earth, let the Beasts of it fear and respect you, and all the
Fowls in the Air, and all the Fish in the Sea. In the great Alcoran it is
spoken of this in these terms; Then it was said to him, O Noah, descend out of
the Ark in peace on our part, and the rest of the Verse. Then Noah ordered them
to built every one a Habitation, whereupon they built fourscore of them in the
City, which is to this day called the City of Themanine, that is, Fourscore.
They afterward fell a Sowing and Planting of Trees. They had ready for that
end the Seeds, the Corn, and the Fruit, which had been put up in the Ship;
there was only the Vine, that The Vine, and the part the Devil has in it.
is the Tree which bears Grapes, which Noah wanted and could not find.
Whereupon Gabriel told him that the Devil had stolen it away, as having some
part in it. Noah thereupon sent for him, and when he was present he said to
him; O cursed Spirit, why have thou done this? Because I have part in it, said
the Devil. Divide it then between you, said Gabriel. I am content said Noah; I
resign him the fourth part of it. It Is not enough for him, said Gabriel. Well,
said Noah, I will take one half, let him take the other. It is not yet enough,
said Gabriel; but he must have two thirds of it, and thou one. When therefore
the juice of it shall have boiled over the fire, till two thirds thereof be
consumed, thou shall be allowed the use of the rest; and in like manner the
Grape as well new as dry, and the Viniger. As to the surplusage which may
inebriate, it is forbidden thee and thy posterity; thou art not to expect any
part thereof from the Devil, nor to commence any action against him for it.
Then the Devil (God hinder him from doing harm) said thus to Noah, (Gods peace
be with him;) I am obliged to you for the great kindness you have done me, and
for which I shall not be ungrateful. O Noah, beware of Envy, Intemperance,
Avarice, and Impatience. For Envy inclined me to make God incensed against me,
and was the cause of my banishment out of Paradise. Intemperance made your
Father Adam transgress the Commandment of his Lord, and eat the fruit of the
Tree. Avarice made Cabel kill his Brother Abel: And Impatience brought you to
make imprecations against your Nation, which caused God to bring destruction on
all, and has given a relaxation of the pains I took to deceive them. Then Noah
caused the Shrine wherein Adams body Noah's Shrine.
was, to be brought into the Cave of Old Age at Meca, and left it there. The
History relates, that when Noah took the Scorpion and the Serpent into the Ship
with him, he prayed his Almighty and All-good Lord, to take away their venom
from them, which was granted. When therefore he put them out of it they spoke
thus to him: O Prophet of God, pray your The Venom of the Scorpion and the
Serpent.
Lord for us, that he would restore us our venom, and that we may make our
advantage thereof against our enemies, and by means thereof defend our selves
against those who would injure us. We promise you in requital, and in the name
of God we grant, that whoever shall every day and every night pronounce these
words, God grant peace to Noah for ever, we will not come near him, and will do
him no hurt. Noah prayed to his Lord, and he ordered the making of that
agreement, and that security to be taken of them: and after he had done it God
restored to them their venom, according to what he had ordained by his
Providence, since no man can destroy what he h(...) ordained, nor defer the
execution (...) his Judgments. They say moreover that when the Chastisement was
taken from the Inhabitants of t(...) Earth, and that fair weather ha^ succeeded
the Clouds, Noah looked (...) on high, and that having observe(...) the
Rainbow, he said thus; Wh(...) means this, O Lord? And that G(...) answered
him, This is an assurance (...) the Inhabitants of the Earth, th(...) there
shall be no more Deluge.

The Kings of Egypt who Reig(...) The Kings of Egypt before the Deluge.
before the Deluge, (says the Author) and were Coptites, are Craos the Giant,
and his son Tegares, and his son Mesra(...) and his son Gancam, and his son
Gari(...) and his son Louchanam, and his (...) Chasalim, and his son Harsal,
and his son Jadousac, and his son Semrod, and his son Josedon, and his son
Sariac, and his son Sahaloc, and his son Saurid who built the Pyramids, and his
son Hargib, and his son Menaos, and his son Ecros. After that the
successio(...) from Father to Son was interrupted which obliged the Egyptians
to tak(...) for their King a certain man of the Royal House named Ermelinos;
and after him Pharaan, who was the first Pharaan.
who reigned insolently and tyrannically, and who gave the name to the
Pharaohs. He was also the last of the Kings of Egypt before the Deluge.

The first of the Kings of Egypt after the Deluge was Masar, the son of
Mesraim, (who is Bansar) the son of Gham, the son of Noah, to whom God grant
peace and mercy. This Masar was son to the daughter of the Priest Philemon, who
believed in Noah. For they say that Pharaan (the last of the Kings of Egypt
before the Delugu) grew proud upon the earth, and treated his people insolently
and tyrannically, taking away their goods, and committing Injustices, such as
none had done before or after him; and shedding Men's blood by his continual
murders. Nay, Kings themselves were afraid of him, and respected him. He it
was who writ to Darmasel the son of Mechavel King of Babylon, and advised him
to put Noah to death. Darmasel had already written to the Inhabitants of
Gueraca, and of all the other Provinces, to know of them whether there were any
other Gods besides the Idols; and had related to them the History of Noah, and
the Religion which he preached, and how he incited them to the worship of one
only God, different from those whom they adored. Every one of them had
rejected this, and had advised him to put Noah to death. But after God had
commanded Noah to build the Ark, Pharaan King of Egypt writ to Darmasel,
exhorting him to fire it; which Darmasel thought to do, but at the same time
the Prince of the Priests of Egypt (Philemon) gave him other advice; Philemon.
and writ to him that he counseled him to leave it as it was, in regard that
if what that man said was true, that is, what Noah said, the King should
embarque with those of his house, and then put Noah to death that he might be
no more troubled with him. The Learned of Egypt knew well that the Deluge was
to come, but knew not how great it was to be, nor how long it was to continue
on the surface of the earth. The Priest Philemon dreamt as he slept, that he
saw Emsos (which is the City of Masre) overturned upon its Inhabitants, and the
Idols falling with their Noses to the ground; and that there descended from
Heaven men armed with sharppointed Instruments of Iron, wherewith they beat the
people; and that he seemed to approach one of them, and spoke to him thus; Why
treat you the men after that manner? Because (replied he) they are ungrateful
and irrespective toward their God, who has created them, and gives them
subsistence. Is there no means for them to be saved? said Philemon. Yes,
replied the other: those who would be saved are only to apply themselves to
him who has built the Ark. Philemon awaked thereupon very much astonished. He
had a wife and two children, a son and a daughter, and seven of his Disciples.
He therefore settled his affairs, with an intention to go to Noah, Gods peace
be with him. Then afterward he saw another Dream; He seemed to be in a green
Meadow, where there were white Birds which smelled of Musk; and as he stood
still to take a view of them, and to admire their beauty, one of them began to
speak, saying to the rest; Let us go, let us deliver the Believers. Whereupon
Philemon said to him, Who are those Believers? They are (replied the Bird) the
men of the Ark. He thereupon awaked very much astonished and affrighted, and
related that to those of his House and his Disciples. Then he went and spoke to
the King in these terms; I have seen a Dream, according to which if it please
Your Majesty to send me to Darmasel King of Babylon, I shall know what that man
is who has built a Ship in a dry Country. I will discourse with him, and
dispute against him about this new Religion which he preaches, and would
introduce, and will inform my self of the truth of his pretensions; and I hope
at length to turn him out of the way which he would have others to follow. The
King approved the design, and ordered him to depart. Philemon then left Egypt,
with his Family and his Disciples, and traveled till he came to Babylon, and
discoursed with Noah, Gods peace be with him, so as that he found what he said
to be true, and believed in him, and followed his Religion. When God will put a
man into the right way (said Noah) no man can put him out of it. Philemon
continued with Noah ever after, and ceased not to serve him and his Children,
and his Family, and his Disciples, till they imbarqued with him in the Ark.

Mean time Pharaan (God curse him) Pharaan.
continued his divertisements, and remained in his error, unworthily treating
the people of Egpyt, and afflicting them by his Injustices and Murders, which
caused many Tumults and Spoils in the Country, and dearth of provisions, Men
oppressing one another, and no body reproving vice. The Temples and the Birbas
were locked up, and their doors full of dirt. The Deluge came upon them, and
the Rain overwhelmed them on Sunday the 24th. day of the Month, Pharaan being
then drunk; so that he came not to himself till the water began to fasten on
him. He started up of a sudden, and ran away as fast as he could; but his feet
sunk into the ground, and he fell on his Face, and fell a roaring like a Bull,
till the Unbeliever perished, he and all his Nation. Those who retired into
some Cave or other secret place perished there also. The water covered the
Pyramids to the end of the Quadrature. The marks of it are manifest to this
day. After the Deluge the first who Reigned in Egypt was Masar, the Son of
Bansar, the Son of Masar King of Egypt.
Cham, the Son of Noah. The Mussulmans who follow the Traditions affirm, that
this Masar was the first King of Egypt after the Deluge, and that he became so,
having been before designed for it by his Grandfather Noah, which happened upon
this, that Philemon entreated Noah to have a particular affection for him, and
for his Family and his Children, and spoke to him thus: O Prophet of God, I am
come to you out of desire I had to believe in God, and to follow your precepts;
I have to that end forsaken my Country, and the place of my Birth, give me
some Prerogative and Pre-eminence, which may cause me to be spoken of after I
am. What do you desire in order to that? said Noah. I desire (said Philemon)
that you would join my Family to yours, and that you would take this my
Daughter to be Wife to one of your Sons. Noah took her and married her to
Mesraim, the Son of Cham, to whom she bore a Son, whom his Grandfather Philemon
named Masar. When Noah would afterward divide the Earth amongst his Children,
Philemon spoke to him in these terms; O Prophet of God, send along with me this
my Son, (meaning Masar) and permit me to bring him into my own Country, to
show him the Treasures of it, and to teach him the Sciences and remarkable
things thereof. Noah sent him along with him, accompanied by some of his own
House. He was a delicate young man, and they traveled during the great heat of
the Sun, so that when they came near the Land of Egypt, Masar made a kind of
Arbor of the Boughs of Trees, at the place now called Garisa, that is to say,
the Arbor, and covered Garisa.
it with the Grass he found on the ground. Near that place he afterward built
a City, which he called Darsan, that is to say, the Door of the Garden, about
which they planted Trees, and sowed the grounds, and made sweet smelling
Orchards. Between Darsan and the Seaside there were tilled Fields and Gardens,
and well cultivated grounds. Masar's people were mighty robust and valiant.
They cut stones, and raised remarkable Buildings, and lived very much at ease
for a long time. Masar married a Woman of the Race of the Priests, of whom he
had a Son named Coptim, and he was the Father of all the Coptites. Afterward
at ninety Coptim, Father of the Coptites.
years of age he married another Woman, and had by her Sons, Coptarim and
Asmomus, and Abribus, who grew up and peopled the Land, and were prosperous
therein. Their Cities were called from their names, and will be so called till
the day of Judgment. They say the number of those who accompanied Masar was
thirty Men, and that they built a great City, which they called Maca; for Maca
signifies thirty; and that it is the Maca.
City of Memphis. Philemon afterward discovered to them the Treasures of
Egypt, made them understand the writing of the Birbas, opened the Pyramids for
them, and taught them the Talismans of their gates, and the ways to be obeyed
by the Spirits appointed over them. He showed them the Mines of Gold and
Silver, and Topazes, and Turqueses, and Esnadosammes. He taught them the Art of
handling white and black Marble and Jasper, whereof they made their Vessels and
Instruments, and the Pillars of their habitations. He writ down for them the
Operations of the Art, which he attributed to a Man of his house named
Moncatam, who practiced Moncatam's Chemistry.
Chemistry upon Mount Mactam. They say the origin of the art of working Marble
(as well White as Black) came from Chemistry; in as much as the waters and
essences, which they distill and circulate by their artifices, passing through
the earthen vessels, he composed for them the white stone in Sand and Glass,
and made the hard red stone for them of a soft stone and red Arsnick, or
Sandarack and Pitch: he kindled a fire thereon, and ordered them by his wisdom.
He made Mills for them in the ground, and caused these materials to be put into
them; then the stones came out figured after what manner they desired in all
sorts of vessels. Nay, they say that the stones were soft with them from the
break of day till the afternoon; and that they made what they would of them.
Philemon taught them also to make Talismans; for there came out against them
out of the Sea certain Creatures which threw down their Buildings, whereupon
they made Talismans against those Creatures, and they never came afterward.
They built several Cities upon the Roman Sea, and among others that of Racoda,
at the place where now Alexandria stands. They made in the midst of that City a
little Turret upon pillars of Copper guilt, and set upon it a Mirror
consisting of a mixture of diverse Mirror of Racoda.
materials, in length and breadth five spans, and the Turret of the height of
100 Cubits according to their measure. When therefore any Enemy came against
them, they made certain Operations on the Mirror, then they made the rays of
it fall on the Enemy, so that they burnt him. This Turret and the Mirror
remained there till the Sea reached and destroyed them. The Pharos also of
Pharos of Alexandria.
Alexandria had not been made but for a Mirror that was upon it, and
discovered those who came against them from the Roman Country. One of the
Roman Emperors prevailed so far by his artifices and great expenses, that he
destroyed it. It was of white Marble well designed, and well wrought. They
relate (says the Author, to whom God be merciful) that God promised Noah (Gods
peace be with him) to hearken to him in a prayer he should make for his son,
and that he deferred that prayer till the next morning; at which time very
early in the morning he was to call his son, and him of his sons who should
readily answer him God would bless when he had prayed for him; and he who
answered not should not have that benediction. The readiest to answer was Sem,
wherefore he prayed God for him and his posterity: and the most backward to
answer were Cham and Japhet, wherefore he prayed God against them. Masar the
son of Bansar, the son of Cham, was an useful and serviceable Young man; for
which reason Noah cherished him, and he was always with him, never leaving him.
Having therefore heard the prayer which Noah had made against his Grandfather
and his children, and the children of his children, he fell a weeping, and
turned to Noah, and said thus to him; O Great Grandfather, I have heard the
Imprecations you have made against my Grandfather Cham, and against his
children; and yet for my part I have been always obedient to you, and ready to
serve you: Pray therefore unto God for me. These words pleased Noah, and
immediately he put his hand on his head, saying; O great God, behold Noah's
Prayer for Masar.
here one of my sons, who answered me when I have called him; bless him, him
and his posterity, and divert from them weakness, and grief, and affliction;
and give them generosity and valor, and drive away far from them trouble,
care, and displeasure. Arm the middle of their bodies with girdles of Steel;
never let them be disabled to perform the Sacred voyage; give them for their
habitation a Land whereof the air is pleasant, the waters sweet, and the
pastures green; which may be the Mother of Nations, and the relief of Men;
which may allure to it all sorts of persons, Citizens and Countrey-people, out
of all the Plains and out of all the Mountains, both far and near; a Land that
has a River transcending all Rivers, whereof the History may be the most
admirable of Histories; from which the Abysses of the Sea are derived, which
divides the Deserts of Countries with its pregnant surges and swollen waves,
from the remainder of Countries to the Metropolis of all other places; the
chosen City, the Country of fair ways, through which the noble Nile flows with
its excellent waters, on which the eye of the Almighty watches night and day,
supplied with springs and fair waters; the Favorite of Heaven in all its
parts, adorned with a River coming from Paradise, replenished with the favors
of the Gratificator, and the mercies of the Merciful; where Plants sprout forth
and thrive exceedingly, where there is abundance of all sorts of good things,
and an a^fluence of all benedictions. After that Noah prayed his Lord to
subject the Land to Masar and his children, to sortifie them over it, and to
make it submissive to them, to assist them to cultivate it, and to relieve the
Prophets among them. Noah (Gods peace be with him) was heard in all this. When
Masar (says the Author) was near death, he made his Will in favor of his son
Coptim. He had before divided the Land among his children, and had given
Coptarim all the Country which reaches from Copta to Syene; to Asmoumus, what
is from Asmon to Memphis; and to Abribus, all the flat Country from about
Saram and the Fennes, as far as beyond Barca; so that he was Lord also of Afric
and the Africans. He recommended it to every one of his children to build
himself a City in his Country; and enjoined them all together (at the hour of
his death) to make him a Cave in the earth, to pave it with white Emeralds, to
dispose his Body into it; and to bury with him whatever there was in his
Treasuries of Gold, Silver, and Precions Stones; and to write thereupon such
names as might divert any from approaching it. They made a Cave 150 Cubits in
length, and in the midst Masar's Tomb.
a place of Assembly wainscoated with Plates of Gold and Silver, having 4
Doors, and over every Door a Statue of Gold, wearing a Crown beset with
Precious stones, and seated on a Throne of Gold, the feet whereof were of
Topaze. They graved on the breast of each Statue great names, able to divert
any from approaching them, and disposed the body of Masar into a Tomb of Marble
covered with Plates of Gold, and writ upon it, Masar, the son of Bansar, the
son of Cham, the son of Noah, died aged seven hundred years from the days of
the Deluge. He died without ever having adored any Idol, not broken with old
age, nor troubled with sickness, not having felt any evil or pain, nor
afflicted with any sadness, care, or displeasure. They fortified him also with
the great Names of GOD, which never permit such as are fortified therewith to
fall into contempt, or be oppressed. They swore moreover the greatest of all
Oaths, that none should come near him, unless he were a King who had 7 of his
sons Kings; and not any of them a servant, or slave, or poor, or necessitous,
who followed the Religion of the King the just Judge, that is to say, the true
God, and believed the Prophet of the Merciful, sent with the Alcoran to bring
the World to the Faith in the last times. They also placed near him a thousand
pieces of Topaze made round about him, and a thousand Statues of precious
Stones of great value, and Gernes or great Vessels, containing the Sciences of
the Divine Art, and the secret Drugs, and the admirable Talismans, and Ingots
of gold in great heaps, like sand or stones. They covered that Cave with great
stones and sand spread thereon, between two Mountains opposite one to the other.

The first King of Egypt who Reigned Kings of Egypt after the Deluge.
after the Deluge was Masar, the son of Bansar, the son of Cham; after him
Reigned his son Coptim, then his son Coptarim, then his son Budesir, then his
son Gadim, then his son Sedathe, then his son Mancaos, then his son Casaos,
then his son Marbis, then his son Asmar, then his son Citin, then his son
Elsabas, then his son Sa, then his son Malil, then his son Hadares, then his
son Cheribas, then his son Calcan, then his son Totis, who is he whom the
Arabians call The Just. For this is the Pharao of Egypt, who had conversation
with the Beloved of God Abraham, (Gods peace be with him) as also with Mahumet,
and Mercy, and who by force would have taken away from him his Wife Sara, which
happened thus: The Beloved of God, History of Abraham and Totis King of Egypt.
(Gods peace and mercy be with him) after God had destroyed the cursed Nimrod
his enemy, took his Journey out of the Land of Gueraca, and came to Egypt,
accompanied by his Wife Sara, (Gods peace be with her) and left Lot behind him
in Syria. Sara was one of the most beautiful Women in the World; they say
Joseph (Gods peace be with him) inherited her Beauty. Abraham therefore (says
the Author) being come he and his wife into Egypt, the Guards who were at the
City-gate having seen Sara admired her beauty, and went presently to give
notice of it to King Totis, and said to him; There came into the City a man of
the Eastern Country, accompanied by a Woman the most beautiful and most
handsome that can be seen. Immediately Totis sent for Abraham, and said to him,
Whence are you? Of Gueraca, replied Abraham. The King enquired further of him
concerning his business, and he gave him an account thereof. Then he said to
him, What relation has that woman to you? She is my Sister, said Abraham. Then
the King said to his Vizier, Bid him bring her to me, that I may see her. That
displeased Abraham very much, but it was not possible for him to disobey; yet
he knew that God would not permit any dishonor to happen in his Family; he
therefore said to Sara, Go your ways to the King, but without fear or troubling
your self, for you are under his tuition who has created you, who will divert
from you whatever you may be afraid of, and will assist both you and me with
his favors. But what would the King with me (said Sara) more then with you? I
hope (said Abraham) it will be nothing but what is good, with the help of the
Almighty. They therefore conducted Sara to Totis's Pa-Palace, accompanied by
Abraham. The King having seen her was surpised with her beauty and behavior,
and said to Abraham, What is this Woman to you? She is my Sister, replied
Abraham. He meant his Sister in God, according to the Religion which he
professed. Whereupon Abraham's heart felt the ordinary sentiments of a jealous
man; he wished he had never come into Egypt. Then he began to say, O God,
suffer not the Family of Abraham to be dishonored. At which words the Veils
and the Curtains were drawn before him, so that he saw Sara speaking to the
King. The King put forth his hand to touch her, but she presently said to him,
If you put your hand on me you are undone. Accordingly even before the Kings
hand was quite come to Sara, and had touched her, that hand shrunk up, all the
Kings members shook, and Death presented it self on all sides. He continued
immovable, not able to stir, and spoke thus; O Woman, deliver me from the evil
that is fallen upon me, and go whither you will. I will do it (said she)
conditionally you do not renew your attempt against me. I promise it, replied
the King. Whereupon she prayed God for him, and God delivered him from the evil
which had happened to him. He recovered his health, and said, Certainly he is a
great Lord whom you adore; that is manifest. Then he inquired of her who
Abraham was, and of what Religion. He is the darling of God; (replied she) his
Religion is the profession of the Unity of the Almighty, and he is my Husband.
He told me (replied the King) that you were his Sister. He told you truth (said
Sara) for I am his Sister in God, and so all who make profession of our
Religion are our Brethren in God. Yours is a noble Religion, replied the King.
He afterward sent Sara to his Daughter Charoba. That young Virgin was
ingenious, handsome, and well-inclined, Charoba Tatis's Da ghter.
as much as could be wished; and therefore she made great account of Sara, took
her into her affection, honored her much, and gave her a very kind reception;
nay, she sent her precious Stones of great value, and Money, and rich Garments.
Sara brought all to Abraham; but he told her she should restore them, and that
they needed them not. Sara therefore returned all to Charoba, who was much
astonished at it, and acquainted her Father with it; who thereupon doubled the
admiration which he had for the Beloved of God, seeing him refuse things which
any other would have eagerly sought, having any means to obtain them. He
therefore esteemed and honored him much, and said to his daughter, These are
persons of good repute, who come out of a House full of purity and sincerity,
and great prudence, and are not covetous of perishable goods. Charoba, do
whatever you can imagine best to honor them. Charoba afterward bestowed on
Sara Agar, who is the Mother of our Father Ismael, Gods peace be with him. As
she gave ^er her, she said to her Hacagare, that is to say, Behold thy
recompense: for which reason Sara called her Agar. She was a Coptess by Nation,
and one of the handsomest young maids of her time, Gods peace be with her.
After that the Beloved of God being resolved to return out of Egypt into Syria,
Charoba provided for them several Baskets of Conserves, and other excellent
things to eat, saying; This is only for your better Provision by the way, and
not to enrich you. Sara told Abraham of it, who said, that as to that he would
accept of it, and that there was no hurt in receiving it of the Princess.
Charoba caused it to be laden on Mules, and afterward caused them to mount
thereon, sending along with them some of her people to conduct them, and to
wait on them, till they were got out of the Land of Egypt. Having traveled a
good part of their Journey, Abraham said to Sara, Give us to eat somewhat of
that which the Princess of Egypt gave to you. Sara set the Baskets before him,
and he did eat thereof, he and those of his Company: but when they came to the
last Basket, they found it full of several sorts of Jewels, and precious
Stones, and Garments. Whereupon the Beloved of God said to Sara, The Princess
of Egypt has deceived us, and has carried her business so as that we have
brought away of her goods. Great God, give her subtilty Abraham's Prayer for
Charoba.
against those who will do her hurt, and strive with her for her Land; bless
her in her Country, and in her River; make that Country a place of safety and
prosperity. When the Beloved of God (said the Author) was come into Syria, he
spent those Presents in Pious works, lodging Pilgrims, and making the Well
which he ordered to be common. He also bought Flocks, which he designed for
Travelers, for the Poor and Necessitous, for Passengers, for the Lame. God
gave them his benediction, and caused them to multiply. Sara put up a little
thereof for two Children which she had. Totis King of Egypt lived after that
till such time as Agar sent to him out of the Country of Meca, to acquaint him
that she was in a barren Land, that she had a famous and renowned Son, and that
there were about her a great number of Arabians, whom the barrenness of the
Country had quite changed, and that she entreated him to relieve her with some
provisions. To that end Totis caused a Chanel to be made in A Chanel out of the
Nile into the Red Sea.
the Eastern part of Egypt, at the foot of the Mountain, and brought into it
the water of the Nile, so that it might carry Vessels into the salt Sea, which
is the Chanel of the Red Sea. By that way he caused Wheat to be sent to Agar,
as also all sorts of Corn, and Presents. They went by water as far as Gedde,
and thence they were carried to Meca on the backs of Beasts. By these means God
long preserved alive the Inhabitants of Totis called The Just.
Meca, which obliged them to call that King The Just, as having performed the
promise he had made them, and given great testimonies of the affection he had
for them. They say also that Agar, after her delivery of Ismael, (Gods peace be
with him) sent to Charoba to acquaint her with the news of her Lying-in;
whereat she was very glad, and sent her abundance of Jewels, and Gold, and
Egyptian Linen to dress her Son withal. Out of one part of these Presents she
established a Porter in the square Temple. Nay, they say that all the Ornaments
of the square Temple, which were put into it at that time came from Egypt,
Presents from Totis and his daughter Charoba.

The History relates, that Totis desired the Well-beloved of God to desire of
God his benediction for his Country. Abraham therefore prayed God for the
Inhabitants of Egypt, and gave his benediction to its Nile, and assured Totis
that his posterity should reign there, and be Masters thereof to the last times
age after age. Totis a Tyrant, the first of the Pharaos.
They relate that Totis was the first called Pharao in Egypt, because he was
cruel and bloody, and put many people to death, even of his nearest Relations,
and those of his own House, and that out of the envy he bore them, fearing the
Crown should be taken away from his daughter after his death, for he had no
other children. She was of a mild and good disposition, and a great Wit. She
always endeavored to prevent the shedding of blood, but could not prevail:
wheresore she was at last afraid they would take away the Crown from him,
seeing him extremely hated by all people, which made her resolve to dispatch
him by poison, after he had Charoba poisons her Father, and reigns after him.
reigned 70 years. Totis being dead, the people could not agree upon whom they
were to make King in his stead. Some said they should take in some of the
Progeny of Abribus, because they had anciently reigned: but one of the Visiers
began to speak thus; My Friends, Charoba is a woman of understanding: besides,
she has delivered you from this Tyrant, out of the extraordinary kindness she
had for you. Moreover, the good man that came from Syria and his wife also have
given her their benedictions. If you give the Crown to any other, you will
repent you of it. The people inclined to this advice, and thought that counsel
good. Most of the Grandees of Egypt followed it; so that Charoba did her work,
and that Vizier made her Queen. After that she sat in the Royal Throne, made
great Liberalities, and promised much happiness to the people. She honored the
Soldiery, gave them great gifts, and doubled their Pay. She in like manner
honored the Priests and the Sages, and the chiefest among the people; made
great account of the Magicians, and heightened their rank, and caused the
Temples to be rebuilt and enlarged. She was afterward many years Queen of
Egypt by the benediction of Abraham, (Gods peace be with him) and not attaqued
by any Enemy who was not presently overcome and subdued by her with the
assistance of God.

Gebirus the Metapheguian came to History of Gebirus and Charoba.
give her a visit: he encamped in the Land of Balca, and had a Brother named
Gebrim, taking his name from him: they were two Giants of the remnant of the
Gadites. When Gebirus sat down on the ground upon the sand, those who were in
the midst of the Sea saw him. He had a Kive 30 Cubits about, which being filled
full of meat for him he eat up all; then they filled it with wine, and he drank
it off. He happened to have the plague in his body, which put him to great
pain, increasing every day; whereupon his Physicians advised him to send some
of his people about the Country to find out for him a soil, whereof the Air
and Waters were agreeable to his Temperament. These gave him an account of the
Country of Egypt, which obliged him to come thither, after he had drawn up his
Forces together, and distributed Money and Arms among them. He brought along
with him 4000 Gadites, every one of whom carried a stone of the breadth of the
Nile of Egypt. He traveled so long till he got near the Land of Egypt, and
approached it at that part where the Queen was willing he should, for he did not
contradict her in any thing, his design being to get her to marry him; and by
that means make him King of Egypt: or (if she denied him) to dam up with the
stones the course of the Nile, and turn it into another Country, and so make
the Egyptians die of hunger and thirst. Charoba sent to him a Servant-maid she
had, one who managed her affairs, a very subtle Wench, a great Enchantress,
and a Cheat: she saw with him huge Bo(...)s, which there was no means to
overcome by fighting; wherefore she advised her Mistress not to engage into a
war against him: I shall endeavor rather (said she) to defeat him by some
stratagem, and to carry the business so as that he may neither hurt you nor
your Subjects. After that she took along with her what was most pleasant in
Egypt, Conserves, (...) Garments, sweet Scents, Arms, Gold and Silver; and with
all this desired permission to visit Gebirus, which was soon granted her. She
presented to him all these Rarities, which he willingly received: Then she told
him that the Queen of Egypt was in Love with him, and desirous to Marry him,
and far from refusing so advantageous a Match. This news made him jocund, and
put him into a good humor. He returned her this answer; Promise the Queen from
me for a Marriage-gift what you please your self. The Queen (replied she) needs
not any thing of yours, since your affairs will hence forth be common; but she
desires of you instead of a Marriage-present, that you cause a City to be built
in her Land, on the side of the Roman Sea, that it may be an honorable mark to
her to the end of the World; and that it may be a discovery of your power; and
that you employ in the Building of it these Stones and these Pillars which you
have brought with you to dam up the Chanel of the Nile. He granted her Request,
and entered into the Land of Egypt with his Forces, and founded the City on the
West Side, at the place where now Alexandria is; to that end encamping himself
and his Alexandria.
Army on the Roman Seaside. Charoba sent him several sorts of Presents and
Refreshments. Alexandria was then ruined, ever since the Gadites went out of
Egypt: for it had been founded by Sedad, the Son of Gad, who had a design to
bring thither whatever was most precious in all the quarters of the Earth, for
he was the Monarch of the World East and West. But the Destroyer of Castles
prevented him, I mean Death, which none can divert or avoid; yet were there
some tracks of it as some affim. Gebirus caused to be brought thither the
Stones, and the Pillars, and assembled the Artists and the Engineers.

Charoba sent him also a thousand Handy-craftsmen. He spent a long time in
Building, so that his money was exhausted, and his people could do no more. For
when they had built and made some advancement, as soon as the evening was come,
while they took their rest in the night, they were astonished in the morning,
that they could find no sign of what they had done. For there came out of the
Sea certain people who took away all into the salt waters. Gebirus was
extremely troubled and afflicted thereat. Charoba sent him a thousand Goats or
Sheep, which were milk'd for the Kings Kitchen. They were kept by a Shepherd
belonging to Gebirus, of whom he had received that charge. This Shepherd led
them out to graze, accompanied by a great many other Shepherds, upon the Sea
side. One day this Shepherd (having put the Beasts into the custody of the
other Shepherds, who obeyed The Nymph Marina.
him) being a beautiful person, and of a good Aspect and Stature, saw a fair
young Lady issuing out of the Sea, which came toward him, and being come very
near him saluted him; he returned the salutation, and she began to speak to him
with all imaginable courtesy and civility, and said to him; Young man, would
you wrestle with me for something which I should lay against you? What would
you lay? replied the Shepherd. If you give me a fall (says the young Lady) I
will be yours, and you shall dispose of me as you please; and if I give you a
fall, I will have a beast out of your Flock. Content, said the Shepherd; and
thereupon he went toward her, and she came toward him. He began to wrestle
with her, but she immediately flung him, and took a beast out of the Flock,
which she carried away with her into the Sea. She came afterward every
evening, and did the like, so that the Shepherd was over head and ears in love
with her. The Flock diminished, and the Shepherd himself pined away. One day
King Gebirus passing by the Shepherd, found him sitting near his Flock very
pensive, which obliged him to come nearer him, and to speak thus to him: What
misfortune has befell thee? Why do I find thee so fallen away? Thy Flock is so
too, it diminishes and grows worse and worse every day, and gives less Milk
then ordinarily it used to do. Thereupon the Shepherd told him the story of the
young Lady. He was astonished at it, and said to him; At what time does this
Lady come thus to see thee? In the evening (replied the Shepherd) when the Sun
is ready to set. Upon that Gebirus lighted off his Beast, and said to the
Shepherd; Take off thy Garment and strip thy self. The Shepherd obeyed, and the
King put on the Shepherds garment, clothed himself like him, and sat in his
place. A while after behold the young Lady, who was already come out of the
Sea, comes to salute him. He returned the salute, and she said to him; Will thou wrestle any more on the same terms we have done already? With all my
heart, said the King. Immediately she came near him, and endeavored to cast
him down; but Gebirus gave her a fall presently, and violently crushed her.
Whereupon she said to him, You are not my ordinary match. No, said the King.
Since I cannot avoid being taken (said she) put me into the hands of my former
match; for he has treated me courteously, and I have tormented his heart many
times: mean time he has captivated me as I have captivated him. In requital I
will teach you the way to complete this Building, as you desire. After
therefore he had put her into the hands of the Shepherd, he desired her to tell
him whence came that which happened every day to his Building; and if there
were any means to make it continue in that condition whereto they brought it.
There are, replied she; but know, great Prince, that the Land of Egypt is a
Land of Enchanters, and that the Sea there is full of Spirits and Demons, which
assist them to carry on their affairs, and that they are those who take away
your Buildings. But what means is there to prevent it? said the King. To do
that (said she) you shall make great Vessels of Transparent glass, with Covers
thereto, which may Painters in the bottom of the Sea.
keep the waters from entering in; and you shall put into them Men wellskill'd
in Painting, and with them Meat and Drink for a week, and Clothes, and Pencils,
and whatever is necessary for Painting. Then you shall stop the Vessels well,
after you have fastened them at the top with strong Cords, and tied them to the
Ships, and then you shall let them go into the Sea like Anchors, and you shall
put at the top of the cords little Bells, which the Painters shall ring; and
then I will tell you what it is requisite that you should do. Gebirus did all
she had ordered him; he caused the Vessels to be made, and brought the Painters
before her, who heard all she said to him; then he promised them great wealth
and honors, and they promised him to do his business. They therefore put these
Vessels to the bottom of the Sea, after they had stopped them well above, and
fastened them with cord, and left them there a week: after which the Painters
rung the Bells, and presently they were taken out of the water, and they opened
the Vessels, out of which they took along with them the Draughts they had made.
The King presented them afterward to the young Lady Marina, and she said to
them; Make now Statues of Copper, and Tin, and Stone, and Earth, and Wood,
resembling your Draughts, and set them on the Seaside, before the Buildings
you shall make: for then the Beasts of the Sea, when they shall come out to
demolish your Buildings as they are wont, seeing those Figures, will imagine
that they are companies of Demons like themselves, come to fight with them, and
they will presently return to the place whence they came. The Painters and
Gravers did so, and by that means Gebirus completed his Structure as he
desired. After that he spoke thus to the Nymph, Behold all the Money we had
has been expended in the Building of this City; know you not where there is
some Treasure in this Land? for the City is not yet finished, and we have no
more Money. There is (replied the Nymph) in this ruined The Seven Tombs.
City (she meant Alexandria) on the one side of your Building an empty round
place, and about that place there are seven Pillars, with a brazen Statue
standing on the top of each of them; Sacrifice to every one of those Statues a
fat Bull, and cause the Pillar under it to be rubbed with the blood of the
Bull, then perfume it with the hair of his Tail, and with somewhat you shall
cause to be shaved from his Horns and his Hoofs, and speak thus to it: Behold
the Offering I make to thee, let me therefore have what is about thee. Having
done and said this, measure from every Pillar, on that side that the Statue
upon it shall have its face turned, the space of a hundred Cubits, then cause
people to dig there. You shall do all this when the Moon is at full, and Saturn
direct. After you have dug fifty Cubits, you will find a great Floor; cause
it to be rubbed with the gall of the Bull, then taken away; for thence you will
descend into a Cave 50 Cubits in length, at the end whereof you will find a
Storehouse made of stone, and made fast with a Lock, the Key whereof shall be
under the Threshold of the Door; take it and rub the Door with what shall be
left of the Bulls gall, and perfume it with the shavings of the Horns and Hoofs
of the same Animal, and the hair of his Tail; for then it shall open. You shall
afterward expect till the Winds that shall be within get out; when they shall
be calmed, enter; for you will meet with an Idol of Brass, having about its
neck a plate of the same metal, on which you will find written whatever is in
the Storehouses, of Silver, precious Stones, Statues, and other Wonders. Take
thereof what you please, but make no stay before a dead person whom you shall
find there, and let not what there is upon him of Jewels and precious Stones
give you occasion of envy. Do afterward as much to every Pillar and its
Statue, you will find there again as much Wealth in a like Storehouse; for
they are the Tombs of seven Kings buried with their Treasures. Gebirus having
heard this discourse of the Nymph was extremely satisfied. He punctually did
all she had said to him, and found great wealth, which cannot be described, and
abundance of rare and admirable things. By this means he completed the Building
of the City, which coming to the knowledge of Charoba, she was very much
displeased thereat, and fell into a great disturbance. For her intention was
only to weary out the King, and to reduce him to an impossibility. They say
that among other Miracles which Gebirus found there, there was a little golden
Cabinet, sealed up with an unknown Seal; and that having opened it, he found in
it a Box made of red precious Stones, and full of a green Powder, in the form
of a Collyrium, (or Eye-Medicine) the mouth of which Box was in like manner
stopped with a green Emerald, and that upon the Cabinet there was written; He
who shall use this Collyry shall grow young again, his hair shall grow black
again, and his sight shall be cleared, that he shall be able to see all sorts
of Spirits. He there found also the Figure of an Ic^neumon (or Egyptian Rat)
made of Gold, which being exposed to the Air the Sky was overcast, and
immediately there came Rain. He there found moreover a Seat of Marble, on which
there was the Figure of a Raven, made of a black Stone, which being questioned
spoke, and answered to what was asked of it. They say that in each of those
Storehouses there were ten Miraculous things, which it would be long to
declare one after another; wherefore we shall content our selves with what we
have briefly said thereof. After Gebirus (says the Author) had acquitted
himself of the Building of the City, he sent the tidings of it to Charoba, and
invited her to come and see it. It was Charoba's Nurse defeats Gebirus and his
Army.
her Nurse who brought her the news, and withal said to her, Fear not, nor
give your self any trouble concerning him. Then presently she carried to
Gebirus a piece of Tapistry of great value, and said to him; Put this on the
Seat in which you shall sit, and afterward divide your people into three
parties, and send them to me that I may give them a Treatment such as they
deserve. When the first party shall be about a third part of the way, you shall
send away the second, then afterward the third, to the end they may be near us
dispersed in the Country for our safety. He did so, and in the mean time she
continued sending to him precious Household Stuff, till such time as she knew
that they were upon their way, and that he had sent to her the third part of
his Army. Then she caused to be set for them Tables, replenished with Poisoned
Meats and Drinks, and when they were come to the Tables, her Servants Men and
Maids made them stay and sit down to eat, standing all about them with
Umbrellos or Fans; so that they all died from the first to the last. They
afterward quitted that Post, and passed to the other, where the second party
met them, whom they treated after the same manner. Then they removed to the
third, and served them as they had done the others, so that all died. After
that she sent word to the King, that she had left his Army in her own City, and
in her Castle and thereabouts, for the safety of her Women; and that she would
be served by his Attendants, who should be about him ready to obey him.
Accordingly she went to his Palace, accompanied by her Nurse and some of her
meaner Women, who were with her, and carried Perfumes in Porcelain Dishes. He
rose up and went to meet her, and immediately her Nurse put about him a
sumptuous Robe, but poisoned, which she had prepared for that purpose; and blew
a Fume into his face, which in a manner deprived him of his senses; then she
sprinkled him with a water which she had, which loosened all his members, and
dislocated all his join(...)* so that he fell to the ground in a swound. Then
she opened his veins, and emptied them of all his blood, saying, The blood of
Kings is an excellent remedy. Her Nurse came up to him, and said to him; Is the
King well to night? Mischief on your coming hither, (replied he;) may you be
treated accordingly. Do you stand in need of any thing (replied she) before you
taste death. I do, said he; I would entreat thee to cause these words to be
engraved upon one of the pillars of the Castle: I Gebirus the son of Gevirus
the Mutaphequian, who have caused Marble to be polished, and the hard red stone
and the green to be wrought; who have been possessed of Gold and Precious
stones; who have built Palaces, and raised Armies; who have cut through
Mountains, who have stopped Rivers with my arm: with all this my power, and my
might, and my prowess, and my valor, I have been circumvented by the artifices
of a Woman, weak, impotent, and of no worth; who has deprived me of my
understanding, and taken my life, and discomfited my Armies. Whoever therefore
is desirous to prosper, though there be no prosperity in this world, let him
have a care of the wilely subtilties of Women. This is the advice I give those
who shall come after me. I have no more to say. Charoba thereupon commanded his
head to be cut off, and that it should be set upon the gate of the City of
Memphis; which was put in executtion by her people. After that she caused the
Tower of Alexandria to be built, and to be graved thereon her own name, and
that of Gebirus, and what she had done to him, and the time when the City had
been built. Her fame came to the ears of Kings, who respected and esteemed her,
and made submissions and proffers of obedience to her. She did since that many
miraculous things in Egypt: among others she caused Castles and Bridges to be
made upon the Frontiers, and put Garrisons of Soldiers therein, to be a Guard,
and to repel Enemies on which side soever they came to plunder them. They say
that Gebirus made this discourse to her at the point of death; O Charoba,
triumph not Charoba's Death.
at my death, for there will happen to thee a day like this, and yet much
longer: such is the custom of Fortune. She troubled not her self at what he
said, but she had not lived above a year after him, when having imbarqu'd upon
the Nile in a small Vessel which she had, to take the air by Moonlight, on one
side of the Pyramids; and being afterward gone ashore to ease nature, attended
by her Men and Women-servants who were about her: whilst she was in the height
of her mirth and jollity she trod on a Serpent, which stung her in the heel,
and made her immediately lose her sight. Woe is me! cried she. It will prove
nothing (Madam) replied her Attendants. You are deceived, said she; the day
which Gebirus threatened me withal is come. Accordingly she died he next
morning.

The Egyptians made King in her Dalica Queen of Egypt.
stead her Cousin-german Dalic; or rather (as others affirm) they made Queen
her Cousin Dalica: for she had continued a Virgin, and was never married.
Dalica was endowed with a great understanding, prudence, and conduct; and
wanted not beauty. She caused the body of Charoba to be embalmed in Camphire,
and brought into the City which she had built on the West side. For Charoba had
caused to be prepared for her there a Tomb, embellished with all sorts of
ornaments; and had appointed for Inhabitants of the City a great number of
Priests, and Artizans, and Doctors, and Military persons. That City continued
in a flourishing condition and populous, till it was ruined by Nabuchodonosor
upon the Conquest of Egypt. Dalica reigned 70 years, and then died. King The
Kings of Egypt after Dalica.
Ablin reigned after her, and after him the Valide, son of Domegus the
Amalekite; and after him his son the Rajan, son of the Valide, who was the
Pharao of Joseph; and after him his son Magadan, and after him his son Axames,
and after him his son Lates, and after him Tolma the Coptite, otherwise called
the Valide, son of Masgab, who was the Pharao of Moses, and who governed
unjustly and tyrannically, attributing to himself what belonged not to him;
wherefore Moses destroyed him, after he had given him the space of 400 years to
be converted, and drowned him and all his people, and all the Egyptians who had
followed him, in the Red Sea, by the virtue of his Rod, according to the Decree
of the Malediction of God, as we shall relate hereafter if God give us leave.
Some would have the Pharao of Joseph to be the same with that of Moses,
grounding their conjecture on what Almighty God said of him; A Believer of the
house of Pharao said thus, Joseph is already come to you heretofore; and the
rest of the verse. God knows how it is.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF The Second Part of the Book OF THE PRODIGIES OF EGYPT.
THE Reverend Prelate the Doctor Murtadi, the Son of Gaphiphus, the Son of
Chatem, the Son of Molsem, Words of Mahumet advantageous to Egypt.
the Macdesian; the Sapheguian, Gods mercy upon him, says, (citing his Author)
That the Apostle of God (Gods peace and mercy be with him) said what follows:
When I was raised to Heaven I saw two Rivers, and I asked Gabriel which they
were. He answered me thus; They are the Nile and Euphrates. The Son of Guebasus
says, that the same Apostle of God (Gods peace and mercy be with him) spoke
thus: The All-mighty and All-good God has caused to descend from Paradise upon
the earth five Rivers; Sichone, which is the River of the Indies; Gichone,
which is the River of Balca; the Tigris and Euphrates, which are the two Rivers
of Gueraca; and the Nile, which is the River of Egypt. He made them descend
from one of the Springs of Paradise, seated at the lowest of its stories upon
the wings of Gabriel, (Gods peace be with him) and has committed them to the
custody of the Mountains, causing them to flow upon the earth, and making them
useful for men, for diverse conveniences of their Lives. And that is it which
the Almighty says; And we have made the Waters of Heaven to descend after a
certain measure, and have appointed them their habitation upon earth; and we;
and the rest of the verse. When the time of the going forth of Gog and Magog
was come, Almighty God sent Gabriel, (Gods peace be with him) who took up by
his Order from above the earth the Alcoran, and Science, and the Black Stone,
and the Support, which is the place of Abraham, (Gods peace and mercy be with
him) and the Shrine of Moses, (Gods peace be with him) with what was within it,
and these five Rivers mentioned before. All this was taken up into Heaven. And
that is it which the Almighty says, And it is in our power to carry it away:
and when I have taken up these things from the earth, the Inhabitants of it
were the choice part of Religion and of the World. And citing his Authors he
speaks thus: I have heard Abulamamus the Bahelian, and Gabdollus the son of
Basar the Mazenian, who said; The Apostle of God (Gods peace and mercy be with
him) one day called his Companions together, and said to them; The All-mighty
and All-good God shall enable you to conquer Egypt after me. Make your
advantage of the Fruits it brings forth: for he who wants money wants not
honesty for that. Egypt is the Mother-nurse; it supplies wherewithal to live
plentifully. Other Countries want her, but she does not stand in need of any
other Country. He said to them also; I have received it from Gabriel, that God
has sent four Rivers out of Paradise; the first of Wine, the second of Milk,
the third of Water, and the fourth of Honey. Then the All-mighty and All-good
God said; I have made my particular standard of the Lord of Rivers, which is
the Nile, in the book of God, and it is a River flowing out of Paradise.

Megavius asked Cabay and said to him, I ask thee in the Name of the great
Augmentation of the Nile.
God, giver of all good things, Do thou find in the Book of the All-mighty
and All-good God, that God declares his Will to this Nile twice a year? I do,
replied he: God tells her when he would have her flow, and says to her, The
All-mighty and All-good God commands thee to flow, and she flows as far as God
orders her: and after that God discovers his Will to her, and says to her, O
Nile, the All-mighty and All-good God commands thee to return to thy former
condition, and to praise him. Jezidus the son of Chebibus speaks thus of it;
When Moses called upon God against Pharao and his Servants, God hindered the
Nile to increase as much as it would have done. Then they had recourse to
Moses, and desired him to pray to God for them, which he did, hoping they would
believe in God. This happened during the time they adored the Cross. The next
morning God had augmented the Nile for them 16 full Cubits. Quisus the son of
Chagegus affirms, that somebody related it to him, that Gamrou the son of
Gazus, after he had conquered Egypt, having entered into it in the month of
Baune, which is one of the barbarous months, the Inhabitants of the Country
came to him and said, Lord Commander, our Nile which you here see governs its
course according to a Law which it inviolably observes. What Law is that? says
Gamrou. When the 12th. of this present month is come (said they) we take a
young Maid, a Virgin, A young Virgin Sacrificed for that end.
from her Father and Mother, after we have satisfied them both, and made them
condescend to what we would do according to the custom, we dress and adorn her
with Jewels and Sumptuous Clothes, then we bring her in the night time, and
cast her into the Nile, and immediately it increases, and spreads, and raises
its course. This cannot be continued (said Gamrou) according to the Mussulman
Law; for the Mussulman Law destroys the profane customs that have been in
vogue before her. So the Month Banne, and the Month Abibe, and the Month
Mesri, passed away, and the Nile increased not its course, neither more nor
less, so that the Inhabitants of Egypt were upon thoughts of leaving the
Country. Gamrou seeing that, writ of it to the Commander of the Faithful Omar,
(Gods peace be with him) acquainted him with what the Egyptians had said to
him, and desired to know his resolution thereupon. Omar made him answer in
these terms: After that, O Gamrou, you have done what you ought to have done
upon that occasion, for the Mussulman Law abolishes the evil customs that have
preceded it. But I have enclosed a Note within the fold of this present Letter,
when you have read it, take that Note and cast it into the Nile, and God will
do what he shall think fit. Gamrou having received the Letter, took the Note
out of it, on which he found these words written: In the Name of God, Gracious
and Merciful; God bless Mahumet and his Family; From Gabdol Omar, the son of
Chettabus, Commander of the Faithful, to the Nile of Egypt. After that, If thou
have flowed hitherto only by thy own virtue, flow no more; but if it has been
the Only and Almighty God that has caused thee to flow, we pray the Only Great
and All-mighty God to make thee flow again. Gods peace and mercy be with
Mahumet the Idiot-Prophet, and his Family. Gamrou took the Note, and came to
the Nile one day before they celebrated the Feast of the Cross, the Egyptians
and others being ready to leave the Country; for they could not carry on their
affairs, nor subsist therein, but by the annual overflowing of the Nile: but
the next morning they found that God had caused the Waters to rise sixteen
Cubits in one night. So God delivered the Mussulmans out of that affliction;
praise and thanksgiving be to him for it.

Gabdol the son of Gamrou, the son of Gasus, (Gods peace be with them both)
speaks thus of the Nile; The Nile of Egypt is the Lord of Rivers; God obliges
all the Rivers from the the East to the West to wait on it at the time of its
overflowing; he turns them all into its Chanel, and increases its course with
their waters. When God would have the Nile of Egypt to overflow, for the
convenience of the Inhabitants, the other Rivers lend it their waters, and God
causes new Springs to rise out of the Earth. When its course is risen to the
height that God would, he orders the waters to return to their Sources. God
All-mighty speaks thus of it; And we have made them to issue out of the Gardens
and the Fountains, and out of the manured lands, and out of the precious
places. The Gardens (says he) were the two sides of the Nile, from its
beginning to its end, upon both the Banks, between Syene and Rasid. Egypt had
then sixteen Cubits of water, accounting from the lowest part of the flat
Country. They emptied and filled the Channels and Rivulets of it every year.
What was yet more noble were the Places appointed for Orations, which were a
thousand in number, upon which they called upon God for Pharao, and they prayed
him to grant him a long life, and to make him liberal, and of easy access.

Aburaham the Semaguian, in his Comment upon these words of Pharao, Is not the
Kingdom of Egypt mine? and the rest of the Verse, peaks thus: There was then no
greater King upon Earth then the King of Egypt; for all the other Kings stood
in need of Egypt. All the Currents were made with the hands of Men, and the
Aqueducts, and the Fountains, and the Bridges, all according to Measure and
Geometrical proportion. They drew them out of the Nile, and brought them into
all their Houses, and into all their Castles, and made them flow under the
places of their Habitations, detaining them when they pleased, and dismissing
them in like manner. Mechacol, the Son of Tabicus, speaks of it in these terms;
I have read a hundred Books upon the Law of Moses, and have found in one of
them, that there are seven Climats in the world, which pray to God every year
weeping and crying, and say; O Lord, send plenty into Egypt, and make its Nile
flow. For when Egypt is watered we have Meat and Drink enough. Withal there is
on our surface of Wild Beasts, and Reptiles, and Tame and Rational Creatures.
Gabdol the son of Gamrou said; By the true God, I know not any year, wherein
the Inhabitants of Egypt went out of their Country, to seek a subsistence
elsewhere. We shall never go out of it, says one of them, if some enemy do not
force us thereto. Not so (replied he) but your Nile shall be swallowed under
ground, so that there shall not be a drop of it left. It shall be full of
Sand-banks, and the wild Beasts of the Earth shall devour its Fishes.

Jezidus the son of Chebibus speaks thus of it; The Nile of Egypt in the time
of Pharao and the Precedent Kings had People appointed to make its Channels, to
repair its Bridges and Banks, and to clear its Rivulets and Trenches of Oziers,
Ordures, Paper-plants, and what ever might obstruct the course of the Water,
when there was occasion, to the number of six score thousand Workmen, always
ready to work Winter and Summer, receiving their pay Monthly out of the
public Treasury, as the Soldiery, as well by Sea as Land, received theirs out
of the Kings Money. The son of Lahigus says, that he heard it of one of
Alexandria, that the Nile one day discovered a Rock, on which there was
somewhat written in the Roman Language, which was read, and signified as
follows: I do what is good, and he seems to forget it, but when I do what is
evil, he remembers it well. He who is such will not be long ere he meet with a
long repose.

An Abbridgement of what is said Pharao.
of Pharao, and how God destroyed him by the Decree of his Divine Will. Gali
the son of Abutalchus speaks thus of him. Pharao King of Egpyt was a Dwarf, or
little Man, but seven spans in height. Others say he was three Cubits high, and
that his Beard was two Cubits long, so that when he sat, he drew one Cubit of
it on the ground before him. He twisted up his Mustachoes, and put them above
his two ears. When the water of the Nile was turned into Blood in the time of
Moses, Pharao drunk the juice of Orange-leaves, with fine Sugar put into it.
Some affirm he was of low Stature, marked with white spots, and that he trod on
his Beard, it was so long. Abubeker the Truth-teller (Gods peace be with him)
said that Pharao had lost all his Teeth. Others affirm he was of the Race of
the Amalekites. Others say he had a large fleshy face. Others say they called
him Abumarus, that is, Married. Others say he was a Weaver of Ciprus, an
Inhabitant of Ispahan, and that Haman Haman.
was his Associate; that both of them became poor, and lost all they had, so
that necessity having forced them to quit the Country and run away, they came
together into Egypt, and prevailed so much by their sleights and artifices,
that they became Masters of it, and that there happened to them what God
revealed to Mahumet, (Gods peace and merey be with him) as it is related by the
son of Gubasus. Others say that Pharao was a Coptite, of a City named Damra,
the most Western of any in Egypt, and that his name was Dolmes.

Mahumet the son of Gali, the son of Gabdol the Teminian, says thus: A
Barbarian Egyptian of the Inhabitants of Copta, skilled, in the History of
Egypt, and what concerns the nature and properties of the Country, told me
that he found it written in one of their ancient Books, that the Nile of Egypt
has its rising out of a Lake in Sources of the Nile.
the most remote Countries of the West, on both sides whereof the Kings of the
Moors have their Habitarions; and that by the Lake there is a great Mountain,
always covered with Snow Winter and Summer, out of which there falls down
Water, besides many Springs that are in the Lake, and which do also supply
some; and that it is thence the water of the Nile comes; which is afterward
augmented by Rains, which augmentation Causes of ^s overflowing.
happens, in regard the Rains fall in Summer in the Country of the Moors,
whence it comes that the Nile overflowes in Summer, and not in Winter in Egypt;
that in all the former Climat, and in part of the Second, the rains fall in the
Summer, and in like manner in India, and in Sinda, and in the other Countries,
which are in the same latitude, as well in the East, as in the West.

Jezidus the son of Chebibus says, that Moses the son of Nasirus speaks thus:
O Egyptians, you know not what I would say, neither you nor any other
Inhabitanr of Egypt. I have heard that one day the Nile became very low, in the
time of Pharao, which obliged the Inhabitants of his Kingdom to come to him and
say; Cause the Nile to flow according to its ordinary course, for behold our
Cattle die, and such as are big bring forth before their time. I am too much
incensed against you (replied Pharao) to be so easily appeased, and to restore
you so soon the course of the Nile. They departed, and after a month returned
to him again, and said; The Cattle perish, the Trees dry up, all is spoiled and
destroyed: cause the Nile to flow for us. I am not yet reconciled with you,
said he. If you make not the Nile flow as it is wont (replied they) we will
make another God besides you. This reply troubled him, but it was not in his
power to do what they desired. His Vizier Haman was he who knew his secrets,
who disposed of all his affairs, who heard his complaints and eased him of his
grief. He had slights and subtle insinuations, which neither Pharao nor any
other man could imitate. One day Pharao spoke to him, only they two together,
and acquainted him with the discourse had passed between him and the Egyptians,
confessing to him that he could not do what they desired, and that that
business of the Nile was beyond his strength. I cannot (said he) take any
course in this case, nor find any means to satisfy them. What do you advise me
therein? Is that all that troubles you? says Haman. And what would you have me
do in it? replied the King. Great King (replied Haman) they have not bethought
themselves of asking you a thing, which would have been much more impossible
then this, and might have given them greater occasion to proclaim your weakness
in all places. What is that? replied the King. If any one of them (said Haman)
had bethought him of requiring you to raise up his father or brother after
their death, that would have been more difficult to you then the affair of the
Nile. Speak not of such things, says Pharao; for Walls have ears. But what
advice do you give me in the affair of the Nile? Light off your Mule, said
Haman; and restore to every one what belongs to him, and the Nile will resume
its course. You know (replied the King) that hitherto I have not wronged any
one, nor deprived my Subjects of any thing belonged to them, that I should
restore it again: and as for my white Mule, I promise you never to get on her
back any more. He had a white Mule, which in swiftness no other Beast in Egypt
could go before, or indeed come near. The Mule I mean (said Haman) is not the
animal so called, but Arrogance and Pride. Humble your self before the God of
Moses and Aaron, acknowledge in your self what you ought; give him thanks for
his favors, and confess his Omnipotence and Unity: for you know well that he
is the Creator and Preserver, and that you are one of his Servants, who can
neither do him harm nor service. Pray him that he would cause the Nile to flow
for his Servants, for he is merciful and meek; he is not hasty, and fears not
that he has not done a thing soon enough. I will do it with all my heart, said
the King. You have at last found out a way to deliver me out of my trouble.
Make an end (O Haman) as you have begun. I shall not fail, said Haman. The
Egyptians came afterward to him the third time, and said the same thing they
had said to him the two former times. His answer was this: Repent you that you
have disobeyed me. We do repent us of it, replied they. Go your ways (said the
King) to the end of the Upper Egypt, clad and dressed the best you can. They
did so, and there remained in Egypt but such as were not able to go out of it.
Pharao went up to them on his Mule; then he turned a little aside from them,
alighted off his Mule, prostrated himself on the ground, and made his prayers
to God in these terms: Great God, you know that I acknowledge there is none but
you alone who can re-establish this Nile in its course, and that I am obliged
to this people in a thing which is not within the compass of my power, and that
I cannot keep my promise with them. Cause it therefore to flow for them as it
was wont, and make me not infamous among them: for you are full of le^ity and
goodness; you are not hasty, nor impatient, and fear not that you have not done
a thing soon enough. Immediately the Nile (says he) swelled, and flowed after
a more excellent manner then it had ever done before, or has done since. Then
Pharao came up to them and said; Return to your homes, for I have restored the
Nile for you into its course. They thereupon prostrated themselves all before
him, and adored him, and then returned to their habitations, speaking
continually of their King, and incessantly resounding his praises. He returned
himself to his Castle, but Gabriel went to meet him by the way in the shape of
a Shepherd, laid hold on the Bridle of his Mule, and said to him; Great King,
do me justice against my Servant. What has thy Servant done to thee? said
Pharao. I have a Servant (replied Gabriel) to whom I have been liberal of my
kindnesses and favors, and yet he persecutes me, and those whom I love, and
obliges those whom I hate: he is rebellious and disobedient to my commands,
ungrateful, and not acknowledging the good I have done him, even so far as to
say, he knows not who I am. A very wicked Servant, said Pharao. If you bring
him to me, I will have him drowned in the Red Sea, and shall not content my
self for his punishment with the water of the Nile, which is sweet and
pleasant. Great King (replied Gabriel) let me have a Decree written to this
purpose, that wherever I shall find him I may punish him according thereunto.
Pharao caused Paper and Ink to be brought, and caused to be written thereon the
Condemnation of a Servant rebellious to his Master, who loves his enemies, and
persecutes his friends; who disobeys and ill-treats him, who is ungrateful, and
acknowledges not the kindnesses he has received of him, making as if he knew
him not, saying he knows not who he is; and ordered that he should be drowned
in the Red Sea. Great King (said Gabriel) be pleased to sign this Decree.
Pharao signed, and sealed it with his own Seal, and put it into his hands.
Gabriel took it, and kept it as long as God commanded him. When the day of
Submersion was come, Pharao being just upon the point of drowning, God having
delivered Moses and his people from the waves, and having opened them a passage
through the Sea, Gabriel came to Pharao with that Decree. What is this? says
Pharao. Open it (says Gabriel) and read what it contains. Pharao opened it, and
read it, and remembered it. You are (said Gabriel to him) the Servant whom this
Decree mentions, and see here what you have decreed against your self. God is
merciful and meek; he is not hasty, and is not afraid not to do a thing soon
enough: Let him be praised and exalted, to the regret of those who attribute
his Divinity to others.

As to the Qualities attributed to The Q^lities of Eg^pt.
the Land of Egypt they say; It is the Relief of Men, and the Nursery of
Nations: that those who live in it, love it; and that those who have left it,
are troubled, and bemoan themselves to return into it: that its Inhabitants are
subtle, and intelligent, and crafty, and deceitful; that they lie to such as
live at a great distance from them, persecute such as are near, and are envious
at the prosperity of others. Some one of them in one of the ancient Books
says, that in Egypt is the straight of Mountains, and the Separation
described, and the reiterated Sea, and accustomed good: that it is the place of
the destruction of the White and Flaxen-hair'd people, when they shall commit
great devastations, and set up the Crosses, and make war against the Merciful,
and persecute the Observers of the Alcoran, and the Nation of the Children of
Mercy, when they shall come against it in the last times; and that every one of
them shall receive the reward of his actions, and not one of them return into
his Country.

One of the Ancients of Egypt made The History of the Ez^pti^^ Slave.
me a relation of his father, (God show him mercy;) that in a Voyage he had
made he had been taken by French Pirates in one of the Islands of the Sea, and
sold by them to an Armourer, who made Arms for the King of that Island, with
whom he had no rest night nor day, being continually employed in blowing,
beating on the Anvil, and carrying things of Iron, wherewith his Master loaded
him beyond his strength. He continued there a long time, so that he became old
and weak. Then (said he) as I slept one night, wearied with hard working, and
overwhelmed with grief, after I had said the last prayer appointed for the
evening, and implored the assistance of God, and put all the hope of my
deliverance in him, I dreamt that I saw a man coming to me, who said, Friend,
rejoice at the good news I bring thee: thou shall ere long be delivered out of
thy afflictions. Be not troubled at the hardship thou art in, and the work thou
do: for the Arms thou make, and those who shall bear them shall with Gods
help be the prey of thy Brethren the Mussulmans. The Romans have a design to
engage in a war against the Mussulman Countries; they will carry thee along
with them whither they go, and God will deliver thee out of their hands. I
awaked thereupon very joyful, and gave thanks to God with great confidence. The
labor and affliction became more light and supportable to me then before; for
I was satisfied it was a true Vision from God. The first night after, the same
person who ha already called me presented himself again before me in my Dream,
and said to me; Pray to God in these terms: O Great God, who have compassion on
Sinners, and keep st those who have stumbl d from falling qui^e down, be
merciful to thy Servant, who has highly offended thee, and to all the
Muss^lmans in general. For All-mighty God will deliver thee and bring thee out
of the trouble wherein thou art. I immediately did so, (said he) and the next
year being come, the French (God prevent their evil designs) prepared for the
War against the Mussulman Countries, putting their Horses and Arms, and all
their Baggage in great Vessels, and taking the Sea. They caused me also to
Embarque among the other Captives, whom they took along with them for their
service, and to execute their Commands. We were a Month at Sea, and made
little Progress, the Wind being not favorable. That Month past, there came a
Wind which pleased them, and by means whereof they thought to complete their
voyage; whereupon they weighed Anchor, and took their course toward the Coast
of Egypt. We advanced with that wind seven Days and seven Nights, till they
came in sight of the Land of Egypt. They were very jocund among themselves,
exalting their Crosses, ringing their Bells, and setting their Gospel in sight.
They thus passed away some part of the night well satisfied in a certain road
of the Sea: But about Midnight God sent a violent wind upon them, with a black
Dust, and Thunder and Lightning, the Air was darkened, and the Sky grew black,
and the Sea was so rough that the Waves rose up like high Mountains. Finding
themselves ready to perish, and to see their Vessels split to pieces, they
resolved to get out of that Road, fearing their Ships should fall foul one upon
another in the Sea, and saying; Let us rather make for any Coast whereto the
Sea shall cast us, though it were into the most remote parts of the world, and
let us not stay here. They therefore weighed Anchor, and hoised the Sails, and
began to go as the wind drove them; so that there remained not one with
another. The Ship wherein I was was forced by the wind upon the coast of
Alexandria, so that we ran aground on the right side of the City near the
Pha^os. Immediately the Mussulman vessels came to us, and seized our Ship and
all that was in it, and made a great booty of Gold and Silver, Arms and
Baggage. For my part I was delivered by the mercy of God, with five other
Slaves who were with me in the Ship. I returned to my Country, and related my
dream to the Mussulmans, who rejoiced thereat, and thanked God for the kindness
he had shown me: May he be praised for ever, at the beginning and at the end of
all things; he who is the first and the last. This is one of the most
miraculous kindnesses and favors which God has done to the Inhabitants of
Egypt, which God preserve.

Some make another Description Qualities of Egypt.
of Egypt, saying that it is a Land wherein there are for famous places
Q^irata, and Ecbata, and Damiette, and Igora, and Rebata, whose River is clear,
and its waters sweet, where diseases are dispelled, and hope crowned with
effect; where the vicissitude of things passes without confusion, and without
disturbance. Those who come thither with an intention to do ill, return thence
without accomplishing their design; those who contrive the destruction of it,
meet with their own; those who have their Habitations therein are in safety,
and make their advantage; and those who leave it, repent them of it. It was
said one day to an excellent person, What say you of Egypt? What (replied he)
would you have me say of that Province? Those who leave it repent them that
they ever did it. It quels Kings and destroys them, and supports the poor. All
those who have an affection for it, find there how to employ themselves about
what they like best, according to their power.

An Extract of the Annals of the Geranian. An ancient Egyptian of the chiefest
of the Country relates, as having taken it out of Abuquilus the Mogapherian,
the Pacifier, whom Gabdol the Son of Nasilus had taught; That Noah (Gods peace
and mercy be with him) after he had divided the Earth among his Children, had a
numerous Posterity, by whom he caused it to be Inhabited and Cultivated. The
Kingdom of Egypt fell to Masar, the son of Bansar, the son of Cham, the son of
Noah, who had many children, and by them a great progeny. Noah had prayed God
for Masar, or Mesraim, that he would give him his benediction in his Land, and
to his Children after him; whence it came that the Land was fertile and
abundant to them; its Nile overflowed, all its quarters fructify'd, its Cattle
were multiplied, its Mines had been discovered. The Trees bore Dates as big as
Pillars: The Grains of Wheat were as big as Hens Eggs, soft as Butter, and
sweet as Honey. There were some among them who particularly applied themselves
to the Mines of Topazes, which are adjoining to the Countries of Syene, at the
upper part of High Egypt, opposite to the Provinces of the Nubians, whom
Mesrai^ the son of Bansar had appointed for his Lieutenants upon the Frontiers
of of Egypt, saying unto them; Be my Lieutenants over the Frontiers of this
Land, whence they were called Nubians, that is to say Lieutenants. One man took
out of the Mines such a The Nubians.
piece* of Tapaze as that he might make a Table of it, with Dishes and
Trenchers to set upon it. All their Vessels were Marble, and Gold, and Silver,
and Topaze. The Nile cast on its Shores certain Leaves which came from
Paradise, so Odoriferous that they needed not other perfumes. There were on
both sides of the Nile Gardens, from Syene quite to the extremities of the Land
of Egypt, so that a man walking along the Banks of the Nile had a perpetual
coolness and shade, and had not his head any way incommodated by the heat of
the Sun. The first City which Mesraim founded in the Land of Egypt was Memphis.
There was not then in Egypt any thing that incommodated the Inhabitants of the
kind of Serpents, or other venomous Beasts. They lived along time without being
impaired by old age, sickness, or infirmity, and without having any having any
hatred or envy one against another, till they altered the Religion of their
Ancestor Noah, (Gods peace and mercy be with him) and changed his Law. Then the
Devil (Gods enemy) got dominion over them by his craft and circumventions,
distracted their affairs, and sowed discord and enmity amongst them. He made
them delight in the worship of Idols, so that they adored them during the space
of five hundred years; whence it came that their fruits diminished, their
Cattle perished, and their Mines became barren. There came out against them
mischievous Creatures out of the Earth, and out of the Sea; the shade forsook
them, the Benedictions were taken away from them, and exemplary punishments
fell upon them. Certainly God changes not the state of a Nation, until it be
changed of it self; and the rest of the Verse. Thus their affairs went worse
and worse, till the King of the Amalekites came out of Syria to War against
them.

The King of Egypt then was Cophtarim, the son of Cophtim, the son of Masar,
the son of Bansar. The King of the Amelekites was named Gainon, from whom
Baitgainon in the Land of Syria derives its ^ame. He was insolent and impious,
and very corpulent. He had to his Uncles among the Amalekites Gebirus the
Mutaphequian, and his Brother Gebrin. This King then came with his Forces,
consisting of a thousand Amalekite Lords, and six hundred thousand Soldiers.
They entered into the Land of Egypt, and Encamped upon its Frontiers on the side
of the great Banks. Gainon Warred against the Inhabitants of Egypt for the
space of a Month; after which he defeated them, and took possession of the
Country, Cophtari^ and his Forces having forsaken it, and got into the Deserts
of the West. The Amalekite continued in Egypt without injuring any person; for
he said to the the Egyptians, You are the Inhabitants of the Country, his
Subjects who is possessed of it, and his Servants who is Conqueror. He
afterward gave them security as to his part, and appointed over them for
Governor his Brother named Gamrou, on whom he bestowed for Vizier a Coptite
named Zephton, who was then of the principal Inhabitants of Egypt, being there
possessed of a great estate; and having many Friends and others inclined to his
party. His skin was black, and he resembled the children of Cham. Gamrou
founded a City upon the Nile's side, which he named Gamra; and ordered his
Vizier Zephton to build such another opposite to it. The Vizier obeyed him, and
named the City he built Zephta, each of them deriving its name from the
Founder. They caused them both to be built, and whitened with great care; and
Vault to be made therein under ground, and Aqueducts coming out of the Nile,
and compassing the public places. They also caused Walls and Trenches to be
made about their Cities, enriched them with Villages and Farms, ordering
Justice and Equity to be strictly observed in the Land of Egypt. They took but
the tenth part of the profits of the Dairies and Farms. In the mean time Gainon
got Provisions together, and fitted his Army to pursue Cophtarim and his
People, who were fled toward the West. They pursued them so closely, that they
forced them to enter into Afri^, and to take refuge on a Mountain called the
Mount of Sosa, where Cophtarim and his People Fortified themselves. There was
on the descent of the Mountain a Castle built by one of the Children of Cham,
very high and inaccessible. They held out stiffly in that Castle, and got into
it their goods. There was on one side of the Castle a Spring of fresh water,
which occasioned them to put their Cattle and Horses that way. Gainon the
Amalekite came and Encamped about the Castle, and Besieged it. That Siege
lasted two Years; for they played upon him with Stones and Arrows, and he could
do them no hurt; whereupon he caused Trenches to be made about them, and
pressed not upon them, having resolved to take them by a long Siege. He
therefore caused Houses and Huts to be made in the Plain; his Vizier Gamrou
relieving him with Money and Provisions, which he sent out of Egypt. They grew
at length so confident, that they began to neglect the business of Cophtarim
and his People; so that at last in a Winter night, the weather being cold, they
entered into their Tents, and fell a Drinking, having no Guard abroad, because
they had no distrust. Cophtarim had Spies among them, who presently gave him
notice of that opportunity, and told him the Enemies were all Drunk, and
immovable as dead men; and if he let pass that night without taking advantage
of the posture they were in, he should never escape out of their hands. Upon
this intelligence Cophtarim came out of the Castle, accompanied by his Infantry
only without Horse. His People being set upon the enterprise, he divided them
into four Battallions, and ordered them at the same time to set upon the four
quarters of Gainon's Camp. They gave a great shout, and fell a cutting them to
pieces, not one of them making any resistance. The slaughter continued all
night till the next morning: those who escaped fled, some one way, some
another, not knowing which way to go, and afterward dyed of hunger and thirst.
Cophtarim's men took all their Baggage, their Cattle, their Horses, and their
Money, and took King Gainon Prisoner, with the chiefest Lords of his Court.
King Gainon recovered not himself out of his Debauch till they had bound him
with Chains of Iron weighing fifty pound. They set him on a Camel, and
immediately took their way toward Egypt, joyful and well satisfied. This news
coming to Gamrou Gainon's Lieutenant, he secretly packed up for his departure
out of Egypt, with those that were about him. His Vizier Zephton followed him
with his Baggage and Equipage, and his Family, and those of his party. They got
both of them into Syria. Cophtarim and his Forces returned in good order, with
Colors flying, marching night and day, not making any stop upon any occasion
whatsoever, till he got into his Country, and had put on his Arms, and was
advantageously dressed, and his Soldiers in like manner; causing to march
before him Gainon bound and chained, and the Camels laden with the Heads of
his Favorites who had been killed, and their Cattle, and their Horses. The
Egyptians went to meet him, joyful and glad of his coming, after they had
beautified and adorned the City for his reception. Cophtarim came and lodged in
his Royal Palace with great joy, and caused it to be publicly Proclaimed that
his intention was to have Justice and Equity, and good manners to flourish. He
ordered also that Gamra and Zephta, the Cities built by Gamrou and Zephton,
should be demolished; as well out of the horror he had for their Names, as to
give a good presage of their punishment, saying, He would not leave in Egypt
any track of the Amalekites. Wherefore the Coptites have it among their
Proverbs, Gainon was blind, and Zephton covered with Infamy. When any one digs
the ground, and finds it so hard that he cannot get forward, they say of him,
He has met with Zephton' s good Fortune. Mean time, the chiefest among them
put Cophtarim's action among the Stratagem of the Coptites, inasmuch as his
flight (say they) was a mischievous subtilty against Gainon, and not an effect
of the fright he had put him into; for they will ever be sly and subtle. The
tracks of the two Cities Gamra and Zephta continued Gamra and Zep^ta.
a long time in the same condition: they were afterward both rebuilt by one of
the Kings, thendestroy'd again by Nabuchodonosor, when he entered into Egypt,
and wasted it. Then when those who were remaining of the Inhabitants of Egypt
returned thither with Belsa the son of the Coptess, Belsa Son of the Coptesse.
when he entered into Egypt after his death, that is, after the death of his
Father Nabuchodonosor, they advised him after he had build the Castle of Cira,
and the Church of Mugalleca, and the others, to built also upon the ground of
the City of Gamrou, and that which was opposite thereto upon the Nile, but he
would not. Yet they say concerning these two Cities, that a long time after
there were two Villages built upon their Ruins, which were called by their
names, and that those names have continued to them. God knows how it is, how
ere it be kept secret from men.

They relate that when the Commander of the Faithful, Omar the son Omar.
of Chettabus (Gods peace be with him) came into Syria, to receive the Keys of
Jerusalem, according to what Abugabidas had written to him of it, in regard the
Patricians of the Romans, who were then in Syria, had entreated him to do it:
when he was come near them he made a halt at a Village not far from Jerusalem,
and continued there some time, during which the Governor of the City sent a
Spy to him, saying; Go thy ways, and observe the King of the Arabians, who
comes hither to take possession of our Lands, and the Patrimony of Caesar, and
return quickly to tell me how he looks; and describe him so to me, that I may
know him, as well as if I had seen him my self. The Spy came away, and made a
shift to get just over against Omar, and viewed him as he sat on a She-Camel
he had, clad in a Woollen Garment, mended with a piece of Sheep-skin, made as it
were into a thread on that side toward the Sun, which had already burnt and
blackened his face, with a bag hanging behind him, into which having put his
hand, he pulled out pretty big pieces of Barley-bread; and with his Fingers
struck off the husks, saying, In the Name of God; then he did eat till he was
satisfied, and afterward took a Bottle of Leather, which he carried with him
full of water, and quenched his thirst, saying after that, Praise be to God.
The Spy brought this news to the Patrician who sent him, and described in what
posture he had seen him; whereupon the Patrician continued along time without
saying any thing, and then he spoke thus to such as were about him: Grant these
people all they desire, for otherwise there is no way to be rid of them without
fighting with them, and they have the favor of Heaven. Their Law and their
Prophet enjoins them Humility, and Modesty, and Compliance; and these qualities
lead to advancement and dominion. This description proceeds from that little
party which appears above all the Inhabitants of the Earth. Their Law shall
abolish all the Laws. My Father predicted this to me, having learnt it of his
Father, who had received it from his Grandfather. They shall take the Kingdom
of Egypt by force. There shall be in that Province Mosqueys and Temples,
wherein they shall make their Prayers, the noise whereof shall be heard, like
the humming of Bees. Their Empire shall extend to the Eastern parts of the
World, and to the Western, and even to the end of the World. Afterward the
Patrician sent to Omar (Gods peace be with him) to get his Protection for
himself, and those of his House, and to agree with him upon such conditions as
he should desire, and be satisfied withal.

The Solphian (God show him mercy) citing for Author the Chasan, son of Ismael
the Sarrabian, in the B^ok of the Histories of Egypt, which he has composed,
speaks in these terms; I have heard that the Land of Alphiom The (...) (...)
and its appurtenances were heretofore governed by the Prophet of God Joseph,
(Gods peace be with him) according to the Revelation which he had had of it,
and the Command given him by All-mighty God, and divided into three hundred and
sixty Towns or Villages, as many as there are days in the year, and that with a
design, which he brought to effect. For when the Nile failed any year, and that
God heard not the Prayers made for the augmentation of its course, every one of
those Villages supplied Egypt with a days sustenance. There is no Country in
the World that has been reduced and cultivated by Divine Revelation but this.
There is not upon Earth a less and yet a more fertile Province, nor one that
abounds in all sorts of good things, or is better furnished with Rivers. For if
we compare the Rivers of Alphiom with those of Bosra and Damas, we shall find
the former have the advantage. Many persons excellent for their wit and
knowledge would have given us the number of its Channels, and its free and
common places; but they could not number them. Others have not meddled with the
Channels, and have only set down the common places of that Country, which are
not in the possession of any person Mussulman, or Alien, and whereof the mighty
and the weak make equal advantage, and they have found about seventy sorts.
It Is related of the Man(...)us (God show him Mamunus.
mercy) that when he came to Egypt he sent for several of the chiefest
Inhabitants of the Country, and among others two Learned men, one surnamed
Abulseriphus, and the other Saguidus, the son of Gaphirus, of whom he enquired
concerning the advantages of Egypt, and what things made it recommendable.
Suguidus the son of Gaphirus made him a large discourse, after which he said to
Abulseriphus; Do you also tell us what you know of the excellencies of your
Country. Abulseriphus praised God, and gave him thanks, and prayed for the
Prophet (Gods peace and mercy be with him,) after which, Lord Commander of the
Faithful (said he) Joseph the teller of Truth, (Gods peace and mercy be with
him) after God had put the affairs of this our Province into his hands, and
given him a Supremacy in it, obliged the Inhabitants to serve him in the
Western parts, in a Land now called Alphiom, where he caused three hundred and
sixty great Farms to be cultivated, as many as there are days in the year; so
that the Village of each Farm furnished the Inhabitants of Egypt with a days
fustenance. Joseph did this by Revelation, which he had had from his Lord. Had
he made as many on the East side, we should have had more then we needed, all
the provisions which might have been brought from the Eastside. For we have one
day in the West. It may be my Lord (said the Mamunus) the Sun rises in the
West. Before that (said Abulseriphas) the Barbarians will come. Who told you
that? Barbarians.
said the Mamunus. I found it (said Abulseriphus) in the Book of the Prophet
Daniel, Gods peace be with him. Is it necessary (said the Mamumus, that the
Barbarians come? It is, (said Abulseriphus;) insomuch that they shall come to
the Land, that is, to the Country of Emesse, and then there will be no other
Sanctuary but Jerusalem, and they shall have no other sustenance but Lupins. He
afterward entertained him with long Discourses, which to avoid tedeousness we
shall abridge. Then he said to him; Lord Commander of the Faithful, if our
Country had no other advantage then what God says of it in the History of his
Prophet Joseph (Gods peace be with him) when he speaks thus to the King, Give
me the oversight of the Storehouses of the Land, it were enough.

Hasam the son of Isaac, says that Joseph (Gods peace and mercy be with him)
when he was Master of Egypt, and highly favored by the Rajan his Pharao, after
he had passed a The Rajan Joseph's Pharao.
hundred years of age, was envyed by the Kings Favorites and the Grandees of
his Court, by reason of the great power he had, and the Kings great affection
toward him, and that they one day spoke thus to him; Great King, Joseph is now
grown very ancient, his knowledge is diminished, his beauty is decayed, his
Judgment is impaired, and his Wisdom is departed from him. Pharao liked not
their remonstrances, and was so far from approving their discourses, that he
gave them harsh language, so that for a good while after they durst not say any
thing to him concerning Joseph: but two years after they renewed their forms
envious discourses, whereupon the King said to them; Tell me wherein you would
have me make a trial of his abilities. Alphiom was then called Geouna, that is
Geouna.
to say, the Fenne, and served for a Common Sewer to the Upper Egypt, and a
passage for the water. They therefore agreed together about what they should
propose to the King for the trial of Joseph, (Gods peace and mercy be with him)
and spoke thus to Pharao; Command Joseph to turn the water of Geouna, and force
it thence, that you may have a new Province, and a new revenue. The King
thereupon sent for Joseph, and said to him; You know how dear such a Daughter
of mine is to me, and you see it is time I should assign her some place where
she may be Mistress, and whereof the Revenues may be sufficient to maintain
her: and I do not find any Lands besides my own which I can give her, unless it
be Geouna: For that Land is neither too near, nor at too great a distance, and
there is no coming into it of any side, unless it be through desert and
dangerous places: the case will be the same with her, none can come near her on
any side, but through desert and dangerous places. Another besides Hasam says,
that Alphiom is in the midst of Egypt, as Egypt is in the midst of other
Countries, Strabo calls these kinds of Lands (...).
in regard one cannot get into Egypt on any side, but through places that are
desert and full of danger. That is true, great King (said Joseph) according to
Hasam: when does it please you to have it so? for it will be with the
assistance of All-mighty God. The sooner the better Joseph, said the King. God
inspired Joseph what he had to do, and ordered him to cause three Channels to be
made; one Chanel coming out of High Egypt, from such a place to such a place;
an Eastern Chanel, from such a place to such a place; and a Western Chanel.
Joseph got men together to carry on this work, and caused the Chanel of Manhi
to be dug, from Manhi.
the Upper part of Asmounine to Lahon, which he caused also to be Lahon.
dug afterward. Then he caused the Chanel of Alphiom to be dug, and the
Eastern Chanel, with another Chanel near it, named Benhamet, from the Villages
of Alphiom, which is the Western Chanel, and draws from the Desert of Benhamet
toward the West. By this means there remained no water in Geouna. That done,
he got Laborers to cut down all the Reeds and Tamarisk that was in it, and
carry it away, and then the Nile began to flow into it, and Geouna became pure
and clean ground. The water of the Nile rose, and entered at the beginning of
the Manhi, and flowed therein till it came to Lahon, whence it turned toward
Alphiom, and entered into its Chanel, so that it was watered thereby, and made
a Champain Country overflown by the Nile. The King (the Rajan) came to see it,
with the Favorites who had given him that advice. After they had considered
it, they were all astonished at the Wisdom and extraordinary Invention of
Joseph, and began to say; We know not whether we should more admire to see
Geouna cleared of the water, and rid of the Reeds, and Paper-plants, and
Tamarisks, and Willows, whereof it was full, or to see it o'reflown by the Nile
after the levelling of the ground. Then the King said to Joseph, How long were
you Joseph in reducing this Land to the condition I now see it in? Seventy
days, said Joseph. Pharao turned to his Favorites, and said to them; It is not
likely any one could have done it in a thousand days. This occasioned the
calling of that Land Alphiom, that is to say, A Thousand Days; and that very
year it The Name of Alphiom.
was sown, and ordered as the rest of Egypt.

Jesidus the son of Chebibus says, that Joseph.
God made Joseph (Gods peace be with him) Master of Egypt at 30 years of age;
and that after he had governed il 40 years the Egyptians said among themselves,
Joseph is old, and has not now the prudence he had heretofore: and that
thereupon they divested him of the power which they had given him over them,
and said to him; Make your choice of some barren and useless ground, which we
may give you to cultivate and people; for by that means we shall make trial of
your prudence and judgment: and then if we find in your management thereof any
thing to persuade us that your Understanding is yet in a tendency to
advancement, we will re-establish you in your government. Joseph considered the
desert places of the appurtenances of Egypt, and chose the place now called
Alphiom, which was presently Alphiom II.
given him. He brought thither from the Nile the Chanel of the Manhi, so that
he made the water of the Nile flow all over the Land of Alphiom, and finished
all their digging work in a years time. We hear also that he did it by
inspiration from his Lord, and that he employed therein a great number of
Workmen and Laborers. The Egyptians considered that work, and saw that in all
Egypt there was not any like or equal to the dead Land which Joseph had raised
up again: whence it was concluded, that there was not a more excellent
judgment, nor safer advice, nor better conduct, then that of Joseph; and they
thought themselves obliged to commit the affairs of Egypt into his hands. He
governed them 130 years, that is, to his death, (Gods peace and mercy be with
him.) Others affirm that he died at 130 years of age: God knows better then we
do how it is. Some relate, as having it from Hasam the son of Isaac, that
Joseph after his his re-establishment in the government of Egypt was well
beloved by the Kings Favorites, and that they made their excuses to him. After
which he spoke thus to the Rajan; You have not yet seen, neither you nor your
Favorites, all my wisdom and conduct can perform. And what can you do more?
replied they. I will put into Alphiom (said he) a Family of every City in
Egypt, that they may there build a village for themselves; so that there shall
be in Alphiom as many villages as there shall be Cities in Egypt. When they
have quite built their villages, I will bring into every village as much water
as shall be requisite, proportionably to the Land I shall have assigned it, so
as there shall be neither too much nor too little. I will also have an Aqueduct
come to every village, for the time that water cannot come there but under
ground; and I will make it more deep for those who are seated high, and less
deep for such as shall be low, according to the times and hours of the day and
night. I will do all this for them by measure, so that every one shall have
neither more nor less than is requisite. Pharao answered him thereupon; This is
of the Kingdom of Heaven, Joseph. It is so, said Joseph. After that (says the
Author) Joseph began the execution of that enterprise, causing the villages to
be built, and assigning every one its limits. The first village built in
Alphiom was called Betiana, and there Pharao's Daughter had her habitation. He
afterward caused the Channels to be dug, and the Bridges to be built: and
when he had done that, he began to allot the Proportions of Land and Water, and
there began Geometry, which before Geomery.
that was unknown in the Land of Egypt: for they only followed Joseph in that,
and it was one of the things which had been taught him by his Lord. They say
also he was the first who measured the Nile in Egypt, and who established the
Nilometer in the The Nilometer.
City of Memphis. After him the ancient Cagalouca, who was Queen of Egypt, and
built the Wall of the ancient City, caused a Nilometer to be made at Alsena,
where the Cubits are small; and another at Achemima: Gabdolgueziz the son of
Merouanes caused also one to be made at Choluan in High Egypt. Zaid the son of
Asam, during the Caliphat of the Valide, the son of Gabdolmelic, under the
Reign of the House of Ommie, caused a Nilometer to be made in the Island which
is opposite to Masre, between its Rivers; and this is greater then the others.
As to that which is now used, it was built by the Mamunus, the son of Harounes
the Law-observer; Almighty God show mercy to both: For when he entered into the
Land of Egypt, he found the Christians negligent in measuring the water, when
by the permission of God it increased; which obliged him to speak thus; This is
a miracle of God, wherein he has put a mystery, secret and nuknown to any
other besides himself; therefore the care thereof belongs only to a Chenifian
Mussulman, who has Religion and Faith. He afterward advised with the Lawyers
of Egypt, who counseled him to bestow that charge on the Lawyer Gabdol, the
son of Gabdolsalem the Schoolmaster. Others say he was called Gait, and that
his Surname was Abulredad. He was a very ancient man, who read the memorable
actions and sayings of the Prophet in the great Mosquey of Masre, and who had
been before a Schoolmaster teaching children. The Mamunus gave him the charge
of Governor of the Nilometer, after it was fully built in the Year CCXLIV, and
allotted him 7 Crowns of Gold monthly for his Pension, which has ever since
been continued to his Successors. Others say it was Mutavacquel who caused it
to be built. They say also that the Coptites had heretofore a Nilometer in the
Castle of Cire. The Romans also had one in the Castle at Babolsaguir.
Gabdorrachaman says after Chaled, who had it from Iachi the son of Bequir; I
came (said he) to the Nilometer of Memphis just as the Measurer entered into
the Fustata, to carry thither the good news of the Augmentation of the Nile.

I have heard moreover (said the Alphiom III.
Author) a third story upon the cultivation of the Land of Alphiom, from
Mahumet the Son of Gali, the Son of Gabdol, the Son of Sachar the Teminian, who
spoke of it in these terms, sincerely citing the Author from whom he had it: I
have heard (said he) of a man who was of the Barbarians of Egypt, and well
versed in the Affairs of his country, and its History, and its Antiquities,
living in a village named Phacat, that he had found it in a book, that Alphiom
was heretofore a Land full of Briars and Thorns, where nobody lived; and that
about that time the daughter of a Roman Emperor having misbehaved her self,
and her offense having been notorious all over the Roman Empire, even in the
most remote Islands of the Sea, her father resolved to put her out of all
places under his Jurisdiction, and to send her to Sea. He put aboard with her
her Mother, her Servants, and all her Retinue, and whatever belonged to her,
and caused them to get out into the Main Sea; having beforehand ordered that
Favorite of his whom he had entrusted with this affair, that when they met
with violent Winds, he should dispose the Ships to sail into a country out of
which they should never return. This Order was put in execution, and the Sails
were hoised in the midst of the Sea, in the midst of a Tempest which blew every
way, so that it carried away the Ships, and cast the Princess with those that
accompanied her straight into Egypt, where she made up the Nile till she came
to the Manhi, at a place where now Lahon is. There she went ashore, and got on
horseback with some of her People to take a view of the Country, seeking a
place where she might make her habitation, and set up her rest: for she had
been told her Fathers will, and knew it was his design she should have perished
in the Sea. After much riding she came to the place of Alphiom, and saw it
covered with Briars, and Trees, and Pastures, and Standing Waters, and
compassed all about as it were with the Sea; after she had taken a full
prospect of it, she returned to the Ship, and said to her Mother that she had
found a place where they might settle themselves, and which they might
cultivate for their subsistence; that there was not such another in the world,
and that she had made choice of it for her abode and retirement. Do what you
please, said her Mother to her. She therefore sent her Retinue before on Mules
which they had with them in their Ships; then they took their way, and advanced
as far as Matartares, which is in the midst of the City of Alphiom, remaining
to this day. The water overflowed Alphiom from the Manhi when the Nile was at
the highest; and when it was very low, the water ebbed from Alphiom. When
therefore she saw the water gone back from Alphiom, she began to build Cities,
to cut down what Trees were requisite, and to clear the ground of the Reeds,
the Paper-plants, and the Tamarisk which grew there. Then she bethought her of
a way to lay out the Money she had brought with her, and sent some of her
Servants to the Villages, and to the Cities, to get people together; so that
there came to her a great number of poor people, and necessitous Tradesmen, to
whom she distributed wherewithal to subsist, and did them many favors,
employing them in digging the Chanel of the Manhi as far as Alphiem. They
wrought it, and began the design thereof; but they afterward found they could
not bring it to perfection, whereupon they gave it over. This is manifestly
seen at this day by the tracks that are left of it. It is on the East side of
the City of Alphiom. They raised the Bank of Lahon, that it might retain as
much water as they stood in need of.

They relate moreover (says the Author) a fourth Story concerning Alphiom IV.
the manner how the Land of Alphiom was peopled. Pharao (say these) commanded
Joseph to reduce it, and proportionably to distribute the waters which flowed
thence. Joseph did it, and so settled all, that it might last to the end of
times upon the surface of the earth. The Lahon is at this day in that posture,
save that Abagon Gabdolmelic the son of Iezidus has added something thereto, on
that side which is toward the wall of the Sources. He also raised in the City
of Alphiom a little Structure, which is of no use. The yearly Revenue of
Alphiom Its Revenue.
was 365000 Crowns of Gold, without exaction, or injuring, or tyrannizing over
any person. But since it has been successively in the hands of several wicked
Governors, who have laid Impositions according to their avarice, the
Benediction has departed from Alphiom, and the rest of the Country: the best
cultivated places are grown desolate, most of the passages and villages were
ruined, and its Revenues abated more and more. And yet if the Princes would
cast their eyes on this Country, and cause it to be r^peopled, and provide for
the observance of Justice and Equity therein, its Revenues would return to what
they were before. But God knows what is concealed from Men.

As to Ioseph's Prison in Egypt, and Joseph's Prison.
the Benediction which God gives upon the Prayers made there, this is one of
the Stories related thereof. There was heretofore Commander in Egypt the
Achesidian, so called from the name of his Master Abulchasam Gali the son of
Achesides, who gave him the management of the Affairs of his Government, even
during his life for a long time; so that after the death of Abulchasam, Caphor
the Achesidian continued sole Governor of Egypt, and was put into the
Government of that Province by the Prelate the Mutigolell, of the House of
Guebasus, God show him mercy, and generally all related to him; which he
enjoyed alone, and without any Partner. Caphor died afterward, but Saphilmelic
the Caid Guehar, servant of the Mugazzoldinill, entered into Egypt even while
he governed it, and obtained of him the Reversion of it. They say this Caphor
(God show him mercy) being one day very much troubled with a difficult and
intricate business, went himself to the Lawyer and Doctor of Egypt, who was
then Abubeker the son of Chedad, and having saluted him said thus to him: I
desire you to name me some place where Prayers are infallibly heard, and show
me in what manner I should pray for an Affair which has happened to me, and
has already given me much disquiet. Lord Commander (replied the Doctor) go
your ways to Ioseph's Prison, and say your Prayer over it with two
Inclinations: if you say it in the Afternoon, it will be so much the better.
After that read the Chapter of Joseph with a loud voice, and in an entire
Alcoran, with your face turned toward Meca, standing, and your hands lifted
up, and ask of God what you desire. For this kind of Prayer is experienced,
ready to be heard and accepted: it is the Prayer of Necessity. I have known
ancient Egyptians make use of it frequently. Caphor departed, and did what the
Old man advised him, and God did the business for him within a week. The
ancient Egyptians, as well the Doctors, and they that profess the knowledge of
the sayings and actions of the Prophet, as before them, those of his company
and retinue, have ever had recourse to that noble Prison, and there they called
upon Almighty God for the accomplishment of their affairs, and their prayers
were heard. Moses, who spoke with God, and his Brother Aaron, (Gods peace be
with them both) even they have made their Prayers there, and obtained Divine
Benedictions: for it is the Prison wherein their Uncle Joseph was detained;
since Moses was the Son of Gamran, the Son of Iaheb, the Son of Levi, which
Levi was Ioseph's Brother. They say that Moses, when he desired God to turn his
indignation from the Inhabitants of Egypt, and to deliver them from the Locusts
and the Frogs, and from the Deluge, and from the Blood, made his Prayer over
Ioseph's Prison, as a place purposely set aside for the imploring of Gods
mercy; to which the Egyptians, when they are visited with sterility and dearth,
or persecution, or are disquieted by reason of any affair, run presently, and
make their prayer there, which is certainly heard. Jacob (Gods peace be with
him) added thereto the place of his She-Camel, where he made her kneel down
that he might get off her back. The place of Jacob's Camel.
Since the Mussulman Religion has been observed, there is a Mosquey built in
that place: it is under the Bank of Sand, upon which is the Prison. For Jacob
(desirous to see the place where his Son had been Prisoner) rode thither on his
She-Camel, and alighted at the place which is now called Ioseph's Mosquey, and
there prayed, and gave thanks to God for the favor he had done him, that he
embraced his Son, and saw him again: then he went up to the Sand-Mount, and so
to the Prison. JESUS the Son of Mary (Gods peace be with them both) did also
visit that Prison. When he and his Mother were in Egypt, they there said their
Prayer. Many of those who accompanied the Prophet entered into it; that is to
say, the Fourscore who were in Egypt at the time of the Conquests, the first
whereof was Gamrou the Son of Gasus, then his Son Gabdol, and Zebirus the Son
of Gavam, and Abuharirus, and Abudar, and Mecdad, and the rest, (Gods be with
them all;) nay some of them left their Prints upon the Roof of the Prison. This
Prison is the place where Joseph sat when he interpreted the Dreams. On one
side of the Prison there is a Vault, out of which Gabriel came down to him.
Zelicha sat in that place (before he was more closely restrained, and that
Zelicha Joseph' s Mistress.
they had laid extraordinary commands upon him, and turned his face from the
vault) that she might see him ever and anon from the upper part of her Castle:
for the Prison served for a Tower to the gate of the Western House of Gazizus,
which was then within the place of Pleasure. The King had two Houses; the
Eastern, called Zelicha's Gallery, where is the Wall which remains to this day,
opposite to the Caves: and the Western, where the Prison was, and belonged to
the place of Pleasure. As to the Prayer which the Lawyer Abubeker (the Son of
Chedad) taught Caphor, (Gods peace be with them both;) it is this: Great God,
give Caphor's Prayer.
thy Benediction to Mahumet and his Family, grant peace to Mahumet and to
Mahumet's Family, show mercy on Mahumet and Mahumets Family, be propitious to
Mahumet and to the Family of Mahumet; as thou have given thy benediction and
peace, and as thou have been merciful, and as thou have been propitious to
Abraham and the Family of Abraham. Thou art praiseworthy, and glorious. Great
God! O thou who have saved thy Prophet Joseph, and have delivered him out of
the Dungeon, and out of Darkness, and have made him to get happily out of
prison, after the Devil had raised dissension between him and his brethren; who
did bring him to be embraced by his father after a long absence; who have
taken away the afflictions of his father the Prophet Jacob, and have had
compassion on the abundance of his Tears, and have crowned his hope by causing
him to see him after he had lost his sig^ht, and have restored him to him, as
it were by a Miracle of his Prophecy; who have heard his prayer, and done the
business he desired of thee: Make haste to dissipate my affliction, and to
facilitate to me the departure of my disquiet, do my business for me;
facilitate my return to my own people, receive me into thy Sanctuary, deliver
me out of my misfortunes, and out of my afflictions, as thou have delivered thy
Prophet Joseph out of his, after thou had afflicted him in this place, for
the trial of his patience; for the raising him to a high rank near thee, and
for the increase of his reward. O Thou, who art he who do compass the affairs
of the faithful, who art the end of the desires of all that petition thee, and
the Butt of their demands, who require any thing of thee, and the hope of those
who seek a refuge, and the sanctuary of those who are in fear; who hear the
prayers of those who have need, and do put a period to great afflictions!
Bless Mahomet thy Apostle, and Lord of Men, and those of his holy Family, and
those of his chosen Company, and his Wives, who are the Mothers of the
Faithful, and those who follow them in well-doing to the day of judgment. Take
me into thy custody, surround me with the Curtains of thy Throne, raise over me
the Forts of thy Cittadels, spread over me the vail of thy protection, and turn
not away thy eyes from me; give me not over into the tuition of any other, free
me from the evil devices of thy creatures, favor me with the abundance of thy
graces, and with that of thy goods whereof the use is allowed, through thy
mercy, O most merciful of all the merciful. God give his Benedictions to our
Lord Mahumet, and to those of his family, and to those of his company, and to
his wives, and to those who follow them in well-doing to the day of judgment.
Praise be to God the Lord of the world.

Megavius, the son of Salichus relates, as having learnt it of Abuharirus,
Joseph's prayer.
God show him mercy, that Joseph, Gods peace be with him, when he was brought
into Egypt, began to weep night and day, out of the grief it was to him, to be
so far from his father and brethren; and that one night which he consecrated to
God, and which he spent in prayer, he implored the assistance of God, and
without any noise spoke thus to his Lord: O Lord, thou have brought me out of
the Country which I love best of any in the world, do me good in this where I
now am, and assist me therein with thy favors; cause me to be loving to the
Inhabitants of these Provinces into which thou have brought and conducted me,
and in like manner cause them to love me: give me wherewithal to subsist
therein happily and handsomely, and do me favor that I may not die till thou
have brought my Brethren and me together with joy and satisfaction, and put us
into a capacity of enjoying the happiness of this world, and that of the other.
After that, Joseph fell asleep, and saw in his dream some body, who said to
him: Joseph, God has heard thy prayer; he will raise in thee an affection to
the Country into which he has brought thee, insomuch that there shall not be
any other in the world, more pleasant to thee, as he has always made it
amiable to those who have entered into it before thee; and in like manner he
will render it amiable to those who shall enter into it after thee, for no body
shall be desirous to go out of it, after he is once come into it. He will in
like manner cause thee to be loved by its Inhabitants, and will make thee
Master and Governor of it. He will also bring you together; thee and thy
Father, and thy Brethren in the midst of thy reign and government, and will
give thee joy and satisfaction. Take courage therefore upon this hope, and be
jocund and cheerful, and know, Joseph, that this Province is the Mother of
Nations, and the support of Men, and that the Treasures and Wealth of the Earth
are in it. Joseph awaked thereupon extremely glad and satisfied, and from that
time advanced by degrees to the condition which God had promised him, always
hoping the accomplishment of the promises which he had made him, till that God
brought them together, him and his Father, and his Brethren. Ever since, Egypt
has been ever loved and desired; no Forreigner comes into it, but is glad to
continue there, and departs thence, but he regrets it and desires to return
into it again. After God had brought him to Reign, and brought them together,
him, and his Father and his Brethren, in the flower of his glory, power, and
grandeur, he humbled himself before God, and abstained from the goods of the
world, aspiring to those which are with God, and said, according to what God
himself relates of him by the mouth of his Prophet Mahumet, Gods peace and
mercy be with him, in his glorious Book: My Lord, you have brought me to Reign,
and have given me the knowledge of interpreting obscure discourses; O Creator
of the Heavens and the Earth. You are my Protector in this world, and in the
other give me the grace to die a Mussulman, and bring me into the company of
the Virtuous. God granted him all that; God bless him and his holy Fathers.

Abumuchammed the Achemimian, the Dyer, God have mercy on him, related to me at
Masre, what follows, says the Author: I went often, said he, to the Country of
Gize about Gize.
some affairs I had there, and some debts I was to receive from certain
Laborers of those parts, so that I saw the Pyramids at a distance; but the
trouble and disquiet I was in proceeding The Pyramids.
from my affairs, permitted me not to go to them, nor to come nearer them, to
consider them at leisure, and to contemplate their structure, and the exquisite
artifice of their Fabric. I was acquainted with, and much esteemed, the
Prelate of the great Mosquey of that Country, so that one night I took up my
lodging at his house, and discovered to him my thoughts concerning the
Pyramids, telling him, that I had always been so taken up with my affairs, that
I had not as yet gone so far to consider them, but that I had a great desire to
see them, and to contemplate the structure thereof, and the excellency of the
artifice employed therein. He thereupon spoke thus to me: Brother, if these
Pyramids were in China, or at the extremities of the West, those who should
hear talk of them, would have the curiosity to go thither to see them, and to
consider the admirable structure thereof; what therefore ought they to do who
are here in the Country where they are, and so near them? My Father told me,
that he had seen Magedolmelic Macherir the Macherir the blind Man.
blind man, who got the Alcoran read to him at the gate of the Western Castle,
Gods mercy on him, in the time of the Prelate Must agalibemrillus, who had seen
him; I say, at these Pyramids, attended by an Ethiopian Youth, who led him by
the hand, and that the Youth having brought him upon the Pyramid which lies
Eastward, he felt the graving of it with his hand, and what was written upon
it, and admired it, praising and giving thanks to God continually for the
knowledge he had inspired his servants withal, and the excellency of their
workmanship and Geometry. My Father saluted him, and spoke thus to him; O Lord,
you put your self to much trouble, and take a great deal of pains to get up and
down this Pyramid. O Brother, replied he, to travel up and down the Country,
and to consider the tracks of ancient Nations, and past ages, is one of those
things which are recomended to us, that those who want examples may thereby
find some for their instruction, and that the sloathful and sleepy may therein
meet with what may awake them out of their slumber, and oblige them to consider
the Kingdom of the Heavens and the Earth, and the Miracles, and prodigious
things which God has placed therein. These Pyramids are one of the most
miraculous things of any in Egypt, after the Nile. For as to the Nile, its
flowings and ebbings depend on a wisdom known only to him who gives it its
course, and obliges it to do its duty; who commands it to increase, and it
obeys; and who causes it to fall, after it has acquitted it self of what
people needed from it. What is there more admirable then these prodigies? For
my part, I am a poor man, who have lost my fight, and whose curiosity can reach
only those miracles and rarities, which may be learnt by the ear. But who comes
it, that those who see well, who have leisure, and live near these miracles,
have not the curiosity to divert themselves in the contemplation thereof? He
thereupon took me by the hand, and recited these verses to me. Pray unto him
who has lived upon the Mount, to dictate unto thee the History of himself, and
cause him not to weep, unless it be with my tears. I cannot see remote
countries with my eyes, but it may be I shall see them by the means of my ears.
Whereupon he fell a weeping, so that he made me weep also, and said to me: O
Brother know that the sighs of the poor blind man will never end in this world,
and that they will not cease, till he has casted death, and that God has
promised him, that if he patiently endure the affliction of his blindness, and
loss of his sight, and shall have taken it as coming from God, and cheerfully
accepted it, he will justify him, and bring him into Paradise. For the blind
man is dead among the living. The Law of God commands a man to salute him; it
is an act of faith, to eat with him; it is an Oblation to God, to sit down with
him; it is a merit of reward to discourse with him; it is a thing of obligation
to give him an alms; he who takes him by the hand in his necessity obtains the
remission of his sins. Then he said further to me: Know that what obliged me to
take the pains to come to this place, was somewhat told me by a certain Scholar
while we were together in the College. 'Twas of his father that he spoke to
me, and he was of that Country of Gize. My father, said he, told me, that while
he was a young man, he went and came many times night and day by these
Pyramids, his affairs obliging him thereto; and that he and some other young
men about his age went up on the top of them, and sometimes into them, without
any other design then to divert themselves. One day among others, said this
father to his son, according to what he added, about noon being mounted on a
beast which I had, as I kept along my direct way, passing near these Pyramids,
I saw a company of Cavaliers, mounted some on Horses, and others on Camels, and
some people a foot marching along with them, as it were in a Procession about
the Pyramids. Whereupon thought I to to my self, Who are those that make a
Procession about the Pyramids now at noon? Is it not for some accident newly
happened in the City? I thereupon made toward them, so that I came pretty near
them, and looked upon them very earnestly. But I found, as I viewed them at a
nearer distance, that they had neither the stature nor mien of ordinary men,
and I made the same judgment of their Horses and their Camels. Which obliged
me to recommend my self to God, after which I saluted them, and they returned
my salutation, and spoke thus to me; Be of good courage, thou shall have no
harm. We are a company of Mussulmans, of the Mussulman Doemons.
number of the Doemons, who believe in God and in his Prophet. When the Doemons
return a man's salutation, he may believe himself safe enough as to them. When
therefore thou shall meet with creatures which thou think not to be men,
salute them, for if they salute thee again, they will be faithful, if they do
not return thy salutation, they will not be faithful; it will therefore concern
thee to recommend thy self to God, that he may preserve thee from them; for by
that means it will not be in their power to hurt thee. After that I saw among
them a Demon whom they honored much, and whom they acknowledged as it were for
their Protector and Superior, to whom one of them spoke thus. See you the
beauty and the excellency, and the workmanship of that Structure, and of that
Architecture, the The Piramids.
solidity of those buildings, and the goodness of their situation? This,
replied he, is an effect of their wisdom, who inhabited the land before us, who
were mightier then we, and fignaliz'd themselves, by more noble marks, then we
can do, upon the earth. I had heard what the ancients said of these Pyramids,
and was desirous to see and consider them my self before my death, should we
now at the time we live in, attempt the making of such works as these, we
should not compass them, even though men joined with us to carry on the work.
Nay, though we should content our selves with the building of but one Pyramid,
we should not be able to do it; what pain therefore would it be to make as many
as there are here? After that they departed as it were in order to their
return, and one of them bid me Adieu, and spoke thus to me; O man, endeavor to
forbear walking abroad at noon; rather sleep at midday, for the Devils do not
sleep at that time. Now this is it that obliged me to come to these Pyramids,
which are such Miracles of Workmanship, that the Doemons themselves cannot make
the like. Why shall I not feel them at least with my hand? Besides, here is a
Youth who represents things so well to me, that I comprehend them as if I saw
them my self: I thank God who guides my Imagination so well.

We find in the Book of the Lives of great and illustrious persons, who have
flourished in several times, that Masre (God preserve it) was anciently called
Babelain, and that that name Babelain.
had been given it in regard that Babel being heretofore the seat of the Empire
of Gueraca and Syria, when the Kingdom of Masre came to be great and famous in
the world the Coptites called it Babelain, pretending by that name to raise the
luster of its State, and to exalt the glory and dignity of its Empire: as if
they would say, the ancient Babel was but one Babel, and that Masre was
Babelain, that is to say, two Babels. Whence it came, that after the Romans got
to be Masters of Syria, they said the Land of Egypt is Babylon, and made
Babylon.
great account of that Province by reason of the conveniences they had thence
by Sea and by Land; so that that name continued to it. Then upon its being
taken by the Mussulmans under the Reign of Omar, (Gods peace be with him) by
the conduct of Gamrou the son of Gasus, (Gods mercy on him) an Arabian Poet
made Verses, wherein he acknowledged the favor God had done them in that
conquest, and the abundance and variety of good things and wealth which they
had acquired by that victory. The subject of those Verses was, that Quisias the
son of Caltham.
Quisias the son of Caltham, one of the Children of Some, (Gods mercy on him)
came from Syria to Masre with Gamron the Son of Gasus, and entered into it with
100 men of his Nation, bringing their equipage on horses; which men he
commanded, having belonging to him 50 Servants and 30 Horses. Gamrou and the
Mussulmans being afterward resolved to besiege the Castle, Quisias chose a
place where he and his men might continue, and caused his Tent to be pitched
there, according to the relation of Abugamrou Mahumet the Son of Joseph, and
abode there during the whole Siege of the Castle, till God brought it into
their power. After that Quisias was with Gamrou at Alexandria, leaving his
people and his baggage in that place; and after Alexandria had also been taken
by the Mussulmans as Gamrou was returning to Masre, having imposed on the
Alexandrians the Tribute they were to pay, and signed the Articles of their
Accommodation: Quisias returned also to his Quarters at Masre, and lodged there
still. The Mussulmans marked Lodgings for themselves, and Gamrou caused his own
to be marked opposite to that heap of Sand where Quisias had taken up his Post.
Then the Mussulmans had a Council about the building of a Mosquey, where they
might meet together, and writ concerning it to the Commander of the Faithful,
Omar, (Gods peace be with him) who returned this answer; I have received the
news of the resolution which you have taken up all together for the building of
a Mosquey, where you may celebrate the Friday, and make your Assemblies. It is
no doubt athing necessary for you, and you follow in that the example of your
Prophet, Gods peace and mercy be upon him. For the first mark whereby he began
to signalize the Mussulman Religion and the first foundation upon which he
would settle it, was the building of his own Mosquey in the place of his
Retreat. Assemble therefore hereupon your Commanders, and take counsel of your
ancients, who are Companions of the Apostle of God, Gods peace and mercy be
with them, for the benediction, of God is in the Ancients. What they shall
resolve on with a general consent, approve it, OGamron, and oppose it not. For
the assembly of the Council brings the mercy of God, who protects that Nation,
out of the kindness he has for his Prophet, Gods peace and mercy be with him.
Through the grace and mercy of God, they will never agree about a thing wherein
there is any error. God keep you in union, and prosper your affairs, and
settle you in the possession of your Conquests, and assist both you and me with
his graces, and bless Mahumet and his family. The Mussulmans having seen Omar's
answer, Gods peace and mercy be with him, held a Council concerning the
building of the Mosquey, and found it might be conveniently built on the place
where Quisias the son of Colthom was lodged. Gamrou sent for him, and asked his
advice, saying; O Abugabdorrachaman, I will take up a lodging for you instead
of this, where you please to have it. Whereupon Quisias spoke thus: I have
already told you, O ye Mussulmans, who are hear assembled, that this habitation
pleases me well, and that it is mine, but I bestow it with all my heart on God
and the Mussulmans. He therefore quitted that place, and lodged with those of
his Nation, who were the children of Some, and took up his Quarters among them.
Whereupon Abucainan the son of Magamar, the son of Rabagui, the Nachesian, in
memory of those adventurers, and to honor these Victories, made the ensuing
verses: And we had the good fortune to Conquer Babylon, where we have pitched
upon booty in abundance for Omar and for God. The good man Quisias, the son of
Calthom, quitted and delivered up his habitation and the lodging which belonged
to him upon the divine entreaty. All those who shall do their devotions in our
structure, will know with the inhabitants of Masre what I say, and will publish
it. Abumansor the Balavian, Gods mercy on him, made these Verses upon the same
subject, wherein he speaks of Gabdorrachaman, the son of Quisias, the son of
Calthom, Gods peace be with him; And thy Father quitted and delivered up his
habitation to the people of prayer and adoration. Lithus, the son of Sagad,
Gods mercy on him, a Lawyer of Masre, speaks thus of the ancient great Mosquey
of that City; Our Mosquey was only Gardens and Vineyards. Abugamrou, the son of
Serragus, says this of it, which he had from Saguidus, who had it from the
Ancients of his time; The place, says he, of our great Mosquey of Masre, was
heretofore only gardens and groves of Palms, but the Mussulmans got it, and
caused a Mosquey to be built there for their assemblies, (Gods peace be with
them all. Guemarus the son of Zebirus) the Crier, says his Father spoke thus
of it: I have heard, said he, our Ancients, of whom some had been present at
the Conquest, who spoke thus: There were fourscore of the Companions of the
Prophet of God, (God's peace and mercy be with them) present at the foundation
of the Mosquey of Masre, Zebirus the son of Gavam, Mecdad the son of Asouad,
Guebad, the son of Samet, Abuldarda, Phedal, Gamron, Gaqueb, and the rest, as
well of the number of those who came for refuge, as of that of the Protectors,
(Gods peace be with them all.) Jezibus: the son of Chebib, speaks thus of it.
Our Mosquey was founded by four of the Companions of the Prophet, Gods peace
and mercy be with them, Abudar, Abunasre, Mahumet the son of Gerou the
Zebirian, and Manbehe the son of Derar. Gabidol the son of Gegafur speaks thus
of it in these terms: Our Temple was raised by Guebad, the son of Samet, and by
Raphecus, the son of Malichus, who were two Captains of the Protectors, Gods
mercy on them. Abudaoud says, that Gamrou, the son of Gasus, sent Rabigas the
son of Sergil, and the son of Galcamas the Carsian, the Guedavian, to determine
on which side should be the Front of the Mosquey, and that he spoke thus to
them. Go you and stand on the top of the The front of the Mosquey.
Mountain, when the Sun is ready to set, and when there shall be one half of it
under the Horizon, do you turn so as that it may be on your Eyebrows, and take
with all the exactness you can, the true side on which the Temple ought to be
turned. I pray God to assist you in the doing of it. They did what he had
commanded them. I have heard, says Lithus, (Gods mercy on him) that Gamrou the
son of Gasus went up to the Mountains, and exactly observed the time, and the
shade of the Sun setting, till the side on which the front of the Temple should
be turned was agreed upon. Guemarus related to me, that he had heard his Father
say, that Gamrou the son of Gasus said to his Companions, Turn the front of the
Mosquey toward the East, that it may be right opposite to Meca. It was turned
(said he) very much toward the East; but after that Corras the son of Coris
made it incline a little toward the South. I have heard (says Masgab) the son
of Abuchebib, who spoke thus upon these words of the All-mighty and All-good
God, We shall see on which side thou will turn thy Face toward the Heaven, and
we shall appoint thee a Situation which thou shall be pleased withal. This
Situation (says Jezidus) which the Apostle of God (Gods peace and mercy be
with him) observed in his Prayers, and which All-mighty God commanded him to
comply withal, consisted in having the face turned toward the Chanel; and it
is the Situation of the Egyptians, and of the Inhabitants of the Western parts.
I have heard the same Abuchebib, added Masgab, read that passage after another
manner, putting the first person instead of the second, thus; And we will
appoint thee a Situation, which we shall be pleased withal. One of the
Protectors says, that Gabriel came to the Apostle of God (Gods peace and mercy
be with him) and said unto him; Dispose the Situation of thy Mosquey so as thou
may have thy face turned toward the square Temple. Then he made his draughts
upon all the Mountains which were between him and the square Temple, and so he
drew the Platform of his Mosquey, having his face turned toward the square
Temple, which happened to be the Chanel side. Malicus affirms that the Front of
the Mosquey of the Prophet of God (Gods peace and mercy be with him) is
Situated opposite to the Chanel. Several Authors relate, that in the Mosquey of
Gamrou, the son of Gasus, there was no vaulted Upper-room, nor in that built by
Muslemas, nor in that built by Gabdolgueziz, the son of Merouan; and that the
first who made an Upper-arched room was Corras, the son of Masquin. They say
the son of Serich speaks thus of it: In the great Mosquey, which Gamrou the son
of Gasus built; there was no Arch, that is, no Arched Upper-room. Saguidus the
son of Serich speaks also of it in these terms; Abusaguid related this to me.
The Chemirian, who is the most aged of those whom I have met, said to them: I
have found this Mosquey where you assemble your selves, and which was built by
Gamrou, the son of Gasus, fifty Cubits in length, and thirty in breadth. Gamer
the son of Omar, the son of Chebib, the Crier, speaks thus of it; Gamrou the
son of Gasus spoke to us, and made a Street which compassed the Mosquey on all
sides; then he made two Gates opposite to the House of Gamrou, the son of
Gasus, and two Gates on the East side, and two Gates on the West side, so that
when the people went out of the little Street of the Lamp, they found the
East-corner of the Mosquey opposite to the West-corner of the House of Gamrou,
the son of Gasus; and that before they had taken out of Gamrou's House, what
was since taken out. The length of the Mosquey, from the front to the opposite
end was equal to the length of Gamrou's House. The Roof on the outside was very
flat. In Summer the people sat all about in the spacious place which was at
the entrance. Abusalich speaks thus of it; Lithus said to me one day, can you
tell what distance there was between the Mosquey built by Gamrou, and his
House? No, said I. Our Ancients told me (replied he) that there were seven
Cubits, and that before they took out of Gamrou's House, what was since taken,
and made part of the Mosquey. This shows that the Eastern Gate was opposite to
the great House of Gamrou. The son of Lahig relates it to us as a thing he had
learnt of the son of Habir, that Abutemim, the Chisanian, had said to him, that
he had heard Gamrou the son of Gasus speaking in these terms: One of the
Companions of the Apostle of God (Gods peace and mercy be with him) told me he
had heard the Prophet, (Gods peace and mercy be with him) speak thus; The
All-mighty and All-good God commands you one Prayer besides the ordinary ones;
say it in the intervall there is from the Evening Prayer to the break of day.
Abunasre the Gopharian related it, and Abutemim speaks of it thus; As we sat
down together, Abudar and I, Abudar took me by the hand, and we went together
to Abunasre, whom we met at the Gate, which is on the side of Gamrou's House,
where Abudar spoke to him thus; O Abunasre, have you heard the Apostle of God
(Gods peace and mercy be with him) speak in these terms? God has yet enjoined
you a Prayer; say it in the intervall between the Evening and betimes in the
Morning. He repeated this to him three times, and he always answered, Yea.
Jachi the son of Salich, relates what follows, as having it from Gadras, who
had it from his Father, and he from Gamer the son of Omar. Muslemas (said he)
caused to be made in the great Mosquey, four Chapels at the four corners of
it; For he first put them there, and they were not there before. He also was
the first who spread it with Mat, for before that it was only strewn with
Gravel. After him Gabdolgueziz, the son of Merouam, the son of Chacam, caused
somewhat to be done therein, according to the relation of Gamer, the son of
Omar, the son of Chebib, the Raguinian, who affirms that Gabdolgueziz, the son
of Merouan quite de-Demolish'd the great Mosquey, and that he augmented it on
the West Side, so that he left between it and the House of Sand, and the House
of Gerou's Son, and the others, but a small Street, which is now called the
Paved Street, and brought into it the spacious place, which was on the
North-side; but on the East Side he had no place to enlarge it. This was done
in the year 79. As to the augmentations The augmentations of the Mosquey of
Masre.
made in the great ancient Mosquey, after the building of it, by Gamrou the son
of Gasus, it is to be observed, that Gamrou did this work after his return from
Alexandria, to the place of his Tent, and that he had taken Masre in the Month
Mucharram, in the twentieth year after the Prophet's Retreat, whom God favor
with his most excellent Benedictions. Abusaguid the Chemirian speaks of it
also; I have found that that Mosquey, where you assemble your selves, was built
by Gamrou, fifty Cubits in length, and thirty in breadth. After him Muslemas
the son of Muchalled made some enlargements in it, under the Reign of Megavius,
the son of the Abusophian, in the Year 35. Then afterward Gabdolgueziz, the
son of Merouan, in the year 79. and after him Corras, the son of Serich, upon
the account of the Valide the son of Gabdolmelic. This last would needs
demolish what Gabdolgueziz had built, and afterward completed his building. He
gave the ovesight of these works to Jachi the son of Chandelas, and above him
to Gamer the son of Levi. He quite demolished the Mosquey, so that the people
met on Friday in another place, till the building was finished. He put up the
Seat for Orations in the great Mosquey, in the year 94. They say there is not
in the World any one handsomer and nobler then this, after the Seat of the
Prophet of God, Gods peace and mercy be with him. After that, there were
enlargements made by Salich, the son of Gali, the son of Gabdol, the son of
Guebas, upon the account of the Commander of the Faithful Abulguebas, who added
behind the Mosquey four Pillars. There were also some made by Gabdol, the son
of Tahar, the son of Ghasan, the Overseer, under the Commander of the Faithful.
Gabdol sais this of it, as having it from his Father. Abutahar came from
Alexandria, and entered into Fustata, which is Masre, where he constituted
Judge Guise, the son of the Moncader, and added to the Mosquey part of the
House of Gamrou the son of Gasus. The son of Remath added thereto the House of
Gabidol, the son of Chareth, the son of Gerou, and the House of Gagelan, the
freed Servant of Omar, the son of Chettab, (Gods peace be with him) and the
House of the Phadal. The Phadal, the son of Tahar, went out of it accordingly
on a Tuesday, five days before the expiration of the Month Regebe, in the year
212. After him Abubeker Mahumet, the son of Gabidol, the son of Chareth, the
son of Masquin, enlarged it on the side of the spacious place, and to that end
took the Gate, and the Mint-house, with what was adjoining thereto, as far as
the Western Wall of the Mosquey, which so enlarged the spacious place, that the
Mosquey was square. He added thereto also a Pillar, which is that on the
South Side. He began to demolish and to build on Thursday the fourth of the
Month of Regebe, in the year 357. and died before he had finished his design;
but his son Gali, the son of Mahumet, had his charge after his death, and
completed the enlargements which he had begun; so that the people did their
Devotions there after Wednesday the 23. of the Month Ramadan, in the year 358.
The Phadal the son of Guebas told me what follows; I asked (said he) the
Architect, named Gali, the Chemirian, who had the charge of that Structure; and
he told me that what was taken out of the Mint-house toward the enlargement of
the spacious Place is nine Cubits in length, according to the great measure.
Sophian the son of Gabdol says, citing for Author Naphegus, the son of Othman,
that there was no History Reading of History in the Mosquey.
recited in the Mosquey in the time of the Apostle of God, (Gods peace and
mercy be with him, nor in the time of Abubeker, Omar, Othman, or Gali, (Gods
peace be with them all) and that practice began not till under the Reign of
Megavius the son of Abusophian. The son of Lahigus says, citing for Author
Abuche^i^, that Gali (Gods peace be with him) went to his Devotion before day,
making imprecations against some of his enemies; and that it being related to
Megavius, he appointed a man to recite the History after the break of Day, and
after Sunset, and to pray God for him, and the Inhabitants of Syria; and
thence began (says he) the recital of History. Abugamrou has related to us,
citing for Author Meguirus, that the first who did his Devotions in the morning
was Gali, and they say he did not that but out of a reflection that he had a
War to prosecute. We will add here a Copy of what is written upon the green
Tables in the ancient great Mosquey of Masre. The Writer was Abulcasem Moses,
the son of Guise, the son of Moses, the son of Mu^adi The green Tables of the
Mosquey of Masre.
the Writer, God. All-mighty be merciful to him. In the Name of God Gracious
and Merciful; God has declared that there is no other God but he (till he
says) in Justice. There is no other God but the true God alone, without
Associate. He gives Life and Death, and he can do all things. It Is he who has
sent his Apostle with good conduct, and the true Religion; and the rest of the
Verse. The Messiah will not disdain; and the rest of the Verse. Great God, give
thy Benediction to Mahumet thy Servant and Prophet, grant him peace; make him
the most honored of thy Creatures before thee, and the most cherished by thee,
and and the most Powerful in favor about thee, and the nearest in dignity to
thee. Great God, hear the Prayers which Mahumet makes to thee for his Nation,
and cause his People to descend into his Fish-pool, without confusion and
without affliction. Gabdol the Strong, Commander of the Faithful, has caused
this Mosquey to be augmented and enlarged; great God, give thy Benediction to
the Commander of the Faithful, thou and thy Angels, increase his reward, and
make him one of thy greatest Servants in happiness; make him one of the
Companions of Mahumet (Gods peace and mercy be with him) in Paradise; assist
him to govern well what he has under his jurisdiction of thy Servants, and of
thy Provinces, by making him thy Lieutenant; and cause his Subjects to enjoy
the happiness of good conduct in safety and assurance. He who had the oversight
of the Structure was Corras the son of Serich; and the time wherein it was
finished, is the Month Ramadan, in the ninety second year of the Blessed
Retreat. I have heard Abugamrou speak thus: The first who made Arched
Upper-rooms was Omar, the son of Gabdolgueziz, (Gods peace and mercy be with
him) in the hundredth year; and the Mosqueys were made in that manner after him,
having been before only without any such Room. The first of the Prelates who
caused the Benediction and the glorification of the Name of God to be
pronounced by Criers after him, was the Prelate of Chasina, whose Son is now
known under the name of the Son of Gali the Prelate. Before that, the Prelates
only pronounced that Benediction to the People. I have heard him speak in these
terms: These Pillars of Wood which are in the Court, were erected the same year
that the Chanel was made. Before that the Veils were in the midst of the
Seeling of the great Mosquey. It Is related that in the Reign of the Mamanus
there were Coffers in the great Mosquey, wherein was put what remained of the
portions of the Poor and Indigent, of what they gathered who walked up and down
the Highways, of all the other Collections which were made. These Coffers or
Chests were opened on the Friday, and they called with a loud voice such as
would accept of those Alms; but it seldom happened that any came to receive
them. Then they called him who had gathered them, and he answered in these
terms; The Charities are come into the Coffers, they shall never return to me;
I leave them to the All-mighty and All-good God. The Nilometer was built of the
remainder of these Alms; there being not any would receive them in the time of
the Mamunus, Gods mercy on him. One of the Grandees of Egypt (God show him
mercy) related to me, that heretofore in the Lampe-street in Masre, on the
Festival day, after the great Feast of the Month Ramadan, they set Kettles
full of Flesh, and Baskets full of Bread, and that they called with a loud
voice such as had need thereof, as they call people to Water on the Highways;
and that it happened sometimes the greatest part remained there all Night upon
the place, so few would take of it. The remainder was carried to the Prisoners,
and they answered, we have enough to live upon, thanks be to God. The Land of
Egypt was then the most plentiful of any in the world, the most Populous, and
the best cultivated, and where there was more convenience of Habitation and
Subsistence. The Masich relates in his Annals, and others affirm also, that the
Egyptians, when they saw the Nile at the highest, gave Alms, released Slaves,
clothed Orphans, relieved Widows, and such as were destitute of Succor, out
of their thankfulness to God, for the kindness he did them in raising the
course of the Nile to its height.

They relate that Pharaoh, after he Pharao's Castle.
grew Proud, and Insolent, and Impious, commanded a Castle to be built on the
descent of Mount Mactam; and that his Vizier Haman, according to this order,
got workmen together from all parts of Egypt; so that there were a hundred and
fifty thousand Architects, with what Tradesmen, Handy-craftsmen, and Laborers
were requisite. He caused Brick and Mortar to be made, Timber to be felled, and
Nails to be made; then they began their Building, and raised it so high, that
never any had done the like before; for the Masons were no longer able to stand
on their Feet to work. But the All-mighty and All-good God about Sunset sent
Gabriel (Gods peace be with him) who smote the Castle with his Wing, and cleft
it into three pieces, one whereof fell on Pharaoh's Army, where it killed a
thousand Men; another fell into the Sea, and appeared there like a high
Mountain; and the third fell into the Western Land. There was not so much as
one of the Coptites who wrought within it saved, they all peperish'd. They
relate that thereupon Pharaoh was so proud, as to cast an Arrow at Heaven; God
willing to try him, returned his Arrow to him all bloody; Whereupon he cried
out, I have killed Moses's God. God is infinitely above what impious men can
do; he does what he pleases with his Servants. God therefore at that very time
sent Gabriel, who did to the Castle as we have related.

One of those who were impious, Caron the Wealthy, who is Corah.
and proud, and arrogant in the Land of Egypt, was Caron the Cup Bearer; He was
an Israelite, Cousin-german to Moses, (Gods peace be with him) for Caron was
the son of Jashar, the son of Caheb, and Moses was the son of Gamran, the son
of Caheb. Others say Moses was Caron's Sisters son; he was called Caron the
Bright, by reason of the beauty of his Face. He was the most diligent of the
Children of Israel in the reading of Moses's Law, but he became a Hypocrite, as
the Samerian was, and said; Since the Prophecy belonged to Moses, and the
Sacrifice, and the Oblation, and the knowledge of the Law to Aaron, what
remains there for me? They relate that Moses having brought the Chilof Israel
through the Sea, gave Caron a Commission to interpret the Law, and to collect
the Offerings, and made him one of the Chiefs. The Offerings belonged then to
Moses, but he bestowed them on his Brother, whereat Caron was troubled, and
envied them both, and spoke thus to them; Behold now the command is come
absolutely into your hands, and I have nothing to do with the affairs of the
Children of Israel; How long shall I suffer this? It is God, replied Moses, who
thus disposes of things. I will not believe it, replied Caron, if you do not
confirm it to me by a Miracle. Then Moses commanded the Children of Israel to
come all to him, every one with his Rod; then he tied all those Rods together,
and cast them into the Tent, where God ordinarily revealed his Will to him.
They kept a Guard about the Rods all night, and the next morning they found
Aaron's Rod shaking with the Wind, covered all over with green Leaves. That Rod
was made of a Branch of Almond-trees. This is no more miraculous (said Caron)
then what the Magicians daily perform. He became thence forward more impious
then before, more wicked, more envious, and more malicious against Moses and
Aaron, as God affirms in his Book, when he says, Caron was of the People of
Moses, but he was unjust toward them. Injustice here signifies a persecution
without any cause, and a malicious and irrational Dispute. Others affirm that
Pharao appointed Caron to govern the Children of Israel, and that he treated
them injuriously and tyrannically. Tyranny (they say) proceeds from greatness,
that is, from the eminence and advantage which any one has over others. The
advantage he had over them was grounded on his great Wealth, and the multitude
of his children. He made (say they) his Garments larger by a span then theirs;
His Keys (say they) that is the Keys of his Storehouses, were carried by sixty
Mules; Evere Storehouse had its Key, and every Key was but a Finger long; they
were of Leather. Some affirm, expounding that passage of the Book of the
All-mighty and All-good God, where it is said of him, I have not received it,
but according to the knowledge which is within me; that he was the best skilled
of his time in the Law of Moses. On the contrary, others affirm he was skilled
in Chemistry; Saguid the son of Musib says, that Moses had the Science of
Chemistry, and Chemistry.
that he taught a third purt of it to Josuah, the son of Nun, a third to Caleb,
the son of Jethnas, and a third to Caron, but that Caron served the other two
so well, that he learnt the whole Science from them both, and that afterward
he took Lead and Copper, and changed it into pure Gold. Others affirm that
Moses taught his Sister Chemistry, inasmuch as his Devotion made him despise
Gold, and that his Sister taught it Caron, who was her Husband. They relate
that Moses said, it was a provision for the life of this World, and that he had
no need thereof, because it was a perishable thing, and far distant from the
truth, which is All-mighty God, and that he quitted what was perishable, which
his Devotion permitted him not to desire, and satisfied himself with what was
near All-mighty God. They say that Caron went abroad one day on a white Mule he
had, covered with a Foot-cloth of Purple, and a Golden Saddle, accompanied by
four thousand young Men, and three hundred beautiful young Maids, clad in Silk,
and set out with Jewels and Ornaments of great value, and diverse colors; so
that he had marching on his right hand three hundred young men, and on his left
three hundred young maids. Others say he went abroad on Horseback attended by
ninety thousand Servants Men and Maids, who belonged to him, young men and
young maids all Marriageable. They relate that he gave very reproachful words
to Moses, and the Children of Israel, priding himself in his great Wealth,
Moses taking much at his hands for Kindred sake, and not willing to be incensed
against him, till the Ordinance for the payment of Tiths came down. Then Moses
made an Agreement with Caron, that of a thousand Crowns of Gold he should pay
one, and of a thousand Drachmes one. But his Soul grew the more Covetous, by
reason of the great quantity of Gold and Silver which he had, after he had
counted it, and found so much. He thereupon assembled the Children of Israel,
and began to make Speeches to them, and spoke to them in these terms; Moses has
hitherto dealt with you as he pleased himself, and now he would take away your
goods. You are our Lord and Master (replied they) command us to do what you
think good. We must (said he) corrupt such a one, naming a woman of a lewd
life, and induce her to calumniate Moses, so as that he may be suspected to
have had some dealings with her, that the Children of Israel may be put out of
the good opinion they have of him, and have an aversion for him, and at last
quite forsake him. They promised that debauched woman a 1000. Crown of gold;
others say a Basin full of gold. Then the day of one of their Festivals being
come, Moses stood up to speak to them; and after he had praised God, and given
thanks, he spoke thus; O ye Children of Israel, God commands you and me also,
that if any one among us be a Thief, we should put him away from us; if any one
commit Fornication, and be not married, we should punish him with the Whip, and
if he be married, we should stone him. And if you your self have committed
those crimes, O Moses, said Caron. Yes, replied Moses, though it were my self.
Certainly replied Caron, the Children of Israel believe that you have sinned
with such a woman, naming the debauched woman. Moses having heard these words
sent for the woman, and charged her by him who had divided the Sea, and sent
the Law from Heaven, to declare the truth. Then God of his mercy, touched the
woman's heart, and she spoke thus: By the true God, those who say it speak an
untruth; but true it is, that Caron and his people have promised me a reward if
I testified that you had sinned with me, O great Prophet, who have spoken to
God. Then Moses fell down to the ground, and worshipped God weeping, and made
this Prayer to him; O Lord, if I am thy Apostle, avenge me, for it is
impossible for me to endure those who have not thy fear before their eyes. And
God revealed his will to him, speaking thus: Command the Earth to do what thou
desire, and by my permission it shall obey thee. Moses lift up his head, and
said to the people; O ye Children of Israel, God has sent me to Caron as he
sent me to Pharao; let such of you as are of his party stand near him. They all
withdrew from Caron, save only two men, who continued obstinate in their
wrath, their imposture, and their malice. Then Moses spoke thus; O Earth take
them. Immediately the Earth swallowed them three up to the Waste. Moses said
again, O Earth take them; and the Earth took them in up to the Neck. Then Caron
and his two Companions began to entreat Moses to be merciful to them; but Moses
made no account of their Prayers, for he was too much incensed. On the contrary
he pronounced the third time the same words, O Earth take them, and detain them
in thy Bowels till the day of Judgment. Then the Earth swallowed them up quite,
and closed over their Heads. Then said God to Moses: O Moses, thou art very
inhumane, my Creatures implored thy mercy several times, and thou have not had
compassion on them. By my greatness, and by my glory, had they but once called
upon me, they should have found me favorable, and ready to hear them. After
that (said the Author) those of the Children of Israel who were not wise, began
to say; Moses has not made imprecations against Caron, but to possess himself
after his death of his Tteasures, and his House. Moses hearing of this was
angry at it, and prayed to God that the House of Caron and all his goods might
be swallowed into the bottom of the Earth. The All-mighty and All-good God
testifies it himself, when he speaks thus; And we have made him and his House
to descend into the Bowels of the Earth; he means Caron: and no man can relieve
him against God, and he was not of those who are relieved.

They relate that the Commander of the Faithful, Omar (Gods peace be with him)
writ a Letter to Gamrou, the son of Gasus, who commanded in Egypt, after he had
Conquered it, and had disposed of the affairs thereof, and had imposed the
Tribute on such as he had received by composition, as well the Coptites, as the
other Inhabitants of it. Behold the Tenure of that Letter: From Gabdol Omar,
the Omars Letter to Gamrou.
son of Chettab, to Gamrou the son of Gasus, God give you his peace, O Gamrou,
and his mercy, and his benedictions, and to all the Mussulmans generally. After
that, I give God thanks for the favors he has done you; there is no other God
but he, and I pray him to bless Mahumet and his Family. I know, O Gamrou, by by
the relation which has been made me thereof, that the Province whereof you
have the Government, is pleasant and well Fortified, well Cultivated, and very
Populous; that the Pharaos and the Amalekites have Reigned there, that they
have displayed therein the marks of their greatness, and of their pride,
imagining they were Eternal, and taking where they had not made any account.
But now God has established you in their Habitations, and put into your power
their Wealth, their Servants, and their Children, and made you Inheritor of
their Land; praise, and blessing, and thanks be to him. To him belongs honor
and glory. When you have received this my Letter, write me the particular
qualities of Egypt, as well in respect of the Land as the Sea, and make me know
it as if I had seen it my self. God preserve you. Gamrou having received this
Letter, and seen what it contained, answered Omar, (Gods peace be with him) and
writ to him in these terms: From Gabdol Gamrou, the son of Gasus, the Son of
Vail, the Sa^amian, to Gamrou's Answer to Omar.
the Successor of the Apostle of God, (Gods peace and mercy be with him) Omar
the son of Chettab, Commander of the Faithful, one of the Chaliphs according to
the right way, whose Letter I have received and read, and understood his
intention; wherefore I will dispel from his spirit the cloud of uncertainty, by
the truth of my discourse. From God comes strength and power, and all things
return to him. Know Lord Commander of the Faithful, that the Country of Egypt
is nothing but a blackish Soil, and green Plants between a dusty Mountain and a
reddish Sand. Between its Mountain and its Sand there are high-raised Plains,
and levelled Eminences. It is surrounded by an Ascent which supplies it with
provisions, and is in compass from Syene to the extremities of the Land, and
the side of the Sea, a Months riding for a Man on Horseback. Through the
midst of the Country there runs a River, blessed in the morning, and favored of
Heaven at night, which rises and falls according to the course of the Sun and
Moon. It has its time, wherein the Springs and Sources of the Earth are opened
to it, according to the command given them by its Creator, who governs and
dispenses its course, to supply the Province with sustenance; and it follows
according to the order prescribed it, till such time as its waters being risen,
and its Waves rolling with noise, and its surges being come to their greatest
elevation, the Inhabitants of the Country cannot pass from one Village to
another, but in little Boats, and a man sees the little Wherryes turning to and
^ro, as white and black Camels in the imaginations of the people. Then when it
is come to this condition. behold it begins to return back, and to confine it
self within its Channels, as it came out of it before, and rose up by little and
little. And then the most forward, and the most slothful prepare themselves for
labor, they are scattered up and down the Fields in multitudes, the people of
the Law, whom God preserve, and the people of Alliance, whom men protect; they
are seen stirring to and fro like Ants, some weak, others strong, and wearying
themselves out at the task imposed upon them; for that is not obaained of them
by their good will, but by force and constraint, by ill-treating and oppressing
them. They are seen searching into the Earth, and turning up so much of it as
has been overflown, and casting into it all sorts of Grain, which they hope
(with the assistance of God) will multiply therein. And it will not be long ere
the Earth puts off the black hew of its manure, and clothes it self in green,
and casts forth a pleasant scent; while it produces Stalks, and Leaves, and
Ears, making a delightful show, and giving a good hope, the dew of Heaven
watering it from above, and the moisture giving nourishment to its productions
from beneath. Sometime there come certain Clouds, with a little Rain, sometimes
there fall only certain drops of water, and sometimes none at all. After that,
Lord Commander of the Faithful, the Earth displayes her Beauties, and makes a
Triumph of her Favors, cheering up the Inhabitants, and assuring them of a
good Harvest of her Fruits, for the sustenance of them and their Cattle, and to
be Transported elsewhere, and to make their Beasts multiply. She appears now
(Lord Commander of the Faithful) like dusty ground, then presently it is a
bluish Sea, and as it were a white Pearl, then like black Dirt, then as green
Taffata, then as a piece of Embrodery of diverse colors, then like a fount of
molten Gold. Then they Harvest their Corn, which being Thrash'd out passes
afterward diversely among Men, some taking what belongs to them, and others what
does not belong to them. This vicissitude returns every year, every thing in
its Season, according to the order and providence of the All-mighty; may that
great God be ever praised, blessed be he, the best of Creatures. As to what is
necessary for the carrying on of these Works, and what should make the Country
populous, and well cultivated, maintain it in a good condition, and make it
advance from good to better, according to what has been told us by such as are
acquainted therewith, as having had the government of it in their hands, we
have made a particular observation of three things; The first is, not to credit
the malicious discourses of the meaner sort of people, against the chiefest of
the Country, because they are envious, and unthankful for the good which is
done them. The second is, to lay out one third of the Tribute raised therein
toward the reparation of Bridges, and Causeys. And the third is, not to raise
the Tribute out of any Species, till it be in its perfection. This is the
Description of Egypt, Lord Commander of the Faithful, whereby you may know it,
as if you had seen it your self. God continue you in your good conduct, and
make you happily manage your Empire, and assist you to undergo the charge he
has imposed on you, and inspire you with an acknowledgment of the favors he
has done you. Peace be with you; May God be praised, and assist with his
favors and benedictions our Lord Mahumet, and those of his House, and those of
his party. The Commander of the Faithful Omar (Gods mercy on him) having read
(says the Author) Gamrou's Letter, spoke thus; He has made an exquisite
Description of the Land of Egypt and its Appurtenances; he has designed it so
well, that it cannot be mistaken by such as are capable of knowing things.
Praised be God, O Assembly of Mussulmans, for the favors he has done you, by
bringing you into the possession of Egypt, and other Countries. He it is whose
assistance we all ought to implore.

They relate, that when the House of Gamrou, the son of Gasus, was demolished
and made part of the great Mosquey of Masre, there was found in a corner a
stone, on which these verses were written: Slight not a favorable occasion,
wherein thou may stretch forth thy hand to do some good; We live but to die,
and death is deceitful; from one hour to another, there is a change of
affairs. They relate also that while the same Gamrou was Governor of Egypt
certain Coptites came, and made evil reports to him against certain persons,
about affairs which he knew nothing of, thinking by that means to insinuate
themselves into his favor, and be powerful about him; but he reproved them of
it saying; O ye Coptites, who are here assembled, know that when any one comes
to give us evil reports of his Brother, we shall advance his Brother to higher
Dignity, and debase the Detractor, for the Detractor envies the prosperity of
his Neighbor, and endeavors to ruin him; the cauldrons of his malice boil in
his breast, so that it rises up into his Tongue, and these wicked discourses
are the smoke of that fire which sets them a boiling. He said also (Gods peace
be with him) he who makes ill reports to thee, calumniates thy self; he who
speaks ill to thee of another, speaks ill of thy self. He said sometimes to his
Captains, and those whom he employed about his affairs; Use me not as a Dagger
to stab people withal. Show your selves kind and obliging to all, for who
would live in peace must practice it. Be careful to secure the Highways, and
protect Travelers; Punish the wicked, that they may be kept in by fear, and
that the Merchant be in safety; Strive not with the weak for the things whereof
they are possessed; claim not the thing wherewith they sustain themselves; eat
not of their Bread in their Houses, that you may have no remorse of Conscience.
Understand you not what is read to you out of the Book of your Lord, which was
inspired into the heart of your Prophet? (Gods peace and mercy be with him) He
will not desire your goods of you, that you might not mutually desire them one
of another, and that you be not covetous in your hearts, and that that may not
make a discovery of your maliciousness.

Abunasre of the West (Gods mercy A Statue of Mahumet at Masre.
on him) in the Book of the Histories of Egypt, which God continue populous and
well cultivated, says, that on the Castle-gate at Masre, in the time of the
Romans, before the Mussulmans conquered Egypt, there was near the great Gate of
the Church of Mugalleca, called the Gate of Grace, an Idol of Brass, in the
form of a Camel, with the Figure of a man riding on him, having an Arabian
Turbant on his Head, and his Bow over his Shoulder, and Shoes on his Feet. The
Romans and the Coptites, when any one injured or unjustly persecuted another,
came to that Statue, and standing before it, he who suffered the injury said to
him who did it; Give me what belongs to me, otherwise I will make my complaint
to that Cavalier, who will oblige thee to do me right by fair means or by foul.
By that Cavalier they meant Mahumet, (Gods peace and mercy be with him) for it
is written among them in the Law of Moses and the Gospel, where the countenance
and posture of Mahumet is described; He shall ride or the Camel, and have Shoes
on; he shall carry the Arabian Bow, and have a Turbant on his Head: Gods peace
and mercy be with him. When Gamrou came to Egypt to conquer it, he and the
Mussulmans (Gods peace be with them) the Romans perceiving they would certainly
be subdued, and not doubting of the Victory of the Mussulmans, hid that Statue
under ground, that it might not serve the Mussulmans for an Argument against
them in the dispute. I have heard (says the son of Lahigus) that that Statue
had continued in that place several thousands of years, and that they knew not
who had made it; God knows how it stands. This story minds me of another, which
is this; The Sultan the Malcolcamel, Mahumet Another Statue of Mahumet.
the son of Abubeker, the son of Job (Gods mercy on him) sent the son of Sagad
Ambassador into one of the Islands of Andalouzia, the Sovereign whereof (as I
think) was the Emperor. This Ambassador returning, related to the Sultan what
strange things he had seen in the Island. He told him among other things he had
seen, opposite to a Church belonging to the Romans, a Statue of Stone in the
form of an Ass, with a man upon it, set on a square Pedestal, so that the
Statue and the Pedestal were all of a piece, of a black bright stone; and all
who entered into the Church, or came out of it, did spit upon the Statue, and
railed at it, then turned away from it. I asked the King (continued the
Sagadian as he related this story) as I sat with him, what figure that was,
and he told me that the Romans thought it a Statue of the Prince of the
Mussulmans. Whereupon (added he) I felt my self smitten with the Zeal of the
Mussulman Religion, which obliged me to speak thus to him; Certainly great
King, this people is ill informed of that Statue, and the opinion they have of
it far from any likelihood of truth. Why? said the King. Because (said I) he
whom they imagine it represent, never rid but upon Camels; on the contrary,
it is the Messiah (Gods peace be with him) who rode on an Ass. The King
thereupon sent for a company of Priests and Monks, and related my discourse to
them, and they doubted not but that I had reason, and spoke the truth, which
made them presently consider what they should do with that Figure. The result
was, that ere next day was over, they prepared it a Chapel, where they lodged
it in the Church, afterward burning incense before it, and clothing it with
Silk, and making a Procession about it, and doing it great honors with much
Devotion. This was a business (said they) which was concealed from us. This
Figure had not been set up in this Country, had it not been the Figure of the
Messiah; for this is not the Country of the Mussulmans, and their Prince never
came thither. He who related this story, said to the Sultan; Have I sinned in
doing so? No, by the true God, said the Sultan, on the the contrary, you have
done well, and deserved reward; since what you did was out of the good zeal you
had for the Mussulman Religion, and the service of the Prophet, Gods peace and
mercy be with him. As to the Statue, that is it which the Christians adore, and
wherein they put their hope.

The Sangian relates in his ancient Annals, that one of the Caliphs of this
Province caused Tribute to be paid at great Constantinople, and that Geuhar
General of the Armies of Mugazzoldinil built the City of Cairo, which was
called from the name of the Chaliph, Cairo of the Mugazzoldinil, Cairo.
and founded the Castles. They say he dilated his Conquests as far as Damas,
before the Mugazzoldinil entered into Egypt.

They relate, that in the seventh year of the Prophet's Retreat, God replenish
him with his Favors and Benedictions, Chatteb the son of Abubalig came into
Egypt from the Mucaux, bringing along with him Mary Mary of Egypt.
the Egyptian, and another young Lady, which they said was her Sister, and that
the Apostle of God (Gods peace and mercy be with him) bestowed her on Chasan
the son of Thabet, who had by her his son Gabdorrachaman. His Mule was a great
Hedghog, and his Ass a wild Goat. The Mucaux, who was then Cesar's Lieutenant
in Egypt, made him a present of all that.

Gabdolaglai the Othmanidan relates what follows; I said one day to The last
words of Mahumet.
the son of Sagad, the Egyptian Lawyer, (Gods mercy on him) Tell us something,
whereby we may know the excellency of the Country of Egypt. To that purpose
(said he) 'twere sufficient to tell what Historirians relate of the son of
Masgud, and what the Prophet (Gods peace and mercy be with him) said to him of
Egypt before he died. We were together (said the son of Masgud) in the House of
our Mother Gaisa, (Gods peace be with he*) and the Apostle of God (Gods peace
and mercy be with him) cast his eye on us, being pressed with pain, with tears
in his eyes, and declared to us, that he should die within a short time,
speaking to us in these terms; You are welcome, God give you a good and a long
life, God preserve you, God govern you, God unite you, God protect you, God
make you prosper, God raise you to honor, God give you peace. I I recommend to
you the fear of God, and I recommend you to the All-mighty and All-good God,
and I pray him to have a care of you, after me. O Apostle of God (said we to
him, when will your day be? The time is very near, (said he) behold I return to
God, and to the Garden of Retirement, and the Paradise above. Who shall wash
you (said we) O Apostle of God? The men of my House (replied he) according to
the order of their nearness. In what shall we bury you, O Apostle of God? (said
we.) In my Garments, if you please, (said he) or in those of the happy Arabia,
or in the white ones of Egypt. Who shall make the Prayer for you, O Apostle of
God? (said we weeping.) Trouble not your selves for that; (said he) God be
merciful to you, and reward you for the care you have of your Prophet. When you
have washed me, and laid me into a Sheet, put me into my Coffin, which is here
by the side of my Tomb, then depart from me for a while, till my good friend
Gabriel has Prayed for me, and after him Michael, then Esraphiel, then the
Angel of Death, with many other Angels, whom God Bless; After that return to
me, and come near me one after another, and pray God heartily to grant me peace
and mercy; and forbear importuning me with Cries, Weeping, and Lamentations.
The first who shall make the Prayer for me, shall be the men of my own House,
then their Wives, then you. Continue in peace with those of my Companions who
are at a great distance from me; and with those who have followed me in my
Religion, till the day of the Resurrection. I make you witnesses of the
Benediction which I give all those who have embraced the Mussulman Religion.
This is the Testament which the Prophet (God grant him peace and mercy) made
before his death. It suffices for the glory of Egypt, that he mentioned it at
his death, and that he ordered they should bury him in the white Garments of
Egypt. What greater glory can there be then that!

The incomparable old Man, Doctor of the sayings and actions of the Prophet
Abugabdol Mahumet, the son of Negaman (Gods peace be with him) Other words of
Mahumet.
relates, upon the credit of him from whom he heard it, that the Apostle of God
(God grant him peace and mercy) spoke one day in these terms; The hand of God
is upon Egypt, the Inhabitants of it are favored with a particular Protection
from God, and with a happy prosperity. The Ancient Abugabdol explicating these
words of the Prophet, speaks thus; That hand signifies Power and Divine
assistance.

Guebad the son of Mahumet, (Gods peace be with him) speaks thus; Sitting The
words of a Sage of Egypt.
one day in the great Ancient Mosquery of Masre, which God preserve, I heard a
Citizen who related it as a thing which he had learnt from some great Person,
that it was on a time asked one of the Sages of Egypt, What is the most
delightful thing that ever you saw? Fruit (replied he) when they appear
clustered all about the Trees and Plants like Clouds, which closely follow one
another. What was the best thing you did ever eat? What was presented to me
(said he) in a quiet place, without trouble and disturbance, when I have been
very hungry. What was the most pleasant Drink you ever tasted? The remainders
(said he) of the overflowing of the Nile of Egypt in the Spring time. What was
the most delightful thing you ever heard? The eloquent voice (said he) of a
Person reading the Alcoran, and pronouncing it distinctly, without Singing and
without Artifice. In what did you find your self most commodiously clad? In
Linen half worn out (replied he) in Summer, and in any other Cloth or Stuff
in Winter. Do you find any thing better then that? Yes (replied he) Health. It
is related of one of Lawyers of Egypt (God show him mercy) that he said; I have
heard a man who related in the Tent of the Commander of the Faithful Gamrou The
Prophets and Devout Persons lived by their Labor.
the son of Gasus (Gods peace be with him) or over against it, as a thing which
he had from Mecdad the son of Magdaquerbe, the Zebidian, that the Prophet (Gods
peace and mercy be with him) spoke thus; No man can eat any thing better in
this World then what he eats by the labor of his hands. For the Prophet of God
David lived by the labor of his hands. It Is related of Bara (Gods peace be
with him) that he said thus upon this occasion; The Prophets and Devout
persons, have always endeavored to get their Livelihood by lawful ways; Adam
(Gods peace be with him) was a Labourer, Seth a Weaver, Edrisus a Tailor, Noah
a Carpenter, Cadar a Mule-keeper, David an Armourer, Abraham a Sower of Seeds,
others say a Weaver of Lawn, Salich a Merchant, Moses and Saguib, and Mahumet,
(Gods peace and mercy be with them) were Shepherds, Locman a Tailor, Jesus the
son of Mary a Pilgrim, Abubeker, and Omar, and Othman, and Gali, and
Gabdorrachaman, the son of Guph, and Talche, were Merchants Trading in Cypres
and Lawnes, Maimoune the son of Meharam, and Mahumet the son of Sirin, were
also Lawn-Merchants, Zebir the son of Gauam, and Gamrou the son of Gasus, and
Gamer the son of Carir were Silk-Merchants, Job the Skinner sold Goats-Skins,
Sagad the son of Abuvacas drove a Trade in Dyers Woad, Othman the son of
Mahumet the Lachamian was a Tailor, Malich the son of Dinar was a Writer.

Neguim the Deaf (God grant him mercy) related to my what follows; There was
(said he) in the Caraph at Masre a devout man, who stood every The cries of a
Devote at the Mosquey-Gate of Masre.
Friday at the Gate of the great old Mosquey, of the same side with Gamrou's
House, after the Prelate had concluded the Prayer, and cried out with a loud
voice; There is no other God but the great God alone, without Associate; It is
he who Reings; He ought to be Praised; Life and Death proceed from him; He ever
lives and never dies; That which is good is in his Hand; To him all things
return; He is able to do all things. All those who heard him repeated what he
said, till there remained but few persons in the Mosquey; then at last he said;
O Assembly of the Faithful, he who abstains from things forbidden, obtains
remission of his Sins; he who is content with what God sends him, has Wealth
enough; he who eschews evil, is in safety. He ceased not to do this, till God
called him, God grant him mercy. He lies Buried in the Cemitery of Masre, which
God protect against its Enemies, and keep in his Holy custody, Amen. It is in
God we hope, it is good to wait upon him; God grant peace to our Lord Mahumet,
and to those of his House, and those of his Party, and fill him with his
Benedictions. Behold the Book finished by the grace of our glorious Lord; let
him be praised, and exalted, and glorified.

This Copy (which God Bless) was finished in Writing, the 14th. day of the
venerable Month Regebe, in the year 992. at Tibe the Noble, God bless her
Nobility, and replenish her with his Favors.

Tibe is a City in Arabia, according to the Geuharian. The 14th. of Regebe 992.
Corresponds to the 22. of July 1584.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of Books printed for Thomas Basset, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the George near Cliffords Inn in Fleet Street.
Various Histories and Miscellaneous Discourses, etc.
1. COsmography in four Books, containing the Chorography and History of the
World, and all the principal Kingdoms, Provinces, Seas, and Isles thereof. The
5th. Edition corrected and enlarged. By P. Heylin. In Folio, price 20 s.

2. The Voyages and Travels of the Ambassadors sent by Frederick Duke of
Holstein to the Great Duke of Muscovy and the King of Persia, begun in the Year
1633, and finished 1639: containing a Complete History of Muscovy, Tartary,
Persia, and other adjacent Countries. Also the Travels of Mandelslo from Persia
into the East Indies, containing a Description of Indosthan the Mogul's Empire,
the Oriental Islands Japan, China, etc. In three Books. The whole illustrated
with Maps and Figures. Written originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the
Embassy. Englished by J. D. The second Edition. In Folio, price 18 s.

3. An Historical Account of the Romish State, Court, Interest, Policies, etc.
and the mighty Influences of the Jesuits in that Church, and many other
Christian States, not hitherto extant. Written originally by Monsieur de Saint
Amor, Doctor of Sorrbonns. Englished by J. D. In Folio, price 14 s.

4. The History of Philosophy, by Tho. Stanley, Esquire In Folio, price 3 l.

5. The History of the Caribby Islands, viz. Barbados, Saint Christophers,
Saint Vincents, Martinico, Dominico, Barbouthos, Monserrat, Mevis, Antego, etc.
in all 28: containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands.
Illustrated with Sculptures representing the most considerable Rarities therein
described. Rendered into English by J. D. of Kidwelly. In Folio, price 10 s.

6. Bentivolio and Urania in six Books, by Nath. Ingelo, D. D. In Folio, price
12 s.

7. Advertisements from Parnassus; with the Politic Touchstone. Written
originally in Italian by that famous Roman Trojano Boccalini. Englished by the
Right Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth. In Folio, price 10 s.

8. Londinopolis: An Historical Discourse or Perlustration of the Cities of
London and Westminster, with the Courts of Justice, Antiquities, and New
Buildings thereunto belonging. By James Howell. In Folio, price 5 s.

9. The Complete Body of the Art Military: Being plain and perfect Directions
for the right ordering and framing of an Army both of Horse and Foot: together
with the manner of Fortifications, and the Art of Gunnery. By Richard Elton,
Lieutenant Colonel. In Folio, price 8 s.

10. The History of the late Wars in Denmark, comprising all the Transactions
(both Military and Civil) during the differences betwixt the two Northern
Crowns, in the Years 1657, 1658, 1659, 1660. Illustrated with several Maps. By
R. Mantey. In Folio, price 6 s.

11. A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon
Questions of all sorts of Philosophy. In Folio, price 30 s.

12. Ecclesia Restaurata: or the History of the Reformation of the Church of
England, containing the beginning, progress, and success of it; from the first
preparations to it by King Henry VIII. until the Legal settling of it under
Queen Elizabeth. By Peter Heylin, D. D. The second Edition in Folio, price 10 s.

13. Aerius Redivivus: or the History of the Presbyterians, containing the
beginnings, progress, and successes of that Active Sect, etc. By Peter Heylin,
D. D. In Folio, price 12 s.

14. The History of England extending to the Conquest of so much of Britain as
was subjected by the Romans. Written in the Year 1666, in Folio, pricee 3 s. 6
d.

15. The Use of the Pen and Pencil, or the Art of Painting. By William
Sanderson, Esquire in Folio, price 2 s. 6 d.

16. Cyprianus Anglicus: or the History of the Life and Death of William Laud
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; containing also the Ecclesiastical History of
the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, from the first rising
till his death. By Peter Heylin, D. D. The second Edition in Folio, price 10 s.
printed 1671.

17. The History of Romish Treasons and Usurpations: together with a particular
account of many gross Corruptions and Impostures in the Church of Rome, highly
dishonorable and injurious to Christian Religion: with a large Preface to the
Romanists. By H. Foulis, B. D. in Folio, price 20 s. printed 1671.

18. The Merchants Map of Commerce, wherein the universal manner and matter of
Trade is compendiously handled. By Lewis Roberts, Merchant. The second Edition
in Folio, price 16 s. printed 1671.

19. Resuscitatio: or bringing into public light several pieces of the Works
Civil, Historical, Philosophical, and Theological, (hitherto sleeping) of the
Right Honorable Francis Bacon, Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Alban. In two
parts. The third Edition, according to the best corrected Copies, together with
His Lordships Life. By W. Rawley, D. D. His Lordships Chaplain. In Folio, price
14 s. printed 1671.

20. Fodinae Regales: or the History, Laws, and Places of the chief Mines and
Mineral Works in England, Wales, and the English Pale in Ireland. As also of
the Mint and Money. By Sir John Pettus, Knight. In Folio, price 5 s.

21. The Art how to know Men. Originally written by the Sieur de la Chamber,
Counselor to His Majesty of France, and Physician in ordinary. Englished by
J. D. In Octavo, price 3 s.

22. Various Histories written originally by Claudius Aelianus, rendered into
English by Tho. Stanley. In Octavo, price 2 s. 6 d.

23. Scarrons Novels, viz. The Fruitless Precaution, the Hypocrites, the
Innocent Adultery, the Judge in his own Cause, the Rival Brothers, the
invisible Mistress, the Chastisement of Avarice. Rendered into English with
some Additions by J. Davies. In Octavo, price 3 s.

24. Hippocrates Aphorisms reviewed and rendered into English, and digested
into an exact and methodical form. In Octavo, price 1 s.

25. Arnaldo, or the Injured Lovers. A new Romance. In Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d.

26. Poems on several subjects. By Edward Lord Herbert, Baron of Cherbery. In
Octavo, price 1 s.

27. A further Discovery of the Mystery of Jesuitism, representing the Humors,
Designs, and Practices of those who call themselves The Society of Jesus. In
Twelves, price 2 s. 6 d.

28. Modern Policies taken from Machiavel, Borgia, and other choice Authors: to
which is added Regi Sacrum. By Sir William Blois, Knight. In Octavo, price 1 s.
6 d.

29. Lux Lillio, or Observations upon these two parts of Grammar, Orthographie
and Etymology. By Tho. Scriven, M. A. In Octavo, price 1 s.

30. Epictetus Junior: or Maxims of Modern Morality, in two Centuries.
Collected by J. Davies of Kidwelly. In Twelves, price 1 s.

31. The Complete Writing-master: A Copybook furnished with all the most useful
Hands now practiced by the best Artists in London, with such plain directions
for young Learners, that they may in a short time fit themselves for any Trade
or Employment whatsoever. Invented, written, and engraven, by E. Cocker. In
Quarto, price 1 s.

32. A Persuasive to Conformity, by way of a Letter to the Dissenting Brethren,
by Jo. Hinckley, M. A. In Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d.

33. The Ceremonies of the Vacant See, or a true Relation of what passes at
Rome upon the Popes death, with the Proceedings in the Conclave for the
Election of a new Pope, according to the Constitutions and Ceremonials; as also
the Convocation and Cavalcade. Out of the French by J. Davies. In Octavo, price
1 s. printed 1671.

34. The Life of General Monk, Duke of Albemarle, etc. with Remarks upon his
Act^ons. By T. Gumble, D. D. one of his Chaplains. In Octavo, price 4 s.
printed 1671.

35. A Help to English History, containing a succession of all the Kings of
England, the English Saxons, and the Britans; the Kings and Princes of Wales,
the Kings and Lords of Man, the Isle of Wight; as also of all the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, and Bishops thereof; with the Description of the places from
whence they had their Titles: together with the Names and Ranks of the
Viscounts, Barons, and Baronets of England. By P. Heylin, D. D. and since his
death continued to this present year 1671, with the Coats of Arms of the
Nobility Blazoned. In Twelves, price 4 s.

36. A Geographical Description of the four parts of the World, taken from the
Notes and Works of the famous Monsieur Sanson, Geographer to the French King,
and other eminent Travelers and Authors. To which are added the Commodities,
Coins, Weights, and Measures of the chief places of Traffic in the World;
compared with those of England (or London) as to the Trade thereof. Also a
Treatise of Travel and another of Traffic. The whole illustrated with variety
of useful and delightful Maps and Figures. By Rich. Blome. In Folio, price 20 s.

37. Titles of Honor. By J. Seldom, Esquire In Folio, price 20 s. printed 1672.

38. The Egyptian History, treating of the Pyramids, the Inundation of the
Nile, and other Prodigies of Egypt, according to the Opinions and Traditions of
the Arabians. Written originally in the Arabian Tongue by Murtadi the Son of
Gaphiphus. Rendered into French by Monsieur Vattier, Arabic Professor to the
King of France: and thence faithfully done into English by J. D. of Kidwelly.
In Octavo, price 2 s. 6. d. printed 1672.

PLAYS.
39. THe English Princess: or the Death of Richard III. A Tragdy written in the
year 1666, and Acted at the Duke of York's Theater. In Quarto, price 1 s. 6 d.

40. The ^oman Generals, or the Distressed Ladies. By J. D. of Grays Inn,
Gent. In Quarto, price 1 s.

41. The Slighted Maid. A Comedy Acted at the Duke of York's Theater. In
Quarto, price 1 s.

42. The Marriage Night. Written by the Lord Visccunt Faulkland. In Quarto,
price 1 s.

43. The Spanish Gypsy, as it was Acted at the Private House in Drury Lane and
Salisbury Court. Written by T. Middleton and W. Rowley, Gent. In Quarto, price
1 s.

DJUINITY.
44. THirty six Sermons: XVII. Ad Aulam, V. Ad Clerum, VI. Ad Magistratum,
VIII. Ad Populum.
By the Right Reverend Father in God Robert Sanderson late Lord Bishop of
Lincoln. The fifth Edition, corrected and amended. In Folio, price 18 s.

45. Scintilla Altaris: Primitive Devotion in the Fasts and Feasts of the
Church of England. By Edward Spark, D. D. The fourth Edition, consisting of
Prose, Poems, Prayers, and Sculptures on the several occasions. In Octavo,
price 7 s.

46. The Worthy Communicant: or a Discourse of the Nature, Effects, and
Blessings consequent to the Worthy receiving of the Lords Supper; with
Devotions fitted to every part of that Ministration. By Jeremy Tailor, late
Lord Bishop of Down and Connor. In Octavo, price 4 s.

47. The Holy Court. In five Tomes. Written in French by N. Caussin. Translated
into English by Sir T. H. and others. In Folio, price 30 s.

48. A Summary of Devotions, compiled and used by William Laud, sometime Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. In Twelves, price 1 s.

49. The Chief Interest of Man: or a Discourse of Religion, clearly
demonstrating the Equity of the Precepts of the Gospel, and how much a due
observance thereof does conduce to the happiness aad well-being as well of
Humane Societiesas of particular persons. By H. Lukin. In Twelves, price s.

50. Corporal Worship discussed and defended in a Visitation Sermon, April 21.
1670. in Saint Saviors Southwark. Published to prevent further calumny. By W.
Bassett. In Quarto, price 6 d.

51. Sculptures, the exactest exstant, designed and suited to every Feast and
Fast throughout the Year in the Book of Common Prayer. By Edw. Spark, D. D. In
Octavo, Twelves, and Twenty four.

LAW.
52. AN Abridgment of the Common Law, Alphabetically digested. By Hen. Roll,
Sergeant at Law. Published by the Lord Chief Justice Hale, and approved of by
all the Judges. In Folio, price 40 s.

53. The Reports of Sir George Croke, Knight, of such select Cases as were
adjudged in the times of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles I.
Collected and written in French by himself, revised and published in English by
Sir Harbottle Grimston, Baronet, Master of the Rolls. The second Edition,
carefully corrected by the Original. In three Parts. In Folio, price 45 s.

54. All the four Parts of the Institutes of the Laws of England. I. A
Commentary on Littleton. II. An Exposition on Magna Charta, and other Statutes.
III. Concerning High Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown. IV. Concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts. All with necessary Tables not heretofore printed. In
Folio, price 45 s.

55. Brief Animadversions on, Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records
to the Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts. By W. Pryn Esquire In Folio, price 12 s.

56. The Reports of the Learned Edmund Anderson, Knight, late Chief Justice of
the Common Bench, of many principal Cases argued and adjudged in the time of
the late Queen Elizabeth. In two Parts In Folio, price 14. s.

57. Reports and Cases taken in the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
Years of the late King Charles, as they were argued at the Common Pleas Bar. By
Sir Tho. Hetley, Knight, Sergeant at Law, and appointed by the King and Judges
for one of the Reporters of the Law. In Folio, price 5 s.

58. The Reports of Sir John Bridgman, Knight, sometime Chief Justice of
Chester, in the time of King James. In Folio, price 5 s.

59. The Reports of Judge Owen. In Folio, price 5 s.

60. Reports of diverse Resolutions in Law, arising upon Cases in the Court of
Wards, and other Courts at Westminster, in the Reigns of the late King James
and King Charles. By Sir James Ley Knight and Baronet. In Folio, price 4 s.

61. The Pleader, containing Presidents and Forms of Declarations, Pleadings,
Issues, Judgments, and Proceedings in all kinds of Actions, Real, Personal, and
Mixed. Collected and published by Jo. Herne. In Folio, price 16 s.

62. The Statutes at large. By Ferdinando Pulton; and continued to the Year
1670, by T. Manby of Lincolns Inn. In Folio, price 50 s.

63. A Collection of Entries, etc. by W. Rastall, Esquire Newly amended, and much
enlarged with many good Presidents of late times, whereof diverse are upon
sundry Statutes, and noted in the end of the Table. In Folio, price 3 l.

64. A Book of Entries, containing Presidents of Courts, Declarations,
Informations, etc. By Sir Edward Coke, Knight. In Folio, price 3 l.

65. Ossicium Vicecomitum: the Office and Authority of Sheriffs, gathered out
of the Statutes and Books of the Common Laws of this Kingdom. Corrected and
very much enlarged by Mich. Dalton, Esquire To which is added a Supplement,
containing a Collection of the Statutes touching Sheriffs made since Mr.
Daltons writing, which are in force at this day. In Folio, price 12 s.

66. The Practical Counselor in the Law touching Fines, Common Recoveries,
Judgments, and the execution thereof; Statutes, Recognizances, and Bargain and
Sale. Collected out of the many great Volums of the Law. By W. Sheppard, Esquire In
Folio, price 12 s.

67. The twelveth and thirteenth Parts of the Lord Coke's Reports. In Folio,
price 7 s. 6 d.

68. Brevia Judicialia. In Folio, price 10 s.

69. Thesaurus Brevium. In Folio, price 6 s.

70. Actions on the Case for Slander. By W. Sheppard. In Folio, price 6 s.

71. Latch's Reports. In Folio, price 6 s.

72. Placita Latin Rediviva. A Book of Entries, containing perfect and
approved Presidents of Counts, Declarations, etc. not heretofore published in
Print. Collected out of the Manuscripts of Richard Brownlow, Jo. Gulston, Rob.
Moyl, and Thomas Cory, Esquires; and digested into an exact method. By R. Aston
of Furnivals Inn. In Quarto, price 6 s.

73. The Grand Abridgment of the Law continued. By W. Hughes. In three Volums
in Quarto, price 50 s.

74. The Complete Clerk: containing Forms of all sorts of Presidents for
Conveyances and Assurances; and other Instruments now in use and practice. The
second Edition, very much enlarged. In Quarto, price 12 s.

75. A Treatise of Forest Laws. By Jo. Manwood. The third Edition, corrected
and enlarged. In Quarto, price 6 s.

76. An exact Book of Entries, of the most select Judicial Writs used in the
Common Law. By Robert Moyle, Esquire late one of the Prothonotaries of the Court of
Kings Bench. In Quarto, price 3 s.

77. An Abridgment of all the Statutes from Magna Charta until the Year 1670,
By E. Wingate. In Octavo, price 6 s.

78. The Terms of the Law, with Additions. In Octavo, price 4 s.

79. The Principles of the Law reduced to practice. By Will. Phillips. In
Twelves, price 1 s.

80. The Parsons Guide, or the Law of Tithes much enlarged throughout the whole
Book. By W. Sheppard, Esquire In Twelves, price 1 s.

81. The Complete Attorney: showing the Office of an Attorney in the Courts of
Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Pleas in the Exchequer, and the manner of their
Proceedings; together with Instructions for the Solicitation of any Cause in
Chancery, Exchequer Chamber, Duchy Chamber, etc. carefully revised and
enlarged. In Octavo, price 3 s.

82. Littleton's Tenures in French and English. In Twelves, price 2 s. 6 d.

83. Perkins of the Laws of England. In Octavo English, price 2 s.

84. The Touchstone of Wills, Testaments, and Administrations. Collected out of
the Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Canon Laws; as also out of the Customs, Common
Laws, and Statutes of this Kingdom. By Geo. Meriton. In Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d.

85. A Guide for Constables, Churchwardens, etc. according to the several
Additions and Alterations of the Law till the 22th. Year of His Majesty's
Reign. The third Edition. Collected by Geo. Meriton. In Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d.

86. Parsons Law: or a View of Avowsons. Wherein is contained the Rights of
Patrons, Ordinaries, and Incumbents, to Advowsans, of Churches and Benefices,
with Cure of Souls, and other Spiritual Promotitions. The second Edition,
enlarged. By W. Hughes. In Octavo, price 2 s. 6 d.

87. The Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England asserted against Sir Ed.
Cokes Articuli Admiralitatis in Chap. 22. of his Jurisdiction of Courts. By R.
Zouch. In Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d.

88. The Grounds of the Laws of England. By M. Hawke. In Octavo, price 3 s. 6 d.

89. The Common Law epitomized. By W. Glisson and A. Gulson, Esquires. In
Octavo, price 3 s.

90. The Ancient Legal Course and Fundamental Coustitution of the Palace Court
or Marshalsea: together with the several Charges of all Proceedings there. In
Twelves, price 8 d.

91. The Complete Justice: being an exact Collection out of such as have
treated of the Office of Justices of the Peace. In Twelves, price 2 s.

92. Justice restored: or a Guide for His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, both
in Sessions and out of Sessions. The second Edition, enlarged. In Twelves,
price 1 s.

93. The Justice of the Peace his Clerks Cabinet: a Book of Presidents or
Warrants fitted and made ready to his hand, for every Case that may happen
within the compass of his Masters Office. By W. Sheppard, Esquire In Octavo, price
1 s.

94. A Vade mecum, or Table containing the substance of such Statutes wherein
any one or more Justices of the Peace are enabled to act as well in as out of
the Sessions of the Peace. By W. Young, Esquire In Twelves, price 1 s.

95. A Catalogue of the Common and Statute Law Books of this Realm, and some
others relating thereunto. Alphabetically digested under proper heads: with an
Account of the best Editions, Volums, and Common prices they are now sold at.
In Twelves, price 1 s.

96. The Law of Conveyances. By Jo. Herne. In Octavo, price 2 s.

97. An Abridgment of Sir Fra. More's Reports. By W. Hughes, Esquire In Octavo,
price 2 s. 6 d.

98. Plowden's Quaere's in English. In Octavo, price 2 s. 6 d.

99. An Abridgment of three Volums of Sir Geo. Crokes Reports. By W. Hughes. In
Octavo, price 6 s.

100. The Young Clerks Tutor: being a Collection of the best Presidents of
Recognizances, Obligations, Conditions, Acquittances, Bills of Sale, Warrants
of Attorney, etc. In Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d.

101. Landlords Law: A Collection of several Cases in the Law concerning
Leases, and the Covenants, Conditions, Grants, Provisoes, Exceptions,
Surrenders, etc. of the same: and several other matters which often come in
debate between Landlord and Tenant. The third Edition. By Geo. Meriton, Gent.
In Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d.

102. An Abridgment of the Doctor and Student. In Octavo, price 1 s.

103. Reports or Causes in Chancery. Collected by Sir G. Carry. In Octavo, price
1 s. 6 d.

104. Formulae been placitandi. A Book of Entries, containing variety of choice
Presidents of Counts, Declarations, Informations, Pleas in Bar and Abatement,
Replications, Rejoynders, Issues, Verdicts, Judgments, Utlaries, and Avowries:
and diverse other Pleadings in Real, Personal, and Mixed Actions. Collected from
the Manuscripts as well of some of the late Learned Prothonotaries of the Court
of Common Pleas, as of diverse eminent Practisers in the Court of Kings Bench.
Never before extant in Print. Methodically digested under apt Titles, with an
exact Table. By W. B. a Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas. In Folio, price 12
s. printed 1671.

105. The Lord Dyer's Reports: with a Table never before printed with it. In
Folio, primed 1671.

106. Cowels Interpreter. Corrected and very much enlarged. By Tho. Manley. In
Folio, printed 1671.

137. The Complete Solicitor. Corrected and enlarged. In Octavo, price 3 s.
Printed 1672.

Now in the Press.
108. The Lord Coke's Eleven Volums of Reports n French, with a Table never
before printed with them. In Folio.

109. A new Dictionary in English and Latin. By Thomas Holy-Oake. In Quarto.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by R. Battersby for Thomas Bassett, Bookseller at the George
near Cliffords Inn in Fleetstreet. 1672.


