SOME CONSIDERATIONS TOWARD PEACE and QUIETNESS IN RELIGION. In Answer to the
Question, Whether the Multitude are fit Readers of HOLY SCRIPTURE.

Nolite Sanctum dare Canibus, nec projiciatis margaritas vestras ante Porcos.

Matthew. 7.6. Printed, 1680.

(...)is the same betwixt the Scripture and the unstable People.

We cannot suppose them, ( viz. Women, Tradesmen, etc.) able to understand the
Circumstances of time and place when and where it was written; nor the
coherence of things; nor the Customs and Rites of the several Nations to which
it alludes; but that they will contrive and apply it, as though it intended the
very State and Condition of these Islands. Nothing has been more experienced
than this. And here the Reader will please to observe, I am not going about to
argue this matter from the abuse of Scripture, but from the popular unfitness
and incapacity to meddle with it. The argument, I confess, is not good, from
the ill use of a thing to take away the use: but I hope the argument is good,
Such a man is of a weak digestion, Therefore not to be advised to the use of
strong meats: or he is of a temper apt to quarrel, Therefore let him abstain
from much Wine.

That this may appear, let it be remembered, the Ordinary means to a right
understanding of the Scriptures are these, Learning, study, rational inference,
collation of places, consulting the Original and Expositions of the primitive
Fathers, who lived nearest the Age of the Apostles, together with an humble
temper and constant prayer for Gods blessing upon all.

Consider also how naturally they mistake these following Texts;

The hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father
in Spirit and in truth.

In vain do ye worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men.

Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free.

Why as though living in the world are ye subject to Ordinances?

The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, but it shall not be so
among you.

O father thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, but have
revealed them unto Babes.

Illuminated by these and other Texts, the grave Shopkeeper can see Popery in
the Church and Tyranny in the State: and in vain shall you or I tell him that
he is mistaken in his interpretation of them.

I would only say this, That learning and modesty are necessary to the
understanding of the Bible; the People generally want both, therefore no
competent Readers. What will the grave Innkeeper say to this? It Is true, I am
not learned my self, but our Minister Mr. T. is a very precious man, and a
Gospel Preacher, and able to teach us the right sense of the aforesaid Texts.

Very good, Though thou be not learned, nor so and so qualified thy self,
thy Minister is; this seems to resolve all into the Minister; and to confess
unawares, That not the unlearned People, but the Church or Pastors thereof are
fit to give the sense of Gods Word. Thus, perhaps, unawares art thou confessing
that Popery, (about which those of thy Party have so long confounded the peace
of Christendom) of resting in the Church or Pastors thereof, for the sense of
Gods Word.

Which being duly considered, it seems to me a little incongruous, if not
absurd, to say, That every Weaver, Brewer, Tailor has (notwithstanding his
want of the aforesaid requisits, to wit, learning and humility) a judgment of
discretion to assent or dissent from the sense given by the Church. To allow
him such a judgment, and yet restrain him the external liberty thereof, or
censure him for it, seems to him very hard and unjust. My dullness, I confess,
apprehends not the difference betwixt this Judgment of discretion and that
which some call the private Spirit.

What? am I allowed a judgment of discretion, will the honest Tailor say; and
must I be debarred the liberty thereof? must I pin my faith on the sleeve of
the Church? No (good Mr. Parson) for all your carnal Sophistry, my Judgment
obliges me to cut out my own Religion and set it up for a Fashion.

To this the ingenious and worthy Dr. Tillotson answers in his late Sermon on 1
John 4.1. page 39. That all Persons having Capacities for it, are to read the
Scriptures and judge for themselves in matters of Religion, but with modesty
and humility, with great submission to their spiritual Guides.

Having Capacities for it; which excludes all immodest and unlearned People
from judging for themselves: with submission to their spiritual Guides, makes
the Tailors judgment of discretion an impertinent thing. It is to be
considered (says the Doctor in the aforesaid Sermon) That the proper remedy in
this case is not to deprive men of this privilege of judging for themselves in
matters of Religion; but to use the best means to prevent the abuse of it. And
this means is, we are to caution them not to assume to themselves the Authority
of Judges, instead of demeaning themselves with the submission of Learners.
It Is an excellent caution, were the multitude capable to receive it.

Well, but you will say, it is true, the Multitude may be somewhat incapable to
judge so them elves as to doubtful and disputable matters. But as to all
matters necessary to salvation, the Scriptures are plain and evident to every
Tailors understanding. Perhaps not.

Where the obscurity dwells, of diverse Articles necessary to salvation, whether
in the Scriptures or the Peoples understandings, I shall not undertake to
determine: but this, I hope, will be granted me, that the doctrine of the
Trinity, the Article of the Holy Catholic Church, Infants Baptism, obedience
to Authority Civil and Ecclesiastical are matters necessary to salvation; and
yet how many thousands (good serious Tradesmen) do attentively read the English
Bible and miss the Orthodox belief of these things? So that to tell us of such
a brightness in the Scriptures as to all necessary matters, is to inform us, as
Country People do Travelers, enquiring their way to such a Town; that we
cannot go astray, when nothing is more easy.

I know not, but if the Scriptures were so extremely perspicuous, methinks the
Controversies between us and the Papists and Socinians were soon at an end:
what should hinder it? the blindness of their understandings or perverseness of
their wills; alas! object this to a Presbyterian or Papist, Independent or
Socinian, they will exceedingly pity your blindness.

Having premised these things, let us proceed to examine what is usually objected
to the contrary.

And first are we not commanded to search the Scriptures, John 5.39. Indeed our
English Bible renders the word Search in the imperative mood; whereas it does
not appear in the Original whether it be indicative or imperative. But
supposing it to have been spoken imperatively, Go search the Scriptures; it is a
mistake to think they were the Vulgar and Unlearned Jews our blessed Savior
was then discoursing with, whose incapacities he understood too well to require
any such thing of them. By Scriptures here, he meant the Psalms, the
Predictions of Ezekiel, Daniel, etc. the Mosaical types and figures of the
Messiah; which, at that time, the most learned Jews had enough to do to
unriddle. The word (...) Search being a Metaphor taken from such as dig deep in
the mines, imports such an Enquiry as unlearned People, who understand not the
Original, cannot be thought capable of. The maternal language of Judea at that
time and long before was Syriac, and (as learned men say) the Vulgar Jews of
that Age understood Hebrew no more than now Vulgar Italians do Latin.

But ('twill be said) The Law and the Prophets were then read in the Synagogues
every Sabbath day. Yes, in the Hebrew tongue, as at this day; and interpreted
by the Scribes and Jewish Doctors; otherwise not understood by the common
people: The perfect Hebrew ever since the Captivity ceasing to be the Vulgar
Language of the Jews. The Reader may please to see a further account of this,
in Bishop Walton's Preface before his Introduction to the Eastern tongues:
Printed Anno 1655.

The Old Testament was not then extant in the Vulgar, that is, the Syriac
tongue: nor perhaps any Chaldee Paraphrase. Or if it were, a Paraphrase is one
thing and a Translation is another. It Is to me a little strange, that our
blessed Savior (if it were a matter of so grand necessity) either left no
injunction touching an entire translation of the Scriptures, or that the
Apostles recorded it not. It Is true, the Old Testament was then extant in
Greek, which the Vulgar Inhabitants of Judea understood not.

But are not the Bereans commended, Acts 17.11. in that they received the Word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those
things were so? Yes Paul and Sylas went into the Synagogue at Berca, and there
preached to the Jews, opening and alleging out of the Old Testament, That
Christ must needs have suffered and risen again from the dead. Whereupon the
Bereans, as many as were capable of it, consulting the Scriptures honestly and
without prejudice, were converted to the Christian faith. Where it is to be
observed, That these Bereans by the Apostles Preaching and Expounding
understood the Scriptures and never before; though they read them and heard
them read every Sabbath day. (...), They were of a more generous and docible
temper than other Jews. In all which there is not, that I can perceive, any
contradiction to what I have said, that the Multitude cannot of themselves and
by their own Reading understand the Scriptures, that is, without the guidance
of their Pastors.

But the Bereans examined St. Paul's doctrine by the Scriptures, therefore the
People are to examine their Pastors doctrine by the Scriptures; It will not
follow. The Bereans were as yet no Christians but Jews; and consequently He not
as yet acknowledged for their Pastor. The case is not the same between
Christian Pastors and Jews, as between Christian Preachers and their own
flocks. Christian people, if they regard the Scriptures, are not to judge, but
to obey and submit themselves to their own Pastors, who watch for their souls
as those that must give an account, Heb. 13.17. We may talk of our judgment of
discretion, and mistake our own petulant humors for it. What but confusion and
distraction can be the consequence of this maxim, that the Sheep may arraign
the doctrine of their Pastors? The Clergy therefore in case of erroneous
doctrine are to be accountable to their own Superiors.

There are diverse other Texts objected against the premises, but none which the
ingeni us Reader (and to such alone I address this Paper) may not easily
answer. That the Israelites were to meditate in the Law and teach it diligently
to their Children, is very often and very impertinently objected. For the Law
of God is one thing and the Scripture at large is another. By the Law of God is
meant not every passage in the Bible, but the moral, judicial, and ceremonial
Laws contained in the Books of Exodus, Leviticus, and Deuteronomy. Which Laws
the Israelites were first to be taught by their Priests Deuteronomy. 31.11. and
afterward to teach them their Children: This is nothing to our case. That
Christian People are to know and understand Gods commandments no body ever
doubted; That they are bound (I mean the unlearned) to read or understand
Ezekiel, Daniel or the Revelations, yea or St. Paul's Epistles, is that which I
deny; and I would gladly see a pertinent Text to prove it.

As for S. Paul's commendation of Timothy, that he had known the Holy
Scriptures from a Child, it is no contradiction to what has been said.

Imagine Timothy, a select Person, an Angel of the Church, understood all the
Prophecies of the Old Testament from a Child, will it follow that every Woman
and Tradesman can be so happy? Again, by the Holy Scriptures cannot be meant
here all the Prophecies of the Old Testament; because diverse parts thereof, as
the beginning of Genesis, the Book of Canticles, the first and last Chapters of
Ezekiel were not to be read by the ancient Jews under thirty years of age, as
S. Hierom informs us in his Epistle to Paulinus.

In whose days the Scriptures being so profaned by Vulgar hands, moved him to
this following resentment, which the Reader will give me leave to transcribe
out of that Epistle.

Agricolae, Caementarii; Fabri metallorum, Lignorumque Caesores, Lanarii quoque
and Fullones and caeteri qui variam supellectilem fabricant, absque doctore
esse^non possant. Quod medicorum est, promittunt medici; tractant fabrilia
fabri. Sola Scripturarum ars est, quam passim omnes sibi vendicant. Hanc
garrula^anus, han^ delirus senex, hanc Sophista verbosus, hanc universi
praesumunt, lacerant, docent antequam discunt, etc. That is, to be a Smith, or
Mason, or Carpenter, or any other sort of Craftsman, there is need of a Master.
only the Trade of expounding Scripture is a Mystery which every one arrogates
to himself. Here the Physician will be prescribing receipts, the Lawyer will be
demurring, and every handy-crafts-man will be handling the Word of God with
impure hands. This the prattling huswife, this the old Dotard, this the
wrangling Sophister, in a word this men of all sorts take upon them to have
skill in, and to teach what they never learned. Thus he.

The Bible then in his days (you will say) had been translated into the vulgar
tongue. It was so, and perhaps two centuries before: and into Greek long before
our Saviors time. The question all this while is not whether the Scriptures
may be read in the Vulgar Language? no, that which S. Hierome resented, was the
promiscuous and unlicens'd use of them by all sorts of ill disposed People. Let
the question therefore be whether the Church in prudence might not restrain
such profanation of them? or whether conduces more to the honor of Religion,
the peace and unity of the Church, to have the use of Vulgar Translations with
or without License?

I don't find the Church of Rome themselves absolutely forbidding the use of
Vulgar Translations; but only providing that the unlearned and unstable people
may read, but not wrest them to their own destruction, as S. Peter speaks. See
Bellarm. lib. 2. de. Verbo Dei cap. 15. I wish it were the worst of their
errors; whereby they have preserved themselves, if not from all disputes of
Religion, at least, from that Labyrinth of Reformation, into which we of these
Nations seem to have brought our selves at this day. For as if Religion had not
been often enough reformed since Hen. 8. we are at this day not without our
apprehensions, nor our numerous Adversaries without their strong hopes of
another Reformation.

Let it be remembered that envy and inconstancy are the natural humors of the
Multitude; and that no experience has found these humors any whit abated, but
rather heightened by their familiarity with the Scriptures.

The High Commission Court in causes Ecclesiastical, if restored, were a happy
remedy (some think) to suppress heresies, errors, schisms, blasphemies, and
abuses in Religion. But alas! reflect a little on our late times, and then tell
me what did this High Commission Court signify against the multitude
intoxicated with mistakes of Holy Scripture?

But Heresies and Schisms (you will say) have been vented for the most part not
by ignorant but learned men. I know not: perhaps if the truth were known, their
pride and ill nature would be found much greater than their learning; and their
schisms might have expired with themselves, were not the Holy Scriptures
unadvisedly exposed into the rude hands of the Multitude.

To be short, let the Reader please to observe with me this one thing, that
unlearned People, when they read the Bible, must of necessity construe it by an
implicit faith on the skill of the Translators: and why not by the same faith
and much more safety and humility receive the substance and effect of it,
collected by the Church into Books of Piety and Devotion? This (I humbly think)
were not to keep them in ignorance, but in sobriety and in their wits. A man
would think (considering the popular incapacity and weakness to receive so
strong meat, not being chewed nor prepared for them) such Books as the
Catechism of the Church of England, or the whole Duty of man much fitter for
them. S. Paul gave this judgment concerning his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.2. I
have fed you with milk and not with meat, for bitherto ye were not able to bear
it, neither yet are ye able.

Unlearned People (I say) whether they will or no, must depend on the fidelity
of the Translators of Holy Scripture. For ought they know, it may be all
misinterpreted into the Vulgar Language, as certainly many places are in our
English Bible. To instance in a few.

Matthew. 28.19. Gal. 5.17. Coloss. 2.20. 1 Cor. 7.9. Matthew. 19.11. Job 7.1. 1
Cor. 11.2. Daniel 4.27. Acts 17.22.

All which and many other Texts are made use of at every turn to justify their
loose and Fanatical opinions. Particularly you shall find Gal. 5.17. cited by
the Presbyterian Assembly of Divines, to prove the impossibility of keeping
Gods Commandments; the words in the Original admitting no such construction.

We will not pin our faith on the sleeve of the Church, no by no means; The
Church is not infallible: but on the sleeve of Translators we will pin all our
Religion.

The self-same thing we will abhor
One way, and long another for.
Hudibr. Well, in vain did we expect the common Peoples amendment by their own
reading of the Scriptures. In vain have they eaten of this Tree of knowledge.
And whereas diverse of them, who read the Bible, are yet modest and tractable
enough to Government, and conformable to the present established Church; some,
you may observe, are indifferent for any Religion; others are conformable not
so much from their understanding of that book, as out of the loyalty and
honesty of their natures: and that such may have license to read it, no body
denies. For the rest, who are inclined to faction and change, experience has
made it apparent enough, the liberty of the Scriptures has made them more
factious and seditious.

For instance, there are many extraordinary passages or matters of fact in the
Old Testament, particularly in the Books of Samuel, the Kings and Chronicles,
which to them are very good arguments against the present Government of Church
and State. The destruction of the Groves and high places and molten Images by
Josiah, the slaughter of Baal's Priests by Jehu, have been very good arguments
against the Hierarchy and Cathedral Service of the Church of England. The
spoiling of the Egyptians, the zeal of Phinehas against Zimri and Cozbi, are
good Precedents for Reformation and defensive Arms against the King. And
examples, so they be Scripture, are as argumentative with the Vulgar, as any
Precepts whatsoever.

The English Bible is become a Glass, wherein the factious Multitude can see
all the Vices, but none of the Virtues of their Governors.

It Is too apparent that English men were never so ill-natured toward one
another, so sacrilegious toward God, nor so regardless of their Clergy, as
they have been for this last Century. And the Author of the late book
entitled, The Reasons of the Contempt of the Clergy, might have assigned one
Reason, for it, which I think he has forgot, namely the liberty of the English
Bible.

For in Scripture I do not find (says the judicious Innkeeper) any such
necessity of the Clergy: do I not read Joel 2.28. It shall come to pass in the
last days, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and
your Daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men
shall see Visions; and also. upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those
days will I pour out my spirit and they shall prophecy.

And do I not read, 1 Cor. 12.7. To every man is given the manifestation of the
spirit to profit withal. And Heb. 8.11. They shall not teach every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all
know me from the least to the greatest.

Ve^ily, methinks the Scripture (says the profound Weaver) holds forth rather
a Presbyterial than Prelatical Government. For don't I read Luke 22.25. The
Rings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, but it shall not be so among
you. And 1 Timothy 4.15. Neglect not the gift that was given thee by Prophecy,
with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. And in vain shall you or I
tell him that he is mistaken in his interpretation of these Texts. Yea as for
Luke 22.25. the spirit, says he, witnesses with my spirit, whatever your
carnal Greek says to the contrary, I am not mistaken.

To dress any meat on the Lords Day is with him a breach of the fourth
Commandment, Thou shall do no manner of work, thou nor thy maidservant, etc.

The Scriptures came at last to be so abused, that about the year 1645. you
might have seen Papers publicly affixt on Walls and Posts in the City of
London with these and the like inscriptions. On such a day such a Brewers Clerk
exercises; such a Tailor expounds, such a Waterman teaches, etc.

Which impudence S. Basil reproved long ago in Demosthenes, Cook to the
Emperor Valens, Tuum est pulmenta decoquere, non Evangelium exponere; mind
your Pottage, and meddle not with the Mysteries of Scripture.

I end all with a passage or two out of our own Histories. The first out of
Howes in the Life of Q. Mary.

In the year 1553. Sr. John Gates was Arraigned and sentenced to death for
Rebellion against his Sovereign the Princess Mary, Eldest Daughter to King Hen.
VIII. At the place of Execution he made his Confession to the People in these
words.

MY coming hither this day (good People) is to dye, whereof I assure you all, I
am well worthy. For I have lived as Vitiously all the days of my life as any
man has done in the World. I was the greatest Reader of Scripture that might
be of a man of my degree, and a worse follower thereof not living; for I did
not read to the intent to be Edified thereby, nor to seek the glory of God; but
contrariwise arrogantly to be seditions and to dispute thereof, and privately
to interpret it after mine own brain and affection. Wherefore (good People) I
exhort you all to beware how and after what sort you come to read Gods holy
Word. For it is not a trifle or playing game to deal with Gods holy Mysteries.
For as the Be of one flower gathers honey, and the Spider poison of the same;
even so except you humbly submit your selves to God, and charitably read the
same to the intent to be edified thereby, it is to you as poison and worse, and
it were better to let it alone. Thus he.

Better for him at least, and all such ill-disposed People to understand their
Catechism, that is, the principles and maxims of Christian Religion collected
by the Church: and to pray to God that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life
in all Godliness and honesty.

The other passage is this. One of the Murderers of K. Charles the First of
glorious memory, as he passed to Tyburn in October 1660. called for his Bible,
and embracing it, said, This has the whole Cause in it, meaning the Good Old
Cause. Yea, the cause for which I have engaged is contained in this book of
God. A certain Minister asked him, what he meant by the Cause? He answered,
Sir, I mean that Cause which we were engaged in under the Parliament; which was
for common right and freedom, and against Surplice and Common Prayer.

This was Colonel Axtel, a man of good natural Parts. See Collection of
Speeches, Prayers, and private passages of Regicides, Printed 1661.

To this we may add the words of Colonel John Barkstead, another of the
Regicides out of the Narrative published by their own Friends, anno 1662.

A Friend coming to Visit him that week he suffered, did partake of many choice
breathings from him: one was this, Although I find I have no strength to
encounter with those great trials I am to meet with, yet I will labor to quiet
my heart through the Spirit of says from that Scripture, Isaiah 30.7. Your
strength is to sit still; and indeed I find it so.

Then one present asked him, if he thought the Cause in which he had been
engaged, would ever rise again; he Answered, the Cause lies in the Bosom of
Christ, and as sure as Christ arose, the Cause will rise again: and we dye but
to make way for it. For when John the Baptist came to prepare the way for
Christ, he must be beheaded for it; so we by our death do but make way for the
next coming of Jesus Christ personally to reign a Thousand years with his
Saints: and although we dye, the Cause will certainly live. This he gathered
out of Ezekiel, Daniel, and the Revelations.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IN the year 1536. when the Bible was exposed in English by the commandment of
K. Hen. 8. these following reasons were given pro and con, which the Reader
will give me leave to transcribe out of the History of those times with some
few remarks.

Those who deny the People the use of the Bible in the Vulgar Tongue, must
needs know their own doctrine and practices to be inconsistent with it.
Therefore Archbishop Cranmer who was projecting the most effectual means for
promoting the Reformation, moved in Convocation, That they should petition the
King for leave to make a Translation of the Bible; which Bishop Gardener and
all his party opposed both in Convocation and in secret with the King; saying,
That all the Heresies and extravagant opinions which then distracted all
Germany, sprang from the common use of the Scriptures: and that there was an
example before their eyes, of nineteen Hollanders that in May 1535. were
convicted for denying Christ to be both God and Man, or that he took flesh and
blood of the Virgin Mary; or that the Sacraments had any effect on those that
received them. It was complained that all these drew their damnable errors
from the indiscreet use of the Scriptures: and that to offer the Bible in the
English tongue during these distractions, would prove, as they alleged, the
greatest snare that could be.

Therefore they proposed* (namely Gardener and his party) that there should be
a short Exposition of the most useful and necessary doctrines of the Christian
faith given to the People in the English tongue for the instruction of the
Nation; which would keep them in a certain subjection to the King and Church in
matters of faith.

The other Party, though they liked well the publishing such a Treatise in the
Vulgar Tongue, yet by no means thought it sufficient; but said, the People must
be allowed to search the Scripture; by which they might be convinced that such
Treatises were according to it. Whereof (the Reader may take notice) the
unstable multitude are excellent Judges.

To this great opposition was made at Court. For some told the King that
diversity of opinions would arise out of it; and that he would be no longer
able to Govern his Subjects, if he gave way to it. These were shrewd guessers.

On the other hand it was represented, That nothing would make the King's
Supremacy more acceptable to the Nation. With what truth this was suggested,
the event has made apparent: our numerous Sects at this day finding no such
thing as his Majesty's Supremacy in the holy Scriptures.

Further it was said, that nothing would render the Pope more hateful to the
People, than to let them see that whereas the Popes had governed them by a
blind obedience, and kept them in darkness; the King brought them into the
light by the free use of Gods Word. Yes, They were brought out of the darkness
of Popery into a great many lights: the light of Presbytery, the light of
Independency, the light of Socinianism, of Anabaptism, Muggletonianism,
Quakerism, Fifth monarchy men, etc. None of these lights, I confess, arising
out of the Bible, but out of the unstable noddles of the People, mistaking and
perverting that Bible. Into what distraction this Variety of lights, in process
of time, would turn, was not then foreseen, Anno 1536.

It was said moreover, That nothing would more effectually extirpate the Popes
Authority (and I am afraid, in time, the King's Authority.)

These arguments (says the Historian) enforced by the power which Ann Boleyn
had in Kings Henry's affections, were so much considered by him, that he gave
order for setting about the Translation immediately.

Doubtless his intention was good: but the fruit of it he saw in a few years.
For his Trading Subjects generally not having temper or capacity to understand
it, were converted from the blind obedience and merits of Popery, into a World
of envy, malice, and jealousy one of another. Of this the King himself takes
notice in his Speech to the House of commons, Anno 1545. the words are these,
viz.

He could not but observe, That instead of charity and concord, discord and
division ruled everywhere. He cited St. Paul's words, That charity was gentle
and not envious nor proud. But when one called another Heretic, and the other
called him Papist or Pharisee, it was no sign of Charity. Some (said he) are
too stiff in their old Mumpsimus; others are too busy and curious in their new
Sumpsimus. He proceeded to reprove those of the Laity who railed at their
Bishops and Priests. For though they had the Bible given them in their Mother
Tongue; yet, said he, That was only given them to inform their own Consciences,
and instruct their Children and Families; not to rail against Priests, as some
vain persons did. He was sorry that such a Jewel as the Word of God was so ill
used: but much more sorry that men followed it so little. For charity (said he)
was never fainter; and a Godly life never less appeared; and God never less
Reverenced and Worshipped. Therefore he exhorted them to live as brethren in
charity together, to Love, Dread and Serve God.

One passage more of this Speech I cannot but observe.

The fault of all this (says he) I must impute chiefly to the Fathers and
Teachers of the Spiritualty, who preach one against another without charity or
discretion. Few preach the Word of God truly and sincerely. And how can the
poor People live in concord whilst their Teachers sow debate among them?
Therefore he exhorted them to set forth Gods Word by true preaching: or else he
as Gods Vicar and high Minister would see these enormities corrected.

This was excellently spoken. The distractions of those times were to be
attributed in a great measure to Preachers. I wish I could not say so of ours.

One thing I understand not, That to prevent indecency, contradiction and
disorder in Gods public Worship, the Clergy are obliged to the use of one
Liturgy or set Form of Prayer; and at the same time (every Novice) left to the
liberty of his own discourse in the Pulpit, provided he quote Scripture for it.

St. Paul leaves not Timothy himself to his own invention to collect Gods Word
out of the Scriptures. No, but hold fast the Form of sound words which thou
have heard of me in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus: and the things
that thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to
faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.

The seed of Gods Word were perhaps better prepared by the Church, than left to
the liberty and discretion of every sower to mistake tares for wheat. Then
would folk come to Church not to admire such a Preachers good memory or good
parts, but to Worship God and hear his Commandments, gravely and materially
expounded by his Church.

Bishop Bramhall was a discerning Person; and tells Mr. Baxter in his answer to
him about Grotian Religion, that it is true, Homilies may come short of
preaching in point of popular efficacy, but far exceed it in point of security.
There is no comparison betwixt the Harangues of Episcopal men and those of the
Fanatics. Yet will the Fanatics by the help of tone and elocution ever out do
them in point of popular estimation.

One of the Emperors of Muscovy (as I have been credibly informed) being weary
of the variety and infinite jarrings among Preachers, and of the distractions
thereby fomented among his Subjects, utterly forbad Preaching throughout all
his Dominions; and instead thereof commanded his Clergy to read certain
Homilies to the People exhorting to the practice of Christian Religion, without
adding one word of their own upon pain of death. He saw otherwise no likelihood
of quietness or friendship among his Subjects.

In these Kingdoms at this day (I speak it with all humble submission) the
Christian Religion is not preached to the People under its proper heads, which
are the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Ten Commandments and the Sacraments, but
handled in confusion on this and ^'other Text; and mingled with their own
Philosophy and Reasonings. The end of it is, The People are ever learning and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; as St. Paul speaks.

FINIS.

