A Letter to a Friend, showing the Vanity of this Opinion: That every Man's
Sense and Reason is to guide him in matters of Faith.
This may be Printed,

March 30. 1688. Patr. Clogher.

SIR,
SAint Austin in the first Book of his Retractations tells us of a certain
Friend of his named Honoratus, a Manichee, that was wont to ridicule the
Catholic Religion as irrational, for teaching men to Believe rather then
understand.

To convince this Person, he wrote his Book De utilitate Credendi: Wherein he
observes the imbecility of all humane understanding; and the incapacity of most
men to discern betwixt true Reason and the Appearance of it: and how Christians
are therefore bound to believe One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church,
against which the Gates of Hell shall never prevail.

I pray be pleased to remember our Saviors words to Saint Thomas the Apostle,
Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have believed, blessed are they that
have not seen, and yet have believed, John 20.29. What great matter is it
(says the same St. Austin) to believe nothing but what our Sense or Reason can
comprehend? it being the Excellency of Faith to believe what we do not see.

To this purpose Ruffinus in the third Chapter of his Ecclesiastical History,
lib. 1. delivers a passage which happened at the first Council of Nice about 318
years after Christ. The Council being assembled, liberty was granted to all
learned Pagans to come and object what they could against the Articles of the
Christian Faith. Many came, and among the rest a Philosopher of great fame for
Sense and Reason; who disputed very rationally (as he thought) and desp^sed all
the Answers given by the learned Men of the Council. At last, one of the
Assembly, a man of great Simplicity, says Ruffinus (whose name or quality he
does not mention) stands up, and praying liberty to speak (insted of other
Resolution to the Arguments of that Philosopher) makes a bare Rehearsal of his
Creed to this effect, viz. I believe in God who made me of the dust of the
Earth; and by the power of his Word created all things. This Word is the Son of
God, who compassionating the lost condition of mankind, condescended to assume
our likeness; and exposed his Life as a Satisfaction for our Sins: I believe
his Resurrection from the Grave: His Ascension into Heaven; from whence he
shall return to give Judgment on all our Actions whether Good or Evil, etc.

It pleased God, that this plain recital of his Faith was more regarded by that
Philosopher than all the other Answers he had rece^ved: Insomuch that he
confessed openly, whilst matters were controverted in the way of his own
Reason, he never wanted somewhat to Oppose; but now he could not resist the
Power of God: So that immediately he went forth and was baptized.

The Plain Man was in the Right, not to enter into more Controversy with a
Person so opinionated of his own Reason: For the Mysteries of our Faith, which
we receive on the Authority of God and his Church, are not to be brought down
before the insufficient Tribunal of every Man's Reasons. We cannot there fore
more effectually put to silence the Arrogance of Schism and Heresy, then by
those words of St. Paul, I have delivered unto you that which I also received,
1 Cor. 15. which you are to believe at your peril.

The first step to Health is to know the root of our Disease; the root of all
Schism and Heresy is the Opinion of our own Sense and Reason; or (which is the
same thing) Scripture interpreted by every Man 's Reason. Do but ask a
Socinian, why he denies the Divine Nature of Jesus Christ? He will answer you,
it is against Reason and Scripture to believe it; but then he means his own
Reason and his own Interpretation of Scripture. Ask a Protestant why he denies
Transubstantiation? and he will return you the very same Answer. Likewise the
Presbyterian and Independent will produce you Reason and Scripture enough (as
they understand it) against the Common Prayer Book and Ceremonies of the Church
of England. Thus every Man's Reason or Interpretation of Scripture being set up
for his Guide in Religion; there must of necessity follow as many Distractions
and Subdivisions amongst the Protestants, as there are varieties of Reason or
Fancy in men's Heads.

In matters relating to their Temporal Estates, wise Protestants are not
usually very confident of their own Reason; but in matters of Faith not so
obvious to humane Sense or Apprehension; it is strange how every one thinks it
his wisest course to follow his own Judgment of Discretion; presuming so far
upon it, that he runs headlong with it; as though it were every Man's Wisdom to
suspect his own Judgment in the Transitory concernments of this Life, but not
in those of his Soul, which are of everlasting importance. Now to be so
diffident of their own Reason, and so apt to submit to other men's advice about
the security of their Estates, and so negligent in the matter of their Souls,
what is it in reality, but to believe an immortality of their Estates rather
than their Souls?

Well Sir, But let us not forget the Answers that are wont to be made to this
kind of Discourse. First (say you) if Sectaries mistake Scripture and pretend
to Reason, what is that to the true Protestant, who makes good use of his own
Judgment, and Reverences the Authority of the Church? Very good; but is it not
the avowed Principle of all sorts of Protestants, that every Man (let him be
Sectary, or what he will) must be allowed a Judgment of Discretion to read and
interpret the Scripture for Himself, so as not to Pin his Religion on the
Sleeve of the Church? to private men we yield only a Judgment of Discretion
(says Bishop Bramhall) that is, we would not have reasonable Men like David's
Horse or Mule void of understanding. To the Pastors of the Church we give a
Judgment of Direction; and to the chief Pastors or Bishops we give a Judgment
of Jurisdiction, page 1017. of his Works printed at Dublin.

Now, Sir, remember your own Principle, every Sectarian Preacher must be
allowed his Judgment of Discretion; and every little Shopkeeper the liberty of
Scripture; but what if that Shopkeepers Judgment, or Interpretation of
Scripture happens to contradict the Judgment of Direction which belongs to the
chief Pastors or Bishops of the Church? Do you allow any man to read the Bible,
and then debar him the use of his Reason or liberty of his Conscience? Does he
mistake Scripture, because he cannot see with your eyes, or understand as you
do? And whereas you say, the true Protestant reverences the Authority of the
Church; I pray tell me what Church Authority did the first Reformers under
Edward 6. submit to? there being at the death of Henry 8. no such thing as a
Protestant Church of England, but Mass said in all Churches of the Nation; yes,
and in almost the whole Christian World. And to make it evident to you beyond
all contradiction, that the first Reformers under Edward 6. regarded no Church
at all, that was then extant, no not their own Bishops; I shall produce you the
Testimonies of Burnet and Fox, which you may please to exa^^ine at your leisure.

In the year 1547. the first year of King Edward 6. the English Bishops were
required (says Burnet) to take out new Commissions (for their Bishoprics). --
But this was only done (says he) by reason of the present juncture; because
the Bishops being generally addicted to the former Superstition (viz. Popery)
it was thought necessary to keep them under so arbitrary a Power as that
subjected them to; for they thereby held their Bishoprics only during the
Kings Pleasure, and were to exercise them as his Delegates in his Name and by
his Authority, Histor. Reformat. 2 vol. page 6.

Observe this, how the English Bishops at King Edwards coming to the Crown were
generally Papists, by Burnets own Confession; and to terrify them into a
submission to the pretended Reformation, they were compelled by Cranmer and the
rest of the Kings Privy Council (the King himself being a Child of nine years
old) to take out new Commissions for their Bishoprics under the great Seal, to
hold them only during the Kings Pleasure, and so at their peril not to
contradict the Reformers, Somerset, Dudley, Cranmer, etc. Thus the Reformation
was imposed on the English Church, and so could not be the voluntary Act and
Deed of the English Bishops; consequently 'twas null and void in it self.

Then see page 227. of 2 vol. and second Edition, where it is confessed by
Ridly, a grand Reformer, that during the Reign of Edward 6. many of the
Bishops, and most of the Clergy were all the while Papists in heart, etc. they
were afraid of those Harpies of the Reformation, whose description you may see
Burn* page 9. 2 vol. second Edition.

Then see Fox page 1180. speaking of King Edwards Reformation; For the most
part the Bishops of Churches and Diocesses were changed: Such as had been dumb
Prelates before, were compelled to give place to other men that would preach
and take pains, etc. and then (says Fox) of the old Bishops some were
committed to one Ward. some to another, Bonner Bishop of London was committed
to the Marshalsy, Gardener Bishop of Winchester with Tonstall Bishop of Durham
was cast into the Tower. Burnet page 150 1 vol. second Edition.
Tonstall, a man of invincible Moderation, would do no body hurt, says Buruet.
A learned man, and of a sweet Disposition (says Fuller, another Protestant
Historian:) However he was a Papist, had a good Bishopric, and that was crime
enough in the opinion of those Reformers.

Thus it appears out of Burnet and Fox what regard was had in the beginning of
the Reformation to the Judgment of the chief Pastors and Bishops of the Church
of England. For the most part the Bishops were changed, some were committed to
one Ward, some to anothe. Fox ubi supra.

So much for your Answer to this Discourse. But I have heard of another Answer,
and that is, It Is certain (say some) that every man takes up his Religion or
Church upon the Dictates of his own Reason; and Roman Catholics themselves,
being demanded why they embrace this Church rather than that? their Answer is,
because they judge this Church to have good Authority, and that none; which is
to draw matter to their own Judgment.

But is not this Answer (if it be right) a good Plea for all Schism and
Heresy? for Socinianism, Independency, Anabaptism? nay for Roman Catholics
too? which is more perhaps than you intend by it. For either it justifies the
Liberty of every man's Reason to take up what Church or Religion he likes best,
or it does not; if not, it is impertinent to this Discourse; if it does, then
Roman Catholics are as justifiable, at least, as any other Church whatever.
Nay, if this be a good Answer, there can be no such crimes as Schism or Heresy
in the world. For allow every man to follow that Church or Religion which he
himself judges most consonant to Scripture, and you shall never find any body
in the wrong. Then to what end does the Church of England pray in her Litany,
From all false Doctrine, Hereesie and Schism Good Lord deliver us?

Moreover, this Assertion of yours, that Every man takes up his Church or
Religion upon the Dictates of his own Reason, may be questioned, since we are
received into the Ark of Christ's Church, and baptized in the Catholic Faith
before we come to the use of Reason; and afterward by our Confirmation we do
but ratify with our own mouth, and consent the very same things that were
promised and vowed in our Baptism; which were (in the words of the Common
Prayer Book) obediently to keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and steadfastly
to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And this Article among the
rest, I believe the holy Catholic Church.

Now Christ having no more Churches but one (as we are taught by the Nicene
Creed, and Protestants confess,) there can be no such choice of Churches, or
Religions, as this Answer seems to suppose; and then this One Church being holy
and Catholic too, and never to be extinguished, I cannot but admire at the
first Reformers under Queen Elisabeth and Edward the Sixth, to pretend to
believe such an holy, never failing Church, and at the same time to deliver it
for Doctrine in their Book of Homilies, that Laity and Clergy, learned and
unlearned, all ages, sects of men, women and Children of whole Christendom (an
horrible and most dreadful thing to think) have been at once drowned in
abominable Idolatry for the space of eight hundred years and more.

And in their 39 Articles to pass this Censure upon the whole Christian World,
consequently upon that Church wherein themselves received their Baptism,
Confirmation and holy Orders, viz. as the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria and
Antioch have erred; so also the Church of Rome has erred, not only in their
Living and manner of Ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith. Article 19.

Now for the Church of Rome to be a true Church of Christ, retaining all the
fundamentals of Christian Religion (as all ingenious Protestants confess, and
particularly Bishop Bramhall) and at the same time to be drowned in damnable
Idolatry and to err in matters of Faith, is a strange Riddle among the
Protestants, and harder to conceive then Transubstantiation. ( An Error in the
Essentials of Faith, says he, destroys the being of a Church) But if Papists
be not out of the way of Salvation, nor out of the Pale of the Church,
notwithstanding their Idolatry, the Wound is not mortal: their Idolatry it
seems is very harmless; and why? the same Bishop Bramhall gives you the reason,
viz. they who are Idolaters only materially, not formally, that is against
their meanings, resolutions and intentions, are no Idolaters in the eyes of God
or discerning men, neither are they out of the pale of the Church, nor out of
the way of Salvation. page 396. of his Works printed at Dublin.

Thus, Sir, your Answers are so f^r from excusing the Liberty of this thing,
cal^'d, every man's Judgment of Discretion, that they expose the vanity and
uncertainty of it; for you see how the first Reformers, by virtue of their
Judgment of Discretion, did attaint all Christendom of damnable Idolatry for
the space of 800 years and more; and how Bishop Bramhall, by virtue of his
Judgment of Discretion, pronounces them only material Idolaters, that is, no
Idolaters in the eyes of God or discerning men, nor out of the Pale of the
Church, or way of Salvation. His Reason you shall hear by and by.

In the mean time, you shall find nothing in all this Paper, that denies the
modest use of our Reason in matters of Religion. It only intimates the
uncertainty of Reason, that a wise man cannot trust it, when it contradicts the
received Faith of the Church. And truly, unless it be governed by the Grace of
God, that is, with Humility and Charity, it runs as naturally into Schism,
Heresy and Rebellion, as a Cockatrice Egg into a Serpent.

Give me leave to recom^end to your consideration these following Texts of
Scripture, and then conclude with a few passages out of Bishop Bramhall.

Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth, and if any man think that he
knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know; but if any man
love God, the same is known of him, 1 Cor. 8.3. See thou a man wise in his
own conceit; there is more hope of a Fool then of him, Proverbs 26.12. Be not
wise in thine own eyes; fear the Lord, and depart from evil, Prove. 3.7. Charity
never fails: but whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail; whether there
be Tongues. they shall cease: whether there be Knowledge, it shall vanish away.
For we now see through a Glass darkly, but then face to face. 1 Cor. 13.8. Be
of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things. Be not wise in your
own conceits, Romans 12.16. All this have I proved by Wisdom: I said, I will be
wise, but it was far from me, Eccles. 7.23. For vain man would be wise, though
he be born like the wild Asses Colt, Job 11.12. Woe unto them that are wise in
their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight, Isa. 5.21. Trust unto the Lord
with all thine heart, and lean not unto thy own Understanding. Prove. 3.5.

These Texts (though I say it) had been good Advice for the first Reformers,
Cranmer, Cromwell, Ann Bolen, Ridly, Latimer, Dudley, Somerset, etc. whose
Charity or Modesty a man can never admire, when he seriously reflects upon
these words of their Book of Homilies, viz. Not only the unlearned and simple,
but the learned and wise: not only the People, but the Bishops: not the Sheep,
but also the Shepherds themselves, (who should have been Guides in the right
way,) as blind Guides of the blind, fell both into the pit of damnable
Idolatry, in the which all the World, as it were drowned, continued until our
Age (that is, until Henry 8, and Edward 6.) by the space of above 800 years
unspoken against in a manner. 3d Part of Homily against Peril of Idolatry.

Now Sir, (If Roman Catholics may be allowed a little use of their Own reason
and choice of their Own Church as well as others) I pray satisfy me by what
Authority or Mission from God did those Reformers damn all the Christian World?
And set up this Altar in England against that in France, Spain, Germany, Italy,
Burnet. Hist. 2 Vol. page 14. 2d Edition.
Greece, etc. reforming the daily Sacrifice (for so the Communion was called in
the primitive Church as Burnet confesses) into once a month in all Cathedrals,
and thrice a year in all Par^sh Churches.

Had they any Commission or had they none? If they had not (as undoubtedly they
had none to authorize such immodesty,) then remember the Divine Indignation
against Uzzab for presuming to put forth his hand (uncommanded) to support the
Ark from falling, 1 Chronicles. 13. If they had any, do me or your self the kindness
to produce it, that we may see the contents of it, and there is an end of the
Controversy. But do not pretend a Mission from the Church of Rome, or from
Christ by the hands of Roman Catholic Bishops. For that is like taking up Arms
by the Kings Authority against the Kings Person. And by the same pretense a
Lutheran Minister having received his Orders from a Roman Bishop may Preach
against the Sacraments of the Church of England. Besides that it serves as well
us Roman Catholics to Preach against your Church; since you can never
invalidate our Mission without destroying your own. Do not Roman Catholics,
Lutherans, etc. think they understand the Doctrine of Christ as well as you? or
what extraordinary things do you pretend to?

I conclude with these passages out of Bishop Bramhall, and I promise you his
own words fairly.

First see page 133 of his works printed at Dublin, where you shall find him
answering this Objection, that we (meaning the Protestants) have Schismatically
separated our selves from the Communion of our Ancestors; whom we Believe to be
Damned, etc.

He Answers: First, for our Natural Fathers, the Answer is easy, we do not
condemn them, nor separate our selves from them. Charity requires both to think
well and speak well of them; but Prudence commands us to look well to our
selves (so say the Presbyterians and Independents excusing their not
Communicating with the Church of England.) we believe our Fathers might partake
of some Errors of the Roman Church. We do not believe that they were guilty of
any Heretical pravity (observe this,) but held always the Truth implicitly in
the preparation of their Minds, and were always ready to receive it when God
should please to reveal it unto them, upon these grounds we are so far from
damning them, that we are confident they were saved by a general Repentance,
etc.

Then see page 68. of his whole Works; If men might not be saved by a general
and implicit Repentance, they were in a woeful Condition, for who can tell how
often he offends, Psalm. 19. and if by a general and implicit Repentance, why
not by a general and implicit Faith? Why not by a general and implicit
Obedience? So as they do their utmost endeavors to learn their Duties and are
ready to conform themselves when they know them, etc. In vain does he (meaning
S. N. a Roman Catholic) demand whether the Church of Protestants were extant
in the World before the Reformation, as if Protestancy were of the Essence of
the Church. As the Errors of the Roman Church were accidental to it, so
likewise was the Protestation against those Errors, and the Reformation of them
which might either be present or absent sine interitu subjecti. (Mark Sir, what
is the English of th^s, but that there was no such absolute necessity of
Reformation as that Christ's Church could not subsist without it?) He proceeds,
A Garden is the same before it be weeded and after: To be purged does not give
a new Being to the Body. The Glory of Christ's Church was not extinguished by
Superstitious Errors, but only eclipsed. page 1013. of his Works.

For the extent of our Separation we have not left the Catholic Church but
only the Roman Church (says he.) Now I pray (setting aside the Roman Church)
name me that Church under the Sun whose Sacraments and Liturgy the Church of
England embraces? Does she communicate with the Greek Church? No, that Church
is for Mass, the Corporal Presence, Invocation of Saints, Prayers for the Dead,
etc. Does she Communicate with Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists, etc. No, no,
Lutherans are for the Corporal Presence, the Crucifix over the Altar, etc. The
Calvinists and Anabaptists have no Orders of Priests and Bishops, therefore
it is a question whether they have any true Sacraments at all. For we as for our
parts believe (says Bishop Bramhall) Episcopacy to be at least an Apostolical
Institution approved by Christ himself in the Revelation, Ordained in the
infancy of Christianity as a remedy against Schism and we bless God that we
have a clear Succession of it, page 133. of his works printed at Dublin.

So that I cannot but wonder at those words of his, page 1018. We have not left
the Catholic Church but only the Roman Church. Good Sir, Name that Church in
Europe, Asia, Africa, or America whom your Reformers have not left: tell us in
what City or Province we shall find it.

Then observe these words, ibid. p. 1018. We would admit the Church of Rome to
be a Sister, if that would content them; yea, an elder Sister; and rather than
fail, to be a Mother Church to the Saxons ( or ancient English,) but we may not
allow them the place of a Lady and Mistress.

And further, We believe the Holy Ghost does lead the Catholic or Universal
Church into all Truths, which are simply necessary to Salvation, and preserves
it from all such damnable Errors as are destructive to saving Faith. page 1018.

The difficulty, Sir, is, to find out this Catholic Church, the Provinces or
Cities where it dwelt before the Reformation or since; if it be not in O
Brazeel, the Isle of Pines, or the New Atlantis. And when we have found it out,
what is the reason the Church of England does not communicate with its
Sacraments and Liturgy; since the Holy Ghost does lead it into all Truths,
which are simply necessary to Salvation, and preserves it from all such
damnable Errors as are destructive to saving Faith, as the Bishop asserts
positively, ubi supra. These are the Questions that you may please to answer at
your leisure. If there be any such Church out of England, what needs any
Separation from her Sacraments or Altars? where is the danger of communicating
with her? did the first Reformers under Edward 6. believe themselves, when they
repeated this Article of their Creed, One holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church? if so; why did they attaint all the Christian world of abominable and
damnable Idolatry for the space of 800 years and more?

Farewell. SIR, Give me leave to add, by way of Postscript, that if you do not
like this Paper, I shall desire to know your Reasons; and when I know them,
perhaps I shall not like 'em. You allow every man his Judgment of Discretion,
that is, a liberty to think or not think as you do in matters of Religion.
Stick to that Principle; and I see not how you can find fault, much less
persecute any man's Opinion, without contradicting your self.

But I have worse news than that to tell you; the Good People of these Nations
never dreamt of a thing called a Republic, or Free State, before the blessed
days of Reformation, that is, until Scripture came to be understood according
to every man's Judgment of Discretion.




FINIS

