A Manifesto: OR An Account of the State of the present Differences between the
most Serene and Potent KING OF DENMARK and NORWAY CHRISTIAN the V. And the most
Serene DUKE of SLESWICK AND HOLSTEIN-GOTTORP CHRISTIAN ALBERT.

Together with some Letters of the KING of Great Britain, the King of Denmark,
and the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, concerning a Mediation in these Differences,
which the KING of Great Britain most Generously offered, and the King of
Denmark refused and slighted.

As also some other Letters of the Dukes of Brunswick-Lunenbourgh, the Emperor,
etc. Whereby the Calumnies of a certain Danish Minister are plainly Detected.

Printed in the Year 1677.

A Praemonition to the Reader.
BEcause some Danish Ministers have published Books full of lying Stories in
the Courts of Princes, and forged many Calumnies to the prejudice of the most
Serene Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, lest the Reader should doubt of the Truth of
what is contained in this Manifesto, we have added at the end hereof the
Authentic Papers of several Treaties and Agreements, which do clearly justify
every thing that is herein asserted.

An Account of the State of the present Differences between the most Serene and
Potent King of Denmark and Norway Christian the V. And the most Serene Duke of
Sleswick and Holstein-Gottorp Christian Albert.
THE Differences between Christian the V. the most Serene and Potent King of
Denmark and Norway, and Christian Albert the most Serene Duke of Sleswick and
Holstein-Gottorp, wherein the Treaty made at Rendsburg on the X. day of July,
1675. is to be in the first place fairly considered, being the subject of this
present discourse; We hope we may with his Sacred Majesty's leave Publish by
command from the said Duke and in his name, whatever we can with truth
allege, either as to the matter of Fact or Law, in behalf of the most Serene
House of Gottorp, submitting it to the just Censure of the whole World: And we
are persuaded that these our endeavors can offend no person, who loving true
Piety follows the precepts of Christianity, which allows of no War to be
lawful, but when it is just and necessary, and especially betwixt such as
profess the same Religion and are so nearly related in blood.

In the examination of the merits of this Cause we shall strictly observe this
Rule, To allege nothing that is false, and likewise neither omit nor disguise
any truth to the prejudice of so just a Cause; since the Justice of any cause
cannot appear but by truth and faithfulness, without which Justice is but
imperfect. And that Christian Princes and their most illustrious and excellent
Ministers and Ambassadors, (who perhaps may at this time be employed in
adjusting the Public differences at N(...)eguen, Ratisbone, or elsewhere)
together with other great Men, lovers of Justice, may not be tired with a
prolix discourse; We shall propose thed state of the case in a few words, and
then proceed to the Accusations wherewith the House of Gottorp is charged,
which we do not question but to answer so fully, that all unprejudiced persons
may clearly judge of the matter of Fact, upon which the said Accusations are
for the most part grounded. These Aspersions being wiped off, we shall add the
Laws and Constitutions, in virtue whereof the Duke of Gottorp ought,
notwithstanding the Treaty to which he was forced at Rendsburg, to be entirely
restored.

It is manifest to all that know any thing of our affairs, that the most Serene
House of Gottorp possessing several Provinces bordering upon Denmark, which
they have hitherto governed jointly with the Kings of Denmark, pursuant to a
Treaty between them, That King has no reason to fear any thing from the House
of Gottorp, if he will but suffer it to enjoy it is own Rights quietly; Whereas
on the contrary the House of Gottorp lies exposed to the Invasion of the Danes,
whenever they shall have a mind to lay hold of any fair opportunity, and abuse
their Power contrary to Justice and the Public Faith. For although heretofore
the Earls of Holstein have had grievous Wars with the Kings of Denmark; yet the
state of Holstein, and the neighboring Provinces, being much altered from what
it was, the Danes can have no reason to suspect the House of Gottorp, and much
less fear any harm from it, except what they may bring upon themselves, by
provoking it by frequent Injuries and Assaults to it is own Defense.

Since the Crown of Denmark is come to the Family of Oldenburg, and that these
Provinces have been more than once divided between these Kings of Denmark and
the Dukes of Sleswick and Holstein, the Power of the said Kings has been much
increased by the said Divisions, and by their Successions to the Crown of
Norway; however it will appear that the Royalties of the House of Gottorp have
not been therefore in the least diminished. The Dukedomes of Sleswick and
Holstein have been both so divided, and the first held at least for many years
from the Kingdom of Denmark, as the other always from the Empire. The whole
Dukedom of Sleswick is a part of Juitland reaching from the borders of
Holstein to the Bridge of Coldingen; one part of it being possessed by the
House of Holstein-Gottorp, and the other by the Kings of Denmark, as Dukes of
Sleswick. Amongst the several Conditions from time to time agreed upon, the
following have been more than once confirmed, viz. That the King of Denmark
should not engage in any War unless for his own defense, or the maintenance of
his Dignity, and then not till after having communicated the same to the said
Dukes; and that if thereupon a War should be agreed upon, that then the Dukes
of Sleswick (of whom the King of Denmark is one) should send to the said Kings
assistance, a certain number of Horse and Foot, maintaining them at their own
expenses, the King contributing proportionably for his part of the Dukedom,
and promising to defend both their Vassals. Chytr. lib. 24. Sat. p. 719. And we
find that upon the said Kings not regarding this Agreement, but making War of
their own heads, the Dukes of Gottorp have not been obliged to send the
assistance stipulated, though it has been demanded from them.

There have been almost perpetual Wars between the Danes and Swedes, which in
former Ages have had different successes, but in this last Age been more
favorable to the Swedes, especially since the success of their Arms in
Germany. Hence it is come to pass, that the Danes, exasperated by the
remembrance of the Losses they had sustained by their Provinces and Places
which they had lost, in hopes of better success, and by the Instigation of evil
Counselors, pouring oil upon the Fire, have taken all opportunities of making
War against the Swedes, without acquainting the Dukes of Gottorp, much less
consulting with them about it; but with so ill success, that they have been
still punished with greater Losses, having likewise thereby involved the
Provinces and Subjects of the said Duke in all the calamities attending a War;
by which, though the House of Gottorp has suffered infinite Damages and
Violations in its Rights, yet were they never extinguished, nor lest to the
sole pleasure and determination of the King of Denmark as Supreme Prince.

But not to take the matter too high, and to come nearer to our Subject, let
the beginning and end of the late War between the Danes and Swedes be
diligently considered, for from thence springs all the mischief. Carolus
Gustavus King of Sweden, making War against Poland, and having raised up many
powerful Enemies, who seemed to have reduced his Army to great streights;
Frederick the III. King of Denmark, of happy Memory, taking that opportunity,
declared War against the Swedes, making great preparations both of Men and
Arms, as thinking he should never have a more favorable opportunity to recover
his Losses, and humble the Swedes. And the King of Sweden being by Marriage
with the Daughter of Frederick, Duke of Gottorpe of happy Memory, become nearly
allied to that House; the said Duke Frederick obtained a Promise from his
Son-in-Law, that he would hearken to a Peace, which he undertook to mediate
with the King of Denmark. The Duke therefore wrote several Letters with his own
hand to the King of Denmark, to persuade him to Peace, and not only profer'd
his own assistance to conclude it, but earnestly recommended the promoting of
it to the Ambassador of the most Christian King. Yet so far was the King of
Denmark from taking this Office in good part, that he never thought fit to give
the Duke any Answer herein. But the event of this unnecessary War was, that the
King of Denmark, instead of reasonable conditions of Peace which the Duke of
Gottorp might have obtained for him, having spent his Forces, was obliged at
last to admit of such as a Conqueror would impose upon him. And whilst this
Treaty was a concluding (by which Schonen and the neighboring Provinces were
yielded up to the Swedes) the King of Sweden thought himself obliged to take
care of the House of Gottorp, which having sustained great damages in this War,
he thought ought likewise to receive all just Satisfaction. Amongst other
things it was agreed, that the House of Gottorp should hold and enjoy the
Dukedom of Sleswick hereafter, not as formerly from the Crown of Denmark, but
independently and absolutely, without subjection to any other Power. To this
the King of Denmark seemed at first very unwilling to consent; but when the
States of that Kingdom offered him the same Right over that part of the Duchy
of Sleswick which was his, and thereby gave him occasion to aspire to the
Monarchy of the whole Kingdom, he approved thereof both for himself and the
Duke of Gottorp.

Not long after the King having compassed his design, and obtained the Monarchy
of the Kingdom of Denmark, from that time governed all things by his sole will
and pleasure, exercising an independent Authority, and absolute Dominion over
the Persons and Estates of his Subjects. Thus the Danish Commonwealth being
changed, and all things having put on a new Face, the King endeavored all he
could, so to order the affairs of the Kingdom, as might best establish his
Authority, enable him to repulse his Enemies, and recover his Losses. And
nothing seeming more to oppose his designs then the Dukedom of Sleswick and
Holstein, eminent in Riches, abounding with Valiant men, and unaccustomed to
such kind of Dominion, which would adhere to the Duke of Gottorp, who had
Soldiers and a well-fortified Town there, and that probably Holstein might
demand help from the Emperor and Empire; the Danes begun to have an ill Eye
upon the Duke and his Fort of Tuningen, suspecting his League with the Swedes,
and Journey to that King; which they endeavored many ways to traduce, insomuch
that their envy against the House of Gottorp, and their Designs to break the
Treaty made at Roschild, appeared ^ain enough, though they endeavored to cover
their designs by writing several Letters, pretending all friendship and
sincerity at the same time, (...) to put them in practice.

These Designs of Denmark being now grown so ripe, that nothing but an
opportunity seemed wanting, it quickly offered it self. For the King of France
having made War upon the United Netherlands, and they having eased themselves
of the burden thereof upon Germany, the Elector of Brandenburg joined himself,
together with others, with the Confederates, in opposition to the most
Christian King, and afterward concluded a Peace with him by the Mediation of
the King of Sweden upon most advantageous Terms, who having interposed his
Guarantee to the King of France, and the Elector soon after taking up Arms
contrary thereunto, the Emperor Elector of Brandenburg and others, fearing lest
the Swedes should make good their Guarantee by force of Arms, drew the King of
Denmark to their side for a diversion to the Swedes. No sooner had the King of
Denmark got this opportunity, but he Mustered his Army in Juitland, and
presently after put them into Quarters; yet so as the Enemies of the Swedes, at
the Court, had an opportunity still to persuade that King to a War against
them; which the Swedes endeavored to divert, by sending a splendid Embassy to
Copenhaguen, but without success, being able to obtain only a short delay of
that Expedition.

In this conjuncture of Affairs, the King of Denmark had fully resolved upon a
War against the Swedes, but suspecting that the House of Gottorp, to which he
had showed so much ill will, would not neglect their own Defense, whereby his
Designs might miscarry; He thought in the first place, by depriving it of all
its Riches, Arms, Forts, and Force, to ruin it wholly; and in order thereunto,
the King made several exorbitant Demands, and moveing frequently with his Army,
seemed to Threaten open Violence; afterward in the Assembly of the States of
the Province, he challenged to himself the major part of the Revenues, which
had always been equally divided between him and the Duke of Gottorp, leaving a
very small proportion to the Duke: But his Highness having signified by his
Ambassadors to the Kings Commissioners, that he would oppose this Demand, as
contrary to the Ancient Customs, the Assembly was dissolved without doing any
thing, and Adjourned to another time, these Controversies increasing daily more
and more.

But the most remarkable was that about the Succession to the County of
Oldenburg and Delmenhorst, which being long debated, was at last left to the
Imperial Tribunal for a final decision, the most Serene Dukes of Holstein-Ploen
being Plaintiff against the King of Denmark and Dukes of Gottorp: whilst these
two last withstood jointly the Dukes of Ploen, according as they had agreed
between them, the business remained undetermined; but the Duke of
Holstein-Ploen going another way to work, found means to transact with the King
separately, and so that obstacle being removed, sentence was given in the
Emperors Court against the Duke of Gottorp. This Transaction was carried so
secretly, that the Duke of Gottorp has not yet been able to learn the
particulars and conditions of the Agreement.

The King of Denmark in the mean time challenging to himself the whole Power in
these Countries against all Right, and excluding the Duke of Gottorp from all
share, not only there, but also in the District of Stad-budjad, a Fief of the
House of Brunswick and Lunenbourg.

For when this Cause was under debate in the Imperial Court, the King of
Denmark himself by Letters to the Duke of Lunenbourg desired him, amongst other
things, to intercede with the Emperor, that the said District Stad-budjad, no
ways belonging to those Provinces, might not be involved in that Controversy.
The Duke obtained his desires from the Emperor, and therefore, when the
Sentence given by his Imperial Majesty concerning these Countries came to be
put in Execution, The Dukes of Brunswick, Lunenbourg, exempted again the said
District from the Execution, and in express terms reserved to the House of
Gottorp their Rights in it. Notwithstanding all this, the King commanded Homage
to be paid to him alone by all the Subjects of that District, not only
excluding the Duke, but using his Ambassador ill, who had entered his
Protestation against it, and attempting also to Usurp to himself the Toll of
E(...) upon Weser, belonging by Inheritance, partly to the House of Gottorp,
and partly to the Kings of Denmark, endeavoring to dispossess the Duke of both.

While these Differences increased more and more, the King of Denmark in order
to the carrying on his designs against the Swedes and the House of Gottorp,
the more secretly and succesfully, caused the Swedish Ambassador then at
Copenhaguen, negotiating a Marriage for the King his Master, and thereby a firm
Peace to be received with the greatest demonstrations of kindness and
friendship* And at the same time the Chancellor of Denmark wrote very civilly
to the Resident of Gottorp, then at Hambourgh, telling him he would meet him
half way, to endeavor a fair composition of all the differences betwixt the
King and the Duke, which, he said, he desired above all things, and doubted not
but a few hours would put an end to what had been kept on foot so many years,
if he would be pleased to meet him accordingly. The King himself afterward
declared his mind to the same purpose to the President more than once, and last
of all by the Earl of Oldenbourgh, who told the President, that the King
desired nothing more then to have his Presence and assistance to accommodate
these difficulties in so critical a juncture, by which compliance of his, he
would oblige his Majesty, who was inclined to hearken to an accommodation.
After this the Earl was sent by the King to the Duke of Gottorp, to assure him
of his Friendship, and let him know the necessity of the President's going to
his Majesty, and after a short stay went to Hamborough with Letters from the
Duke to the President, for whose further security to come to the King at
Rensbourgh, his Majesty sent him a Passeport, and one of his Trumpets.

Soon after the King of Denmark going to Holstein, to put his designs in
Execution, acquainted the Duke of Gottorp with his Journey, desiring him not to
be troubled at it, as having no other intention therein but to compose all
things to both their satisfactions. The Duke of Gottorp trusting to several
Letters full of the like assurances, when the King was on his way with all his
Army to Holstein, sent one of his Gentlemen to Hadersleby, to complement him,
and went himself soon after with his Brother the Bishop of Lubeck and the Earl
of Aldenburgh, then returned from Hambourgh to meet his Majesty, waiting upon
him at Hensbourgh, after which the King being to go through Dennewerk, and his
Highness having entertained him there with all imaginable respect and
splendor, the King desired him to come and see him at Rendsbourgh, where he
was to stay for sometime, and for a larger expression of kindness, both his
Majesty and his Chancellor drunk several times to the good success of the
approaching Consultation.

After this Adolphus Kielmannus chief Minister to the Duke of Gottorp,
notwithstanding his Sickness and the dissuasions of his Friends, went directly
from Hambourgh to Rensbourgh, where having conferred with the Chancellor of
Denmark above eight hours about the principal matters in debate, he offered the
Government of Tunderen for the County of Oldenbourgh and Delmenhorst, and
having removed all other Impediments he could think upon, and taking the
business to be near its conclusion, and to want nothing but the ratification
and subscription of the Princes; he went to Gottorp to let his Master know, how
far they had proceeded, and with what success. The Prince himself, that nothing
might be wanting on his part for composing the remaining Differences, deputed
Adolphus Buchwaldius Governor of Sleswick, Frederick Kielmannus the President,
and Andrew Cramer one of his Counselors of State, with a special Commission to
go to Rendsbourg, June 22. 1675. being Arrived there, they conferred the next
day with the Earl of Rantzo, and the Lord Wibius, and Gloxinius his Majesty's
Counselors of State; and they being the same that had assisted at the Assembly
of the States at Kilon, on the part of the King, without effecting any thing,
renewed the matter of the Taxes, saying, That the King persisted still in his
demand of the greater part of them for the maintenance of his Army, which
granted, his Majesty would bind himself by Reversal Letters, as they call them,
(a thing not so much as mentioned in the Assembly of the States) never to make
this a President for the future. But the newness of that being a prejudice
great enough, the Duke of Gottorp thought it not secure to recede from the
Ancient Customs; yet to gratify the King, he made this Proposal, That the
greater Taxes should be paid, but to be equally divided and employed by each
Prince, in raising and maintaining Soldiers for the defense of the said
Dukedomes; and that the States might the easier consent thereunto, he desired
the whole business might be proposed to them, it being most agreeable to
Ancient Customs and former Treaties, especially that of the Union, to consult
the States about raising of an Army, maintaining and quartering it, and then
proceed according to their resolutions.

While they were thus debating concerning Taxes, and other things, the
Chancellor of Denmark wrote from Rendsbourgh to the President Kielmannus,
acquainting him that the King being ready for a Treaty, it would be
advantageous to both Princes, if the Duke of Gottorp would please to come to
the King at Rendsbourgh, and by his Presence promote an Amicable composure of
all these matters. The Duke remembering his Majesty had desired the same thing
of him at Dennewerk, to show at once his duty to the King, and his inclinations
to Peace, sent one of his Gentlemen upon St. John Baptists day to his Majesty,
to acquaint him, that his Master was ready to wait upon him, if he would give
him leave. The King commending this Resolution of the Prince, said twice, he
hoped the President Kielmannus would come along too. Accordingly next day, the
Duke being persuaded that all was sincerely and honestly intended, begun that
unhappy Journey with the President and some others, and being near Rendsburgh,
was received with the shooting of several Guns. But hearing there from some of
his, what had been said in the Kings Name about the Taxes, his Highness desired
it might be regulated according to former Treaties and Ancient Customs; and as
to other things, he declared himself as above, protesting he would always obey
the King, and wholly employ these Taxes in a War for the defense of his Country.

At last comes that fatal and unfortunate day, the 26. of June, in which all
the designs that had been so long ahatching against the House of Gottorp to its
Ruin, were to be put in Execution, and that hidden Fire to break out into open
Flames. It was hastened by some Letters, that came that very day from the
Elector of Brandenbourg, and brought the News of the defeat of the Swedes in
the Province of La Mark: As Soon as they were read, all things seemed to favor
the Kings designs, and conspire to the Ruin of the House of Gottorp. The Danes
glad and proud of this good Omen, thought it not sit to delay or dissemble it
any longer, but called a Council of War, shut the Gates, drew up their
Draw-bridges, sent their Forces to Sleswick, Tonninghen, and up and down; shut
up the Harbor with a Boom, disarmed and secured the Dukes Troop of Guards, and
permitted none to sti(...), unless they could show the Kings leave under his
own Hand. The Duke himself, instead of being Invited to Dine with the King, as
formerly, had his Dinner brought him apart in his drawing Room, and Guards set
to watch him; his Chamber-doors being bolted every Night: None of the King
Ministers being suffered to come near him for some days, except the Sieur
Winterfield, High-Marshal of the Court, to whom the Duke, having called him to
him, said, That he was a Prince of the Empire, there unworthily Treated,
contrary to his expectation, and undeservedly; nay, contrary to the greatest
Protestations and assurances of Friendship, and Public Faith, desiring him to
acquaint the King therewith, that his Majesty might permit him to depart. But
alas, all was in vain, it being resolved, that the Blow should be followed,
this Detention being but a Prologue to more mischief.

For the Duke and his Ministers being now in their Power, and a fair
opportunity presenting it self to invade the Swedes, weakened by their loss at
F^^^berlin, the Kings Deputies having sent for Buchwaldius, Frederick Christian
Kielman, and Cramer, to Court, told them, that the Case being altered, they
were no more to dispute about giving the greatest part of the Taxes to the
King, who would now challenge the whole alone, and quarter his Army up and down
in the Dukes Territories to preserve them from the Enemy, and that the Emperors
Requisitorial Letters might be obeyed, which they would therefore now exhibit
to them, showing also by this their ill will and premeditated Designs against
the House of Gottorp. Moreover they added, that the King had for a long time
been jealous of the Dukes designs and inclinations, and being to carry his Army
out of the Country, he thought he ought to take care to leave no Enemies behind
him, wherein he could not secure himself but by seizing upon the Castle of
Gottorp, the strong Town of Tonningen, and all the Dukes Forces, till the
change of Affairs might secure him otherwise. That it was not sit for the Kings
Majesty to exchange the Counties of Oldenbourgh and Delmenhorst, for that of
Tunderen. That these and other things could not be done in haste, but required
more time than the King could now spare, fearing lest some third Party might in
the mean while seize those Provinces. That the King therefore would put
Garrisons into all the Fortified places of the Country, and provide all other
things necessary for its Defense: protesting withal, that if any loss should
happen by the Dukes delay, the Reparation of it would be required from the
Author thereof; but if the Duke would accept of one hundred and fifty thousand
Dollars offered him at Copenhaguen, to renounce his Right to them, they still
hoped his Majesty might be prevailed upon at the Dukes request to pay that money.

The Danes having proposed these severe conditions, and the Dukes Commissioners
having been to consult their Master, returned this Answer, That as to the
Taxes, the Duke, without prejudice to his Right, was forced to yield to the
present juncture of time in that Matter. That the Requisitorial Letters of the
Emperor concerned only the Dukedom of Holstein, not that of Sleswick; and they
being according to the Constitutions of the Empire, and the Pragmatick
Sanction, could require nothing of him but a safe Passage, which his Highness
would never deny, when ever the King should desire it. That the Castle of
Gottorp was neither by Art nor Situation so strong as to be formidable, and
therefore the King might well permit the Duke to secure the place of his
Residence and Habitation, with some Soldiers; and for an evident proof of his
respect, the Duke was contented his Majesty should have as strong a Garrison in
Tonningen as he himself, provided both should take the Oath of Fidelity to each
Prince; and that the King would oblige himself, that upon the change of
Affairs, all things should be restored again as they were. That if the King
would dispose solely of all things in these Countries at his Pleasure, the Duke
must yield to it, but hoped his Right should be saved entire: That he had never
committed nor omitted any thing that might entitle the King to demand
reparation of him; and for the Proposals of an Exchange, they were neither such
as imposed a necessity upon his Majesty's will, nor derogated from it. That he
would leave the Transactions of Copenhaguen till they were set on Foot again.
And lastly, That he earnestly begged, that the King would no longer delay to
grant him and his, Liberty to go where they would.

This most reasonable Answer of the Duke proved of no effect, the Danes being
resolved to pass to the greatest Extremities: For the Kings Deputies signified
again in Writing, That their Master persisted firm in his first offers, hoping
to provoke the Duke to discover his mind in the same manner. But he replied
only as before, requesting again, That the King would not urge so much the
Surrender of his Castles and Forts, but consent to some easier Terms than
these; which the Danes said were only Bagatelles.

But that King and his Minister were so far from remiting any thing of the
Rigor of their Demands, that they added Rebukes and Threats; For, said they,
the Dukes absolute Power over Sleswick, being extorted from the King by force
of Arms, the Duke had thereby lost the Fief of it* and his being in a League
with the King of Sweden, an Enemy to the Empire, might probably cause him to be
dispossessed of the Dukedom of Holstein, and the King to be invested therein.
Moreover, that the King was fully resolved, That neither the Duke, nor any of
his Ministers, should be set at Liberty, uniil he had seized all the Dukes
strongholds, and that he would even confine his Highn^ss apart from all his
Ministers and Servants, and proceed to the Execution hereof by force of Arms.
For as we have before mentioned, they had already Body of Horse and Foot in
Sleswick, which blocked up the Castle of Gottorp, where the Reverend Bishop of
Lubeck, Brother to the most Serene Duke, then was, and had also invested
Tonningen and Holme: and that nothing might retard the Surrender of Tonningen,
an Order was drawn by the Kings command for the Duke to Sign, and send to the
Person that commanded for him there.

The Duke seeing himself betrayed, and without any help, deprived of his
Liberty, and fallen into a very dangerous distemper, fearing greater Evils
might be intended against him and his Ministers, (which was not obscurely given
him to understand) suffered at length the Surrender of all his Forts and Forces
to be extorted from him: and though he only desired from the King that the
Castle of Gottorp, the place of his Residence, might be free from a Garrison,
he could not obtain it, nor so much as that the King would annex to that fatal
Surrender, a Promise to secure him by Reversal Letters of the Restitution of
his Forts, and what belonged to them. But though this was promised by the
Chancellor of the Kingdom, in the hearing of the King and his Brother, who
never contradicted it; yet his Majesty refused to oblige himself to it in
Writing, the Chancellor answering again for his Master, that a Kings promise by
word of Mouth was more to be valued than any other Security. And when the
Castle of Tonningen, with all his Magazins and Ammunition, was shortly after
delivered up to Charles Arenstorf for the King, he added these words to the
foot of the Inventory, which was signed by him, That all things should be
restored fully and faithfully according to the Kings Promise.

The Danes being Masters of the Castles of Gottorp, and all the other Forts,
the Duke was carried to Gottorp on the 6. of J^ly from one Prison to another:
For the Danes had not only seized the Passages, Gates, and Fortifications of
that place, but ordered a Company to watch night and day near his Highnesses
Chamber, to let him know that he was still their Prisoner. The Prince being
thus in their Power, the Princess his Wife, whom he had not been able by all
his kind Letters to get out of Copenhaguen, where her Mother had invited her
before all these Troubles, and kept her, was at last restored to him, perhaps
for fear, lest she might prevail upon the King her Brothers mind, and avert
those great Violences designed against her Husband and Children.

Who would not have thought the King fully satisfied with this? but it proved
otherwise; For the Earl of Alefield Governor of Holstein, having sent for the
President Kielmannus, dictated to him eight Articles of great Importance, and
bid him acquaint the Duke with them by Buc^wald, the Vice President Kielman,
and Cramer, and get him to declare his opinion about them, detaining the said
President Kielman still at Rendsbourgh. This being done, and they returned to
Rendsbourgh, did according to their Instructions declare his Highnesses mind
upon every Head, delivering also his Letters to the King and the Chancellor,
and entreating them to have some regard at least to Justice and Equity. But all
was in vain; for the Chancellor and the Governor having sent for the Dukes
Deputies, and read to them these Eight Articles of their own Penning, demanded
with great Threats, that the Duke should sign them without any Alteration or
Limitation; adding, that if the Duke refused to obey the Kings will, both
Dukedomes and all belonging to them, being now in the hands of his Majesty, he
could easily force a disarmed and forsaken Prince to do what his Majesty had a
mind to, and then it would be too late to Repent. The Duke sensible of this new
Violence, and of his being kept a Prisoner by the Danes, in his own Castle and
House, yielded at last to Force, and with great reluctance subscribed to these
severe conditions, as thinking it in vain to hope for any more reasonable, and
with his Brother, the Bishop of Lubeck, renounced their Supreme and Independent
Right over the Dukedom of Sleswick, which was extorted from them by mere
Violence and Necessity.

At last the Duke being impatient to be kept always a Prisoner in his own
House, and to be forced every day to consent to what the Danes would exact, and
being informed that the City of Sleswick, though unfortified, was yet full of
Danish Soldiers, begun to be more jealous of the designs of the Danes, and
seared either yet a closer Imprisonment, or to be conveyed God knows where. The
most Serene Queen Dowager of Denmark was now come to Augustberg, and had sent
for her Daughter the Dukes Wife, who had acquainted the Duke her Husband with
her intended Journey, in obedience to her Mother, praying him to accompany her:
But the Duke remembering that when the King went to Holstein just before these
troubles, the Duchess his Wife had been sent for to Copenhaguen, upon which
all these mischiefs had befallen the House of Gottorp, apprehended new Evils to
him and his, from this second Journey, and thought of his escape. Therefore to
lay hold on the occasion, his Highness caused some Horses to be made ready,
took a few of his Servants with him, commanded that his Dogs should follow,
pretending his intention was to accompany his Duchess part of the way, and
then recreate himself with Hunting; but having gone a few hours with her,
taking his leave of her, he rid away as fast as his Horse could carry him to
Kilonium. Being there, as he was resolving to leave his tired Horses, and
prosecute his Journey in a common Coach, word was brought him, that the Danish
Troopers were riding, not only about Sleswick, but everywhere as far as
Hambourgh, and guarded all the ways; not staying therefore to Dine, he was
scarce gone out of Town, but he was met with two Danish Troopers, who taking
hold of the Reins of the Horses to stop the Coach, the Duke telling them he was
a certain Nobleman, escaped to Eutin, where he heard, that both the Kielmans
were carried away Prisoners to Copenhaguen. From Eutin he came to Hambourgh
indeed, but as a Banished Person, and one forced to leave his Country and
Subjects, exposed to the will and pleasure of the Danes. For the King
afterward, contrary to the Engagement the 11. of March 1676. demolisht the
strong Town of To(...)ngen, and the Castle of Holme to the ground, the Drums
beating, and the Trumpets sounding; and having caused the Dukes Arms upon the
great Guns to be defaced, sent them with all the Ammunition partly to
Rendsbourgh, and partly to Copenhaguen; and exacting also Contributions to the
value of many Millions of Gold, and a prodigious quantity of Corn, Chariots,
and Horses; wasting all the Dukes Villages and Towns with Quartering his
Soldiers in them, and causing them continually to pass and repass to and fro.
This his Majesty does to this day, not having remitted a penny of Taxes and
Impositions for the Dukes Subjects thus expressed, though many times desired to
it by the Dukes Letters and his Ambassadors, and using the Duke at the same
rate, not permitting his Subjects and Servants to pay him any thing of his
Revenue, that both Prince and Subjects might at last perish by Famine, and the
many other Calamities they are forced to endure.

The King nevertheless being extremely vexed, that the Duke had chosen his
abode in a City so Famous and Populous, from whence the whole Story of the
Barbarity exercised against him, and the breach of so many reiterated
Engagements, might be spread over all the world, employed all sorts of
Persuasions and Cunning to get his Highness back, and have him again in his
Clutches, and at his disposal; but his Highness warned by his former Usage,
having learnt to distrust, would not be prevailed upon. His Majesty for all
that, remitted nothing of his Prosecution against the Duke, and both by Letters
and Envoys demanded especially, with great earnestness, that the Duke in
compliance with the late Treaty (if it may be so called) at Rendsbourgh, would
solemnly receive from the King the Investiture of the Dukedom of Sleswick,
threatening for default thereof to Confiscate the same. On the other hand, the
Duke sent him word, that the Transactions at Rendsbourgh were so unjust, that
he thought his Promise less engaged thereby than the Danish Reputation. Yet for
fear of exposing his Subjects to greater Cruelties, and to comply with the
Times and the advice of those, who thought, that in Civility to the King, the
Duke would do well to send some Gentlemen, to know his Majesty's pleasure, and
upon what conditions he was resolved to grant that Fief; (for it is certain
that it had been held formerly upon different conditions) the Duke thereupon
sent his Ambassadors to Copenhaguen to desire the King, that he would be
pleased first to remedy some of the chiefest grievances, which had Relation to
the Fief it self, and then declare his pleasure about it. The Ambassador during
their stay at Copenhaguen, had no success, and having once mentioned the
Grievances, were scarce ever after admitted or heard; the word Grievances
offending the Danes extremely, and the Kings design being, without any regard
to them, to order all things according to his own Pleasure. Therefore the
Ambassadors, being advised by the Queen Mother to return to their Master, and
let him know the whole business, and the eminent danger a delay would cast him
into, and to return with new Instructions from him, agreeable to the Kings
will; they parted from Copenhaguen without their Masters knowledge, or
effecting any thing. But the King interpreting this and other things in the
worst sense, sent a little after three Commissioners to Sleswick, the
Metropolis of the Dukedom, viz. The Earl of Rantzo, the Lord Gloxin, and the
Baron Lenten Assessor of Gluckstad, with Orders to Sequester the Dukedom in
the Kings Name, and absolving the Magistrates and People from their Allegiance
to the Duke, oblige them to take an Oath of Fidelity to the King, and if any
refused it, to deprive them of all their Offices; to bring in all the Dukes
Revenues into the Kings Treasury, and put a Garrison again in the Castle of
Gottorp; adding these secret Instructions, that if the Duke did not comply with
the Kings pleasure within six weeks, and accept this Fief upon the Kings terms,
it should for ever be annexed to the Kingdom of Denmark. And that these new
Orders of the Kings might be more public, and the better observed, the Kings
Proclamation to that effect was published and affixed at Sleswick; in
opposition to which Usurpation, the Duke published another, together with his
solemn Protestation, commanding the States of the Dukedom and all his
Subjects, to continue in their Loyalty and Obedience to his Highness.

The Narrative of the matter of Fact might very well end here, but that many
calumnies thrown upon the House of Gottorp must make part of it. Therefore,
that the Truth and the Innocence of the most Serene Duke may appear the better,
and to take off all subject of cavil from the Danes, we will say something
about what the Danes pretend to be most offended at, that so the Justice of the
Dukes Cause may be more evident.

First of all, we shall speak about the Dukedom of Sleswick, and show that the
Danes had not always the same right over it, but sometimes little or none. For
when anciently the Venedi had great Wars with the Danes, the Diocese of
Sleswick being chiefly in^ested by their Inroades and Robberies, to prevent it,
the Kings of Denmark erected it into a Lieutenancy to oppose them, as formerly
the Emperor had erected Denmark into a Marquisate. In the beginning of the
twelfth Century, ^he Vandals having invaded Sleswick, and razed the chief City
thereof, no body would accept of that Lieutenancy, till at last Nicholas King
of Denmark turned it into a Dukedom about the year 1118, and made his Brothers
Son first Duke of it, who being Murdered by his Subjects, was Canonized, and
called St. Canut. Now whether this Canut received the Dukedom to hold as a
Fief of Denmark, is not only questioned, but rather denied by the great
Historian Jo. Adolphus Cypraeus, in his Annals of Sleswick, lib. 1. cap. 21.
It Is true, it cannot be disputed, but that the Kings of Denmark grant the same
to be held as a Fief from them, but the terms upon which, have been different;
and the Kings sometimes reserved nothing to themselves but the Solemnity of the
Investiture. For Waldemar the Third, with the Advice of the States of the
Kingdom, gave to Gerhard Earl of Holstein his Uncle, for him, and his lawful
Heirs, the Dukedom of South-Juitland, cum Dominio utili and directo, and all
things belonging to it, and all the Vassals in the Diocese of Sleswick, to be
enjoyed for ever by him and his, quietly and peaceably, and to be held as a
Fief with the Arms of it. Renouncing for him, his Heirs and Successors, all
the Right that ever they had in the same. Two years after, King Christopher
made over the Island of Femeren, with the Propriety of it, to John the III.
Earl of Holstein, and all his Heirs, as well Male as Female, to be held
likewise as a Fief; which Donation was confirmed by Waldemar the IIII. his Son.
And Christopher the II. being restored to his Throne, Waldemar the III. who had
Resigned it, had the Hereditary Dukedom of Sleswick conferred upon him. John
Meurs an excellent Writer of the Danish History, relates of Margaret the
prudent and careful Queen of Denmark, that she made a Peace with Gerhard Duke
of Sleswick, and those of Holstein, Covenanting, That the sole Jurisdiction
over Sleswick and Holstein should remain to their Dukes and Earls, and that for
the future she should not meddle in the Affairs thereof, nor they in those of
Denmark, lib. 5. Contin. Hist. Dan. p. 9^. But Gerhard being Dead, Margaret and
her Husband Eric demanded the Guardianship of his Children, and under that
pretense, seizing upon many Castles and Places of the Dukedom, at last
endeavored to get the whole, and reunite it to the Crown of Denmark, which
being perceived by Gerhards Sons, and other Princes, and that she demanded of
them, first absolutely to resign that Dukedom to the King and Kingdom of
Denmark, before they should receive the Investiture of it, occasioned a sharp
War for Thirty years. At last when the Dukedom came to Adolph the last, Duke of
the House of Schawenburg, and that by his Interest, Christian the first, Son to
Theodorick Earl of Oldenburgh and Hedewig Adolphus's Sister, had been Elected
King of Denmark, He promised by a solemn Deed to his Uncle, and the States of
the Province of Sleswick, that he would never unite or incorporate the Dukedom
of Sleswick to the Kingdom of Denmark, and that they should Swear Allegiance to
him as Duke of Sleswick, and not as King of Denmark. And Adolph dying Ten years
after without Children, Christian succeeded him, and from that time the Fief of
the Dukedom of Sleswick was not solemnly granted by the Kings of Denmark to
any Body, that I know (says the Learned David Chytraeus, lib. 24. Saxon. Hist.
p. 717. seq.) for above 120 years after. There have been besides other disputes
about this Dukedom, as, That this Fief should be exempted from the performance
of all Services; That the Succession should come to Women as well as Men: by
which it appears, that it was not always granted or held upon the same
conditions, and that there is little Reason to envy the House of Gottorp, for
having at its own great charges and cost, obtained for that Dukedom an
Independent Authority, and thereby taken away all occasions of discord between
them and the Danes. For after this Independent Sovereignty was granted, though
they might have justly demanded other satisfactions to be made them, the Duke
preferred a Peace which they had justly sought by the alteration of this
Dukedom, and which was confirmed by the consent of the King and States of
Denmark, as most advantageous both to the King and the House of Gottorp, to all
the Moneys they might expect. And as all other humane things or goods may by
commerce pass from one hand to another, so there is no doubt, but the Right of
an Independent and Supreme Power may likewise be transmitted and alienated.
Therefore if a proportioned satisfaction be demanded to a great loss sustained,
it may be given, not only in paying so much money, or delivering up so many
Towns and Provinces, but by quitting and transferring the Right of Supreme
Power by those who have a right to Alienate; so that a Person, who before he
had due satisfaction made him, had but a Dependent Power, may receive and
retain it Supreme and Absolute: This being confirmed by a late instance of the
Elector of Brandenburg, who, not many years ago, obtained Prussia in this
manner.

To say that the most Serene Dukes of Gottorp have fortified Tonningen, levied
Forces, entered into a League with the Swedes, and made a Journey to Stockholme,
is but a frivolous Accusation. For what should hinder the Duke of Gottorp, or
by what Law is he prohibited to fortify a Town, or raise a Fort? and Building
one in the Dukedom of Holstein, he only does what all the Princes and States
of the Empire think they may do, and do every day. And if he would do the same
in his Dukedom of Sleswick, we know no Law or Treaty by which he is prohibited
to do it. Frederick Duke of Gottorp having to his own cost found that he was
exposed to all sorts of injuries and damages, whenever the Enemies of the
Kings of Denmark were by War, or otherwise, drawn into his Territories, and
that he was secure nowhere; toward the latter and of the year 1644. (during
the War) began to fortify Tonningen, which was not opposed by the King of
Denmark, as there was no just reason to do it. But about the year 1660. that
King laid Siege to the place, to force the Duke to abolish and annul the Treaty
made at Roschild for the benefit of the House of Gottorp; whence you may well
judge with how little sincerity the Danes intended to keep this Treaty, which
they had so solemnly agreed and bound themselves to. But the Duke refusing to
hearken to so unreasonable a demand, endured the Siege stoutly, till after some
time a Peace was concluded without the least mention that these Fortifications
ought not to have been raised, or promise of demolishing them: For as this Fort
was built only for the security and defense of the House of Gottorp, that the
Dukes might have a Place to retire to in times of danger; so they never raised
more Forces than were necessary for the defense of the Place: And if the Duke
had intended to invade Denmark, he must have provided much greater Forces, and
taken other Measures.

That the Duke has entered into a League with the King of Sweden, is not denied,
but it is only such an one, as may enable him to resist an unjust Force, and
defend himself. If the Danes do accuse him of making any other Leagues to the
Ruin of Germany or Denmark, his Highness denies it absolutely, and desires no
credit may be given them in a thing for which they can bring no evidence: But
if they allege, that the Conditions by which the Duke has sought to secure
his own House from their Oppressions, are Hostile and against them; they
plainly show that they have a mind to wrong those they ought rather to Protect,
and not provoke to a just Defense, which in the end may prove dangerous to
Denmark it self.

That Objection of the Dukes journey into Sweden is much of the same nature:
For although his Highness would not be diverted by the Councils and demands of
the King of Denmark, tending to nothing but a War, from going to see the King
and Queen Mother his near Relations, and take their advice; yet this Journey
was never undertaken to enter into new Alliances, those Princes being entered
into one long before, but in respect and deference to the most Serene Queen his
Sister, who had promised to come and see him. Nay, if the Danes (who are
generally very clear-sighted in the affairs of the House of Gottorp) did not
interpret all that which the House of Gottorp does in the worst sense, they
could have satisfied themselves easily, that that Journey was never intended
against their Interest.

But some may say, that it was not lawful for the Duke of Gottorp to make a
League with the King of Sweden, because he was declared an Enemy to the Empire.
Such fooleries are so ridiculous, that they deserve no Answer: But because they
are spread abroad, and may deceive the simple, who are the greater number, we
must say something to them. Why the French and Swedes have been declared
Enemies of the Empire, is a matter we shall not meddle with. The Duke of
Gottorp is not concerned in the Quarrel of either of them, and so ought not to
be involved therein. The Duke has been allied with Sweden since 1661, long
before the Swedes were declared Enemies of the Empire, and at a time when all
the Parties in War, even the Emperor, and also Spain, courted the Friendship of
Sweden, and earnestly desired their Mediation to compose the differences then
on Foot: Besides, there is no Article of that Treaty with Sweden, which may
endanger the safety of the Empire, or any of its Members, since it is wholly
Defensive. Nay, the Duke has by express words excepted the Empire, declaring he
would not be bound by this Treaty whenever any thing should happen to the
prejudice of the same: And also the King of Sweden in it recommends to the Duke
by all means to entertain a friendship with the King of Denmark. And the Danes
themselves will not deny, but that they, the Elector of Brandenbourgh, and
others, have invited Sweden to enter into a League with them; and therefore
cannot blame in the Duke of Gottorp what they themselves did or would have
done, especially since the Duke sought nothing more than to render the Peace
and public Safety more firm and secure. It is then a mere cavil to object,
that the Dukes of Holstein have made a League with the Swedes, who are Enemies
of the Empire, as such, since their help was never intended to be used but for
a just defense against those, who contrary to the Faith of Treaties, would
invade them, and not to the prejudice of the Empire, or any body else, there
being reason enough to fear an Invasion by the face of things then, as the
event has too unfortunately shown.

But because the Danes are of opinion, as to the Taxes, that their Kings demand
of the greater part of them for himself was very just, and that the Duke had no
reason to deny it, since his Majesty had an Army in Pay, or at least more
Troops than his Highness, to defend both Dukedomes; this must be more
particularly examined: And first, it is certain that the King would never
acquaint the Duke, nor the States of the Province, with the designs of this
War, though it was to be carried on with their Moneys, and so was far from
undertaking it with their will and consent, according to the Treaties and
ancient Customs. Moreover, though he had undertaken this War with the consent
of the Duke and States, he could not demand more money than was agreed by the
ancient Treaties, and was wont to be granted. Besides, this War was not entered
into for the defense of these Dukedomes, but that the King of Denmark might
take that occasion of invading the Swedes, and recover his losses in the last
War. Again, if the King of Denmark thought, that because of his League with
the Emperor and the Elector of Brandenbourgh, he could justly attack the
Swedes; yet could he not violate the Agreements made by the Treaty of Roschild,
trample it under feet, ruin the House of Gottorp; and to that end demand first
the greater part of the Taxes, then overcharge the Dukes Subjects with
Impositions, exhaust them almost totally, by forcing from them in less than
half a year, several Millions of Gold. Nay, when the King of Denmark is put
upon a necessary and defensive War, it is but just he should bring into the
Field a greater Army than the Duke* for the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein
lying as a fence to Denmark, and its security depending upon theirs, each
Prince is bound to find Forces proportionably to the Land they possess, and
which are to be secured from the Enemy. And though perhaps the King of Denmark
may say, that* he will with his own Soldiers alone, defend those Dukedomes,
and therefore has right to demand money from them, and all other necessaries
for War at his pleasure; yet it is to be considered, that this cannot be done
but by violating in the highest manner the Rights of the Duke of Gottorp; for
we must not think, that by reason of a War, the King may do every thing, and
the House of Gottorp have no Power left in their own Territories. Nay, that
Serene House pretends to as much Power and Right, as to the making and carrying
on a War, as the King of Denmark, in quality of Duke of Sleswick and Holstein
can any ways pretend to. The Danes now do not question, whether the House of
Gottorp has the Power of War, since they have enjoyed it in all Ages, and
made use of it against the oppressions of the Danes: but that King endeavors
to get it to himself, having in these late troubles manifested his designs of
absolutely depriving the House of Gottorp of the Power and Right of War; for
when the Duke and all his Territories were in the Kings possession at
Rendsbourgh, the Danes demanded an account of what Troops the Duke had sent for
the defense of the Empire, ordering that they should be paid only by the Kings
Commissioners, (as they are called) that the Duke of Gottorp might understand
from thence, that he was not to keep any more Soldiers for his Defense, nor to
have any part of the Right and Power of War in the affairs of the Empire; or
the Circle of Lower-Saxony, but that the King would challenge it wholly
himself, to the great injury and oppression of the House of Gottorp, and danger
of other Princes.

But the Proceedings at Rendsbourgh are covered with this further pretense, as
if by it the Ancient Union between the Kings of Denmark and House of Gottorp
was restored, and those Provinces re-establisht in their most flourishing
Condition; and therefore since the greatest Masters of Prudence teach us, that
that Government which makes both the Prince and his Subjects most happy, ought
to be preferred and kept, the King seems to have rather done well than ill, by
having disposed and brought the Dukedomes from a less, to a more happy, nay,
most happy state, by the transactions of Rendsbourgh. This is a fair Speech,
but if we consider it a little nearer, we shall easily discover its fraud: For
whereas the Kings of Denmark and Dukes of Gottorp, have their Lands,
Governments, and Towns, in the Dukedomes of Sleswick and Holstein, not only
contiguous, but intermixed with one another, and the safety and happiness of
Denmark depending not a little upon the good Government of these Dukedomes,
there were Treaties of Union made, confirmed, and exchanged on both sides, by
which the Government of these two Countries was left to both Princes jointly,
and they to command in them every year alternatively, and to have the whole
Nobility and other the States, subject to them. And as it cannot be denied* but
that this conjunction contributed very much to the peace and qulet of Denmark,
so the Dukes of Gottorp have used this Right so carefully and discreetly, that
none of their Acts have in the least derogated from these Treaties of Union,
which is more than can be said of the Danes; for though they talk of the Union,
when it is advantageous to them, yet have they often violated the same in
things of the greatest Importance, which is proved by this: That the Kings of
Denmark cannot without breach of the Treaties, (as most manifestly appears, by
the Articles of the Union) enter into a War, nor carry it on at their own
pleasure, without first acquainting the Dukes of Gottorp with their Designs,
and obtaining his consent to it; nor in time of War dispose at his will of
their Subjects, or their Estates, who are either in his or in the Dukes
Territories. But as the will and authority of the Kings of Denmark have
sometimes prevailed in other Affairs relating to these Dukedomes, so have they
affected hitherto to take greater power than the Dukes, though but their equals
there. And this having happened many times before the Danish Monarchy was
Hereditary, and the Danes since strengthening themselves by little and little,
are now come to that, as to make and expound all manner of Treaties for the
advantage of their King, and either think themselves no longer obliged to them
then as they are found such, or as they may by them ensnare the Dukes of
Gottorp. For the Danes publish openly, that their King will hereafter order
matters in these Provinces, (the Government whereof is jointly in him and the
Duke) as a Prince having the Sovereign Power, and consequently use the Duke as
his Vassal. This Joynt-Government being by the Treaties extended to both
Dukedoms, it is easily to be seen, that the King intends to exercise a
Sovereign and Independent Power in Sleswick, and afterward by little and
little Usurp the same under diverse pretenses, and especially that of the Union
in the Dukedom of Holstein, and so wholly abolish the Dignity and Authority of
the Dukes of Gottorp, either by the Right of a Military Power, or by degrees in
time of Peace. Therefore, what one of the Fathers says of Religion, That she
brought forth Riches, but the Daughter devoured the Mother, may be said upon
this occasion; The Union brought forth this Joynt-Government, but the
quarrelsome Daughter has destroyed her Mother. The Danes have no reason then to
deceive the House of Gottorp, and the World with the specious word of Union,
since every one may see, that the former condition thereof is much altered, and
the farther this Danish Sovereignty shall extend her VVings, the more the House
of Gottorp will be endangered thereby.

And no body can look upon this as a mere Conjecture and Guess, since the Danes
have in times past and of late confirmed the Truth hereof, and forced the most
incredulous to Believe it: For in the beginning of May, 1677, the King began to
demolish the VValls of the Fort of Tunderen, in the Dukedom of Sleswick,
though it appertained to the Duke of Gottorp, without speaking a word to him of
his design or reason for it. Not long before, a laden Ship belonging to some
Merchants of Lubeck, was stranded upon the Shore near Newstadt, a Town of the
Duke of Gottorp's, in the Dukedom of Holstein. Now this being without dispute
in the Territories of the House of Gottorp, and some monys being due to the
Duke as Lord of the Place for salvage of the Goods and the keeping of them, the
Officer of the Place, to keep his Masters right, caused the Goods to be brought
Ashore, and to be shut up in a Barn, etc. The Duke intending they should be
restored to their Owners: But soon after came some of the Kings Officers with
orders to confiscate the Goods, and having broken open the Barn-door, without
any regard to Law, or the Sovereignty of the Place, conveyed the Goods away
upon several Wagons to Hilgenhaven, one of the Kings Towns, and thereby
manifestly violated the Dukes right, having no Orders for the same but from the
Kings Commissioners. Besides, in the latter end of March 1677, the King of
Denmark signified to the Duke of Gottorp, that he thought fit some Public days
should be appointed for the Subjects, to Pray for the Preservation of the
Country. But herein likewise was a design, for it being usual to set three days
apart for public Prayers yearly in his Highnesses Territories, in the week
before Rogation-Sunday, the King resolved to take that time, and would not
expect the consent of the Duke for it; but taking no notice thereof, commanded
those days to be kept in the Dukedom of Sleswick in his own Name alone, and in
the Dukedom of Holstein in his and the Duke of Holstein's Name, thereby
infringing the Articles of Union in several respects. And though the King
publishes, he acquainted the Duke of Gottorp with this design, yet the Duke did
never consent to the thing, nor the manner of it. It is by mere force and no
right, that the King deteins that part of the Dukedom of Sleswick, which does
and did belong to the Duke of Gottorp, as we shall at large prove: The Duke of
Gottorp having already contradicted, and firmly contradicting all what his
Majesty shall publish or command there in his Name alone. Besides, the King
alone has no right to order matters of the Government of the Dukedom of
Holstein, (which ought to be settled by both Princes) not having the consent of
the Duke, though he cause his Orders to be Published and Proclaimed in the
Dukes name as well as his own. For a thing is not done by two persons unless
there be a joint consent. It is evident therefore, that this also has been done
contrary to the ancient Treaties: and because that the Kings Order had only his
Majesty's Seal, and that the King alone cannot enjoin the States of the
Provinces any thing, and especially because that all this has been done at a
time when the Duke, according to course, ought to have had the direction and
Prerogative of the Sovereign Power, and Joint-Government (from whose Power and
Right herein, howsoever the Danes endeavor to detract by these pretended
Novelties) the most Serene Duke did on the first of May 1677, protest against
it; and having appointed the usual days for public Prayers, does again hereby
repeat his public Protestation in that behalf.

Lastly, this Calumny has also been added to the abovementioned, as if the Duke
of Gottorp (though almost entirely ruined by the Danes) should intend dangerous
practices against their state. And first, this Story has gone about, that he
was raising Eight Thousand Men in Ireland, to Transport into his Territories,
and a great many have believed it. But it being impossible to begin such a
thing, much more to perfect it, without the knowledge and consent of the King
of Great Britain, and the Danish Envoy at London having complained hereof, his
Majesty desired him very prudently to prove it; which he not having hitherto
been able to do, all good men are satisfied of the Vanity of the Fable.
Afterward another Story has been raised and spread in the Court of the Emperor
and other Princes, having been presented in writing by the Danes to the
Deputies of the Circle of the Lower Saxony at Brunswick, that the Dukes
Deputies being excluded from that Assembly, and the deliberations thereof, it
might serve as a President to help them to perfect their yet worse Designs. It
is also charged upon the Duke, that he has taken measures with the Duke of
Mecklenbourgh, to contrive how they should with their own Forces, or those of
the Swedes or others, retake Wismar and Gluckstadt from the Danes. They
endeavor to prove this Story by I know not what discourse, of a certain
Frenchman called De Luis, who was carried away Prisoner to Copenhaguen, and by
some Letters they found about him.

We shall not now dispute what the Duke of Gottorp, so unjustly oppressed by
the Danes, may lawfully do against them, and why he should not use all means
for his own Defense: Neither is it necessary we should plead another Cause,
since it may be presumed, that no man will desert himself. But we solemnly
affirm here with all sincerity, in the Name, and by the Command of the Duke of
Gottorp, that he never thought upon any such thing, nor exchanged a word with
the Duke of Mecklenbourg about it, as that Duke has himself asserted to the
Duke of Gottorp's Minister sent to him expressly, promising to declare the same
publicly, and that he never gave any Orders to this De Luis, nor trusted him
with any Letters. The Danes themselves, when they think of it, insult over the
Duke of Gottorp, and say, they wonder extremely he will not submit to the
Danish Dominion, that is so easy, seeing himself destitute of all help, and no
Prince willing to raise an Army in his behalf. And yet at other times they make
him so formidable, and so full of pernicious designs against the Empire, the
Kingdom of Denmark, and the Confederates, that they would have him declared an
Enemy of the Empire, excluded from all public Assemblies, and having almost
entirely ruined him themselves, to be quite oppressed by others. This is indeed
a great Malice and Hatred, sit for none but men full of Gall, who are not
ashamed to obtrude such Lies upon their King and the whole Christian world,
that they may take away from the Duke all means of helping himself, and so
stain his Innocence with calumnies* that so good a Prince might be thought not
to deserve any pity, and much less the help of Justice against such manifest
Injuries, the greatness and splendour of whose Family is such, that there is
scarce any great Family in Germany, to whom he is not Allied and Related. In a
word, since the discourses or Letters of this De Luis, that are spread abroad,
and pretended to be intercepted, do not at all concern the Duke, we desire no
Faith may be given to these Stories of the Danes, till they show the Truth of
them to the World, which undoubtedly they can never do.

The falsehood of these Stories and Inventions thus plainly appearing, it
remains we should give the Reasons why the Duke ought in any impartial judgment
to be entirely restored to all his Rights, which the Danes have so contrary to
all Justice Usurped. His Highness obtained three points chiefly by the Treaty
of Roschild, viz. The Sovereignty or Supreme Power over the Dukedom of
Sleswick, without any dependence from the King or Crown of Denmark; the
Territory of Schwabstadt, and the Cathedral Church of Sleswick, with its
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and some other things. And because the King of
Denmark had at that time entered into an unnecessary War against the Swedes, not
only without consulting the Duke of Gottorp, but contrary to his Opinion, and
notwithstanding his dissuading the said King from the same, and had brought
great Calamities upon the Provinces and Subjects of the Duke, by drawing the
Swedes, Imperialists, Brandenburgers, Polanders and Tartars into them; the King
of Sweden would have procured a proportionable satisfaction to his
Father-in-Law, and his Highness might justly have admitted of it; but was
contented for all the damages he had sustained, with the remission of the
Vassalage of the Dukedom of Sleswick, and the yielding up of the Sovereignty
thereof to him, without demanding any thing more for his satisfaction. This
occasion of the Controversies and Wars between them being cut off, and both
Princes having solemnly Sworn to keep this Peace, it seemed as if none more
firm and secure could have been wished for; but the Danes continually tormented
since the Peace at Roschild, by the remembrance of their having yielded up this
Sovereignty, have so far indulged their desire of Revenge, that they have
studied nothing more than how to regain this Dukedom and its Sovereign Right,
and wholly supplant the House of Gottorp; which is fully proved by what we have
said already, and the most severe conditions of Rendsbourgh, and the means used
to force the Duke and his Ministers to consent to them; which being necessary
to be known by those that would judge aright of these Differences, we shall,
before we have done, give the world some account, leaving it to their just
censure.

And though the Danes have obtruded these conditions upon the Duke of Gottorp,
and have extorted from him the Authentic Instrument of the Peace of Roschild;
yet hereby they have done nothing but shown their own insincerity, and the
dis-ingenuity of their Proceedings; and rendered themselves obliged upon many
accounts to make the Duke amends for their violating of his Rights, and to
restore him entirely to the same; which if they refuse to do, they deserve to
be forced thereunto by all Princes who have any consideration for Faith,
Justice, and Conscience. And this we shall endeavor thus to demonstrate.

1. Whatsoever was given, yielded, and promised to the Duke of Gottorp, by the
King and Kingdom of Denmark, at the ending of the last War 1658, was yielded
deliberately With their Will and Consent; and it was particularly provided,
that neither of the Parties, under what pretense soever, should ever recede
from the Articles agreed upon, and that they should be kept inviolable. Neither
can the Danes object here, that they did not consent to these things freely and
frankly, but only as forced by the Arms of Sweden; for having freely and
voluntarily attacked the Swedes, they were free certainly also to consent to
what satisfaction and compensation the Swedes would insist upon; and the Swedes
having justly extended what they demanded to the benefit of the House of
Gottorp, which had sustained so many losses by the War, the Danes have no
reason to complain of them for it; the Swedes having then a just right by the
Law of Nations to require yet more from Denmark: And here this Rule of the
Civil Law must take place, Whatsoever damage a man suffers through his own
de(...), is to be accounted no damage.

2. Not only (...)nd the States of the Kingdom of Den^^^^ (...) with the Duke
of Gottorp, have Sworn each of (...)eep those Articles inviolate; but the King
of Great Britain, the Most Christian King, and the States of the
United Provinces, by whose care the Peace of Roschild was procured, have also
approved the same as Guarantees; and thence it is manifest, that whosoever of
the Parties shall violate this Treaty, or refuse to be obliged by the same,
does not only offend against God and his Conscience, but also the Law of
Nations, and particularly provokes the Arms of those Princes who are engaged
solemnly in the Guaranty of the Treaty.

3. The Danes have consented to this Agreement twice already; first, by a
general Approbation in the 22 Article of the Peace of Roschild, made the 26 of
Feb. 1658, and then more specially by the Agreement made at Copenhaguen the 12
of May the same year. A little after the War between the Swedes and the Danes
being renewed of a sudden, the Danes besieged Tonningen, and the Duke with all
his Court residing in it, to make him renounce the Articles abovementioned,
and renounce his Sovereignty in the Dukedom of Sleswick. The Danes indeed
complained at that time, that the Swedes had retaken Arms against them, but
whether justly or unjustly, is not our business now to dispute. For what has
the Duke of Gottorp to do with it? The King of Sweden his Son-in-Law, did not
give him the least notice, that he intended to pass into Denmark and renew the
War there; neither was his Highness charged of having committed any offense
against the King of Denmark. But suppose this second War of the Swedes was
unjust, as the Danes allege, must therefore the Innocent and the Guilty be
treated alike? what the Duke enjoyed, was as a just satisfaction, the Justice
whereof he never did any thing against. Therefore when there was an end put to
this War by the Peace of 1660; the Swedes indeed remitted again into the hands
of the King of Denmark some things that had been granted them by the Treaty of
Roschild. But all that had been yielded or promised to the House of Gottorp
remained as before without the least diminution. The Most Christian King, the
King of Great Britain, and the States General of the United Provinces, thinking
it just to leave it so; the Danes for the third time now approving that Treaty,
and agreeing besides with the Duke of Gottorp to pass a general Amnesty for all
Injuries and other matters committed before that time, as appears by the 27 and
28 Articles of that Treaty.

4. Besides, when the Treaty of Peace was concluded between the Swedes and the
Poles, with their Allies, the Emperor and Elector of Brandenbourgh at Oliva
1660, the King of Denmark and the Duke of Gottorp were not only included
therein: But the Treaty between them the Swedes and the Duke made at Roschild,
and renewed afterward 1660, was also included in it, as if it had been
transcribed word for word; the Danes ratisying what the Kings of Sweden and
Poland, and the Emperor and Elector of Brandenbourg, had stipulated to that
purpose, and so now the fourth time solemnly approved the Agreements between
themselves and the House of Gottorp. And to the intent that this Peace might be
strictly kept by all Parties, not only the Danes and Poles, with their
Confederates, promise one another a mutual Guaranty; but the King of France
also entered into the same, agreeing amongst other things, That if any Prince
thought himself grieved by any other way than force of Arms, he should not
Revenge it by way of Arms, but complain to the several Princes, who were
Parties in this Treaty, desiring them to procure him a present and sufficient
satisfaction, Vid. Artic. 22. 26. 31. and 35. of that Treaty. I would fain have
the Danes tell us, what Injuries the House of Gottorp has done them, either by
way of Arms, or otherwise: If they cannot tell, nor prove any, the Duke of
Gottorp has reason to expect to be restored to all his Rights by the Princes
that have engaged their Faith in this Treaty, and that the Danes should be used
as breakers of the Peace. If the Danes will make these trivial objections,
which have been already answered, pass for Injuries, and especially the League
made with Sweden by the Duke of Gottorp for his own defense; I am afraid they
will find few expert Ministers of their mind. It has always, and ever will be
lawful to make such Leagues. Nay, if the Danes will but remember their own
Designs, and examine their Conscience, they must needs own themselves the
Authors, or occasion of this League. For such Principles must never be
neglected, nor the Power of any ever be raised to such a greatness, (or it must
not be left in any ones power to do hurt, who has a mind to do it) that
afterward you may not be in a condition to dispute your right upon equal
terms. Says Polyb. lib. 1.

5. The dissenting minds of Princes having been in all Ages happily reconciled
by Marriage, and their Animosities thereby laid down, and sometimes totally
extinguished; the Duke of Gottorp thought fit to use this Remedy, and having
humbly demanded, and obtained as a Pledge of sincere Friendship between both
Princes, the Daughter of Frederick King of Denmark of happy Memory for his
Wife; and several Articles being at the same time agreed upon by the King and
the Duke, as well relating to the Dowry as other things, the King then again
ratified all that had been so many times agreed between them concerning this
Dukedom. So that the King now for the fifth time gave his consent to it in the
year 1667, most freely, and without the least appearance of constraint by War
or otherwise.

6. The Danes without the least provocation or new injury (all former matters
being by an Amnesty in the Treaty abolished on both sides) but out of a desire
of Revenge, and hope of regaining their losses, have first broken this Peace
and Agreement made and concluded between the King and States of Denmark, and
the House of Gottorp, so often Sworn to and approved by both, partly by
committing Violences upon old abolished pretenses, and which by several
Conventions have been before adjusted, and partly by doing things either
directly against the tenor of the Articles, or the necessary consequences of
them; for whatever is acted contrary to Friendship, breaks the Peace which
subsists by nothing else; And what other men are obliged to by Friendship
alone, Grot. lib. 3. c. 20. n. 27. seq.
Princes are further tied to by their Promises and Treaties. And therefore we
hope it will find little credit what the Danes falsely accuse the Duke of, as if
he should have provoked them justly to what they have done. For those break the
Peace who first commit Violences, and not those that repel them, and much less
those that only endeavor to defend themselves, says Thucydides; wherewith
agrees the common opinion of the Learned in the Law, who say, That to make a
Defense lawful, it is not necessary to expect or receive the first blow.
Therefore what is objected to Chosro^ in Procopius, may be applied here; Those
break the Peace, who in time of Peace or League are first found to endeavor to
surprise others, and not th^se that are first in Arms. Now, if any one will
impartially consider all Transactions since the Peace of Roschild, it can never
be made out, that the House of Gottorp has conspired against the King of
Denmark, but on the contrary, that the King has laid snares for the Duke from
time to time, and at last surpised him at Rendsbourgh, as has been before
said.

7. If we consider well the means taken by the Danes to gratify their desire
of Revenge, though they have covered their intentions with many fair words, we
shall find them very false and unjust. For the Duke of Gottorp and his
Ministers having been drawn to Rendsbourgh upon the hopes given, and so many
times confirmed of a fair composure of things, and several protestations of
friendship and kindness, were presently after shut up, and detained in Prison,
where they were forced to most unjust conditions: there was quite another thing
intended than what was acted; and any man may easily see by what trick they
were betrayed and trepanned. Therefore, whatever was concluded there, is void
in Law; and the Danes have done nothing, either in forcing the House of Gottorp
to agree to these unjust conditions, or extorting fit and just ones from it.
Neither have they hereby confirmed their old Right, nor got a new one. They
have only taken Papers and Parchments from the Duke, but not the Right they
looked for; and in truth there has been only a Play Acted at Rendsbourgh, but it
was a Tragedy. For if we weigh this by the Law of Nations, which is chiefly of
Force between free Princes and People, the Convention at Rendsbourgh is
absolutely null and void; nothing being more contrary to Faith and Justice than
such tricks as these, and Princes being more strictly bound not to depart from
it than any private person; especially since the Articles with the House of
Gottorp of 1658, were agreed upon, and signed with such Ceremony, and in such
manner, as equal them to an Oath; and that by them, not the King, but the
injured Duke is to be entirely restored. It was a saying of the Ancients, That
amongst good men all proceedings ought to be sincere. Now Princes ought not
only to be counted good, but the best of men; and the more punctual and sincere
they are in their Treaties with others, the greater will their Reputation be.

8. This Transaction was likewise no small breach of the Law of Nations. The
King had desired the Duke, after they had Feasted together friendly and kindly
at Dennewerk, to come and see him at Rendsbourgh, and the Chancellor of the
Kingdom having repeated this desire of the Kings, the Duke sent word he would
do himself the Honor to come and wait upon his Majesty. His Highness was
received with the shooting of Guns, and all other demonstrations of kindness
and respect, that he might believe himself welcome. But when he was detained a
Prisoner, with Guards to watch him, and that those who ought to have been used
like Guests and well entertained, were not permitted to go away, nay, not so
much as to stir out, the Law of Nations was eminently broken, and sufficient
occasion given for Reparation. Many wonder that the Duke would trust his Person
and his Ministers with the King, and that in a very strong Town. But they will
cease wondering when they know all the repeated protestations of true
Friendship made by the King and his Ministers, so that the Duke, who has a
generous and great Soul, was afraid to be thought mistrustful, or give a
suspicion of it, esteeming with Livy, that to trust was the way to be trusted.
Thus of old perished Dio, who knowing that Calippus had laid ambushes for him,
was ashamed to use precaution against a Friend, and one whose Guest he then
was, says Plutarch.

9. And here we must not omit the Violences used toward the Duke of Gottorp
and his Ministers, and the Troubles they were put to. If a man puts another in
Prison or Custody to extort from him, all what is done by it is null, say the
Civilians, Vid. Paulus Ictus. Lib. 22. ff. quod met. cause. gest. Nay, he that
shuts any one in his house to get a Promise or Obligation from him, does force
him to it. V. L. 1. Sent. Tit. 7. Sect. 8. Therefore in the Commonwealth of
Rome, by the Julian Law, he was guilty of public Violence, who had shut up a
man with an ill design, restrained him, or got an Obligation from him by force;
the Law declaring all such void. l. 5. pr. ff. ad. l. Jul. de vi publica. As
force imposes a necessity upon the mind, and is commonly accompanied with fear,
because of the imminent danger that unsetles the Soul, lib. 1. quod met. cause.
So the Duke of Gottorp, a Friend, a near Relation, a Guest, a Brother, etc.
being come to visit his Friend, Relation, Brother, etc. endured not only many
hard violent injuries and unjust things, as well as all his Servants, but was
terrified daily with new threats and apprehensions of great Evils, by which his
Mind and his Body were brought so low, that his grief cast him into a dangerous
distemper. Some of the Danes have endeavored to conceal the disguise, nay,
deny too what passed at Rendsbourgh, and perhaps are yet unwilling to confess
the truth; not because they can stiffle what has been done in the view of so
many people, then at Rendsbourgh, but to suppress all they could the
remembrance of this Infamous Story. For we do not doubt but that there are many
good men among the Danes, who abhor the Counsel of that man, who was then the
great man with the King, and never kept within bounds.

But however the Danes may be thought of by impartial judges of these things
for his inexcusable proceeding, they can neither reap any advantage thereby,
nor cause any damage to the House of Gottorp, or render its condition worse.
For though by the Principles of Philosophy, whosoever has promised any thing by
force or fear, seems to be bound to it in strictness of Law: Yet since the
Ancients have been of opinion, that summum jus is sometimes injurious, and that
the Law of Nature abhors an unjust force or constraint; no Prince ought to be
bound by this summum jus, when accompanied with force, but rather restored to
what has been forced from him, which the following words of Grotius explain and
confirm. I am wholly of the opinion of those, who believe, that laying aside
the Civil Law, (by which the Obligation may be taken away or diminisht)
whosoever has promised a thing through fear, is bound, because he has given his
absolute consent, and not a conditional one, as in the case of one that
mistakes. For as Aristotle says very well, he that throws his goods into the
Sea for fear of Shipwreck, would willingly save them conditionally, viz. if the
danger was not imminent; but he is absolutely content to lose them, considering
the circumstance of time and place. But I esteem this most true, if the man to
whom the Promise is made, has terrifyed ^he other not justly, but unjustly,
though but a little, and upon this has got a Promise, he to whom the promise
was made, is bound to release him from it, if the other desires it; not because
the Promise is of no force, but for the injury done. L. 2. de Jure B. and P. c.
11. n. 7. He explains these last words thus in another place; He that has by
cunning, force, or unjust fear, obtained from another a Contract or Promise, is
bound to release the Person of his said Contract; for he had a right neither to
be deceived, nor to be forced; the first by the nature of Contracts, the other
by the Liberty of Nature. Lib. 2. de Jure B. and P. c. 17. n. 17. And he
repeats the same, lib. 3. c. 19. n. 4. 10. The King of Denmark can so much the
less deny this right of Restitution to the House of Gottorp, because he himself
would have challenged the same right when it was his own case* For his Majesty
having extorted from the Duke, by mere force, all he thought fit, his Highness
was reproached, that he had gotten these things before by force, and the Arms
of an Enemy, and had given just cause consequently to the King to repossess
himself the same way; It will then be very just, that the King suffer the Duke
to make use of the same Law against his Majesty, which he would have used
against his Highness, since this is a Rule of the Law of Nature, which obliges
all Princes without distinction. I say the King would have made use of this Law
against the Duke, that having been forced to the Treaty in question, he ought
to have been restored unto his Rights again. But in this the Danes are very
much mistaken, that they do not distinguish by what kind of force or fear one
is constrained, whether just or unjust; and have gone about foolishly to
persuade themselves and others, that the King had recovered the Sovereignty of
the Dukedom of Sleswick, the same way he had lost it. For as Justice offers
Restitution with both hands to a man, forced unjustly to a promise or grant; so
it denies it flatly to one justly forced. Therefore when any one has himself
been the cause of his being compelled to promise o^ give, he cannot recover it
the same way, having lost his right of Restitution, by giving a just cause to
the other, who has justly employed a just force. Grot. lib. 2. c. 17. n. 19.

11. This Restitution due upon so many accounts, ought not to be denied,
because of the great Evils and dangerous Errors which may spring from such a
denial. For if we take the Treaty of Rendsbourgh into serious consideration, we
shall find the Duke of Gottorp deprived of all his Royalties, and the King
alone invested with them, and all submitted to his Pleasure. For the King alone
having undertaken the defense of both Dukedoms, declared all the Dukes Treaties
null, deprived him of his Soldiers, demolisht his Towns and Forts, detained
him against his will in Custody, raised such great Taxes upon his Lands, that
his Highness and his Subjects have nothing remaining; whence it is manifest
that the Right of Peace and War, and the other great Royalties, are taken away
from the Duke by this Treaty, or at least so much incroached upon, that all the
Authority which he might of right, and has hitherto, after the Example of his
Ancestors, enjoyed and exercised, is now in the King alone, and at his dispose,
under whose power and pleasure his Highness must hereafter live, under the
Notion of a Client or Vassal, but really as a Subject. So heretofore the Latins
complained, That under the color of a League with the Romans they lived in
Slavery; and the Achaians, that their League was now become a precarious
Slavery; and, as Tacitus speaks, A miserable Slavery was now falsely called
Peace. And though Proculus be of opinion, that free Tenants are not under the
Dominion or Subjection of the Patron, yet when a Prince or People come under
the Protection of a Superior Prince or People, we know by experience that a
fall is easy in slippery ground, and that the Tenantship is soon changed into
a soft Slavery, which the Duke of Gottorp has the more reason to fear and
avoid; For that the King of Denmarks Power reaching from the further part of
Norway, as far as Holland, is very great, and that under the pretense of the
Union at the Treaty of Rendsbourgh, vainly called by the Name of Pragmatick
Sanction, an occasion may be taken to oppress or suppress the Authority and
Dignity of the House of Gottorp. Who ever saw a Sovereign Prince without
Royalties? Who can show a Duke of Sleswick thus wholly divested of his high
Prerogatives? If the Dukes of Sleswick are to be invested hereafter by giving
them a Banner, and with the Ceremony observed at Ottenwaldt in 1580, will not
that be a Proclaiming of them Subjects with the greater Pomp only, and telling
the world by this Investiture, how proud they are of this Subjection? If the
Dukes of Gottorp were cast into this condition or abandoned in it, and on the
contrary, the Kings of Denmark might govern at their Pleasure the Dukedomes of
Sleswick and Holstein, and that part of them also which belongs to the Duke,
what an augmentation of Power would that be to them, and how might they abuse
it if ever they would make use of it against Germany, and especially the Circle
of the Lower-Saxony? This may be made out by an exact account of the vast sums
of money, and all other things they have extorted in a little time from those
Provinces; it is hardly credible how great the sums are. And we know well
enough what an ambitious Example they have shown, and there is no question but
opportunity and power will invite others to follow them. Therefore Prudence
requires rather that the Duke of Gottorp should be in time restored to his
former condition, and all his Rights, than that so many Princes, Provinces, and
Towns, be destroyed by his Ruin, which will be easily prevented, if the injury
now done to his Highness be looked upon by every one of them as done to
themselves.

But suppose we should grant that the Duke of Gottorp has effectually bound
himself by the conditions of Rendsbourg to a Vassalage for the Dukedom of
Sleswick, (which supposition we yet constantly deny as false;) yet the delay of
demanding the Investiture cannot be imputed to the Duke, but to the King alone:
for who does not know that the Strongholds of Tonningen and Holme are seated
in the Dukedom of Sleswick? And the King without regard to his Word, having
razed them both, taken away the Garrisons and all the Artillery, kept the Duke
besieged in his Castle of Gottorp; and all this relating to the Dukedom of
Sleswick, has not the Duke justly demanded, that all these Grievances be first
redressed, and satisfaction be made to him for them? If he had done otherwise,
and blindly asked the Investiture, trusting himself to the Kings pleasure,
there had never been any notice taken of the old and new Grievances, and his
Highness had rashly submitted himself to a Vassalage, that had deprived him and
his Posterity of all his Royalties, and exposed them to the eternal Scorn of
the world. Besides, since it was suggested to the Dukes Ambassadors sent to
Copenhaguen about the Fief and Grievances, that they would do well to return to
his Highness for new Instructions about the Fief, without expecting any Orders
from him; the King had certainly no cause given him for Sequestrations, and
those other acts of Hostility committed by his Order in the Dukedom of
Sleswick. And so we must not yield that the King, by doing Acts by which the
Lord of a Fief uses to lose his Right, should take away another Right; and not
only gain by the Ruin of the other, but even by what ought to turn to his own
loss, contrary to the Laws of Nature; Nations, Feudal, and all others
whatsoever. Eric Duke of Sleswick, having left after his Death his Son Waldemar
a Child, Christopher the Second King of Denmark, possessed himself of that
Guardian-ship of Waldemar, and at the same time of the whole Territory of
Sleswick, except Gottorp, which when he also besieged to gain the whole Duchy,
Gerhard Earl of Holstein, Uncle to Waldemar, with some others, opposed him
stoutly, and for this Felony committed by the King in 1326, there was great
Debate, which Meursius thus relates; The Dukedom of Sleswick having been held
till then as a Fief from Denmark, and these Princes by reason of this
Usurpation of the Kings, being unwilling it should continue so hereafter, was
the occasion of a long Contention, lib. 4. p. 70, which ended, as we have said
before. If this demand in the Name of Waldemar was not unreasonable, with how
much more Justice does our Duke desire that he might have his own, and a full
Restitution from the King of what he detains from him so unjustly, and has
Sequestrated by mere force; and God Almighty having ordered Restitution to be
made where Covenants are broken, it is but just that his Vicegerents upon
Earth should endeavor to put his Decrees in Execution.

13. If we look upon his Sequestration rightly, and examine it by the Rules of
Justice, we shall find it wholly void by Law. For it was neither done by any
Convention of the Parties, nor by any Judicial Authority. The Danes, I presume,
will confess the former, and the other we do not question but to make them also
agree to. The King of Denmark having made himself Plaintiff against the Duke of
Gottorp, in the business of the Dukedom of Sleswick, his Majesty cannot be a
Judge in the same cause: Which is explained by several Civilians, Ad. Tit. Cod.
Nequis in sua causa judicet vel jus sibi dicat; that is to say, Let no man be
Judge in his own Case, or do himself justice. And this must not be understood,
as if the Positive Roman Law only (by which the Danes are not bound) did
prohibit any one to be Judge in his own cause, for the Law of Nature dictates
the same, and right reason which obliges all the world, proclaims it. Men
blinded by their affections do not see the truth in their own affairs, says
Aristotle. And for this reason the Kings of Denmark themselves consented
heretofore, that all Disputes about this Fief should be determined by Impartial
Judges, according to the contents of the Treaty of Union, and that both parties
should abstain from hasty Sequestrations, Ord. jud. prove. part. 3. tit. 3. A
judicial Sequestration being thus prohibited, because it is a kind of Execution
wherewith a State ought not to begin; This Sequestration of the Dukedom of
Sleswick cannot certainly be defended by any Law, nor by any Judicial
Authority, nor by a previous cognizance of the cause, upon which a just
Sentence had followed, but only by the way of violence and absolute force; by
which the Duke of Gottorp has been thrown out of a certain Possession and all
his Revenues, and an usurped Possession transferred by pure Fact upon the
Sequestrator, against the nature of all Judicial Sequestrations, which are made
use of only for the better keeping of things: so that this pretended
Sequestration is really a violent spoil committed by the King (supported with
more than one Army) upon the Duke naked and disarmed: Now it is the Opinion of
all wise men, that a person who has been spoiled, ought first of all to be
restored.

14. And this Restitution is so much the more earnestly to be pressed, as this
Sequestration may be dangerous both in Temporals and Spirituals. For the King
having suffered himself to be persuaded, that he could absolve the common
people, Priests, and Magistrates, Subjects to the Duke in the Dukedom of
Sleswick, from the Allegiance they have sworn to their Prince, he has caused
sometimes one, and sometimes another to be carried away by Soldiers from their
habitations, and from their Sacred and Civil Functions, and some to Rend^bourgh
(where this whole Tragedy was begun, and where they have been put in Prison, at
least detained for some time.) Those of the Dukes Officers and Subjects, that
have seen and understood all that has passed between the King and the Duke,
must needs know, that his Majesty has indeed a great Power over his Subjects,
but none over those of other Princes; at least not such a one as can free them
from their Oath to God, and Allegiance to his Highness; especially whilst the
matter in difference is not only doubtful, but before no Judicial Court, much
less determined. Nay, they know that they are bound to suffer rather the
greatest Miseries, and the loss of their whole Fortunes, than to act against
their own Consciences and Oaths, or do any thing to the prejudice of their
Prince, lest they should provoke the Anger of God, and the Dukes just Revenge;
no obedience being due to any body, that gives sentence out of his own
Territory, where he has no Jurisdiction. L. Vel. ff. de Jurisd. And if others
frighted with the noise of an Army, or the fear of greater Evils, renounce
their Allegiance, let them consider how they ensnare their Consciences, if not
expose themselves to the punishments for Perjury and Perfidiousness. To prevent
which, let a full and quick Restitution take away this illegal Sequestration.

15. The King caused this Sequestration of the Dukedom of Sleswick to be
Proclaimed with a Threatening of Deprivation. It is apparent from what has been
said, that this Sequestration is such, executed with that Rigor, as if the
Duke was actually deprived and divested of the Dukedom of Sleswick; though
this Deprivation be as unjust and violent as the Sequestration. How can the
Authors of such Counsels be sufficiently wondered at, by those that remember,
that a Fief is a Contract obliging both Parties, and that the Obligation
between the Lord and his Vassal is as reciprocal, as that between Husband and
Wife, says Cujacius. Therefore, as a Vassal promises to his Lord upon Oath to
perform truly, safely, securely, honestly, well, etc. so also does the Lord to
the Vassal, and is obliged to fulfill it; if he does the contrary, he is
declared of no Faith, Perjured and Perfidious by the Feudal Longobardick Law, 2
Feud. 6. Thence it is that all Felony which deprives a Vassal of a Fief,
d^prives the Lord also of the Propriety thereof, if committed by him, and
confers it upon the Vassal; most especially if the Lord spoils him, that holds
a Fief from him, of his Forts, wherein he may keep himself secure much more: if
the Lord demolishes and destroys them to the ground; If he uses the Vassal and
his Subjects ill, charges them with Imposts and Taxes, and Pillages them; if he
lays Siege to the Vassals Castle, or other his place of habitation: If the Lord
bereaves him of the Fief by his own Authority, without cognizance of the cause,
and judgment thereupon; or if judging the cause himself, he alienates the same:
For though the Lord accuse his Vassal of having done some act deserving
Deprivation, yet he is not to be absolutely believed, though he be a Supreme
Prince, says Vult^j^s lib. 1. c. 11. n. 55. In a word, to repeat the proper
Terms of the Law, If the Lord enters into the Fief by a bad way, that is to
say, as Baron Schenkius explains it, ad lib. 2. F^ud. Tit. 22. sed. Si vero
Vassallus. If he breaks i(...)o Possession not by the way of the Law or
Justice, but by Violence. For in such a case, if he refuses wholly to restore
the Fief, and what belongs to it, he may be forced to it by the way of Arms.
And therefore, if the Lord and Vassals are to be judged in the same manner,
according to the opinion of all Feudists; certainly the King of Denmark has
lost all his Right long before, if he had any, in that part of the Dukedom of
Sleswick which belongs to the Duke of Gottorp, and the Duke ought to be
Restored against the King, according to all Laws.

16. For the Duke of Gottorp having received this Dukedom with the greatest
Right, and in the most absolute manner, free from all Vassalage, and obtained
and kept at a very chargable rate the Sovereign Dominion thereof by the so
often repeated consent of the King and States of Denmark; the unjust Convention
at Rendsbourgh cannot savor the King of Denmark's cause in this, nor take away
the least part of the Dukes Sovereign Power in the Dukedom of Sleswick. This
forced Agreement his Majesty himself having not a little receded from, and
first broken, by demolishing the strong Towns, in which, by this very
Agreement, he was only to put a Garrison for a while, and then to restore them:
carrying away the Dukes Ministers Prisoners, who had already bound themselves
to the King by the Allegiance he required from them; reducing the Dukes
Subjects to the last extremities, though his Majesty had promised before, that
not a Hen should be touched, and other like things; by which things his Majesty
seems not to desire the said Treaty should remain in force.

17. Lastly, an entire Restitution being the common refuge of Princes and
Commonwealths, to which they have recourse in their Afflictions, the Duke of
Sleswick cannot be excluded from this Privilege of all Mankind. For though in
the Commonwealth of Rome, Restitution was to be demanded from the Praetor within
a certain time; this and the like are only Pleas of the Civil Law. Restitution
absolutely considered, is grounded upon the Principles of Equity, which takes
its Original from the purest Springs of the Law of Nature; and is so much the
fitter for injured Princes and free Nations, as it is more important to provide
for the safety of Commonwealths than of private men. For why should not a
Prince, as well or rather than a private Person, be restored unto all his
Rights, if he has been deceived or injured by fraud; force, unjust fear, or the
like? Certainly there is no reason against it, Equity requires this remedy for
both. Neither is it limited to these alone, but it is applicable as often as
there is any cause of Restitution. L. ^. ff. de restit. in integ. Natural
Equity it self requires, that a man deceived in any thing, where others ought
to have proceeded with sincerity, be fully restored, especially since by such
deceits whatever is done, is anaulled, says a great Lawyer.

Now, who must restore the Duke unto all his Rights? What has been said before
does furnish us with an answer. The King of Denmark, who has unjustly injured
the Duke, is beyond all others obliged to do it in the Court of Equity and
Conscience, which demands as ready an obedience, as the King himself does from
his Subjects. For those that do an ill act knowingly, or are instrumental to
it, are to be put in the number of those that cannot go to Heaven without
Repentance. And true Repentance requires absolutely, if there be time and
power, that he that has done the Injury make satisfaction for it, Grot. lib. 3.
de J. B. and P. c. 10. n. 3. and 4. From whence it appears too, that the King
ought not only to restore what he has extorted from the Duke at Rendsbourgh
and afterward, but make good also those damages his Highness and his Subjects
have suffered by the War, and the occasion of it. What if the King of Denmark,
for reason of State, excepting against this Court, refuses to restore the Duke?
First, I say, that the great God is Judge, and the truth of his word will not
so easily wear away as the Danish Coin upon which it is stamped. Besides, the
King thereby would give the Duke just reason to endeavor to right himself. If
an unj^st fear caused by another, has forced any one to make a Promise, he that
has promised may demand Restitution, and, if denied, may take it himself,
Grot. lib. 3. de J. B. and P. c. 23. n. 2. When any one demands satisfaction
from his Fellow-Subject, the Authority of the Magistrate must be employed as
Superior, to force the Inferiors. And so in the Commonwealth of Rome, the
Praetor having heard the cause, was wont to order Restitution. But when a Prince
must be restored against another Prince, that is Sovereign as well as he, and
his Equal, the injured Prince, or any for him, may perform the Office of
Praetor, use all means to procure a full and ample Reparation of his damages. If
the Duke of Gottorp is not strong enough to do it himself, all Christian
Princes and Commonwealths must make this cause theirs, and employ all their
Power to restore him; For Wars may be undertook not only for Friends and
Allies, but for men, as such, if they are barbarously injured. Grot. lib. 3. de
I. B. and P. c. 25. n. 1. and seq. And who is more injured than he, who by a
Cousin of the same Family, his near Ally, and Brother, against his Faith so
many times sworn, is so ill used, as to be deprived of all his Authority and
Dignity? Therefore since other Princes are not a little concerned, when the
condition of any Prince is brought so low, contrary to all Justice, and when
perhaps his entire ruin is endeavored, especially if these base Counsels
proceed from Ministers, who in their actions and speeches, have no regard to
the great Asserter of Faith, and consequently less to Faith it self, the
foundation of Justice, and the tie of all human Societies; all Princes and
States ought first of all to take care, that Faith be kept inviolable, and
Treaties and Contracts between them be not violated, lest this tie of
Friendship and Society being broke, the world should fall into confusion by
their c^nnivence before the time decreed by Divine Providence.

And those Princes and States are chiefly obliged to take care of this
Restitution, who have guaranted the Treaties between the King of Denmark and
the House of Gottorp, and have signed the Instruments of Peace between Sweden
and Germany, and that of Roschild and Oliva, engaging for the performance of
them in such terms and expressions, that if they were meant, as they are set
down, (which is not at all to be doubted,) no man but will believe they intend
to perform their Promises. And to induce them thereunto without any delay, let
the great danger of this example, and the greatness of the Injuries be
considered; and that it is also the earnest request of the Duke of Gottorp, who
is every day more and more oppressed with new Injuries.

And since amongst these Princes that are Securities, the good will of the most
Serene and Potent King of Great Britain, toward the House of Gottorp, appears
above the rest, his Majesty having not only engaged himself with other Princes
and States, for the preservation of the Peace at Roschild, and the Treaty of
Copenhaguen, made between the King of Denmark and the House of Gottorp, soon
after that at Roschild; but having also passed his word and Guaranty for the
Sovereignty yielded by the King and Kingdom of Denmark to the House of Gottorp;
and most especially his Majesty being now the Mediator of all public
Differences: Give us leave, most Potent King, to let all the World know this
great affection of your Majesty's toward the House of Gottorp, and to put you
in mind of your special Engagement to our Duke for the Sovereignty of Sleswick;
which you can as easily make good, as you were pleased to engage for it; that
you may be known for as great a Defender of the Civil as of the Christian
Faith; and in judging the Differences between the King of Denmark and the House
of Gottorp, or disposing all things to a Peace, make use of that Equity and
Moderation, which may prove a Remedy to the Injured, a Defense to the
Oppressed, and a Reward of Eternal Glory to your Majesty and the Noble People
of England.

THE ARTICLES Of the TREATY at Rendsbourgh.
KNow all Men to whom these Presents shall come, That whereas, for the common
Security and Safety, several Treaties of Union and Conjunction have been
heretofore made between the Kingdom of Denmark and the Dukedoms of Sleswick and
Holstein, which have been renewed, augmented, and changed, according to the
Exigence of times; and that the most Serene and Potent Prince and Lord
Christian the V. King of Denmark and Norway, Goths and Vandals, Duke of
Sleswick and Holstein, Stormar and Dithmars, Earl of Oldenbourgh and
Delmenhorst, and the most Reverend and Serene Prince and Lord, the Lord
Christian Albert, Heir of Norway, Coadjutor of the Bishopric of Lubeck, Duke
of Sleswick and Holstein, Stormar and Dithmars, Earl of Oldenbourgh and
Delmenhorst, judging it very necessary in these dangerous and troublesome
times, that such Treaties of Union be renewed after the Example of their
Ancestors, and be accommodated to the present condition and State of their
Kingdoms and Dominions: And his said Majesty having appointed on his part [Here
the Names of the Kings Commissioners were inserted] and the said Duke on his
part [Here the Names of the Dukes Commissioners were inserted] and the said
Commissioners, having accordingly met together, have agreed upon the following
Articles.

I.
As his Royal Majesty and his most Serene Highness do Govern jointly the
Dukedom of Sleswick and Holstein, and the Countries incorporated therein; so
they shall both endeavor, according to the Contents of the former Treaties of
Union, unanimously to direct all their Counsels for the safety and augmentation
of the said Dukedoms, and to preserve them from all damage, danger, and
detriment.

II.
Therefore, as often as necessity shall require it, or any danger seems to
threaten these Dukedoms, they shall both do all they can, by united Counsels
and Forces to prevent it; and if the thing comes to a War, let no Truce be
made, nor Peace contracted, before the danger be removed from both their Heads,
and satisfaction be made to both by the Enemy, and the public security
provided for.

III.
And as therefore his Royal Majesty by this takes entirely upon him the
Guaranty and Defense, both of the most Serene Duke, and the part he has in the
Dukedoms; so his said most Serene Highness promises again, that as often as his
Royal Majesty shall be necessitated to draw Forces from his Kingdoms for the
defense of these Dukedoms, and the Countries incorporated therein, or shall be
in War against any Foreign Prince whosoever he be, none excepted (though his
Majesty thinks it already his due by the Union) he shall not only give him free
passage through his Land, and all his Towns, but liberty to List and Muster
Soldiers, assigning them quarters and places to Encamp, and helping the King
with all his Power.

IIII.
Because also, during these troublesome times, his Royal Majesty could not
forbear by an unavoidable necessity to ask leave for his further security to
put Garrisons of his own into the Forts of Gottorp and Tonningen, and the
Fortress of Stapelholme, which his most Serene Highness has granted, upon this
certain hope that these troubles being over, and the Peace made, all things
should be entirely given back and restored as they were: And his most Serene
Highness having made certain Leagues, in which there are some things which give
no small jealousies to his Royal Majesty; that he may hereafter be more secure
of the intentions of his most Serene Highness, and all occasion of mistrust be
wholly taken away; it is agreed and covenanted on both sides, that it shall not
be lawful hereafter for his most Serene Highness to make any Alliances with
Foreign Princes and States without a previous communication with his Majesty
and his consent obtained, nor make use of any of those already made to the
prejudice and detriment of his Royal Majesty.

V.
And that the Forts and Strongholds that are necessary for the Defense of
these Dukedoms and Countries therein incorporated, may be provided and
furnished with all necessaries, according to the Exigencies of times, and the
threatening dangers, with least trouble to the States of the Provinces; both
Parties have agreed, that hereafter the Contributions shall be brought into a
common Treasury, and shall not be employed to any other use than this now
mentioned.

VI.
But because the Contributions that have been paid till now, have been so far
from keeping the Soldiers which are appointed for the Defense of these
Dukedoms, that his Majesty has been necessitated to add considerable sums out
of his own Revenue; and his most Serene Highness having put into his Coffers
the best part of the Contributions he has received, and employed the same to
other uses, for which his Majesty pretends a satisfaction to be made to him:
Therefore in lieu of a compensation, and that all things, as much as is
possible, may be reestablisht in the same state, and restored according to the
Rule of the ancient Division, which Hereditarily has been granted to each
House; His most Serene Highness quits wholly and for ever to his Royal Majesty
the Territory of Swabstadt, with half of the Chapter of Sleswick, and of the
Cathedral Church, which together with the said Territory of Swabstadt, was
heretofore yielded to his most Serene Highness by his Sacred Royal Majesty of
glorious Memory, with all the Appurtenances, Revenues, Profits, Domains,
Prerogatives, and Royalties, as his most Serene Highness had the same yielded
to him, and has quietly possessed till now.

VII.
As to the Controversies about the limits, and other things relating to the
Territories of Ripen and Tundern, the discussion whereof remains in suspense
till now, they shall be decided by Equity, and according to the Opinions of the
Royal Commissioners, who were present at the last Assembly held for that
purpose; and if hereafter any differences or disputes should arise, either
between his Majesty himself and his most Serene Highness, or their subjects,
which cannot be determined by them, they shall be composed amicably and
according to the Articles of Union.

VIII.
And nothing being intended on both sides by the renewing of this Union and
Treaty but to re-establish a perpetual and most necessary good understanding
between the Royal and Ducal Families, and to keep the same inviolable for ever,
and the novelties and changes which have happened in process of time, having
given not a little occasion of mistrust; it is at last agreed and Covenanted,
that to reduce all things to their former condition as soon as may be, his most
Serene Highness and his Successors, shall renounce fully and for ever their
Sovereignty over the Dukedom of Sleswick and it is appurtenances, together with
the Island of Femaria, which they obtained by the Peace of Roschild, and the
Treaty of Copenhaguen, in the same manner as if they had never obtained or been
in possession of the said Sovereignty, and shall be obliged, no less than
heretofore, within a year and a day, as often as the case, either by the death
of the Lord or of the Vassal, shall happen, to demand and receive in due manner
(as heretofore has been used) from the Kings of Denmark, the Investiture of
the said Dukedom of Sleswick and it is Appurtenances, together with the Island
of Femaria, and to perform all things according to the form prescribed by the
Act of Renuntiation to be made by his most Serene Highness; for which end his
most Serene Highness has also obliged himself to deliver up again, and consign
into the hands of his Royal Majesty the Instrument he received from his late
Sacred Majesty of glorious Memory, and from these Senators of the Kingdom then
in being, which is hereby made void and rendered null.

Lastly, this Union and Transaction shall remain entire and firm, as the Basis
and foundation of an everlasting Friendship and Alliance between both Houses,
and as a strong obligation by which his Royal Majesty and his most Serene
Highness are joined together, and shall be inviolably observed by both parties
and their Successors, neither shall any of them do any thing contrary hereunto,
or suffer the same to be done; and besides, all that is not here altered, shall
by virtue of the ancient Treaties, remain in full force. For the greater
assurance of the performance of these Presents, these Articles of Union and
Agreement have been by Us, as well his Majesty's, as his Highnesses
Commissioners, deputed for this affair, signed and Sealed at Rendsbourg the 10.
of July 1675.

Out of the Articles of Union made 1533.
Neither Party shall enter into a War without the Counsel and consent of the
other.

And the same is confirmed by the other Treaties of Union.

Out of the Transaction at Othenwaldt 1579.
If his Majesty for the defense of his Provinces and Subjects or the
Conservation of his Dignity, is necessitated to take up Arms, so that the
business cannot be determined by way of Justice or a fair Composure, the most
Serene Duke of Gottorp (if the War has been undertaken and ended by his
advice, and with his full consent, after a previous deliberation) shall be
obliged to send the Succors agreed upon.

Out of the Concordats of the Kingdom of Denmark, and the Dukedom of Sleswick
and Holstein 1593.
Neither of the Parties shall make War without the Advice and consent of the
other; but if it happen that the King and Kingdom of Denmark, and the Dukes of
Sleswick and Holstein, consent to refer their Controversies to the Cognizance
and Decision of a Judicial Court, and nevertheless either of them be attacked
by force of Arms, the other Party shall send such ^roops to his Assistance, as
by the following Articles are agreed upon.

Out of the Union renewed in the Year 1624.
The Party whose Counsel and help is employed, may and ought to make use of
this Right, to profer his Mediation to the Parties entering into War, for the
composing their differences without coming to Arms, and to this end must invite
and join with him other Neutral Princes and States; and if there be time, and
no danger will arise by delay, let him propose all just and equitable
conditions, not derogating from the Dignity of the Princes engaged, nor
prejudicial to the cause, and try what success that may have before they come
to an open Rupture.

Out of the Inventory 4 Jul. 1675. made when the Fort of Tonningen and all its
Ammunition was delivered up.
This written Inventory, with all the things set down therein, -- were
delivered, and really received by me under-writen, Lieutenant General of the
most Serene King of Denmark and Norway, after the performance of the Surrender
of the Fort of Tonningen; and I do engage my Faith, that all shall be fully
restored according to the promise of his most Serene Royal Majesty, and as it
ought to be, and to that end, have subscribed this with my own hand.

Charles Arenstorff.

Out of the Instrument of Peace at Roschild 12. May 1658.
As to the pretended satisfaction for the damages received by the last War, the
most Serene Duke of Gottorp (the most excellent Mediators judging it fit)
condescends out of friendship and affection, to remit all his pretensions
thereunto for all the Vassalage remitted to him, that the Amty between his most
Serene Royal Majesty and the Duke, and also the Kingdom of Denmark, the
Dukedoms and the Subjects of both Princes may remain firm and entire, and that
the good correspondence which ought to be between Allies, Brothers, and
Neighbors, may be preserved.

Out of the League between Sweden and Gottorp, made May 24. 1661.
And as there is no other cause for the making of this Alliance, than to keep
the Peace between the Princes of the North inviolate, and render the security
of the House of Gottorp, established thereby, more entire; and the most Serene
Duke of Gottorp not obliging himself in any thing to the King and Kingdom of
Sweden, but what relates to this Peace and Security, and the preservation of
the Friendship and Amity between them: so no other Leagues, whether already
made, or which shall be hereafter made, shall prejudice either of the Parties,
nor be a hindrance to this Treaty, or take place against it. Besides, the most
Serene Duke, that he may remove all suspicion of his proceedings, desires that
the extension or interpretation of this League may no ways reach his Imperial
Majesty or the Empire, or any other Kings, Electors and Princes, if they do not
injure the Duke contrary to the Peace of the North; and he also reserves to
himself the liberty to keep and improve, by the best ways he shall think fit,
that good correspondence with the King of Denmark, which may and ought to be
between Neighbors, and may be most advantageous to his Family, Provinces, and
Subjects, without derogating from the Peace of the North.

Out of the Peace of Roschild made the 26 Feb. 1658. Art. 22.
His most Serene Majesty of Denmark, shall be obliged to satisfy Prince
Frederick Duke of Sleswick and Holstein-Gottorp, according to Equity, which
satisfaction shall be treated of by his Royal Majesty's and his Highnesses
Commissioners; yet so as that this Treaty be finished before the second of May.

Out of the Instrument of Peace between the most Serene King of Denmark and the
Duke at Copenhaguen 12 of May 1658. Art. 6.
And so in the Name of God the Grievances and Demands exhibited, are either
absolutely or provisionally taken off, to the satisfaction of the interessed;
and the King and Prince do promise bona side, and in words without
equivocation, that they will keep this Treaty, and not recede from it under any
pretense whatsoever, whatever it may be, and observe these Articles, as
faithfully as those of the Peace at Roschild, employing all their cares to
transmit and propagate this Friendship now renewed perfect and entire to their
Posterity.

We Frederick III. King of Denmark and Norway, etc. declare by these Presents,
that we have, after mature deliberation upon all that has been proposed by the
Lords Mediators, either by word of Mouth or in Writing, concerning the Treaty
and Conclusion of a Peace, consented, and by virtue of these Presents do
consent to the same, as far as they agree with the Acts passed by the three
States for the establishing a Peace between Us and the King of Sweden.
Copenhaguen August 23. V. S. 1659.

Another Declaration of his most Serene Royal Majesty upon the business of the
Peace to be made with the King and Kingdom of Sweden, presented to the Lords
Mediators Plenipotentiaries at Copenhaguen.
We Frederick III. by the Grace of God King of Denmark and Norway, Duke of
Sleswick and Holstein, etc.

To all and every one whom it does or may any way concern; Be it known, that as
we have among other things, as well by our Declaration of the 14/24 August,
showed our great propensity to a Peace to the Lords Mediators of the three
States, as by another of the 25/4 August / Sept. delivered by Our Order into
the Hands of the same Mediators, by which we declare, that after a due
consideration of the Propositions of their Excellencies, made as well by word
of Mouth as in Writing, the 18/28 of the same Month, for a happy Issue of this
present Peace, We do consent to them all as far as they are agreeable with the
resolutions past by the three States the 11/21 of May, the 14/24 of July, and
25/4 July / August about the Peace to be made between Us and the King and
Kingdom of Sweden; so we do hereby testify and confirm that We adhere still
to the same Declaration; and to give a greater proof of our said Inclination
for Peace, and to take away all sort of suspicion of the contrary, We declare
by these Presents, that We desire nothing more than that the Commissioners of
both Parties, without any delay of time, may meet at the place before appointed
for the Treaty of Peace, and by the Mediation of the Ambassadors of the three
States, make a happy conclusion of the same without any further delay.

And We relying entirely upon the Integrity and Equity of the said Lords, do
also hereby declare, That if it shall be thought fit to add or change any thing
in the Treaty at Roschild, we remit and leave it all to their discretion and
care. In greater trust and certainty whereof, we have to these Presents set Our
Royal Hand and Seal at Our Court at Copenhaguen the 19. of March 1660.

Frederick III.

Out of the Instrument of Peace at Roschild renewed in the Year 1660. Art. 27,
and 28.
Whereas it was agreed by the 22th Article of the Treaty at Roschild, that his
Royal Majesty of Denmark should be obliged to give an equitable satisfaction to
the most High Prince, the Duke of Sleswick and Holstein-Gottorp, and his said
Majesty's and his said Highnesses Commissioners, after several Conferences held
at Copenhaguen the 12/22 of May 1658, having at last come to a final Agreement
and Conclusion, it is hereby stipulated, that all those Treaties and
Transactions shall be exactly observed and fulfilled faithfully on both sides.
Moreover, if there has happened any thing in this or the precedent Wars, which
may any way create animosities and jealousies between his most Serene Royal
Majesty and Kingdom of Denmark and his most Serene Highness the Duke of
Holstein-Gottorp, or any thing between his most Serene Royal Majesty and his
most Serene Highness, their Ministers, Servants, or Subjects, which may be
taken any other ways than in good part; It shall all, as well for the sake of
the mutual Consanguinity, and especially of her most Serene Royal Majesty the
Queen of Sweden, as for the perpetuating the friendship between both Houses,
from this day forward be forgotten, and be no more remembered to the prejudice
of any one, but by virtue of this Transaction be wholly extinguished. And his
most Serene Royal Majesty of Denmark, will also, when Denmark shall be
evacuated, not only withdraw his Army and Forces out of his Highnesses Country
and Places, but likewise do his utmost endeavor to oblige his Allies to send
away, and draw their Troops without any delay or ^ergiversation out of the
Lands, Towns, and Forts of his Highness, which they have possessed themselves
of.

Out of the Treaty of Peace at Oliva.
Art. 22. The Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, by the consent of the Parties
stipulating, shall be included in this Peace.

Art. 26. The same is repeated.

Art. 31. It importing very much to the establishment of this Peace, that it be
made to reach all parties in Difference, and that the safety of Trade between
all the Parties engaged in the War be provided for, and therefore, though the
Controversies that are depending between the most Serene King and Kingdom of
Sweden, and the most Serene King of Denmark, cannot be well determined here,
but are now under discussion at Copenhaguen, and in a fair way of Composure, it
is nevertheless Enacted, that the Kingdoms and Countries of the most Serene
King of Denmark and Norway, included in the Danish Peace, shall be comprehended
in this Treaty; so that all which has been agreed and concluded between the
said Kings of Sweden and Denmark, shall be part of this Peace, as if the
particulars were specifyed, and set down in this Instrument; yet so as not to
derogate from any thing of the Treaty already concluded, or which shall be
concluded in Denmark, between both Kings and Kingdoms.

35. To the end that this Peace may be rendered more firm, permanent and secure,
and remain inviolable on every side, the said Parties, as well Principal as
Allies, now Treating, do promise besides, that they will and intend to keep
this Transaction and Peace inviolably, with all its Articles, Contents, and
Clauses; and that it may not be violated hereafter, they oblige themselves to a
mutual Guaranty and reciprocal defense on all parts, promising by these, as
firmly as it may be, that if it happen that any Party be attacked by another or
others, either by Sea or Land, against the Contents of this Treaty, the
Aggressor shall, ipso facto, be accounted by all the rest as the Breaker of
this Peace, losing all the benefit thereof, and the rest of the Parties now
Treating shall be obliged to assist the Party injured with their Forces and
Arms, within two Months at the furthest after thereunto desired by the injured
Party, and prosecute the War against the Aggressor until a Peace can be made
to the satisfaction of all. But if it happen that one Party shall receive any
grievous injury by the other, or some by others without force of Arms, it shall
not be lawful to the Injured to have presently recourse to Arms, but endeavors
shall be used to compose such kind of Controversies amicably and in a friendly
manner.

Out of the Transactions at Gluckstadt, October. 12. 1667.
And first, that a Friendly, kind, and filial affection may be restored between
his most Serene Royal Majesty and the Duke of Gottorp, all those things which
have been acted directly or indirectly against the Union, and and all those
Treaties that concern the Kingdom of Denmark, the Dukedoms of Sleswick and
Holstein, and all the Princes belonging to the same, shall on both sides be
absolutely forgotten, and are abolisht for ever; and the said Union (except as
to what has been in 1658, and 1660, otherwise determined by the aforesaid
Treaties of Roschild and Copenhaguen) shall subsist in its full force in Peace
and War, any pretense or interpretation whatsoever notwithstanding, and shall
be constantly observed. And neither Party shall molest or oppose the other for
any cause whatsoever contrary to the same.

At the end of this Transaction these words are set down.
We do Attest and Certify, that we have approved the foregoing Transaction,
and all and every the Articles and Clauses of the same; and accordingly do
approve, agree, and confirm it, promising for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
upon Our Royal Faith, that We shall not directly, nor indirectly act, or suffer
any thing to be acted against the same, and that we shall firmly adhere
thereunto. Given under Our Hand and Signet.

Frederick.

We CHARLES by the Grace of God of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, KING,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

Make known and certify, That whereas the most Serene Prince Frederick the
III. by the same Grace of Denmark and Norway, Goths and Vandals King, Duke of
Sleswick, H^lstein, Stormar and Dithmars, Earl in Oldenbourgh and Delmenhorst,
having wholly and fully freed and absolved the most High Prince the Lord
Frederick Heir of Norway, Duke of Sleswick and Holstein, etc. and his lawful
Heirs Males, from a certain Feudal Homage and Vassalage for the Dukedom of
Sleswick, and having yielded up to him and his Descendents Males the Dukedom of
Sleswick, with the Supreme and absolute Dominion thereof (commonly called the
Sovereignty) and all its Rights and Appurtenances, as appears more fully by the
Treaty or Instrument: And whereas the most High Prince the Lord Christian
Albert, Elected Bishop of Lubeck, Heir of Norway, Duke of Sleswick, Holstein,
Stormar, Dithmars, Earl in Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst, Our Cousin, having
desired Us by the Illustrious Sir John Leyenberg Knight, Resident in Our Court
for the most Potent King of Sweden, that interposing our Authority, We would
confirm and ratify by way of Guaranty, See the Patent for the Grant of this
Sovereignty in Lundorpius, Contin. part. 8. lib. 8. cap. 10. page 318. and
elsewhere.
the said Treaty or Covenant concluded at Copenhaguen, with all and every one
of its Clauses, as it is set down word for word in the German Exemplar (which
We have received from the said Resident of the most Serene King of Sweden upon
his Faith.)

We therefore, as well to gratify the demand and desire of the most Serene
King of Sweden, as to show the affection We bear and will always bear to the
aforesaid Duke Christian Albert, nearly joined to Us both in Friendship and
Blood, have thought fit to constitute Our Selves as Guarantee, and a Security
for the observation of this Treaty or Convention concluded at Copenhaguen the
12 May 1658; as by these in the best, most ample, and secure form, We do
constitute Our Selves Guarantee, and a Security for the same; Promising upon
Our Royal Faith, that We will maintain the Duke Christian Albert, his Heirs and
Successors in the said, and all other and singular their Rights; and if any
thing be attempted against his Highness, his Heirs and Successors, We shall
endeavor by a Friendly Mediation, or by opposing all necessary means against
force, that these Countries, Dominions, and Territories, with all the Rights,
Royalties, Sovereign and absolute Dominion, or Sovereignty thereof, may remain
whole and safe to him. And for the greater security of all and singular the
Premises, We have subscribed this Instrument of Guaranty with Our own hand,
and have caused Our Great Seal of England to be affixed thereunto.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster the 23. day of February, in the year one
Thousand six Hundred Sixty five, and in the Eighteen year of Our Reign.

Charles R.

SOME LETTERS OF THE KING OF Great Britain, THE King of Denmark, AND THE DUKE
OF Holstein Gottorp.

The King of Great Britains Letter to His Majesty the King of Denmark,
concerning a Mediation in the differences between His Majesty and the Duke of
Holstein Gottorp.
CHarles the Second, By the Grace of God King of Great Britain, etc. To the
most Serene and Potent Prince Christian the Fifth, by the same Grace of
Denmark, Norway, Goths and Vandals King, Duke of Sleswick, etc. Greeting.

We were extremely troubled to hear of the Differences lately arisen between
your Majesty and Our good Cousin the Duke of Holstein, for the nearness and tie
of Blood and common Interests between you; and therefore out of the Affection
We bear to both your Families, and the good and advantage of the same, We did
almost a Year ago offer our Mediation and good Offices between you; and We had
long since charged Our Minister residing at your Court to do it more solemnly,
if your Majesty's Envoy residing with Us had not induced and desired Us, as in
favor of himself; that all We should resolve to do therein, might be done
through his hands, which We the rather consented to then, because he charged
himself seriously to represent to your Majesty the offers We made of Our
Offices and Mediation. But your Majesty having not hitherto sent Us any direct
Answer thereunto, and your said Envoy having only by the by insinuated to Us,
that your Majesty rather desisired, that since this Affair seemed to be purely
Domestic, and concerned only the private Interests of two Princes of the same
Blood, it might be left to be determined among your selves; We hoped not to
have found your Majesty in this mind which We perceive by your Envoys
discourse, you are of: However, We cannot but, out of the desire We have to
reconcile two Princes that are of a Blood, so nearly Related to Us, and for
other considerations, (which induce Us to concern Our Selves with a more
special care in this matter, than perhaps We should otherwise) repeat again in
the most solemn manner, the first Offer of Our Mediation and good Offices, not
doubting but that your Majesty, after having seriously reflected upon the
thing, will think fit to admit of Our good Offices and Mediation, which you may
be confident, We shall always apply on all occasions which may concern your
Majesty, in such manner, as you have reason to expect from the mutual
Friendship between Us, of which We shall always give your Majesty those Proofs
and Arguments which you can desire, etc. July 2. 1677.

The King of Denmark's Answer to his Majesty the King of Great Britain.
CHristian the Fifth, By the Grace of God King of Denmark, etc. To the most
Serene and Potent Prince, Charles the II. by the same Grace, King of Great
Britain, etc. Greeting.

By your Majesty's Letters of the 10th of July last past, We have understood
more at large what Reasons induced you to offer Us your Mediation and good
Offices for composing the Differences arising between Us and Our Cousin and
Kinsman Christian Albert Duke of Holstein. This Offer of your Majesty's has
been the more pleasing to Us, because We do not doubt at all, but it proceeds
from a sincere and Brotherly affection toward Us; and We put so great a trust
in your Friendship, that if there were place for any Mediation in these
Differences, We would as readily accept of your Interposition for the
composing of them, as We have accepted of the same in the present Negotiation
for an Universal Peace, which We have constantly endeavored should remain
solely in your Majesty. But the Disputes and Controversies complained of by the
Duke of Gottorp to your Majesty, being grounded upon no other foundation than
his endeavors to lay aside all the Alliances and Treaties which have subsisted
for many Ages betwixt Our Royal Predecessors and his, and especially that which
he Voluntarily made with Us at Rendsbourgh, and approved several times after,
and so to free himself from all those ties, by which he is bound to Us as a
Vassal of Our Kingdom of Denmark, and Our Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein are
united together, hoping after the Example of his Father, (who in the last
unhappy War supported by the Arms of the King of Sweden his Son-in-Law, and by
the favor and unjust Authority of the English Usurper Cromwell, without any
respect of his obligations to Our Kingdom, under color of some frivolous and
groundless pretensions, extorted most unjust, and almost intolerable conditions
from Our Lord and Father of blessed and glorious Memory) to accomplish and
perfect his pernicious designs and unjust attempts, in these troublesome times,
as well by the help of his Neighbors Arms as your Majesty's Authority. The
Truth hereof appears also by this, that though We have diverse times proposed
to his Dilection, to restore him unto the former condition of his Ancestors, if
he would keep to the aforesaid Treaties, and fulfill their Tenor, he does not
cease nevertheless to complain of Force, and to solicit the help and succors
of other Princes and States, to finish those unjust Enterprises he has proposed
to himself. From whence your Majesty, according to your singular Prudence, will
easily judge, whether We can, without the greatest prejudice to Our Rights,
recede from the ancient Treaties, and those which have been made between Us and
the Duke of Gottorp, upon which the safety of Our Kingdoms and Dominions in
great measure depends, or suffer them to be disputed, and thereby expose Our
Selves to new and everlasting Differences and Quarrels; especially since it is
expressly covenanted by the said Treaties, that if any disputes shall hereafter
arise, they shall not be composed by the Mediation of other Princes, but by
other friendly and amicable means. For these and other Reasons which we have
ordered Our Envoy Extraordinary, Resident at your Majesty's Court, to represent
more amply to your Majesty, We do not doubt in the least, but your Majesty will
not only think it wholly unjust, that We should consent to such prejudicial
Treaties, and so contrary to the aforesaid Conventions and Domestic
agreements, but also that by virtue of the Alliances We have with your
Majesty, by which each of Us is obliged to promote the good of the other, and
to keep all dangers from him, your Majesty will compel the aforesaid Duke to a
better and more exact observance and execution of the Ancient Treaties, and all
others, to the performance whereof he has bound himself, and seriously dissuade
him from his usual pernicious designs against Us. The many proofs We have of
your Justice, and your experienced commendable Constancy and Faithfulness in
keeping your Treaties, makes Us promise Our Selves this from your Majesty's
friendship; being also resolved never to suffer any thing to be wanting in Us
that may prove for the advantage of your Majesty and your Subjects, and
persuade you of Our sincere affection toward you. By which your Majesty, etc.
Given at Our Court at Landscroon the 4th of August 1677.

The Duke of Holsteins Letter to his Majesty the King of Great Britain in
Answer to the King of Denmarks.
Most Serene and Potent Prince, etc.
HAving had a view of the Letters written to your most Serene Majesty by the
King of Denmark, the 4th of August of this present Year, We find by them, that
his Majesty of Denmark does indeed commend your Majesty's offers of Mediation
for composing Our Controversies, but in reality shows an aversion thereunto,
and declines it as unnecessary, endeavoring to demonstrate the same by
coloring his Actions with the specious pretense of ancient and late Treaties,
and accusing Our Lord and Father, and Us with a great many things. These
Letters being full of such complaints, We cannot but defend Our Innocence, and
free Our Honor from such accusations, by letting your most Serene Majesty
understand Our Reasons, why the differences between Us and the King of Denmark
ought not to be excluded out of the Negotiations for an Universal Peace, not
indeed can be debated any-where else without great danger and prejudice to Us.
We have been so observing of the ancient Treaties and Alliances, that for
several Ages the Dukes of Gottorp have lived under the Authority and at the
Devotion of the Kings of Denmark. But We are not by any Treaties to be
oppressed by those who are obliged by Virtue of Our Alliances to defend Us, nor
are We to submit Our Selves to a voluntary Slavery, but are rather by the said
Treaties freed from so sad a Yoke. Let the Kings of Denmark but consider how
they could make Wars upon Wars, and involve the Dukes of Gottorp's
Territories so often in the Calamities attending War, not only without
consulting the Dukes, but against their will and earnest dissuasions from the
same, without breach to the ancient Treat^es and Alliances, from which We are
sure it cannot be proved, that Our Ancestors ever receded rashly or unjustly.
As to the Articles of Rendsbourgh, We confess that We do not think Our Selves
further obliged to them, then either the goodness or equity of the cause, or of
the way of proceeding will oblige Us. We came as Friends and Guests to
Rendsbourgh, enticed with great hopes and ample Protestations, that all things
should be sincerely and fairly transacted and determined. But We were against
the Laws of Nations and Friendship Treated like Enemies, detained Prisoners,
guarded with Soldiers, and at last sent from one Prison to another,
everywhere besieged, and through fear and threatenings compelled unjustly to
most unreasonable conditions, (which the very way of proceeding argues to be
null). Therefore We are so far from consenting to them freely and voluntarily,
that We have never so much as freely ratified them. For those things that are
done by force, and through fear, may be sometimes made valid by a subsequent
free consent; yet no consent is to be esteemed such, except the person who is
said to have consented freely, be first set at full liberty: when on the
contrary, fear once caused in any transaction is supposed to continue still:
and We were the more disturbed thereby, because We were by the King deprived
of all good Counsels, Our Principal Ministers being violently carried away
Prisoners to Copenhaguen, and the rest frighted from Us by this unheard of
Example. The Sovereignty of the Dukedom of Sleswick, purchased with a very good
Title, and at a dear rate, was yielded up to Our House by Frederick the Third
King of Denmark, by his own free and often repeated consent, and has been
quietly possessed by Us for above Sixteen years; neither is it any matter, that
it was obtained partly by the fortunate Successes of the Arms of Sweden, since
it is undoubtedly true, that Wars may be made not only for O^r own good, but
for the good of others, and that the King of Sweden was then justly provoked to
take up Arms against the Danes, and that if the King of Denmark has suffered
any force, it being but just, he cannot pretend to any Right of Restitution.
We cannot like wise conceal, that by this and the foregoing Wars made by the
Kings of Denmark, We have contracted many great Debts; and Our Subjects are so
exhausted by Contributions, that part of them have been forced to quit the
Country, and the rest are glad if they can get the coarsest sort of Bread to
eat. Now when We quitted, by the last Treaty, all Our pretensions of
satisfaction from the King of Denmark, in consideration of the Sovereignty
which was yielded up to Us; what have we got, I pray, that any one should envy
Us for? It is the King of Denmark only is the gainer, who by that opportunity
got the Sovereignty of that part of the Dukedom of Sleswick which is his, and
thereby soon after an occasion of getting the Monarchy of the whole Kingdom.
Therefore, since that Our Lord and Father was by so many Solemn and public
Treaties absolutely freed from the tie of Vassalage and Homage, it cannot
certainly be imputed to him, that he had without any regard of his Alliance to
the Kingdom of Denmark, extorted the Sovereignty of the said Dukedom, unless
the King will slight all the Treaties of Peace and Conventions that have been
made upon that occasion, and by his Example incite the Kings of Spain and
Poland, nay his own Subjects to repossess themselves of their lost Provinces,
and Ancient Rights and Authorities, as soon as they shall have an occasion and
power to do it. We do with all gratitude acknowledge your Majesty's favor,
that besides the general Guaranty of all the conditions of the Peace at
Roschild, you have been pleased to oblige your Self to a special one for the
Preservation and Assertion of this Sovereignty. It is without any ground the
King of Denmark pretends, that We obtained the Sovereignty by the favor of
Cromwell only: For besides, that the good Offices and Mediations of other Kings
and States intervened in this Affair, and the conclusion thereof; We do not
well conceive how the King of Denmark can show which of the Usurpers Acts your
Majesty is pleased to hold ^or good, and which not: For it will not consist
with reason of State, and the public good, that they should be all annulled.
Nay, if the King of Denmark will be pleased to look into the circumstances of
this matter, he will find that the English Ambassador, who Resided at that time
at Copenhaguen, was unknown to the King of Sweden, brought to his Majesty by
the Danish Commissioners, and by them Solicited to employ his utmost endeavor
for a Peace. It appears from hence, that all Our Complaints of the great
Injuries We have sustained by the Danes are just, and that We never designed
any thing to the Kings prejudice, but that what may perhaps have displeased his
Majesty, was solely intended for the defense of Our House and Dominions, which
is every way lawful; and therefore We are most unjustly reproached of
intending and having such pernicious Designs, since we have only sought for a
lawful Defense against an unusual Domination and Oppression. Which things
being thus, as your most Serene Majesty may be more particularly informed by a
deduction we have lately caused to be Printed of this whole Affair, or by Our
Envoy Extraordinary Residing in London, we hope nothing will appear more
reasonable, than that we should be admitted into the Treaty for an universal
Peace, and that your most Serene Majesty's Mediation should not be rejected by
the King of Denmark, especially since he seems willing to admit of the good
Offices of other Princes of the Empire. Neither will their Objection, as if the
matters between the King and us were purely Domestic, be any ways material;
seeing it is known by all the world, that a Peace confirmed by so many
Protestations, was broken, and no regard had of any Domestic considerations;
and therefore your Majesty's Mediation is declined, for no other reason, but
that which makes Criminals fly from their Trials. For your Majesty will by what
follows see, how improper a Jury of Sixteen men (as they call it) is to decide
this Domestic business. In the year 1533, a Treaty was made between the
Kingdom of Denmark and the Dukedom, and between the Princes and States of both,
which usually bears the name of the Union; and among other things, a certain
form of Judicature was agreed upon, according to which all the Controversy,
that should arise between the two Princes, or between them and the States,
ought to be determined; viz. That the differences between them should be left
to the Arbitration of Sixteen Counselors, to be in equal number named by both
Parties. And though by the Articles of this Treaty a very ample power seems to
be given to these Judges, of examining and deciding all sorts of causes; yet we
do not remember that ever disputes of Moment, and about the Dukedom of
Sleswick, were brought to them, but they have always been left to the Mediation
of Foreign Princes. For there is not only not a word in this Treaty, by which
it may appear that these Princes have renounced all other Judgments and
Arbitrations; but the express words of it, as well as the usage and custom,
(which is the best interpreter of Laws and Treaties) have confined the Power of
this Tribunal of Sixteen men, to affairs of lesser importance; That is to say,
when the complaint concerns any Lands or private Subjects. Therefore, not long
after the Union made, several Transactions have been about the Fief of the
Dukedom of Sleswick, first at Coldinga 1547, and then by the Interposition of
the Elector of Saxony, of Vlrick Duke of Mecklenbourgh, and William Landgrave
of Hesse at Odensea 1557; though nothing was then agreed on: but at last 1579,
in the same place, it was expressly provided by a solemn Convention, That if
there should happen any dispute about the Succession to the Dukedom of
Sleswick, which was not decided by this Transaction, the Dukes of Sleswick
should either themselves, or by the help of other Princes and Friends,
endeavor to compose the same, or that it might be determined by a Judicial
Sentence. Here is no mention of this Judgment by Sixteen men, but rather all
Controversies, that may arise about the Dukedom of Sleswick, are in express
words exempted without any contradiction from the States. And therefore the
question about the Sovereignty is so much the less to be referred to their
determination, because in that Age, wherein the Union was made, such a thing
was not so much as thought of; and therefore its Articles cannot extend to
affairs of this nature, and which are wholly above the condition of Subjects.
And though we can (without prejudice to Our cause) allow, that sometimes feudal
differences about the Duchy of Sleswick have been left to this sort of
Arbitration, (which it seems may be done by the consent of both Princes,) yet
there has happened so great a change in the Danish affairs and Ours, that we
cannot be forced to consent thereunto against Our will; and the like
Controversies can no longer be debated there, at least without great
inconvenience, because such Constitutions remain only in force, so long as the
state of public Affairs is the same and unaltered; which being entirely
changed, as well in Denmark as in these Duckedomes, and all the Power of the
States of Denmark being devolved unto the King and in his hand, and there being
no such thing now as Senators of the Kingdom, who had great Authority when the
Union was made, it is not reasonable his Majesty should sit as Judge in his own
cause; and that a matter of so great moment should be submitted to the decision
of those, who, for fear of the Kings Power, or to gain his favor, may be so
much biased, that Our loss may be irreparable. And therefore seeing that
amongst free people and Princes, it has been always allowed to refuse to stand
to the Arbitration of a Judge justly suspected, and that this present
conjuncture of Affairs, as well as the Transaction at Odensea, shows Us another
way, We earnestly desire your most Serene Majesty will endeavor to prevail
with the King of Denmark, that Our Differences may be Treated of at Nimeguen,
that so We may find some Remedy abroad for those vast Damages and Injuries We
have sustained and received, which We cannot hope for at home. For as the
Peace at Roschild was made by the Interposition of several Kings and States, so
it is of public concern, that it should be restored and confirmed by the like
means. All who think themselves injured contrary to the Treaties of Westphalia,
Roschild, and Copenhaguen, have liberty to come to Nimeguen: And why should We
who are oppressed contrary to all these Treaties, be hindered from it? At
Nimeguen a general Peace is Treated of; why should our cause then not be
admitted there, who have without all reason suffered most grievous injuries
from the Danes, and been almost undone by them? We suppose the Objection is not
considerable, that none are to be admitted there, but those who have joined
their Arms to either of the Parties now in War. For if those who were in a
condition to resist Arms by Arms, and return Force by Force, are admitted; with
how much more reason ought We to be received, who being deprived of all Our
Arms and other helps by the King of Denmark, have been forced to endure all his
affronts and injuries? We know that the Laws of Nature and Nations are for Us,
and we do not think that any Prince will oppose it, but those who over-byassed
by Partiality, or the desire of their own advantage, would have a Peace for
themselves and theirs though at Our Cost, and the loss of Our Dignities and
Dominions; not reflecting that the sum of Our Cause is only, whether We shall
become a Subject, or be a free Prince again; and after Our Example, Whether the
other Princes of the Empire must not hereafter rather become Subjects than
enjoy their ancient Rights of free Princes. This being contrary to all Justice,
to the Treaties so often repeated, and so Religiously Sworn to, to the common
Interest of all Princes, and to the Honor and Authority of your most Serene
Majesty, and other the Princes who are Guarantees, We do earnestly recommend
Our Cause to their good Will and just Affection, and We have particularly
great hopes in your most Serene Majesty's Equity and Protection. And if the
King of Denmark desires to be admitted and heard at Nimeguen, sure it cannot be
upon any other Terms, than that he must in all things stand to that Law which
he intends to use against others; and endure as patiently the just Complaints
of those who have been highly injured by him, preferred to that great Assembly,
as he has perhaps resolved vigorously to prosecute others there. Nay, let the
King of Denmark be willing or not to accept of this Mediation and Place,
certainly We will rely so entirely and constantly upon the Guaranty of the
several Princes, who have entered into it, and especially upon the general and
particular one of your most Serene Majesty, that We had rather suffer any
thing whatsoever, then be forced away from that Sacred Anchor, being well
assured, that your Majesty will employ your Authority as well against those
that decline your Mediation, as for those that have accepted thereof; and that
Our Restoration and Safety will be secure and certain upon your most Serene
Majesty's Faith, which the Kings of Great Britain have always Religiously kept
to God and men. May it please God, that this Great Affair of the Peace may
succeed under the Auspices of your most Serene Majesty, and to your Immortal
Praise, That every body may have his own, and none be hereafter Injured. And so
we most earnestly recommend your most Serene Majesty to his Grace and
Protection. Given at Hambourgh the first of October. 1677.

Christian Albert by the Grace of God, Heir of Norway named Coadjutor of
Lubeck, Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar, Dithmars, Earl of Oldenbourg and
Delmenhorst, etc.

A Letter to his Majesty the King of Denmark, from the Dukes of
Brunswick-Lunenburgh, etc.
Most Serene,
WE have thought fit to let your Majesty understand, that his Highness the Duke
of Holstein-Gottorp, Our Beloved Cousin, has lately signified unto Us, that
although the Affairs concerning the Succession of the Imperial Feifs, the
Counties of Oldenbourgh and Delmenhorst, after a long dispute, have at last
been brought to a full and final determination, (and particularly the Town and
Country of Bu^jading, a Feif of Our Princely House, has been adjudged not to
depend upon the said two Counties, which also at the time of Execution shortly
after in the Month of May, remained except and exempted accordingly); his said
Highness conceiving no other hopes, but that as he equally shares with your
Majesty in the same Rights and Regalities, and has 1674, received the
Investiture of the same from Our Princely House, he should accordingly enjoy
the same quietly for the future: Yet his Highness found afterward in effect,
that the Provincial Judge, constituted by your Majesty and him jointly, was
removed from his Office without the knowledge or consent of his Highness, and
an other put into his room, who in Public Prayers (contrary to the former
Customs,) caused his Highness to be left out, pretending that your Majesty had
given him orders so to do, (a Copy of which being communicated to Us, we
thought fit here to insert it) and commanded all those Officers, both
Ecclesiastical and Secular, to do homage to none but your Majesty, by which
means, the said Town and Country of Budjad seems in effect subject to the
ab^vesaid Imperial Execution. Wherefore his Highness thought fit and necessary
to mind Us of the Dominium directum which Our Princely House holds over those
Lands, and that your Majesty and He were jointly invested therewith by Our
Princely House, and that (according to the Universal Laws of Fiefs, as well as
by the abovesaid Covenant, made at Hambourgh, and the Instruments thereof duly
interchanged) we ought to Protect him as Feudatarie of Our House, in this his
manifest Right (so solemnly gotten by the said Covenant and Agreement); and to
desire Us, that without delay We would do Our parts, and endeavor with your
Majesty, that his Highness neither directly, nor indirectly be disturbed in the
possession of those Regalities, and enjoyment of the Revenues of the said
Lands, but be suffered to continue therein quietly.

Whereas now it is manifest by the said Treaty, which praemeditate, and after
much pains, was at last concluded 1653 at Hambourgh, viz. That the said Town
and Country of Bu^jad is a separate thing and Independent from the Imperial
Fiefs, (the Counties of Oldenbourgh and Delmenhors^) and since your Majesty's
Archives will show, what between his late Majesty, your Father of Blessed
Memory, and Us has passed; and that his Majesty during the said Process of Law
about the Succession of the said Counties (in a Letter dated at Copenhaguen the
29 of January 1668) desired of Us, that pursuant to the second Article of the
said Treaty or Covenant (wherein it is expressly provided, that not any of the
Princes of Holstein, either of the collateral, or any other line of that House,
shall ever have pretension now, or for the future thereupon, and that on the
contrary it shall neither lie in Our Power to confer the same upon any of them)
We should make Our most humble Address to his Imperial Majesty to demonstrate
the Interest of Our Princely House, and so prevent that the Town and County of
Bu^jading from being drawn into the Controversy about the Oldenbourgh
Succession, etc. which we have done accordingly; and the effect of it was, that
that not only in the Sentence and Executions Commission, (afterward published)
not one word of them was mentioned, but also when We, George William, the 22
and 24 of May at Oldenbourgh and Delmenhorst, proceeded to the Execution upon
the said Town and County of Budjading, by Our Sub-Delegats, appointed for that
purpose, in the presence and hearing of the Duke of Holstein-Pleun's Deputy,
his Chancellor, they were purposely and in plain Terms excepted and exempted;
as it appears by the Rolls kept for that Act.

Wherefore we could not but find Our Selves obliged at the request of Our
Cousin Duke Christian Albert of Holstein, to second his desires in so just a
matter, which so evidently concerns the Interest of Our Princely House: and as
we have a sure confidence in the great aequanimity of your Majesty, that your
Majesty does not intend to undertake, or suffer any thing to be undertaken, to
so m^nifest a prejudice of Our Princely House, contrary to the Treaty
concerning the said Fief of the Town and Countr^ of Budjading, and Our
Letters-Pattents, and the Reversales thereof passed in order thereunto; so We
beseeci your Majesty to take such order concerning the sai^ Country, that
nothing may be committed which is prejudicial, but that pursuant to the said
Covenant and Transactions, joint Possession and Enjoyment may for hereafter, as
formerly, be permitted to his Highness Duke Christian Albert of Holstein, and
that what already has been acted contrary to the Premises, (doubtless without
your Majesty's command and knowledge) may be altered, abolished, and all things
reduced to their former condition.

In so doing your Majesty will perform, what the Treaty, Covenant, and Laws do
require, and we shall upon all occasions be ready to do your Majesty acceptable
Service. 12 of September. 1676.

George Wilhelm. John Frederick. Radolph. Augustus.

His MAJESTY the King of Denmarks LETTER To his Highness the Duke of
Holstein-Gottorp, CONCERNING The Sequestration of the Dukedom of Sleswick: And
the said Dukes Answer thereunto. AS ALSO His Imperial Majesty's Letter to the
Duke of Holstein: With the Dukes ANSWER.

Printed in the Year 1677.

The King of Denmark's Letter to the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, concerning the
Sequestration.
Christian the Fifth, by the Grace of God, King of Denmark, etc.
Serene Duke, etc.
IT is not unknown to your Dilection, what hitherto has past about the
receiving of the Investiture over the Dukedom of Sleswick, whereunto you have
obliged your Self by the late Agreement of Rendsbourgh; and how your Dilection
since that time, upon Our several well-meant Admonitions, by diverse Letters
directed to Us, has promised the performance thereof; and in order thereunto,
sent hither some of your Ministers, who nevertheless under the pretext of going
for some more particular instructions from your Dilection, are lately parted
again from hence, without having dispatched any thing at all. And whereas We
have hitherto in vain expected their promised return; the time likewise at the
said Agreement of Rendsbourgh appointed for the receiving of the
abovementioned Investiture being already past in the Month of July last,
besides diverse other Terms since indulged which are long ago expired; We also
having a sufficient and true information of those most dangerous Machinations,
which your Dilection has in hand against Us and Our State; and besides, it
being very requisite, that We carefully do mind what is necessary for the
preserving of this Investiture, depending upon Us and Our Crown of Denmark:
Therefore have We found Our Selves unavoidably, and as it were against Our
will obliged, now to Sequestrate that part of the said Dukedom, wherewith your
Dilections Ancestors have been heretofore Invested; and to issue out a
Commission to some of Our Counselors and Officers there residing, for putting
in Execution the said Sequestration, and for performing all that is necessary
to be done about the same. Since therefore We would rather have desired any
thing else, than to come to this Extremity, We have thought good to give
notice of this Our Resolution to your Dilection, and to appoint yet, out of a
super-abundance, another Term of Six weeks from the date hereof, for the
receiving of the said Investiture, to the end that your Dilection and all the
World may see, how willingly we would use all possible moderation herein,
without any over-hastening of your Dilection. However, we do it with this
further precaution and warning, that in case the said prefixed Term, contrary
to all expectation, likewise should be disregarded by your Dilection, We then
shall be necessitated, though much against Our will, to proceed ad ipsam
Privationem Feudi, or to the cutting off the Fief, and to take such further
courses as the Feudal Laws do allow of. Of all this we have thought convenient
to advertise your Dilection, Recommending, etc. Dated at Our Place of Residence
at Copenhaguen the 19th of December 1676.

Your Dilections Affectionate Cosen and Brother-in-Law, CHRISTIAN.

The Duke of Holsteins Answer to the foregoing Letter.
Most Serene and most Potent King, etc.
YOur Majesty's Letter of the 19th of December last past, from Copenhaguen
directed to Us, has been presented to Our hands the second of this instant, by
an Express from one of your Majesty's Commissaries; by the C^ntents whereof We
have seen the same things, that already some days before had been published by
some Letters Patents affixed in Our Dukedom of Sleswick, viz. That your
Majesty has been induced to Sequestrate that part of the said Dukedom, which
does belong to Us, and to nominate to that effect certain Commissaries, with
the annexed warning, that in case we did not within Six weeks, from the date of
the said Letter, effectually accomplish the receiving of the Investiture over
that Dukedom of Sleswick, your Majesty would proceed ad ipsam Privationem
Feudi, or the cutting of the Feif, and take such further courses as the Feudal
Laws do allow of, being moved thereunto by these Reasons: That We in the point
of the receiving of the said Investiture, neither had performed that so called
late Agreement of Rendsbourgh, nor the Promises made by Our Letters under Our
own hand, nor sent back our Ministers, who without any dispatch of Affairs were
gone from Copenhaguen; but that on the contrary we had in hand most dangerous,
and, by a singular accident, discovered machinations against your Majesty, and
your State; and had also, as it were, unavoidably obliged your Majesty to the
preservation of your Majesty's and the Crown of Denmark's Rights.

Whereupon we cannot but with all due respect return this our Answer to your
Majesty, that for the sake of your Majesty's own Glory, and high Reputation,
and your Realms and Dominions welfare, We have most ardently desired and
wished, that our thoughts at the first seeing of your Majesty's aforementioned
Letters Patents, (as if they might have been published without your knowledge)
might have a sure ground, and your Majesty such a kindness for us, as not to
indulge any longer our Persecutors, but rather to put a period to those unusual
hard proceedings, which we undeservedly have suffered from them, and to
re-establish and consolidate that ancient tie and friendship, which has proved
so useful and beneficial to both Great Houses, and their respective Kingdoms,
Territories, and Subjects; seriously considering withal, that it cannot be
available, neither to the repute of your Majesty's innate Generosity, nor to
your Majesty's Realms and Dominions, to see us, (who are in many regards so
nearly related, and never failed either in due Respects, or required
Faithfulness to your Majesty,) thus oppressed, and reduced to a quite desperate
condition, without having been able to obtain the least redress, which yet lies
so absolutely in your Majesty's own hands.

However, this is our only and especial comfort in all our daily increasing
calamities, that your Majesty by your Letters does furnish us with an occasion
to make our justification before your self, and briefly to refute those
accusations so inhumanly invented by our ill-wille^s. For your Majesty's own
Christian Conscience will be the best and sur^st witness for us, that we never
have entertained any other Counsels, nor have negotiated with any body
whatsoever about any other things, but what to our best understanding we have
deemed to be good, expedient, and lawful for a free Prince, to preserve our
selves in that State God Almighty has been pleased to settle us in, by making
us a lawful Heir and Successor to the Duke our Father of Blessed Memory, and to
transmit the same to our Posterity, as we had got it. We our selves have not
made that Agreement concluded at Copenhaguen on the 12th day of May, in the
year 1658, but have inherited those Rights, which in due consideration of the
manifold damages sustained have thereby accrued to our Family. And it is also
known to the World, that we have employed none at all at the Treaty and
Conclusion of the reiterated Northern Peace in the Camp for Copenhaguen, on the
27th. day of May in the year 1660, although we had then already taken the
Government upon Us; and the said Treaty of Copenhaguen has nevertheless been
confirmed therein, and the Guaranty thereof undertaken by the three most
Puissant States of Christendom. And presupposing his Majesty the King of
Denmark, Frederick the Third, our most Honored Father-in-Law of glorious
Memory, unwillingly and against his mind, (which yet is altogether unknown to
us, since his Family as well as ours has been benefited thereby,) should have
proceeded to the granting of that Sovereignty, and other advantages promised to
our Family; yet it was but a mere spontaneous Act; nay, it has been an evident
token of his Royal Affection toward us, that having observed by our Addresses
for a near Alliance of Marriage in his Royal Family, our sincere inclination
toward him, his Majesty in the year 1667, when the Contract of Marriage in his
own Fortress at Gluckstadt was a-making up, has in all and the singular
Articles, Points and Clauses, wholly, and to all perpetuity, confirmed to us
the abovesaid Treaty of Copenhaguen, grounded upon the Sovereignty over the
Dukedom of Sleswick, and established the same jointly with that ancient Union
for a perpetual rule betwixt both Families, with this engagement, and Royal
firm Parol, that himself and his hereditary Successors in the Government,
neither directly nor indirectly would act, nor cause to be acted against the
same. But in what manner we have since been dealt withal at Rendsbourgh, in the
year 1675, and how we have been constrained by a most troublesome detention to
surrender our Fortresses, Artillery, Ammunition and Militia; yet with this
Comfort given us, that all differences therewith were ended, and upon change of
Times, and an ensuing Peace, all should be restored in such a condition as it
was taken from us: and how, notwithstanding all th^s, (after we forsooth, for
our Person, were dismissed to Go^torp, yet still had strange Troops about us,
and so only had changed place, but not detention,) certain Articles have been
prescribed to our Ministers and Counselors remaining behind in Arrest, and we
forced to the pretended Ratification thereof, even as we were to the surrender
of our Fortresses without any liberty left us, only therein to alter things
quite inconsistent with the Dignity of a free German Prince of the Empire: We
are as unwilling to relate, as your Majesty can be desirous to hear, and should
also have forborne to mention it either to your Majesty, or to any others, if we
were not assured in our Conscience that your Majesty, out of an inbred Heroic
Love to Justice, does detest such a way of proceeding, and in that regard has
laid a Ground for that high displeasure your Majesty thereupon conceived
against him, who out of Reasons unknown to us, has occasioned all that
mischief which then did befall us.

And since that time we have not been able to imagine, that your Majesty should
ever have intended, to set up that so called Agreement of Rendsbourgh,
proceeding from such derogatory and extorted Principles, and consequently made
void by Law, into a Pragmatical Sanction, after your Majesty has charged our
Subjects with such Contributions as are intolerable, and do quite cut off both
our extraordinary and ordinary Revenues, and has quite demolished to the
ground our Fortresses, your Majesty having thereby introduced an impossibility
to perform what the pretended Agreement of Rendsbourgh does import: For if we
by virtue thereof are to receive the Investiture over the Dukedom of Sleswick,
it must be done at least after such a manner, as the Duke our Father of Blessed
memory the last time, viz. in the year 1648, received the same; and then we
ought to be Invested not only with the bare Land, but also with those
Fortresses, since the last Feudal Letter does make express mention thereof. It
is true, we do confess, that even after such rigorous proceedings, to testify
our deference to your Majesty, and our desire of Peace, but chiefly, to ease
our Subjects something groaning under their burden, and to promote their
freedom according to our Power; we have come so far, as to condescend at length
to the receiving the Investiture upon these terms, that all things should be
resetled in such a state, as they had been before the pretended Agreement of
Rendsbourgh, and that the weighty burden lying upon our Territories, should be
taken off, and due satisfaction effectually made for the damages sustained: And
for that purpose we have sent some of our Ministers to Copenhaguen; but our
just desires have been rejected, an unconditional performance of the Feudal
duty insisted on, and the redress of our Grievances set out of doors, and our
Ministers having alleged the want of full Powers thereunto, have been sent
back for new Instructions, without being recalled by us from Copenhaguen, as
her Majesty the Queen Mother by her own Letters deted at Copenhaguen the 19th
day of November, 1676, has informed us. And we do confess very freely, that in
case our Subjects presently after our Conditional Promise made, had been eased
from their burden, the Fortresses reduced to their former state, and due
satisfaction effectually given us, we would have done the utmost, and undergone
afresh that Feudal Duty. But whereas also, since possession has been taken of
our part of Stadt and Butjadinger-Land, notwithstanding the same has no
Relation at all to that Process, which was made at Vienna in the Cause of
Olden^ourgh, (besides his descending as a Fief from the Ducal House of
Brunswick-Lunenbourgh;) our Subjects likewise both in Holstein and Sleswick,
have been forbid to pay us the few remaining ordinary dues; and furthermore
such aims are taken, as to exclude us from that Treaty of a General Peace at
Nimeguen, and consequently from all hopes of redress; and lately Navigation
has even been by open Proclamations absolutely Interdicted to all our
Inhabitants and Subjects of the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein, without
affording us, as Prince Regent, the least knowledge thereof, much less
designing us to join in the said Publication, if the same had been required: We
therefore have had good reason to wave the sending over our Deputies the second
time again, after they were thus dismissed before, but rather have taken a firm
resolution to get our Cause ventilated and discussed at the Treaty of the
General Peace at Nimeguen, with this certain hope and confidence, that no
Potentate concerned therein will dispute our admission, in regard that amongst
other high concerns, the re-establishment of the Northern Peace, will be also
treated there, which is not only the foundation of our Sovereignty over the
Dukedom of Sleswick, with the other advantages stipulated for us and our
Family, but also is an essential part thereof, and stands comprehended under
the undertaken General and Special Warranty. Neither do we think that your
Majesty's Ministers in Holland have had any orders to render difficult the
impetrating of the Pasports, by us desired from the States General of the
United Provinces, for our Ministers destined to Nimeg^n; seeing they have not
been able to allege any thing at all which should deserve the least
reflection, and exclude us from the General-Treaty, if we were but to be
considered as a German Prince, and had no concerns in the reestablishment of
the Northern Peace, which nevertheless has first of all been endangered on our
side. But concerning those machinations discovered by a singular accident,
whereby, as we do conceive, some endeavors are used, to justify that (in all
points formally commenced) Sequestration, we have not the least cause to clear
our selves in that respect, before any particulars are nearer touched, and it
be duly made appear to us, that we have been concerned in any of those
Machinations represented to your Majesty. However we are sure and confident,
that we never have been so deservedly suspected privy to any thing as that
thereby just cause should have been given, to charge us therewith by
Potentates, both within and without the Empire, and to alienate their former
inclination from Us and our Family; much less can a Pretext thereby
conveniently be taken to sequestrate that part of the Dukedom of Sleswick,
which with all right Hereditarily and Properly does belong to us, and to menace
us with a total deprivation thereof; and we do also fully persuade our selves,
that your Majesty will put this to the serious consideration of your Ministers,
who have brought this Process upon the Stage, and perhaps do endeavor to
assert it is consistency with the Feudal Laws, That as your Majesty doubtless
makes great doubt, to assume a Judges part in your own Cause, so neither the
Sequestration of the Fief, nor the Deprivation of the same, can or may consist
after that manner, as it is intended against us, although we should be
indisputably obliged to that Vassalage of the Dukedom of Sleswick, which yet,
saving all due respect to your Majesty, we find our selves necessitated
solemnly to contradict, except one would presume to Act by nullities, or by
making no reflection upon the Law. And the common Feudal Laws, whereupon
likewise the ancient Unions and Hereditary Agreements, (in case any difference
as well in Feudal as other matters should arise) are usually grounded, do show,
That not only in the total deprivation of a Fief, but also in the
Sequestration, the hearing of the Cause before a Competent Judge, ought
solemnly to precede it, (notwithstanding one should presume to assert the
necessity of a Sequestration,) in case the Parties show themselves unwilling,
the reasons whereof, nevertheless, will never be made out of those pretended
Machinations.

Having therefore pondered all the abovementioned, and such other concomitant
circumstances, we cannot but still keep to our resolution once deliberately
taken, and remit that point of our undeservedly questioned Sovereignty over the
Dukedom of Sleswick, with all the other alien^ted Dignities, Prerogatives,
Territories, and Fortresses; as also all due and equitable satisfaction, and
what else can conduce to our future Security, to the place of Congress for a
general Peace at Nimeguen, patiently expecting from God and time, what
Conclusion there will be made and come forth about the restoring the Northern
Peace, and consequently also of our Rights and Concerns. But we do in the mean
time very kindly and instantly entreat withal your Majesty, that out of an
Inclination to Justice, and in regard of that desolate condition, whereunto we
and ours thus undeservedly see our selves more and more reduced, your Majesty
would be pleased till then, and till the speediest (God grant) ensuing
conclusion of a general Peace, to preserve all peaceable thoughts, and not to
press upon us any further with the said Investiture, and any other demands; but
on the contrary, without delay to recall that unjust and ungrounded
Sequestration, and not only leave to us the enjoyment of all our Rights and
Prerogatives undisturbed, but also to take off the exceeding Contributions from
our quite exhausted Subjects, and to restore that part of Stadt and
Budjadinger-Land, and also of the Customs at Elistiet, properly appertaining
unto us, and amicably and friendly to interpret this our unavoidable
Justification and Declaration; with this assurance, that as we have in all
Points carefully observed that high respect due to your Majesty, so likewise we
have intended to say or write nothing, which should tend against the same. All
this is very consentaneous to equity, and to your Majesty's inbred Generosity;
and we shall be ready for our part everywhere to praise such your Majesty's
kindness, and with due thankfulness, and all possible services, always
acknowledge the same; most faithfully recommending withal your Majesty to God
Almighty's Protection. Dated Hambourgh the 16th of Jan. 1677.

Your Majesty's Obsequious Cousin and Brother-in-Law Christian Albrecht.

THE EMPERORS LETTER TO THE Duke of Holstein.
LEOPOLD by the Grace of GOD Elected Roman-Emperor.
Serene Duke, etc.
BY these We give your Dilection to understand, that We are informed, how you
have not only for your part approved of those proposals which were made to you
by Graventable the Swedish Minister, (lately residing in Our Imperial City of
Hamborough,) about certain Levies to be made in Foreign Parts, and are come to
a certain conclusion with him in that affair; but also that your Dilection for
the promoting of the said Levies has made use of Kielman your late President's
Monys, that lie there, and taken thereof the Sum of 200000 Rix-dollars, and
that your Dilection does employ in this affair the Swedish President Kley, (who
hitherto has pretended to live there as a private man,) and also another
person named Vlke.

And although We do repose a far better confidence in your Dilection, than to
think that you (setting aside your strict Ties and Duties toward Us, and the
whole Roman Empire,) will thus lose your Self, and by such prohibited, and
culpable advantages, take the Enemies part, contrary to the public Statutes of
the Empire, and Our Imperial Avocatories published thereupon; yet have We
thought good kindly to acquaint, and seriously to admonish you by these, that
in case things should be thus, your Dilection might betimes desist from such
Enterprises, and embracing better Counsel, comport your Self according to what
Duty does require of a Loyal Member of the Empire, lest otherwise We should be
obliged to cause your Dilection be proceeded against according to Our Imperial
Avocatories; all which is for your Dilections Government: Tendering withal Our
Imperial Grace and good Will to your Dilection. Dated at Our Castle at Lintz
the 6th of January in the Year of Our Lord 1677. of Our Reign in the Roman
Empire the 19th. In Hungary the 22th, and in Bohemia the 21th.

LEOPOLD,

V. Leopold William Count of Konigsegg,
Ad mandatum Sacrae Caesareae Majestatis proprium, John Ambrose Hogell.

The Duke of Holstein's Answer to the foregoing Letter of the Emperor.
Most Serene, etc.
YOur Imperial Majesty's most gracious Letter from Lintz of the 6th Instant,
has been some days ago delivered to Me by your Imperial Majesty's Minister
here residing, the Lord Baron of Rond(...), and received by Me with all the
humblest respects Imaginable: but with extreme astonishment I understood by the
contents thereof, that your Imperial Majesty had got Information, as if I had
not only, for my part, approved of those Proposals which had been made to me by
Graventable the Swedish Minister, lately Residing here in Hamborough, about
certain Levies to be made in Foreign Parts, and had come to a certain
conclusion with him in that affair; but also, that for the promoting of the
said Levies, I had made use of Kielman, my late President's Moneys, that lie
here, and taken thereof the Sum of 200000 Rix-dollars, and that I also did
employ in this affair the Swedish President Kley, (who hitherto has pretended
to live here as a private man,) and another person named Vlcke: Wherefore your
Imperial Majesty most graciously has thought good to acquaint me therewith,
and seriously to admonish me, that in case things should be thus, (which yet
your Imperial Majesty would scarce expect from me,) I may betimes desist from
such Enterprises, and embracing better Counsel, compor^ my Self according to
what Duty does require of a Loyal Member of the Empire, lest otherwise your
Imperial Majesty should be obliged to cause Me be proceeded against according
to your published Imperial Avocatories.

It is true, I can promise my Self nothing else from your Imperial Majesty's
most mild and yet most just disposition, but that your Imperial Majesty's very
gracious Letter, (although occasioned by the industrious contrivance of some
envious persons, who, by all ways and means, seek very watchfully the
oppression and ruin of my self, and my Ducal House) has been sent to me for no
other end, but that your Imperial Majesty might thereby get a fitter occasion
to discover my Innocence, and consequently, by your Imperial Majesty's
Authority and highest Power, to Protect me as a Loyal Member and Prince of the
Empire, against those who have made no Conscience for the space of these 19
Months, to Treat me unworthily, and oppress me undeservedly, leaving me nothing
of all my Princely Dignity but bare life. However, when I call to mind again,
in what manner your Imperial Majesty's Requisitorials concerning me, which were
delivered into his Majesty the King of Denmarks hands, have been (by the
contrivance of some Ministers, bearing an hatred to me) abused so far, that
they begun almost from that very hour to exhaust my poor Subjects, as well of
Holstein, as of Sleswick, with intolerable Contributions, and to render them
quite incapable to contribute so much, as they were lawfully bound to do for
the upholding my Princely State and Dignity; (which proceedings are yet till
this very moment continued, to the utter destruction of my Territories, though
no further Imperial Requisitorials have been signified to me, which have been
granted to other States of the lower Circle of Saxony in the point of
Quarters:) Then have I just reason to fear, that they likewise now under your
Imperial Majesty's highest Name and Authority, though against your Imperial
Majesty's will and intention, do go about to color, and palliate what they
newly have contrived for the finishing of my premeditated ruin, and partly have
already brought to an Execution. All which I have by my former complaints, with
all submission represented to your Imperial Majesty, and thereby most humbly
implored your speedy Protection; whereunto also I do now refer my self, in
hopes your Imperial Majesty will be pleased, not only most graciously to hear,
but also see them according to your Imperial Clemency forthwith redressed.

Concerning those Accusations brought before your Imperial Majesty, and laid
home at my door, I should never have Imagined, upon what bottom and foundation
they could be grounded, unless your Imperial Majesty by the Nomination of
certain Persons had obliged me to a more exact Information; whereupon I most
humbly can assure your Imperial Majesty, by the true and faithful Word of a
Prince, that I never had the least knowledge of these specified Projects,
touching the Levies of some Foreign Forces, much less have I approved of the
same, or dealt or agreed about them, directly or indirectly, with any man in
the World. And I can protest with Truth it self, that Kleyhe the King of
Sweden's President, has not, all the time of his abode here, made any
Propositions to me concerning my Conjunction with Foreign Crowns against your
Imperial Majesty, and your high Allies, nor ever offered to persuade me to any
such thing. But this I do declare willingly and freely, that I have caused my
disconsolate condition, whereunto I find my self undeservedly reduced, to be
fully represented to his Majesty the King of Great Britain, as Guarantee of the
Northern Peace, which first of all began to bleed and suffer on my side; to
whom I made it my humble Request, that his said Majesty would be pleased, (in
respect both of that General and Special Guaranty taken upon him concerning my
Sovereignty over the Dukedom of Sleswick, lawfully obtained,) to procure my
Restitution, and due Satisfaction; which I have been so far from disowning,
that I was content that the Memorials about the said Subject exhibited from
time to time by my Deputy, should be faithfully communicated to the Danish
Minister residing in England. For which end I have also employed at that Court
the same Vlcken my Counselor there, whom I did for almost two years employ at
your Imperial Majesty's Court; and have amongst other Negotiations also caused
my most humble Remonstrations and frequent Instances by him to be made to your
Imperial Majesty for my Protection, with certain hopes, that he has behaved
himself so well, that no cause is left to mistrust him, or to charge him with
any sinister and ill-grounded accusations. Since therefore the abovesaid foul
aspersions, studiously contrived by my ill-wishers, can never be proved nor
laid to my door; the rest consequently must fall to the ground, which charge me
that for the carrying on of such fictitious Levies, I should have taken and
employed the said Sum of 200000 Rixdollers belonging to the Heirs of Kielman,
which moneys I do not know in the least if they do lie here or no. Whereas now
my Innocence, and the Fictitiousness of those Sinister imputations do
sufficiently appear by the premises; I can with all submission assure your
Imperial Majesty that nothing in the World shall be ever forced from me, which
may offend and interrupt my Loyal Duties tendered to your Imperial Majesty, and
to the Roman Empire, and that Devotion which my Ancestors have Sealed with
their Princely Blood to the Mighty House of Austria. I do therefore again most
humbly implore your Imperial Majesty, as the most Sacred Head of the Empire,
that your Imperial Majesty would be pleased not to give way to the Suspicions
raised against me, but rather, out of your Highest Fatherly care provide such
ways and means, whereby I, as a devoted Co-member of the Roman Empire, may be
upheld and freed from all my pressing Calamities. Thus longingly I do look for
your Imperial Majesty's effectual and gracious Resolution, etc.

Dated at Hambourgh the 20 of Jan. Ann. 1677.
FINIS.

