A LETTER From a Friend in Shropshire to his Countryman Mr. Richard Baxter AT
HIS MEETING HOUSE IN LONDON.
BEing well assured of the respect you bear to mankind in general, and
particularly those of your Native-Country, I presume to trouble your Reverence
with the perusing of these lines, being mostly matter of Fact, as it is acted
by one Mr. Hugh P -- and Mr. Philip ap R --, Preachers of an Independent
Congregation at Swiny in this Parish, at Mrs. Bakers, in which you may easily
observe how some men corrupt the word, and what kind of gain they make by the
pretense of Godliness Had I known the particular Resident at London for this
part of England, I would have forborne this trouble to your self; but presuming
you may have some knowledge of him, I desire, at your first convenience, to
communicate this with what you shall think fit further to be done in the
Affair, as your Reverence's Wisdom shall find most expedient. The Case is, Mrs.
Baker before-named was left by her Husband Baker (one whom you know to be an
honest man, and active in the late Reformation) in possession of an acquired
Estate, to the value of 500 l. per annum well stocked, and generally believed
to be a moneyed man. The said Preachers, with one Mr. M -- of Shrewsbury, a
Person for his Integrity well known to all the Gentlemen in the County, were
deputed Trustees for the securing of the said Estate according to the Will of
the Donor, his chiefest care being to prevent any Claim his Nephew Mr. John
Lloyd might make to it, for that his said Nephew was a frequenter of the
Parish Church all his lifetime, etc. and did not partake of the benefits he
might have made by Dissenting in that particular. But so it is, the Testator
has been dead about four years, and our good woman before-nam'd has enjoyed the
Estate, and has not in any thing slackn'd her hand wherein she might serve the
Cause; for doing of which the more effectually, she converts the Hall of her
Mansion House to a very convenient Meeting Place, and furnished it with a
Pulpit, and all necessary Pues and Seats for accommodating of the Auditory,
which was very numerous; for the Word was preached as well in Welsh as in
English; Mr. P -- performing the first part; and of both Nations there was
generally a great appearance.

It is to be considered in our remote parts, and especially in Villages, there
is not Conveniences for accomodating of People with necessary Provisions, when
so far from their homes; to supply which, the good Woman (out of her own Purse)
relieved all persons according to their Qualities, which you may reasonably
guess cost Money; and it is now more then suspected that she has disbursed above
2000 l. besides the yearly In-come; for that was very insignificant to the
pressing occasions of the Congregation; and indeed (to give some of 'em their
just Commendation) they were not wanting at any time to supply the good
Gentlewoman with such sums of Money as she thought (for the better carrying on
of the Work) she might stand in need of; and for security, they were so much
her true Friends, that they never refused the meanest Servant in the House; by
which kindness they the more easier effected their ends; as you shall presently
understand.

The good Woman being entangled, as you have seen, and now hardly is Mistress
of any thing she used to call her own, she laid it a little too near her heart,
and was very much afflicted with melancholy, and by the care of her Trustees
she was conveyed to Shrewsbury, for the better recovery of her health, and in
the mean time the Estate is seized by the said Preachers for the use of the
Creditors; which was done so effectually, that all, or most of the poor
Servants being engaged with their Mistress, fled, for fear of the storm coming
upon themselves, and left the booty to any that would take it.

Mr. P -- and Mr. ap R -- having now preached themselves from the Hall to every
individual Room in the House, and in full possession of the whole, it is
observed that the usual care that was taken on the Congregation is somewhat
abated, and the numbers begin to lessen, not only in the Weekly-Meetings, but
in the Great and Monthly Meeting, which was celebrated with breaking of Bread
in the evening, after a good Dinner at noon; the defect of the latter does seem
much to impair the use of the former; to prevent such an evil, will take up
some Time and Cost.

And now, my good Countryman, as I have always heard a very good report of
your Justice and Integrity, and your willingness to employ your self upon all
occasions wherein you might serve your Generation in any honorable
undertaking, let me desire you to consider the sighs of the poor abused Widow,
and find some expedient that she may be restored to her House and Estate; for
in all probability that may be the only effectual way of a certain Cure; for so
great a burden is too hard for one shoulder, (as appears by our Object;) but if
laid upon the whole, it will not only cure a Distemper in her, but in many
hundreds, who (it is feared) are infected, more or less, with the spoils of a
devoured Widows House; And if by your spiritual Comforts to the poor Woman you
are successful, no doubt but it will be an acceptable piece of Service, and a
much greater to God and the whole Kingdom, if your fatherly Admonitions against
such Practices, there shall be no occasion for the future to make any
Complaints of this kind. My service to the Brethren, but more especially to
your self: I am a hearty well-wisher, and your Countryman.

Oswalstree in the C^un^y of Salop, July 20, 1681. J. M.


London: Printed for All. Banks, 1681.


