THE HISTORY OF THE Late Wars IN DENMARK.

COMPRISING, All the TRANSACTIONS, both MILITARY and CIVIL; during the
Differences betwixt THE Two Northern Crowns, In the Years, 1657, 1658, 1659,
1660.

Illustrated with several Maps.

By R. M.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign
of the George, near Clifford's- Inn, in Fleetstreet, 1670.

TO THE KINGS Sacred MAJESTY.
SIR,
THis Narrative should have had like its Author, too much Humility to presume
into Your Sacred Majesty's Presence; but that it is warranted by Your Royal
Commands; and that all the Actions of my Life are Dedicated to Your Service.

The Subject is indeed one of the most considerable, that has happened upon
the Stage of the World of late Ages; where Kings, were both Agressors and
Defendants. And this may in some sort warrant its Dedication to that Monarch,
who is proper Vmpire of the Controversies of Christendom. Besides, there was
no Prince, nor scarce any State in Europe of note, that was not a Party in the
quarrel. Nay, Your Majesty's own Fleets, and Your Treasures were employed
there, though not by Your Orders: And Your Majesty's happy Restoration, had so
much natural Influence upon the transactions in the North, that it also
restored those Crowns to that Peace they now enjoy.

If the English did not always follow their true Interest in those parts, it is
not to be wondered at, being they prostituted it so unnaturally at home; which
did continue, until the sense of their Faults and Errors, obliged them to
reassume it, by returning to their Duty and Obedience to Your Majesty.

All I will say for my Self is, that as I cannot tell whether my humble
Reverence for Your Majesty's Person, or my Loyalty and Allegiance for my
Sovereign be the greater, so they shall ever remain by an equal intermixture of
Passion and Duty, in

SIR, Your Sacred Majesty's, most Obedient, and always Loyal Subject and
Servant, ROGER MANLEY.

The Preface.
TRuth being the life and chief ingredient of History, has been also my chief
research in this Relation, which I was so exact in, that I cannot yet discover
that I have been materially imposed upon.

I have endeavored also to exempt my Narrative from both flattery and
detraction; which was no hard matter for me to do, being I had been neither
tempted by favors nor dis-obliged by injuries by either of the warring
Princes, though I had the honor to know them both.

What I wrote by way of memorials whilst it was acting, upon the place in
another language, though not published, see^ light but now in ours; and it may
be too soon, to discover the imperfections of its Author. And yet I will not
court the Readers favor being my errors are voluntary. For who is obliged to
write? And how few write well?

A Catalogue of Books in the Press this 16th. of September 1669. Printing for
Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleet Street near Cliffords-Inne.
ECclesia Restaurata, or the History of the reformation of the Church of
England, containing the Beginning, Progress, and Successes of it; the Counsels
by which it was conducted; the Rules of Piety and Prudence, upon which it was
founded. The several steps by which it was promoted or retarded, in the change
of times; from the first preparations to it by King Henry the 8th. until the
Legal settling, and establishment of it under Queen Elizabeth; together with
the Intermixture of such Civil Actions, and affairs of State, as either were
co-incident with it, or related to it, The second Edition by P. Heylyn.

Rastalls Entries with a Table not Printed heretofore: This Book will be
published in Easter Term next.

Aerius Redevivus or the History of the Presbyterians; By P. Heylyn in fol.
This Book will be published in Michaelmas Term next.

A Help to English History; By P. Heylin. This Book will be published in
Michaelmas Term next.

Littletons Tenures, in French and English in a small Pocket Volume, exactly
corrected and better Printed than any of the former Editions. This Book will be
published in Michaelmas Term next.

Wingates Abridgement of all the Statutes in force and use, from Magna Charta
until this present year, 1669.

A Geographical Description of the four parts of the world, taken from the
Notes and Works of the famous Monsieur Sanson Geographer to the French King,
and other eminent Travelers and Authors.

To which are added, the Commodities, Coyns, Weights and Measures, of the chief
places of Traffic in the world; compared with those of England (or London) as
to the Trade thereof.

Also a Treatise of Travel, and another of Traffic; wherein the matter of
Trade is briefly handled.

The whole illustrated with variety of useful and delightful Mapps and Figures;
By Rich. Bl^me, the price bound 40 s. This Book will be published in Michaelmas
Term next.

THE HISTORY OF The late Wars in DENMARK, BETWIXT The Two Northern Crowns.
The First Part.
THough my design at first was but to describe the Siege of Coppenhagen and its
accessorys, as will appear by some passages in this narrative: Yet upon second
thoughts, and to gratify the curious, if this jejune Relation find any such; I
have judged it proper to add a summary of those transactions which were
previous to it, deducing the whole War from its original to that last Treaty
which put a period to so many and so eminent calamities.

The ancient emulation and jealousy betwixt the two Crowns of Sweden and
Denmark, the result of their neighborhood, and frequent broils, have been
much heightened by the Swedish acquisitions in Germany; For having joined
Pomerania and Bremen to their former Dominions; they have in a manner enclosed
and beleagured Denmark, which rendered them so uneasy to the Danes, that these
seemed to desire nothing more than an opportunity, not only to recover the
Duchy of Bremen, and what they had lost by the Treaties of Bromsbro and
Christianople, to wit, Halland, Jempterland, Gothland, and the Oesel, but also
to enlarge their own limits, and secure themselves for the future from the
further encroachments of their growing neighbors. And now a so wished for
occasion did fairly present it self; for Charles Gustave King of Sweden being
deeply engaged in Poland, had carried with him the flower of the Swedish
Soldiery to serve in that expedition; so that whilst he was busy in the
conquest of other Countries, he did in some sort expose his own. Nor did the
Danes omit so favorable a juncture, but mustering their grievances into a
Manifest (too long to insert) which they published, least they should be
thought to be rather invited by the favor of the occasion, than necessitated
by any provocations or injuries.

They had beat up their Drums about the beginning of the year 1657. and their
preparations for war were carried on with unusual pomp and hopes of success:
Their proceeding was likewise formal, for they denounced war by a Herald at
Arms some months before they entered into the Lists, which proved ruinous to
them; for they thereby gave the enemy time, not only to fortify against the
ensuing tempest, but King Charles leisure enough to come with his Army out of
Poland to show them the fault they had committed in letting slip that which is
most precious and most irrecoverable. The English and French set all their
Engines on work, their intercession and their threats to stave off the Danes,
but to no purpose: For the occasion was too fair, and their preparations too
forward to desist; so that their Ministers were roundly answered, that the King
of Denmark had long expected satisfaction from the Crown of Sweden, but being
the Resident of the said Crown was retired without giving any, his Majesty was
obliged to endeavor his own satisfaction and security by the way of Arms.

The truth is, the party was not ill concerted, for the Brandenburger was
already drawn off from the Swedish alliance, and upon assurance given him from
the Polish Court, that the Sovereignty of the Ducal Prussia should be conferred
upon him (which he also now enjoys) he confederated himself with the Pole and
Dane against Sweden. The Dutch were also highly engaged, for that wary
Republic reflecting upon King Charles his progress in Prussia and Poland; and
foreseeing what obstructions his continued conquests in these parts might
bring to their Eastern Traffic, resolved to oppose him; which they not only
did by sending a fleet and 1300 Foot to secure Dansick, but also by this
powerful diversion of the Danes, to which they contributed vast sums of monys,
especially those of Amsterdam upon the securities of the Customs in the Sound
and Norway.

The King of the Romans, at present Emperor, had also an Army hovering about
the Swedish frontiers in Prussia and Poland, which put King Charles to a stand,
not knowing which to turn himself; yet resolved to fall with his whole power
upon the first that broke out, fancying that he was strong enough to deal with
either of them apart (and it was impossible they should join at the distance
they were at) whereas he should be too weak both for the one and the other if
he divided his Forces. He was at Thorn in Prussia in expectation of the motion
of these new Adversaries, where he at length heard the news of the Danes
invading of him in the Duchy of Bremen and the Frontiers of Sweden. And this
seems a second error, for either they ought to have begun sooner whilst the
King was engaged with so many enemies in Poland, or they ought to have stayed
longer, and expected until the Imperialists had made the first attempt, so that
they then should have had nothing to combat with but Cities and Fortresses. The
King of Sweden was so transported with the first notice of this breach, that
amongst other expressions of rage and scorn he was heard to say: Frederick,
Frederick, I will stick so close to thee, that I will sink with thee. It may be
reasonably imagined that for all this appearing violence, he was secretly glad
of this rupture with the Danes; for it did not only in some sort justify his
invading of Poland, the Truce being not yet expired, by their example; but also
gave him an opportunity to quit that Country with honor, which he would
otherwise have been forced to leave of himself. He had indeed wholly mastered
that great Kingdom by his valor and the divisions of the Nobility there, many
of which he had gained by his own and the Vice-Chancelors Radizeuski's
practices and intelligence, having forced all to swear fealty to him, though
they all left him afterward with the same levity, but with more justice, being
they returned to the obedience and service of their own Prince again; so that
he was weary of that War, as being engaged in too vast a Territory, and so far
from his Confines. He had obliged Ragotski Prince of Transylvania to be of his
party, who had also entered Poland with a very great Army; but he suffered him
to be lost by exposing him: for though they had joined forces together, yet he
drew his off, being he could not draw the enemy to battle and marched toward
Prussia, whilst the other was designed to return home, which for want of
conduct he could not compass: having lost his whole Army, his hopes in Poland
(being no less than a Crown) and afterward his whole Country by that
unfortunate expedition.

The King of Sweden being therefore resolved to quit the Polish War, left his
Brother Prince Adolph, in Prussia, for the defense of that Province, which he
mainly desired to conserve: In so much that he had made offer of the Crown of
Poland (being Ragotski failed of it) to the King of Hungary himself, provided
he might keep Prussia; Count Steinbock to observe the Imperialists and Poles;
his Brother in law Count Magnus de la Guarde in Leifland against Muscovy and
Lithuania; and marched himself (laying all in ashes behind him, to secure his
Rear from the pursuit of the Polish Cavalry) with about 6000 Horse toward
Pomerania. He had in vain solicited the Duke of Brandenburgh to lend him some
Troops, though he had offered him Thorn, Elbing, and Marienburg as cautions,
provided he might leave Swedish Officers in them. Being therefore obliged to
stand upon his own bottom, he came to Stetin, whence he wrote to all the
Electors, especially him of Mentz as most addicted to France; complaining of
the Danish invading of him in the Empire, which was against the tenor of the
instrument of Peace; and besought his counsel and assistance. Whilst the King
of Sweden hastens thus by Land toward Denmark, the King of Denmark being
advertised, (though falsely) that he took his journey by water, put to Sea in
person with his whole Fleet; and coasting the Country of Pomerania, came to
Dansick, where he understood the truth of King Charles his motion, which obliged
him after a fruitless survey of the Baltic Sea, to return in great have to
Coppenhagen. Whilst the Swedes were on their way toward Holstein, part of the
Danish forces had taken Bremerford, a good place in the Duchy of Bremen, and
two other Forts, the Bellemer Sconce lying upon the Elbe, and the Leher Sconce
commanding the Weser. They solicited also the City of Bremen by an Ambassador
to quit the Swedes party, but not with that success they had hoped; for it
seemed yet too early for them to declare: Although they were assured in answer
to their address to the States, Aug. 13. of being assisted in case they were
attempted, conformable to the Treaty betwixt them; which regarded the Swedes
not the Danes. And here some take the freedom to blame the Danish Conduct; for
had they carried the War into Sweden it self, disfurnished of her principal
Defendants; Her King absent in a remote Country, the very terror of an
invading Army, would have wrought that confusion and consternation in the
Country as might probably have given the Dane opportunity to have driven on the
War as far as Stockholm. But they on the contrary attack the Swedish Dominions
in Germany, Allarming thereby their friends as well as their enemies: For the
Princes of the nether Saxon circle, declare the inv^ding of the Duchy of
Bremen, to be a breach of the peac^ (...) the Empire, and a violation of the
Instrument of Peace; for the observation whereof, they stood reciprocally
engaged.

By this time King Charles was advanced as far as Hamburgh with his harassed
and ill accoutred Troops, without opposition, where he mounted, and clothed,
and armed them by the favor of that Ci^y, jealous of its own Lords greatness;
and the assistance of good supplies of moneys, which he received there upon the
French account. It seemed strange what was become of the Danish Army, but that,
however sixteen thousand strong: In stead of fighting the enemy in Pomerania or
Mecklenburg, or any where before they reached Hambourg, still retired before
them; but whether affrighted with the reputation of these glorious Ruffians, or
betrayed by their own dissentions, I will not determine; though it be certain
that King Charles had his Ulefeld in Denmark as well as his Radizeuski in
Poland. The Swedes being thus refreshed and lusty, grew also very numerous, by
the accession of such whom the hopes and liberty of pillage daily added to
their party. They followed the retiring Danes as far as Fr^dericks-ode, which
they also after some time took by assault, under the conduct of Marshal Wrangel.

Fredericks-ode is seated upon the lesser Belt, a new Town endowed with many
privileges to invite Inhabitants, and fortified on the land side, though the
Works were not fully finished after the modern fashion; the Sea was esteemed a
sufficient guard on that side it watered, being strengthened with Pallisadoes
from the adjoining Bulwarks as far as deep water. But the Swedes under favor
of the darkness, and some false Allarms in other places, broke down this wooden
Fence, and rushing in on that part up to the Saddle skirts in water, wheeled
about the Bastion and entered the Town rendering themselves Masters of the same,
without any considerable resistance.

This victory equalled a gained battle, for they made above 2000 prisoners
(besides the slain which amounted to as many more) well nigh 200 Officers, 33
Colors and above fourscore pieces of Cannon, with other store of Ammunition
and plunder. This success rendered them also absolute Masters of Holstein,
except Krempen and Gluckstadt, and Rensbourg; gave them the plunder and
contribution of all Jutland, and the communication betwixt the North and East
Seas by the lesser Belt. It was thought strange that so strong a place as
Fredericks-ode, and so well provided with Garrison and provisions, should be
taken by a number scarce equal to them within. Andrew Bilde Marshal of the
Kingdom, was Governor of this important place: but whether he lost it by his
fate, or by his folly; by his cowardice, or by his treason is still
disputeable. However it was, it cost him his life, he being mortally wounded in
the attack, which did not yet suffice to clear his memory from obloquie and a
suspicion of disloyalty. The Swedes themselves contributed much, though
accidently to this rumor, for they sent his body richly vested, without ransom
over into Funen, which increased the ill reports or him; though it might as
well have been thought an argument of their generous humanity, as his perfidie,
as they will hereafter evince in the person of Vice Admiral De Wit, slain in
the Sound, and returned with no less honor and pomp. King Frederick hearing of
this great loss quits Schonen, where he had in person twice beaten the enemy by
Helmstat, and flies into Funen to give orders for the conservation of that
Island, the second of Denmark: Which done, he leaves his Bastard Brother
Guldenlew there with 3000. men, and returns to Coppenhagen, to struggle with
the divided factions of his Nobles, which did not end but in theirs and their
Countries Ruin.

But leaving the Danes to their dissentions, and the Swedes posted in their new
conquests; let us step back a little to take a short view and prospect of the
civil transactions contemporary with the former.

England had too great an interest in the Baltic, which may not improperly be
called the Mediterranean of the North, to sit still without making reflection
upon the great commotions in those parts: And besides the concerns of a free
and undisturbed Commerce; England being at that time in an open War with Spain,
had much rather that the Swedish Arms had been at liberty to give a check to
the other Austrian Branch in Germany, than to have been diverted by a War
with Denmark: Upon this account two Gentlemen are made choice of to endeavor a
Reconciliation betwixt the two Kings. Mr. Meadowe being sent to the Court of
Denmark, and Mr. Jepson to that of Sweden. The former arrived in Denmark in the
beginning of September 1657. much about the time that the Swede entered Jutland.
He was received far above his Character, being that of Envoy Extraordinary, to
the regret of other foreign Ministers: But the conjuncture of time and affairs
obliged the Danes by all possible ways and means to ingratiate themselves with
the English: So that the Envoyes Proposition for a Mediation, after he had
declared the ruinous effects of a War, Sep. 25. 1657.
was accepted off. The Dane declaring that he was ready to enter upon a Treaty
of a sure and honorable peace under the Mediation of England; and that so soon
as the King of Sweden should testify a suitable concurrence on his part. This
Declaration was transmitted to the Swede with all possible diligence, and drew
from him a reply dated at Wismar, in October following; in which offer many
expostulations how injuriously he had been dealt with, 19. 1657.
intermixed with some language, which the Dane resented as opprobious: He
declares likewise his assent to enter upon a Treaty under the Mediation of
France and England, and that the preliminaries as to place of treating, number
of Commissioners, sale conducts, etc. should be adjousted according to the
transactions betwixt the two Crowns in the year 1644. upon the confines of the
two Kingdoms.

This reply produced another Declaration from the Dane. Nov. 5.
That he consents also to the transactions in 44. only as to the place of the
future Treaty conceives Lubeck or some other in that neighborhood to be most
commodious: That the Treaty should commence under the Mediation of England, and
also of the States General, and so soon as France should offer him their
Mediation, he would accept of that likewise: But that the designed Peace be not
restrained to the two Crowns only, but that the King of Poland and the Elector
of Brandenburg be comprehended in the same, It was easy to see how this
comprehension of the Pole, insisted on by the Dane, would trouble the scene of
affairs which obliged the English Mediator to remonstrate it to be a novel
Proposal; and how that it would render the so much desired peace tedious and
difficult, if not impossible; for that the differences betwixt Denmark and
Sweden were but a sudden paroxisme, if taken in time, easily cured; but those
betwixt Sweden and Poland were chronique and inveterate, not so soon eradicated.

However the second Declaration of the King of Denmark of the third of November
was sent to the King of Sweden, Dec. 7.
and begat another from him; wherein he declares himself unsatisfied with the
King of Denmarks nominating Lubeck for the place of Treaty, and receding
thereby from the so anciently practiced Custom betwixt the two Crowns. He
further takes notice of the conquisite delays and difficulties made by the
Dane, by intermixing the controversies of others which have no reference to the
Danish War. Yet that he is willing to grant his safe conducts to such
Confederates of the Danes as shall be desirous to be present at a treaty in any
place of the Confines. And for the States general, after they shall have
ratified the Treaty made at Elbing and thereby renewed their former friendship
with Sweden; in case they offer to him their Mediation, he would so declare
himself, that they should have no occasion of complaint.

To this the King of Denmark rejoyned another answer, 27. Dec.
insisting upon the immediate admission of the States General to the Mediation
without the previous qualification of first ratifying the Elbing Treaty; a
point which had already been depending a whole twelvemonth, and was like to
depend longer: adheres to the place formerly nominated for both sides to meet
at, and presses that the Pole and Brandenburger his Confederates should not
only have the bare liberty of being present at the Treaty, but that the
respective Treaties to be had with them should proceed by the same steps and
means as that with Denmark.

As to the place of the Treaty the intrigue was this: the Dane would have the
meeting at Lubec or any other neutral place in Germany, where the Polish and
Brandenburg Ministers might be present as parties with the Dane in the same
War. On the other side; the King of Sweden would have it upon the Frontiers
betwixt the two Kingdoms on the other side the Baltic, whither he knew the
Pole and Brandenburger could not easily come; thereby to disunite the Pole and
Dane by the jealousy of a separate Treaty. And perhaps at the same time
treating openly with the Dane, and underhand with the Pole, and they two
striving to prevent each other in the peace; where he saw the most advantageous
conditions proffered him there clap up a peace and prosecute the War against
the other. To prevent this the Mediators endeavored to draw from the King of
Sweden an intimation of what terms and conditions he would rest satisfied
within the ensuing Treaty; that so when the Commissioners came to meet, they
might have little more to do, than to sign and seal; and the business be
effected as soon as reported; with insinuations of conditions of this Nature. A
general Amnisty for what was past, Restitution of places taken each upon other:
A solemn Reversal under good Garanties of the peace in 44. And a way opened for
redressing the Gravamina, particularly those relating to the trade of the
Baltic, and for preventing defraudations of the Duties in the Sound, which
were the pretended cause of the War. And to dispose the King of Denmark to
dis-joyn his interests from Poland, it was represented to him what a broken
Reed Poland had proved to him, sometimes making proffer to pass their Forces
over the Oder, and then presently retreating again, upon pretense of joining
the Austrian Foot; not so much as entering Pomerania all this while to give the
Swedes the least diversion. That the Conditions of the Alliance were mutual and
reciprocal, which not being performed on the Polish part, his Majesty of
Denmark was no longer obliged. That Confederacies were for mutual safety, and
not intended to oblige Princes to perish either singly or in company. That he
had the fresh Example of his Heroic Father, who though he had entered into an
Alliance with the Protestant Princes of Germany, yet the necessity of his
affairs, to recover what was lost, contrained him to make a peace with the
Emperor, in the year 1629. exclusive to his Allies.

But neither did these reasons prevail with the King of Denmark to depart from
his alliance with the Pole, till a more pressing necessity afterward extorted
from him a separate treaty. Nor was the King of Sweden willing to anticipate
the treaty by Declaring himself before hand as to the Conditions, nor to
content himself in the Conditions with less than an honorable compensation,
for the pretended injury the Dane had done him: But that since the Dane had
made him dance so long a march from Poland to Jutland, he was resolved at least
to make him pay the Fiddlers.

Thus the War of the Cabinet was managed by paper missives and memorials, but
that of the field was carried on at another rate; for whilst the active Swedes
omitted nothing for the prosecuting of their Conquests, they gave out they
would besiege the remaining Fortresses of Holsteyn, and seemed to hearken to
such overtures of peace as were made to them the better to amuse the Danes,
whilst they secretly prepared their Bridges, Wagons, Sleads, Hurdles, and the
like necessaries to pass over the Ice into the Isles. They were secure on the
Holsteyn side, no enemy appearing to disturb them; for the Elector of
Brandenburg though reconciled to the King of Poland, had not yet openly broke
with Sweden, and the Imperialists were busied at the sieges of Cracow and
Thorn. Only the Poles not unmindful of the favor the Danes had done them, by
drawing the burden of the War (which had well-nigh overwhelmed their Country)
upon themselves, out of interest, or gratitude, or both; sent Charneski with
12000. Horse to their assistance. These troops past the Oder in order to their
march toward Holstein; but hearing of the taking of Fredericks-Ode advanced no
farther, but having pillaged and ravaged the Country, returned back into their
own, having effected nothing but the ruin of a great number of Villages and
poor people. As the Swedes were frighted with this cavalcade of the Poles, so
the Danes had also been with the arming of the circle of the nether Saxons for
the recovery of Bremerford, as a part of the Empire, pretending to keep the
peace of the same (as is already mentioned) and the removal of all hostility
out of its bounds. But the troops these raised amounting to 4000. dispersed
without a blow, occasioned as well by their own Divisions, as the open
dissenting of the Duke of Lunenburg, a Prince of that circle, and Brother in
Law to the King of Denmark; so that they, as well as the Polish Auxiliaries,
only appeared and Meteor-like threatened and vanished. But the Swedes having got
all things in a readiness to attempt Funen, the heavens also seemed to
contribute to their Designs; for the cold was so intense, and violent beyond
the memory of man, that not only lesser Rivers and Fountains froze up, but the
Sea it self became passable, being covered with an unusual, but solid bridge of
Ice. King Charles was too prudent to let slip any opportunities which made way
to his greatness. Not a night passed wherein he did not send his Spies into the
Island, and his Scouts to discover the firmness of the congealed Waters, which
being at length reported to be strong enough, save only a small but long rent
of scarce five foot broad, he gave orders to march; commanding great quantity
of planks, posts, hurds and the like materials to make a bridge over the said
breach, to be first brought thither and laid. Two troops of Waldechs Regiment
fell in, the Ice breaking, and several other single troopers were drowned,
which forced the Army to rush on with more vigor, being too far engaged to
retire, and the danger behind them being greater than that in their front. The
Danes made some though no great opposition, for being bravely charged, they
were easily broke, routed and slain, scarce two hundred of them escaping: the
King pursued them that fled so close, that he overtook Guldenlewe who was sick
in his Coach not far from Odensea, in which town the chief of the Island, he
also surprised five Danish Senators, and several other fugitives, so that he
became absolute Master of this wealthy Province and the whole power of the
Enemy in it, which consisted of well with 5000. Soldiers and armed Boores,
sixty pieces of Cannon and great Magazines of all sorts of military provisions.

It Is not unworthy the remembering, that this adventrous march over the Frozen
Seas, was the resolve of the King himself at a Council of War against the sense
of his chief Officers, who censured it of too much temerity. And since it
prospered well, it is due to the honor of that Kings Name, which had it
otherwise succeeded would have aspersed his memory.

The news of the loss of Funen being arrived at Coppenhagen carried so much
the more of terror and apprehension with it, because besides the loss of so
important an Isle, the like Bridge, which had let the Swede over the little
Belt into Funen, might serve to pass him over the great Belt into Zeland.
Hereupon the King of Denmark sends for Mr. Meadowe desiring him to set a Treaty
on foot with all possible expedition, which he did, Feb. 3.
by writing to the King of Sweden, the purport whereof was to this effect: That
the King of Denmark had authorized the Lord Joackim Gersdorff, and Christian
Sckeel, both Senators of his Kingdom his Plenepotentiaries and Commissioners,
to meet, treat, and conclude with the like Commissioners of his, at such time
and place as his Majesty should please to appoint: which he also desired at the
instance and intervention of England, and that his Majesty would be further
pleased to deliver out safe conducts in due form, both for him the Mediator,
and for the Danish Commissioners; and in the mean time suspend all future
Hostilities. This being dispatched with extraordinary diligence, Feb. 5.
the Messenger returned with his Answer Dated at Newburg in Funen, where he
left the King; whereof the substance is, That he thanked him for his care and
dexterity in promoting the concerns of a peace, which the Dane had hitherto so
obstinately opposed How he was willing to enter presently upon a Treaty under
the respective Mediators of France and England; and being it was left to him
to appoint the place, he gave the King of Denmark the choice, either of the
Isle of Spro, or of Ruakoping in Langland for the Commissioners of both sides
to meet in, within eight days. That together with the present Letter he had
sent safe conducts as desired: And that the business required the greater
haste, forasmuch as he could promise no security to himself in a suspension of
Arms.

This was a clear answer and concession as to the desired treaty but he would
not be complemented our of his advantages by a cessation of Arms, knowing well
that nothing more facilitates a conquest than a pannick terror incussed by the
suddenness of an invasion, and that the only way to profit upon it, is to give
no respite for recollecting those Spirits which the first impressions of fear
had dissipated. The Swedish King marches incessantly. His nearest way to Zeland
had been over the great Belt, from Newbourg to Cors^ur, about 16. English
miles. But he takes that of Langland, so to Laland, then to Falster, which
though much the further, yet was the safer; because the traject from Island to
Island was no where so broad as that in the great Belt; And he would secure all
behind him.

They were not idle this while at Coppenhagen. The Swedish safe conducts being
delivered, the Danish Commissioners together with the English Mediator
journeyed with what diligence they could toward Rydcoping. They had traveled
little more than sixty miles English, when not far from Wardenburg or Warburg,
the last town upon Zeland from Coppenhagen they met with the Swedish scouts by
whom they were advertised that their King was newly entered upon Zeland and not
far behind. And soon after they met the King himself in a Sledge at the head of
200 Finnish Horse. This incredible diligence was altogether surprising to the
Danish Commissioners. All alighting out of their Sledges (the manner of
traveling in the Northern Countries) to salute him; His Majesty did the same,
and willing them to pass on to the neighboring town, and that he would
speedily be with them: For that he was going only to take view of a ground
where he might most conveniently draw his Army into battalia. To Warburg they
went, and there the Treaty first began, where they also met the Chevalier
Terlon Ambassador of France, who came in company with the Swedish King; The
Commissioners on the part of Sweden were Count Ulefelt a discontented Dane, who
had a long time refuged himself in the Court of Sweden, and Steno Bielke a
Senator of Sweden.

The King of Sweden staid no longer at Warburg than was necessary for drawing
over his Army, and then ranging them in Batralia in a large extended Front in
view of the Danes to make them appear more numerous at last marched off in the
direct way to Coppenhagen. 'Twas uncomfortable treating whilst the King was
marching, and the Mediators and Commissioners not being willing to be left
behind, adjourned the Treaty, and breaking up thence overtook the King at Keuk
four leagues from Coppenhagen, who the next morning drew up in Battalia again,
and then drew off as before in an orderly march toward Coppenhagen. The number
of the Swedish Army was about 7000. Horse and Foot and some few Fieldpieces,
with which he took up his quarters within two leagues of the City; of which he
would often sportingly say, she was a fair Bride and deserved dancing for, and
not without reason neither, for had he won Coppenhagen as he wooed her, she had
brought him for her Dower all Denmark and Norway, and then without the tedious
enumeration of his particular principalities, he might for his imperial style
and title have wrote himself, King of the North.

The Mediators and Commissioners went to a near adjoining Village called
Tostrup there to draw up the abstract or minutes of the Treaty, which when
mutually agreed on, all hostility was immediately to cease. In the mean time it
will not be impertinent to take a short view of the posture and condition of
Coppenhagen.

The Fortifications of the City were much decayed, partly through security, not
having seen an Enemy in an hundred years, partly through Parsimony to avoid an
expense supposed needless: Besides, that great trading Towns are not over
willing to be fettered with Walls and Bastions: And perhaps the Danish Nobility
were as to this case less willing than they of Coppenhagen, for fear the
strength of the City should make the Burgers heady. The walls being of Earth
only, had been much crumbled down with the frost and time, and were scaleable
without Ladders; neither could they use the Spade at that time the earth being
so petrified with the cold. There were no Cannon upon the Walls when the
Commissioners parted from Coppenhagen, but by this time good store were drawn
from the Ships and mounted upon Ship carriage. The truth is, the City was full
of men, the Burgers and such as fled out of the Country, besides five or six
hundred Horse and some Foot which were drawn from Schonen, but they wanted
provisions and forage to hold out a long siege: But nothing dismayed the Dane
more, than that none of their Confederates was in a capacity to help them: For
the Pole and Brandenburger were too remote, and the Ice which was a Bridge to
the Sweed, was a Bar to the Hollander: Add to this the temper of the people,
some murmuring against their Governors, others crying out they were betrayed,
and all affrighted and irresolved: Only this testimony is justly due to the
person of the King, that he comported himself with a magnanimous constancy
amidst all adventures. Some think if the King of Sweden had been truly
informed of the condition of the Town, he would have attempted the taking of
it: But though he knew all was not well with the Dane, he did not know the
worst; and it may be he thought the hazard too great to attack so great a City
with so little an Army. Perhaps he would tempt Fortune no further, but esteemed
it a prudent choice, rather to close with present and certain advantages, than
to catch at things future and contingent, especially such as depend upon the
issues of War, than which no humane thing is more subject to vicissitude.

The Minutes of the Treaty were in few days concluded at Tostrup, upon which a
cessation of Arms followed, and from thence the Mediators and Commissioners
removed to Rotschild there to digest them more at leisure into the body of a
Treaty, which being done, Feb. 26. 1657/58
they were Signed and Sealed by the Mediators and Commissioners on both sides;
and afterward ratified by both Kings, together with the Seals and
Subscriptions of the Senators of both Kingdoms. The Sum of the Articles were:

1. That there be an eternal Peace, Amity, and Amnistie betwixt both Crowns,
Kingdoms, etc. 2. That both Kings renounce and forsake all former contracts and
alliances made with any other Princes, Kings, Commonwealths, etc. to the
prejudice or hurt of either party, nor make none such for the future. 3. That
both parties shall endeavor to their power, to exclude all foreign hostile
men of War out of the Sound and Baltic Sea. 4. That all Swedish ships
whatsoever, shall in the Sound and Belt be free and exempted from all Customs,
Inquisition, Visitation, Arrest or other Molestation whatsoever, etc. producing
only a right sea-pass in the King of Denmarks Custom-houses of Elzineur and
Newburg. 5.6.7.8.9.10.11 That the King of Denmark should in consideration of
the restitution of the places taken and possessed by the Swedes, as also for a
recompense o^ the damages caused by this War, give and grant to His Majesty of
Sweden and His Heirs for ever, the Provinces of Haland, Belking, Schonen, and
Bornholm. The Castles, Towns and Territories of Bahuys, and Druntheim in
Norway, and that secular and Ecclesiastic jurisdiction which the King of
Denmark has over some places in the Isle of Reugen, all places whatsoever
taken from the Swedes during this War. As also three Swedish ships taken in the
Sound, with their lading, upon the first breaking out of these differences.
12.13 In consideration hereof, the King of Sweden shall restore to the King and
Kingdom of Denmark, all these places he now possesses jure belli; as Sealand,
Laland, etc. as soon as the 2000. Horse which the King of Denmark promised to
the King of Sweden, were delivered; renounce all pretenses to the Earldom of
Delmenhorst and Ditmarsen, and disclaim all rights to those Noblemens goods in
Holstein, notwithstanding their dependence upon the Duchy of Bremen. The
following 6. Articles relate to the evacuation of places. 19. That all
Prisoners be released without Ransom. 20. That all inhabitants of any the
delivered Countries, may remove their habitations whither they will. 21. That
all former alliances betwixt the two Crowns continue of force. 22.23. That the
King of Denmark shall give equitable satisfaction to the Duke of Holstein
Gottorp, and forget all differences and unkindnesses which this War may have
produced betwixt them. 24. That Count Ulefeld be placed in his estates and
honors. 25. That such Princes, etc. that desire to be included in this Peace,
shall seek it with both Kings. 26. That the Danish manifest be recalled. 27.28.
And that all as above be inviolably observed on both sides, etc.
Thus this pacification was concluded and Signed, which divested King Frederick
of the best Provinces of his Kingdom, which would have cost much blood, and
many years to have conquered; of great part of his Army, to be employed ere
long against himself; and of his reputation, the best jewel of Princes; which
he will yet recover when he is out of the apprentiship of his Nobles, and
reduced to that extremity, that nothing but his own magnanimity can support him.

But on the other side, If the King of Denmark were a great loser by what he
quitted, it may be well said he was a great saver if we consider what he kept.
For he who had lost all in the Field, could not reasonably expect to regain it
upon the Carpet: And though some of his principal branches were lopt off, which
through time may grow again, yet the root was preserved, for had that been lost
all had gone without resourse: So that I esteem it only as an expression of
kindness toward his King and Country, that of the Danish Ryxhoffmaster, a
person of eminent merit, who immediately before he was to Sign the Treaty
whispered into the ear of one near him, those words of the Roman Emperor,
Utinam nescirem Literas. Since Knighted by his sacred Majesty here.
And upon this account and in gratitude for his good offices the King was
pleased to admit Mr. Meadowe the English Envoy into the Order of Denmark. This
Treaty thus concluded and ratified, the next thing which followed was the
solemn Enterview betwixt the two Kings at Fredericksburg a sumptuous Palace of
the King of Denmark about four Leagues from Coppenhagen: Thither both of them
went, and which is remarkable without any previous stipulation, concerning
guards or number of followers usually practiced upon such occasions; but with a
frank and Northern simplicity, either not mistrusting or not willing to
mistrust each other.

King Frederick met his new guest who came from Rotskild some two miles from
his house: Both Kings being at a competent distance alighted out of their
Coaches at the same time, and approaching on foot saluted each other by joining
their right hands with all the respect and obliging demonstrations of kindness
immaginable; and now as if their late enmity had been entirely forgot, they
both entered the same Coach, being the Danish, first the Swede, then the Dane,
accompanied by the English Mediator and the Duke of Holstein Sunderburg, and
so rode to Fredericksburg, where they were received and entertained with as
much magnificence as the place and season could afford. At Table the Queen of
Denmark sat at the boards end, the King of Sweden on the side at her right
hand, as being the guest, and next below him on the same side the King of
Denmark. Were that Roman to describe this entertainment, who affirmed that the
same wisdom was requisite for ordering a feast as for disciplining an Army; he
would be more large in the description of it than I shall be. Let it suffice to
say that the method was exact, the provision sumptuous, and the solemnity rare,
to see two Kings at one Table, who had so little before been in Arms one
against the other. And it was not unpleasant that those Trumpets and
Kettle-Drums which so lately denounced Death should now be made use of, as
loudly to proclaim Healths. The Solemnity continued from Thursday to Saturday,
both Kings for two nights lodging under the same Roof: At parting they
exchanged Horses, and other Presents, and those Officers of the Danish Court
who were particularly appointed to attend the Swedish King, were nobly regaled
by him. On Saturday he took his leave and went to Elzineur the King of Denmark
accompanying him part of the way; from thence he past the Sound through the
noise and smoke of the Cannon of the two Castles of Cronenburg and Elzenburg,
to take possession of his fresh conquests in Schonen; where he was entertained
by his new Subjects, with more pomp than passion, more state than affection;
the sense of their wonted obedience being yet too green to be so soon forgot.
He did not stay long there but went to Gottenburg to meet his Queen, as also to
deliberate with his Senate and rejoice with his friends over his late successes.

And thus the Scene of Affairs being changed in Denmark, a Serene calm did
ensue, but not last long: However, the Swedes did pretend to treat a new and
stricter Alliance betwixt the two Crowns.

The Swedish Army was to continue in Denmark till the first of May, where they
lived with the usual rapines and disorders of insulting Victors; which must yet
continue longer than the designed time for their removal. The Danes thus low
were forced to a quick execution of the Treating, as fearing to displease their
new friends; who yet complained of delays and evasory and nonperformance. Most
of the two thousand Horse were run away, which they pretended was by collusion,
and the Governor of Bremervord made difficulty to deliver up that place, which
he will yet part with too soon. But that which vexed the Sweeds most, was that
the Danes refused to enter into a Treaty Offensive and Defensive with them. The
main design of the Swedes herein was the stopping of the Sound, which Van
Beuning the Dutch Ambassador then in Denmark well observing, presented a
memorial to the King, desiring him, that whereas by the third Article of the
Treaty of Rotschild, that both Crowns should endeavor to hinder all Hostile
Fleets from entering into the Baltic Sea, that the said Article should not be
understood of the ships of the Lords the States General, being it directly
opposed the league formerly made betwixt them and the Danish crown. The said
Ambassador had upon the fabricking of this Article, likewise declared against
it; but Denmark was then forced to yield to demands much more prejudicial, and
of greater importance to it self, not being in a condition to mind the
interests of others, where their own did so eminently suffer. The King of
Sweden had sent two Commissioners to Coppenhagen to urge this mutual
confederation, but they could not bring the Danes to it, which produced new and
more intricate difficulties, for the Swedes complained openly of the Danes
delays, and the Danes of the Swedes not withdrawing their forces out of their
Countries, as they had promised. One pretext seemed to beget another, and one
obstacle was no sooner removed but new ones appeared, especially on the Swedes
side, who at length declared, they could not withdraw their Army out of Denmark
until they had entire satisfaction. Their chief pretenses were the completing
of the 2000 horse, they having received no more than 936 most Danes, whereas
they should have been all Germans, the possession of the little Isle of Ween as
belonging to Schonen, 400000 ryxdollers in consideration of the loss they
sustained by Henry Carloff (who had carried one of their Guinea ships, laden
with a quantity of Gold and Elephants teeth into Gluckstat, after the making of
the peace) and other no less considerable points, relating to the late treaty.
But most of these difficulties were cleared or remitted to the mediation of the
English and French Ministers, and now all seemed to tend to a perfect
understanding. By this time, the King and Queen of Sweden were come into
Holstein, from whence they went to Wismar, a convenient Port to transport the
Queen back to Stockholm at pleasure. The King returned to Oldeslo, the general
rendezvous of his troops, where he gave audience to several Ambassadors; the
neighboring States, and Towns, and Princes, being jealous of his great
preparations and designs, which jealousy was augmented by the daily boastings
of his Officers, who seemed to threaten all, whilst the truth lay closlier
concealed. Denmark alone seemed to have no reason to fear, having not only
delivered Bremervorde, but consented almost to every thing that was required of
them to content the Swedes, and get them out of their Country; well-nigh ruined
with their extorsion and in-quarterings. But they will not be gone so, and now
smile at the Danish credulity, whilst they prepare to possess the whole, and
render their King one of the greatest Princes of Europe. The pretexts for this
second War* were plausible enough; as appears by the Swedish Manifest, and the
Kings own speeches in the ensuing narration. But the Danes accused Charles his
boundless ambition, and cried out plainly, and not without probability, that he
had already devoured the dominion of the East sea in his thoughts; which was
not to be compassed but by the preceding conquest of Denmark. They further
affirmed, that he had therefore been persuaded at Gottenburg, to prosecute the
enlargement of the Swedish Empire by new acquisitions. The conflict would be
easy, and as the first was, bloodless. He should but go and overcome, and by
the accession of his future victories, open a passage to his farther greatness.
Add to these, the tried difficulties of the Polish war, the quiet but armed
condition of Germany, the peaceful inclinations of France at that time, but
above all, a warlike Prince (and as he pretended provoked and injured)
environed with a victorious Army, and it will not seem strange that the fury of
the threatening tempest fell upon Denmark. But whatever the causes were, the war
was easier begun than ended, whilst the Danes serve for a memorable example to
posterity, how valid despair is, and that there is nothing proof against an
enforced necessity.

The Swedes were obliged, as is already observed, by the Treaty of Rotschkild,
to withdraw all their forces out of all the Provinces of Denmark, by the first
of May; which they did not only not do, for Holstein, Jutland, Funen, and the
Dukedom of Sleswick, were still in their power, but took also new councils, to
invade and conquer the rest of that divided Kingdom. The King then being
resolved to renew the war, prepared all that was judged necessary for so great
an expedition, and that with no less secrecy than prudence; and truly it was no
wonder that the Danes were surprised (being by several Embassies, letters and
messages lulled into so ruinous a security) when as the Ministers of diverse
Princes who then followed the Court, were so far from penetrating into its
designs, that they had not the least suspicion of a second invasion upon
Denmark. Aug. 5. 1658.
The fleet and land forces met at Kiel in Holstein, and now all things being in
a readiness, the Army and provision for a longer journey than was intended,
were imbarcked. The King being under fail, with eleven men of war, and near
sixty great and lesser Vessels, whilst some thought him gone toward Prussia,
others toward Pomeranta, and others toward other places, but none toward
Denmark; secured as it was thought by the late Peace, he steered his course
toward Zealand. Aug. 8.
Being arrived at Corsieur, a sea town on the West side of the Island, he
landed his Army, greater in reputation than numbers (for it did not exceed 1200
horse and 4000 foot) without any opposition or resistance. These few guards
that were on the coasts, fled at first sight of the fleet, before they knew
whether they were enemies or not: and the Towns men dissembleing what they
durst not seem to fear, were forced to receive these new guests as friends;
whilst they and the country, as the Army passed along, were made believe, as
the Swedes gave it out, that they intended no hostility to any, but were come
to assist the King of Denmark against the designs of some of his rebellious
Nobles. King Charles his chief care upon his landing, was to keep his soldiers
from plundering, and by quick sending out of parties of horse to suppress the
Danish troops which were quartered up and down the Island; or at least to
hinder their retreat into Coppenhagen. Count To^te Lieutenant General of the
horse, led the Van; but the King himself (I know not by what fatality) did not
stir till the day following: and however his main hopes of victory consisted in
the quickness of his motion, he marched but slowly; fearing peradventure
ambushes in an unknown Country, or least he might be obliged, in the absence of
his Naval forces, to bear the brunt of the war alone. The noise therefore of
this invasion sled to Coppenhagen before him, and filled the Court and City
with the terror of so imminent a danger. All was full of fear and confusion,
and the people then at divine service (for it was upon the Sabbath day in the
morning) struck with the apprehensions of their approaching ruin, which they
looked upon as infallible, if the enemies made that have they might, and
assaulted the City, then destitute of order or forces to withstand them. The
slight of the country people, who came slocking into the town, magnifying the
number and progress of the enemy according as their fears suggested, redoubled
the terror; in so much, that all dreading their destruction as unavoidable,
bethought how best to secure themselves. Some hid their best movables where
they best could, whilst others searched about, whither they might best slye
and hide themselves. Many preferring their personal security to that of their
Country, cried out for peace, and a recourse to the conquerours clemency: but
the wisest, and they were but few, persuaded a vigorous resistance, and exhort
the rest rather to commit their common safety to God, and a just defense, than
to the arbitration of a cruel and insulting enemy. Neither were the disorders
and apprehensions at Court inferior to these, until the King himself, having
rejected the advice of those, who would have persuaded him to preserve himself
for better times, by a timely retreat into Norway, or Holland, had declared,
with a magnanimity truly royal; That he would live and dye in his Nest, and not
survive the sat and glory of his Country. The following letter, though not
signed, fell as was informed into his hands, the which as being of an
extraordinary nature, merits to be inserted; it was as follows.

Sir, Notwithstanding my being engaged in the service of your mortal Enemy, I
am a very affectionate well-wisher to your Majesty. I am very confident that
the King of Sweden designs to take Zeland from you, and consequently yuur
crown, I humbly desire your Majesty to save your Royal person, the Queen, and
the Princes your children, by a quick retreat into Norway, or elsewhere, until
this tempest be over, and some happier opportunity present it self, for the
recovery of your kingdom. Save your self Sir, that you may not fall into his
hands, preserve your self for better times, and believe the counsel of him who
is your Majesty's most humble servant.

I will leave the disquisition of the author, the contriver, and the intrigue
of this letter to the curious, and only add, that if he had followed the advice
of most part of his Council, he had hearkened to that of his kind enemy, and
lost his kingdom into the bargain. But he being more generously resolved, did
by his example raise the drooping spirits of them about him, which quickly
appeared in their countenances, and expressions. Shame and emulation, and a
desire of revenge, had mastered those weaker passions their fear had begot in
them before; so that at present there was none amongst them, that did not seem
full of courage and indignation, against the unjust proceedings of the enemy.
The Court being thus appeased, and confirmed; the King commanded the trumpet to
sound to horse, and quick messengers to be dispatched into the Country, to
allarm those horse that were quartered in the neighboring Villages, and order
their sudden coming to Town, which they did with so much diligence, that they
prevented the enemies speed and precaution. In the mean time, the Magistrates
and chief amongst the Citizens were sent for, and enquiry made, what was to be
expected from them in so imminent a danger? The King having aggravated the
ambition and perfidie of the Enemy, added, that they were not now to sight for
the recovery of what they had lost, but lest they should lose (which he abhorred
to think on) what they had yet remaining, and become the prey and scorn of
their insulting foes. The Lord Gerstorf great Master of the kingdom, proceeded
to tell them, That there was nothing more glorious for generous spirits, than
bravely to maintain that duty, and that fidelity, which they owed by nature and
oath, to their King and Country. They were now reduced to that extremity, that
they must defend themselves or perish; there being no mean betwixt the Enemies
ambition, and their slavery. He did therefore exhort them in his Majesty's
name, to unity and concord amongst themselves, to sight like men, to arm all
that could bear arms, and to refus^ no labor, nor nothing that might be
required from them for their common defense. The Enemy was not so formidable as
some men believed, nor their condition so despicable, but that they might yet
hope for an issue suitable to the equity and innocence of their cause, if they
did not betray it by their own dissentions and infidelity. There were some who
had apprehended, that the Citizens fears might surmount their loyalty; which
they having understood, protested by the mouth of their chief Burgomaster John
Nansen, that they would expose their lives and what ever was dear to them, for
the defense of their King and Country; and by an example worthy to be
transferred to posterity cried out, They would dye his Majesty's subjects.

Monsieur Van Beuning Pensionair of Amsterdam; then Ambassador from the States
General of the United Low Countries, at Court, did by his presence and
authority (which the King of Sweden complained of afterward, as discrepant
from the function of an Ambassador) extremely raise the minds of all, and
exhorting them to a brave defense, assured them of speedy succors and relief
out of the Low Countries, in case they held out but till it was possible for a
fleet to come to their assistance. He visited the guards in person, and
throwing moneys by handful amongst the soldiers, did much quicken them by his
liberality and promises. But that he might hasten those ayds he had so
seriously assured them off, and lest his passage might be cut off by the
Swedish fleet already in sight, he immediately went on board, and set sail for
Holland in a man of war, which lay ready in the haven for his transport. Owen
Joel a Danish Gentleman, was sent by the King along with him, but deputed to
the Elector of Brandenburg, to complain of this unjust invasion of the Swedes,
and to invite him also to his aid and succor. These Ambassadors touched upon
the Coasts of Norway in their passage, and landing at Flecker, acquainted the
Governor by word of mouth, and the Kings Officers farther off by Letters, of
the renewing of the wars in Denmark, admonishing them to stand upon their
guards, as well against the surprises, as the open violence of the Swedes, now
their declared enemies. Whilst Van Beuning hastens toward Holland, struggling
against the winds, the rumor of the Swedish invasion slew thither before him,
and having gained belief with them that were most concerned, the States voted a
fleet and 2000 foot, for the present relief of Coppenhagen. Van Beuning's
arrival quickened these preparations, for having demonstrated the danger Denmark
was in, and the Kings earnest desires for the hastening of the succors, added,
that it was impossible for the City to hold out much above six weeks.

Hereupon all imaginable speed and care was taken, to forward the designed
supplies, neither could the Swedish Ministers then in Holland, with all their
skill (however they magnified their Masters affection and amity toward the
States General) divert them from their taken resolution. Nay, the King himself
having dismissed above seventy of their Merchants ships, which he had surprised
in the Sound, wrote to them the 21 of August out of his Camp, Aug. 21.
in which Letters, after an enumeration of the reasons, which he said, obliged
him to continue the war, and mention of the ancient confederations betwixt the
Crown of Sweden, and the United Low Countries, he did solemnly profess, that he
desired nothing more than the liberty of Commerce, and an unviolable friendship
with the free Belgic Provinces, which he was for his part resolved to persist
in, and testify by all arguments of candor and reality, if they on their parts
would but do the same, as it became true confederates and friends. But all this
was to no purpose; for the States sensible what danger might accrue to their
Eastern traffic (nay many of them judged it quite ruined if Denmark were lost
(and the very ship-fraught alone was estimated at three hundred and fixty
thousand pound sterling a year) if the two Northern Crowns were united under
one Prince, resolved to hinder it by ballancing their forces, and aiding still
the weaker; so that they did not only not change their resolutions, but
commanded the voted supplies to be made ready with all imaginable speed; and in
the mean time, sent several expresses to the King of Denmark, to assure him of
the sudden coming of their fleet and forces to his assistance. All this while
the Danes were busy in fortifying their Town, they repair their old works,
raise new ones where they were defective, cleanse and deepen their moats, and
strengthen their bulworks and curtains, with cannons, and mortar-pieces, and
great grenades (lying here and there upon the parapets to be rolled down into
the moat upon occasion, a very useful and destructive invention) and several
other offensive and defensive arms. No age, no sex, no quality or order of men
were exempt from labor, but all were employed in working or watching, the
public danger they were all in, requiring their whole endeavors for their
common safety. The Kings example and presence encouraged all men; for he seldom
quitted the walls, spending the d^^ amongst his soldiers and workmen, and that
part of the night which his repose required, in his pavillion upon the
ramparts, so that there was no body of so abject a spirit, that did not
willingly woe travails and dangers, where his Prince was his spectator and
companion. Neither did the King confine his care to Coppenhagen only:
Cronenburg being looked upon as the most considerable fortress of the Kingdom,
as it really is, was judged worthy his best thoughts. He therefore sent one
Benfield thither, and joining one Bruno and Bilde in Commission with him,
seriously recommended the conservation of that important place, to th^^r valor
and fidelity.

Necessity and Despair, those two powerful movers, obliged the Danes to these
unusual preparations for war; but the distrust they had of their own affairs,
made them wish for peace, for their City was not well fortified, the succors
they were to expect were far off, their Ga^^son did not exceed twelve hundred
effective soldiers, and the Citizens, as it is usual in such encounters,
however numerous, were but few in force and resolution. For these reasons,
Magnus Hoeg, Aug. 8.
and Christian Ski^l, two Senators of the Kingdom, were dispatched in Embassy
to the King of Sweden, the same day he arrived, with instructions to divert him
if it were possible from his present expedition, or delay him from his more
active prosecution of it. The day following they met him at Ringstead, but
being it was late, they were not admitted to audience before next morning, and
that then not without much difficulty. 10.
Being introduced into the Kings presence, they told him in a long speech
(whereof this is the sum) that the wars betwixt the two Kings, had not only
been composed and ended by the peace of Rotschkild, but what ever had been
acted in the same forgot and forgiven, by a solemn act of oblivion on both
sides: But being some doubts and difficulties were risen, concerning the true
sense of the Articles of the said Pacification, there had been another Treaty
held at Coppenhagen, for explication of the first, wherein all the aforesaid
difficulties had been removed, and every thing else so agreed upon, that there
seemed nothing more to be desired. These things being thus, the King their
Master could not choose but wonder, especially being he had on his part
performed every thing he had promised, to see himself and his dominions, and
that without any denunciation of war at all, invaded in a hostile manner.
Lastly, having extolled their Princes desire for Peace; they added, they had
been sent to his Majesty for that purpose, and to remove and obstacles or
mis-understandings that might occasion a new breach. They therefore desired
Commissioners might be appointed to treat with them, not doubting but to be
able to demonstrate abundantly, that their King was not only a stranger to all
thoughts of war, but extremely desirous of peace and concord, which he would
also (if it might be) always maintain and cherish. The King but little moved
with what he heard with patience, having repeated what had happened in the
former wars, and former times; added, that he had been more then sufficiently
provoked to continue this, by the continual injuries he and his Crown had
received from Denmark, which did not cease to endeavor his, and his subjects
^uine, by their daily practices against them. This he said, sufficiently
appeared out of their intercepted letters, by their disturbing of the liberty
of Commerce in the Sound, by their various obstructing and delaying of the
execution of the treaty of Rotschkild (whereby they had hindered the prosecution
of his other more weighty designs) and by their refusing to deliver Carloff
(who had robbed him in Guinea) into his hands. He farther complained, of their
ill using of his father in law the Duke of Holstein, of their refusing to enter
into a nearer confederation with Sweden, and their den^ing to lend him ten
ships at his request. For these and other causes he had resolved, being also
advised to ^t by his Council, to continue the war (for so he termed it, urging
that a war could not be said to be ended, before the execution of the Treaty
that concluded it was completed) and leave the issue of it to God, and his good
fortune. The Danish Ministers protesting their innocence in all things;
replied, that it was not they, being they had performed what ever they were
obliged to by the late Treaty, who were the cause of these delays so much
complained of but the Swedes? who had not made good their promis^s. They
desired those letters so much spoke of might be produced, being they knew
nothing of them, and urged that the business of the Guiney controversy, was
concluded with his Ambassador Coyet before he had left Coppenhagen. As for the
Duke of Holstein, he had obtained by the Swedish interposition, all he could
reasonably desire, and as for themselves, their Kingdom was so exh^usted, that
it was impossible for them either to furnish the desired ships, or to engage
themselves in a more active confederation. They hoped therefore, that his
Majesty would not refuse an equitable ^^eaty, beseeching him (as they had done
before) to appo^nt Commissioners to treat with them, whereby the remaining
differences if there were any, might be removed, and the flames of a new war,
which could not prove but ruinous to both sides, be ex^inguished; before they
broke out to further violence. The King made no great return to these
passionate expressions of the Ambassadors, though mingled with tears; but
demanded them, whether they for their particular did desire his protection?
which they refusing, it was told them they had their last answer. The
Ambassadors seeing the King inexorable, took leave of him and returned to
their lodgings, where they were followed by Marshal oxenstern, and the Count of
slippenbach, by order from the King; who asked them whether they had any thing
more to propose, besides what they had said to his Majesty? from whom they were
sent to them, to know their farther desires. The Danes having repeated in
substance, what they had delivered to the King, were answered by Slippenbach in
his Majesty's sense; adding moreover, that the Danes had by their delays,
occasioned not only the increase of the Pole, Muscovite, and Brandenburg's
powers, but the precipitate election of the Roman Emperor, as also the
confederations of those Princes against Sweden. It was well known how precious
a thing time was, not to be recalled by the Gods themselves; and being Denmarks
fall seemed now inevitable, and at hand, they should choose the best means to
save themselves. The King of Sweden was Master of the field, and would suddenly
be of their fortresses and towns too; they should therefore have recourse to
their sovereign remedy. What could it signify to subjects how their Prince was
called? or of what use was the sound of a few syllables, it was therefore equal
to them, whether Charles or Frederick were their King. There was one God who
was the disposer of Empires, and it seemed Denmark's fatal hour was now drawing
near. He would notwithstanding, pray to the King of Kings, that so noble a City
as Coppenhagen was, might not be destroyed, and so many thousands of persons
involved in it is ruins. The Swedes, when they had conquered and taken
possession of the whole Kingdom, would abundantly manifest the justice of their
proceedings to all men. The Ambassadors being dismissed with this severe
message, were upon the point to depart, when it was told them again, that if
they were sollicitous about the event of this present expedition, they should
make such propositions to the Swedish Ambassadors, then residing in
Coppenhagen, as might be conformable to the present state of their affairs, and
the condition they were then in. The Ambassadors being returned to the City,
and having acquainted their King with what had passed in their negotiation,
applied themselves to the Swedish Ambassador Mons. Bielke, then in restraint;
demanding him, whether he had any instructions to treat about peace? which he
denying* they resolved, as they wrote in their letters to the French
Ambassador then in the Swedish Camp, to commit their cause and its decision to
God alone. The said Swedish Ambassador, was in the mean time in no little
danger through the peoples fury, who believing that he, under the color of
friendship had betrayed them into this war, however he solemnly protested to be
altogether a stranger to his Masters present proceedings, and not to have had
the least knowledge of this invasion. Which is more then probable, being Coyet
his Colleague, who was returned to his Master some days before, had left papers
of consequence, and a good sum of moneys behind him, which fell into the Danes
hands. But neither these excuses, nor his standing upon his guard in his
lodgings, whither all the Swedes then in Town were fled for Sanctuary, could
have saved him, if the King had not upon his request taken him into his
protection, and secured him in Rosenburg, a house of pleasure in the Kings
garden; where he remained under custody (notwithstanding the Swedes objecting
of the breach of the law of Nations by his detension) until he was afterward
delivered thence by the intercession of the Mediators of England and Holland,
especially the last. All hopes of Peace being now laid aside, the Danes prepare
for war with so much the more vigor. They burn the suburbs, which they had
hitherto spared, and omitted nothing they thought requisite for their defense.
By this time, the Swedes troops were advanced within sight of the Town, and
seeing the suburbs on fire, could not choose but wonder, that they who but a
while since, armed and in a warlike posture, had not refused peace upon such
mean conditions, should now unarmed, and destitute of any real force to defend
themselves, not despair of their safety. King Charles observing the enemies
countenance, made a stand till all his army was come up, and then seized upon
the two Forts of Wartew and Ladegard, which joined by continual works and
trenches together, extending also on both sides to the sea, environed the whole
suburbs: and now his Navy, consisting of 28 men of War were in sight, and
commanded to anchor before the Town, so that the City was environed by sea and
land, and shut up from all intercourse from without. But before I begin to
describe the particulars of this famous siege, I have thought it not
impertinent to say something of the original, increase, and present state of
this City, the Metropolitan of Denmark, and one of the beautifullest of the
whole North.

Coppenhagen the royal seat of the Danish Kings, called by the inhabitants
Kiobenhaven, that is to say, the Merchants-haven; is seated upon the East side
of the Island of Zeland, under the 56 degr. of Northern latitude. This Town was
in its beginnings very mean, a few fishermens Cottages; but in succession of
time grew to that greatness, by reason of the excellency of the haven, that it
is at this present, most justly ranked amongst the most noble Cities of the
North. Many of its Kings, especially Christian the fourth; the memory of whose
virtues is still cherished by the inhabitants, adorned this their residence
with many notable privileges and public buildings. This Christian, having
laid the foundation of a new City in the Isle of Amack, joined it to the old by
a bridge, and called it by the name of Christians-haven. He built also a goodly
Magazine house, and strengthened the City on the Island-side with walls and
bulworks, but these fortifications neglected, and well-nigh fallen in the long
peace they had enjoyed, were now repaired. The Moats were cleansed and deepned,
and new works being added to the old where they were defective, the Land-side
was enclosed with ten whole, and two half bulworks, the rest of the
circumference, lying betwixt the Citadel and the Western part of the Town, is
environed with the sea, which extending it self Southward, divides the Kings
Palace, a fabric of ancient structure, from the Island of Amack by a narrow
inlet, making the most commodious and capacious haven, as also the most safe
against all winds of the whole Baltic sea Coppenhagen has as well as other
great towns, felt the various vicissitudes of fortune. The Lubeckers having
pillaged it twice, consumed it once with fire. Jarimarus Prince of Rugen, the
Sweaes; and the Hanse Towns, ravaged it by turns, though these last, in the
year 1427 upon another attempt, were beaten off with much loss. Neither has
this City been only oppressed by strangers, it has labored also under the
miseries of civil dissensions, for taking part with Christian the second
against Frederick, it was taken by Frederick, and in the year 1530, after a
years siege, and the calamity of famine and war, forced to surrender it self to
Christian the third. After that it enjoyed the sweets of peace for a long
series of years, until Charles Gustave King of Sweden made war upon it, who had
also subdued it, if the Dutch, the Brandenburgers, the Imperialists, the Poles,
the Muscovites, and almost whole Europe had not hastened to its succor, as
concerned in its conservation, and rescued it out of the hands of that
victorious Prince. But of these in order.

King Charles his sea and land forces being, as we have already mentioned, met
before the Town, seized upon the Castle of Wartow, and Ladegard, as also the
other outworks, without resistance; for the Citizens sollicitous for the main,
and not sufficing for all had contracted their forces within their walls. He
omitted the sudden assaulting of the City, having been certainly informed of
the enemies desperation and multitude, resolved to perish rather than change
master. Being therefore overborn by the advice of his chief Officers, he was
forced to prolong the siege; but lest he should leave any place behind him out
of his power, he divided his Army, and sent Marshal Wrangel with part of it, to
besiege the strong Castle of Cronenburg, which commands the Sound; not absurdly
fancying by taking of it, to deter foreign forces from coming to relieve
Coppenhagen, or at least, to be the better able to hinder and oppose them if
they should attempt it.

Whilst both parties were thus struggling in Denmark, the wars broke out in
other places with no less violence; for Charles had before he had left
Holstein, given and sent secret instructions to his Commanders and Governors,
that they should assault and oppress the Danes now his enemies, by sea and
land, wherever they could meet with them. Hereupon many eminent men, some
Governors of Provinces and places, and amongst others Monsieur Godde the High
Admiral of the Kingdom, were intercepted here and there, whilst they dreamt of
nothing less than a new war. Rensburg, Crempen, and other fortresses of
Holstein were attempted, COPPENHAGEN
xxxxx th^^ Outworkes abandoned by the Danas anaaa the Swedes app^^^^^^
Christians Ha^^^ D the Palace F Citadel G (...) H North Port M West Port N
Helmer Bul^^^^^

Coppenhagen
view of Copenhagen

map of Copenhagen but not surprised, escaping for the most part, the force and
practices of the enemy, by the vigilance of their Governors. Only the King of
Denmark's Regiment of guards, which was enquartered in the Marshes of Holstein
was oppressed, and -- Duke of Lu^^^^urg, the Queens brother, was taken as he
sailed to Lubeck, but ^^^^g known to be a Prince of the Empire, he was
dismissed, and ^^^mitted to continue his journey. Many ships, as well men of
War (...) Merchant-vessels were intercepted, and many other losses were
s^stained and suffered, by the secure Danes. But to return to Copp^^hagen,
where we left the Danes busy in putting themselves into a posture of defense,
and the Swedes in taking up their quarters before the several avenues of the
Town. The flower of their Infan^^y lay before the Western Port, the North gate
was but loosely blocked up, and at a distance, but the Eastern was guarded as
neighboring upon Wartow, with several Companies of Foot. The Horse divided
into eight bodies or great squadrons, (the right Wing extending toward the
Hollands village, the left behind Wartow, and the main body at Ulersleve) took
up the whole Campania, so that the Town and all the avenues, except the passage
into Amack, were wholly shut up. The Swedes having thus disposed of their
quarters, began their approaches toward the West Port, being secured on the
right hand by the sea, and on the left by St. George's lake. The Danes
observing the advance of the enemy, armed two great boats or lighters, which
they call Prames, with men and cannon, and bringing them by sea near the right
side of their trenches, did extremely gall them with their great shot: Neither
were the Pioneers able to avoid their strokes, for what way soever the works
were directed, these moving Castles did still follow and flanck them with their
un-erring cannonades. The Swedes to prevent or revenge this mischief, raised a
battery against these Prames, but could not with all their skill oblige them
to quit their stations, for lying flat upon the water, the enemies shot flew
over or fell short of them, whilst they lined cannon-proof on the side next
the Fort, shot as out of a secure Fortress. These boats were of great use to
the beleaguered, and could not be obliged to remove their stations during the
whole siege. The Danes who were still mending, and patching, and perfecting
their Fortifications, strengthened the North and East gates with Ravelins; the
Citadel on the side next the sea, with a half Moon; the rest of the walls where
they seemed lowest and weakest with other works, and the whole Parapet of the
Ramparts quite round, as also the entire Moat of the Town, with stakes and
pallisadoes; whereby they secured themselves as well against the surprises, as
assaults of the enemy. But King Frederick thinking no fortifications equal to
the affection of his subjects, resolved to oblige them more strictly to
himself, by new and unhoped for concessions; for judging wisely, that they who
have most to lose, have most reason to defend themselves, he granted them,
amongst others, these following Privileges. 1 That Coppenhagen should be a
free City. 2 That it should be endowed with Privileges necestary for the
increase of Traffic. 3. That it should be one of the States of the K^ngdom,
and enjoy a vote in all those deliberations which concerned the public good of
the K^ngdom. 4 That the Citizens should have power to purchase any Lands and
Lordships whatsoever, and enjoy and possess them, with the same rights that t^^
N^bles did. 5 That ^h^y should not be burdened with any imp^^sitions the Noble
did not bear and not that but by publ^^^ consent. 6 That they should be ^ree
from all contributions or enquarterings whatsoever in times of peace, but
should in time of war bear the public burdens equa^ with the other sta^es. 7
And lastly, that all the Citizens children, whether Ecclesiastic of Civil,
should enjoy the freedom of being admitted to Honors and public Offices,
equ^lly with Noblemens children provided they rendered themselves he and capable
for them.
The Swedes having advanced their trenches toward the Western Port, winding
and turning as the manner ^s, to cover themselves from the enemies shot,
st^engthened them with a Redoubt, the better to seem their Watchmen: but the
Danes rushing out of their receptacles with two troops of Horse and bout 200
foot, most of them being Sea men, armed with brown Bills and morning Stars,
fell upon them with such have and vi^l^nce, that they did not only beat them
out of their said appro^^hes and Redoubt, but having slain or taken all they
met with, returned in triumph into the Town, with the loss only of one Captain,
and three common soldiers. The besieged raised with this little success, Aug.
13.
began to hope for better fortune, and look upon themselves as not wholly lost,
nor altogether unequal to their enemies. And this made them reject the French
Ambassadors letters, brought the same day into the Town, inviting them to an
accommodation with the Swedes, and that they should propose conditions so ^^ble
to then present ex^gen^^es, and the desperate estate they were then (...). The
day following, the Swedes ^an two approaches m^^^ tow^rds the Gate, but
fortified their brinks with crossed pallisadoes or twine pikes, against the
sudden sallies of the besieged. They could not adv^nce their trenches with that
case they at first ^^^^med, by reason of the moistness of the earth in some
places, which they did yet overcome by ^^eyning the water, and fastening the
loo^e earth with bows and branches. There remained stil^ some unburnt houses,
by favor whereof, they (hiding themselves in (...) ^^mes) endeavored by then
frequent shooting, to beat the soldiers and laborers out of then works, which
they were bu^lding before the Gate, which they yet could not do, being
themselves very much annoyed out of the lower behind the said Gate, by the
enemies muskatoons. To remedy this, they raised a b^ttery of five guns against
the said Tower, which King Frederick observing, commanded the Tower to be rased
and thrown down, lest us ^^^nes shivered pieces, might do more harm than the
enemies bullets. The Moat on that side of the town, was not so well furnished
with water as was desired, which obliged the Danes to convey a quantity of it
thither out of the Sea by Engines, and Conduits; raising it first on h^^h by
pumps and mills, and then leading it by pipes into the said Moa^. They forced
such Swedes as they had prisoners to labor in these works, which was revenged
by the besiegers, who on the other side compelled the Danes to work in the^r
trenches: The m^s^^able of both parties, being necessitated to endeavor ^^e
ruin of what they desired to conserve most, only with this diff^rence, that
the Sw^des although forced to work were yet seem, whilst the D^^^s were not
only constrained to labor* but th^^ a ^o^m great danger of the^^ lives, by
their friends continual shooting out of the town. The Sw^des played ho^^y upon
the Po^^ and the ^ower, though to ^^og^^^ purpose; by reason of the firmn^s^ of
the one, being well l^n^d within, and the ruins of the other, it being already
thrown down. It is remarkable, that the statue of Christian the fourth, which
was over the gate, was not injured at all, neither now, nor during the whole
siege, for all the en^mies incessant shooting* which was looked upon as a good
Omen by the b^si^ged. Aug. 1^.
But King Fred^rick himself did but narrowly escape so, for wh^l^st he stood
upon the battery at the West gate, a ^andom bullet, out of one of the broken
houses next the walls, shot one of his train close to him. The same day the
King put out a Proclamation, wherein, after exaggerating the injustice of the
Swedish arms, he my^^es all honest G^rmans to abandon their service, promising
every horseman 50 crowns, and every footman ten, but ^ew o^ none listened to
it, most soldiers following rather the succes^ than the justice of arms. The
Swedes did not only attack the town from without, but endeavored also to
incommode it within, which they did in a great measure, by breaking and ^u^^ing
the pipes which conveyed fresh water into it; but this evil (the greatest that
can happen in besieged places) was remedied by the continual r^in and wetness
of the season, so that the Citizens were abundantly refreshed with this
celestial moisture, which they received and conserved in Cisterns, and other
receptacles for their use. The King had also commanded several pu^s to be
dug in several places of the town, which was done with so good s^^^^ss, th^^
several ^oun^^^ns and veins of h^^h water were discovered, within four or five
^oo^ of the supers^^ies of the ^a^th. By this time the Swedes were by their
windings and turnings, advanced within musket shot of the Most, which as it
stra^ned the besieged, so it put them upon thoughts of obstructing these
dangerous approaches. They therefore resolved upon a second sally, as the only
means to hinder the enemies progress, which they were highly encouraged to by
their former success, and the apprehension of their present danger. All the
horse commanded by Guldenlew, and seven hundred foot, consisting of Students*
Sea m^n, Artifi^^rs, and some few Soldiers, were ordered for this exploit,
which they performed with so much quickness and courage, that they were upon
the enemy before -- Banner, who* commanded in the approaches, could put himself
into a posture to resist them. The suddenness of the action facilitated the
victory, and made it rather an execution than a combat, and yet the Swedes made
what resistance was possible: But being surprised and in so unequal a place
(for it is an error to think to maintain trenches against a resolved attack)
they were forced to fly. A company of Norway boores did wonders with their
morning stars (being clubs armed wi^h great nails at their stump end) upon the
Swedes that were below them in the^r trenches; and all did so well, that the
enemy was absolutely routed, slain or taken; and all their trenches,
approaches, batteries, redoubts, etc. mastered, slighted, and broken down.
There remained yet 150 Swedes in a Sconce upon the right hand, who seeing the
slaughter which was made of their men, and fearing the same misfortune, tamely
surrendered themselves and their Fort, to Lieutenant General Schack Governor of
the City, who had threatened them with present death, if they made the least
resistance. These and some more prisoners together, with five pi^ces of cannon,
with the German Emperors arms upon them, when were upon the nearest battery,
were brought into the town in triumph. The other great Guns which had been
planted against the Prames, were dismounted and nailed, and thrown into the
ditch of the old works. In a word the victory was entire, and for all the
enemies have, who came flocking out of their Camp to the relief of their
approaches (though too late) secure; For Guldenlew and Schack were no less
diligent in bringing their men off in safety, than they had been dexterous in
the management of their sally: so that the Swedes had only the regret of seeing
their men slain, their approaches ruined, and so signal a loss to pass
unrevenged. They lost in this encounter about five hundred men. Those who were
taken prisoners being most Germans and Poles, took pay in King Fredericks
service, a thing usual amongst those mercenaries, who warring only for a
present subsistence, will easilier change Master, than endure the penury and
miseries of a nasty prison. The Danes did not lose above thirty of theirs in
this sally, besides as many wounded, some whereof were destroyed by the blowing
up of the enemies gunpowder, which taking fire by the neglect of a Danish
soldier, the sparkles of whose match had fallen into it, all that provision which
the Swedes had there for battering of the town, vanished in an instant. It is
believed, that if the Danes had vigorously pursued their advantage, and had
broken the Ladegard bridge which they attempted, but too late, they had not only
hindered the Swedes horse from approaching the town in any reasonable time, for
they must have gone far about, but have taken all the enemies cannon. But they
did not sally out with such vast hopes, and many things do occur in such
encounters, that cannot be seen, and consequently not provided for. The Danes
however satisfied with the success of the day, found the night no less
favorable. They had indeed employed their utmost endeavors, since the first
instant of the enemies invasion, in rigging of their fleet, they had also
manned and made ready (though with much difficulty) six or seven good men of
war, but when they should use them, they did not know where or how to employ
them, for the Swedes were too strong at Sea, and it seemed too dangerous, to
hazard the loss of so many brave seamen, which made up a great part of the
forces of the town, without probability of success. They therefore contented
themselves to have them in a readiness, as occasion might serve, which now in
some sort did present it self. The Swedes had made provision of boats and other
small vessels, for the transportating of part of their forces into Amack; these
lay at anchor near Kalleboe, not far from the town, and secure, as not fearing
any attempt upon them by sea. But Nicholas Held and Bredal two good sea
Commanders, having manned, and armed a good number of their long boats, Aug. ^4.
stole upon them and surprised them a little before day. The Swedes being thus
circumvented, made little or no resistance, so that all their vessels (except a
small ship of war, which cutting its cables saved it self by flight) were
taken, stranded, sunk, or consumed with fire. Some Held brought into the town
with him, and the rest which he could not by reason of the shallows, he burnt;
having saved the men, cannon, and whatever other provision was portable, before
he destroyed them. The two Kings were spectators of this nocturnal combat,
though at a distance, both imagining the success according to his hopes and
fears. But Held's return with five Lighters or Portoons, and many other
conquered smaller boats, put the business out of controversy, and King
Frederick into such a transport of joy, that he received Held (leaping out of
his boat) as one that had well deserved of him, and gave him his hand to kiss,
publicly commending his courage and conduct, as a testimony of his valor, and
an incitement to others. The Danes in the desperate condition they were in upon
the first appearance of the enemy before the town, added their supplications to
God, to the arms they bore, as the most efficacious means for their
deliverance. Their Churches and Altars were crowded by their women and
children, whilst the men each in his station upon the walls, stormed heaven by
their prayers and intercessions. These holy employments were the daily and
hourly exercises of the besieged, at their spare times, which were now by the
Kings command turned into thanksgivings for these two signal, and in the
condition they were, very great victories.

The Swedes being rendered more wary by so many losses, omitted the present
attacking of the town, to secure and fortify their own quarters; they
therefore strengthen the outworks the Citizens had formerly quitted; with
pallisadoes they turn their breast-works against the town, and in them, and
their ditches or moats (dividing them near the sea, and cutting them off from
the rest of the said works) they made a quarter large enough to contain all
their foot, and all their instruments of war. This quarter was strengthened
within with a ravelin, and on the side toward the fields with a tenaille, or
tongue; and being also scated betwixt the sea and St. George's lake, was secured
on the back side by the right wing of horse, which lay in the Hollands village.
The rest of the horse (except the guards disposed of upon the several avenues
of the town) were enquartered betwixt Uttersleve and Wartow in the open field,
ready in case the Citizens should sally again, to oppose them upon their first
appearance. The Danes were no less busy on their side; they cut down all the
trees which which were in the Queens garden or else where planted, as well for
ornament as use, without their gates; they burnt such edifices as were yet
standing, and level their very rubbish with the ground, lest the enemy might
find any safety or shelter behind them. Things being thus ordered on both
sides, the Danes full of hopes, and encouraged by their former good fortunes,
prepare for another sally, but being upon the point to march, they were stayed
by the sudden appearance of the Swedish horse descending the hill from Walbuy.
This unexpected sight did not only break their present design, but filled them
with amazement and jealousy, whilst most of them apprehended there might be
treason amongst themselves, and a secret correspondence with the enemy from
within. But not knowing how that might be, the town being so well guarded, and
at a loss who to suspect, an uncertain rumor was spread abroad, that a
standard had been seen lift up, and displayed upon Ulefeld's house, which all
concluded was done to give the enemy notice of what passed in the town, by
orders from that traitor (as they called him) to his King and Country. But the
said lodgings being visited and searched, and some who were suspected examined
and imprisoned, though nothing got out of them, this sear vanished. But the
true reason of this discovery was not known till afterward. There was a Wind
mill not far from the town, which over-looked it, though at a distance; the
Swedes having their sentinels day and night there, could (though confusedly) by
the help of perspectives, see what was done upon the walls, which they within
were not at first aware of. The Swedes having secured their quarters, began to
infest the town by shooting multitudes of glowing bullets into it, especially
by night, to add terror to the harm they might do; and indeed the fear was
greater than the mischief, for the King having at the beginning of the siege,
appointed three hundred men to guard the several streets of the town, as well
against such accidents as casual fires, had abundantly provided for any harm
that way; which order had that also of good in it, that the other Citizens and
soldiers who were appointed for defense of the ramparts, being strictly
enjoined not to quit their stations in any case whatsoever, were less
sollicitous for their own dwellings, being secure in the others care. These men
therefore being provided with great hooks, great tongs made like men's fingers
at the ends, and other such instruments to handle these fireballs, easily
prevented their mischief, so that there was no material harm done, either by
them, or by the grenades thrown into the town, during the whole Seige. And now
the Swedes began to approach again, but with more circumspection then at first,
for they built a large square fort, to defend their trenches, and making use of
St. George's dike, fortify it with a breast work and pallisadoes, and having
raised a battery for two and twenty pieces of Cannon upon it, began to thunder
upon the remains of the Tower, upon the Helmer bullwork and opposite Curtain,
endeavoring by that violence to dismount the Cannon upon the walls. They also
made another battery in the Ladegard fort, of nine Guns, out of which they shot
(not only bullets) but fireballs into the City. The fortifications at Wartow
being open toward the town, were shut up with new breast-works, and further
strengthened with twelve pieces of Ordnance. The besieged had ordered two other
Prames with good Cannon in them, to flanck and defend the East side of the
town, which they did with so much obstinacy, that the incessant violence of the
guns out of this sconce, could not oblige them to quit their stations; the
covers indeed of these flat boats were beaten down, and that was all the harm
was done them, which they sufficiently revenged by dismounting some of the
adverse cannon, and killing several of their men. The Danes seeing the enemies
order and approaches, and seeing no means to disturb their advance but by
sallies, resolved yet again to try their fortune that way. They stole out of
the North gate, Aug. 30.
with four hundred horse and foot, and falling with great have and resolution
upon the enemies post, on the other side the Bebling Lake, beat them from it at
first onset, but being frighted by their horse which hastened to their
succors, they were forced to retire toward the walls again, leaving behind
them one Captain, and fifteen or sixteen common soldiers. This did not daunt
them so, but they would hazard another combat, which five hundred of them
rushing upon the adverse approaches, performed with much resolution. They
indeed routed these next to them, as it is usual in sudden sallies at first,
but these run aways did but save themselves in their sconces, whereby they not
only eluded the endeavors of their pursuers, but being suddenly reinforced
from the neighboring stations, forced them back; mortally wounding two of
their Colonels, Urne and Bremer, who died of their hurts the following day.
King Frederick escaped also narrowly that same day: for having stood near the
West port a good while to see the skirmishing without, he had no sooner changed
place, but Col. Lange stepping into it, was shot through the breast with a
musket bullet, whereof he died some few days after. Neither is this the only
danger the King has been in, for Providence (who has a peculiar care of
Princes) protected him from another no less eminent, some time before; He had
no sooner removed himself from leaning upon a wall at the same West port, but a
musket bullet sl^pt in that very place, where he had rested his head but a
moment before. The Danes seeing they could do no more good by their sallies, by
reason of the enemies vigilance and strength, opposed new works to their
approaches; they made a Ravelin upon the Curtain next the Western gate, with a
covered way which extended to both sides the said gate, and strengthened the
Helmer Bulwork, the weakest place of the whole town, by reason of the sharpness
of the angle, and the length of the Curtain Northward, exceeding musket shot
with another Ravelin, against the enemies approaches; which they advanced upon
the Dike, betwixt the Bebling and St. Georges lake. The Swedes had likewise
omitted nothing for securing of their approaches, they raised another redoubt
in the highway, and joined all their quarters with lines of communication. The
cannon thundered perpetually on both sides, and scarce a day past without
skirmishing, though with no notable advantage for either party. The City had
the worst of it, for by this time provisions grew very dear, the public
magazines were empty, and there was no moneys in the treasury, so that private
men were forced to support the public charges, by enquartering and feeding the
soldiery. There was indeed store of wine, of oil, and of corn, but little or no
butter, fresh meats, or fuel; what there was, was registered, as well the wants
of the poor, as the better provisions of the richer Citizens: the hay for the
horses was divided, to each trooper his share a part, for fear the fire might
consume the whole if kept together, and the gunpowder was for the same reason,
disposed of into several quarters of the town. The besieged bore these
hardships with much constancy, being chiefly encouraged by the example of the
great ones, especially the King himself; who refusing those refreshments which
distinguish Princes from the vulgar, was content to share with the soldiers in
all their hardships. The Swedish fleet was by this increased, with a supplement
of six men of war; they had sunk several old vessels in the entry of the haven
of Coppenhagen, to hinder the passage; but yet they could not either do that,
or watch so narrowly, but several messengers and boats, and some little
provisions out of the Isles, stole into the town. These brought the glad
tidings of the preparations in the United Low Countries for their relief, of
the Elector of Brandenburg's marching into Holstein with the Imperial and
Polish forces, and how that the Swedes had surprised nothing in that Country
upon their first breach, save the Regiment of Guards already mentioned. These
news did indeed much quicken the besieged, until the fatal surrender of
Cronenburg had like to have sunk them. But we will leave them a while to their
grief, well-nigh despair, with the apprehensions they had of the woeful
consequences of this loss; and deliver in short, the story of the taking of
this important Fortress.

Field-Marshal Wrangel, having shared the Army with his King upon their first
arrival in Denmark, was sent as we have already mentioned by him, to besiege
and reduce Cronenburg, with all imaginable industry and celerity, as knowing of
what consequence the taking of this considerable Castle would be to his
interest and reputation CRONENBVRG
view of Kronborg Scale of Rods 12 foot to a Rod for the Outworkes

Cronenburg Fortifyed with outworkes by the Swedes

map of Kronborg abroad. Wrangel being come before it, fell immediately to
work, and ran his approaches by favor of the Houses in a little time, to the
very Moat of the Castle. There were indeed no Outworks to hinder him, and the
Garrison being surprised, had had no time or precaution to ruin the
neighboring houses, though the place was otherwise very defensible, being
secured by the Sea on one side, and strengthened with a large Moat and good
Walls on the other. Besides this, there were above 80 pieces of Ordnance in it,
an immense quantity of Powder, and Soldiers enough, King Frederick having sent
a recruit of an hundred and sixty fresh men in a Galliot thither by night, out
of Coppenhagen. But all this would not suffice, where fear and despair had the
predominance. The Swedes increased these terrors with a stratagem; for giving
out they had taken Coppenhagen, they celebrated their feigned Victory, with the
discharges of all their great and small shot, with the noises of their Drums
and Trumpets, with Bonefires, and all the imaginable signs of true joy, even to
excess. These unusual Triumphs amazed the Garrison, but sunk them when they
understood the supposed reasons of them, which were transferred to them with
all the cunning imaginable. In the neck of this they were summoned by Wrangel,
and threatened with all sorts of extremities, if they alone (the only remaining
place in Denmark) should continue to oppose their victorious armies. The
Governors (for they were three) too credulous to believe what they feared, and
irresolved enough of themselves, supposing all now lost, and themselves not
sufficient to resist the fate of their Country, thought it their wisest and
safest course to provide for themselves in time. Sept. 6.
They therefore shamefully delivered up this strong place, upon the sordid
suggestions of fear, and a precipitate credulity, though no way necessitated,
having scarcely held out three entire Weeks. These three Chiefs, or Triumvirate
of Cowards, were afterward condemned by a Council of War at Coppenhagen, to
lose their heads; but pardoned by the Kings clemency, and the intercession of
the Mediators then there. And thus this Castle, the strongest and most
considerable Fortress of Denmark, was taken. Frederick the second had built it,
laying its foundation by reason of the unstableness of the sand, upon great
Oaken Piles or Stakes, and raising the whole Edifice above ground, with stones
fetched from the Isle of Gotland. The whole structure was the Product of eight
years labor, and a vast expense; which as we have already related, was taken
in the space of two and twenty days. The Swedes heightened with this Victory,
having found an immense quantity of Gunpowder which they much wanted, and great
provision of Cannon and other Instruments of War, did hope that Coppenhagen
would quickly follow, which they now resolved (being-secure behind) to attack
it with their united Forces. They did not omit the divulging and heightening of
this Conquest abroad, as well as nearer hand; Mr. Appleboem their Resident at
the Hague, acquaints the States General with it, who would have willingly
dispensed with so in-officious a civility, though he assured them (provided
they would not assist their Enemies) that they had no design to hinder their
Navigation and Commerce, or heighten the Customs in those Seas. But their
acquainting of the English had more of reality and advantage to both, for they
offered them the possession of the said Fortress, if they would join with them
offensively in this War. In the mean time, they transfer the Toll paid hither
to at Lanskrown, by such Ships as passed through the Sound, to Cronenburg
again, and settle there as it were, the seat of their present Empire in
Denmark. But the news of this unhappy surrender being brought to Coppenhagen,
filled the Town with sorrow and terror. At first they did not believe it,
because they did not desire it, and thought it impossible that so strong a
Place should be so soon lost, and therefore the Messenger was thrown into
Prison, as suborned and an Impostor. But the Enemies triumphing in their Camp,
and other confirmations from other parts, manifested it to be too certain;
which so oppressed them with grief; that they reflected upon themselves now as
irrecoverably ruined; and there was n^ne amongst them, of so resolved a mind,
but was shaken at this fatal Trtuh. For they as well as the rest, feared lest
the succors designed for their assistance in the Low Countries, terrified with
the taking of Cronenburg, would either not come, or if they did, intend others
danger with more remisness and less care, where their own was so great. But
these fears vanished by degrees, and the Citizens reassumed their wonted
courage, being confirmed by the States Generals Letters, that the promised
succors were ready, and on their way to their relief, with Orders to break
through all obstacles, or whatever might oppose them. Many thought these
Letters feigned, and only a Court trick to amuse the people, neither would the
incredulous vulgar believe otherwise, until the Letters themselves were
publicly read in the Churches, and their signature exposed to the view of all
men.

The Swedes had made great provision of all sorts of Engines, fit for
assaulting of Towns, which King Frederick having notice of, as also that they
were at a place called Flescha, on the other side of Amak, ept. 6.
resolved to attempt the seizing or ruining of them. The most desperate Seamen
were picked out for this exploit, but the wary Enemy sensible of the danger,
prevented it by a timely landing of their Instruments, and withdrawing of
themselves. The Swedish Fleet was retired from before the Haven of Coppenhagen,
toward the Sound, in whose absence, many lesser Vessels, with some provisions,
partly out of duty and partly out of desire of gain, (for they made great
profit of their Merchandises) stole daily into the Town; Sept. 25.
twelve Boats with store of refreshments, and a hundred and sixty Soldiers sent
from Laland, creeping along their shores, and by favor of the night and lusty
rowing, got into the Town in safety: but that which no less amazed than
rejoiced the Citizens, was the unexpected arrival of a Swedish Frigate of
sixteen Guns, laden with spoils and prey. The Master and Seamen were Swedes,
but it happened, that besides their Lading they had a Danish youth (I would I
knew his name) and sixty Zeland Boores on board. The Vessel having passed the
Isle of Wenen with full sail, and in sight of Coppenhagen, the young Dane
showing his Countrymen the Town with his finger, told them they had a happy
opportunity to deliver themselves out of their slavery, and do their Country
some service, if they would resolutely fall upon the Swedes with them, and turn
their course into the Haven. He had no sooner said this, but it was resolved
upon, and as soon put in execution, for most of the Seamen being under
hatches, they easily mastered rest, and came as they designed with full sail
into the Haven. But that which made most noise in the Town, was the
intercepting of a Letter of the King of Swedens to Douglas, his General in
Liefland, with Orders for the seizing of the Castle of Mithow in Coucland,
which he notwithstanding did, as also the Duke in it, who with his Lady and
Children, were sent under safe conduct to Riga. This violence was aggravated
with all the circumstances of infidelity and tyranny, the better to estrange
the people from any thoughts of an accommodation with such an Enemy.

The Swedes having brought all their strength before Coppenhagen, and having
enlarged and fortified their Quarters, made all the appearances of force
imaginable; and to show they were in earnest, thundered upon the Town from three
several Batteries at once, with that impetuosity, that they threw down the
point of the Battery at the Western Gate, shivered many houses in Town, and
slew sixteen of the Desendants with their Cannon bullets in one day: to this
they added the terror of their Grenades, which they tossed over the Walls in
great numbers, but not with that success they expected, for they either fell
into Pudoles and Moorish places, or were prevented before they took fire, by
the vigilance and address of those who were appointed to attend them. The Danes
repaired by night the Battery the Swedes had shaken, and disposing of their
Cannon (of which they had above 300 in all upon their Walls) in convenient
places, rebeat the Enemies Forts and Works, and oblige them to the like
nocturnal labors and reparations. They also threw great stones out of their
Mortars into the Camp, omitting nothing which they thought hurtful or
offensive, so that the Siege and attack seemed reciprocal, and alternative.
Sept. 20.
On the 20 of September, the Swedish Fleet having weighed their Anchors, sailed
toward the Sound, leaving only four Ships behind them to attend the besieged;
this infused new joy into the Citizens, fancying their promised relief out of
the Low Countries to be near, so then disdaining to be blockt up by such a
slender remainder, Held was commanded by the King to go and flight them with
three men of War, which the Swedes perceiving, Octov. 1
cut their Cables and retired to the rest of their Fleet. The Danes encouraged
by the supplies they had received from Laland, and their former successes,
adventured another salley. A hundred and fifty armed for the most part with
Sithes and Morning stars, rushed upon their most advanced approaches, and
falling lustily on, slew above an hundred of the Enemies Pioniers (whom they
surprised, resting from their labor, for it was late evening) and some few
Soldiers: But the Guards hastening from all quarters to the relief of their
men, they were forced to return, though not without the loss of a Captain, and
six or seven Soldiers. The Swedes repaired the disorders of the late eruption
the same night; which the besiegers observing, and heightened with so many
lucky encounters, flew out upon them again, armed besides their usual Weapons,
with hand Grenades. The Swedes were building a Redoubt to secure their
Trenches, which being yet imperfect was easily surprised, Oct. 4.
many of the Workmen being slain, and the Materials of it most thrown down, the
Danes retiring into their receptacles again, without any considerable loss.

And thus both sides attacked, battered and offended each other, whilst the
Swedes endeavored to approach the City, and the Danes, to stave them off. The
Swedish Fleet which had continued some time in the Sound, (seeing the
Netherland Succouls were not so forward as they had imagined, and that several
Vessels during their absence had not into the Town, as also some Merchants
ships which had been taken by the Danish Capers, not as enemies, but only to
supply the present necessity of the besieged) returned back to Coppenhagen, and
advancing as far as Draker, landed eight hundred Foot and three hundred Horse
in the Island. 7.
A thick Mist contributed much to their easy coming on shore, for they were
not discovered till they were read to leap out of their Boats, which affrighted
the Boores, and a few Soldiers that watched there away, and obliged them to
save themselves by a timely flight. Amak lying on the South East side of
Coppenhagen, and only divided from it by a Bridge, containing six English miles
or six thousand paces in length, and four thousand in breadth. The ground is
very fertile, abounding in Milk, Butter, Cheese, Hares, Domestic fowl, and all
sorts of Kitchen herbs, insomuch that it may properly enough be called, the
Cities Store house, furnishing indeed its Markets with those necessary
commodities; there are several Villages in it, inhabited partly by Danes, and
partly by Dutch, the latter having been brought thither out of North Holland,
by the command of Christian the second, to make Butter and Cheese (as being
esteemed more skilful in that mystery than the Natives) above an hundred years
since. The Kings unseasonable indulgence, had permitted the Inhabitants to live
at their own Houses with their Provisions and Cattle, upon their intercessions
and promises, to guard the Avenues of the Island, and assurance that they could
not be so surprised, but they should have time enough to retire, and send their
Cattle and Provisions, with their Wives and Children before hand into the Town;
but they were deceived, for the Swedes were upon them before they were aware,
so that they had scarce time to save their own persons and their Cattle. The
Swedes being become thus Masters of the Island, began forthwith to fortify
their landing place, and secure themselves a retreat, in case the Citizens
should attempt to disturb them in their new Conquest. King Frederick made
indeed a show as if he would have fought them, appearing in the Island about
noon with all his Horse, but he was dissuaded by them about him, and the
Enemies numbers, at least their advantage, being too strongly entrenched and
Pallisado'd (for they had brought store of Turn-pikes, Freeze Horsemen, and
such defensive materials with them) to be forced by a weaker Party than
themselves. The Danes therefore seeing there was no good to be done upon the
Enemy, returned into the Town, but first burnt Sunbug a Village near the Gate,
lest it might afford them either lodgings or shelter. But the Swedes stay in
the Island was not long, October. 9.
for King Charles having received certain intelligence that the Netherland
Fleet was under sail, and on its way toward Denmark, quitted his present
design, with a resolution to oppose the advance of these succors. In the mean
time, because the Enemy might not overmuch rejoice at his departure* he
commanded all the Villages and Houses in the whole Island, to be pillaged and
burnt, and whatever might be of use to the besieged in his absence, to be
destroyed. The Danes beheld this sad spectacle from their Walls and Towers with
much regret, especially such who were particularly concerned in this
devastation. But the King knowing bewailings were fruitless, resolved to
revenge this violence, being also incited to it by the disorders of the Enemy,
he being assured by a fugitive out of their Troops, that they being dispersed
through the Island, and intent only upon their plunderings, might be easily
surprised and oppressed. Hereupon the King commands to sound to Horse, October.
10.
and all being in a readiness, marches out himself with his own Guards; two
hundred and fifty Horse commanded by Guldenlew and John Alekefeld, a few
Dragoons, and a good Troop for the Reserve. Some of the nimblest Foot got up
behind the Troopers, for the business required expedition, and four light
Fieldpieces, drawn each of them by single Horses were carried along. The
Senators who were present, would have dissuaded the King from hazarding his
person (in whose safety their all, and their Countries did consist) to the
uncertainties of war; but he knowing of what moment the presence of Princes are
in such encounters, and hearing that the King of Sweden was also in the Isle in
person, gave them no hearing, but clapping spurs to his horse continued his
way. The Swedes being allarmed with this appearance, drew into a Body near a
Village called the Hollands Dorp; they did not exceed three hundred Horse, and
those for the most part fresh men, and one hundred Foot. The Danes finding them
in this posture, charged them bravely, and after some resistance broke and
routed them, and had in probability, if they had pursued them closely, taken or
slain King Charles himself, who together with the Prince of Sulsbach and
Wrangel, were forced to a hasty retreat, leaving above a hundred of their men
behind them upon the place. Some few days after, the King escaped no less
danger by water, than he had done before by land; For the Boat which he was in,
passing out of Zeland into Schonen, striking against a Galliot (which by
violence of the Wind and stream was forced upon him) was broke in pieces. Most
of his men were drowned, whilst he catching by the end of a Rope was saved,
and pulled up into the great Vessel, with the loss only of his Hat and Staff.
Count Slippenbach was also with him, but reprieved for the present, though he
perished afterward by the same Destiny.

The Danes content with this Victory, would not endanger the losing of it by
pursuing it, but returned in triumph into the Town, then slain and wounded not
exceeding thirty in all. The joy was so great for this success, that they gave
public Thanks in their Churches for it; forgetting the just sorrows they had
conceived for those real losses they had sustained, being they saw themselves
so eminently revenged upon the Authors of them. The same morning the Besieged
had sallied out with three hundred men upon the Enemies Works by the Behind
Lake, but found them in such a posture of defense, that they were forced not
only to desist but retire. This done, the Swedes raised a new Battery of eight
Guns upon the said Dike, and whilst it was a building, threw great stones and
Grenades out of two Mortar-pieces, without intermission into the Town. Upon
the eleventh day, they shipped their Troops in Amak, and set sail toward the
Sound, the news of the approach of the Belgic Fleet increasing daily. The
Danes made yet another sally, after the departure of the Enemy out of Amak,
with four hundred men, upon the square Fort or Redoubt next the West Gate, and
beat the Defendants out of it with Hand grenades, and other fireworks which
they showred into it. They threw down and pulled out the Turn-pikes and
Pallisadoes, which were planted for its security, and having filled the
Trenches with much terror, retired without the loss of one man, in safety into
the Town. However the Swedes had endeavored to approach the City with their
whole might, yet the valor of the besieged was such, that they could do it but
slowly, and not without much difficulty* by reason of the frequent fallies, and
uncessant firings out of the Town. And yet they were got within fifty paces of
the Moat, and would undoubtedly have advanced farther, if they had had time.
They approached upon that side of the City, not as being the weakest, for it
was well flancked on both sides, but with design (as I suppose) to get into the
covered way, and by it to the Sow or Dike next the Gate, which being broken
down (for the earth was lower there) all the water of the Moat which it
supported, would be let out, the Moats dreigned, and the Ascent to the Walls,
on all sides by that means dry and easy. But the time, as we noted, failing
them by reason of the Netherlanders approach, King Charles betook himselt to
other Counsels, and making a show as if he were not averse from Peace,
signified the same by a Trumpet to the City. But being refused, as also the
Propositions from the English and French Ministers, for a Cessation from Arms
rejected, as unseasonable, being they daily expected their relief; he omitted
the present attacking of Coppenhagen, and transferred the War into the Sound,
with a resolution to oppose the Dutch in their passage that way with all his
power.

Whilst these two parties do thus amuse the world with their struglings in
Denmark, the Dutch Fleet aslembled at the Vly in North Helland. It is not
imaginable with what fervor the depart of these succors was pressed by all
men. De Wit Vice Admiral of Rotterdam was first ready with his Squadron, and
sailed to Doggersand, with Orders to expect the rest of the Fleet there. But a
sudden and dreadful Tempest rising out of the North and North East, forced him
back into the Maze, to repair the disorders he had suffered in it. But the
Merchantmen did not escape so, for being unable to resist the rage and
violence of the Sea, several of them were sunk, and many being thrown upon the
Coasts of Holland and Friezland, were split and swallowed in that vast abyss.
Amongst the rest* there was a Citizen of Dockum, whose misfortune seemed the
most deplorable of any; the Ship he was in lay at Anchor, but he fearing it
would not be able to ride out the storm, pressed the Master to cut the Cable,
and trust themselves to the mercy of the Water, which the Skipper refusing,
added they had no hopes but in the firmness of their Anchor. The other not
believing this, and ter^^sied by the prodigious reciprocation of the Waves, ran
to the Cable with an Ax in his hand and cut it. The Ship being thus at liberty,
slew in a trice to the Neighboring shore, and being flung against the Pales
thereof, by the force of the Wind and Sea, after some reiterated shocks broke
in pieces. Before the Ship was wrackt the man had lift up his Wife upon one of
the pales, but turning about to help his son which stood by him, a sudden Gust
had prevented him by throwing the Boy over-boord, which the Father seeing,
catched with one hand at one of the Pales, whilst he stoopt with the other to
help his Child, which he had done, if the said Pale being rotten and unable to
support his weight, had not broken, whereby he also fell. His Wife astonished
with so dismal a spectacle, and seized with a sudden grief, fell into a sound,
and as if unwilling to survive such dear pledges, tumbled headlong into the
Sea, and perished with her Husband and Child in that unpitying Element.

There was no industry omitted to repair De Witte's shattered Vessels, as also
to make ready the rest of the Fleet, to which end the States sent express
Commissioners to the Fly, who with their presence and authority should hasten
these preparations. And now all things being in a readiness, the Soldiers were
embarked, only the Wind was contrary, and by good fortune continued so, until
the number of the Fleet was well-nigh doubled, for when they were first ordered
to set sail, they were scarce strong twenty men of War. James Wassenar Hier of
Opdam, October. ^.
and Lieutenant Admiral of Holland commanded the Fleet, and now the Weather
being favorable, and the Wind at South East, he weighed Anchor, and failed
accompanied with the prayers and wishes of his Countrymen, to relieve that City
which thus long had been the prize, for which two potent Kings had in person
contended. The Swedes had used all their industry to hinder these preparations
of the Dutch; they had offered the States their own conditions in the Sound,
and had amply enough not only laid before them their old and inviolable
Confederations, but also the ill usage which they had received from the Danes,
by their manifold exactions. But seeing the States resolved, they resolved
also, to carry it on with a high hand, in as much as in them lay, and venture a
Battle, though at Sea, rather than be frighted or treated, out of their hopes
and Conquests in Denmark. They therefore had their Katches and Spy-boats,
swarming about the Coasts of Holland, to observe the Fleets order and motion;
not wanting as well friends as intelligence, within the very United Provinces
themselves. And that it might appear that these were real ones, two Ships
laden with Ammunition, packed up in Herring Tuns, were intercepted in the
Texel, designing to direct their course for Corsoer in Zeland. Opdam being
advanced as far as the Point of Schagen was forced to Anchor there, as well to
stay for De Wit, as the Wind to double the Cape, so that he could not reach
Lapsand before the two and twentieth, where he was also forced to expect six
days more, 22.
by reason of contrary Winds. King Charles seeing his Adversaries Fleet so
near, and in his neighborhood, omitted nothing on his side for their
reception. He went daily upon the Sands to visit and view their numbers, and
bulk, and order, with his perspectives. Sometimes he seemed resolved to take
advantage of the Wind and Stream, and fall upon them where they were, which
both himself and many of his great Officers, wished afterward they had done;
considering that if they had been worsted, they might have retreated to
Gottenburg, and that both the shores were possessed by the Swedish Troops. But
the contrary opinion prevailed, which was to expect them in the Sound, being
they must first pass the batteries of the Castles from both sides, and that
they themselves if they were not victorious, might abundantly secure their
retreat, by the neighborhood of these two Forts, and the Haven of Lanskrown.
The Wind being come about, and blowing gently out of the North, Opdam summoned
the chief Officers and Captains on board, and having given those Orders to each
of them which were necessary, dismissed them with this admonition; that they
should not be wanting to themselves, to their Country, nor to them whose
deliverance depended upon the success of their present endeavors. The Anchors
being weighed with the general assent of all, they set sail for the Sound. But
whilst they are hastening thither, it will not be amiss to take a view of the
Admiral and Colonel Pichlars Instructions; which were as follows.

1 The Lieutenant Admiral shall first and before all things take notice, That
the intention and design of this State in this present Expedition of their
Fleet, is, to deliver such of the Inhabitants and Subjects of this State as
traffic in the East sea, from all oppression, as also to assist the King of
Denmark against the King of Sweden, who lately, unexpectedly invaded him, and
that so effectually, as may by Gods help d^liver him from the aforesaid
violence.

2 To this end the Lieutenant Admiral shall sail with the Fleet of this State
with all diligence to the Sound, and convoy thither the Auxiliaries of this
State, designed for the assistance of the King and Kingdom of Denmark, and
especially for the relief of Coppenhagen and Cronenburg.

3 Being come as far as Cronenburg, he shall so far countenance and assist the
said Succors with all his Forces, that part of them may land and be received
into the said Castle, in case upon communication with the Governor there, it
be judged necessary.

4 He shall in like manner endeavor to put the rest of the Succors and
necessaries, into Coppe^hagen.

5 He shall vigorously and manfully, like a Soldier and Seaman, endeavor to
deliver all the Ships, Goods and Persons of the inhabitants of these United
Provinces, who are taken or detained by the Ships of War of the King of Sweden.

6 For which end, he shall, in case he encounter the Swedish Fleet or any part
of it, vigorously attack, and if possible, overcome the same, using therein
such courage and Soldier like precaution, as the occurrences of affairs will
permit, and he is entrusted with.

7 Further, he shall in general, treat all them who will any way oppose or
impede him in prosecution of his said Orders, as is more amply mentioned in the
aforesaid Article.

He shall, the Land Militia being landed, continue with the Fleet under his
Command in and near the Sound, and contribute by all Occurrences, all that is
necessary to remove the mentioned oppression: Also he shall do his utmost
endeavor, to retake any Ships belonging to the Inhabitants of this State now
with the Swedes, and also hinder any further molesting of the Trafficking
Subjects of this Land: in Order to which, he may upon such intelligences as he
shall receive, as occasion may require, send any Ships or part of his Fleet, to
prevent any design that may threaten them.

9 And in case the City of Coppenhagen and the Castle of Cronenburg should
(which God forbid) be taken, by the Swedes before the arrival of the Lieutenant
Admiral, the said Lieutenant Admiral shall then keep with the Fleet upon the
Coasts of Denmark and Norway, in such places as he shall judge securest and
most proper to carry on the design of the States, as in the eighth Article, and
to wait their farther Orders.

10 The Lieutenant Admiral shall comport himself as above, without
notwithstanding tying himself so precisely to the Letter and Orders here
prescribed, as not to act according to intelligence and occurrences, as he
shall judge best for carrying on the designs and intentions of the States, as is
already expressed: and shall also give the King of Denmark notice of his
approach, and defer much to his considerations and pleasure, to which end he
shall from time to time correspond with His Majesty.

11 The Lieutenant Admiral shall take care that he show all respect and
civility to the Chiefs of other Armies or Squadrons belonging to any King,
Commonwealth, or State, in peace and alliance with the States General,
conformable to their respective Treaties, yet without yielding in any thing
contrary to these instructions, much less receiving any command from them, or
suffering any visits by them: but repel any with force that shall thus pretend
to treat him.

Any chief Officers that come to dye in this Expedition shall be succeeded by
their Lieutenants or next Inferiors, unless incapable, etc.

13 The Lieutenant Admiral shall keep an exact journal of all material
Occurrences, and advertise the States and the respective Admiralties therewith.

14 The said Lieutenant Admiral, shall in all other occasions (not mentioned in
these Instructions) which may happen, act by advise of his Council of War, and
as shall be judged most for the Lands service.

Sept. 14. 1658.
Colonel Pichler had also his Instructions apart, which were

That he should conduct his 38 Companies in the best order to the Sound. That
being come thither, he should immediately confer with the Governor of
Cronenburg, and put so many men with their Officers into the said Garrison, as
should be judged necessary for its defense, by the said Governor. The said
Officers and Companies should receive Orders from the Kings Governors,
reserving notwithstanding to themselves, the correction and paying their
soldiers. He should also furnish them with Ammunition, if they wanted it. This
done, he should in person go with the remaining Companies to Coppenhagen, and
addressing himself forthwith to the King, or him who commanded there in Chief,
receive such Orders as they pleased to give him, and precisely follow the same;
reserving as above, the payment and military discipline over the same, to
himself and his Council of War.

Cornelius de Wit Vice Admiral of Holland and West-Friezland, lead the Van,
consisting of eleven men of War, two Fluyts, and one Fire ship; the main Battle
containing 13 men of War, 2 Fluyts, and one Fire ship, was conducted by Opdam
himself; and the Rear, equal in number and strength to the Avantguard, was
brought up by Peeter Floriz, Vice Admiral of North Holland. The Land Militia
consisting of thirty eight Companies of Foot, under the Command of Colonel
Pichler an old soldier, were, as also their chief Officers, carried in Fluyts,
but manned and armed as the other with Cannon for war; except some few
Companies and commanded men, which were dispersed and mingled with the Seamen,
in the several Vessels of the Fleet. Count Wrangel High-Admiral of Sweden, who
had hitherto lain with his Fleet, consisting of two and forty men of War,
whereof twelve or thirteen were of vast greatness, under Cronenburg, seeing
Opdam's order and motion, resolved to meet him in his passing the Streights. He
had divided his Navy into four Squadrons, the first being led by Henry Gerdson
a Dutch Zealander, who having served long in the Swedish Fleet, would not now
quit it; Wrangel himself followed him with the second, Vice Admiral
Bielkenstern with the third, and the Rear was closed by Gustavus Wrangel, a
Kinsman of the Admirals. King Charles had levied Seamen about Lubeck and
Wismar, and had many English intermingled with the rest. Many also of his old
and best Soldiers, both Foot and Horse, were brought on board, he being
resolved to omit nothing that lay within the compass of his power, for
promoting of his Conquests, at least conserving the glory of his Arms by Sea as
well as by Land.

Things being thus ordered on both sides, they met, and fought with equal hopes
and courage. The Dutch, born as it were in the Sea, and expert in that Element,
disdained to see the honor they had acquired by their skill in Navigation,
disputed by an unknowing Enemy, whilst the Swedes were transported with desire
to show themselves men at Sea, as well as they had done by Land, especially
being their King was a Spectator, and an exact observer as well of the brave,
as more degenerous actions of his Soldiers. It was betwixt eight and nine in
the morning, when the Dutch Fleet was advanced midway betwixt the two Castles.
They from Cronenburg saluted them with a brace of Guns, being the Swedes
Signal, but with loose powder: but the Datch not answering, they let fly with
sharp from both Fortresses, but did no great harm, by reason of the distance*
only one Bullet fell into Peter Floriz his Ship out of Elzenburg Castle, which
slew three of his men. De Wit, who led the Avanguard, approaching the Schonen
shore, let fly a Broad side at the Bridge which extends it self into the Sea,
so that they at the Battery there, fearing the like greeting from the other
Vessels, quitted their Guns and fled into the Town. The Vice Admiral being past
the Bridge, directed his Course fully upon Wrangel, who advanced toward him,
and however shot at by the Swedes Ships of their first Squadron, did not answer
them, nor Wrangel himself who gave him a broad side, till he was come near him.
He then discharged a whole volley of Cannon at him, and being repayed in kind,
returned him his thanks in the same coin. The first Squadrons being past, the
main Battles began to approach, and now the two Admirals being within reach,
Wrangel thunders upon his Adversary, with his great and small shot, Opdam did
the same, but with more success; for Wrangel's Ship lost her Rudder in the
encounter, which necessitated her to retire out of the Battle, and go to Anchor
under the Castle of Cronenburg. By this time the Fleets were mingled, and the
fight grew hot on all sides, especially where the chief Officers were; for
whilst each endeavored to succor his own, all were engaged, which rendered
the Combat terrible, and the more, being the place they contended in was so
narrow. The contest betwixt Bielkenstern and De Wit was very hot, and might
have been disputed longer, if the Swede being helped by one of his own Ships,
called the Wismar, had not attacked him in his front and side, neither did he
overcome him, till he had slain him, and sunk his Vessel; which his unadvised
running upon the ground did much contribute to. Opdam having oppressed Wrangel
was shot at, at a distance, by all the Ships that approached him, but laid on
board by two, the Morning Star and the Pelican. These lying on his Lar-board
side, fought lustily, and extremely perplexed the Defendants with hand
Grenades, which they threw amongst them out of the Round-top of their
Main-masts. A third Vessel lying a stern of him, battered him sorely behind,
and powered small shot into his Cabin, but there was no body there, for the
Admiral though then extremely tormented with the Gout, had caused himself to be
carried in a Chair, and placed before the door of the Hut or Captains Cabin,
on top of the upper Decks, that he might as well see, as be seen of all men,
and give those directions that the present occasion required. He sustained the
violence of the Enemies attacks for some time singly and alone, but Van Nes one
of his Captains coming to his aid, the two Ships that had laid him on Board
were mastered, the one being sunk by the said Van Nes, and the other taken by
himself, and manned by his Lieutenant, but sunk also afterward upon mistake,
by one of his own men of War. Opdam's Ship, had in the heat of the Fight fallen
foul of the Sands, as de Witte's had unhappily done before, if he had not
prevented it by chopping to an Anchor, which saved him; for the Ship tacking
about, by that means she cut and recovered the deep again. In the mean time she
was extremely battered, her sails were all torn, her rigging broken, and her
sides so pierced with Bullets, that she had five foot water in Hold. But
nothing seemed more dreadful, than an accidental fire which took in the Poop,
which would have proved fatal, if it had not been suddenly quenched. Opdam had
more than half his men slain and wounded, and his brave Capt. Egbert Meus, had
received some slight hurts, which rather heated than hindered him, to do all
the functions of a worthy Commander. For all this the Admiral did not quit the
fight, until left alone betwixt the two Fleets, so that he then followed his
own toward Coppenhagen, whil^st the Swedes assembled theirs under Cronenburg.
The Dutch lost in this Fight about eight hundred men, amongst whom were the two
Vice Admirals, de Wit, and Peter Floriz, (the last having been slain by an
accidental Bullet at a distance) and five Captains. Only de Witte's ship,
called the Brederode (their Admiral in the English War) was lost, having been
stranded and sunk, as we have already mentioned. The Swedes had indeed taken
Captain Brunsfield's Ship, having slain him, and well nigh all his men, but
they quitted it again, it being on fire, which threatened its sudden ruin; but
that being quenched by the remaining Dutch who were left in it, being but 14 in
number, the Vessel was brought by them to the rest of the Fleet. The loss on
the Swedes side was greater; for three of their Ships were taken, and two, some
say more sunk. There perished two more of their Ships, in their retreat to
Lanskrown, one being stranded and quitted by them near the Isle of Ween, and
the other, running upon its own Anchor, split in the entry of the Haven. The
number of the slain and drowned on the Swedish side is uncertain; as near as I
can gather, they doubled that of the Dutch, though these affirm them to have
been more, and the other scarce so many. It is constant that all on neither
side did not their duties, but being the number of eithers Cowards was not very
disproportionable, the disadvantage that way seems not unequal. But to leave
these degenerous spirits to the shame and punishment that attends them, we will
pursue our Relation.

Toward Evening, the Danish Admiral Bielke, who by reason of the contrary
Winds could not get up to the fight, joined Opdam betwixt Coppenhagen and Ween,
with six men of War. Hereupon it was resolved to engage the Enemies again, but
they having secured themselves in Lanskrown, the design was changed into a
Blockade, and being they could not enter the Haven without too great a hazard,
to endeavor to destroy it by sinking several old ships filled with sand,
stones, broken Cannon, and such like Ballast, in the entry of it, and so render
the Fleet within it useless, by obstructing their passage out again. The Swedes
were at first frightened with the greatness of these preparations, not thinking
that impossible, which they saw undertaken, and pursued with so much eagerness.
Seeing therefore they could not hinder what they so much feared by force, they
would try what threatening could do, and sent King Frederick word, that they
would revenge the detriment which should be done their Haven, with the
destruction of the Kingdom of Denmark. But the Danes did not desist for all
these menaces, but returned answer, that the King would persist in his design,
if he thought it might prove prejudicial to his Enemies, not despairing, but to
be able another day to revenge those injuries, which their malice might create
him in Denmark, by a just retaliation in Sweden it self. But this, as also
another design of the Danes, to surprise the Castle of Elzenburg about the same
time, proved fruitless. Six hundred foot were ordered for this exploit, but
being opposed by a rude storm were forced back, though not without some loss.
The whole Fleet, the Winter being far advanced, was likewise obliged to return
to Coppenhagen, for the Sea began already to freeze, and crust with drifts of
Ice.

It is not imaginable, with what excess of joy the Dutch Auxiliaries were
received within the City, but the Besieged were transported when they saw (the
next morning after the fight) that the Swedes had quitted their Works and
Approaches near the Town, and were retired. The Sun had no sooner discovered
the Enemies Retreat, but the forsaken Trenches swarmed with the glad Citizens;
The Works which had been raised against them were levelled, and whatever the
Swedes had left behind them of moment, carried in triumph into the Town. These
public joys were further celebrated, with public Thanksgiving in all the
Churches, and this oppressed people, seemed raised by this unexpected
deliverance to hopes of a better fortune.

King Charles seeing the Garrison so strongly reinforced by the addition of the
Netherland Troops, drew his Army off from before the Town upon their approach,
and retiring to Walbey, stood there in Battle a^ray two days together, but
seeing no preparation on the other side to fight him, he pitched his Tents at
Bronshoy, two thousand paces from the City. There he encamped his Army with
Walls, and Trenches, and Pallisadoes, as well to secure himself, as to keep the
Danes from any material excursions: and being he was not at present in a
condition to continue the Siege, he converted it into a Blockade, whereby he
abundantly annoyed the Citizens, and kept the whole Country within his
obedience. He also commanded Huts and Houses to be made for the Officers, and
Soldiers, the Neighboring Villages being broken down to be transferred
thither, so that the whole Camp seemed like a new City, raised to brave the
other. The Danes were content to become idle Spectators, for want of Horse, and
forced to look on with patience where they could not remedy; so that they being
only rescued, and not delivered, labored still under an irksome restraint,
whilst their chief Town continued besieged by Water with vast sholes of Ice,
(for the whole Sea was frozen, and the Fleets immovable within the Haven) shut
up on all sides by Land, except Amack now covered with Snow, and debarred from
all correspondence and communication with Zeland, or any of the other Isles, as
yet within its obedience. The Dutch had indeed brought a Fleet, (but it was
Victualled but till December) and Soldiers, and some Provision into the Town,
though not enough of the latter, to suffice so great a multitude: and the
Citizens who had been surprised by the unexpected invasion of the Enemy, had
neither their Storehouses full, nor as yet laid up for Winter; so that their
wants grew daily upon them, and all hopes of further supplies were taken from
them, by the extremity of the season, which rendered the Sea altogether
un-Navigable. The greatest wants were of fresh meats and fuel, both which grew
as well very dear, as very scarce: and yet the Citizens under went these
hardships with much constancy, expecting till the more favorable Spring should
restore the use of the Sea to their more numerous Fleets. In the mean time,
those Ships which the States General had had upon the Coasts of Portugal this
last Summer were returned The Swedes Army in Batalia before their Camp when
they quitted it
map (...) they de^^ed nothing more than Peace, but being their preparations
went still on, the English sent also a Fleet consisting of 23 men of War, and
Soldiers, which caused no little apprehension in the States, toward Denmark.
These forces were no sooner past the Point of Schagen, but they were obliged to
come to Anchor by Pickerholm, a small Island belonging to Jutland. Neither were
they able to pass further amongst the dangerous Shallowes in the way, and those
sholes of Ice which the Baltic Sea did incessantly disgorge. Dec. 3. 1658.
Goodson who commanded the Fleet, had sent one of his Vessels before hand to
discover the way, but the Winter being too far advanced, and he being assured
that he could not continue his journey without endangering the whole Fleet, and
having also received Letters from the King of Sweden, who for the same reasons
persuaded his return, he steered his Course back toward England. Although this
Fleet was constrained by the extremity of Weather to return to Port without
acting any thing; yet it is very material to be enquired what measures England
took in this Affair, and what their aim and design was, in equipping so many
men of War. And this will best appear, from the Instructions which accompanied
the Fleet; as well those sent to Sir Philip Meadow the public Minister with
the two Kings, as those to Vice Admiral Goodson, the Commander of the Fleet.

Those to Sir Philip Meadow, were as follows:

Whereas, upon occasion of the present War, lately fallen out betwixt the Kings
of Sweden and Denmark, We have thought fit to send a Fleet toward the Sound,
under Command of Vice Admiral Goodson, for the ends and purposes expressed in
these our Instructions, and also in those given by Us to the said Vice Admiral,
which he has order to communicate to you, you are to take the first, and
soonest opportunity you can, to speak with the said Vice Admiral, and to
communicate with him, or such as he shall send to you, concerning the best
ways, and means for putting in execution what you shall herewith receive in
charge.

2 In pursuance thereof you shall, in Our name, offer to both the said Kings
Our friendly Mediation, for composing the present War, arisen betwixt them; and
for preventing the further effusion of Christian blood, you are to desire a
Cessation of all Acts of Hostility betwixt them, during the Treaty.

3 In case a Treaty shall either be begun betwixt them, before these arrive
with you, or shall be entered into upon your offer of a Mediation, as aforesaid,
you shall use your best endeavor to bring the said two Kings to an Agreement,
and to settle a good and secure Peace between them; taking care therein, that
nothing be concluded on, to the prejudice, or detriment of this Commonwealth.

4 In the management of this Affair, you shall communicate as you shall have
opportunity, with the French Minister remaining in the Court of Sweden, with
whom we would have you to maintain a very good correspondence. And in case the
States General of the United Provinces have any public Ministers residing with
the King of Sweden, or the King of Denmark, you shall do the best you can to
have a communication with them, and to incline them to use their endeavors, to
the settling of this Peace, betwixt the said two Kings.

5 In case the Mediation so to be offered be not accepted; or that Affairs
there are in such a condition, that a Treaty cannot be propounded, or in case a
Treaty shall be accepted, but no Cessation granted, or no effect likely to be
had of such Treaty, for the ends aforesaid, you are then, for the better
securing of the interest of this Commonwealth in these parts (no other way
appearing to Us possible in that behalf) to let the King of Sweden know,
according to what you will find in Our Instructions to Vice Admiral Goodson,
that the Fleet under his Command will be ready, upon reasonable Conditions, to
give him assistance, for his defense.

6 And that you may fully know Our mind, and intention upon this whole Affair,
We have herewith sent you a Concept of Articles, which We judge fit and
necessary to be agreed upon, betwixt Us, and the King of Sweden, as the Terms
of our Assistance, which you shall communicate to the said King, and upon his
agreement thereunto, and formal ratification thereof, you shall signify the
same to Vice Admiral Goodson, That he may accordingly pursue the Instructions
given him in that behalf.

7 Though We have sent this Form, yet Our mind and intention is, not to tie you
up to all the words, and expressions therein, but that you keep to the
substance thereof, so as if alterations be made in any part thereof, the
substance be not altered. And in case any thing else occur to you, being upon
the place, which as affairs stand may be of further advantage to the interest
of this Nation, you are to propound, and insist on the same accordingly.

8 In case matters should so stand at the arrival of Our Fleet, that by reason
of the King of Swedens successes in his affairs, Our Fleet can be of little
help, or advantage to him, at present; you are in such case to try what terms
may be procured from the King of Sweden, for securing our Commerce in those
Seas, and to transmit them to Us, without doing any thing positively therein,
till you shall receive special direction from Us.

9 As to what shall concern the wearing of the Flag, after conjunction of Ours
with the Swedish Fleet, and the management of both, in point of Command in
reference to service, or action: As also, concerning the dividing of any Prizes
that shall be taken, by the Fleets, in conjunction, or apart, you shall make
such agreements as upon advice with Vice Admiral Goodson, shall be thought
reasonable, and consistent with the honor of this Commonwealth.

10 You are to give Us an account of affairs, by all possible opportunities,
and by all Expresses both by Sea, and Land, that We may from time to time have
certain, and particular knowledge thereof.

11 Whereas some di^ficulty may possibly arise, concerning the second Article
in the Concept, whereby the people of this Commonwealth are to pass the Sound,
and Belt without paying of any duty to the King of Sweden, on supposal, that
the people of other Nations may pass free by color thereof; you are empowered
to insert such an additional Article, to secure His said Majesty from all
frauds in that kind, as you shall find meet, and reasonable.

12 Whereas We are uncertain, at this distance, in what condition the affairs
of the King of Sweden are, and how far the Fleet now sent will be of
consideration to him; In case therefore, upon advise with the Commander in
chief, you shall find that Our Fleet, in conjunction with the King of Swedens,
shall not be sufficient to oppose any Forces, that may assault the said King,
you are to take such care, in the Treaty, that Our Fleet may not be put upon
disadvantagious Engagements.

13 Whereas the performance of this Treaty is of great consequence to this
Commonwealth, you are to use your endeavors, in this Treaty with the King of
Sweden, for to procure some reasonable security to be given to this
Commonwealth, That the particulars contracted, and agreed in this present
Treaty be performed, and observed; which We are not able to ascertain here, in
regard His Majesty's Commissioners had no power to agree any thing therein. And
therefore must leave it to you, to do therein, with the advice of the Commander
in Chief of Our Fleet, as you shall find most advantageous, and feisible.

Dated at Whitehall this 12. of November. 1658.
Those to Vice Admiral Goodson, were also as follows:

1 Whereas, for composing the present Wars, which are lately fallen out, betwixt
the Kings of Sweden, and Denmark, We have found it necessary, to offer Our
friendly Mediation betwixt the said Crowns, as well for the settling of Peace
between them, and for the good of the Protestant Cause in general, as also for
preservation of Our Interest, so far as it is concerned therein; As also to
send a Fleet, which may attend the issue of that Mediation, and the affairs
depending thereupon; You shall therefore sail with the first opportunity of
Wind and Weather, toward the Sound, taking along with you the Fleet under your
Command. And after your arrival in those parts, shall take your first
opportunity, to deliver, or send unto Sir Philip Meadow, Our Envoy
Extraordinary with his Majesty of Sweden, the Letter herewith delivered you
(whereby he is authorized to offer the aforesaid Mediation;) As also to cause
these Our Instructions to be communicated to him, either by some fit person to
be sent to him for that purpose, or by procuring him to come aboard you, as you
shall find most convenient. And from time to time to take all opportunities of
communicating each with other, for the better effecting of what is given you in
charge respectively.

2 Whereas Sir Philip Meadow is authorized, by Our Instructions, to desire of
both the said Kings a Treaty, and during such Treaty, a Cessation of all Acts
of Hostility betwixt them, you are to join with our said Envoy in that desire,
as Commander in Chief of thee English Fleet; communicating as well to the King
of Denmark, as to the King of Sweden, that you are come thither with Our Fleet,
not to offend either of them, but to take all opportunities, that shall be put
into your hands, for obtaining an Accommodation between them, for the good of
both. And to see, that nothing be done to the prejudice of the free Navigation
and Commerce into the Baltic Sea, nor to the particular detriment of this
State, We conceiving Our Interests to be in the issue thereof, much concerned.

3 In case you shall find a Treaty betwixt the said Kings to be begun before
your Arrival there; or that, upon this Mediation offered, a Treaty shall be
entered upon, you are by advise with Our said Public Minister, to use your
best endeavors, that nothing be agreed upon, betwixt the said Kings, or any
other, that may be to the prejudice of this Commonwealth, or to the Trade, and
Navigation thereof.

4 If upon your coming upon the place, and advising with Sir Philip Meadow, you
shall find, there is no room left for a Mediation, or Treaty, but that the War
is likely to proceed betwixt the said two Kings, Or in case a Treaty shall
begin, and be after broken off without effect; It appearing not to Us, That
there is any other way to secure the Interest of this State in those Seas you
are then, with Our Fleet under your Command, to give assistance to the King of
Sweden, for his defense against such as shall assault him, upon the Terms
herewith delivered you, and in the manner hereafter expressed.

That is to say,

5 You are, in the Cases expressed in the next aforegoing Article, to apply
your self to the King of Sweden, and to let him know, That you have received
direction from Us, To acquaint His Majesty, That We have authorized the said
Sir Philip Meadow, to treat with His Majesty about the Terms of an Assistance
to be given Him in this present War; And that, the said Treaty being agreed,
you shall be ready with Our Fleet, to assist him, according to the Conditions
that shall be agreed upon in the said Treaty.

6 But until you shall find, upon advise with Our said Public Minister, that
no Treaty will be accepted, or being accepted, not take effect, you are not to
communicate Our last mentioned Instruction to the King of Sweden, or any other
person whatsoever.

7 After such Treaty with the King of Sweden shall be agreed, and so certified
by the said Sir Philip Meadow, and a Copy thereof transmitted unto you, you are
to employ Our Fleet, according to such Articles, and Agreements, as shall be
therein contained.

8 In the prosecution of this whole service, you are in respect of the season
of the year, to take the best care you can, for the safety of Our Fleet under
your Command; It being Our intention, and meaning, That the Fleet shall not
stay in those Seas so long, as to be hindered from coming home, by the Ice, or
hardness of the Weather; and therefore We would have you so to order the
Station of Our Fleet, That you may be at liberty to return, in case you shall
be forced, for the reason aforesaid, to leave those parts.

9 In case the Treaty with the King of Sweden shall not take effect, through
his not agreeing to the Articles, you are to forbear to give that King any
assistance, till further Order. But shall immediately send away one of your
Ships to advertise Us thereof, bringing the rest of the Fleet into some safe
Road, or Harbor, where you may with security, expect Our further direction.

10 In your saluting of the Castles, or Fleet of the King of Sweden, you are to
observe the usual custom in like cases.

11 You are to give us an account of affairs, by all possible opportuties, and
by all Expresses both by Sea and Land, that We may from time to time have
certain and particular knowledge thereof.

Dated at Whitehall this 12 of November. 1658.
In both the forecited Instructions, mention is made of a Treaty of Assistance,
concerning which these three things are to be noted.

First, Assistance was to be given the Swede conditionally, in case a Peace
could not be obtained, and the repugnancy to the Peace, was on the part of the
King of Denmark. 2 It was to be given defensively only, against those who
should assault the Swede. 3 The Treaty was to be signed and ratified by the
King of Sweden, previous to the Assistance, lest after his work done, he might
profit upon the English Assistance to their own disadvantage. To which purpose,
it is remarkable, that Sir Philip Meadow was authorized by the thirteenth
Article of his Instruction, to use his endeavor, to procure some reasonable
security that the particulars contracted and agreed in the said Treaty be
performed and observed. In pursuance whereof, he afterward to taste the temper
of the Swedish Court, propounded that Stade upon the River Elbe, and Landscrown
a considerable Port within the Sound, should be deposited in English hands, as
a pledge and Garanty of the faith of the Assisted. But this Treaty of
Assistance being the same in substance with that sent upon the Fleet under
General Mountague, in the Spring of the following year, I have reserved it to
that place.
The year was by this time run out, Jan. 3. 1658.
without any remarkable action in Denmark, but the new one produced new
exploits, and discovered the new Designs of the Swedes, though for the most
part unfortunate: for their attempt upon Langland failed, and they were beaten
off from Meun with loss. The Island of Bornholm having surprised and suppressed
the Swedish Garrison in it, returned to the obedience of her old Lord, and when
the waters were open, furnished the City with great store of provisions. The
Cold had congealed and frozen the whole Sea, all ways were passable, and all
passages open. The azur'd plain was marbled with Ice, the two grosser Elements
making but one vast Champion: and truly, this was the best season to war in, in
those cold Regions, and the time wherein the Swedes had achieved their
greatest Conquests. Coppenhagen was as well in their eye, as in their thoughts,
and the only object they now aimed at. The acquisition of this remaining City,
would was well crown as complete their Victories, besides the addition of a
Fleet as an Appendix to their triumphs. King Charles was therefore resolved to
omit nothing for the compassing of this great Design, and now four thousand
choice Soldiers were ordered to make an attempt upon the Enemy. These were all
disguised, by wearing their shirts upon their clothes, to render them less
discernable in the Snow. They were armed each with a brace of Pistols fastened
to their Girdles, being provided also with Spurs for their hands and knees,
against the slipperiness of the Ice. But their Design being discovered by one
that fled from them into the Town, was laid aside for the present. Neither were
the Danes wholly idle, they had secret correspondence with some Citizens of
Malmuyen, and hopes to surprise that considerable Town. The occasion seemed
fair, as it was supposed, and the soldiery (most whereof were Netherlanders)
was embarked for this important enterprise But they lost their way in the dark,
being by the unskilfulness of their Pilots, stranded upon the shallows of
Southolm, which lucked well, for the Swedes had notice of the whole
transaction, and having reinforced their Garrison with 600 men, expected them
with impatience. The Danes had sent one Troll, a Gentleman of the Kings
Chamber, who was the Author of this Expedition, to discover the Coasts, but
whether his intention was to surprise his Mistress or the Town is uncertain,
both are credible in a Lover and a Soldier. However it was he brought a young
Lady back with him, which he had found in an appointed place without the Town,
and word that the business was discovered, and not to be pursued without
eminent danger. In the mean time, two Traitors who had undertaken to burn the
Fleets were intercepted. They were induced thereto, by very extraordinary
rewards, but being discovered received other payment, more suitable to their
treason, and unfortunate endeavors.

The Swedes being resolved to vex the Citizens, drew out their Troops almost
every night, frightning and wearying them with perpetual Allarms. They hoped to
find some opportunity or other to surprise them, grown negligent through
custom, or an opinion of their strength: but they were deceived, for the Danes
having their Sentinels upon the Steeples and heights of the Town, were warned
by their Cannon, and tolling of their Bells, of every appearance or motion of
the Enemy, so that their Walls upon every the least Allarm, were immediately
filled with the Defendants, who crowded from all parts to oppose the danger.
King Charles therefore, seeing he could neither intercept nor surprise them,
resolved to attack them by force, and relying upon the valor of his
unconquered Army, and his own good fortune, which had thus long been prodigal
in her favors to him, would, notwithstanding the strength of the
Fortifications, and the numerousness of the Garrison; try what he could do by a
general Assault. He had many reasons that pressed his very have. Amongst others,
he apprehended the preparatious made in Holland, where a great Fleet, and a
fresh supply of Soldiers, expected only the Spring to set sail: but that which
perplexed him most, was, that it had been not obscurely intimated to him, that
the English (whom he trusted above all other) had declared, they would not
willingly see Coppenhagen change Master; so that fearing now his friends as
well as his enemies, he would whilst he had time attempt it, supposing if he
had carried it, it would be no impossible matter for him to make peace with the
one, and reconcile himself with the other.

At this time Sir Philip Meadow being in the Swedish Camp, having received
Letters from England, instructing him to urge a separate Treaty betwixt the two
Crowns, sent into Coppenhagen several Proposals to the King of Denmark,
conformable to his Orders, to press the business of a speedy Peace, in order to
prevent the hazardous contingencies of an Assault, to which he saw all things
disposed and prepared. The Gentleman also whom he sent, did not obscurely
intimate the said preparations in the Swedish Camp, for a general Attack, but
the King nothing terrified here with, returned answer, That he could not in
honor and safety, enter upon a distinct and separate Treaty, without a
comprehension and inclusion of the rest of his Allies. The Swedes having notice
of this refusal, prepare to force that by Arms, which they could not get by
composition; and approaching the ^own walls with their best Troops, fired a
Prame or Flat-boat, which lay betwixt Christians-haven and the City, armed with
six small Guns, and twelve Soldiers. But the day coming on, they retired for
that time into their Camp again, without any further attempt. The Night
following they made another show of assaulting the Works, but retired as
before, and for the same reason. The third day, the Army being well refreshed,
was drawn out of the Camp, and being abundantly furnished with all things
necessary for the present Expedition, was commanded to march. The King had
affigned each Regiment his Post, and the place they should attack, and having
ordered that the Soldiers should wear Straw, and little bundles of Juniper on
their Arms or Caps, gave the word, God help us.

The sign to fall on being given by firing some pitched Barrels, the King, who
was present, commanded fifty Musketeers to go and take possession of the
Ravelin, before the half Bulwork near the West Port. This being done,
Lieutenant Colonel Geneki marched with two hundred men, on the right hand of
the said Ravelin, up to a little Work which lies betwixt the long Gallery and
the Wall. Delwig attackt the half Bulwork with his Regiment, and Major General
Fersen seconded him on his right hand. The English and the Palsgraves Troops,
assaulted the Bulworks next the Kings Stables, Colonel Voyette seconded by
Aschenberg with three hundred Horsemen now on foot, the Brew House; and Major
Smith assisted by Bidal a Lieutenant of the Kings Guards, a man of War and a
Prame, which lay betwixt Christians-haven and the Town. The rest fell upon the
other quarters of the City, as they were ordered, all full of hopes for a happy
success. But if the Swedes omitted nothing for compassing of their Design, the
Danes on the other side, whose mark was their Hankerchiefs in their Hats, were
no less sollicitous to divert the storm, which did so threaten them. They were
informed of the Enemies motion, by their Sentinels, and Patrouillis without the
Walls, so that they were more than sufficiently allarmed and prepared to
receive them. And truly we have not often heard of a more surious encounter.
Charles showing his men the riches and pillage of the Town, bids them hew out
their own rewards, for all their past and present labors: whilst Frederick
riding from one Guard to another, tells his, that theirs and their Countries
welfare, depended on their valor, and this moment of time. The fight grew high
and hot; the Defendants upon first sight of the Enemy, thundered upon them with
their great Guns as they approacht, but when they were come nearer, well-nigh
overwhelmed them with showrs of Bullets, Cartrages, Wild-fires, Hand and
Mortar-granadoes (which they rolled in great numbers from the Walls) and other
offensive instruments. That side which the Swedes assaulted was best flancked
of any, so that they were viewed and shot at from several parts at once: but
they chose it by reason of the Ice, to avoid the Graffs and Pallisadoes, and
because the Works there were less complete than the other, the Sea in gentler
seasons rendering them inaccessible on foot. For all this, they came up to the
very Walls. Fersen's men were got so close, that they were secure from the
Flancks, and having pulled out some of the Pallisadoes, began to rear their
Ladders, and mount. The Besieged, on the other side, filling the Bulworks with
their numbers, and their Moates with swarms of Darts, which they incessantly
threw upon the Assailants, forced them back; three or four got upon the top of
the Works, but being ill seconded perished there, though otherwise worthy a
better fortune. Neither were the Swedes more succesful else where: the Colonels
Gengel and Voyet were slain; and Ashenberg, Hestrige, and Weyssensteyn being
sorely wounded, the Soldiers they had led, began to give back. The King seeing
it, dispatched Count Erick Steynbock with the Smaland Regiment, to their
assistance, but he observing their disorder, and apprehensions at the loss of
their Officers, passed by them, with design to fall upon the Rampart next the
Stables; but whilst he endeavored to pass the Ditch, he was shot into the
breast, and slain. Neither did the Lieutenant Colonel who commanded the
Smalanders escape, he being also sorely wounded, so that the Soldiers seeing
their Leaders fall on all sides, did not a little stagger. The King had also
sent the two Spars, with the other Swaland and Sudermanian Regiment to second
Fersens men who fought so well; but seeing the inequality of the place they
contended in, and the little appearance there was of success, he commanded to
draw off, though necessitated to retreat, through the tempest and incessant
hailing of the adverse shot. The fight at the Ship was very hot, the Swedes had
dragged Boats and Bridges with them to pass the Water (for the Defendants had
broken the Ice round about them) and some got over and entered, but being ill
received by them on Board, and worse seconded by their own men, they were
forced out again, or slain in it. Smith and twelve more of his men were killed
upon the Hatches, the Sea swallowed many, and such as escaped the Cannon, were
glad to save themselves by a hasty slight.

Banner and Vavasor, who were ordered to keep the Enemy in allarm on the
East Side, were no less unfortunate than their Comrades. Lentsman and
Fittinghoff two Lieutenant Colonels, were commanded to assault the Citadel,
but they, whether upon mistake or a sudden change in their design is uncertain,
fell upon the Mill-bulwork next the Eastgate. The Netherland Auxiliaries, made
up of several Companies, of those Nations which are in service of that
Illustrious Republic guarded that Post, the which, together with the Port and
the neighboring quarters, had been assigned them upon, their first arrival;
they had sent 100 of their Soldiers with a drum of every Nation, at the
beginning of the tumult to help the Danes where the storm was hottest, which
deceived the Enemy, who believing by this various noise, that most of them were
un to the danger, hastened to take possession of their for saken stations. The
night by this time was far spent, it being about four in the morning, and the
storm ceased on the other side, when it began with new courage and fury on
this; for the Swedes having passed the Wartow Dike, marched with much
confidence toward the Town Moat, and neglecting the Ravelin on their left
hand, laid their Bridges, and crowding upon them endeavor to pass; but these
Bridges proved so short, and consequently unable to bear the weight they were
pressed with; so that the Assailants, terrified with this unexpected accident,
retire again. Some indeed got over, but perished whilst their Companions, who
could not get to them, made what have they could to get away, leaving their
Ladders, Bridges, etc. one hundred and ten common Soldiers, and their chief
Officers, Vavasor, and Fininghoff, and Lentsman, slain upon the place. The
attempts that were made upon Christians Haven and the North Gate, were scarce
worth the mentioning, being only feigned Alarms to frighten the Besieged, lest
whilst they seemed assaulted on all sides. they might perceive on which it was
seriously intended. Seeing therefore the contest ended where it was more really
meant, they drew here also off, though not without some loss, by reason of the
incessant discharges of the adverse Cannon, It would be unjust to pass by the
remarkable service which the Dutch Seamen did in this storm. Opdam kept a good
troop of them near his person, for a reserve upon all occasions, but sent his
most expert Gunners to assist the Danes; these being numerous, and more skilful
than the other, discharged the Cannon with so much dexterity and speed, that
what with the multitude of Guns (there being three hundred and five upon the
Walls, besides seventy more upon the four Prames, and two small men of War) and
their nimbleness, the whole firing seemed but a continual Volley. But the day
began now to break, no less grateful to the Defendants, than dismal to the
Besiegers. The Moats, the Counterscarps, and the whole Fields, covered with the
bodies of dead and dying men, manifested the greatness of the slaughter. There
lay slain upon the place, five hundred sixty four dead bodies, besides several
which the Sea had swallowed up, and not a few who had been carried off by their
friends.

In the Catalogue which was given the King of Sweden by his command after the
fight, there are found five hundred and eighty dead, and nine hundred wounded.
Amongst others was Count Erick Steynbock, General of the Ordnance, La Voyes a
French Colonel (both which died of their wounds in the Camp.) Major General
Sir William Vavasor was found amongst the dead, with his Ears cut off by the
greedy Soldiers, to get his jewels that hung in them. Guengel, Dromond,
Lentsman, Fittingboff, and Smith, besides a great number of inferior Officers,
at least a hundred, fell in that bloody assault. The Besieged lost scarce ten
of theirs, and now the Enemy being gone, rush out of their Fortifications, and
stripping both the dead and dying, sent these later to bear their friends
company: the Swedes had lest six Colors behind them, twelve Drums, two
Mortar-pieces, two Petards, and many scaling Ladders, Bridges and other
instruments of War, all which were brought in triumph into the City, and the
same morning Te Deum was sung in all the Churches for the delivery of the King
and Country from so eminent a danger.

Many who presume to judge of the actions of Princes, and that by the event to,
seemed to wonder why the King of Sweden, did not at his first arrival before
the Town, endeavor to take it by Assault, being it was but weak in
Fortifications, destitute of Soldiers, and full of terrout and distractions?
And why he did now attempt it at all, seeing the Citizens, having had time to
recollect themselves, were grown strong in the opinion of their numbers, and
past successes, that their Walls and Bulworks were high and firm, and their
Garrison reinforced with great supplies of old Troops from their Confederates.
It is constant that the King did not omit the Attacking of the City of his own
accord, but by the persuasion of others, who affirmed, that it was an
enterprise full of difficulty and rashness, to provoke desperate men, whose
only hope was in their Arms. They further urged, that the City was not so weak
in Fortifications, however thrown up in have, but that they were desensible.
Nay this very thing was an invincible Argument, that they were ready and
resolved to suffer the worst of extremities, being they prepared for their
defense with so much constancy and care. Moreover, they supposed it wholly
incredible, that the King, the Nobles, the Clergy, and People, should tamely
surrender or betray his Crowns, their Honor, their Revenues, their Houses, and
Families, and all of them being they were numerous and armed, their Liberties,
their Country, and what ever was more dear to them, to the common Enemy. It was
safer therefore to draw out the War in length, being they themselves were not
very strong. Lastly, the multitude was to be overcome by delays, and the
miseries of the mind, however they may be of proof against sudden violence, yet
they are often found to languish in length of time, and by a continued succession
of injuries. These and the like were the reasons of those, who were against the
present assaulting of the Town, and they prevailed then; but seeing it fell out
otherwise, the King calling to mind the taking of Fredericks-Ode last year,
where the Defendants out-numbred the Besiegers, and considering that those
things which are most difficult, are most glorious, and imagining nothing able
to resist the valor of his victorious Army, now great and formidable, resolved
to try his fortune which he had hitherto found so propitious and favorable.
But his main encouragements were, the immense rewards of so noble a Conquest,
the Monarchy of the North, and the Dominion of the Baltic Sea; which he had
already swallowed up in his vast thoughts. On the other side, if the success
did not answer his expectation, the loss would not be very great, bearing no
proportion with the hopes of so many, and so great Victories, crowded up in the
taking of one Town. However it was, his forces were beaten off, and forced to
retire to their Camp, where we will leave them to mourn their present loss, and
bury their slain (which they serched off by leave from King Frederick, and
inhumed with as much military pomp as the place and time would admit off) to
prosecute those other transactions of War, and Treaties, which were carried on
in order to the relieving of this important City.

THE HISTORY Of the Late Wars in Denmark, BETWIXT The Two Northern Crowns.
The Second Part.
DUring these Contests at Coppenhagen, there arose another, and more formidable
War, which put King Charles hard to it: and it is a wonder how he could resist
so many, and so powerful enemies. Germany, Poland, and the Elector of
Brandenburg arm against him, and under pretense of relieving an oppressed
Prince their Ally, and maintaining the Peace of the Empire, march with their
conjoined Forces toward Denmark. The true reasons of this arming, was the
apprehensions they had of the unexpected successes of this great Prince; and
lest Sweden, grown powerful with the accession of the Danish Crown, might prove
no less ambitious than formidable. Upon this account they conclude a League
betwixt themselves, and resolve with their United strength, to endeavor the
succouring of King Frederick by Land, as the Dutch did by water. The
Imperialists commanded by Montecuculi were esteemed eleven thousand; Czerneski
and his Poles six thousand, all Horse, and the Brandenburgers, at least twelve
thousand strong. The Elector himself, a warlike Prince, and heightened with the
glory his valor had gained him in the famous Battle of Warsow, was General of
this vast Army: Sept. 17. 1658.
And now their divided Forces being met, they resolve to march into Holstein,
where the Swedes had hitherto lorded without resistance. Being advanced as far
as the Borders, the Elector commanded public Proclamation to be made; How that
the King of Denmark having signified to the Emperor and himself, in what manner
the King of Sweden had broken the Peace made in February last, invaded Denmark
without any denunciation of War; besieged Cronenburg and Coppenhagen, and
designed the Conquest of the whole Kingdom: had also desired him to join his
forces with the Emperors, and come with all possible speed to his relief. He
therefore declared, that moved with the just demands of a Prince he was in
League with, he was hastening to his assistance, to deliver him rom his
oppressors, and procure a firm and equitable Peace. Lastly, he desired all men
to contribute their endeavors to so just a work, especially in Victualling his
Army, promising in case they did, to protect the Inhabitants from all violence
and disorder of the Soldiery.

The Swedes unable to resist so powerful an Enemy, thought it safest to
withdraw betimes; but lest they might not prejudice their Adversaries in their
very retreat, they destroyed all the forage they met with, burnt all the
Villages and Houses in their way, and ruined what ever they thought might be of
use to their pursuers. Having past the River Egder, on a Bridge of Boats, they
broke it after them, and retiring into Jutland with their General the Prince of
Sulsbach, encamped their wearied forces at Fredericks-ode a Sea Town of the
lesser Belt, and well fortified with Bulwork, and a strong Garrison. The Elector
followed the sad track of this flying Enemy, Sept. 25.
and being come to Gottorp, the Dukes Residence, commanded a Battery to be
raised against the Castle, threatening its ruin in case of resistance. The Duke
of Holstein who had retired betimes to Tonningen, a strong Fortress lying on
the North Sea, having notice of this summons, sends an Envoy to the Prince
Elector to desire a Neutrality, which was granted him upon condition, that he
should deliver his Castle to the Confederates, as a gage of his future good
behavior, and pay sixty thousand Ryxdollers as a present ransom. Gottorp being
surrendered, the Army marched to Alsen, a little Island separated from the
Continent, by a small Arm of the Sea, which they passed in Boats under favor
of their Cannon, and over-powring the Enemy in numbers, forced them to retire.
Colonel Aschenberg commanded in the Island, with three Regiments of Horse and
some few Foot, but being shut up in Sunderburg, and seeing no hopes of relief,
he silently conveyed himself and his Soldiers, by favor of the night, into
some Ships that arrived there some hours before, and so escaped the danger. The
following day discovered the Enemies flight; but all then baggage, fifteen
hundred Horses, and twenty four pieces of Canon, fell into the Conquerours
hands; who in pursuit of their Victory marched immediately to Nordburg, another
Fort in the Island, which they likewise took without resistance, and in it
Colonel Knust with his Regiment, who were forced to deliver up themselves and
the place to the power of the Confederates. Dec. 15.
The Island being thus cleared Czerneski marched toward Jutland, and falling
upon a party of the Swedes at Colding, beat them, and forcing the Kings
Palace, put the whole Garrison to the sword, reserving only the Governor and
his Lieutenant, to publish his victory and their own misfortune. The
Confederate Army drawing near Fredericks-Ode, met with a party of two hundred
and fifty Swedes Horse, who had been sent to discover their Forces. These
falling unwarily upon the Prince of Anhalts Troops, were beaten and routed,
many of them slain, and Lieutenant Colonel Strekihurst that commanded them,
with some other Officers of note, taken prisoners. The Prince heightened with
this success, draws near the Town, but finding the Garrison strong and resolved,
contented himself with the advantage he had already got. The Winter was too
much advanced, and the Weather too wet, to undertake a Siege so full of
difficulty as this was like to prove. The Army was therefore sent into Winter
quarters, and divided by Regiments into the several Provinces of Holsteyn and
Jutland, in expectation of a milder season. The Winter being past, both parties
prepare a fresh for War; the Swedes had suffered much within the Town, and lost
many of their men, poisoned with stenches, and other calamities. Nov 165
Marshal Wrangel had taken this place by Assault, the year before, and the dead
bodies having been thrown by heaps into holes, and but ill covered, broke out
again, insomuch, that the streets ran with the gore and matter, which issued
from those dis-interred carcasses. This so infected the Air, that the Swedes
resolved to quit the place; besides that, the greatness of the Works,
containing seven capacious Bulworks, required more men for their defense than
they could well spare. Having therefore demolished the Fortifications, and
burnt the Town, they transported their Troops over into Funen, leaving only a
Garrison in the Citadel, which was presently besieged by the Confederates, and
indeed taken, but empty; for the Swedes, unable to resist the Enemies violence,
stole away by night, with most of their Cannon and Provisions, over into Funen.
They left some iron Guns behind them but nailed up, and having destroyed what
the former flames had spared, mined their own Bulworks, and filling the
Cavities with Powder, laid a train which might give it fire. The next morning
the Confederates seeing the Enemy gone, rush carelessly into the Castle, and
unmindful of what might happen, were most of them that had entered, by the
sudden taking of the Mines, blown up and buried in the ruins of their
destroyed Conquest. The Confederates having forced the Swedes out of the
Continent, resolved to pursue them into their very retirements. Jun. 1.
Hereupon they attack the small Isle of Fenoe, seated betwixt Jutland and
Funen. The fight was sharp, until the Swedes were forced to fly and save
themselves in Funen, having left behind them one Colonel, three Captains,
several other lesser Officers, six Fieldpieces, and one hundred common
soldiers. The Confederates did not loose above forty men in this exploit, and
being now Masters of the Island, filled it with men and Ammunition, as a place
very convenient for the invading of Funen. Having therefore all things in a
readiness, and filled all their Sloops and Boats with Soldiers, they made for
Funen, under favor of some Dutch men of War, which lay there to facilitate
their passage. They designed to assault the Island in four several places at
once, which they endeavored, but being ill received by the Defendants, could
not reach the Shore. The Swedes had fortified all the Avenues and descents with
Trenches, Traverses, and Cannon in abundance. Their Forces were likewise great
and strong, especially in Horse, several supplies being come out of Zeland to
their aid, so that the enterprise seemed no less difficult than great, to
undertake to force an Enemy, so well entrenched and so numerous as they were.
The Confederates lost above three hundred, in their retreat, besides the slain
and drowned in the Attack, which were many. On the Swedes side there fell about
two hundred, which number had been undoubtedly greater, if they had fought in a
more equal place.

This misfortune did not so dishearten the Confederates, but they resolved to
adventure another attempt, only the place seemed not so proper, as it was at
first imagined. They therefore ship their men again, and make for Middlesfare
where the Traject was narrowest. The men of War got thither, for all the
Enemies great and small shot, but the Carriage-boats could not advance as was
desired, for the Wind turning, and the Stream which follows it being against
them, they were forced to desist, and turn back to Fredericks-Ode. The Swedes
however glad of the Enemies retreat, thought nothing done, unless they could
disinable them from attempting to pass the Streights for the future. This could
not be effected, but by ruining their Boats and Vessels, which they bravely
endeavored, but finding the Enemy more watchful than they had hoped, they were
after a rude reception, forced back; two of their Boats being sunk, with their
men in them, by the Enemies Cannon. The Confederates seeing they get over in
parties, Jul. 4.
resolve to attempt it with all their forces, and that in three several places,
with their three Armies at once; but wanting Vessels to transport so great a
multitude, they sent five of their six men of War, to gather up all the Boats
they could find along the Coasts of Jutland.

The King of Sweden having notice of the Confederates design, was solicitous
how to prevent it. He therefore commanded Captain Cox an Englishman, then in
his service, with eight men of War, one Catch, and one Fire-ship, to Middlefare
to oppose them. He He met the five abovementioned Ships at Ebeltot, July 23.
who were so affrighted with the sight of this unexpected Enemy, that they
immediately cut their Cables, but seeing no way to escape, and having less mind
to resist, most of the Officers and Mariners saved themselves on Shore with
their Cock-boats. The Admiral indeed made a show of Defense, but being sorely
wounded was forced to yield. The number of the slain was not great, but the
prisoners many, especially Soldiers; amongst which there were six hundred
Brandenburgers; and four hundred Imperialists. Cox having mastered the greater
Vessels, burnt thirty lesser ones, commonly called Schuyts, that lay in the
Haven. He went thence to Arhausen, where having fired three Merchantmen, and
one and twenty of the aforesaid Schuyts, he threw his firebrarnds into the Town
it self, notwithstanding a thousand Poles who were enquartered there. Having
performed this great service, he returned with his Fleet to the Sound in
triumph. The conquered Ships followed spoiled of all their Ornaments, two
whereof being Danish, having their Colors dragged at their Sterns, and the
other two Netherlanders, equal with them in fortune, though not in disgrace;
which it may be was omitted in complement to the Dutch Ambassadors, who stood
in their Windows at Elzeneur to behold the spectacle. This Victory, however
easily obtained, was a very great one, and highly esteemed by King Charles
himself, being now secure of Funen, the Enemies Vessels, together with their
hopes of passing thither, being wholly destroyed. Cox was ennobled, and vastly
rewarded for this service, the King being no less just in recompensing merit,
than in discountenancing baseness, and no less prodigal in his favors, than
severe in his punishments; knowing well that these are the true stirrers up, to
great and brave Atchievments.

The Prince Elector moved with the loss of his Ships, and having no other in a
readiness, nor no hopes of any from the Dutch Fleets, which the reiterated
Cessations had rendered useless, laid aside all thoughts of further attempting
upon Funen. He thefore quitted Fenoe, and having sunk his remaining Boats at
Fredericks-Ode, removed his Camp to Hopdorp, on the South of Jutland, with
design to transfer the War into Pomerania. The Swedes seeing the Enemy gone,
re-garrison Fenoe, and landing on the Continent, began to rebuild a Fort, which
the Poles had demolished upon the quitting of it: but having intelligence that
a strong party of the Confederates, which was left behind to hinder their
incursions, was marching toward them, they left their Works and retired into
their Islands again.

And this is the sum of the Confederates Expedition, and Adventures in Holstein
and Jutland, which I thought good for methods sake to put thus together,
leaving the more particular relation of affairs, to them that will write their
story, for being my intention was only to observe what happened in order to
this famous Siege, and not the whole War, it will suffice to have only
mentioned those things which happened further off, though relating to it.

To return therefore to Coppenhagen, where nothing of moment did happen after
the great Storm: We find the Citizens secure within their Walls, and the Swedes
in their Camp; whose Fortifications and strength in Horse, took away all hopes
the Enemy might conceive of attempting upon them. Both parties suffered much
through the extremity of Winter, but the Danes. most, being shut up from all
communication from abroad, the Enemy besieging them by Land, and the Ice by
Sea. But they bore these as they had done their former hardships, with great
courage and resolution. The approaching Spring increased the hopes and fears on
both sides. The Danes expected more solid succors from the Dutch, and the
Swedes bragged of their more forward friends the English; and indeed neither of
them was deceived: In the mean time, both Kings prepare for War. The Dane makes
ready his Fleet with all imaginable industry, whilst the Swede resolves the
conquest of the remaining Islands. To this end, General Wrangel ships six
hundred Foot, and three Regiments of Horse, at Newburg in Funen, and sets sail
for Langland, as the most accessible of them. Count Waldeck had attempted and
taken it before, it being assigned him by the King for his Winter quarters: but
he had been beaten out of it again with loss, he himself having been likewise
hurt in the arm. But Wrangel's fortune was better, though his Victory more
difficult. March 19. 1659.
He came with his Fleet to Langland Head, where he designed to land, but the
calm retarding his endeavors, gave the Danes time to hasten thither from all
parts of the Island, so that they did not only repel the Enemy, but took one of
their Long-boats with fifty men in it; this disaster did not at all discourage
the Swedes. They resolve to venture again, but the place was not good to land
in, being Moorish. They therefore sent all their passage Boats, and most of
their Soldiers by night, it being dark, to search out a more convenient
descent. In the mean time, the Fleet continued its station, and sending out
their Cock-boats. kept the Enemy in perpetual Allarms, making show of landing,
the better to conceal their intended design, which lucked so well, that the
party they had sent out, gained the shore three miles off, before the Danes had
notice of it, and having immediately cast up a Breastwork to secure their entry,
landed all their men without any considerable opposition: for those that
hastened to the danger came too late, and in such disorder, that they were
easily broken and routed. The remaining Danes retired into Traneker Castle, one
of the Kings Houses, which was surrendered at mercy, as likewise the whole
Island, without further resistance. The Prisoners were many, at least three
hundred Soldiers, and above a thousand Country fellows which were in Arms for
defense of their Country, but forced to yield to the strongest; the ordinary
fate of Islanders, when a powerful Enemy is suffered to land. Langland being
thus mastered, Wrangel sets sail for Alsen, where landing his men, he took the
Castle of Norburg by storm, but having assaulted Sunderburg thrice in vain,
quitted the Island again, and content with his former Victory, and pillaging
the Coasts of Holstein in his way, returned with his Prisoners and Prey to
Funen.

The loss of Langland did much trouble the Danes, and oblige them to hasten out
their Fleet with all possible speed. The milder Spring had dissolved those
sholes of Ice that had besieged the Haven, and the Sea was now grown Navigable,
when Vice Admiral Held was sent to observe the Enemy, with sixteen of those
Ships which were ready. He met with six Swedish men of War, betwixt Langland
and Laland, which he charged. March 30.
The Fight was hot and sharp, but the Swedes being over-powred were forced to
fly; having lost one of their best Ships, with fifty Guns, which Held took,
and another which ran on ground to save it self. But the Danes did not long
continue Masters at Sea, for being too weak to oppose the Swedish Fleet which
came afterward into the Belt, they were forced to save themselves in the Bay
of Flensburg. This news being brought to Coppenhagen, Bielke and Opdam, the
Dane and Dutch Admirals hasten with the rest of the Fleet, to relieve their
friends. Being past the Island of Falster, they discovered not far from
Femeren, seventeen Swedish men of War, who having left Held to his liberty,
thought to save themselves through the Belt, but the Wind proving contrary,
they were forced to prepare for fight. April 28.
The odds was indeed great, the Danish-Dutch being much stronger, and in
probability of an absolute Victory, if they had not let it escape out of their
hands by overmuch precaution and circumspection. Bielke as the Kings Admiral
led the Van, and bearing up with the Enemy with a flown Sheet, came to a Tack,
for fear that lest advancing too much, he might loose that Wind which he had so
favorable, and which filled the Enemies eyes with the smoke of his Cannon. He
kept therefore to Windward, plying them with broad sides as he past. Opdam
following in the wake of the Danes did the same, not absurdly fancying that
when they had tired the Enemy, their Victory (provided they had had the Wind
enclosed in Bottles) would be no less assured than easy. But it fell out
otherwise, for during this Gun-fight, the Danish Admirals Main top-sail came by
the Board, which rendered his Ships motion less active, so that his men for fear
of falling into the Enemies hands, called to Opdam to save them, which he did:
but before they had brought a new Sail to the Yard, the Wind grew more
favorable for the Swedes, for it turned from East North East, to South East;
by which means and by the stiffness of the Gale, they having gained the
Weather-gage, retired without any considerable loss, to Wismar. The
disadvantage in this Naval skirmish was not great on either side. Bielkenstern
who commanded the Swedes was lightly hurt, and but very few of his men slain,
which he had revenged with the conquest of the Danish Admiral, if he had not
been prevented by Opdam.

King Charles seeing no way of conquering Coppenhagen, but by the Conquest of
the remaining Isles, for they were the Granaries and Storehouses of the City,
resolved to attempt them. To this end, he embarks himself in person, and being
come with four men of War betwixt Warberg and Nypcopping, two Towns of Zeland
and Falster, April, 20.
made show of attacking a Fort raised by the Inhabitants for the defense of the
latter. In the mean time, he sent out a Longboat with some of his Guards,
under the Command of a Lieutenant Colonel, to coast and view the Shore; for the
entry near the aforesaid Fort was too difficult, by reason of the shallowness
of the Water thereabouts. The Lieutenant Colonel fell accidentally upon a Boat
passing from Laland to Falster, which he took, and in it the Danish Admiral
Lindenowe, and several Letters designed for Coppenhagen, containing the true
state of the Militia of the two Islands. The Prize being brought to the King,
he upon stricter examination commanded the Fort to be battered, but seeing it
was but to little purpose; by reason of the distance and difficulty to land, he
removed to Coldberg, where the Straight is narrowest and deep; so that bringing
his Ships near the Shore, he forced the numerous Defendants, by his continual
thundering of great and small shot upon them, to quit their station, and make
place for his men to land, which they quickly did. The Country men threw down
their Arms, and hid themselves in the Wood, whilst the Soldiery being closer
pursued, was overtaken at Nycopping, and three hundred of them, who could not
get soon enough over the passage, forced to submit to the Enemies mercy.
Falster being thus subdued, the King in pursuit of his Victory, resolves to
Attack Laland, the fruitfullest of all the Danish Islands. He therefore returns
to Coldberg again, with six men of War, and several Carriage Boats, and coming
up close to the shore, for it is very deep there, began to play upon the
Enemies Works. The noise of the Cannon brought the Islanders together, to the
number of near five thousand, but all could not hinder the Swedes to land under
favor of their Guns. They also mastered the aforesaid Works, which were open
to the Land side, which so terrified the Enemy, that they were at a stand what
to do, until the King caused Proclamation to be made by sound of Trumpet, that
the Inhabitants should retire to their several dwellings, for he would use no
hostility, but against such as were found in Arms. Hereupon they all retired,
and left a free passage for the Swedes to land with all their forces. Only
Naskow did dare to put a stop to the Enemies Cariere and Victories: For the
Town being well fortified, and filled with the Soldiers that had retired
thither out of Falster, and all the parts of the Island; and furnished with an
immense quantity of Corn and other Provisions, seemed able enough to hold out a
very long Siege; and truly it cost the Enemy much pains and time, as will
hereafter appear, before they could take it. The King having thus mastered
these Islands, found Corn enough in them to suffice a great Army for a year. He
therefore sent two thousand Tuns of Rye, and one thousand of Barley into Funen,
where the want was greatest, and victualled his Fleet for six Months besides.

Whilst the King was thus ordering his affairs in Laland, another part of his
Forces were employed in the conquest of Meun, where the resistance was greater,
than in any of the greater Islands. Major Schroder commanded there, assisted
with a hundred Horse, and five hundred armed Boors. The Swedes were at first
bravely beaten off, and obliged, Apr. 26.
by reason of the shallowness which hindered their Ships to approach the Shore,
to quit their design for the present. In the mean time, the Garrison was
strengthened by the addition of a Company of Foot from Coppenhagen, which
apprehended the danger most, this Island lying nearest to it, and readiest to
assist it. But the Enemy, watchful upon all occasions, had caused new fashioned
Carriage-boats to be made at Nycopping in Falster, each of these held fifty
Horse in their Hull or Bottom, and as many Foot upon the Decks, which were
environed with thick plancks, made Breast-work wise, and Musket proof. These
Vessels were so flat, that lying level with the shore, the Horsemen mounted
might easily get out; whilst the Foot facilitated their passage if there were
need, with their shot from above as out of a Fortress. These Castle-boats,
being ready and filled with Soldiers put off, and making toward the ordinary
Landing-place, drew all the Enemies forces thither to oppose them, which they
observing, suddenly changed their Course, and directing it to an unusual
quarter, rowed with that violence, that they rushed on shore, and landed all
their men, maugre the feeble resistance of the Defendants, who were indeed but
few. There was an Inlet of the Sea betwixt that place which the Islanders
guarded, and that other where the Enemy landed, so that before the Governor
could get thither to oppose their descent, they were got into Battalia, and yet
he charged them bravely, but being wounded himself, and seventy of his men
slain upon the place, he was forced to yield the Victory, and the price of it
the Island, to his more numerous Enemies. And thus all the Islands fell into
the Swedes hands, and all the Kingdom likewise, except Coppenhagen, shrewdly
shaken with the loss of its obeying Provinces. The City was likewise blockt up
on all sides, the Camp keeping them from any Communication by Land, and four,
sometimes five of the Enemies Ships besieging their Haven by Sea, so that
nothing material could enter in or out, without the Adversaries leave. This
caused a great dearth within, which lasted all the Summer, and might have
continued longer to the ruin of that Noble City, if they had not been relieved
by the coming of the Dutch Fleet.

General Wrangel had hitherto held the City of Naskow close besieged, and
having taken the Islet before the Town, and the two Forts in it, which secured
the passage by water, straightened it so, that the succors designed for the
relief of the besieged, however assisted by the Dutch Fleet, May 23.
could not enter. Wrangel hereupon summons the place, adding threats to his
invitations, which the Garrison rejected, with no less courage than constancy.
The Marshal General was loath to leave the Work he had so well begun unfinished,
but being called to a more weighty employment, he was forced to quit it, and
hasten to the defense of Funen, so much menaced, and so often attempted by the
Confederates, as has been already related. The Garrison was glad to be rid of
this valiant adversary, but their joy did not last long, for Field Marshal
Steynbock being sent to succeed him, and not ignorant in whose place he came,
was heightened with the example. He therefore pressed the Besieged with all his
industry; and having got all things necessary for forcing of the place,
approached, battered, and mined it, with that violence, that the Garrison
unable to resist any longer, was constrained to surrender. July 26.
Thus this considerable place wanting powder, and hopeless of relief, fell into
the Enemies hands, who proud with so signal a Victory, sent most of their
Troops to prosecute the Siege of Coppenhagen.

And thus we have hitherto continued our observations of what happened at Land.
Neither did the Sea want its contests, though less bloody, whilst those two
Potent Commonwealths, of England and the United Provinces, made preparations
equal to their Grandeur, for the carrying on of their several interests, under
pretense of assisting their Allies. The truth is, the Trade of the Baltic and
free passage of the Sound, exclusive each to other, was the ground of their
jealousy, and the design of their Arms. The contests between the Swede and
Dane (remaining as it were) in aquilibrio, it was generally believed, that
which Statesoever could first send from home a considerable Fleet, would carry
the business, and compose the business of the Sound to their own mind. Yet it
is worth the noting, in this main end of theirs, what great advantages the
Dutch had over the English; for by assisting their Ally the Dane, if they
prevailed, and ruined the Swede, they looked for no less than an absolute
Guardianship as it were of the Crown, both by their Land and Sea forces, and in
consideration of their lent moneys; to have been their own security for passing
the Sound, and imposing a restriction upon any else at pleasure, and so engross
the Navigation and Commerce of the Baltic Sea to themselves: Whereas England
by assisting their Ally the Swede, and helping him to conquer Denmark, could
not assure to themselves the benefit they looked for, but must remain
precarious, and stand to the courtesy of a potent Monarch, whilst they had
but his bare faith plighted, to give them equal privileges with Swedes, to
pass the Sound Toll-free, and to have their Enemies excluded the Trade of the
Baltic. Both States therefore prepare their Fleets, each of forty men of War.
The English (as is already mentioned) had about the latter end of the last
year, sent a Fleet toward Denmark, but that being by reason of Tempests, and
the unpassableness of the Seas, full of sholes of Ice, unable to advance, was
obliged to return. The Winter being past, General Montague was sent thither
with a second, no less useful for service, being very well fitted for War, and
well manned, with betwixt nine or ten thousand men (but no Land forces) then
glorious for ostentation.

The English Fleet was got ready with that expedition, that it put to Sea a
Fortnight or three Weeks before the Dutch, which bred no little jealousy in
them, seeing their Rivals ready before them, and that with such powerful
Forces; however Mr. Downing then Resident at the Hague had assured them, Apr. 6.
that the English Fleet which was gone toward the Sound, had no Orders to use
any kind of hostility against their Shipping, but only to endeavor the
procuring of a Pacification betwixt the two Crowns. And it proved so, though
the States were hardly induced to believe it; And yet they will not now (making
a virtue of necessity) seem to wish it otherwise, so that their preparations
moved flower, at least in appearance; whilst they gave out, that they did not
need to make have, being Denmark was secured in the Neutrality of that present
power. General Montague having Rendevouzed in Sold Bay, March 27. 1659.
weighed the twenty seventh of March, and arrived in the Sound at an Anchor
between the Island of Ween and Cronenburg Castle April 6. Apr. 6.
And And by agreement between the King of Sweden and the English Admiral,
neither flag was stirred, but born aloft, and the three Flagships as they
passed by the Castle, saluted it (where the King and Queen were in person) with
21, 19, and 17 Guns. Every other Ship gave only a Volley of small shot, which
were answered (Flags and all) only with two Guns, each according to the Custom
of Sweden.

The Instructions given to General Montague, I have thought proper to insert
here, being they will give great light to the following passages of that
Summers action.

WHereas upon consideration had of the state of Affairs in the Eastern parts,
and particularly of the War fallen out betwixt the two Kings of Sweden and
Denmark; which has greatly disturbed the Navigation, and Commerce of this and
other Neighboring States, and distracted the Affairs of the greatest part of
Europe, We thought it necessary to use Our best endeavors, for composing the
said War, and thereby to remove the manifold Evils, and Inconveniences which
depend thereupon; And to that purpose, gave directions to Sir Philip Meadow Our
Envoy Extraordinary with the King of Sweden, to offer Our friendly Mediation to
both those Kings, and to contribute his utmost diligence, for settling a Peace
between them; Giving him such further Instructions as We found necessary for
that occasion; a Copy whereof (they bearing Date the ninth of December last) is
herewith delivered unto you; And whereas since that time, there has been a
Treaty made and concluded on betwixt Us, and the King of France (a Copy whereof
is also herewith delivered you) touching the said Affairs, which both States
finding to be of so great importance to their respective Countries and
Dominions, and the Interest thereof; They judge that it concerned Them in a
joint way, and by joint Counsels to apply the most effectual remedies that
could be thought of, for composing the said War; And therefore did agree by the
said Treaty, to offer their joint Mediation to those two Kings, for procuring
of a Peace betwixt Them, as also their Garranty for securing thereof in case it
should be accomplished; With a mind also to accommodate the differences betwixt
the King of Sweden on the one side, and the King of Poland, and the Elector of
Brandenburg on the other; And for the better effecting of the mutual intentions
of these two States, It was further concluded by the said Treaty, that all
endeavors should be used, for disposing the States General of the United
Provinces, to cooperate with England, and France in this good Work; And
accordingly, as well We as the King of France, have given Instructions to Our
respective Public Ministers, both at the Hague, and with the said Kings of
Sweden, and Denmark, to prosecute and promote the aforesaid good Intention,
which We hope will have the issue that is desired, and that such a Peace will
be settled in those parts where so great and powerful Armies both by Land and
Sea are engaged) as will be for the security of the common Interest, and in
particular of this Commonwealth; And having on these grounds sent a Fleet
toward those parts the last Winter, which in respect of the season of the
year, was not able to perfect the intended Voyage, We have now judged it
necessary upon the same Grounds, and to the same ends as are before expressed,
to send a Fleet under your Conduct and Command, into the Sound and Baltic Sea.

You are therefore on the receipt of these Our Instructions, and of the other
papers herewith delivered, to repair to Our Fleet prepared for this Expedition,
a List whereof is hereunto annexed, and upon your coming aboard, you shall (by
Gods blessing and assistance) with your first Opportunity of Wind and Weather
set sail for the parts aforesaid, and having come thither, shall follow and
pursue the Instructions, following, viz.

1 You shall immediately upon your arrival in the Sound, send to Sir Philip
Meadow, as also to our Envoy with the King of Denmark, if he be there residing,
and receive from them a true and perfect account, of the state of the affairs
of the several Princes engaged as aforesaid, and what effect our Mediation has
had, and whether it be probable that a Treaty and Peace will ensue, on the
Terms wherein you shall find affairs to stand at your arrival.

2 You shall either by your self, or by the hand of Sir Philip Meadow, as you
shall find it most convenient, let both the Kings of Sweden and Denmark know,
that you have brought the Fleet into these parts by Our command, as a common
friend to both, and with desires to procure a Peace betwixt them; And that for
the same purpose, you are ready to contribute all that lies in you, to remove
those difficulties that lie in the way of Peace and secure Agreement betwixt
them, We judging it to be their own Interest, as well as that of their
Neighbors and Allies, that the present War between them, should be put to a
speedy end, And that We cannot understand how the same can be continued,
without extreme danger, as well to themselves, as to the present Interests of
their Allies.

3 If a Treaty be begun between them before your arrival, you shall do what you
can to bring the said Treaty to a Peace without delay, But if it be found, that
either no Treaty is begun, or that the difference is such upon the Treaty, that
no Agreement is like to be made thereupon, Then Sir Philip Meadow (as We have
directed him by your Instructions to him) shall in Our name propound the Treaty
of Rotschild to be the Terms of a Peace to be now settled between them, with
such Alterations as shall be found necessary, upon occasion of the War since
fallen out between the said two Kings, persuading both of them to center therein,
as that which is the likeliest means (as affairs now stand) to put an end to
this unhappy and unchristian War; And this you as Admiral of the Fleet shall
also let both the Kings know. And also, that you shall be obliged by your
Instructions, to oppose that Party, which shall refuse a reasonable Peace upon
these grounds, We holding our self engaged to propound this Treaty, in respect
We were one of the Mediators thereof.

4 In case the said two Kings can be brought to a Treaty, then a Cessation of
all acts of Hostility is to be endeavored between them, in which Cessation it
is to be expressed, that no part of the Forces under the Command of the Elector
of Brandenburg, and that Confederate Army, be transported into Zeland, Funen,
or any other of the Isles, where now the King of Sweden has footing, and that
no relief of Men or Shipping, be put into Coppenhagen; nor any attempt made
upon either of the said Kings, by the Forces of any Prince or State whatsoever;
And you are authorized to use your endeavors that the Terms of the said
Cessation be observed, and to oppose whomsoever shall go about to break the
same.

5 And whereas We find that One great difficulty which the King of Denmark,
makes about treating separately with Sweden, is because of his engagement to
his Allies, We have directed the said Sir Philip Meadow to let him know, That
this Peace being once concluded, yea whilst it is Treating, We shall use Our
best endeavors to reconcile the King of Sweden unto the King of Poland, and
the Elector of Brandenburg, and do not doubt, but something very effectually
may be done therein; But we conceive it of absolute necessity, in the first
place, to agree the said two Kings, without which it is impossible to imagine
that any peace at all can any way be concluded on: And we hope that the States
General of the United Provinces will likewise agree herein.

6 You shall also take the first opportunity to deal very seriously with the
King of Sweden, touching his present War in Denmark, letting him know that We
apprehend it very dangerous both for him and all his Allies, in respect of the
great Combinations that are made against him both by Land and Sea, which in all
probability he will not be able to defend himself against; And that whosoever
comes in to his assistance, must expect to engage himself in a War with
Holland, and those other States which are the Allies of Denmark, being a War
which at this time this Nation is in no condition to engage in, nor is the
Parliament now sitting, satisfied so to do: And that therefore the Counsel
which We as his true Friend and Ally, do find necessary to give him at this
time, is, That he will apply himself to make a reasonable Peace with the King
of Denmark, upon the Treaty of Rotschild, which We at his own desire did in
some sort become the Garranty of; Letting him further know, that in case his
Majesty shall not think fit to follow this Counsel, We cannot satisfy Our self
to give him any assistance, the consequence whereof will be so great upon this
Nation; And in case the Dutch will be persuaded to say as much to the King of
Denmark, We doubt not but matters will be brought to a happy issue in those
parts.

7 In case the King of Denmark shall refuse to treat upon the Terms before
expressed, you shall let him know, That although We have not interested Our
self in this present War, but have carried Our self as Neuter betwixt him, and
the King of Sweden; Yet now We find the Interest of this Commonwealth so much
concerned in this War, That We held Our self obliged to make use of all the
means God has put into Our hands to put an end thereto; And that having done
what lies in Our power, by Our Ministers, in a friendly way without success, We
have found Our self necessitated to give assistance to the King of Sweden, as
Our Friend and Ally, who having declared himself willing to make Peace upon the
Terms of the Rotschild Treaty, We thought it not for the Common good, nor for
the interest of England, to suffer him to be oppressed and totally ruined, by the
conjunction of so great and powerful Forces against him.

8 And upon this state of the case, and having by your self, or Sir Philip
Meadow Our said Envoy, used your best endeavor as aforesaid for making a
Peace; And if the King of Sweden shall give satisfaction upon the Terms of
Assistance, you shall then with the Fleet under your Command, assist the King
of Sweden in a defensive way, in the manner expressed in the following Article.

9 You shall with the Fleet under your Command, either alone or in conjunction
with the Swedish Fleet, hinder what in you lies, the transporting of any part
of the Confederate Army, under the Command of the Elector of Brandenburg, or by
whom else the same is commanded, into the Isles of Zeland and Funen, or into
any other of the places now possessed by the Swedes; And if any attempt shall
be made to do it, you shall use the force that is in your hand to withstand and
prevent it, by whomsoever it shall be attempted.

10 In case the Fleet of the King of Sweden shall be attempted by the Dane, or
by the Fleet of any other State, separately or in conjunction with the Dane,
you shall use the Force which God has given you to defend him.

11 You shall also labor by the Fleet under your Command, to hinder the
carrying of any Succor or relief into Coppenhagen, until the King of Denmark
shall be willing to Treat upon the Terms expressed in the former Article, and
are hereby empowered to fight with any such as shall endeavor to carry in any
such relief, as aforesaid; And are also empowered to authorize such number of
the Fleet as you shall judge necessary, under the Flag of Sweden, to join with
the Fleet of Sweden, to pursue and assault his enemies, for the better
accommodating of the Terms of Peace as aforesaid.

12 And because Our intention is to manage this business by Counsel and
Correspondence with the States General of the United Provinces, as also to
prevent any further Engagement between the King of Sweden and the Lords the
States in a Hostile way, We have directed our Resident at the Hague, to
propound to the said States General, that they will join with England and
France, in the making of this Peace, upon the grounds of the Treaty of
Rotschild, and that in order thereto, they will not send to the King of Denmark
any assistance further, till the issue of Our joint endeavors for a Peace be
seen, nor go into those parts with a Fleet, to take part with any side, which
We have also expressed Our self resolved to do; And have accordingly given you
direction by the foregoing third Instruction: And have also desired of them to
agree that their Fleet shall not sail into the Sound or Baltic Sea, ut remain
in some convenient place without, in expectation of the Conclusion of the
Peace, whereunto We hope they will agree, and give Instructions to their
Admiral to conform thereto, and to hold a good and friendly correspondence with
you in the management of this business; you shall therefore in case you shall
either meet with the Fleet of the said Lords the States at Sea, by the way
thither, or shall arrive in the Sound or those parts before them, you shall
hold a good and friendly Correspondence with them, sending to the Admiral, upon
your first descrying of their Fleet at Sea, and letting him know, that you are
come into those parts, to endeavor a Peace between the two Crowns of Sweden
and Denmark, without taking either side, or giving assistance to either, if it
be possible to make the Peace without it; and further, that We have ordered the
Treaty of Rotschild to be propounded as the Terms of the Peace to be made
between them, with such alterations, as are necessary, the management whereof
between the two Kings, is left by Us to Our Public Minister upon the place;
And that you hope he is come with the same mind and intentions, and that the
Lords his Superiors, have given him Instructions to conform thereunto; And
that he will accordingly declare himself, and join with you, for the making of
this Peace, upon the terms aforesaid, in such a way as may be most likely to
effect it, and prevent all jealousy between England and the United Provinces,
whilst these endeavors are on foot. And in order thereunto, you are to desire
the said Admiral, That by agreement with you, he will not give any assistance
to either side, either by Men, Ships, or otherwise, nor endeavor to go with
his Fleet into Coppenhagen, or into the Sound or Baltic Sea, lest further
Hostility fall out betwixt the Swede and him, but that they will remain without
the Sound and Belt, until it can be seen whether by your joint endeavors, a
Peace may be concluded betwixt them, or until some other certain way of
management of this affair, may be agreed upon between you and him, conducible
to the ends aforesaid; Engaging likewise to him, that you will give no
assistance on either side, nor remove the station of the Fleet from the place
which shall be agreed upon between you, until the issue of the Treaty be seen
as aforesaid; But in case the Admiral or Commander in Chief of the said Dutch
Fleet shall not hearken to these terms; But shall with their Fleet endeavor to
go through the Sound or Belt, for the relieving of Coppenhagen, assaulting the
Swedes Fleet, or giving other assistance to the Dane; or that the Danes Fleet
with the Dutch Ships already there, shall endeavor to join with the said Fleet
of the States General for the purpose aforesaid, you shall in any of those
cases by way of assistance to the Swede, use your force for the hindering
thereof.

13 Incase you shall find the Dutch Fleet and their new Succors for Denmark,
to be arrived in those parts before you, and that they have relieved
Coppenhagen, and joined themselves to the Dane, contrary to those intentions
and Propositions made in pursuance thereof, expressed to Our Resident at the
Hague, you shall let the Dutch Admiral also know your intentions of coming into
those Seas, and desire him to join with you in the promoting thereof, according
to the twelfth Instruction. But if that be refused, or delayed beyond what the
nature and condition of affairs will admit, you shall give assistance to Sweden
upon the Terms before expressed. Or, if whilst you are debating these things
with the Dutch, or during the Treaty with Sweden about an assistance, any
endeavors be used to transport the Forces under the Elector of Brandenburg,
and to fight the King of Sweden, you shall oppose it by force, either by your
self, or in conjunction with Sweden, by whomsoever it be attempted.

14 And in respect there may many cases fall out, wherein We at this distance,
and upon affairs subject to so great Changes and uncertainties, cannot give
particular Instructions, you are in cases which are omitted, or not well
explained, to have your eye in the determination thereof upon Our General
scope, which lies in two things, to wit, the making of a good Peace between the
said two Kings, wherein we desire a good Correspondence with the Lords the
States General, and their Forces which shall be in those parts. And secondly,
if it shall please God, to bring things to that pass, that you shall find your
self obliged by the tenor of your Instructions, to give assistance unto
Sweden, that you so manage it, that before you engage the Fleet in Action, the
King of Sweden do agree and Authentickly ratify the Treaty herewith delivered
to you, lest that after any part of his work be done, he should refuse to do
what in justice may be expected from him. However, for preventing of the
transportation of the forces under the Elect. of Brandenburg as aforesaid, or
for executing your 12th Instruction, you are authorized to engage the Fleet,
although the said Treaty should not be agreed.

15 In case that the refractoriness to the Peace shall be on the part of the
King of Sweden, endeavor shall be used to settle things so with the King of
Denmark and the States General, that the Treaty betwixt Denmark and this State
may he observed, and that whatsoever advantages are granted to the States
General in point of Trade and Commerce, may be likewise granted to this State,
and the same security given to Us for the performance thereof; letting them
know, that otherwise We shall be obliged to provide for Our own Interest, and
this We have directed Sir Philip Meadow to transact, who shall also follow such
advice, as you shall think fit to give him therein.

16 As to matter of salutes betwixt Our Fleet and the King of Swedens, as also
for what will be necessary to be agreed touching the manner of your Conjunction
with the Swedes, in case it shall fall out you join with them, you are to do
therein what shall be found necessary and agreeable to the Honor of this
Commonwealth, as you in your judgment and direction shall think fit.

17 You shall in case of meeting with any Ships of War belonging to any
Foreign State in the British Seas, take care that the Honor of this Nation be
preserved, by causing them to strike their Flag, and lower their Top-sail, as
is accustomed, and in case of refusal, you shall compel them thereunto by force.

18 You shall take care to give Us frequent Intelligence of your proceedings,
and of every thing that shall occur in those parts; That thereupon you may
receive further direction, as shall be necessary, either touching your acting
there, or returning with the Fleet; which yet you are to do, when the season of
the year, the necessity of the Fleet, or other condition of affairs shall
require, although you should not receive Our further directions therein.

19 In case it shall please God to take you away, or otherwise disinable you
that you cannot intend this service, The Vice Admiral of the Fleet is hereby
empowered to execute these Instructions, until We shall give other order therein.

March 18. 1658.

20 In case the whole Fleet contained in this List be not ready, you shall
proceed upon your Voyage, with such part of them as are ready to said with you,
giving order to the rest to follow after you.

Out of these Instructions it is observable, that the true Interest of England
was then judged to be; First, to preserve Denmark from ruin, and the power of
the Sound in his hand, as being a weaker Prince, whose Interest it would be not
to impose upon his Neighbors, or if he did, it were easier reducing him to
terms of reason; and therefore sincerely they endeavored to re-establish the
Peace of Rotschild, and save that King from the violence of the Swede and Menes
of the Dutch, and to leave him a free Prince. Secondly, but if that could not
be done, then as has been touched before, they chose rather to help the King
of Sweden, and take his word for their share in the benefit of the Conquest,
than that the Dutch should grapple all into their hands and power.

The English being come thus first into Denmark, resolved to hinder De Ruyters
conjunction with Opdam (who had Wintered in Coppenhagen, and governed greatly
in all their Councels and affairs) for fear their force might be superior in
the Sound: And therefore when the English Admiral was past the Schaw or Point
of Schagen, ( De Ruyter being not yet come out of Holland.) he left three
Scout-ships, one at the Schaw Point; another about Lezow and Anout, and a third
at the Koll, all in sight one of the other, and the last in sight of the Fleet.
He at Schaw had Order to meet De Ruyter there, and deliver him a Letter,
wherein he desired him, that he would signify to him, that he would not give
any assistance to either side, Apr. 4. 1659.
by Men, Ships, or otherwise, nor endeavor to go with his Fleet into
Coppenhagen, the Sound, or Baltic Sea, lest further hostility should fall out
betwixt the Swede and him, but remain with his Fleet without the Sound and
Belt, until it might be seen whether by their joint endeavors a Peace might be
concluded, or until some other certain way of management of this affair, might
be agreed upon between them, conducible to the ends aforesaid. And he engaged
on the other side ( De Ruyter agreeing to the desires expressed in his Letters)
that he would give no assistance to either side.

The arrival of this great Fleet, was no less terrible to the Danes than
acceptable to the Swedes, for these hugged themselves with the hopes of
powerful assistance from their tried friends, whilst the other apprehended the
carriage of a reconciled enemy. King Frederick being therefore doubtful of what
might happen, gave notice to the States General by an Express, of the arrival
of the English Fleet, consisting of thirty six men of War besides Fireships,
in the Sound, adding his entreaties, That they would be likewise pleased to
dispatch their promised Succors, whereby he might be at length delivered from
the oppressions of his growing enemies. But neither the Swedes confidence, nor
the Danes fear did last long, for Montague having sent his Cousin Mr. Montague,
and his Vice Admiral, to salute King Charles, did likewise assure him by word
of mouth; as he did King Frederick the next day after his arrival by Letters,
that He was come with his Fleet to help to reconcile the two Kings, which he
would endeavor with all his might, and in the interim neither assist nor
offend either of them. April. 11.
The Danes raised with the Admirals friendly Message, were assured by Sir Phil.
Meadow the English Envoy's confirming of it. He wrote in the same sense
Montague had done before, offering withal his Masters so often proffered
Mediation, and having laid open the irreparable evils of a continued War,
magnified the Peace of Rotschild, as most consentaneous to the present State of
affairs, and the surest foundation of the future Treaty. But both Kings delayed
their Answers, though he of Denmark did at length reply, 20.
that he did very willingly accept of the offered Mediation, the very name of
Peace being most welcome to him, but he could not Treat, much less Conclude any
thing, without his Allies and Confederates. The truth is, he abhorred the
thoughts of the Peace of Rotschild, and had obliged himself but lately, by a
Treaty with the Emperor, the King of Poland, and the Elector of Brandenburg,
to make no Peace with the Swedes, without mutual consent of the Confederate
Princes.

King Charles seemed no less averse from the Treaty of Rotschild than the Dane,
and however Montague did daily tamper with him, to incline him to it, yet his
returns were all delatory, because he saw the English posted, so as he thought
their reputation would never permit them to suffer the Dutch Fleet to sail by
the sides of their Ships into Coppenhagen; and that then his work would be done
gratis, if they were together by the ears, and he free from having signed any
Terms for the benefit of England. The English Admiral on the other hand
apprehending his danger, in being engaged to such a disadvantage, pressed his
Majesty for a clear answer without delay, which not receiving, and withal
finding that King preparing to be gone in person into Funen, where intercourse
would be long and difficult, and continue this inconvenience; The Admiral sent
him word, that he was sorry he could not all that time know his Majesty's
resolution, and that now he was obliged to pursue some other instructions he
had: and presently weighing Anchor sailed out of the Sound, and posted himself
in the Cattegat, between the Koll and the Town of Guildeley in Zeland. As his
Fleet passed by Cronenburg, the King of Sweden sent Count Brake and Monsieur
Post, two Senators of his Kingdom, to complement the Admiral* and wish him good
speed in his undiscovered design; And within two hours after, sent another Boat
to him, with an Instrument under his hand and seal, accepting the mediation of
England, upon the Terms of the Rotschild Treaty, which was in effect welcome to
the English Admiral, although he had an important reason to remove the Fleet as
he did, though he had hoped no other advantage thereby. For in the Sound where
the Fleet was posted, it was found that the Current ran so violently and
uncertainly, and differently in every small space of distance; and the breadth
of the water was so little, that if the Dutch Fleet had come, and he been
obliged to fight, the place was such as no Pilot knew how to work a Ship in:
And the other Station a breast of the Koll, was good Sea-room, and a steady
Current (for in that place is discernable no tide at all) but if the Wind blow
from the Ocean, the Current runs into the Sound, and if it blow out of the
Baltic, then the Current runs out.

The English Fleet thus posted, and having obtained the consent of the King of
Sweden to the Rotschild Treaty, the Admiral again enforces the English
Mediation upon the King of Denmark, who being bound up, and overruled by his
Allies, refuses the Terms of the Mediation; whereupon the English Admiral,
according to his Instructions, offers a Treaty of Assistance from England, to
the Swede; which I thought fit to insert here.

WHereas there is a new and unhappy War, broken out betwixt his Majesty the
King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark, and that since the said Rupture, the
King of Sweden has by his Arms got possession of the Town of Elzineur, and
Castle of Cronenburg, in the Isle of Zeland, and obtained thereby the Command
of the Sound, and has also beleaguered the City of Coppenhagen, yet with this
mind and desire, to make and conclude with the King of Denmark, a good and
secure Peace; And whereas, upon pretense of giving assistance to his Majesty
the King of Denmark, there is a great and powerful Army, consisting chiefly of
the Forces of the King of Hungary now Emperor of Germany, and of the King of
Poland, already marched into Holstein and Jutland, whereof they have already
possession, designing also to possess themselves of Funen and Zeland, and the
strength therein, which should they be able to effect, it would in all humane
probability, prove the ruin and loss of the Protestant Interest in those
parts, and endanger the subversion thereof in all Europe, and also be to the
destruction of Navigation and Commerce in the Baltic Sea, and the King of
Denmark himself (whose assistance they pretend) captivated into the hands of
those whose interest obliges them to make a prey of him, and his said Majesty
the King of Sweden, having upon these grounds, and to the ends before
expressed, and in this exigency of affairs (in pursuance of a Treaty made at
London betwixt the two States, on the seventh of July Old style, in the year of
our Lord 1656, whereby it is in the first Article thereof (among other things)
agreed, that it shall be lawful for either of the said Confederates within the
Kingdoms and Countries of the other, to hire Ships, as well Men of War, as
Merchant men, upon the Terms and Conditions therein expressed) desired the
Assistance and aid of his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging, and for the further settling the Trade and Commerce betwixt the two
States.

1 It is agreed on either part, that for the affording of Aid and Succor to
His Majesty and Kingdom of Sweden, His most Serene Highness the Lord Protector
shall be obliged to send forthwith toward the Sound a Fleet of Ships of War. 2
That the said Fleet or Navy shall at the Charge of his said Highness and
Commonwealth of England, etc. be equipped and fitted forth sufficiently, with
all things necessary for such an expedition, and shall be also from time to
time supplied for the keeping and maintenance of them in those Seas, until the
twenty ninth of September next. 3 The said Fleet being come into those Seas,
they shall aid and assist His Majesty the King of Sweden, in a Defensive way,
that is to say; First, they shall do their endeavors to hinder any Foreign
Ships of War to join themselves with the Fleet of Denmark, under what Plag
soever it be attempted, or on what pretense soever. Secondly, for the hindering
the transportation of any Soldiers or Forces belonging to the Confederate
Army, under the Command of the Elector of Brandenburg into Coppenhagen, or any
Islands of Denmark. Thirdly, for preventing of the carrying any Relief or
Succor of Money, Victuals, Soldiers, or other provision of War into
Coppenhagen. Fourthly, for the defense of the Swedish Fleet, in case they shall
be assaulted at Sea, or blockt up in Harbor by the Dane, or any other in
Conjunction with him, or separately from him. 4 Forasmuch as His Highness and
the Commonwealth of England will be at excessive charge in setting forth and
managing the foresaid Navy, for the attaining the ends aforesaid: Therefore by
way of Recompense, and satisfaction of the charges expended and to be expended:
And in respect of the other hazards and dangers which may ensue to this
Commonwealth by reason of this Assistance: It is agreed that the People and
Subjects of this Commonwealth, from time to time Sailing and Trading, coming
and going through the Sound, or Belt, shall not at any time be obliged to pay
any Tribute, Toll, or Custom, Duty or other Charge whatsoever, for either
Ships or Merchandises, to the King, or Kingdom of Sweden, or any of his
Officers or Ministers whatsoever; but shall in their said Passage, and
Navigation through the said places be treated in manner following. 5 That upon
the coming of any of the Ships of His Highness, and this Commonwealth, and the
People and Subjects thereof, into those parts, and at their passage through the
Sound or Belt; producing their Legal and Authentic Certificates to the
Officers of the King of Sweden, and to such Officer or Officers as shall be
appointed by His Highness to reside at Cronenburg, or such other place
thereabouts, as His Highness shall desire, the Commanders, Masters, and other
Officers of such Ships of this Commonwealth as shall so pass, shall on such
Certificates pay to the Officer or Officers so to be appointed by His Highness,
such Toll and Duty as His said Highness shall think fit to appoint, which
Toll and Duty, shall be for the sole benefit of His Highness and this
Commonwealth, in recompense of the said Charge and Hazards aforesaid: And upon
payment of such Toll or Duty, such English Ships shall be suffered to pass
without any stop or molestation. ^ that the People and Subjects of this
Commonwealth shall in the ^^^ntreys and Dominions of the King of Sweden, which
either (...) are in His possession, or hereafter shall come into His
possession, pay no higher or greater Custom, or Duty, than the Subjects of
Sweden at this time do, and be used in all other things as the Subjects of
Sweden at this time are. ^ That His Majesty of Sweden shall shut up the Sound,
as also the Great and Little Belt, and all other Passages into the Baltic Sea,
and prohibit all Commerce and Navigation through the same, to all such who
shall be in Amity with those Confederates, or either of them. 8 That all the
Ports, Rivers, Roads, Harbors and Countries of Sweden shall be free and open
for the English Ships and men to come into, reside in, and go forth of, from
time to time as there shall be occasion, without any molestation, and shall be
assisted and furnished with provisions and other necessaries, at the same rates
that the People and Subjects of the King of Sweden are. ^ That all reasonable
endeavors shall be used by these Confederates ^o withdraw the Elector of
Brandenburg, and all other Princes ^^d States from any conjunction with the
House of Austria, and to Unite them against the said House. ^ That the said
Fleet set out by His Highness, as aforesaid, shall be continued forth, for the
purposes aforesaid, for so long time as the present season of the year shall
permit, with respect to the safety of the Fleet and no longer.
^he English Admiral was bound up, not to admit of any altera^^^ in the Treaty,
and the King of Sweden, how great soever his ^eed of Englands help was, yet
immoveably persisted in refusing to sign the Treaty upon these Points.

First, that he could not admit the English the Privileges in Sweden that all
Swedes have, because he alleged some sort of Ships were built there in a form
particular to be useful in his Wars, and for lading Salt also, in consideration
whereof they had special immunities. But he offered to make them equal with
the rest of the Nation. 2 That he could not exclude their Enemies out of the
Baltic Sea; For it was not possible for the English alone to suffice for the
Commerce of it, and if they could, yet it was giving them to much advantage in
Trade upon his own people, and all the bordering Nations upon the Baltic Sea
to make them Monopolizers thereof.
Whilst these things are in discoursing in the Sound, the change of Government
happened in England, and the English Fleet thereby taken off from the
prosecution of its first design, was made to wait the new directions of the
Power then in possession; whose Interest differing from the former; seemed to
espouse that of Holland, by undervaluing the Swedes to their very great
prejudice.

But however affairs went in Denmark, the struglings at the Hague were no less
remarkable, which ended at length in a League betwixt the three States, to wit,
England, France, and the United Provinces; Whereby they resolved to persuade or
enforce, the warring Kings, and that against their wills, or without consulting
with them, to a Reconciliation and Peace. The Articles of this Convention,
wherein its Authors showed, they no less minded their own, than their
Neighbors interest, were in all nine. The first was, May 22/11. 1659.
that a Peace should be made betwixt the two Kings, upon the foundation of the
Rotschild Treaty. 2 That the second Article of the said Treaty, by which all
Foreign hostile Fleets were prohibited to pass the Sound, should be wholly
exploded and left out, or so couched, that no Vessels or shipping whatsoever,
belonging to any of the three States, should be comprehended in that
restriction; but that on the contrary, they should be permitted to pass the
said Straight at pleasure, without any let or interruption. 3 That the English
Fleet should not join it self to either of the two Kings Fleets, nor affist nor
offend either of them, for the space of three whole Weeks, counting from the
day that notice hereof was given to the Commander in chief of the said Fleet:
And likewise, that the Dutch Fleet, which was to be sent for Denmark, should
observe the same, and not join with Opdams Fleet, who was also to act nothing
in prejudice of the Swedes for the said three Months time; and that the Fleet
to be sent thither should not go to Coppenhagen, nor enter the Baltic Sea,
either by the Sound, or by either of the two Belts. 4 That the said three
States, should withdraw all manner of aid and succors, from that King who
should refuse equitable terms of Peace, and continue so to do, until he had
declared the contrary. 5 That the three States should stand bound for ever, for
the executing and keeping of the made peace. 6 That all Ships whatsoever
belonging to the Subjects of the three States, as also their Merchandise and
lading should be free, and exempted in the Sound, and both the Belts, from any
new Impositions or Tolls. 7 That England and France should undertake to remove
all diffidences and mis-understandings, arisen betwixt the King of Sweden and
the States General, and cause the Treaty of Elbing with its elucidations to be
ratified. 8 That the three States should use their utmost endeavors to compose
the War with Poland, as also the difference betwixt the Elector of Brandenburg
and the Swedes. 9 Lastly, that the Articles of this Treaty should be ratified
and duly observed by the three States.
And thus this Treaty, notwithstanding the main opposition of the Emperor, the
Danes, and the Brandenburgers Ministers, was agreed upon by the three States.
But being those of England and France did refuse to sign it at present, under
pretense of waiting further, and more plenary Orders from their Principals, the
States General dispatched an Express to the King of Denmark, assuring him that
their Fleet. notwithstanding the arrival of Foreign Fleets in the Sound,
April. 29.
should follow, with the forty Companies designed for his assistance, with all
possible speed; and that they would omit nothing whereby they might remove that
oppression that his Kingdom did at present groan under. There was no industry
omitted for the hastening out of the Dutch Fleet all foreign Commerce and
traffic by Sea being forbidden, and wholly prohibited, until the same were
furnished with Mariners. This unusual Embargo did extremely trouble the
Merchants, especially the Green-land Farers, for the season to fish for Whales
drew nigh, and the loss would be as well great as irrecoverable, if it were
neglected. Seeing therefore that Seamen came but slowly in, as unwilling to
engage in a War, where nothing was to be expected but blows, and that they
would not be pressed, as inconsistent with the freedom they pretend, they were
forced to hire them at excessive rates, the price heightening, even to forty
Guilders a man every month. At last, though with much ado, they levied twelve
hundred Seamen, which were dispersed amongst the Navy, which by this time was
ready, consisting of forty brave Ships of War. And now their Landforces being
likewise embarked, May 10/3^.
they set sail toward Denmark. The Danish Agents which resided in Holland, had
hired several Fluyts and Galliots, to carry provisions to Coppenhagen, and to
transport the Confederate Armies out of Jutland into the Islands: but wanting
both moneys and credit, they were stayed behind, to the prejudice and
dis-reputation of them who were concerned. Michael de Ruyter Vice Admiral of
Amsterdam had the present Command of this Fleet, for Opdam was absent, and yet
the Land Colonels pretended they ought not obey him, which rather than do,
they proposed to pass in the quality of Passengers, but the States undertaking
the decision hereof, ordered that the Vice Admiral should preside in Counsels
of War on board, but should sit below the Colonels at meat in the Cabin.
Being under sail, De Ruyter had Orders sent him (for the abovementioned
convention betwixt the 3 States was signed) to use no hostility, 22.
unless provoked, against any whosoever, for the space of 3 Weeks, not to enter
the Sound, nor to join his Forces to Opdam's during the said time. The same
Orders were also sent to the two Admirals in Denmark, both of them being
strictly enjoined to attempt nothing until the expiration of the said Truce:
But being the time was wel-nigh expired, before the Admirals could have notice
of these transactions at so great a distance, it was agreed upon that the Truce
should take its beginning from the receipt of the Advice, and Letters which
were sent them. De Ruyter therefore being advanced as far as the Islands of
Lesow and Anhout, came to Anchor, where he staid whilst the Ambassadors sent
by the States General to both the Kings, continued their journeys to Cronenburg
and Coppenhagen. The Dutch for all their vast preparations, considering the
hazards and consequences of a War, wisely thought the way of Mediation the
best, at least the safest, to appease the troubles of the North. They therefore
dispatched their Ambassadors to the differing Princes, to each two, but with a
strong Fleet, an excellent way of interposing. There were who alleged, that in
case the business came to blows; that fighting and the function of
Ambassadors, whose errand was Peace, could not square, and so would have had
them go by Land; but that nicety being waved, they embarked, though not all at
once, and therefore did not arrive at the same time in the Sound. The first
(being likewise the first in Commission) that came to Cronenburg, was the Here
Slingland, Counselor and chief Pensioner of Dort. He had given the Court
notice of his approach before his landing, by a Gentleman of his train, and
Letters to the King. Whilst he himself, having complemented the English
Admiral by another, went himself on board him, where after a reception equal to
his Character, he fell into discourse with Montague about the present
constitution of affairs, though in general terms; for the Admiral being not
then empowered (for the English Embassy was not as yet arrived) they did not
descend to particulars. Slingland being returned to his Ship, received late
that night an Answer from Court, which was, that he should be welcome, and
received according to his dignity. There came with this Gentleman another, with
a complement and civil Letter, from the Senator Rosenhaen, who brought him also
a Pasport which he had not desired, and a large Declaration in answer to his
Letter, which contained a recapitulation of Complaints against the States
Generals proceedings, and continual thwarting of the Swedes interest. But he
waved any particular debate thereupon, by advice of the other Ambassadors
designed for Coppenhagen, then with him, reserving it to the States
considerations and orders, and being however admitted, he was conducted in the
Kings Coach, with that solemnity which is due to Ambassadors, to the Lodgings
designed for his Reception, and three days entertainment. The Here Huybert,
Counselor and Secretary to the States of Zealand, who had been joint
Colleague with Slingland in Prussia, was also joined with him in Commission
here, but being he did not Embark as soon as the other, and that he spent some
time in giving the last Orders to the Chiefs of the Dutch Fleet, and in
Conference with General Montague upon his; he did not arrive in the Sound,
(where his Reception and Audience was the same in substance with the other,)
till three days after. But the Heeren Vogelsang Counselor and Syndick of
Amsterdam, and Haren a Gentleman of Friesland, both, but more particularly
deputed to the King of Denmark, arrived there the same day that Slingland did;
they (as De Huybert also did) came in a man of War, and saluting the Castle
with their great Guns, were repayed with the same civility. Being landed, they
were conducted to Court with Ceremony, and admitted into the Kings presence,
told him; that the States General were much troubled at the unhappy differences
that were risen betwixt the two Nations, and that they were and always had been
far from any thoughts of hostility against the Crown of Sweden, only had not
been wanting to their Allies in their extremity, according to the Covenants
made with them. They had therefore sent them their Ambassadors, to renew their
old friendship with their old friends, and to endeavor to remove those
misunderstandings and animosities which were at present betwixt both Kings. The
King having answered in order to these particulars, though in general terms,
expressed himself no less desirous of Peace than the States. The Ambassadors
being dismissed, returned to their Ship, being waited upon thither with the
same Ceremony they came; the next morning they sailed to Coppenhagen, where
they were received and treated with as much splendidness, as was possible in a
Town so long besieged. Jun. 11.
Amongst other discourse, they acquaint the King with the Treaty concluded in
the Hague, betwixt the three States, and seriously invite his Majesty to
embrace the same, as most agreeing with the present estate of his affairs. But
the King having thanked them civilly for their former favors, protested
solemnly, that he had rather hazard all, than treat upon the foundation of the
Rotschild Treaty, and that with the exclusion of his Friends and Allies: He
therefore besought the continuance of their helping hand, as the true and
safest means to a wished Accommodation. Neither was the King of Sweden less
averse from that hated Treaty, however pressed to accept of it, by the other
Ambassadors at his Court. And yet lest he might seem to do nothing, he ordered
Commissioners to argue the case with them, but their Conferences proved for the
most part fruitless, and there was no great appearance, to put an end to the
War in the three Weeks time prefixed by the three States. In the interim, there
was no industry omitted in the Fortifying of Cronenburg; the best part of the
Town of Elzineur next the Castle was thrown down to make way for the new Works,
and near a thousand Country people did labor day and night without any
intermission in the raising of them. Koege, Corseur, and other places of
Denmark, were likewise fortified, and the Camp before Coppenhagen strengthened
by hightening the Walls, and enlarging of the Moat: By all which it appeared,
that the Swedes had no mind to be discoursed out of their Conquests and warm
Quarters.

De Ruyter who had hitherto lain betwixt Lesow and Anout in order to the Truce,
weighed Anchor, and being commanded by Opdam, came with his Fleet to Sampso,
that they might join with more ease and at pleasure, when the three Weeks were
expired, Opdam himself lay with his Fleet, and some Danish Vessels, betwixt
Spro and Komps, expecting the expiration of the Truce, which was yet prolonged
for three Weeks more. For Monsieur Newport the States Ambassador in England,
had made a new Cessation with the Usurpers there, and that without the
knowledge of his Superiors, the Counsel of State there having absolutely
insisted upon it, by reason their Commissioners designed for Denmark were not
yet gone, and lest any thing might happen before they could get thither,
prejudicial to the Peace they all so much desired. June 13.
The States seemed unsatisfied with this unexpected agreement, but yet least
they might seem likewise averse from thoughts of an Accommodation, they
approved of it, and commanded their Admirals to observe it, but with that
restriction, that they should join Forces upon the expiration of the first
three Weeks, and land their Land Militia in Coppenhagen.

In the mean time, whilst the English Fleet expected new Orders, an occasion
happened wherein the English did the King of Sweden a singular good turn: For
28 sail of Swedish ships, very good ones, were gone under the Command of young
Wrangel, into the lesser Belt, for the relief of Funen. Opdam and De Ruyter
being newly joined in the great Belt, were going to surprise this Swedish
Fleet, the news thereof coming to the English Admiral, he presently sailed into
the Belt, and there found the whole Dutch and Danish Fleet about ninety Sail,
pursuing the Swedish Fleet, and in sight of them. But upon discovery of the
English Fleet the Dutch tackt, and put themselves into the great Belt, before
the English Fleet, and came to an Anchor near Komps Island, and the English off
the Town of Callenburg; in the mean time, the Swedes delivered, in sight of
both Fleets, sailed away toward the Isle of Haselin, and so for the Sound,
where the King of Sweden questioned and imprisoned young Wrangel for his ill
Conduct. The Dutch apprehending the English advance, made ready for Fight, and
the allarm lasted until Montague's Ketch and Letters assured them, that they
were friends, and had no other thoughts but of Amity and Peace. Hereupon
followed all the demonstrations of kindness on both sides, the Generals
complementing each other by their Vice-Admirals, and the several Officers of
the Fleet, visiting, receiving, and feasting each other, with all imaginable
kindness and civility, and now the Cessation being already expired, the Chiefs
themselves mentioned and concluded a further continuation of it for three Weeks
more.

After both Fleets in the Belt had disputed some ten days, the explaining some
terms in the Hagues Treaty, which the English Admiral made his pretense, to go
to the relief of the Swedes, he weighed Anchor and sailed by Haselin into the
Sound, and came to an Anchor between Ween Island and Coppenhagen, shutting the
Dutch our of the Channel, and expecting the coming of new Ambassadors from
England, and lying in a Post advantageous to correspond either with
Coppenhagen, or Elzineur, as occasion offered; whilst Opdam sailed with his
Fleet to Coppenhagen. The Danes who languished within their Walls, clamoured
against these noxious Truces; the loss of Naskow heightened their murmurings
and complaints, justly searing, lest the whole burden of the War might fall
upon them, whilst the great power of their Confederates seemed but idle
Spectators in their Tragedy. This moved the King to press the States by
re-iterated Messages and entreaties, June 24. July 31.
that they would not suffer Denmark to be wholly lost, and such vast and
chargeable preparations to be rendered fruitless, by their re-iterated
Cessations. The Enemy had in them, taken all the Islands, and Naskow it self in
sight of their Fleet; so that he had nothing now left but Coppenhagen only, and
that straightly besieged, by Sea and Land. He added, that the Swedes did fortify
the landing places of Zeland and Funen with all diligence; neither had they
desisted from assaulting and taking the States own Ships in the lesser Belt; by
all which it appeared, how little hopes there were to bring these to reason by
Cessations and Treaties: He did therefore earnestly desire them, and that by
virtue of the League betwixt them, that they would send their Generals orders
to obey his commands, and that until Denmark was delivered from the danger it
was in, and the Enemy obliged to embrace a desired and equitable Peace. July
1.22.22.
Carisius the Danish Resident in the Hague, urged the same by three several
Memorials, but all could not persuade the States to recede from their late
Conventions with the English and French. Monsieur De Thou had told them in
their full Assembly, that if they did depart from the Treaty which they had
concluded with so much difficulty, his King would also withdraw from the terms
of Mediation, and help the King of Sweden, according to his agreement with the
English, with all his power. But their greatest apprehensions were from the
English, as nearest, and upon the place, not that they feared their Forces, for
they were themselves double their numbers, but lest they should engage in a
War, which might be easier begun than ended. But the apprehensions of the
English and the French threats, did quickly vanish, for both Nations did
ratify the Treaty of the 21 of May, and the English Commissioners were daily
expected at Elzineur.

That Bloody Faction, the disgrace and Fag end of a Parliament, who had
murdered their Sovereign, had also now cashiered their pretended Protector,
and having re-usurped a Tyranny over their fellow subjects, and the most noble
English Nation, swayed and domineered at pleasure: and thinking themselves now
secure at home, extended their ambition (the only commendable thing they did)
to foreign parts. Amongst others, the affairs of the North seemed most
considerable,. They therefore dispatched three Commissioners thither, Colonel
Algernoon Sidney, Sir Robert Honywood, and Mr. Thomas Boon, to whom they were
pleased to add General Montague, as not daring to distrust him, because he
commanded the Fleet. (Though they sent him no new Commission to be Admiral,
when they did send new ones to all the rest of the Fleet.) But they excluded
Sir Philip Meadow, who had hitherto managed the whole Mediation, as jealous of
his affection to their Government. These Ambassadors came with Instructions
and Orders to mediate a Peace betwixt the warring Kings, upon the Basis of the
Rotschild Treaty; they were also commanded to join Counsels, and means with the
Dutch, for the effecting of it according to the tenor of the Hagues
Conventions, which obliged a mutual communication betwixt the three States.
These Ambassadors arrived at Elzineur with a splendid train, where they were
received and treated by the Swedes, with all manner of civilities and honor:
the King himself was not there, being gone to Naskow, June 23.
then taken by his forces; they therefore stayed there in expectation of his
return, but to loose no time, had daily Conferences with the French and Dutch
Ambassadors, so that the whole Negotiation seemed to be carried on by common
consent; the Swedes were troubled at this intimacy and familiarity, affirming
that it was wholly unpracticable, that Ambassadors sent to a Foreign King,
and not having seen that King to whom they were so deputed, should in the mean
time confer and treat with the Ministers of other States, not friends of the
said King, and that in his own Court or Camp. But the Kings arrival put an end
to these murmurings; the English Commissioners went to Fredericksburg where he
was, and being received in the way, by a party of Horse and some Gentlemen,
which the King had sent to wait upon them, were conveyed to their Lodgings in
the Kings Coaches, accompanied with the Coaches of those Public Ministers who
were then at Court. Having reposed a while; they were led to public Audience,
which passed in congratulations and mutual expressions of friendship. After
Dinner, being admitted again to the Kings presence, they unfolded the secret of
their Commission, the sum whereof was, the story of the Hagues Treaty, which
the three States had agreed upon and resolved to stand to: neither did they
omit to tell him, with what industry and affection, they had promoted his
Majesty's Interest in the said Convention. The King, who had expected better
things from his friends he had so much relied upon, was troubled at this
discourse. He found also that the state of his affairs had been represented to
them in a lower condition than they truly were in; and that by such who either
envied his felicity, or were ignorant of his condition: He therefore magnified,
though modestly, the past and present, and making a Majesteous reflection upon
his own Person and Conduct; told them, He did not despair of a happy and a
hoped issue to his undertakings. After this, the Mediators did all they could
by joint Counsels, by communication of affairs, by several Conferences with the
two Kings their Commissioners, and by their utmost endeavors, to compose the
vast breaches betwixt these dissenting Princes, but to little purpose; for the
Danes would listen to no Accommodation, that did not restore them all that had
been taken from them, and include their Allies; and the Swedes refused to stir
out of Zeland, unless the Fortresses and strong places of Denmark, were left
them as Pledges for the observing of the future Peace. The time seemed to be
spent not in treating, but in fruitless and quarrelsome contestations; King
Charles caused a large Declaration to be delivered to the Dutch, wherein,
beginning at the Wars of Poland, he put them in mind of the injuries and
offenses he had received from the United Provinces, not forgetting their
Collusion, as he called it, about the Treaty of Elbing. The Dutch Ambassadors
on the other side; afterting their candor and desire of Peace, professed they
were far from any thoughts of harm toward Sweden, proposing nothing to
themselves but the security of their Confederates, and the freedom of their
Commerce. About the same time, there were published two invective Manifesto's,
by the two Kings Orders, against each other. They were both severe and harsh in
their expressions, but being both are in print, I thought fit, in order to the
brevity I propose to my self in this Relation, and out of the reverence I bear
to such great Princes, July 24/14.
to omit any further mention of them. Whilst they thus cavil in Denmark, there
was another Treaty concluded on in the Hague, betwixt the three States, more
advantageous for the Danes than the former, for Drontheim was restored to them,
by virtue thereof, in compensation of the losses they had sustained by this
last invasion. In this, as in the other Treaty of the 21 of May, the Ministers
residing with both the Kings, were enjoined, that they should by joint Councels
and Forces endeavor, and this in the space of fourteen days time, to conclude
a Peace upon the Basis of the Rotschild Treaty, except in what is excepted in
this present agreement, or should afterward be changed by consent of the two
Kings. And lastly, that they should support and assist with all their might,
that Prince which should declare for Peace, and compel the unwilling by force
of Arms to accept of it. This Treaty was followed by another more forcible and
nervous, wherein it was agreed, July 25. Aug. 4.
that if the fourteen days mentioned in the second Treaty were not begun, when
this Convention should be delivered to the Ministers in Denmark, that then the
said term should begin within four and twenty hours after the receipt thereof.
And further, that the dissenting King should by the conjoined Forces of England
and the Low Countries, be without any intermission of time compelled to receive
and accept of Peace; this was the sum of this third Convention. But the States
solicitous for Coppenhagen, sent secret Instructions and Orders to their
Officers in Chief, that however affairs went, they should have a care to
conserve the same, and hazard all, rather than suffer it to be lost, or change
Master. Neither were the English ignorant of this mystery, though they
dissembled it, being no less unwilling than the Dutch, to see this considerable
City, the balance of the North, fall into the hands of the aspiring Swede.

King Charles full of scorn and indignation, to see the Law prescribed him by
others, resolved not to treat but by the ordinary way of Commissioners. He did
not absolutely reject the amicable interposition of the English and French, but
would by no means admit of the Dutch, his Enemies and actually in Arms against
him, until the old and usual friendship betwixt the two Nations were renewed.
King Frederick on the other side, professed he would do, much less conclude
nothing, without the Mediators, especially the interposition of the United
Provinces: although he did not deny, but that the Treaty begun and ripened by
them, might be polished and brought to perfection by the Commissioners of both
Kings. Charles would not hear of quitting of Drontheym, without an equivalent,
nor be perseaded to determine any thing about the time of evacuation, or
withdrawing his Army out of Denmark: and being urged to declare himself, grew
angry; protesting though in private, that he being a King, and a Conqueror,
and not inglorious, could not, nor would not suffer himself to be braved and
controulled by two Commonwealths, whereof one had abdicated, and the other
murdered their Prince. He was more in choler against the English than the
other, because he expected more kindness from them than any. These he
reproaches with parricide, and wonders they durst approach him, with their
hands reeking with the blood of their own Sovereign: They should therefore get
them gone with their. Fleet, out of the reach of his Cannon, unless they meant
to try their violence. But this transport of rage and scorn, was but vented
amongst his Confidents. What he said to the Ambassadors themselves in public,
some time after, was of no less consequence or noise. The Plenipotentiaries of
the two Commonwealths, had with communication of the French Ambassador, framed
a Concept or Form, which they called a Project (and which we will call so
hereafter also) upon the Basis of the Rotschild Treaty, according to the
Conventions agreed on at the Hague. This Project or Instrument of Peace, they
first presented to the King of Denmark, who received it, and requiring time to
deliberate upon it, promised an answer. The Ambassadors hereupon went the same
day to the Camp, and having obtained Steno Bielke the Swedish Ambassadors
liberty, Aug. 28.
(for he had been thus long detained prisoner at Coppenhagen) took him with
them, fancying that so great a present would render their coming more
acceptable. Being entered the Kings Lodging, and in the Antichamber, his
Majesty after a little stay came out to them, where Colonel Sidney,
accompanied with all his Colleagues, and the Dutch Ambassadors (for the French
had withdrawn himself) after a profound Reverence, presented him a Roll of
Paper, being the aforesaid Project. The King asked what Papers they were?
Sidney answered, that they contained the desires of the three States. But the
King replied with a stern countenance, if it be the Project for Peace, I will
not receive it: And adding, told the English; as for you, I will not refuse
your Mediation, as long as you continue in the terms of friendship, but will
suffer no Arbitrators: And then turning to the Dutch subjoyned, as for you,
being you are my Enemies, I absolutely refuse to receive you as Mediators: and
to them all, You make your Projects in your Fleets, and I (clapping his hand
upon his Sword) wear mine at my side. Having said this, he left the
Ambassadors, and turning suddenly from them, went to the other side of the
room. The Dutch Ambassadors following him said, we are not your Majesty's
Enemies, and shall ^prove your best friends. The King looking fiercely upon
them, answered, my Ambassadors are unworthily used and you are suffered to go
and come at pleasure. Slingland replied to this, We need fear nothing from a
generous Prince; and the King abruptly, I have no great resentments of
generosity for such Enemies. The Ambassadors would not provoke the offended
King any further, but retiring with a profound and respectful Reverence, left
the presence; where His Majesty having given Bielke his hand to kiss rallied
with his great Officers, most of them having been present at this audience,
upon this unusual rencounter. This indignity of offered the Ambassadors, was
seconded with another, though not so considerable. They were scarce got into
their Coaches, when it was told them, that the Trumpeter who waited upon them,
was thrown into prison. Being surprised with this Novelty, they sent me to the
King to complain of this violence, and breach of the Law of Nations. But the
Trumpeter was immediately released, and his detension excused, having happened
without the Kings knowledge, and done by the Generals command, not with an
intent to affront the Embassy, but because he belonged to the Garrison of
Coppenhagen, which was very true.

The Danes were over-joyed with this ill treatment of the Ambassadors,
fancying that the Dutch would now employ their Forces against the common Enemy,
without any further intermission, as well in revenge of their own injuries, as
to assist their Confederates. In the mean time, Posts were dispatched into all
parts, with the news of this encounter, the circumstances of it being
aggravated, according to the several passions of the interessed. The States
General were most netled at it, as being most concerned, and did not fail to
exaggerate the affront done to the Ambassadors of the three States by their
Ministers in England and France, as an indignity common to them all. But the
Mediators, how ever ill received at their former Audience, did not yet despair
of a desired issue to their negotiation. They knew the King of Sweden was not
wholly averse from Peace (for he had several times professed he had not
espoused his Conquests, provided he did not quit them without a compensation)
but from the manner of compassing it; and he was not against the officious
intervention of Mediators, though he could not endure the Umpirage of their
Arbitration. The Dutch therefore seeing that he would never admit of their
Mediation, unless the ancient Correspondence and Amity betwixt him and them
were first restored, drew a form of reconciliation, which should put an end to
all their former misunderstandings and Controversies, and sending it to
Rosenhaen by the French Ambassador, wrote also to him, that they purposed to
come to the Camp, to perfect the Treaty of Elbing and its Elucidations, and
also to endeavor to accommodate the differences betwixt the two Kings. But
being they perceived that the King of Sweden looked upon the States as parties,
and their Ministers for that reason, as improper for the Negotiation in hand,
and that it seemed not good to His Majesty, to assent to the aforesaid
elucidations, before the difference betwixt himself and the States General were
removed, and the ancient friendship betwixt the two Nations restored: and being
they doubted whether their coming to the Camp at that time might be acceptable
or not, they thought good to send an Instrument of reconciliation, with a
promise that they would sign it as soon as the Peace betwixt the two Kings was
concluded.

The day following the Dutch Ambassadors being informed, that the King had not
only laid by his choler, but that also he desired their return to his Court,
sent me to him, to know whether their coming to the Camp, would be agreeable to
his Majesty or not? Aug. 31.
And whether they should be received according to their dignities, in case they
came? I being returned, and having brought word that all was as they desired,
the Heeren Slingland and Huybert went to the Camp; where being civilly received
by the Courtiers, they were immediately introduced into the Kings presence;
where having first condoled with him for the death of the Duke of Holsteyn his
father in Law, they urged what concerned the illustrations of the Treaty of
Elbing, the Peace betwixt the two Crowns, and the reconciliation betwixt His
Majesty and the States General. They most insisted upon the present Treaty, and
pressed the King, that he would be pleased to declare himself as to the main
heads of it, and grant his Letters of safe conduct for the Danish
Commissioners, in such manner and form as was required. The King answered, that
he desired nothing more than to cultivate the ancient friendship betwixt Sweden
and the United Provinces, and had therefore sent Coyet his Ambassador
Extraordinary into Holland, to represent to the States General themselves, the
candor of his intentions in that particular. As for the Peace, he was not
averse from it, provided it were safe and honorable; only he believed that the
business would advance best, if it were carried on by Commissioners of both
sides, according to the usual method betwixt the Northern Crowns. The
Conference being done, the Ambassadors returned to Coppenhagen, being followed
by Monsieur Terlon the French Ambassador, who brought with him the desired
Pasports for the Danish Commissioners. There was no little difficulty on both
sides, about the titles of the two Kings, to be inserted in the said Pasports.
The Danes refused to acknowledge the new Duke of Schonen, and the Swedes would
not relinquish their acquired honors; but a middle way being proposed by the
Dutch was embraced by both, to wit, that King Charles should only write himself
King of Sweden, and King Frederick only King of Denmark, without any further
additional titles, on either side. The Letters of safe Conduct being granted by
the Swedes, others of the same tenor were required from the Danes, which they
differring to give under pretense of new difficulties, were pressed to it by a
Memorial, delivered to their King by the Commissioners of the two
Commonwealths. In it, they desired His Majesty, Sept. 1.
being the Treaty could not begin, much less be concluded, without the required
Pasports for the Swedes Commissioners, that he would forthwith grant them, lest
the procrastination of the so much wished for Peace, should lie at his door.
The King having received this Writing, and the Swedes safe Conduct with it,
sent also his, writ in Danish, by the Lord Peter Redes one of his Senators, to
the Mediators; with a Declaration, wherein he professed that he would send
Commissioners to perfect the Peace with the King of Sweden, provided the said
King would declare his mind concerning the further Contents of the present
Declaration. But being there were several Clauses in the said Declaration, not
only offensive to the King of Sweden, but also displeasing to the English and
Dutch, besides the stop it was like to put to the Treaty it self, the King was
again earnestly desired both by Word and Writing by the Mediators, that
omitting his late Declaration, its conditions, and restrictions; he would be
pleased to send his Commissioners to the place appointed, instructed with such
powers, and authority, as should be necessary for the happy Conclusion of the
present Negotiation, lest (which they did abhor to think on) they should be
necessitated to judge that he had no thoughts of Peace, being he refused the
means by which it was to be effected. The King seeing himself so sharply
pressed by the Mediators, did at length deliver them a more satisfactory
Declaration, Sept. 5.
whereby he did consent to all that was desired, as far as agreeing with the
Decrees of the three Sates, of the 11/21 of May, 14/24 of July, and the 25/4
Jul./Aug. The French Ambassador went the same day to the Camp, with this
Declaration and Letters of safe Conduct, and though the Swedes desired some
things in them to be changed, that was also assented to. The day following the
Lords Rosenhaen and Bielke came from the Camp, and the Lords Pasberg and Magnus
Hoeg, from the City, and met in the Tents pitched about the midway betwixt the
City and Camp: the Deputies of the three States were likewise assisting at this
Conference, in whose presence the two Kings Commissioners having saluted each
other in their proper idioms professed their mutual desires and endeavors for
peace: the Danes did mainly urge, that the most material things should be first
treated on, and that without delay; and having delivered a Paper to the Swedes,
demanded, that being the King of Denmark had been unexpectedly invaded, even
then when he hoped to enjoy the real effects of the Rotschild treaty; that the
King of Sweden should forthwith restore unto him all the Provinces, Lands,
Forts, Places and movables, which he was obliged to surrender by virtue of the
said Treaty. 2. That a just and equitable satisfaction be made in lieu of all
the vast losses which they had suffered by this last Invasion. 3. That the
evacuation of all those places to be restored should immediately follow. 4. That
all the Danish Captives, and such who had been transported out of the Provinces
subject to Denmark (for the Swedes had pressed and sent some thousands of the
Danish youth into Prussia, Lieftand, and their other remote Conquests) should
be set at liberty.
And lastly, that the King of Denmarks Confederates should be duly included in
this Treaty. The Swedes on the other side, did urge that a more fit place
should be chosen to treat in, and that the parties should agree upon the manner
and form of treating, before they entered upon the business it self. As for the
Mediators, they would not refuse their Amicable intermedling in greater
difficulties; but if they intended to direct or decide matters, by virtue of
their Hagues Conventions, or any other pretext whatsoever, they professed it
could not be, as being a thing without example, and not to be admitted by the
Kings themselves, without a manifest intrusion upon their dignities and honor.
Two days after they met again, and the Treaty of Rotschild was reassumed and
read by the Commissioners of both sides, but being there arose several contests
about its third Article, the explication of it was referred by the Danes to the
Mediators: these taking hold of the occasion, went to the Swedes into their
Tents, and delivering them the projected Treaty which they had formerly
presented their King, desired them to recommend it to His Majesty, and entreat
his speedy answer to it; the Swedes Commissioners received the Treaty though
not without some difficulty, with promise they would present it to His Majesty,
and enquire into his pleasure concerning it.

The Dutch Commissioners seeing that the Days of Cessation from Arms was past
(for they were as well Generals as Ambassadors) wrote to their Admiral Opdam,
that whereas the King of Sweden had positively refused his Declaration for
Peace, and that the King of Denmark had satisfied the desires of the three
States, he should therefore make War upon the Swedes where he could meet with
them, relieve the City, in as much as in him lay with provisions, and hasten De
Ruyter whom they daily expected, with all possible speed. In the last Hagues
Convention, it was agreed; that the Plenipotentiaries of both Commonwealths,
should deliberate and determine amongst themselves, what force and what number
of Ships they thought sufficient to carry on the design in Denmark, and that
the rest, as superfluous and extreme expensive, should be sent to their
respective homes again: the truth was, the Dutch Ambassadors had Orders, not
to dismiss above twenty of their Ships, nor those but with this precaution,
that the remaining should be sufficient to execute the Convention of the twenty
fourth of July. neither should the said Ships be Licensed but with the English,
not before them, and by no means after them, and that the number of the
dismissed Vessels, should by no means exceed that of the English, but if
possible be less. The English ignorant of this, pressed that the precise number
of Ships which were to Winter in Denmark, should be determined, but being the
Dutch seemed unwilling to divide their Fleet as yet, General Montague declared
in the name of his Colleagues, that being the Dutch Commissioners would not
define, according to the Conventions betwixt the two Commonwealths, how many of
their Ships should join with an equal number of English men of War, and how
many of both Fleets should after the said conjunction be returned home, they
were resolved, wanting also provisions for so great a multitude, to send their
whole Fleet back into England. This, he said, they did not with an intent to
depart from the Conventions betwixt the two Commonwealths, or that they had any
new design on foot, but really forced to it through want of necessaries, for
the subsistence of so great a Fleet. The Dutch seemingly endeavored to divert
the English from this resolution, and showing them where and in what manner,
they might procure what provisions they pleased, they besought them, being the
common Interest was to be carried on with common and conjoined power, they
would not withdraw theirs, seeing that could not be without a diminution of the
dignity and credit of the two Commonwealths, a weakening of their Mediation
with the two Kings, and a manifest retarding of the present Negotiation. After
this, several Propositions were made concerning the number of Ships to be left
behind, and the English were invited to leave only fifteen of theirs, whilst
the whole Dutch Fleet continued there until further Orders from the States
General, but yet with this restriction, that they should attempt nothing
without communication of Councels with the English Plenipotentiaries, and being
the English were averse from such odds, and so them a solemn Instrument of
Assurance under their hands and seals; and that one of their Commissioners
should (as a further testimony of their candor and sincerity) not only trust
his person in the English Fleet, but continue in the same, to communicate
Councels with Montague, and deliberate of what should concern the generality of
their affairs, according to emergencies. Sidney did hereupon confess, Sept. 5.
that they had no Orders to send away their Fleet at all, but on the contrary,
commands to observe the Hagues Convention. But Montague, of whose mind
Honniwood and Boon also was, being urged to declare himself, answering very
ambiguously, broke the conference, and next day leaving Coppenhagen, went to
the Sound, and having saluted King Charles at Cronenburg, where he was royally
treated, and all his chief Officers and Captains honored with Presents, he
sailed with his whole Fleet toward England, then full of Commotion and tumult.
The sudden departure of the Admiral, surprised and troubled the minds of all
parties: The Swedes were grieved that the Sound, their Havens, and the Sea, lay
now open to the prevailing Dutch, whilst the Danes interpreting all things in
the worst sense, fancied that Montague was therefore gone, because he would not
now war against the Swedes, now openly refusing Peace; and that all those
Truces extorted hitherto from the States General, had been prolonged in favor
of their Enemies. The Dutch also seemed to condemn this withdrawing of the
English, as happening contrary to their Treaties, and even then when they were
to act by virtue of them. But this was but in outward show, for they did
inwardly rejoice that this Imperious Fleet was gone, and they at length at
liberty to act without control. But Sidney and his Colleagues were more really
trouble at the absence of their Forces, not being ignorant how weak their
disputes were like to prove against an armed Mediation. They were also more
nearly grieved at the Admirals return, as sensible of the great forces he
commanded, and his averseness to the present Government. And truly they were
not deceived, for whilst all England, weary of the tyranny of the Regicides,
prepared to vindicate their Liberties by Arms, requiring tacitly their Prince,
but openly a Free Parliament. Montague being invited and commanded by the King
of Great Britain, into whose grace and favor he had lately been restored,
hastened thither with his Naval forces, to assist those just, however
unfortunate endeavors.

The day after Montague's departure, the Commissioners met again in the Tents,
where the Danes demanded an Answer to their former Proposals, declaring
withal, that their King induced by the desires and persuasions of the
Mediators, had consented to, and would willingly accept of their Project for
Peace, so far forth as it agreed with the Hagues Conventions. They therefore
desired to know whether the King of Sweden had likewise done it, protesting
they would otherwise proceed no further. The English and Dutch Ambassadors
pressed the same, urging the Swedes to declare, what Orders their King had
given, in answer to their just Propositions. Rosenhaen being thus put to it,
replied, that they had indeed delivered their King the Mediators Project,
professing further that His Majesty would omit nothing on His part for the
compassing of an equitable and honorable Peace; to which end he declared, that
the Mediators endeavors should be most acceptable to him, provided they
interposed only when they were required, and that as friends, not Arbitrators;
leaving the disposing of affairs, to the Commissioners of both Kings. This he
said was His Majesty's resolution, who could not choose but wonder, to see that
a Treaty made at the Hague, by the three States, and that without his
knowledge, should be also obtruded upon him, and that without his consent. He
further added, that it was a thing wholly unpractical, that Commonwealths
should prescribe Laws to Kings at pleasure, and never heard of in History, that
Mediators should undertake to press or compel dissenting Princes, even against
their wills, to accept of their fancies and conceptions, as Laws. This
therefore being so, his Majesty could not answer to those kind of proposals:
But if they would treat after the old fashion, and according to the method
hitherto observed betwixt the Northern Crowns, he did not doubt, but the way to
the so much desired Peace, would be plain and easy. Monsieur Terlon the French
Ambassador, arrived there at the same time, and declared to the Mediators,
that the Commissioners had truly and fully told them the Kings sense, in order
to the present transaction, as he himself had understood it from His Majesty's
own mouth at Cronenburg, from whence he came; adding, that he was very angry
with Rosenhaen and Bielke, for receiving their Project without his orders, and
had not pardoned them, if he had not mainly interceded for them.

The Dutch Ambassadors being returned to Coppenhagen, sent Orders to De Ruyter
and Everson, to act with all their Forces both by Sea and Land, against the
Swedes, and make war upon them, wherever they met with them. The next day they
gave the English and French Ministers notice of what they had done, which could
not at all (as they affirmed) retard the Peace, which was (being it could not
be procured otherwise) to be thus sought for according to the intention of the
three States. In the mean time, they persuaded them to continue their
endeavors, and that with joint advice, to which also they would contribute
their utmost. As for the meetings in the Tents, they declared they could not,
and that for weighty reasons, come thither any more, until it appeared that the
Swedes did accept of the States Generals Mediation, and would receive their
Ambassadors according to their dignity. The rest of the Mediators acknowledged
that the Dutch had done nothing contrary to the Covenants betwixt them, and
promised that they would not act as Mediators any more, but conjoyntly with
them.

But the Treaty did not break off for all this: The English and French after
Communication with the Dutch, meet the Swedes again; who propounded Rotschild
or Elzineur, as fitter and more convenient places to treat in, which the Danes
did not only oppose, but the Dutch also absolutely reject, being unwilling to
remove so far from the City or Sea. Two days after, Sidney and Terlon returned
to the Camp, to see whether the King of Sweden had yet given any Answer either
to the Danes Demands, or to the Propositions of the three States, but in vain,
for the Swedes Commissioners did plainly tell them, that it would be but lost
labor to insist any more upon this way, for the Danish Demands were couched in
such general terms, that it would be to no purpose to Answer them so; and as
for the Project proposed by the Mediators, they positively declared, that the
King would hazard all, and venture his own life, rather than to submit to the
dictates of others, being he could not do it, without infringing his honor,
and his reputation. Lastly, they protested he desired nothing more then Peace,
provided it were not imposed upon him, and proposed, (being the Tents were no
fit place to treat and meet in, by reason of the cold and approaching Winter)
that they should all go to Rotschild, Elzineur, or Fredericksburg, as more
proper for so celebrious an Assembly. The Mediators seeing the Swedes
immovable and resolved, Sept. 11, 12, 13.
desired the King of Denmark, that he would be pleased not only to continue the
Treaty, which they did not yet despair of perfecting, but also to change the
place for one of those already proposed, as more convenient. But the King
replied, that this could not be, before the King of Sweden had declared, as
himself had done, that he would accept of that form which the Mediators had
presented, and given his answer to the five aforementioned Articles. The
Ambassadors were not well pleased with this Declaration of the Kings,
especially the English and French, who seemed now to doubt whether of the two
Kings was most refractory, or ought to be esteemed least desirous of Peace.
Hereupon the Ambassadors went again to Court, and pressed the King so far,
that he was content, (though with much urging) to join the Lord Gesdorf, his
chief Minister of State, to his other Commissioners; but upon condition, that
the States Generals Fleet and Landforces, should continue to prosecute the War
against the Swedes, until the Treaty were brought to a desired conclusion. And
thus the Treaty was reassumed, but the place of treating was not changed, only
the Tents were taken away, and Houses made of Plancks, of better proof against
the extremity of the Weather, raised in their places. The Commissioners did
indeed sometimes meet, though their Conventions proved wholly fruitless, these
contests for Peace being necessitated to give way to the more clamorous and
more severe disputes of War.

During these traverses and treaties, Coppenhagen continued blocked up by Sea
and Land. The Swedes had lain before the Haven the whole Summer, with four,
sometimes five Ships, so that the City labored with the want of all things,
especially fresh Meats and Firing. The Dutch Fleets lay useless in the Great
Belt, kept up by Cessations or contrary Winds, and could not help them; whilst
the English lying betwixt the Town and the Island of Ween as Neutrals, did not
assist them; until the General being advertised by me, who was newly come from
Court, and had seen the miseries thereof (a few Herrings and a piece of salt
Beef, being the best regalie at the Kings Table) did send a Vessel fraught with
all manner of Fowl and fresh Meats, for the Kings children. July 7, 17.
The Court moved with the English Generals munificence, sent two Senators in an
English man of War, which I procured them from him, to complement and thank
him. They were received by the Admiral, with all sort of honor befitting their
qualities, to whom, after the usual expressions of gratitude and kindness, they
represented and recommended the afflicted condition of their affairs; and lest
they might be thought to yield in civility to the generous General, they
returned his favor with an Honorary of Rhenish Wine. After this, the Citizens
received several considerable refreshments from other parts. The Ambassadors,
both English, French, and Dutch, did ordinarily reside in the City, but had
their provisions from abroad, by permission from the Swedes, under which
pretense their servants carried great quantities into the Town, the surplus
whereof they sold at good rates to the eager buyers. The Swedes were not
ignorant of this kind of Commerce, but connived at it, as sharing in the
profits; Sept. 7, 8.
for their Officers by this means got moneys for the Cattle, which the said
Servants bought from them in great numbers, upon condition they would suffer
them to pass with them into the City in safety. But this traffic ended with
the coming of the Dutch fleet, which arrived at Coppenhagen the second day
after Montagues departure, who from the beginning of June to this time, had
lain betwixt Ween and Zeland, as if he would cover the Sound on this side, as
he had formerly done it on the other, when he hovered betwixt Lap and Koll. De
Ruyter the day after his arrival, sailed toward the Sound, and having blocked
up the Haven of Lanskrown continned there. There lay two men of War under
Cronenburg, which he defigned to ruin, but his Fireships failing him, he
attempted them no further, the loss which he might suffer in the enterprise,
not countervailing the victory. It seemed likewise too hazardous, to enter the
Haven of Lanskrown, though the ruin of the Swedish Fleet which lay in it
seemed infallible, the difficulty was to get out again through so many Volleys,
which the Castle and Batteries on shore, might thunder upon them, especially if
the Wind proved contrary. Besides, it may reasonably be thought that the Dutch
design was not to destroy, but to humble the Swedes. However it was, they
contented themselves with lying before the Haven at present, and shutting up
the Enemy within his receptacles. But lest the Fleet might seem to do nothing
at all, Colonel Killegrew, who commanded the Land forces at present on board,
Sept. 21.
was sent with 1200 commanded men, 11 ships of War, and 7 Fluyts, under the
direction of Cornelius Everson Rear-Admiral of Zeland, to intercept Keucks.
King Frederick had been advertised by his Spies, that there were not above 200
men in the Town, and the Works on the side next the Sea were open, which was
true; But the Swedes having notice of this Design before hand, had filled the
place with armed men. King Charles was come thither also in person, and all
things were in a readiness to receive these new guests. Killegrew knowing
nothing of these preparations, was advanced within a League and a half of the
Town, with intention to fail up close to it, but a sudden calm preventing him,
he was forced to expect the day, which discovered the Enemies countenance and
numbers, and posture; so that finding, that instead of surprising them, he
should be inevitably lost himself, he commanded his men, (four hundred whereof
had been put into Boats with design to land) back to the Fleet, which was no
sooner done, but the Enemies bodies of Horse which had lurked in the Wood
appeared, as also the danger they had infallibly run into, if the Wind had
continned blowing an hour longer. The Danes had at the same time surprised
Udstead a Town in Schonen, which Killegrew having notice of, had Orders
likewise to hasten thither to their Succor, which he did, but they had
dislodged before he could get to them, for the place was not very tenable, and
the Enemy made head on all sides against them. Having therefore met them by the
way, they returned all together to Coppenhagen, with a purpose to land the
Auxiliaries, which had thus long languished on Shipboard: but they were much
surprised to see the Citizens refuse them entry, who fearing peradventure such
numerous ayds, told them plainly, they were strong enough to defend themselves.
This refusal, did much cool the Dutch kindness toward them, who not examining
whether their diffidence were just or not, took it ill to be denied any thing
from them, who owed them for all they enjoyed. Besides, the Land soldiers were
hereby subjected to sicknesses, as being out of their Element, and obliged by
this stay, to consume those Provisions which were only designed for the Seamen.
Neither were the Danes content to defend themselves only, they designed also
the recovery of Cronenburg, which had probably been effected, if not discovered
by a miracle.

The men of Elzineur were the contrivers of this Plot, who having gained some
of the Garrison, thought the Victory secure. Seven or eight hundred men worked
daily at the New Fortifications, and the Country was summoned to carry Wood,
and Fuel for the Provision of the Castle. The design was to arm those Car-men,
who were nigh fourscore strong, with short Swords and Pistols, who were ordered
to overturn a Wagon or two in the very entry of the Castle, and thereupon to
call their Companions to their aid, as if it had been done by accident. Being
come together, they were to fall immediately upon the Guard at the Gate, whilst
the Townsmen, who were ready in their Houses, should hasten to their
assistance, and the aforesaid Workmen be invited with their Spades and
Mattocks, instead of other arms, to their liberty, and to the spoil. The plot
being thus laid, the Contrivers and chief Actors in it, who had given the Court
intelligence of it, were mainly encouraged by promises thence, and the glory of
Delivering their Country, to dare any thing; which they had infallibly put in
execution, if they had not been strangely discovered. The man that carried
their Letters to Coppenhagen, and brought them their Orders and directions
thence, had passed several times with a little Boat, as if he had gone a
fishing along the shore, betwixt the Town and City. He had often slipped by the
men of War undiscerned, which was no hard matter, considering the distance they
lay from the shore, the largeness of the Sea, and the favor of the night. It
happened, that in going by, he saw the Admirals Longboat put off, which
frightened him into a fancy that it was after him, and fearing to be taken, he
threw his Packet of Letters with a Stone tied at them into the Sea, and made
away with all the have he could. But when he saw that the Swede had taken
another Course, as not minding him, he then began to condemn his vain fear and
precipitation; however glad, that his Letters which the Sea had swallowed, were
not fallen into the Enemies hands. But he was deceived, for the string that tied
the Packet to the stone being slipped, or broke, the Letters floated, and were
carried by the Tide, which in the Streights of Denmark, N. 6.
as also the whole Baltic Sea, waits upon the Wind, to Lanskrown; where being
taken up by a Soldier that accidentally walked upon the shore, they were
brought to the Governor; and so the whole design discovered, and prevented, by
the punishment of such of its Contrivers, that did not save themselves by a
timely retreat.

The Plot to surprise Malmuyen one of the Chief Towns of Schonen, was no less
odly discovered, than this of Cronenburg, the Messengers that were employed by
the Conspirators, used to hide their Letters in a Wood, in a hole covered with
Earth and Sods, where they also found their Answers; so that the business was
come to some ripeness, when an unhappy Fox ranging that way, and smelling at
that new Earth, scarp'd it up in search of somewhat to prey upon. This being
observed by an accidental Passenger, who curious to see what the industrious
beast was doing, found the Letters which contained and detected the whole
progress of the conjuration. I cannot tell how truly I have related the
particulars of these Conspiracies, though they were thus told me by several
persons of credit: but being I dare not affirm them in all their particulars
though they are most true in the general (as the rest of this Relation for
undoubted certainties) the Reader may take the same liberty in believing what
he pleases, as I did in writing of them.

The King of Denmark having at length obtained permission to employ the Dutch
Auxiliaries, thought fit to undertake somewhat of consequence before Winter.
Having therefore got together all the small Vessels and Ships of burden which
the City could afford, de Ruyter was by consent of the States Ambassadors,
sent with all his Fleet toward Holsteyn, with Order to embark the Land-Army
that was there, and carry it according to such directions as he had or should
receive. Whilst he was on his way thiether, accompanied with the prayers and
wishes of the Citizens for his good success, Admiral Opdam, who had kept the
Sea the whole Summer, came to Coppenhagen, October. 26.
bringing with him a great number of Vessels laden with Fuel and other
Provisions. His stay there was not long, so that having taken his leave of the
King (who regaled him with a Present of three thousand pounds, and three
hundred pounds yearly for his son, in consideration of his eminent services)
and of the City which he had saved; he passed the Sound the second time,
discharging his Cannon at the Castles as he sailed by, Nov. 4.
and after twelve Months absence, arrived safe in Holland, where having given
the States a summary Report of his actions, and negotiations in the North, he
received (though not without some opposition) the public thanks of the
Assembly, for his prudent and valorous Conduct.

King Charles was gone to Nykopping in Falster, where he continued some time,
to be nearer Pomeranta, where the Confederates domineered at pleasure, and the
better to observe the motion of the Dutch Fleet. Colonel Sidney and Sir Robert
Honniwood, as also the French Ambassador, not yet despairing of Peace, went
thither to him; which the Dutch being looked upon as Enemies, refused to do:
but yet that it might appear how desirous they were of an Accommodation, they
dispatched me with Letters and Messages, intimating so much to His Majesty. The
Plenipotentiaries being arrived at Nykopping, began to treat again, but being
nothing could be concluded without the Dutch, it was thought good to invite
them also thither, which was done by Letters from the Court, from the
Ambassadors, and from me, by the Kings order and the other Ambassadors
entreaty. They had also Passports sent them from the King, and a Convoy, with
some of His Majesty's servants to wait upon them and serve them by the way, so
that there appeared now more hopes than ever, of composing these ruinous
differences. Being come to Nycopping; they were lodged and defrayed by the
Kings Order, and the Treaty was reassumed with no less expectation, than
seeming propension to a Peace on all sides. But these flourishes quickly
vanished, for the King Persisting in his former opinion, and the Ambassadors
not departing from theirs, there was nothing concluded. October. 25.
The Swedes Commissioners having exhibited some previous demands to the
Mediators, declared, that they must be first granted, before they could come
to the main business of Peace. These were, that the three States should first
jointly and generally, and then severally, and apart, stand good and be bound
for the performance of the Treaty with Denmark. That they should undertake,
that the War which the Emperor and Electour of Brandenburg had raised in
Germany, and did actually wage against the Swedish Provinces there, in favor
of Denmark, should be laid aside with all speed, and a plenary restitution made
of all they had taken therein; and that they should become Sureties that the
King of Sweden should not be disturbed for the future, by any, contrary to the
German Instrument of Peace. Further, in case the aforesaid Enemies should
refuse to restore what they had violently usurped, that then the three States
should compel them to it by force, and interpose and engage, for the Swedes
future defense and fecurity in those Provinces, which appertained to them.
Lastly, these things being thus granted, the King of Sweden would then
condescend (in favor of the three States) to a Peace with Denmark, and that
upon the Basis of the Rotschild Treaty, taken in its right and genuine sense,
which could not otherwise be done. The Mediators answered to these Demands,
that the three States would become sureties for, and engage themselves to
assert what ever should be agreed upon betwixt the Kings. That (as soon as the
Peace was made in Denmark) they would use their utmost endeavors to compose
the Wars in Germany, and oblige the Emperor and Elector of Brandenburg, to
restore those places they had taken from the Swedes. That the King of Sweden
should for his part, in the interim consent to a pacification according to the
Rotschild Treaty, save that the second Article of it should be so interpreted,
that either, and both of the Kings, should be at liberty to Treat and make
Leagues with any Prince, or Commonwealth whatsoever, for the mutual defense of
themselves and States. That all dubious expressions in the said Treaty, should
be explained or expunged, to impede new disputes. That the Castle, City, and
Territory of Drontkeym, should be restored to the King of Denmark, in
consideration of all those vast losses which he had suffered by this last
invasion; And lastly, that there should be a time prefixed for the removal of
the Swedish Garrisons and Armies, out of all the Isles and Provinces of
Denmark, and that in all other things and particulars, the Treaty of Rotschild
should stand in full force and vigor. They made also other propositions,
concerning a free passage through the Sound, about removing of
misunderstandings betwixt the Swedes and United Provinces, the Ratification of
the Treaty of Elbing, the Peace with Poland, and of restoring the old
friendship, betwixt the King of Sweden and the Elector of Brandenburg. And
these were the Proposals made on the King and Mediators sides, but his Majesty
seemed the most refractory, not that he was averse from Peace, for he had too
many Enemies to struggle with, but lest he might be thought to desire it for
fear of War, and even then when he was most threatened.

In the mean time, the days were passed in Feasting and Hunting, the King
having then invited the Mediators to those diversions. His Majesty was at Table
with the said Ambassadors, when he received the news of the Enemies Fleet and
Land-Armies being at Sea; neither did he therefore quit his Guests, but
concealing the matter, continued his feasting till late in the night. The next
morning betimes, he surrounded the Island, viewed its Forts, and left good
Guards at all its Entries and Avenues, in case the Enemy should attempt to land
there; but being advertised by quick Posts, and manifold Beacons, which he had
ordered upon all the heights in the Country, that the Fleet was entered the
Creat Belt, he flew with all the Forces he could get together to Corseur, a Sea
Town in Zeland: Being come thither, he perceived that the Enemies design was
upon Funen. He therefore sent Field-Marshal Steynboch thithea, with Orders to
the Prince of Sutlsbach, to quit the Island, and transport himself and all his
Forces (leaving only a Garrison in Newburg) into Zeland. But these Orders came
too late, for they did not only want shipping in Funen, but the whole Straight
was covered with the Enemies numerous Fleet. The King seeing this, dispatched an
Express to His Admiral, to hasten thither with the Fleet which lay in the Haven
of Lanskrown, with all possible speed. He being upon the Point to hoist sail,
received contrary commands to stay, which were again followed by other Orders
to come away; and yet others in the neck of them not to stir, and all in one
and the same day: so uncertain he was what to determine. One while he resolved
to fight them at Sea, but finding the odds too great, would pass over into
Funen in person. He fretted to see the Enemy brave it in his presence, and
could not suffer that his Army should engage in his absence. But he had no
shipping ready, and the Enemy were absolutely Masters at Sea, so that it was
impossible for him either to fight them, or join with his own Troops.

And thus this brave Prince, being hurried betwixt the passions of hope, and a
generous fear, was forced against his Nature and practice, to become a
Spectator, whilst others played his part, but with their own Fortune.

THE HISTORY Of the Late Wars in Denmark, BETWIXT The Two Northern Crowns.
The Third Part.
FIeld-Marshal Schack, Commander of the Danish Forces, had embarked at Kiel in
Holstein. His Army consisted of Eighteen hundred Horse, Six hundred Foot, Nov.
6.
and forty Companies (though not exceeding two thousand five hundred men) of
Dutch Auxiliaries. The Germans, Polish, and Brandenburger ayds marched by Land,
under the Conduct of Field-Marshal Ebersteyn, toward Middlefare, where they
were to pass over into Funen, some ships of War having been sent thither to
facilitate their transport. Whilst they were on their way by Land, the Sea
Forces advanced with more ease and speed, and being past Langlands Point, were
come within sight of Newburg. They cast anchor in the mouth of the Haven, and
resolved at a Council of War, to endeavor to land there. Lieutenant General
Alefeld, was sent with two thousand men to execute this design, but most of
the. Boats which carried the Soldiers, having lost their way in the dark, and
being scattered and dispersed by the ill-Weather, the Wind blowing high and
contrary, they returned again to the Fleet, without attempting what they were
sent for. And truly it was well they did not, for the descent there was, by
reason of the Enemies frequent Forts and numerous troops, very difficult and
hazardous; As soon as the day appeared, they weighed Anchor again, and leaving
Newburg coasted the shore as far as Cartmund. When they were come near the
Town, which is seated at the mouth of the River Carta, from whence it has its
denomination, and had viewed it well, the place seemed very abordable, in so
much that it was unanimously resolved to try their fortune there, with hopes of
better success than at Newburg. The Boats therefore were immediately filled
with Soldiers, and commanded toward the shore. The Danes had the Van, being
no less eager of the honor, than desirous of performing their own business:
But being they did not advance as fast as was required, and that the Boats, by
reason of their loading and the shallowness, could not move further; Colonel
Killegrew, Sir Walter Vane, (Monsieur Buat, who was with the Danes in the
Vanguard and first quitted his Shallop) Sir John Skeleton, and the rest in
Killegrew's Boat, leapt into the Water, being breast-high, and being followed
by all the Netherland Alixiliartes, made toward Land. The Town gave and
received several Vollies of shot as they waded along. Some few Swedish Horse
advanced into the Sea, but were easily repelled and beat back. The Cannon from
the Ships thundering from all parts incessantly upon the Shore, the Bridge, and
the neighboring Town, did much facilitate the landing, by forcing the Enemy,
unable to resist its violence, to retire. The Town was also possesed that
night, being abandoned by the Swedes, and the rest of the Army was landed with
all imaginable speed, though much time was spent in getting the Horse on shore.
Shack hearing nothing of Ebersteyns advance, continued at Cartmund for some
days, until the Army being fully refreshed, it was resolved, they should march
toward Odensea, the chief Town of the Isle, and seated in the middle of it:
But their motion was but slow, by reason they had the Enemy in Front, who had
also possessed all the Streights and narrow Passages in their way.

The Prince of Sulsbach was General of the Swedish Forces in the Island. His
Army was not great, not exceeding five thousand effective Soldiers (which were
increased to that number by the additional Foot which the King had caused to be
conveyed over by night, to reinforce his Troops there, when he saw it
impossible to transport them out of the Island) but it was high in reputation;
and yet he could not hinder the Enemies landing at Cartmund, or thought it less
hazardous to fight them afterward, than to expose his men to the certain
danger of their Cannon. And yet he was censured, because he did not engage
either then, or when they were landed, or at any time before their conjunction,
though he could not avoid it afterward. His chief care now was, to hinder the
uniting of the two Armies, and therefore he had planted himself in those
advantageous Streights, betwixt Cartmund and Odensea. But hearing that
Ebersteyn was likewise landed, contrary to his expectation, and the opinion he
had of those Troops which he had ordered to oppose him, he changed his mind:
for fearing he might be himself enclosed betwixt two such powerful adversaries,
he marched with all his Fo^ces to Newburg, where he posted himself, with a
resolution to receive and fight the Enemy in his advantages. Eberstein had
passed that arm of the Sea which divides Holstein from Funen at Middlefare,
without the loss of one single man. He had four Imperial Regiments, as many
Brandenburgers, six hundred Polish horse, six hundred Danish Dragoons, and a
thousand horse of the same Nation with him. All these were wafted over in three
days and nights time, in thirteen Boats (the Troopers holding and training
their Horses by the bridles, whilst they sworn after them) without any
opposition at all. There were indeed two men of War, and two other armed
Vessels appointed to meet Ebersteyn at Middlefare, and also to transport those
troops that were in the Islet of Alsen into Funen, but being detained by
contrary Winds, they were forced to the Isle of Aroe, where they had
intelligence of some Swedes ships laden with prey and spoil, that lay in an
Inlet by Alsen, which they took with their long Boats, and plundered without
resistance: the Swedes which were in Middlefare, and in the Forts and trenches
along the shore, quitted them contrary to their custom, and the wonted bravery
of that Nation, at first sight of the Enemy; and leaving above thirty pieces of
Cannon behind them, and other warlike provisions, retired; leaving an
uninterrupted passage for the pursuers to follow. Ebersteyn wondering he had got
over so easily, was afraid the Enemy had laid some ambush for him, which made
him move slowly, so that he was seven days in marching so many miles to
Odensea, where he found Schack and Killegrew, who had been there three days
before him, and waited his coming. All the Confederate Forces being now joined,
amounted to near nine thousand, so that surmounting the Swedes in numbers, they
resolved to go search them out, and give them battle where ever they could find
them: there was some little dispute betwixt the two Generals about the
precedence. Ebersteyn pretended it as eldest Field-Marshal, and Schack would
not submit, being more immediately commissioned for the present expedition. It
was therefore agreed, that each should command his own men, and lead the
Avantguard by turns. The next day they broke up, and Ebersteyn having the Van
they marched four miles; the day following they came to Maselboom, Nov. 14/29.
a mile and a half from Newburg, and on the fourteenth, saw the Enemy drawn up
in Battle-array expecting of them: the Right Wing of the Swedes Army,
consisting of ten Squadrons of Horse, was lead by the Prince himself, four
whereof composing the Reserve, being commanded by Major General Beteker, one
hundred Dragoons closed this Wing on the right hand, and the Front was
strengthened with three pieces of Cannon; the left Wing equalled this in
strength and order, conducted by Lieutenant General Horn, and the Count of
Waldec: But the main Body, consisting of four Battalions of Foot, though not
exceeding fourteen hundred in all, and five pieces of Ordnance, were commanded
by Marshal Steynbock, sent thither to assist the young Prince, with his more
aged Councels. The Town and a Wood, covered the Army behind, so that their Rear
was secure, and a long continued Ditch with some water in it, where the ground
was lowest, interposed betwixt their Front, and the larger Campania: there were
some Avenues in the aforesaid Ditch, through which the Bodies of Horse did
move, when they engaged on either side. Ebersteyn seeing the Enemies order put
also his Army into Battalia, Major General Quast commanded his Right Wing,
consisting of the Imperial Regiments, some few Poles, and a Company of Danish
Dragoons; Count Vander Not, with his own Regiment and part of Colonel
Mathew's, made up the Reserve: the Danish Infantry being but two small Bodies,
composed the main Battle, being otherwise strengthened with fourteen pieces of
Cannon; the Left Wing made up of Brandenburgers, Poles, one troop of
Ebersteyn's Regiment, and a few Dragoons, was increased by five Dutch
Companies, under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Aquila: the rest of
Ebersteyn's own, and Konenberg's whole Regiment, were appointed for Reserves.
Marshal Schack had by this time also put his Army into Battalia, his Right Wing
being commanded by Lieutenant General Alefeld, and his left by Major General
Tramp: the Netherland Auxiliaries, made up of English, French, and Dutch
Companies, divided into three Regiments, and lead by their three Colonels,
Killegrew, Allowa, and Metteren, composed the main Battle. Killegrew commanded
these in chief, and the rest of the Officers, excepting Allowa who was absent
by sickness, and Sir Walter Vane, who worthily discharged the Office of Major
General, marched with their several Companies, and in their several places.
Marshal Ebersteyn had chosen the Left Wing, because he would be opposite to the
Enemies right, which Shack observing, drew up his troops on his right, so that
both Armies thus united, made but one, though a very irregular Front, which was
occasioned through Ebersteyn's have to engage, and the disorders which usually
arrive in such encounters. The Armies being thus ranged, they met and fought
with no less desires than bravery, and the Battle proved doubtful as well as
hot, until the Netherlanders, the rest being broken and disordered, turned the
day, by only keeping firm, and snatched the Victory out of the Swedes hands.
Ebersteyn had before the Battle began, sent four hundred Horse to observe the
Enemies order and countenance, who advancing too far, were rudely received and
beaten back to their main Body. In the mean time, the Eberstenians move on, and
marching on to the Swedes Ditch, endeavored with great courage to beat them
from it, but being as bravely received, they were forced back with great loss,
all the Officers of Ebersteyns own Regiment, being either slain or wounded.
Neither was Shacks fortune better, all his Horse being broken, and routed, so
that if the Swedes had not been hindered by their own Ditch to pursue their
advantage at once, by hindering the Enemy to rally behind the Dutch Foot, they
had infallibly got the Day. Killegrew seeing the Horse beaten, marched up in
good order to the Ditch, and firing continually by Ranks as he advanced, forced
the Swedes Foot to quit it, and retire further into the Field behind them. The
Swedes endeavored to make head again, but being again disordered, were
charged, broken, and cut in pieces by the Polish and Danish Horse, who were
returned to the fight. Alefeld had by this rallied his Troops again, and
bringing them on a fresh, passed also the Ditch, and charging the Swedes Left
Wing of Horse, routed and pursued them to the Walls of the Town. The Prince
having lost all his Foot, and weakened by the flight of his Left Wing, seeing
no hopes of recovering the Day, retired also in reasonable good order into the
City, however pursued by the Victorious Enemy. The Field being cleared, and
plundered, and the night growing on apace, the Danish Generals encamped as near
the Town as was possible. The next morning; they put they Armies into Battle in
sight of the Enemy, and having planted their Cannon, threatened a sudden and
general Assault, unless they surrendered. The Swedes seeing the Enemies
preparations, sent out Commissioners to treat with them, and a Trumpeter to De
Ruyter, who continually thundered upon them with vollyes of Cannon, to desire
him to desist, for they would deliver up the Town upon reasonable terms. But
all mention of Conditions being rejected by the insulting Victors, they were
forced to Deliver up themselves and the Place at discretion. Lieutenant General
Horn marched out with three thousand Horse, which as also the Prisoners and
Colors which had been taken in the Fight, he presented to the Confederate
Generate Generals, who divided and distributed them amongst their several
Regiments: the Officers, the Town, the spoil and all, fell into the Conquerours
hands, together with fourscore Cornets, and eight and twenty Foot-Colours.
Amongst the prisoners of note, were Horn himself, and the two Major Generals
Weyer and Waldec. The Duke of Weymer, and the Count Koningsmark had been taken
in the Battle the day before; there were also ten Colonels besides the
inferior Officers, and some other persons of quality. The slain on the Swedes
side amounted to well nigh two thousand, besides Major General Beteker, and
some other lesser Officers. The Danes lost only their Colonel Booth, one
Lieutenant Colonel, one Major, and three Captains of Horse. Piazenzewski the
Commander in Chief of the Poles, died in this Field of Honor, as also Captain
Hemmema a Gentleman of Friezland, the only Officer amongst the Netherlanders.
The number of the slain soldiers did not exceed five hundred in all, neither
did this so signal a Victory and the fruits of it, the Island of Funen, cost
the Danes any more; which seemed in some sort, to recompense the manifold
losses they had hitherto sustained. The two Swedish Generals the Prince of
Sulsbach and Marshal Steynbock escaped the danger, for being retired into the
Town, and in an impossibility of either defending the place or being relieved,
and seeing they had but that one night of reprieve, they thought it more
reasonable to hazard an escape, than submit to a certain surrender. They
therefore exposed themselves in a small Boat to the mercy of the Sea, and
escaped by favor of the darkness, and nimbleness of their Rowers, through all
the Enemies Fleet, and came early the next morning to Corseur, where they in
person, the only remains of so great a Defeat, were the Messengers of the Kings
loss, and their own misfortunes.

The Danes heightened with this success, would by all means transfer the War
into Zeland, terrified as they supposed, with the late loss. But De Ruyter
pretending the hasty approach of Winter, the danger of the Ice if it should
freeze, and the want of Provisions in his Fleet, refused to help them over, and
however they demonstrated to him that it was but a business of a few hours, yet
he would not be persuaded to assist them any further; the States peradventure
thinking they had done enough, if they could oblige the Swedes to a Peace, not
ruin them: for they could not choose but remember the Danes former exacting
upon them in the Sound, and the dangerous growth of the House of Austria in
Germany. The Confederate Army was therefore dispersed into Winter quarters.
Ebersteyn returned with his Troops into Holstein: Schack and the Dutch
Auxiliaries continued in Funen, and De Ruyter sailed to Lubeck, to re-victual
his Fleet. The Holland, the Norway, and the Island Fleets, laden with an
immense quantity of all sorts of provisions, arrived at the same time in the
Belt; and joining with De Ruyter, sailed with him to Coppenhagen, where he was
received with joy by the Citizens, and with much favor by the King, who
honored him with a great Chain of Gold, Dec. 15.
and a Meddal beset with Diamonds, as a mark of the esteem his Majesty had for
the service he had rendered him.

The Mediators having had notice of what had passed in Funen, went to
Elzineur, fancying that the Swedes would after so great a blow be more
inclinable to Peace, but they were deceived; for the King, lest he might be
thought to yield with his misfortune, seemed no less constant now than he had
been before; and yet they gained so much, that an Act of Redintegration of
September twenty nine, was passed, whereby all hostilities, unkindnesses, and
controversies should be removed; and the old, sincere, faithful and perpetual
friendship, be renewed and restored betwixt the King and States. The Treaty of
Elbing and its elucidations were also agreed upon; but with this restriction,
that the said Treaty should not be binding and of force, before the Peace
betwixt the Northern Crowns were concluded. But before we go further, it will
not be from the purpose, to give the curious Reader, a short account of this
Treaty of Elbing, being we shall have occasion to mention it so often
hereafter, and that it will be so much insisted upon in the following Narrative.

The States General interessing themselves in the Wars of Poland, and
apprehending the Swedes conquests in that Kingdom, had sent their Ambassadors
into Prussia, to secure their own traffic, and mediate, if possible, a peace
betwixt them and the Pole. Their reception there was not ill, though their
entertainment by the way had been but course, for they had been detained some
days at Lowenburg against their wills, though under pretexts of honor, their
complaints being only paid with excuses, and a pretended mistake of the
Commander, though he had shown the Chancellor Oxenstern's order for what he
did. These Ambassadors were followed by a great Fleet, under the Command of
Admiral Opdam, who in order to the League quaranty with Denmark, for defense of
the Commerce of the Baltic Sea, and particularly for the City of Dantsick,
came and Anchored before the said Town. This way of Negotiation produced the
Treaty of Elbing, which renewed them of the years 1640, and 1645. confirmed the
liberty of traffic without augmenting the impositions, and included the City
of Dantsick with a reserve of their fidelity to their own Prince. But Dantsick
waved this inclusion, under pretense of Loyalty to the King and Commonwealth of
Poland, but more truly, because they not only feared an incorporation with
Sweden, but also desired no Superior stronger at Sea than themselves, which
would infallibly follow, if Prussia continued in the Swedes power: For these
and other reasons, discovered in the context of this Relation, the whole Treaty
continued hitherto unratified. But to return from whence we digressed, the said
Treaty being now agreed upon, many prisoners on both sides, were as a testimony
of their renewed Amity, set at liberty, and the Dutch Ambassadors are now
received as Mediators, without any scruple or exception. For all this, they
could not bring the business to an absolute Accommodation, Winter was near, and
there was no appearance that the Swedes would change quarters in so rude a
season, and therefore the King having left the Command of his Forces and the
Isles, to the Prince of Sulsbach, and bid adieu to the Mediators, after he had
feasted them, he passed over into Schonen, and went thence in have to
Gottenburg to be present at the Assembly of the States of Sweden, which he had
commanded to meet him there.

The Mediators seeing the King gone, and perceiving that nothing would be done
in his absence, returned all to Coppenhagen, where the time for the most part
was spent in jollity and feasting. Neither had the Citizens any great cause to
complain, being abundantly furnished from Holland, Island, Norway, Jutland,
Holsteyn, Lubeck, and other places of the Baltic Sea, with all manner of
provisions. The Soldiers, especially the Dutch, both Sea and Land Militia,
were furnished with stockings, shoes, shirts, and coats, against the present
cold, so that the City had rather the appearance of a place that triumphed over
their Enemies, than of a besieged Fortress. The Dutch, as also the Danish
Ships, were all within the Haven in surety, being frozen up, in so much that
the Mariners who still lodged on Board, were forced every day to break the Ice
round about them, which secured them as well against the surprises, as other
designs of the Enemy. All the Marshes and Waters about the City were frozen,
so that the whole Campania was become passable and open, which induced many of
the Besiegers to refuge themselves in the Town, pretending the unsufferableness
of the cold, and the hard duty they were put to: King Frederick had also caused
Billets to be thrown about the Camp, inviting all such as would come to his
service, with promise of present reward, and good quarters. He likewise ordered
ten Ryxdollers to be given to every fugitive Trooper in hand, provided he came
with his Horse and Arms; and five to every Footman that came accoutred; and
certainly, if his moneys had held out, the number of these Run-aways, which
were near an hundred, would have amounted to a far greater. Most of these
fellows were Germans, which obliged the Swedish Generals, to remove all the
German Regiments and Troops further from the Town, and put Swedes and Fins in
their places, as men of better principles and fidelity.

The Summer and Fall were past, without any remarkable action betwixt the City
and Camp, both parties seeing no appearance of doing good upon each other;
being content to keep within their holds. But the Winter being advanced, and
the Ice having rendered the ways and fields passable, they skirmished,
attacked, and made sallies upon each other, with various success and fortune.
In November, the Danish Horse fell upon a Guard of the Swedes, betwixt the Town
and their Camp, which they surprised, killing and taking above sixty of them.
The Month following, thirty stout fellows of the Garrison slipped out in a Boat,
and by favor of the night, landed near the Paper mills, a Dutch mile from the
City: they hid themselves in a Wood all the following day, but the darkness
being come, they went to Fredericksburg, a pleasant and sumptuous House of the
Kings, and breaking open the Stables, took away eight and twenty good horses,
belonging to the King of Sweden, and mounting them, got safe with them, for all
the Enemies pursuit, to Coppenhagen: the lucky temerity of a Lieutenant, being
one of the aforementioned Fugitives, was no less remarkable; who stealing out
of the Town by night, passed all the Enemies stations undiscovered, and coming
to Rotschild, surprised the Guards there, and brought some twenty Horse with
him back into the Town; these small successes did much heighten the besieged,
who as it is usual in such encounters; began to contemn the Enemy, and hope for
greater advantages, which they attempted, though not with the like facility, as
we shall see hereafter.

During these doings in Denmark, it will not be from the purpose to observe
what happened elsewhere in order to them. King Charles was not ignorant how
many difficulties, and what great obstacles the Netherlanders had opposed to
his proceedings, how violently they had acted against him, and what further
resistance he might expect from them, unless they were diverted. He had
therefore dispatched Monsieur Coyet his Ambassador extraordinary to the States
General some months since, to endeavor to remove those jealousies, which
obliged this wary Nation, to interest themselves in the transactions of their
Neighbors. Whilst Coyet was hastening for Holland in a Zeland States man of
War, he had like to have been shipwrackt upon the dangerous shores of Anhout,
for his Vessel being thrown upon a ridge of Sand by the violence of the
tempest, stuck there immovable, save its fearful rocking by the reciprocation
of those Waves, which threatened its ruin every moment. Coyet saved himself in
a Merchant ship which accidentally passed that way, and many of the Seamen
having tied a number of empty Casks together with ropes, changed one danger for
another. But the Captain being resolved to perish with his ship, did yet what
he could to save both: He threw all his heaviest Cannon and luggage over-boord,
and so lightened his Vessel, that the Wind turning Northwards, it was lift up
with the Waters, and so got off its unhappy station, and returned contrary to
the expectation of all men, back to Elzineur. And certainly, so brave a man as
this Captain, whose name is Adrian Bankert, a Zealander, deserves to be
mentioned in our Relation, especially, having signalized himself once before by
saving his Ship. It happened, that having the outwatch before the Haven of
Coppenhagen, his Cables being cut in pieces by the Ice, he was carried away
with the stream and sholes, as far as the little Island of Ween, and so near
the shore that he stuck fast in the Sands. The Swedes eager of the prey, which
they thought assured, sent two men of War and several armed Boats to seize upon
him, but finding more resistance than they had imagined, they raised a Battery
on Land, and so attacked him on all sides at once; but Bankert defended himself
so well, that he sunk the Enemies fire-ship, battered their Battery on shore,
and treated the rest so rudely, that they were forced to retire, and suffer him
to get off, which he did in safety. Coyet notwithstanding his former danger,
went aboard the same Ship again, which being repaired, he set sail and arrived
in Holland in November following. The Danish and Brandenburgish Ministers, did
all they could to hinder his Reception and Audience, not forgetting to put the
States in mind of the injuries and affronts, which the King of Sweden had so
lately done to their Ambassadors in Denmark. But all they could do, Nov. 25.
could not unmask the States so far, as to oblige them to declare open War
against Sweden, though they otherwise incommodated it by all the means they
could imagine: a public rupture had not been advisable, being the English
Fleet there, and the English and French nearer home were reasonably to be
apprehended, besides they thought it below their accustomary prudence, only to
crack the Shell whilst their Allies went away with the Kernel; all the
Conquests they could hope for in those parts, being but a liberty of Commerce,
which they were surer of, in the dismembring of the Sound, than in a plenary
restoration of Denmark to its pristine greatness, which had formerly so much
perplexed and troubled their Navigation. Besides all this, there was anotheer
weighty reason why Coyet should be admitted, which was, to render their
Neutrality faster, and their interposing less suspect: being therefore received
with the usual Ceremonies, and admitted to Audience, he laid before them the
ancient Leagues and Confederations betwixt the two Nations, and how religiously
they had been observed on the Swedes part, which the present King Charles
Custave had not only sacredly kept hitherto, but had also obliged himself by
the late Treaty at Ething, which contained most advantageous conditions for the
Dutch, to do so for the future. He could not therefore but wonder to see, that
the same was not ratified by them; which the credit of some men, who preferred
their own passion and lucre before the good of their Country, and hitherto
hindered; and how ever he had consented to an enlarging and explaining of the
said Treaty, to their own desire, yet it took no effect; for the States had for
all these amicable Concessions, sent their Fleet to Dansick to thwart his
Designs in Poland, and instead of assisting of him against the invading Danes,
with those supplies which they were obliged to by their Leagues with him and
his Predecessors, they did not scruple to favor the King of Denmark in his
unjust endeavors against him. Nay, they had so far contemned and rejected his
friendship, who had suffered near a hundred of their Merchantmen, which he had
in his power in the Sound, to pass untouched or molested; that they had after
the manner of professed Enemies, sent a Fleet of War to assault and oppress
him. He did therefore seriously complain of this ill-treating and violation of
friendship, especially being he had omitted nothing on his part, for the
conservation of a good understanding betwixt them, and that they on the
contrary, had flown into open acts of violence and hostility, without so much
as trying the ways of Peace: For all this, the King had sent him to declare
his most secret intentions to them, to explain those things which their
Deputies in Denmark had scarce order to mention, to endeavor to remove what
ever there was of any moment, that might cherish those heats and jealousies
which were betwixt them, and to renew those Leagues of Amity, which they had
formerly so much esteemed, and which the King, would if they pleased always
keep inviolably. He further propounded, that Commissioners might be ordered to
treat with him, which was granted, although they moved not so quick as he
desired, the main business being referred by the States to their
Plenipotentiaries then in Denmark.

The King of Denmark, hearing of Coyet's being in Holland, resolved, least his
affairs there might suffer, to oppose him in kind. He therefore sent the Lords,
Otto Krage, and Gotske Bockwalt, Jan. 9.
two Senators, his Ambassadors extraordinary to the Hague, who were received
with more appearance and realities of kindness than the Swede. Amongst other
things, they told the States that the time designed to make the Peace in, was
expired, and consequently that that the Hagues Agreement and Conventions did
cease of course. They therefore besought them to continue their assistance,
according to the reiterate Leagues betwixt them, and that until Denmark were
delivered from the oppression of their Enemies. They further demanded, that
they might not at all be tied to the Treaty of Rotschild, which the Swedes had
broken, but that the said Swedes might be obliged, not only to render what they
had usurped, but also to restore Schonen a dangerous neighbor to Coppenhagen,
in compensation of the manifold losses which they had suffered by their
violence. Lastly, they desired a Peace, but would have it general, as securest
both for their Commerce and their Allies. Some time after, they required that
the Dutch Militia in Denmark, might be made up six thousand effective men, that
the States would furnish them with 24 thousand Crowns every month, and lend
them thirty Ships of War as soon as the Ice was broken, to be at the Kings
command. In lieu of all this, they offered the States Drontheym in Norway,
Malmuyen or Lanskrown in Schonen, when they were taken, or Gluckstat in
Holsteyn, as pledges and security for their moneys. But the English opposed
these Propositions of the Danes, not willing to suffer that either the Elbe,
the Sound, or the Northern Navigation, should run the hazard of more
interruptions: so that this was no further insisted upon, especially, being the
English Resident had desired in Writing from the States, that they would not
accept of any Cities, Havens, Forts, or other places whatsoever, before his
Superiors had been first acquainted with it. The States answer to the Danes
(except in this particular) was very favorable, for having sent a great
quantity of all manner of Provisions to Coppenhagen, they further declared,
that they would not be wanting in assisting their Confederates. It will not be
impertinent, to add a Catalogue of the Provisions which were to compose a
Magazin for the Citizens at Coppenhagen, and to be sold to them at reasonable
Rates, the particulars and prises were;

500000 Weight of Cheese, cost; 29160 Livers or Guilders. 300 Tun of Herrings,
at 40500 Guild. 400000 Weight of Stockfish, at 28000 Guild. 120 Tun of Grout,
24840 Guild. 120 Tun of Pease, at 29160 Guild, 135 Tun of Salt, at 14610 Guild,
800 Firkins of Butter, 59200 Guild. 400 Hogsheads of Brandy, 34080 Guild. 500
Hogsheads of Vinegar, 10075 Guild. 400000 Pound of Bacon, at 72000 Guild. 100
Ship pound of Hops, 4300 Guild. 200 Tua of Malt, at 23240 Guild. 200 Quarts of
Train-Oyl, 6300 Guild. 4000 Pound of Horseradish, 340 Guild. 200 Ames of Rape
Oil, 7800 Guild. 300 Tun of Beef salied, 16600 Guild. 10000 Pounds of Candles,
3000 Guild. 20000 Pound of Tobacco, 4000 Guild. 200 Tun of Oats, at 14000
Guild. The whole Sum is, 474045 Guild. In English moneys, 47404 l. 10 s. 00 d.

The States also answered Coyets expostulatory speech, accusing the Swedes as
the causers of the breach of those Leagues, and that friendship they so much
complained of. First, they put him in mind how Queen Christina, had not only
refused them those Succors during the English War, which the Crown of Sweden
was obliged to send them, but had also hindered the transport of the Cannon,
which they had then bought in Sweden for their use, and imprisoned some of
their Merchants, upon unjust and frivolous pretenses. They further declared,
that their usage had not been better since the coming of Charles Gustave the
present King to the Crown, for that when a Catalogue of those Princes and
States which were esteemed Friends and Confederates to the Kingdom of Sweden,
had been openly read in the Assembly of States, they were omitted, and wholly
left out; nay, that this King had, as Christina had done before, when he was
pressed to renew the ancient Alliances betwixt the two States, declared (under
pretext of their League with Denmark) that he was not at all obliged to observe
them. They also complained, how the Kings Fleet had exacted extraordinary
Imposts, from their Subjects in the Baltic Sea, and how their Ambassadors had
been detained at Lowenburg against their wills. As for the Treaty of Elbing,
they acknowledged they had demanded a necessary Elucidation, not Elusion of
some of its Articles, the which not being concluded, and the Swedes having
declared the former Treaties betwixt them not to be obligatory, it seemed but
reasonable in them to look to their own affairs, and to send a Fleet and
Soldiers to Dansick, as well to secure their Trade, as to insure a City which
was their Friend and Confederate. They added, that they were not ignorant with
how much industry both Queen Christina and King Charles, had not only
endeavored to ruin the good intelligence which was betwixt King Frederick and
their State, but had also labored by the accession and assistance of Denmark
to exclude them out of the Baltic Sea. But being they could not compass it, it
was no wonder if the States General did assist a Prince who was their
Confederate and Friend. And yet they professed, that when the Peace betwixt the
two Northern Crowns was once made, they would omit nothing which might conduce
to renew and re-establish the ancient Alliances and friendships, betwixt the
Crown of Sweden, and their United Provinces.

During these transactions, the Imperialists and Brandenburgers made havoc of
all in Pomerania uncontrouled, under pretext of diverting the Swedes in their
proceedings in Denmark. The War in Norway was also carried on with much
eagerness, but with more variety of success; but being these Contests happened
out of Denmark, however relating to the subject in hand, though at a distance,
I thought good to omit them, as well to avoid prolixity, as to ease my self,
especially, being the knowledge I had of them was but at second hand. I must
not however omit to say somewhat of the death of King Charles, he having been
the only Author of the Siege we mention, although prevented by his untimely
end, from finishing that which he had so vigorously undertaken.

The Convention at Gottenburg being ended, the King who had lain some time sick
of a malignant Fever, seemed to have overcome the violence of his Disease; but
falling into a relapse, and perceiving that he must submit to that necessity,
which imposes upon Kings as well as meaner persons; he caused his Queen, his
Friends, and the Chief Officers of his Crown, to be called to him. He comforted
such as he perceived to mourn his misfortune with most tenderness, and having
spoken to many of them in particular, spent the approaching night in struggling
against the rage and impatience of his malady. He passed the following day (as
if he had made a truce with death) in ordering his affairs, and now all things
being finished, he received the blessed Sacrament with much devotion, and
seemingly satisfied with the unevitableness of his fate, commanded his chief
Phisician, to give him timely notice, some hours before he must expire. A while
after, being warned as he had desired, he rose up, and being placed in a Chair
at the Table, he caused his Will to be produced and read, in the presence of
the Senators of his Kingdom. Amongst other Legacies, he had left the Crown to
his Son, and appointed his Queen, Regent and Tutress during his minority. His
Testament being read, he demanded if there were any amongst them, who had any
thing to say against it, but no body answering, he signed it, as also very many
other Instruments, Orders, Letters, and the like. When there remained nothing
more to be done, as if tired with labor, he demanded rest; but being shown his
Bed by his Attendants, he replied, that he should dye as soon as he entered into
it; but added, this also must be hazarded, manifesting no less courage in his
last moment, than he had done in the whole course of his life. Being therefore
laid, he recommended his soul to him that gave it, and with a gentle sigh,
expired betwixt the arms of Count Brake and Bidal, then next him.

And thus ended Charles Gustave King of Sweden, a Prince for Council, for
Industry and for Eloquence; not absurdly compared to Philip King of Macedon,
and for greatness of mind to his son Alexander. He had done many brave actions,
being yet but a private man, but being come to the Crown, he invaded Poland,
and having expelled the King, forced all the Orders of that Kingdom to swear
fealty to him. Being returned, he repressed the Danes, who had made War upon
him in his absence; and had if he had not been hindered, as we have already
related, oppressed them altogether. I am not ignorant, how that not only this
brave Princes Enemies, but many of his friends, did attribute the cause of his
distemper, and end, to a melancholy which he had contracted for the loss of
his Army in Funen. I will not say, but this blow was very sensible, as being
the only material disgrace which he had yet suffered from fortune; but that he
should sink under it, was below so vast a mind: Neither did he ever say or do
any thing since, that might betray him to so great a weakness. His reception of
the Palsgrave and Steynbock immediately after their defeat, had nothing of
harsh in it; and his treating of them afterward, showed him rather a just
recompenser, than a despiser of unfortunate virtue: for he for he continued the
one in his Government of Schonen, and entrusted the other with the Command of
his Armies, and the Isles in Denmark in his absence. I can say somewhat upon my
own knowledge; Upon the Kings return to Cronenburg after the Battle, I had the
honor to be in the presence, and being called, his Majesty asked me what news
there was at Coppenhagen, and if their joy there for their late Victory was not
very great? I answered, that they were indeed much heightened with it. His
Majesty thereupon was pleased to tell me the whole manner of the Battle, and
what Regiments, and what particular persons did well: concluding, that no body
was a Master of Fortune, and that nothing was more casual than War: but the
blow was not great, and not meanly repaired, in the satisfaction he had, that
his men had fought well.

King Charles being thus dead in the flower of his age, for he was but thirty
seven years and three months old, was much lamented by all sorts of men. The
Soldiers bewailed him not as their General, but as their common Parent. Only
the Swedes hating his severity; and the continual dangers he engaged them in,
seemed to grieve least. Besides, the great ones of the Kingdom did not
obscurely foresee, that the administration of the public affairs, during the
Kings minority, and the Regents Government, would of course fall into their
hands; which did likewise happen: For the Senators and Chief Officers having no
body to oppose or awe them, acted now with more liberty and secureness. And
truly, their Councels were more moderate, for they did now dare to profess,
that they desired that Peace which their magnanimous Prince had so often
rejected. Letters were therefore writ by the Queen, in her Sons name, and
subscribed by all the Senators then present, to the Mediators, which witnessed
the same: For the young King having in them bemoaned the untimely death of his
Father, did not obscurely intimate his desires for Peace. Upon receipt of these
Letters, The French Ambassador, Sir Robert Honywood, Febr. 29.
and Monsieur Slingland, went to Elzineur, where they found the Swedes not only
inclinable to Peace, but brought the so often required Declaration for it, with
them, back to Coppenhagen. The sum of the said Declaration was, that the King
of Sweden would embrace Peace, and that upon the Basis of the Rotschild Treaty,
so that besides the restoring of Droutheym as his deceased Father had designed,
1659 Dec. 28 1660. Jan. 7.
in favor of the Mediators, out of a desire to hasten the Peace: and besides
the Conventions formerly agreed upon with the said Mediators, it should be of
full force in all its Articles; excepting where the exigency of the present
posture of affairs, did necessarily require some alteration, and such changes
as should be agreed upon by both Kings Commissioners, by mediation, and
interposing of the three States. The above mentioned Conventions with both
Kings, were, that the King of Sweden should not exact for the future, any Toll
or Imposition, from any armed or Merchant Ships, either in the Sound or Baltic
Sea. Nor the King of Denmark (who was to content himself with the old and usual
Taxes) imposed any new, upon any Vessel whatsoever, belonging to the Subjects
of the 3 aforesaid States. The Declaration did further intimate, that the King
satisfied with the justice and integrity of the Mediators, did refer all to
their industry and endeavors; and that he would restore to the King of
Denmark, such places as should appertain to him by force of the Treaty, after
the Peace was concluded and ratified, at that very time which should be
prefixed by the Mediators for their evacuation. As for the King of Poland and
the Elector of Brandenburg, he did profess, that he did willingly consent that
both of them, if they pleased, might be included in the Treaty, and that he was
ready to compose all differences and controversies which were risen betwixt
himself, and either or both of them. The Mediators having received this
Declaration, address themselves to the King of Denmark, tell him how far they
had proceeded with the other party, and desired he would be pleased likewise to
declare his intention, in order to the hoped Accommodation. But the King
abhorring the thoughts of the Rotschild Treaty, delayed his answer, which
obliged the Mediators to deliver him a Paper, wherein they pressed him to
vouchsafe an Answer to their Proposals, and that without any delay, as he had
promised by his Declaration of the fifth of March new style; urging further,
that the least demur would be extremely prejudicial to his affairs and
interests, But the King continued in his resolved silence, which obliged the
Dutch Plenipotentiaries, forced to it by the incessant importunities of the
English and French Ministers, to withdraw their Naval Auxiliaries from his
service, which they were the more inclined to do, being it appeared by the Lord
Steno Bielke's Letters (for he believed that the Treaty of Elbing, March 5.
as he had understood from the English Plenipotentiaries, was to begin and be
of force from that day) to Marshal Wrangle, that the Swedes had inhibited all
further hostility against the Dutch, and permitted an entire liberty to their
shipping to sail whither they pleased.

The Dutch Fleets had Wintered in Coppenhangen, being detained there by the
rigor of the cold, but the warmer Spring having dissolved those congealed
Waves which had shackled them thus long, fifteen of the greatest men of War,
because unweeldiest, and consequently unfittest for those Narrow Seas, Nov. 1.
were sent home with Egbert Mewse, who in censideration of his own deserts, and
Opdam's recommendation, succeeded De Wit in the Vice-Admiralship. The rest of
the Navy, excepting only three men of War (sent with Corn and other Provisions,
under the Command of Captain Barkel into Funen, for relief of the Netherland
Troop inquartered there, was ordered to shut up the Haven of Landskrown, which
was scarcely yet effected, when the Dutch Commissioners, who had also the
Supreme Military as well as Civil power, sent their Admiral new Orders, by an
Express, to abstain from further hostility against the Swedes, to withdraw his
Fleet from before the Haven of Lanskrown, and to suffer the Swedish ships to
pass and repass at pleasure. De Ruyter being upon the point to depart, was
retarded by King Fredericks sudden and unexpected arrival in the Fleet. His
Majesty hastened thither with some Fireships, before the Dutch should quit
their station, full of hopes to ruin the Swedish Fleet; and had obtained so
much from the Admiral, that however pressed by his Orders to be gone, he did
not dare to leave him there alone. The Dutch Ambassadors being acquainted by
De Ruyter's Letters of the Kings resolution and design, and that the Swedes
made preparation to go to Sea, were at a stand. It seemed dishonorable and
unbecoming their friendship, to abandon the resolved King, who protested he
would not stir thence, till he had put his design in execution, and to
countermand their Orders, seemed to question the sincerity of their intentions
and promises. In this straight, they bethought themselves that the Swedes had
not as yet given any real assurance that they would not disturb the Dutch
Navigation and traffic; they therefore sent new commands to De Ruyter, not to
stir till further Orders, and in the mean time resolve to expect the return of
one of their Gentlemen, which they had sent the day before to Helsingneur to
the Swedes Commissioners, with their instrument of Cessation, who was to bring
another with him from them of the same force and tenor. They day following,
they wrote again to the aforesaid Commissioners, assuring them, That they would
immediately recall their Fleet upon the receipt of their Instrument of
Pacification, and give commands for the future, that no manner of hostility
should be used against any of their shipping whatsoever. And they proved as
good as their words, for the Messenger being returned the same Evening with the
desired Instrument, and the King being come back to Coppenhagen without
attempting what he had so confidently undertaken, for his Fireworks did not
take, they forthwith sent De Ruyter Orders to come away with the Fleet, the
which notwithstanding he could not perform, by reason of contrary Winds and the
adverse stream, until the second day following. The sense and tenor of the two
Instruments was in effect the same; to wit, a reciprocal promise and
engagement, that no force or injury should be committed on either side, against
the Ships of War, or Burden of the other, for the future; and in case any
should happen before notice could be given to their several Commanders, that
all such losses should be immediately and fully satisfied and repaired. The
Swedes Commissioners, had together with the said Instrument, sent the Dutch
Ambassadors other Letters, wherein having magnified their candor, sincerity
and desires for Peace, they required that the Treaty of Elbing might be
ratified with all speed, and that in the mean time it might begin, and be of
force, to all intents as if it were already ratified and confirmed. But this
being waved for the present, the Dutch thought it enough to keep to their
Cessation, and therefore as they had ordered their Navies not to act, so they
sent an Express to Sir William Killegrew, their Colonel General in Funen, with
Instructions to keep his Soldiers within the Island, and to attempt nothing
against the Swedes, unless first provoked by them.

The English Commissioners in the interim, looking upon the Dutch delays but as
delusions, and troubled that the Fleet was not returned according to the first
Orders, wrote a sharp Letter to their Ambassadors, wherein having minded them
with what incessant endeavors they had sought for Peace, and how averse the
King of Denmark was from it, who had not vouchsafed an Answer to their
equitable and pressing desires. They besought them, that as they had formerly
made War by Sea and Land upon the King of Sweden, when he refused Peace, they
would now, not unmindful of the rules of justice, and their re-iterated
Engagements, withdraw all their Succors from the King of Denmark, who did at
present, and had for some Months absolutely refused the ways of
Accommodation; being therefore that the Swedes had abundantly-witnessed their
propensness for Peace, as appeared by their Declaration of the twenty ninth of
February, and that it was evident that the King of Denmark, however pressed by
the Mediators, had no such thoughts, but only to gain time by his shiftings and
delays, which was so prejudicial to the Commonwealth: They required that they
would endeavor to force Denmark now, as they had done Sweden formerly, to
accept of Peace, and that they would abstain from all manner of injurious
actions, and hostility against the Swedes, now openly professing their desires
for rest and quietness. They added in case they would not, that they should be
obliged to declare in the Name of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, that the Dutch had violated the Covenants made betwixt the two
Nations, and that it should be lawful for the said Parliament to demand
reparation for all such breaches and unsufferable provocations. But the Fleet
having quitted Lanskrown, as is mentioned, the Mediators laying aside these
altercations for the present, repair to the King again, and jointly entreat
him, that he also would at length, as the Swedes had already done, be pleased
to give in his Declaration for Peace; which he yet deferted, in expectation of
the return of an Express which he had sent into Holland; hoping that the
industry and endeavors of his Ambassador at the Hague, would incline the
States General to procure him better conditions. In the mean time, he demanded
of the Dutch Ministers, what return they did expect for their expenses in the
War? for it concerned him to know it in time, because those charges, how vast
soever, were to be required from the Swedes as the Authors of it, before the
Peace should be concluded. But these cross questions were but to gain time,
whilst the Danish Ambassadors pressed the States with their solicitations at
the Hague. Amongst other things, they highly complained, that their
Plenipotentiaries in Denmark, had upon the bare receipt of the Swedish
Declaration, rashly and inconsiderately recalled their Fleet from before
Lanskrown, and that without so much as consulting their King; which was of so
mischievous a consequence to him, that the Swedes by this means let loose, had
already intercepted many Vessels belonging to his Subjects, and did daily rove
at the Gates of Coppenhagen, and that in sight of the States Fleet without
control. They further desired them to call to mind, the Leagues betwixt both
Nations, and those engagements they had made to prosecute the War, until
Denmark were restored to its pristine tranquillity and condition: They therefore
besought them, that they would desist from that fatal Cessation, which had lost
them their Islands last year, and now the occasion of ruining the Swedish Fleet
in the Haven of Lanskrown, with those fireships they had prepared for that
design, and command De Ruyter to act vigorously against their Enemies, until
they did declare that they would embrace an equitable peace, wherein the Danes
might find security for the future, and compensation for their past and present
sufferings. Neither did these complaints of the Ambassadors prove wholly
fruitless, being the Swedish Declaration, which made no specific mention of
the Hagues Conventions, was not judged ample enough, but more especially,
because of the diffidence there was that the effects of it should not so
suddenly follow, as was desired.

The States therefore profess by their Letters to their Ministers in Denmark,
the dislike of the removal of their Fleet from Lanskrown, and the licentious
ravaging of the Swedes at Sea: adding, that if the Peace were not yet made, and
that it should appear that the Swedes were the cause of this delay, that they
should then not only hinder their Naval excursions, but employ all their Sea
and Land Forces, to compel them to it with all imaginable speed and vigor. And
this indeed was the Ambassadors design, before they granted the Swedes the
above mentioned Cessation; to the which they were not only inclined, by the
Swedes aforesaid Declaration, but chiefly because the King of Denmark did then
against all expectation manifestly refuse Peace.

But to return to Coppenhagen, Mar. 18.
the abovementioned Messenger being arrived, the Mediators were sent for to
Court, where instead of the Declaration they did expect, they were demanded by
the Kings Order, what change the Swedes desired in the Treaty of Rotschild? To
which the Dutch answered, that the Mediators were not very sollicitous of that,
only desired to know, whether his Majesty would be pleased also to give his
Declaration for Peace? Adding, that otherwise they should be necessitated to
observe and put in execution the Commands of their Superiors. After many
Contests to and fro, the King lest he might seem altogether averse from Peace,
did at last promise, that he would the following day, deliver the so much
desired Declaration, and that in the same form that the Swedes had given
theirs, which he also did. During these disputes, the Swedish Commissioners had
by the instigation of the French Ambassadors, pressed the Dutch to a
conjunction of Arms with them, by virtue of the Treaty of Elbing, the which
ought as they pretended, to begin and be of force from that time they had
exhibited their Declaration for Peace: but they were answered, that that could
not be under that pretext, but rather by virtue of the Treaty made betwixt the
three States, which also was now needless to urge, being affairs were in so
hopeful a way of being accommodated without coming to those extremities. The
Dutch Ambassadors did moreover complain, that Coyet the Swedish Legate at the
Hague, had endeavored to bring the said Treaty of Elbing, to the test again,
and subject its illustrations, the product of so much sweat and time, to new
and impertinent disquisitions. But the Kings Declaration silenced these
unseasonable disputes, and now both their Commissioners by the intervention of
all the Mediators met in the Tents again, and seemed to reassume their Treaty
with better hopes of success than before.

The Dutch Fleet being retired from Lanskrown, they were followed by eight
Swedish Men of War, who having saluted the Admiral, cast Anchor near him, and
began to shut up the Haven of Coppenhagen once more. Hence many Merchants Ships
of burden, being ignorant of what had happened were intercepted, and that
Naval Commerce which the besieged had hitherto freely enjoyed was interrupted.
But this mischief was timely remedied, for the Dutch Ambassadors upon notice
hereof, commanded De Ruyter not to suffer any hostility whatsoever within sight
of his Fleet, which he was so careful to perform, that when the Swedes had sent
three Men of War to lie at Draker, he also did send as many to wait upon them
there. The Swedes seeing themselves thus observed, pretending want of provision
(and indeed the Treaty advanced but untowardly) hosed sail again; and returning
to Lanskrown, came to Anchor at the entry of their Haven, ready there upon all
occasions. The three Ships which were at Draker, making toward the East Sea,
fell upon a Galliot coming from Holsteyn, which they took, and in it
Field-Marshal Schack, and John Alefeld Lieutenant General of the Horse, both
going to Coppenhagen, being sent for by the Kings orders. They were carried
Prisoners to Malmuyen, and being delivered to Marshal Steinbock Governor of
Schonen, were kept in safe custody by his command. Sir Walter Vane came with
them from Funen, but was immediately set at liberty without ransom (the Swedes
supposing the Peace betwixt themselves and the States already concluded) and
permitted to continue his journey to Coppenhagen, the Messenger of this unhappy
accident.

In the mean time, there was no industry omitted to bring the Treaty to a happy
issue, but being the meetings of the two Kings Commissioners, by reason of that
distance and those animosities which their fresh differences had bred, seemed
fruitless, they were content upon the Mediators pressing desires, to give in
their several Propositions and Demands by writing, permitting also in some
sort, the management of their several Interests to their united Arbitration, at
least wise to their industry and endeavors. The Mediators knowing now what
they both required, labored to compose an instrument which might be acceptable
to the one and the other, moderating the desires of the one, to the content and
satisfaction of the other. After much toil, and time, and conferences, and
after many heats, and disputes, not only betwixt the Mediators and the
Ministers of both parties, but also betwixt the Mediators amongst themselves,
especially about the compensation of losses, and the remitting of the 400000
Crowns, which the Swedes demanded for their Guiney damages, the business
seemed fairly advanced, and the Articles were well nigh all agreed to, when an
unexpected stop was put to these proceedings, by the English and French
Ministers, demanding a further explanation upon the Elueidations of the Treaty
of Elbing. May 3.
The difficulty, was about the extent of the defensive Article comprised in the
same: for being that Treaty was to be of force, as soon as the Peace betwixt
the two Kings should be concluded, the English judged it, as it was indeed
reasonable, to clear that point first. Before this remora could be removed,
behold another and no less surprising accident, which did not only disturb the
whole Negotiation, but hurried the Mediators themselves, but too much
dissenting before, into a manifest and open rupture. The States General, being
as we have mentioned, not fully satisfied with the Swedes Declaration, and
fancying that the uncontrouled liberty which they had to rove at Sea since De
Ruyters withdrawing from Lanskrown, had rendered them less inclinable to
quietness, had by redoubled Orders commanded their Ministers in Denmark, that
in case the Swedes had not already accepted of Peace, according to their
Declaration they should (all delays laid aside) following the Conventions
between the three States, compel them to it by main force. The wary Swedes had
notice of these resolutions, neither did the Dutch Plenipotentiaries deny their
reality when they were interrogated concerning them by the Swedish
Commissioners, who for all that looked upon them (being they seemed too
violent) but as fictitious, and published on purpose the better to conceal the
true design. But the Dutch seeing their secrets (by a mischief unavoydable in
Commonwealths by reason of the multitudes of Masters) discovered, acknowledged
openly and ingenicusly that they were indeed the true and real intentions and
resolves of the States, which they would positively follow, and execute against
such who were averse from Peace. The Swedes, as also the other Mediators,
seeing the Dutch thus determined, were at a stand; for being these only were
armed, it was supposed they might dare any thing. This therefore being
foreseen, the English and French club'd Councels apart, not a little
sollicitous, least the Dutch forgetting the limits of Mediation, should render
themselves Umpires and Arbitrators of the whole Negotiation. This jealousy was
much lightened the next day, when as the Dutch having framed a new Design or
Project for Peace, however conformable to the Rotschild and Hagues Treaties,
did not stick to deliver the same in writing to them. Terloon did indeed accept
of the Instrument, but the English, being it was made without the assent of all
the Mediators, absolutely refused it, although they suffered it to lie upon
their Table, being laid and left there by the Dutch Plenipotentiaries
themselves. The English and French being much perplexed at these proceedings,
bethought how best to prevent their progress; two days after, Terloon having
largely professed his desires for an Accommodation, presented an Instrument in
writing, which the English had framed, to be assented to and signed by all the
Mediators. The sum of it was, That nothing should be done or concluded, or be
valid, or invalid, in the present Negotiation, that was not done by the
unanimous Act and Consent of all the Mediators, ana being the greatest
difficulties was about the 400000 Rixdollars, it was subjoyned that that should
be referred to the Arbitration of their respective superiors themselves. The
Dutch perceiving the drift of this Design, replied, That all new Obligations
would be superfluous, they being sufficiently bound by the Hagues Treaty,
neither could they consent to their reference concerning the moneys, being the
weight of that burden would probably fall upon the Danish account. The
following days were for the most part spent in heats and eager disputes, and
the differences and diffidences grew daily, yea hourly, more and more betwixt
them, especially being the English did not cease to move new difficulties about
the Elbing Treaty. But all these contests did not surpass the modesty of words,
nor was there any hostility increased betwixt these great Dissenters. The Dutch
Fleet lay before the Haven of Coppenhagen, and the Swedes had theirs secure in
that of Lanskrown. De Ruyter had indeed Orders to observe the Swedes, and to
oppose them with all his might, in case they attempted any thing. And it was
not long ere this vigilant Commander found an opportunity of acting, for the
Swedes, notwithstanding the reiterated warnings given them, fancying nothing
less than an interruption, and thinking themselves secure, by virtue of their
exchanged instruments of Cessation, and Liberty with the Dutch, sailed out of
Lanskrown with nine Men of War, one Merchant ship, and a small Ketch, and came
to Anchor under the Island of Ween, where they lay two days. The Dutch
Ambassadors observing this, sent Cornelius Everson Rear-Admiral of Zealand,
with seven men of War to the Sound, to hinder their passage through that
Straight, in case they attempted it. De Ruyter continued with ten Ships where
he had hitherto lain (the rest of his Vessels being sent into the Baltic Sea)
with a resolution to oppose them if they made that way. The Swedes being as
they pretended bound for Stockholm, having got a good Wind hoised sail, but
being advanced as far as the Shallowes near Southholm, their Admiral received a
Letter from De Ruyter (which the Ambassadors had for fear of mistakes dictated
for him, as they also had done for Everson, in case the Swedes had designed to
pass the Sound) desiring him to Anchor where he was, for if he should endeavor
to pass further, he was resolved to oppose him, least he might attempt any
thing contrary to the tenor of the Swedes Declaration, or prejudicial to the
present Treaty. The Swede amazed with these unaccustomed commands, and doubtful
what to do, was at length forced to submit: for being unequal in strength,
though equalin number of Ships, he obeyed De Ruyters second summons, which was
a Cannon Bullet, and letting fall his sails, after mutual salutation came to
Anchor. Cornelius Everson who followed the Swedes, took his station betwixt
them and Lanskrown, and the next day De Ruyter drawing nearer to them environed
them round, to take from them all possibility of escaping in case they
attempted it. The Dutch Ambassadors were at the time of detaining the Swedes
Ships, upon the top of the round Tower at Coppenhagen, and perceiving the
motion of the Fleets, De Huybert and Haren went forthwith on board de Ruyter,
to give such Orders as they should judge necessary; from whence they likewise
sent the Swedes Admiral word, that what they had done was to further the Peace,
and not out of design to prejudice him in the least, which he might be assured
of. The Swedes Commissioners were extremely vexed at the detension of their
Ships, and complaining bitterly against de Ruyter's insolence, required that
they might be suffered without delay, to continue their journey to Stockholm,
whither they were designed. The English and French Ambassadors fretted yet
higher, and accusing the Dutch of breach of Faith, and violation of Covenants,
demanded the instant relaxation of the Ships; threatening that in case they
would not, that they would treat no further with them, but revenge with all
their power, those indignities and injuries, which were offered to England and
to France. The Dutch Ambassadors replied, that what they had done was but to
further the Peace, which if seriously and sincerely intended, would be easily
compassed, and least any thing might intervene which might disturb and
interrupt it; in the interim, they only endeavored to oblige the Swedes to put
their Declaration in execution. After this, May 7.
they wrote Letters to the English and French, wherein they professed, That
they did not vary from any of those Articles contained in their former Project;
adding, that as for the Treaty of Elbing, there was the same provision both in
it, and in its Illustrations, made for France and England, as for Sweden and
the United Provinces, if they would but be included in it. They did therefore
conjure them, that they would add their endeavors to theirs, according to the
so often mentioned Conventions, and the instructions of their respective
superiors, in the procuring of a sudden and settled Peace. The English and
French perceiving the Dutch had made no mention in their Letters of the
detained Ships, fancied they jeered them, and therefore repeated, by most
bitter rescriptions, what they had declared before by word of mouth, and
sending expresses into England, France, and Holland, acquainted their several
Masters, and their Masters Ministers, with what had hitherto happened in
Denmark. The Dutch Ambassadors seeing that the other Mediators had resolved
to treat no more with them, until they first released the Ships, did send their
above said Project for Peace to the Swedes Commissioners, with Letters to the
Camp demanding their answer. Another Instrument of the same tenor was
delivered to the great Master of Denmark, and both parties invited to accept of
those Forms. But the Swedes delaying their Answer, were again pressed though in
vain; for they affirmed, they would not treat any further unless their Ships
were first at liberty. Hereupon the Dutch resolved to fight the said detained
Ships, and to make War upon the Swedes, now manifestly refusing Peace, which
they also had done, if the Danes themselves fearing the continuation of their
misery, and the perpetuity of these destroying contests had not dissuaded them
from it. In the mean time, the English and French Ambassadors had daily
conferences with the Swedes in their Tents and Camp, and did mainly endeavor
to make up a Peace betwixt the two Kings without the Dutch. But the Danes were
not to be separated from their Deliverers; neither would the Swedes however
irritated against the Dutch, conclude entirely without them. But so much was
effected, that both Kingdoms were more desirous of Peace, and their Ministers
now at more liberty and freedom, by reason of the dissentions of the imperious
Mediators, endeavored the composing of it more than ever. And finding
themselves well nigh at their own disposal, and unconstrained, they urged the
business with more fervor than before; and advanced so far, that they agreed
upon all the Articles of the Treaty, except only on the term to be designed for
the withdrawing of the Swedish Troops, and Garrisons out of the Country.
Hereupon the Swedes Commissioners composed an Instrument of Pacification,
according to their Conventions with the Danes, and sent it into the City, May 15
which being examined, was not only found to quadrate with the Hagues Treaties,
and the above mentioned Projects for Peace, but also to contain several more
advantageous conditions for Denmark, than they did hope for. The chief
controverted points were about the remission of the 400000 Crowns, the
restitution of the Island of Bornholm, and the possessions of the Gentry and
Nobilities goods in Schonen; all which were concluded as the Danes desired, for
the aforesaid sum was absolutely remitted; the Goods and Lands were restored to
their true owners; and the Island was left in the King of Denmarks possession
for a whole year, with power to redeem it for its value, by exchange or
otherwise, or restore it at the expiration of the said time. The Treaty being
thus far advanced without the Mediators, the King lest they might seem
neglected, sent for the four Dutch Deputies to Court, where the Ryx-hoff-master
in presence of his Majesty and Senators, told them, that they had agreed with
the Swedes to the content of both parties, except only the time of evacuation,
or clearing the Country of the Soldiers. The Ambassadors having congratulated
his Majesty hereupon, congratulated also the Swedes Commissioners by Letters
upon the happy progress of affairs, and invited them, notwithstanding the
sinister interpretations of some men, meaning the English and French, to the
sanction of the Treaty of Elbing, the which, together with its Illustrations,
they desired might be forthwith ratified and confirmed. Some few days after,
not only these Demands of the Dutch were assented to, but all other differences
and desires accommodated, and concluded by consent of both Kings, and all the
Mediators; so that the detained Ships were thereupon lest to their liberty, and
by De Ruyter's removal from them, permitted to sail whither they pleased, which
did not happen without the congratulatory thunder of the Cannon on both sides.

During this Treaty for Peace, the thoughts of War were not so laid aside, but
that several encounters and light skirmishes happened betwixt the City and Camp
Militia. The besieged heightened with their former successes, thought of
attempting somewhat more extraordinary, and therefore sallying out by night
with all their Horse, fell upon the Enemies Stations or Posts with the same
confidence, Mar. 4.
though not with the same success, as they had formerly done; for the Swedes
having notice of their designs, and ready, received and charged them so rudely,
that they forced them to save themselves by flight within their Works, five of
their men being taken prisoners, and several of them slain. The following Month
they made another attempt, Apr. 28.
but with no better fortune, for they were repelled in the Kings presence, and
lost threescore foot which they had taken with them to strengthen their Horse.
The Swedes also had designed the surprising of the City Cattle which fed under
the Walls, May 17.
to which purpose they hastened thither with all their Horse; but their intent
being likewise known, the Cattle were secured, and the Enemy forced by the
Cannon from the Ramparts to keep at a distance. They yet returned some days
after with a thousand Horse, May 21
and threw down a Breast-work not far from the ruined Suburbs on the West side
of the Town, which annoyed them, the which was again raised by the
Coppenhageners two days after. The Sweaes were also busy in other parts of
the Kingdom, for having gathered some small Vessels upon the Coasts of
Holsteyn, they landed by Nysted, but being repelled thence, they resolved to
try their fortune on the Isle of Fameren, though not with better success, for
the Danes having retired their Troops into a strong double Ditched Fort which
they had there, contained themselves in it, until they were reinforced by
fresh supplies out of Holsteyn, which obliged the Enemy to retire to their
Ships again.

But Denmark was not alone the stage of War, neither was it here only that the
treaties for Peace were in agitation. Poland, the seat of so many miseries, was
at length delivered from the oppression of their infesting Enemies, by the
Treaty of Oliva. This Treaty was chiefly managed by the French, their
Ambassador being the only Mediator admitted in it. The Dutch had indeed sent
an Extraordinary Deputy to the Polish Court, but he was received there without
Ceremony, scarce civility, upon pretext they were not acquainted with his
Character, it being a new thing with them. His Mediation was likewise waved,
the French influence (the Queen being Ascendant) being too strong, and the
jealousies which they began to entertain of the Imperialists, not a little
formed. Neither was he more acceptable to the Swedes, his visit to their
Plenipotentiaries, being but repayed by a complement by their Secretary, upon
pretense he was lodged in Dantsick an Enemies Town; and his interposition
wholly refused, being looked upon as a party, so that he was but an idle
Spectator, as to the main in the said Treaty. But for all the States exclusion,
the Emperor and the Electour of Brandenburg were not only included in the said
Pacification, but the old Friendship and Concord renewed, by a new Act of
Oblivion, betwixt them and Sweden. Only King Frederick for whose sake they had
armed, (their own business being now done) seemed forgot in that Treaty, the
Commissioners giving this reason for it, that the Danish affairs could not
commodiously be decided at that distance, being also at that time treated in
Denmark it self, not without great hopes of success. But the Danes troubled to
be thus abandoned by their Allies, were so much the more desirous of Peace.
They were indeed supported at present by the Forces of the United Provinces,
and with hopes out of England of more powerful Succors, the Scene being there
changed by the happy restitution of King Charles the Second, to his hereditary
Dominions. This great Princes restoration did indeed contribute much to the
present reconciliation, for the English Commissioners foreseeing their
authority would quickly expire, and loath to quit their Province without
effecting what they came for, urged it; the Swedes considering the ties of
blood and friendship betwixt the two Kings, Charles and Frederick, did desire
it. And truly the same reason prevailed with the Dutch, but upon another
account, to wit, lest they should be pressed by this great King to continue the
War, until Frederick his Friend and oppressed were restored to his entire
Dominions, which the victorious Swedes had so miserably mutilated. Only the
Danes, the only sufferers, were thought not so forward, especially being
obliged by this second Treaty, once more to quit all their pretensions which
they had so lavishly divested themselves of in the former War. But they
foreseeing that the ayds from England, the King being not yet fully
established in his Kingdoms, could not be sudden; and that the vast expenses
which they were daily at in feeding so many Armies within their Country, would
necessarily ruin it; seemed to prefer a certain Peace before the uncertainties
of a War. All parties being then agreed, and that happy day, which by a hopeful
Peace was to put a period to this unhappy War being come, the two Kings
Commissioners and all the Mediators (if they may be properly called so, who
seemed interessed asperties) met in the Tents again, where the Treaty
elaborated with so much industry and pains, was signed; first by the Mediators,
and afterward by the Commissioners of the two Kings; and then exchanged and
delivered in the mid way betwixt the Danish lodges and the Swedish Tents, by
the Mediators themselves, a little before Sun* set, to the Commissioners of
both Kings. This being done, the Assembly broke up, the Swedes returning to
their Camp, and the Danes into the City; where both from their Walls, as also
from their Fleets which lay before the Town, witnessed their joy for this happy
Accommodation, with the more pleasing noises of their great and small shot. The
Peace was proclaimed the same night in all the public places of the City, by a
Herald with his Scepter and Coat of Arms, with the tintamar of Drums and
Trumpets, whilst every individual published his satisfaction with more than
usual signs of joy. The following days the Swedes came into the Town, and the
Danes went into the Camp without exception, neither satisfying their greedy
eyes, and their curiosities with the contemplation of those unaccustomed
sights, whilst both admired, and secretly condemned those things which they
had found by experience to have been hurtful to them. But this intercourse did
not last long, for the fourth day after the signing of the Peace, the Prince of
Sulsbach did according to the Articles of the Treaty, draw all his Forces,
which were 3000 Horse and Foot out of the Camp, and putting them into Battle
array betwixt that and the City, made a stand there, exposing his Army and
himself to the view of the Danes, who flocked thither in multitudes to see so
goodly a sight. A while after having commanded his Cannon, and all the Muskets
and Pistols of his Army to fire twice round, he left the City to its pristine
Liberty, and the Camp to the Danes disposal, and marched with his whole Army
toward Rotschild.

THE END.
The Articles of the Treaty of Peace betwixt the Two Northern Crowns, concluded
and subscribed by the Mediators and the Commissioners of both Kings 27/6 May /
June in the Year MDCLX.
I. FIrst, Let there be a firm, perpetual, and irrevocable Peace, between the
two Kings and their Successors, the Kingdoms, Countries, Counselors,
Ministers, Subjects and Inhabitants of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden; so that all
suspicions, ill will, diffidence, discord, enmity and Wars be forgot and taken
away on both sides; as also whatever happened in or before the War, be buried
by a general Amnisty in oblivion: But on the contrary, let there be restored
and conserved a perpetual Friendship, mutual Benevolence, Concord and ^^al good
Neighborhood, so that the one shall both by word and actions, promote and
defend the good and welfare of the other, as his own, and also avert and impede
for as much as in him lies, what ever may be prejudicial and hurtful to the
Person, Government, Kingdoms, Countries and Subjects of the other.

II. And that these things may the better be done, and a mutual confidence be
cherished and conserved betwixt the two Kings and their Kingdoms of Sweden and
Denmark, let all considerations made with any Powers, Kings, Princes, States
and Commonwealths whatsoever, in prejudice of each other, be taken away and
rejected on both sides; so that also neither shall make any League against the
other for the future, nor succor or assist the Enemies of each other, under
any pretext whatsoever.

III. It is also agreed and concluded, that all Ships whether armed or unarmed,
whether great or small, with what Merchandise or Lading soever, belonging to
the King of Sweden or his Subjects, to the inhabitants of Sweden, or Provinces,
Countries, or Cities subject to it, shall not only be free in the Sound and
Belt, from all Taxes, Tolls, Inquisitions and Visitings whatsoever, but also
shall not need to have or show any Certificates of their Ladings, provided they
only exhibit and show their lawful Sea-passes, at his Majesty of Denmark's
Toll-houses at Elzineur or Newburg. As for those goods without Merchandise,
which belong or appertain to the King of Sweden or his successors, his subjects
the Inhabitants of Sweden, as also those that dwell in other Provinces,
Regions, or Cities subject to it, but carried in foreign Bottoms, the Order
appointed in the Treaty of Bremsbro, as to their Certificates shall be
observed, in that sense, that if they but show their lawful Certificates, they
shall then be suffered to pass through the Sound or Belt without impediment,
detension, interdiction, or any exaction of Toll whatsoever. But Swedish goods
carried in Foreign Bottoms, that can produce no lawful Certificates, shall be
obnoxious to examination, and pay Toll in the Sound or Belt.

IV. As the Castle and Government of Bahuys, as also the Provinces of Schonen,
Bleking, and Halland, together with all their appurtenances, Cities, and
Castles, Islands, Rocks, with the Island of Ween surrendered afterward, with
all other Superiorities, Preheminences, Regalities, Jurisdictions, as well
Ecclesiastical as Secular, goods, rents, tolls, rights, as well by Sea as Land,
by what name soever they come, as the Kings of Denmark and Norway have formerly
possessed them, have by the Peace of Rotschild, concluded in the year 1658, on
the 26 of February, betwixt the King and Kingdom of Denmark, and the King of
Sweden, been yielded and given over to be joined and incorporated to the
Kingdom of Sweden, for an everlasting and undisturbed possession, as it appears
by peculiar Acts and Letters of Cession, dated ^t Coppenhagen the 24 of
February 1658, and signed and subscribed by the King and Senators of Denmark.
So the Concession of the said Provinces, Countries, and Governments, are by
these presents confirmed and strengthened in such sort, that the said
Provinces, Countries and Governments, with all the Cities, Forts, Castles,
Islands, Rocks, Superiorities, Preheminences, Jurisdictions, and Rights, as is
above mentioned, shall remain now and for ever, in the perpetual and
uninterrupted possession of the King of Sweden his successors and Kingdom.

V. And being it was judged fit to insert the Agreement about the Isle of
Bornholm in a separate Instrument; It is therefore concluded that the said Act
shall be of the same vigor and force, as if it were comprehended verbatim
amongst these Articles. And that it be ratified and observed by both Kings
equal with the other Agreements and Conventions.

VI. Whereas the Nocturnal Fires which are instituted and kept betwixt Schagen
and Falsterbo, to the great commodity of such as sail those ways, are some of
them situated within the Dominions of the King of Denmark, and maintained upon
His Majesty's charges; and others of them situated within the Dominions of
Sweden, and ought to be nourished and maintained by His Majesty of Sweden. The
King of Denmark only exacting Toll of such Ships as sail through the Sound,
under pretext of such fires: It is agreed, that the King of Denmark, shall pay
yearly to the King of Sweden, in consideration of the charges and expenses in
nourishing the said fires, the sum of 3500 Ryxdollers, payable half thereof
every six months to His Majesty of Swedens public Minister at Elzeneur or
Elzenburg, it being further to be understood, that neither the King nor Kingdom
of Sweden, shall either upon that or any other pretext whatsoever, pretend to
demand or exact any Toll or Tribute within the Sound.

VII. It is also agreed, that as often as one or more Swedish Ships of War,
whether great or little, do pass the Sound, that they shall salute the Castle
by shooting off their Guns according to the Swedish manner; and also receive
the same honor from the said Castle, according to the manner of Denmark. And
also the Danish Ship or Ships of War passing through the said Straight, shall
likewise salute the Castle of Elzenburg, by shooting their Guns according to
the Danish signal, and shall also be re-saluted from the Castle with the
Swedish signal again. But if it happen that the Dane and Swedish Ships do meet
at Sea, or in any Havens, what number soever the one or the other may be of,
neither party shall be obliged to strike, but only to salute each other with
their usual civility, mutually and amicably.

VIII. When ever it happens that either of the two Kings sends any Military
Forces or Ships of War, whose numbers may breed suspicion, out of the Ocean
into the Baltic Sea, or out of the Baltic into the Ocean; It is agreed and
concluded, that if the Military Forces exceed twelve hundred, or the Ships five
in number, it shall then be notified three Weeks at least before hand, by His
Majesty of Denmark at Elzenburg only, and by His Majesty of Sweden at Elzeneur,
or Newburg, when they pass the Belt without any other ceremony.

IX. The King of Denmark does also for Himself and his Successors, resign unto
the King of Sweden His Successouts, and the Kingdom of Sweden, all jurisdiction
as well Ecclesiastic as Secular, that he has or does pretend upon some goods
seated in the Island of Rugen.

X. In like manner it is agreed, that the remainder of the sum which was to be
paid for the Salt, wherewith the three Ships detained in the Sound, about the
beginning of the former War were laden, shall be paid according to the
liquidation made at Coppenhagen; and it is therefore agreed that His Majesty of
Denmark shall cause the said remainder to be paid within one year and a day,
unto such Merchants at Hamborough as His Majesty of Sweden shall appoint to
receive the same.

XI. Moreover, all the Nobles who possess goods, and inhabit in the surrendered
Provinces, Lands and Governments, shall be obliged to do homage, and take an
Oath of fidelity to the King, his Successors and Kingdom of Sweden, and be
further bound to a due obedience, and allegiance, and services as they formerly
were to the Kings of Denmark. In like manner, all the other Inhabitants of the
said places, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, Citizens and Country people,
shall from this day and for ever, be bound to His Majesty, his Successors, and
Kingdom of Sweden; and all Super-intendents and Priests, shall follow that
Bishop, Super-intendent and Consistory, to whom His Majesty shall commit and
enjoin them.

XII. On the other side, His Majesty and the Kingdom of Sweden do promise that
all persons, Nobles or Ignoble, whether Ecclesiastic or Seculars, whether
Citizens or Country people, dwelling in the Provinces or places surrendered, by
this Treaty ought to retain their goods and proprieties, whether Inheritances,
Emptions, Changes, Morgages, Grants, etc. And that in such manner, that they
shall have power for the future of possessing, using enjoying, and retaining
the said goods and proprieties as they formerly did; in like manner they shall
retain their usual Rights, Laws, Jurisdictions, Privileges, and Immunities,
such as are those Bi^^ae vitae ac manus ut and Patronatus, according to the
Laws and Constitutions of the Province, without all impediment or let, so far
forth as they do not contradict or oppugn the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom
of Sweden, wherewith these surrendered Provinces and places shall hereafter be
eternally united. What ever shall be determined and decided by Law, Justice or
Judgment, or any other lawful way within those surrendered Provinces, that same
shall hereafter continue so, altogether unchanged and unmoved. That it may also
appear that His Majesty of Sweden out of His singular grace and indulgence, had
rather better than diminish the condition of His Subjects, it is promised, That
all the Nobles that will wholly subject themselves to the King and Kingdom of
Sweden, as for their persons, they shall enjoy all those Prerogatives and
Privileges, that the Subjects and Nobles of Sweden do enjoy, to wit, they
shall be capable of being received and admitted into the Order of Knighthood,
of the Nobles of Sweden, and may enjoy equally with them, the right of Voting,
according to the first constitution of the Court of Knighthood; and that also
so, that as many of the Nobles, who can prove that themselves or their
Ancestors did enjoy the Office of a Senator in the Kingdom of Denmark, may
also be assured to be honored with the Prerogative of being received into the
second Classis of the Knightly Order of Sweden. The rest also may be received
according to the Ordinance of the Court of Knighthood, and shall absolutely be
demeed for Nobles of Sweden, and shall, provided they render themselves
capable, enjoy the same access and admission to Benefices and Honors as the
other Nobles of Sweden. His Majesty of Sweden does likewise promise, that he
will be no less careful in conserving the conditions privileges and liberties
of the others Orders in these surrendered Provinces, and provided they persevere
in their duty to His Majesty of Sweden, they may entertain an assured hope of
bettering their conditons, and enjoying the same Rights as the Natives of
Sweden, for the acquiring of Offices and Advancement.

XIII. That all the Inhabitants, of what quality soever, none excepted, whether
in Schonen or in Denmark, or in Norway, who have goods and properties in
Schonen, Halland, Bleking, Bahuys, and the rest of the surrendered Provinces and
Towns, may enjoy them again, and retain them, together with all the movables
or immoveables which are found there, and that they take possession of them,
the next Feast of St. John, together with all the privileges, proprieties and
rights, in like manner as had been agreed upon, and concluded in the Treaty of
Rotschild, and afterward increased and bettered by His Majesty of Sweaen, and
all without any revenge or loss for any thing done by any whatsoever, in the
late War; provided notwithstanding, that wary and moderate Commissioners be
constituted on both sides, who may deal amicably betwixt both parties, evenning
and liquidating their accounts to the full satisfaction of each one, the better
to prevent all differences in their beginnings which might obstruct this wished
for Peace.

XIV. It is likewise consented to on both sides, that when the Fortresses are
delivered to the King of Sweden's Commissioners, then also all the Documents
and Instructions concerning the Condition, Revenues, Rents, Borders, Shores,
and Limits, and also those writings which concern the Administration of
Justice, Books of Accounts, and others, which may relate to the knowledge of
these things shall be delivered, in case any such be found, which are not as
yet given over. This done, two or three Plenipotentiaries shall be appointed on
both sides, with power to separate, review, direct, and ordain, all the limits
and borders betwixt the surrendered and their neighboring Provinces and
Governments, where they are not as yet reviewed, separated, directed and
ordained, whereby all controversies and differences may be the better declined,
and every one enjoy that which is his, in peace and quietness.

XV. On the other side, the King his Successors and Kingdom of Sweden, do yield
to the King his successors and the kingdom of Denmark, all those rights and
pretensions which his Majesty of Sweden may have upon all the Fortresses,
Fortifications, Isles, Provinces, Cities and Territories, which he mastered by
force of his arms, namely, Zeland, Laland, Falster, Meun, with all the Castles
and Fortlesses in them, as Nykoping, Naskow, Cooster, Corseur, Keuk and
Cronenburg, as also all other Cities, Castles, Forts, Governments, Gentlemen's
Houses, and Territories whatsoever, which are not expressly excepted in this
transaction, or not surrendered by former Covenants. And after they shall be
rendered and restored, with all their appurtenances and rights, according to
the tenor of this Treaty, they shall follow and belong to the King his
Successors and Kingdom of Denmark, without any impediment whatsoever.

XVI. And for the better establishing of mutual confidence and Amity betwixt
these two Kingdoms, His Majesty and Kingdom of Sweden, will have no refusion
for his expenses, in those Fortifications which he raised in Denmark, but will
at the time of their evacuation, take care that they be all delivered entire,
and in the state they are now in, to His Majesty and the Kingdom of Denmark.

XVII. In like manner, at the instance of the Mediators, and for the love of
Peace, the Palace and Government of Drontheym, or -- together with all its
subject Cities, Towns, Castles and Fortresses, as also all their Ecclesiastical
and Secular goods, Governments, and appurtenances, as they were delivered to
His Majesty of Sweden, by the Treaty of Rotschild, shall be restored to the
King, Kingdom and Crown of Denmark, to be re-annexed to the Kingdom of Norway
for ever, without any reserve of pretension upon the same to the King, his
Successors and Kingdom of Sweden; to which end, the King of Denmark's Letters
of Cession made according to the sixth Article of the Treaty of Rotschild, shall
be restored and cancelled.

XVIII. In like manner, the Kings Majesty surrenders for Himself, His
Successors, and the Kingdom of Sweden, all the rights and pretensions that he
had or shall have, as Duke of Bremen, upon the County of Delmenhorst and
Ditmarsh, and transfers those his rights over to His Majesty of Denmark, his
Successors, and the Dukes of Holsteyn of the Royal and Gottorp's Line, so that
His Majesty of Sweden and his Successors, neither will, nor ought, either de
jure, or de facto, ever to pretend any thing more upon these Countries. If also
His Majesty of Sweden obtained any pretension, as Duke of Bremen heretofore,
upon some Noblemens goods in Holsteyn, that also is remitted, by virtue of this
Treaty, and promise made that the documents which are to be found, and pertain
hereunto. shall be delivered to the King of Denmark, and the House of Holsteyn
of the Royal and Gottorp Line.

XIX. And that this renewed Friendship, may be laid upon a more firm
foundation, the King and Kingdom of Sweden will let fall and remit, as they do
hereby let fall and remit, that Right which His Majesty, or any of his
subjects, pretend upon the four Tun of Gold for the Guiney business, so that
henceforward nothing shall be demanded or required for that sum, but the King
and kingdom of Denmark shall remain wholly acquitted and free from any payment,
or least pretense thereof.

XX. As also the Fortresses, as well those which have been taken in this War,
as those which are surrendered by this Pacification, shall be delivered without
Cannon, Carriages, or warlike Ammunition on both sides; except the Castle of
Cronenburg, where according to agreement, those Cannon which were not brought
thither by the Swedes, or have no Swedish Arms or Inscriptions upon them,
shall be retained: So it is likewise agreed, that the Country people of those
Governments, where those Fortresses are seated, shall be obliged to carry the
Cannon and munitions of War to the Shore, where they may be most commodiously
shipped and transported.

XXI. It is also concluded and promised, that in those Fortresses which are to
be surrendered on either side, there shall be a certain time determined, wherein
he who so surrenders a fortified place, shall conserve and keep his Ammunition
of War which is at present there, until he may commodiously transport it
elsewhere.

XXII. All Captives, of what condition soever, shall immediately be set at
liberty without Ransom: But as for their Diet, they shall satisfy that
according to equity. In like manner all Danish subjects which the King and
kingdom of Sweden caused to be transported into other places of their obedience
whatsoever, may have free and unhindred liberty, to return again into their
Native Countries. Such Prisoners who have taken up Arms under the Danes shall
have liberty to return to their former Militia, as also such who are in the
Swedes service, if they please, provided it be done within three Months after
the Ratification of this Peace.

XXIII. It is also agreed, that the places taken by either King, since the
Peace of Rotschild, ought by force of this Treaty be restored to that party,
whose they were, or ought to have been by the Treaty of Rotschild, and all the
Swedish forces, Horse and Foot, shall be withdrawn out of all the Kingdoms,
Provinces, Dutchies, and Lands belonging to the King of Denmark, within 14
days at most after the ratification of this Treaty, which ought to be within a
Month after the conclusion of the Peace; in this manner, that as soon as the
Peace is subscribed, and the same day that it is published, the Siege before
Coppenhagen shall be raised, so that the Camp shall be evacuated within the
four following days, and Nyc^ping, Falster, and Meun within the four next
days after. And on the contrary, the Siege of Tonninger shall be raised, and
all Eyde^stadt and Husum evacuated. Eight days after Nascow shall be
surrendered to the Danes, and about that time, as soon as Shipping is ready and
at hand, the withdrawing of the Forces shall Commence; eight days after this,
Koeg or Keuk shall be surrendered, and the Soldiers drawn out of it, as soon as
the Ratifications are exchanged, within the Month after the signing of the
Peace, and that the shipping for transporting the soldiery are ready; within
the four following days Corseur shall be delivered up, and the Soldiery begin
to be embarked and transported, and at the same time the Duke of Holsteyn's
Country shall be freed from all His Majesty of Denmark's soldiers. Shortly
after, the forces which remain, Horse and Foot shall imbark in convenient
Havens, and likewise be withdrawn from Cronenburg, so that that Fortress shall
be wholly evacuated and surrendered the 15 day after the exchange of the
Ratifications, or when the six Weeks after the conclusion of the Peace are
expired, and at that very time all Zeland shall be delivered and cleared from
the Swedish soldiers.

XXIV. And that no force or injury be done during the said term, to the
inhabitants, in the changes of Fortresses and withdrawing of soldiers, out of
the Cities and Provinces, but that all things may be done in order,
Commissioners from both sides shall be present, who shall both in the Towns and
Ports take special care, that no force, direption of goods, or injuries be done
to the Subjects, or any other unlawful thing imposed upon them, under pain of
punishment to be inflicted upon the transgressour. And as it is necessary that
provisions be made for the sustentation of the Swedish forces during their stay
in the Country, but so, that after the day of concluding the Peace, nothing
more shall be demanded from the subjects, under pretext of Redemption, or any
other burdens whatsoever, but only what is needful for their subsistence
whilst they stay in this Kingdom, and which shall be adjudged such, according
to an appointment made by the Commissioners of both sides; and that the
evacuation may the sooner and better be effected. His Majesty of Denmark shall
forthwith command, in all convenient Havens in every Province, that Ships,
Vessels, and Boats, with their necessaries, Men, Mariners, and implements, be
gathered together and in a readiness, as His Majesty will also command, whereby
the transport of the soldiery, and the evacuation of places may be hastened,
and not impeded, unless by contrary Winds. And all the Ships, together with
their Mariners and men, and what ever else, shall be provided by Denmark for
the said evacuation, shall as soon as the transport is done, be released
without any let or hinderance.

XXV. It shall also be free for all the subjects and inhabitants of the
surrendered Regions and Provinces, to transport themselves into any other Cities
or place to dwell there, provided it be done according to the Statutes of the
Provinces and privileges of the Cities out of which they will transmigrate:
what concerns the goods which in the time of War were carried into Cities for
their security, the Masters and Owners thereof may redemand them, without
contradiction and impediment.

XXVI. The former transactions and Covenants, to wit, those of Stetin, Sioder,
Bromsbro, and Rotschild (excepting the third Article, which is plainly excluded
here) made betwixt these Noble Kingdoms, shall retain their force and vigor in
all their Articles, and shall be confirmed as they were before the beginning of
this War, and as if they were inserted word for word in this Treaty, unless in
as much as they are expressly changed in this.

XXVII. Whereas it is provided by the 22 Article of the Treaty of Rotschild,
that His Majesty of Denmark shall be obliged according to equity, to satisfy
his Highness the Prince of Sleswick, the Duke of Holsteyn Gottorp, after that
the Commissioners of both parts, as well of the King of Denmark's, as of his
said Highness have treated, transacted, and concluded of the matter in
difference at Coppenhagen, the 22 of May 16^8. it is agreed by these, that all
those Covenants and transactions shall be exactly observed and faithfully
performed in every particular.

XXVIII. Moreover, if any thing should have happened in this or the former War,
that might breed any enmities or diffidence, betwixt the King and kingdom of
Denmark, and the Duke of Holsteyn Gottorp, as well betwixt themselves, as their
Ministers, servants, and subjects, all that, as well out of consideration of
their mutual consanguinity, and especially of Her Majesty the Queen of Sweden,
as betwixt the two Royal, and Ducal House of Holsteyn Gottorp, shall from this
day, by virtue of this Treaty, be composed and wholly forgot; and on the
contrary, a perfect, solid, and perpetual friendship be established betwixt
them. His Majesty of Denmark will also when the evacuation is made in Denmark,
withdraw his Army and forces out of his Highness Countries, Fortresses, and
Cities, and also use his utmost endeavor to persuade the Confederates to
evacuate such of his Highness Forts and Towns which they possess, without any
delay.

XXIX. What Kings, Commonwealths, Powers, and Princes soever, shall desire to
be comprehended in this Peace, must require it of both Kings. But the Emperor,
the King of Poland, and the Elector of Brandenburg, together with their
Kingdoms, Electorships, Dutchies, and Provinces are expressly included herein.
So that His Majesty and Kingdom of Sweden, will seek no pretense, under no
pretext whatsoever, against the aforementioned Emperor, King of Poland, and
Electour of Brandenburg, because of the aid given by them this War, against the
Kingdom of Sweden and its Confederats.

XXX. The Lord Anthony Gunther Earl of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst, etc. his
Successors, Feudals, and Freeholders, together with their Countries,
Dynasties, Lands, Goods, Jurisdictions and Appurtenances, shall be included in
this Pacification; wherein also John Prince of Anhalt, of the Line of Zervest,
because of the Dynasty of Jeveren, and the Lord the Earl Anthony of Oldenburg,
Lord in Varel and Kniphawsen, with his Dynasties, Lordships, Goods and Rights,
shall be also comprehended.

XXXI. It is further agreed, that all the Cities comprehended in the Hanse
League, none excepted, are likewise included in this, so that they may enjoy a
free and undisturbed Commerce, in both Kingdoms, both by Sea and Land: and if
any thing have happened in this War, that might offend either party, that also
is forgot and buried in eternal Oblivion.

XXXII. And whereas certain secret Articles were concluded about the time of
the Rotschild Pacification, which are not reiterated in this, all such shall be
of force, as if they were inserted word for word in this Treaty. Moreover, what
Writings soever have been published during this War, on either side, tending to
the prejudice or scandal of the other, are hereby wholly taken away, and shall
be cashiered and prohibited, and be no more divulged or reprinted, within these
Kingdoms.

XXXIII. But that all these things as they are set down, as well in word as in
deed, may be observed and fulfilled now and for the future, with all firmness,
fidelity, and sincerity, it is mutually promised that these our Covenants shall
be amicably confirmed by both Kings, Frederick the third King of Denmark, and
Charles King of Sweden, with the subscriptions of their Hands, and impression
of their Seals; and for greater security, they shall be signed and sealed by
the Senators of both Kingdoms.

XXXIV. It is also concluded and promised, that a Senator and Secretary of both
sides, shall about the 24 of June next following meet at Elzeneur, and bring
with them and exchange the Ratification of this Treaty, confirmed with the
Subscriptions and Signatures of both parties. Where also the Swedes shall have
with them the Letters of Cession, for the Government of Drontheym, and deliver
them at the same time to the Danish Commissioners, as a testimony of the force,
firmness, and observance of the concluded Peace.

This Treaty being thus Concluded, Subscribed, and Sealed, by the Commissioners
of both sides, the Ambassadors, Commissioners, and Plenipotentiary Deputies of
the most Christian King of France, of the Commonwealth of England, and of the
High and Mighty Lords of the United Provinces, did promise in the Names of
their Principals, and oblige themselves by a reciprocal Caution and Garranty,
as well general of the three States together, as special of each State apart,
as they do hereby tie themselves in the best Form, by a most ample, secure, and
mutual Obligation, as Sureties, Cautions, and Avengers of what is transacted,
and cause effectually that these covenants be fully, carefully, and religiously
performed, and observed for ever: And that they will also procure the
Ratifications of their respective Principals hereupon: So that they have been
further entreated by the Commissioners of both Kings (not only as Mediators,
but as Sureties, Pledges, and Avengers of these transactions) for greater
confirmation, and certain assurance of all, to Subscribe and Sign these
Articles and Treaty together with them.

dated betwixt Coppenhagen and the Camp, the 27 of May, Anno 1660. Hugues de
Terlon (LS.) Al. Sidney (LS.) Rob. Honniwood (LS.) G. Van Slingland (LS.) Pet.
Vogelsang (LS.) P. de Huybert (LS.) W. Haren (LS.) Olaus Gasberg (LS.) Axelius
Urup (LS.) Pet. Rees (LS.) Sch. Rosenhaen (LS.) Steno Bielke (LS.)


Whilst this Work was in the Press, the following Papers came accidentally to
hand. Which containing a Summary Account of things conducing to the
illustration of much of the Political part of the foregoing History, whose
Author chiefly intended the Military (being composed by One, who had been
public Minister upon the place, during the time of the first War, terminated
by the Rotschild Treaty, in which He was Mediator; and during most part of the
Second; renewed by the Swede upon a pretended inexecution on the Danish part of
the said Treaty) I have thought good to subjoyn, as an useful Appendix to it.

A Report of the State of Affairs betwixt the two Crowns of Sweden and Denmark;
made by Sir Philip Meadow, upon his return into England, in December, 1669.
AFter the Peace concluded at Rotschild, in Febr. 1657. Betwixt the two Crowns
of Sweden and Denmark, under the Mediation of England and France, to the
seeming good contentment of both the Kings: The one gaining eminent advantages,
by the acquisition of a new Territory; The other, avoiding the imminent peril
of the loss of his whole Country; I was remanded out of Denmark, by express
order from England, and placed with His Majesty of Sweden, with intention to
begin a new Mediation, betwixt Him, the King of Poland, and the Elector of
Brandenburg, and had powers and creditives requisite for that purpose. In the
mean time, new and unexpected jealousies arose, betwixt Sweden and Denmark,
which at last broke forth to an open rupture of the Peace so lately
established. The beginning of August 1658. His Majesty of Sweden rendezvouz'd a
Body of his Army at Kiel in Holsteyn, and there embarked them, but kept his
Design very secret. He propounded to me to go along with him, which I refused,
considering that his Design must either be upon Denmark or Prussia, in neither
of which cases it could be proper for me to accompany Him. Not into Denmark,
for there I had been already Mediator, and therefore incongruous for me, to
have been the Spectator of a breach of the Peace I had so lately concluded,
without having orders from England suitable to such an emergency. Not into
Prussia, because thither I was designed Mediator, and therefore ought not to
make my self a party, by putting my self in company of an Enemy. Whereupon I
stopped in Germany, writing immediately into England, to communicate what had
passed, and attending further Orders.

During these traverses, the old Protector fell sick, and incapable of making
reflection upon affairs in those quarters; and soon after died. But as soon as
I had received new Orders and Creditives from England, I embarked at Travemond
and returned for Denmark, in quest of His Majesty of Sweden. The latter end of
October, 1658. Admiral Opdam with the Dutch Fleet consisting of about 38 men of
War, and 70 small Merchantmen and Fluyts, upon which were embarked 3000 Land
soldiers, passed the Sound, and after a sharp encounter with the Swedish
Fleet, arrived at Coppenhagen. Thus was Sweden engaged at the same time in a
War with the Emperor, Pole, Brandenburger, Moscovite, Dane, and Hollander. But
this powerful arming of our Neighbour-State, awakened us in England to
consider, that we also had an interest to preserve in the Baltic Sea, which we
had no more reason to believe that the Hollander would do for us at his own
charges, than that he would imbarque himself in so expensive a War, without
expecting some satisfactory considerations of return from Denmark. Besides,
though we were willing to see Coppenhagen relieved, yet we were not sure the
Hollanders assistance would be bounded there, and could not be willing to see
the King of Sweden ruined by the combined force of so many Enemies.

The States General made it their work and business, absolutely to assist the
Dane, and never made any overture of accommodation betwixt the two Kings, nor
had as yet any public Minister upon the place by whom to do it; But England
steers in this affair another course, propounds not a direct Assistance, but a
Peace. Has no design to make the King of Sweden Master of Denmark, for on the
contrary, the conservation of Denmark is the common Interest both of England
and Holland; But the proper Interest of England, was so to make a Peace, as not
to suffer the Dane to be ruined by the Swede, nor to suffer the Swede to be
ruined by the Hollander; or in the conditions of the Peace, to be subjected to
such Laws as he should impose upon him at pleasure; but to preserve Sweden not
only as a balance upon the House of Austria, which is the common interest of
England and France, but as the counterpoise upon the Confederate Naval strength
of Holland and Denmark, which is the peculiar interest of England. And besides
this, England had another interest in this Affair, viz. To enable the King of
Sweden so to retire himself out of so unhappy a War, and upon such equitable
terms and conditions, as might have both capacitated him, and obliged him, to
give us some reasonable satisfaction and recompense, in consideration of the
great expenses we were necessitated to be at, for the securing of his interest,
together with our own. And indeed the most visible medium at that time for
stopping the progress of a War betwixt Sweden and Holland, and taking up the
differences betwixt Sweden and Denmark, was a Fleet from England.

In November 1658. A Fleet of twenty Frigates was sea out under Vice Admiral
Goodson, who coming to the height of the Scaw, found he could not enter the
Cataget, for the abundance of Ice, and so was constrained to return without
effecting any thing, only that this warlike appearance from England, stopped
the 4000 men and twelve ships of War which were ready in the Texel, designed
for the Baltic, under the command of de Ruyter.

During this, I had proposed to both Kings, the Mediation of England, for
composing a second-time the differences betwixt the two Crowns, which both of
them freely accepted. But I could never induce the King of Denmark to treat
seperately with the King of Sweden alone, he always insisting upon the
comprehension and admission of all his Allies to the same Treaty, which was
directly against the letter of my Instructions.

In January 1658. A Treaty was made betwixt France and England, for
re-establishing a Peace betwixt the two Northern Kings, upon equitable terms.
Wherein it was particularly provided, that if upon occasion of the succors
sent, or hereafter to be sent from England to the King of Sweden in order to
such a Peace, a War should arise with any other Foreign Prince or State;
France together with England, should declare such Prince or State their common
Enemy.

The beginning of April 1659. The Fleet under General Mountague arrived in the
Sound. My Instructions, were to propound a particular Treaty betwixt the two
Crowns, because a general one, in order to an Universal Peace, would have been
at that time tedious and impracticable, and the Peace to be established in
pursuance of this particular Treaty, was to be under the conditions and
qualifications of the Rotschild Treaty, as the most proper Medium for
accommoding all differences. Besides, both France and England, esteemed it most
honorable, to assert and maintain that Peace wherein they had been joint
Mediators. The issue of my Negotiations was this. The K. of Denmark absolutely
refused to treat sperately with Sweden, the K. of Sweden declares himself
willing to treat, but not willing to accept of the Rotschild Treaty, as the
terms and conditions of the Peace. Pretending, that this would be tacitly to
accuse His last enterprise upon Denmark of injustice, for if the Dane gave the
occasion of the War, by entering into new practices and combinations with his
Enemies, after the former Peace made, which he avers they did (though both
Kings as is usual in such cases, highly protest the right of their Cause, and
the justice of their Arms) then says he, I ought to have better security for
the future, that the Dane by an innate animosity and desire of revenge,
fomented by other States, start not out upon every occasion, to traverse my
designs, and work me mischief, when they shall find me entangled in a remote
War, as formerly in Poland: especially being contiguous with Sweden, and so
most capable of doing me hurt. Besides that, He pretended satisfaction for the
loss of Thoren, and a considerable part of Prussia, occasioned by this
diversion of his Arms in Denmark; As also, for the loss of these opportunities
in Germany, during the vacancy of the Empire, which He might have improved by
the presence of His Army in those parts, and the assistance of France and his
other Allies, either to have turned aside the Succession from the House of
Austria his Hereditary Enemy, or to have capitulated advantages for himself
with the Emperor that was to be Elected, or at least wise to have prevented
the conjunction and confederacy betwixt the now Emperor and the Electour of
Brandenburg. Many other difficulties lay in the way of the Rotschild Treaty,
amongst which it was not the least, that the King had already disposed of to
the Officers of his Court and Army, the Lands in Schonen and Bleking, which by
the Treaty of Rotschild are reserved to their respective Proprietors, viz. the
Danish Nobility. However, after many instances and solicitations, together with
the advantage of the Report, which was about this time confirmed from all
hands, that the Peace betwixt France and Spain was intended in good earnest,
which might probably oblige England to retire home their forces for their own
security, and slacken any assistance from France, and so Sweden left alone to
contest with so many Enemies. His Majesty began at last to hearken to the
Proposition of the Rotschild Treaty, and by a Paper in writing signed by His
Commissioners; bearing date the 21 of April, in answer to a former Memorial of
mine, expressly accepted the said Treaty, but then subjoyned to the words of
acceptance, a provisional clause of better security, than what was formerly
granted him, by the bare disposition of the Rotschild Treaty. Which clause I
not being satisfied with, as that which might be interpreted as elusory of the
foregoing words, His Majesty soon after declared to me, that as to point of
future security, He would acquiess in the special Garranty of England and
France, which I had power also to offer Him on the part of England.

In pursuance of the Instructions sent upon the Fleet under General Mountague,
and the better to facilitate the work of the Peace, by engaging the States
General to act in Consort with England and France. A Treaty was concluded at
the Hague the 11 of May, 1659. Betwixt the three States, in order to
re-establish a Peace betwixt the two Northern Kings, upon the root and
foundation of the Rotschild Treaty. There Weeks time was limited to the
Negotiation of the public Ministers upon the place, after the expiration of
which Term, neither England nor the States, were to assist either of the Kings
who should refuse the Peace, during his refusal. The King of Sweden, though
unbeknown to the States General, had already assented to treat upon the foot
and foundation of the Rotschild Treaty, his safe Conducts prepared, his
Commissioners nominated; I as Mediator, propounded Fredericksburg for the place
of the Treaty, which the King also accepted. The Dutch Deputies Extraordinary
from the States General to the two Kings, who arrived about this time, made
their instances and applications to his Majesty of Denmark (as I had formerly
also done) to draw from him a suitable concurrence to the Rotschild Treaty. But
that King still persisted in the same resolution, not to treat separately, but
propounded an Universal Treaty, at which the Ministers of his respective Allies
and Confederates might be present; and to this end, nominated Lubec for the
place of a general Assembly. I urged upon the Dutch Deputies, the fourth
Article of the Treaty of the Hague, wherein it is covenanted; that no assistance
was to be given, to the Prince that should refuse a Peace upon just and
reasonable conditions, which reasonable conditions are by the first Article to
be expounded the Treaty at Rotschild. Now he who refuses to treat (which in
this case, according to the sense of the three Estates was to treat separately)
refuses a Peace upon what conditions soever.

The Deputies were at accord with me, that His Majesty of Denmark continuing in
that resolution, their Fleets could no longer assist him, and wrote to General
Opdam their Commander in chief, to the same effect; who at that time was with
his Fleet in the Belt. He notwithstanding continued still to favor underhand
the Dane, but durst not so vigorously and openly assist him, as otherwise he
would, partly by reason of the contrary Advise and Orders which he had received
from the Deputies of the States, but more especially, because overawed by the
presence of the English Fleet.

This suspension of Assistance on the part of the Hollander, though the English
Fleet remained Neutral and acted nothing, only obliged the other to the
performance of Covenants, gave the Swede some considerable advantages, who upon
this opportunity, reduced the Isles of Moenen, Falster, and Laland, together
with the capital Town of Naskow under his obedience. The truth is, the Dutch
Deputies found themselves engaged in some difficulties, for whereas they
supposed that the King of Sweden would have been the refuser of the Treaty, and
consequently the English Fleet bound up from giving him any Assistance (which
was the main thing they aimed at) and the King of Denmark the accepter, and
consequently the Dutch Fleet at liberty to assist him, they found the quite
contrary, and so had tied up their own hands, by their Treaty made at the Hague.

This was the state of Affairs in the Northern parts, at the time of the Change
of the Government here in England, and the Parliaments being restored to their
former authority. And this was the true season of ripening things to a
conclusion, and if the Negotiation had continued still in the same train and
method, that is, if the Parliament had either immediately sent new powers to
me, to act according to my former Instructions, viz. the Rotschild Treaty; or
forthwith dispatched some other person or persons to pursue the same, it had
certainly issued to a Peace. For England, France, Sweden, yea and Holland too,
being at accord concerning the Medium of the Peace, it was not possible that
the Dane should stand it out long. But no persons appearing from England, and I
having no authorities from the Parliament, the Dutch Deputies began to seek
evasions. When I urged upon them, that they ought not to assist the refusing
King; their only Reply was this, that by the first Article of the Treaty at the
Hague, the Ministers upon the place were to use their utmost diligence and
endeavor with both the Kings, which, said they, I had done with the King of
Sweden, but not with the King of Denmark, which was a mere shift, because they
knew I could not at that time go to Coppenhagen, being destitute of Creditives.
And now they held themselves no longer obliged by the Treaty at the Hague, but
de Ruyter with a new Fleet of forty men of War enters the Belt, joins with
Admiral Opdam, passes on to Coppenhagen, all which was expressly against the
letter of the said Treaty.

True it is, that about the middle of June 1659, I received a Letter from the
Council of State, directed to my self; authorizing me to continue my
Negotiation with the two Kings as formerly, till further order from the
Parliament or Council of State, but I neither had Creditives nor Commission,
nor any thing to exhibit to either of the Kings, whereby to constitute and
legitimate me, as the public Minister of this Commonwealth.

And now the Negotiation for the Peace was at a long pause, and our Fleet in
the mean time at an Anchor in the Sound. Only because His Majesty of Denmark
had always insisted upon an Universal Treaty, in reference to a general Peace,
His Majesty of Sweden gave me a Declaration in writing, which I sent to the
Council of State June the 28, in which he also declared himself willing to
treat a general Peace.

This he did of his own accord, not at my instance, for all my Instructions
directad me only to a particular Treaty betwixt the 2 Crowns. His Majesty told
me moreover, that in case England and France would obtain for him a general
Peace, in which said Peace he propounded to himself no more, than that things
betwixt Him, the Emperor, and the Electour of Brandenburg, should return to
their former estate without any further demands on either side; and for the
Pole, he should only give him some equitable recompense for the places he
should surrender to him in Pruss. He would not only admit the Dane to the
Rotschild Treaty, but release something considerable in the said Treaty, in
consideration of a general Peace. But in case of a separate Treaty with
Denmark, he would remit nothing of the Rotschild Treaty.

The 20. of July 1659. The Commissioners Plenipotentiary arrived in the Sound,
which was three months after the Change of the Government here in England, I
was put out of the Commission for the Mediation, and had Creditives sent me
only as Resident. A little before this, viz. the fourth of the said Month, a
new Treaty was made at the Hague, by which the King of Sweden was to restore,
not only what he had gain upon the Dane by this last War, but also the Island
of Bruntholm, with the Government of Drontheym in Norway, with all its
appurtenances, a Country of near 200 English miles extent, which was formerly
granted him by the Rotschild Treaty, and by authentic Acts of State
incorporated in the Crown of Sweden: Besides the remission of the 400000
Ryxdollers, which the Dane had formerly promised to pay for satisfaction of
damages, done to the Swede in Guinea. The King of Sweden was also to admit the
States General to the Treaty made at Elbing, and the Elucidations thereof made
at Thoren, and both States, viz. England and Holland, reciprocally oblige
themselves, not only not to assist the refuser, but to compel by joint force of
Arms, to an acceptance of the foresaid conditions. And thus the State of
Affairs was quite altered, and new obstacles interposed in the way of the
Peace. For, I. Both Kings were highly dis-satisfied with this manner of
proceeding. For whereas the first Treaty at the Hague of the eleventh of May,
was never propounded to either of the Kings as that which should bind or oblige
them, but only made use of by Me as a private Instruction; this was not only
publicly propounded, but was to be obtruded by a compulsory force, England and
Holland making themselves not Mediators, but Umpires and Arbitrators of the
quarrel betwixt the two Kings, which they interpreted to a diminution of their
Sovereignty, by erecting a superiority over them. But the King of Sweden was
most of all disgusted, because England without any concert or communication had
with him, enters into a Treaty with his open Enemies (for so at that time he
reputed the States General) to impose upon him by a conjoint force, Laws and
Conditions which he judges altogether unreasonable. II. Whereas the King of
Sweden had already accepted of the Rotschild Treaty, conform to the Agreement
made at the Hague of the eleventh of May (though not under the notion and
formality of the Treaty at the Hague as obligatory upon him) but as the counsel
and advice of England his faithful Allies, and upon the King of Denmark's
refusal, had in prosecution of the War gained notable advantages upon him; the
King of Sweden expected both to have profited by his acceptance of the Peace,
at the instance of England, and by the advantages of the War, he having after
the refusal of the King of Denmark, reduced Moenen, Falster, and Laland.
Whereas a new Treaty is made at the Hague of the fourth of July, in prejudice
of the accepting King, to clog the Peace on his part with new and burdensome
conditions, and these to be forcibly imposed upon him, in favor of the
Refuser. Besides that, England recoils from their own Agreement; and says the
King, as they have made a second, so they may still make a third, and a fourth
Treaty at the Hague. III. The tedious and unnecessary delays which have been
used, have been a great obstruction in the way of the Peace. For if the Peace
betwixt the two Crowns had been concluded in the Spring of the year, the King
of Sweden had had time enough to have transported his Army into Pomeren, to
have taken the Campagn there, to have prevented the infal of the Imperial Army,
and to have provided Winter quarters for his Troops. But the Summer being
almost passed, before the arrival of the Plenipotentiaries, and the Peace to be
begun anew upon another foot, which would necessarily require some longer time.
The King of Sweden was to seek what to have done with his Army; to disband them
was not reasonable, because though he had made Peace with Denmark, yet he had
still War with the Emperor, Pole, and Brandenburger. In Sweden there was no
subsistence for them, to transport them into Pomeren, and there take the Field,
he could not, for the Imperial Army was much superior to his in strength, and
had already seized the principal Passes of the Country, and was absolutely
Master of the Campaign. And to have put them into Garrisons, which above two
parts in three consisted of Horse, the want of forage had ruined them in few
days. So that now the King of Sweden holds close to Denmark; First, as a
quarter to his Troops. Secondly, as a place of refuge and security, putting
himself upon the Defensive, as it were entrenched within those Islands, not
having strength sufficient to appear before his Enemy upon the Terra firma.
Thirdly, as a Gage or Pledge for the restitution of what he had lost in
Pomeren. And I have reason to believe that as things now stand, the War betwixt
Denmark and Sweden will hardly be accommodated but by a general Peace.


In the mean time, I humbly conceive that England in the management of this
business, has departed from their proper Interest, and that upon these
following grounds.

I. We have wholly dis-obliged the Swede who is Englands counterpoise against
the Dane and Hollander, The Hollander is sure that the Dane will always side
with him against England, witness the Arrest of our Merchantmen in the Sound,
in 1653. We ought to be as sure of the Swede, and though not to assist him in
the conquest of Denmark, yet so to have managed the business of a Peace, as to
have firmly engaged him in our Interests.

II. We have lost our reputation; It had been honorable for England to have
maintained the Rotschild Treaty, in which we were Mediators. But to equip a
mighty Fleet of forty of our best men of War, and to keep them out at Sea six
Months together, to the amazement of all our Neighboring States, without
effecting any thing, failing of our End and Design, is wholly inglorious.

III. We have lost our Expenses. The King of Sweden never supposed that England
would be at all those vast charges, without expecting any return from him, but
freely propounded several advantages in point of Trade and Commerce by way of
recompense, and amongst others, propounded that the Pitch and Tar, and the
whole growth and production of Sweden, which is for the apparel and equipage of
Shipping, should be sold at a regulated price to English Merchants only, by
which means London might have become the Staple of those Commodities. But we on
the contrary, have barred our selves from accepting any thing of privilege or
advantage, though it be only ratione oneris, upon the account of our expenses,
and so to be considered as a re-imbursement. For by the Agreement of the Hague
of the fourth of July, England is to compel the King of Sweden to admit the
States General to the Treaty at Elbing. And by the express letter of the Treaty
of Elbing, the King of Sweden is obliged to admit the people of the United
Netherlands, to the same privileges and advantages which he either has, or
shall hereafter grant, to any other Foreign Nation whatsoever.

IV. We oblige cour selves, to force the King of Sweden to admit the States
General to the Elbing Treaty, notwithstanding that by that Treaty the former
Treaties made betwixt Queen Christina, and the States General, one at Stockholm
1640, and the other at Suderacre 1645, are expressly renewed and re-confirmed.
Both which are Treaties of mutual Defense, and by virtue of which, in case
England become hereafter engaged in a War against Holland, the King of Sweden
will be obliged to assist Holland against us, with four thousand men at his own
charges.

V. We have lost our Opportunity of making the Peace. England was once in a
manner Arbitrator of this whole affair. England propounds the Rotschild Treaty
as the Medium of the Peace, Holland though very unwilling, yet is necessitated
to assent thereto. For to think that Holland, who was in actual War with
Portugal and Sweden, would at the same time break with England, when backed
with France, especially his most confident Ally the Dane, being reduced to that
extremity, as to become instead of a help, a charge and burden, is to suppose
that which is Morally and Politically impossible. But as the case now stands,
England is the least in this business, all that we pretend to, is to be
included in the States Generals Treaty of Elbing, wherein they are Principals,
and we but Accessories.

VI. We play advantages into the hands of the Hollander our Rival State, and
that only which stands in the eye and aim of England's greatness. For besides
the Treaty of Elbing, which we engage to obtain for him. The Hollander obliges
us also to see Drontheym restored to the Dane. In which the Hollander consults
his own utility, for Schonen is the Country, which the King of Denmark would
have restored, but the Hollander profits more by Drontheym, when in the King of
Denmark's hands, than the King of Denmark himself; both in point of Trade, and
in Levies of Men: For, during the late War betwixt England and Holland, the
Dutch had seldom less than two or three thousand of those Norwegians in the
service of their Fleets. Besides that, the greatest part or the whole of the
Revenue of Drontheym, is oppignorated to the Merchants of Amsterdam for debt.
And indeed, the whole Kingdom of Denmark is become so obnoxious, upon the
account of vast Debts, that it is in a manner at the disposition of Holland.

The States General have steered an even and direct course to their Interest.
They have maintained their Ally, they have not only secured Denmark from the
power of Sweden, but secured it to themselves; And being secure of Denmark, are
now assuring Sweden to themselves also; having already weakened the near Amity
and correspondence which was betwixt England and Sweden. Whereas we, after all
our Expenses, are so far from being sure of the friendship of either of the
Kings, that we are sure of the ill will of both; Of the Dane, for appearing
with an armed Fleet in the Interests of Sweden; of the Swede, for no sooner
appearing but deserting him. They have also obtained their Treaty at Elbing,
which in rigor of justice they could not pretend to, for they themselves
formerly refused to ratify it in due time. And to crown all, they have
heightened their reputation, by rendering themselves Masters of their Design. We
on the contrary, have lost our Friend, lost our Expenses, lost our Business,
lost our Reputation; From whence I conclude, that in the management of this
Affair, we in England have departed from Our proper Interest.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books, Printed for and are to be Sold by Thomas Basset, at the
George in Fleet Street, near Cliffords-Inn.
Folio 's.
1. COsmography, in four Books; containing, the Chorography and History of the
whole World, and all the principal Kingdoms, and Provinces, Seas, and Isles
thereof. By P. Heylin, Printed 1669 in Columns, much better than any of the
former Editions, price 20 s. 2. The Voyages and Travels of the Duke of
Holstein's Ambassadors into Muscovy, Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year
1633, and finished in 1639. containing a complete History of those Countries.
Whereto are added, the Travels of Mandelso, from Persia into the East Indies,
begun in 1638, and finished in 1640. The whole, illustrated with diverse accurat
Maps, and Figures: written Originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the
Embassy. Englished, by J. Davies of Kidwelly. Price bound 18 shillings. 3. An
Historical Display of the Romish State, Court, Interest, Policies, etc. and the
mighty influences of the Jesuits in that Church, and many other Christian
States, not hitherto extant. Being a full Account of all the Transactions both
in France, and at Rome, concerning the five famous Propositions, controverted
between the Jansenists, and the Molinists, from the beginning of that affair
till the Popes Decision: Written originally by Mons. de St. Amor, Doctor of
Sorbonne, Englished by G. Havers, price bound 14. s. 4. A general Collection of
Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon questions of all sorts of
Philosophy, and other natural knowledge, made in the Assembly of the Beaux
Esprits at Paris, by the most ingenuous persons of that Nation, Englished by G.
Havers, in two Volumes, price bound 30. s. 5. The History of Barbado's, St.
Christophers, Mevis, S. Vincents, Antego, Martineco, Montserrat, and the rest
of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight, in two Books; containing the
Natural and Moral History of those Islands; illustrated with diverse pieces of
Sculpture, representing the most considerable Rarities therein described.
Englished by J. Davies, price bound 10. s. 6. Bentiv^lio and Urania, in six
Books; Written by Nath. Jugelo, D. D. The second Edition: To which is added,
the Interpretation of the hard names imprinted in the Margin, throughout the
Book, price bound 12. s. 7. J. Ragguagli Di Parnasso, or Advertisements from
Parnassus. With the Politic Touchstone, written Originally in Italian, by
Trajano Boccalini, Englished by the Earl of Monmouth, the second Edition, price
bound 8. s. 8. The History of Philosophy, by Thomas Stanley, price bound 3. l.
9. Londinopolis, an Historical Discourse or Perlustration of the City of
London, whereunto is added another of the City of West minster, with the Courts
of Justice, Antiquities, and New Buildings thereunto belonging: by James Howel
Esquire, price 5. s. 10. The Complete Body of the Art Military, in three Books:
Being perfect Directions for the right ordering and Framing of an Army, both of
Horse and Foot. Together with all the manner of Fortifications, and the Art of
Gunnery. By Rich. Elton Lieutenant Colonel, price bound, 8. s. 11. The History
of the late Wars in Denmark, comprising all the transactions both Civil and
Military, during the differences betwixt the two Northern Crowns. By R. Manley.
12. An Abridgment of the Common Law, Alphabetically digested, by Hen: Roll,
Sergeant at Law: Published by the Lord Chief Baron Hales, and approved of by
all the Judges, price bound 40. s. 13. The Reports of Sir George Croke, in
three Volumes, in English: Allowed of by all the Judges. The second Edition,
carefully corrected by the Or^ginal, price bound 45. s. 14. All the four
Volumes of the Institutes of the Laws of England. First, a Commentary on
Littleton. 2 An Exposition on Magna Charta, and other Statutes. 3 Concerning
High Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown. 4 Concerning the Jurisdiction of
Courts. All with necessary Tables not heretofore printed, price bound 47. s.
15. Brief Animadversions on, Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records,
to the fourth part of the Institutes of the L^^s of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts. by W. Pryx,Esquire. price bound 12. s. 16. Reports and
Cases taken in the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh years of King
Char^es the first, as they were argued at the Common Pleas Bar. By Sir Thomas
Hethy, Sergeant at Law, price bound 5. s. 17. The Reports of Sir John Bridgman
Knight, Sergeant at Law, price bound 5 s. 18. The Reports of Judge Owen, price
bound 5. s. 19. The Reports of Sir James Ley Knight, price bound 5. s. 20. The
Reports of Edmund Anderson, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in two
Parts, price bound 14. s. 21. The Pleader, containing perfect Presidents and
forms of Declarations, Pleadings, Issues, Judgments, and Proceedings in all
kinds of Actions: By Jo. Hern, price 15. s. 22. An exact Book of Entries, of
the most select Judicial Writs, used in the Common Law, by R. Moyle Esquire one
late of the Prothonotaries of the Court of Common-Bench, price 3. s. 6. d. 23.
A Treatise of Forest Laws, by John Munwood, price 6. s.
Quarto 's.
24. Placita Latinae Rediviva, a new Book of Entries. By R. A. of Furnivals
Inn, price 6. s. 25. The Slighted Maid, a Comedy, price 1. s. 26. The Roman
Generals, Or, the Distressed Lady, price 1. s. 27. The Marriage-Night, written
by the Lord Faulkland, price 1. s.
Octavo 's.
28. The Art how to know men: written Originally by De la Chamber, Englished by
J. Davies, price 3. s. 29. Claudius Elianus his Various History, Englished by
Thomas Stanley, price 2. s. 6. d. 30. Scarron's Novels, viz. The Fruitless
Precaution, the Hypocrites, the Innocent Adultery, the Judge in his own Cause,
the Rival Brothers, the Invisible Mistress, the Chastisement of Avarice,
Englished with Additions, by J. Davies, price 3. s. 31. The Worthy Communicant,
or a Discourse of the Nature, effects, and blessings, consequent to the worthy
receiving of the Lords Supper: with devotions fitted to every part of the
ministration: By Jer. Tay^o D. D. and late Lord Bishop of Down and Connor,
price 4. s. 32. Scintilla Altaris, Primitive Devotions, in the Fasts and Feasts
of the Church of England: The fourth Edition, with additions upon the three
grand Solemnities last annexed to the Lyturgy. By E. Spark. D. D. price 7. s.
33. An Abridgment of the three Volumes of Reports of Sir George Croke Knight,
by W. Hughes of Grayes-Inn, price 6. s. 34. An Exact Abridgement of the Doctor
and Student, price 1. s. 35. Landlords Law, a Collection of several Cases in
the Law, concerning Leases, and the Covenants, Conditions, Grants, Proviso's,
Exceptions, Surrenders etc. of the same. As also, touching Distresses,
Replevins, Rescour, and Waste, and several other things which come in debate
between Landlord and Tenant, by G. Meriton, price 18. d. 36. The Young Clerks
Tutor, enlarged: Being a Collection of the best presidents of Recognizances,
Obligations, Conditions, Acquittances, Bills of Sale, Warrants of Attorney,
etc.

