THE Manner of the EXECUTION OF William Howard, late Earl of Stafford, and one
of the Popish Lords On Wednesday the 29th of this instant December, For
High Treason, In Conspiring the Death OF THE KING, AND To subvert the
Protestant Religion.
When Men ungrateful, and base Souls are by their Prince's favors, raised
most Commonly they degenerate into Terasons, and the fowlest Crimes that
Intrest or Ambition can put into their Minds, not only against those that are
their Equals, but against that power that raised them; and that they ought most
to reverence and respect as bound to it, not only by the Laws of Man, but
likewise by those of Heaven, which have commanded us to honor and Obey the
King, and that it is Damnation to resist his power; yet such have been our
Traiterous Sons of Rome, that blinded by their Superstitious Zeal and gross
Errors they have not regard either; but have gone on in such horrid and
diabolick Conspiracies which had they not been prevent by an Almighty Arm. and
we plucked out of the Jaws of Ruin and Desolation; their horrible effects, had
^^de the World look pail to see the Kingdoms lie welltring in their Childrens
Bloods; whilst on each hand insulting Papists with Fire and Sword, destroyed
each Sex and Age of their merciless cruelty many Countries can testfie; witness
Bohemia, Abligentia, Waldentia, Podmont, Flanders, France, Ireland, England,
and, an^ many Countries more where those Slaves to the Scarlet Beast, and
Enemies to the Gospel have Tyranized; but let us leave those acts of Ancient
times, and come to these our Modern ones, and take a serious veiw of the mighty
Stratagems, and Dark contrivances they had for this Fifteen or Sixteen Years
past been brooding.

First, To Fire the famous City and great Metropolis of the Nation by, That to
reduce us to poverty, and in rich themselves by the plunder; that uot taking
effect, a Massacre was next designed; but first the King must be Murdered to
begin the bloody Scean and Tragical destruction to perfect this, they had hired
several Persons with vast Sums, five Hundred or a Thousand pound, was a small
offer, and over and above a Pardon for their sins; for ever such was their
Ignorance hudwinked to rush upon Damnation; nay so far went, they, when they
saw the courage of their Ruffins fail, and that God held back their ^ands; as
to offer Waik^man, Ten Thousand pounds actually for to Administer a Dose of
Poison, but at last Heaven brought to light their Hellish practices, so deep in
Night and Darkness laid, and the grand Traitors were apprehended and lodged
safe in the strong Tower; this Lord of whose deserved fall we intend to Treat,
being one of the Number, and proved to be guilty of most or all the before
mentioned villainies; for so we may rightly term such vile and horrid Treasons
in his Plea before the Lords assembled in Parliament, he could not well deny
the same, they were sworn so positively and plain against him, by those very
men whom he had endeavored, or did actually hire to undertake the same by which
it was seen that Heavens imediate hand was in the discovery and means to bring
him to his deserved punishment; so that after several Evidences for him had
argued backward and forwards confounding their Testimonys almost at every
Question demanded of them rather to his disadvantage, then profit, so that one
of his Servants was heard to say to him in Court that he wondered he would ever
trust Mr. Dudgale (one of the meterial Evidences for the King) with any of his
secrets for he had often told he would betray his Trust, or words to that
effect.

After he had, had a fair Trial before his Peers which lasted for the space of
Six days he was Cast by his Peers and found guilty of the High Treason, with
which he was charged; upon which he made many Apologies but of no avail, for
the most part being convinced of the illegality of his Opinions by the Lord
high Steward. So that at last he was brought to the Bar with the Tower Ax boren
before him, to receive Sentance of death, at which he seemed much dismayed; for
it is most commonly observed those that are inclined to cruelty and eagerly
hunt after the lives of others, are not willing to graple with death himself;
one thing is worthy to be observed which never yet any Papists owned, that upon
his Trial he being questioned as to the Plot of Gunpowder Treason, whither he
did not believe that was carried on by the Papists? His answer was, That he did
believe it, but that they were very vile and wicked men. His Sentance after a
most Anthentick Speech made by the Lord High Stward, was, That he must go to
the place from whence he came, and from thence be drawn upon a Hurdle to the
appointed place of Execution, there to be hanged up by the Neck not till he was
dead, but to be cut down alive, his privy Members to be cut off, and his Bowels
to be riped out and burnt before his face, then his Head to be severed from his
body, and his Four Quarters to be divided and disposed of according to his
Majesty's pleasure, or to this effect; then the Ax being boren before him, he
was conveyed by the Leiutenant, and a Guard of Partisans into the Barge, that
lay at Old Palace Stairs, and in it to the Tower, where he went through
Traitors Gate to his former Lodging; seeming very much discontented and
troubled in Mind; for no doubt his Conscience being awaked he began to think of
his latter end.

Being come into the Tower to his old Lodging he behaved himself very modestly
fetching many sighs at the reflection of his Tottering State, and the near
aproch of Death; being often observed to pray to himself and meditate upon the
misery his horrid Treason had involved him in: For souler Crimes have not been
known, the he past doubt was guilty of during his Imprisonment; after
condemnation Dr. Burnet, and several other Godly Ministers were with him, to
preswade him to a free Confession of the horrid Plot, and so far prevailed with
him as to make him somewhat relent, bur 'twas not long, for being over awed by
Rome's pernicious Serpents that lay hissing Damnation in his Ears. If he
discovered out, he was no doubt compelled to recant those: thought yet
something more then ever Catholic did: yet, he owned, for he did confess their
was a Plot to promoate the Catholic Religion, and that there were several
Geatherings and Contributions to propagate the same; but devised that ought was
intended or designed against the Life of his Majesty, upon the pretense of of a
Discovery, he was likewise according to his own desire brought to the Bar of
the House of Lords, where he showed his Malice and his weakness by endeavoring
to spot the candid Reputation of some Honorable worthies, but in vain, for it
not only begat him a sharp Reproof, but likewise incenced the House against
him, being remmanded to the Tower, where he continued very pensive when he knew
the day was perfixed for his Execution which was the 29th. of this instant
December, and that now intercession would be vain; the watches being warned,
and the Trained-Bands ordered to be in Arms, on Wednesday the date above
mentioned; be was brought our of the Tower by a Guard of Partisans, and
conveyed through a lain of Soldiers and the Hamblets Wards, the Ax being boren
before him to the place of Execution, being come to the Scaffold he was by the
assistance of some Officers of the Tower, helped upon the Scaffold that stood
upon the Hill where no sooner being mounted, but his countenance altered
exceedingly as dreading much the near approach of certain Death, whilst many
Catholics that crowded as near as possible and had taken up standings: look as
dejected as he to see the Champion of their Cause now bogle at Death; many
prayers he made and often lifted up his hands with diverse Protestations, for
the space of half an hour, was observed to weep often casting his eyes upon his
Friend that stood nearest him as being loath to bid the World farewell, though
he would not have blushed to have been a main Agent in distroying so many
Thousands as were intended a Sacrifice to Rome Yet, Notwithstanding his fear:
Stafford, must receive the reward of his black Treasons, in order to which
accordingly he laying his Head on the Block, after some Time the Executioner
did his Office and at one blow severed his Head from his Body, does of them
containing life and motion for a good space especially the Body which stirred
and wallowed to and fro, and had the Simptoms of Life, for about a quarter of
an hour after the blow was given as it is credibly reported by those who had
the ordering of the same; thus fell the Traitor, in the Snare he had laid for
others, and had his own Blood justly shead, who did design to make Three
Kingdoms Swim in Blood; after Execution his Body was conveyed back into the
Tower, to be disposed of as his Majesty shall think fit.

London, Printed by D. Mallet. 1680.


