De Termino Vitae; OR THE TERM OF LIFE.

VIZ. Whether it is fixed or alterable; With the Sense of the Jewish Doctors,
both Ancient and Modern, touching Predestination and Free Will.

Also an Explication of several obscure Passages and Prophecies in the Old
Testament; together with some remarkable Customs observed by the Jews.

Written in Latin by the Famous MENASSEH BEN-ISRAEL the Jews and now Translated
into English.

To which are added, the Author's Li^^, never before Published; and a Catalogue
of his Works.

LONDON, Printed for W. Whitwood at the Rose and Crown in Little-Brittain. 1700.

BOOKS Printed for William Whitwood at the Rose and Crown in Little-Brittain;
at which place you may have ready Money for any Parcel or Library of Books.
1. THE Principles of a People styling themselves Phyladelphians, with their
Rise, Continuance, and Tenants in Doctrine and manner of Proceeding. price 6 d.

2. The Religious Stoic, or Discourses upon Atheism, Superstition, the Worlds,
Creation, Eternity, Providence, the Immortality of the Soul, of Faith and
Reason, of the Fall of Angels, etc. by Sr. G. Makenzie p. bound 1 s.

3. Minerva, or the high Dutch Grammar, teaching the English Man exactly the
Neatest Dialect of the high German Language, with Dialogues in the German and
English Tongue price bound 1 s.

4. A Theater of Wars between England and France, from K. William the Conqueror
to the 10th, of September 1697. being the Conclusion of the Peace. Containing
the Causes of the Wars, Battles, Seiges, Naval Fights, etc. with a Discourse of
the Salique Law exercised in France, with a Map of England and France, upon a
Copper Plate. p. 6 d.

5. The English and Netherdutch Academy, or exact Rules teaching the English
Man the Dutch Language, with Colloquies in English and Dutch by Dr. Richardson
p. bound 2 s.

TO Colthrop Parker, Esquire
SIR,
I Hope you will Pardon my Presumption, if I trouble you to read this Book, in
your leisure hours (if you have any from doing Good) which I partly Translated,
and partly Composed in Mine. I must humbly Request another Favor from you, and
that is your Protection (if it is not an Encroachment) because you are
qualified to Judge of the Performance, and (if you approve of it) to defend me
against the unmannerly Censures of ill-natured Men. I take this Opportunity
likewise, publicly to acknowledge my great Obligations both to you, and your
good Lady, whose extensive Charity, and exemplary Devotion, prevent my just
Commendations of her to the World. The fulsome Flatteries which usually fill
the Dedications of indigent, cringing Authors, oblige me not to display your
Virtues, and Accomplishments, which have been conspicuous, both in our own, and
Neighboring Countries. It was the Opinion of the most Learned Rabbis, (as
Menasseh Ben-Israel informs us in this Treatise) That a Man's Life might be
prolonged by meditating on God's Law, and keeping his Commandments; now since
this seems highly probable, I have good Reason to believe, you may religiously
expect as long, and as Happy a Course of years, as some of your pious Family
have arrived to. I may without the imputation of Flattery, confidently affirm
the same of your sincerely virtuous Lady.

That you may both enjoy, (till a good old Age gently leads you to decay) the
same Health, and the same Comforts you do now, is the hearty Wish of,

Your most obliged Humble Servant, P. T.

The Translator's Preface.
I Doubt not but the World will expect (according to Custom) the Reasons that
induced me to Translate. Now some of them are these; 1st. My own Diversion. 2d.
Because I imagined, that others would have the same satisfaction, and
improvement, that I had in the perusal. 3d. (and I Will add no more) because the
Original is very scarce, and not to be purchased at any Rate.


I have done so much Justice to my Author (and no more is to be expected) that
as he has expressed himself in plain and easy Latin, I have endeavored to
make him speak clear, familiar, and unaffected English. His thoughts are not
very bright in the Original, and therefore you must expect no mighty Splendor
in the Translation. As his Style is not very Polite, so there is no la Cadence
des Periodes (as the Frenchman says) in mine. As Modesty and Humility were
conspicuous in his Temper, so likewise are they discernible in the Proposals of
his Sentiments. He delivers other Men's with fidelity and candor, and his own
with ingenuity and submission. His Judgment is solid, and his Argument
strenuous, and if his Reasons are not so fine as other Men's, yet they are just
and impartial.

This Treatise was begun at the Request of Jr. Beverovicius* a Senator and
Professor of Physic in Dort,) who had, not many Years before with several
others, (as Episcop^us, Mer^^^nus, Rivetus, C. Barlaeus, Vossius, etc. engaged
in the same Controversy. But not being fully contented with the various
Opinions of Christian Writers upon these Subjects, he importuned this Author to
inform him likewise what the Eminent Rabbis and Talmudick Doctors said about
them; for fear (as he tells us himself) it would be a great injury to his
Prosession, did Men believe, that the Time of their Death was so absolutely
determined by God, that they could neither die sooner or live longer than that
fatal Period, whether they took the Advice and Prescriptions of the Physicians
or not. I must confess I have omitted in the Translation his numerous
Quotations, because scarce any Man has half of the Authors to consult, and if
he had, the Advantage would not be very great. Some Men of late have not been
very just to their Authors, but I declare plainly I believe he is. Some places
(but very few) I have not translated, because the Sense is the same in other
Parts.

I must declare something else too, and that is, that I am not of those Men's
minds and humor that grow conceited with an Author; and if there be any thing
true or good in a Book, are presently extravagant in extolling it; who please
themselves with what they do not understand, and would fain have all the World
admire it with them. I have a great and true respect for the Author, and some
of his Works (perhaps) deserve as favorable a Reception as most of our late
Modern Christians. Here is enough in this to improve the Knowledge of a wise
Man, and very few of those Rabbinical Fables, that rather divert, than instruct
the Reader. I am sure Beverovicius thought it would be beneficial to the
Commonwealth of Learning (as he tells this great Author in a courteous Letter)
and was highly pleased himself, to see the Opinions of the Rabbis and
Cabbalists about this dark Controversy.

I contentedly expect the Censures of a Set of Men, who value no Performances
but their own; but let them empanel a Jury of the sourest Critics, I bravely
despise their Verdict, because I am sure of the Benefit of the Clergy. If they
find fault with it because it is only a Translation, (and that no Vivacity of
Wit, Strength of Judgment, Subtilty of Reasoning, or close Application to
Lexicons or Indexes, are requisite to set up a Translator) I shall presently
answer them, I only made use of a little discretion in making choice of an
Author, that may perhaps be more serviceable to the Advancement of Knowledge,
and (pardon me for saying it) Christianity too, than the late stupid Defenses
for a lewd ill-govern'd Stage; or the abominable Libels of all revealed
Religion, and of our most holy Faith, that have been published by the
perfidious Underminers of them.

Some Men I know will quarrel with me (but not sting me) for letting Women, and
part Apprentices know what the Jews have said concerning these matters. But if
I can improve any Man's knowledge, though it is a Cobler's, I shall not refuse
to be his humble Servant at Command.

If the bold Maintainers of Mr. Hobbs's Sophistical Principles concerning
irrevocable Fate and Necessity, are displeased with the Author or the
Translator, I Will leave them to be confuted by the Learned Dr. H. More,
(Immortal. of the Soul. B. 2. c. 3.) or (what is worse) by their Necessity.

My Author has divided his Treatise into three Books. In the first he maintains
that there is a certain Term of Man's Life, and tells us how this was
understood by the Ancient and Modern Jews. In the 2d he handles that celebrated
Problem, whether this Term is fixed or alterable. In the 3d he endeavors to
show, how God's Foreknowledge and Man's Free Will are to be reconciled. I have
translated all the Texts of Scripture (quoted by M. B. I) according to the last
Translation of our Bibles.

Now because it is plain that I have some time, and Paper to spare, it may be
expected I should declare my own Sentiments about these things. I am sorry I am
obliged to disappoint these Men, but I will comply so far, as to discover (I
have his leave for it) the Opinion of an intimate Acquaintance. Says he, We
cannot be too cautious of avoiding that Opinion, which Demure People have
entertained of God's pre-determining the Acts of our Will, and of absolutely
pre-ordaining the means, as well as the end. For this seems to cut of a
possibility of Guilt, and a possibility of Innocence; for what possibility is
there of abstaining from that Sin, which by God's Determination is acknowledged
to be inevitable? How can that be a Sin which carries no contrariety to God's
Will; as being preordain'd, and so Willed by him? This Opinion, (continues he)
seems to rob us of our Understandings, and Wills, for what use is there of
Understandings, if we cannot do what we know, or of our Wills, if we do not Act
that voluntarily which we do? How apt are Men when they look upon Christianity
as a Chain, only of fatal Causes, and affix all Events to a necessary
Concatination of Causes, to throw off all thoughts of a Judgment to come, and
to undervalue all Threats which might restrain their Impieties, and all Rewards
that might oblige them to Obedience; and so run into those Extremes which are
opposite to God's Laws, and irreconcilable to the Civil Constitutions of Men;
for he that conceits himself led by such irresistible Decrees, will not only
prosecute his own Fancy, (and so transgress) but even hate all Laws, and all
those too, who are by Duty obliged to punish them for their Extravagancies.

This is all I shall offer now, because I am told (by a very great Man of our
Church) in his Discourse of Death, Sect. 5. p. 186. That these things will be
Disputes as long as the World lasts, unless Men grow wiser than to trouble
themselves with such Questions as are above their reach, and which they can
never have a clear Notion, and Perception of.

The Reason of concealing my Name, is too great to be inserted here, but when I
have another Opportunity, I will show that I am not ashamed of it.

I have presented the World with the best Account of Menasseh Ben-Israel's
Life, that I could pick up in his own Writings, or in common Conversation. If
any one can oblige me with any thing more remarkable, I hope I shall have room
to insert that, and my Thanks in another Edition.

Farawel.

THE LIFE OF Menasseh Ben-Israel.
MENASSEH Ben-Israel was born in Portugal about the Year 1604, in the Reign of
Philip the III. King of Spain. His Father was Joseph Ben-Israel, a rich and
eminent Merchant. His Mothers Name was Rachel Soeira, who was descended from an
Honorable Family.

His Father being persecuted, by the Spanish Inquisition, for his Religion, and
having lost his Goods, and almost his Life, (for he was three times most his
barbarously Tortured) privately made his Escape to Holland with his Wife and
Children, Ephraim and Menasseh. Not long after his Arrival, Menasseh was
committed to the Care of R. Isaac Usiel, who instructed him in the Hebrew
Language; in which he made so great a Proficiency, that at the Age of Eighteen
Years, he succeeded his Master in the Synagogue at Amsterdam, where he Preached
and explained the Talmud for several Years together. Of the exact time of his
Marriage, I cannot at present be informed: But his Wife's Name was Rachel, of
the Family of Abravanel, (Counselor to the King of Spain) whose Pedigree some
of the Jews (I know not upon what grounds) derive from David. He had by her two
Sons, ( Joseph and Samuel) and one Daughter, named Grace. His Circumstances
being very low, (for his Salary from the Synagogue, was not above fifty Dollars
per annum) he was forced to send to his Brother Ephraim, at Brasil, to put him
in a method to mend his Fortunes by Merchandise. In the mean time he applied
himself to the Study of Philosophy, and the Holy Scriptures, to which he was
addicted, even from his Childhood. He maintained a good Correspondence with
several Learned, and Ingenious Men of his time, and was deservedly Honored,
and Respected by them, as I shall show in its proper place. But after he was
engaged (to his unexpressible Grief) in a way of Traffic, he was very much
diverted from the Prosecution of his beloved Studies. Great part of his time,
was taken up in the Press, for he Printed all his Books with his own Letters,
and at his own Expense; so that considering his Attendance in the Synagogue,
his Care of the Press, and necessary Employment in his Domestic Affairs, he
had no opportunity to discharge the common Offices of Friendship.
Notwithstanding all this, (upon an Invitation) he came into England, in the
times of the execrable, and un-natural Rebellion. His stay here was but short,
because he did not meet with that Encouragement which he expected. However he
had the joyful Satisfaction, to contribute to the Settlement of those of his
own Religion in this Country.

And as I am informed, he was once civilly entertained by the Protector at his
Table; he had frequent Conferences with some of the Eminent covenanting Divines
of those unhappy times, but I believe he was too honest, and sincere to approve
of their unjust Practices, whatever he thought of their enormous Principles.
His forefathers indeed had Crucified the True Messiah, whom they called the
King of the Jews: But he must needs be displeased with them, who had Martyred
him, who in some Respects bore the Injuries, and Affronts that were put upon
his Great Master. For they laid to his Charge things that he knew not. This, I
say, might reasonably be disagreeable to him, because it renewed (as it were)
the remembrance of his Predecessors Shame, Cruelty, and Punishment. And he
might Fancy, that what they suffered for the Crucifixion of one, these might
suffer for the Decollation of the other.

When he departed from England, he went into Zealand, and as I was informed (by
that most courteous and ingenious Jew, Mr. Gomesera) he breathed his last
(about the fifty third Year of his Age) at Middleborough; but by the Generosity
of the Jews of Amsterdam, his Body was brought thither, and decently interred
at their Expense.

He left one of his Sons behind him in England, who married into a Credible
Family, but did not long survive his good Father, leaving behind him only one
Child. How his other Son and Daughter were disposed of I cannot yet Learn.

I hope I shall incurr no Man's Censure, if I present the World with a short
Character of this great Rabbin. He was in his Opinion a Pharisee, (as it seems
they are all at this time) but of a Temper directly contrary to those, who are
described to us by the Evangelists. All the time he could spare from urgent
Business, he spent among the best Authors of all Classes, as will appear to any
one that consults his Writings. Though he was not a Gassendus in Philosophy, or
a Grotius in Divinity; yet he was reputed the most celebrated Rabbin of his
Age. His chiefest Application was to illustrate the Books of the Old Testament,
and he has succeeded so well in this Undertaking, that his Works are almost a
good Comment upon it. He was always industrious, careful, and frugal; his
Apprehension was quick, his Judgment solid, and his Reason not too severe, and
subtle. He was a loving Husband, a kind Father, and a peaceable Subject. He
was of a modest, sober and affable Temper.

I shall beg Leave to digress into one Instance of this, which was imparted to
me by an Honored Friend. Being about to make his Tour in the united Provinces,
he acquainted his Tutor (a Worthy and Learned Fellow of Queens College in
Cambridge) with his Resolution. Upon this kind Information* his Tutor requested
the Favor of him* to purchase two Hebrew Books that were very uncommon, and
withal added* That he thought Menasseh Ben-Israel was the likeliest Person to
procure them for him, or satisfy him concerning them. Upon this Gentleman's
Arrival at Amsterdam, he immediately inquired ou^ this Eminent Rabbin; and in a
little time after made him a Visit, which was as civilly received, as paid. He
told our Great Author the occasion of his Coming, and desired him (if possible)
to help him to two Hebrew Books, which could not be purchased in England. He
readily complied with this Request, and at the same time cut these Books out of
a large Volume, in which they had been bound up, with others of the same
Language. I need not express the Pleasure this Learned Jew had in granting this
Courtesy, or the Gentleman in receiving it, or the great Obligation the
ingenious Tutor had to both. But to proceed: The Study of the Scriptures made
him passionately delight in Devout Contemplations. In Truth, he was a Man of a
singular Virtue, and Integrity of Mind, and seemed to want no Accomplishment,
but the Faith of a Christian. Several Worthy Men of this Nation, (viz. Dr.
Nath. Homes, Dr. Jessey, Mr. Boil,) as well as of his own, and of other Places
settled a Correspondence with him, and have not been backward to give him just
Encomiums. But especially that Learned Senator, and Physician of Dort,
Beverovicius, maintained an intimate Friendship with him, as long as he lived.

He was of a middle Stature, and inclining to Fatness. He always wore his own
Hair, which (many years before his Death) was very Gray; so that his Complexion
being pretty fresh, his Demeanor Graceful, and Comely, his Habit plain and
decent, he Commanded an aweful Reverence which was justly due to so venerable a
Deportment: In short, he was un homme sans Passion, sans legierete, mais Helas!
sans opulence.

I cannot but observe here (with the Readers leave) that some People have
unaccountably reached out their Malice against the Jews, who were once the only
People of God. It is true some of them, about Seventeen hundred years ago
ignorantly (but barbarously) Crucified our blessed Redeemer; Acts 3.17.13.27.
but alas! That perverse Generation miserably smarted for it, as the Learned
Josephus in his Wars of the Jews. faithfully records. I shall not pretend to
give an Abridgment of his Works, especially after the Endeavors of a late
Excellent Author: But I shall only briefly discover, how and where they were
dispersed after the Destruction of their Great City.

When their Sins were ripe for Vengeance, God sent the Roman Armies, to inflict
that Punishment which was so often foretold. Some of them miraculously escaped
to Pella, others either sell by their Neighbors, or their Enemy's Sword; 16000
were sent to Rome at one Time by Titus, to augment the Glory and Pomp of his
Father's Triumph, and he sold no less than 100000 Slaves. Not many Years after,
Adrian the Emperor ruined the whole Country, and transplanted many into Spain;
these dispersed into France and England, but were banished in a little Time
from these Places. In some Ages after they crept into these Countries again,
but were banished from Spain in the Year 1500, and then dispersed into Africa,
Italy, Germany, the Low Countries, Constantinople, and the Dominion of the
Turk, where they remain in great Numbers at this Time, and are very often
employed in the Receipt of Custom, to the great Advantage of the Government.
The Visiers and Bashaws have such respect for them, that they generally (as Sir
Henry Blunt informs us) admit them into their Counsel. William the Conqueror
brought them out of Roan to inhabit here, and William Rufus favour's them so
far, that he swore by Luke's Face, his common Oath, if they could overcome the
Christians, he would be one of their Sect. They had a Synagogue at the North
corner of the Old-Jury, which was so called from the Jews living there. King
Henry the Third founded a Church and House for converted Jews, (now called the
Rolls) and in a little Time there was a great Number of Converts. They were
often persecuted here in the Reigns of King John, Henry the Second, Henry the
Third, and Edward the First, in whose Reign John Peckham Archbishop of
Canterbury, commanded the Bishop of London to destroy all the Jew's Synagogues
in his Diocese. And they were likewise all banished about this Time out of
England. The Inquisition (that Rack of Men's Consciences) was first introduced
into Spain, (in the Reign of Ferdinand the Fifth, 1478.) by the especial
Procurement of Don Pedro Gonsales de Mendoza, Cardinal and Archbishop of Sevil,
occasioned by the Apostasy of the newly converted Jews and Moors, who began to
return to their old Superstition. Now this in some respect had been practiced
before; for in the fourth Council of Toledo, A. D. 639. in the Reign of
Sysenandus, the Apostatizing Jews were compelled to persevere in the Christian
Religion, lest the Name of Jesus might be blasphemed, and the Faith which they
had embraced, might by that means become vile and contemptible. This was
ratified likewise by the eighth Council held at the same Place, A. D. 671. when
Recesuvindus Reigned over the Goths. After all these Iliads of Afflictions,
they remain at this Day scattered over the Face of the whole Earth, and because
they continue peaceable, by the Connivance of our Laws they are not disturbed.
And good reason, for if (as most learned Men agree) they will all be converted
to the Christian Religion, no place can be more proper to promote this
Conversion, than a Christian Country. But alas! there are three Impediments to
this, especially in Foreign Parts. 1. The Scandals of the Papists. 2. The want
of Means to instruct them: And, 3. The Punishment or Loss, which by their
Conversion they incurr.
As many Papists are converted to Judaism, as Jews to Christianity. Several of
our Countrymen, as Doctor Gouge, Doctor Jessey, etc. have by their Conversation
and Charity, piously endeavored to begin this good Work. But that which must
be most effectual to the Proficiency and Accomplishment of it, is, by letting
them see our good Works, and then we may joyfully see them glorifiing, not only
our Father which is in Heaven, but the Son and Holy Ghost too. Let us not
maliciously imagine that they have a natural unsavory Smell, but let us be
careful that our Sins do not stink in their Nostrils We ought not to mispend
our Time in railing against the Jews, but we must mortify our Sins, those more
inveterate Murderers of the Lord of Life and Glory: Our Sins daily spit upon
him, and bind him, and load him with a Burden much heavier than that of the
Cross. Let us unanimously endeavor to advance the means of their Conversion,
as well as pray for it. This I am sure was the devout Practice of the
Christians in the Primitive Church; for Clemens often takes notice of the
Prayers that were offered up for the Jews in the Easter-Week,(...). 5. c.
12.14. Now this Time and this Country may afford us seasonable Opportunities;
for I am not a little satisfied, that the Obstinacy and Stiffness they were
once remarkable for, are almost worn off. One odd Fancy they still entertain
(which Menasseh Ben-Israel has strongly asserted in his Spes Israelis) that is,
That the Ten Tribes which were lost are now behind the Caspian Mountains, from
whence they expect their Messiah, who with Fire and Sword shall subdue the
World, and restore their Temporal Kingdom. The Tribes that now remain are of
Judah and Benjamin, most part of the former being settled in the East, the
latter in Germany, Holland, Italy, and England. He that desires to see the
History of the Rites, Customs and Manner of Life of the Modern Jews, may read
Leo Modena, a Rabbin of Venice, translated by Mr. Chilmead of Christ-Church in
Oxon. 1650. I shall conclude with an Exhortation to the Jews (besides my
Prayers for them) taken out of the 95th Psalm, Harden not your Hearts, as in
the Provocation, and as in the Day of Temptation in the Wilderness, etc.

The Catalogue of the Works of Menasseh Ben-Israel, which he presented to Mr.
Paul Felgenhawer, in the Year 1655.
Hebraice.
LIbri 4 de immortalitate animae. Pene Rabba super Rabot antiquorum Rabbinorum.
Latin and Hispanice.
Pars prima Conciliatoris. Libri tres de Resurrectione Mortuorum. Problemata de
Creatione. De Termino Vitae. De fragilitate humana. Spes Israelis. Grammatica
Hebraea cum novis observationibus. Oration gratulatoria ad Celsissimum Principem
Auriacum. Oration panegyrica ad sereniss. Reginam Sueciae.
Hispanice.
Conciliatoris omnes parts. Pentateuchus cum Margin* notis. Libri 5 de ritibus
and Ceremoniis Judaeorum. Duobus Tomis. Biblia Hispanica cum Commentariis. De
statua Nebuchadonosoris, 12o.
Libellus Anglicus.
De fidelitate and utilitate Judaicae Gentis.
Sequuntu^ Libri parati ad Editionem.
De cultu Imaginum ipsiusmet Dei contra Pontificios. Latin. 450 Conciones in
Lingua Lusitanica. Loci communes omnium Midrasini, sive, Sententiae antiquorum
Rabbinorum. Hebraice. Bibliotheca Rabbinorum cum argumentis lib. quibus
adduntur diversae impressiones, ubi and quando editae, cum judicio meo de
quolibet. Phocilides ex Graeco in versum Hispanicum redditus.
Libri adhuc sub manibus versantes, nondum perfecti.
Hist. Judaica, vel continuatio Hist. F. Josephi ad haec usque tempora. De
divinitate legis Mosaicae. De scientia Talmudistarum in omnibus facultatibus.
Hebraice. Nomenclator Heb and Arab. De disciplinis Rabbin. Philosophia
Rabbinica.
Menasseh Ben-Israel, OF THE Term of Life.
BOOK I.
SECT. 1.

SOLOMON plainly declares, that there is a certain Term or Time of Man's life
appointed aforehand, Eccles. 3.1, 2. To every thing there is a Season, and a
Time to every Purpose under the Heaven. A Time to be born, and a Time to die,
etc. For as he assigns a determined Time to all sublunary things; so likewise
does he attribute the same to Life and Death.

That Place of Job is remarkable, Chapter 7.1. Is there not an appointed Time to
Man upon Earth? Most of the Hebrew Doctors upon this Place agree, that the Time
is fixed how long a Man shall live. Job is more express in another Place, Chap.
14.5. Seeing his days are determined; the number of his months are with thee;
thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. Here the Doctors are of the
same Opinion

This is likewise confirmed another way. Moses says, Exodus 23.26. The number
of thy days I will fulfill. And David, Ps. 39.4. Lard, make me to know mine end,
and the measure of my days, and in the next Verse, Behold thou have made my
days as an hand. breadth: Where R. Solomon comments, As a thing that is
measured with the hand, so are the days of Man determined. Solomon Eccl. 5.18.
All the days of his Life which God gives him. Job 14.14. All the days of my
appointed time will I wait till my change come. From whence it is inferred,
that our Life consists of a certain number of days afore-appointed. And because
Life has such a Term, to which, (as to a Goal) Man bends his Course, hereupon
the Scripture makes use of this Phrase, Genesis 47.29. And the Time drew nigh that
Israel must die, Deuteronomy. 31.14. And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thy days
approach that thou must die, 1 Kings 2.1. Now what do these expressions
signify, any other than a fixed and settled Boundary to which a Man is directed.

To increase and diminish pre-supposes some certain Quantity and Number. Now
the Scripture affirms, That the fear of the Lord prolongeth days, but the years
of the wicked shall be shortened, Prove. 10.27. from whence it follows, that Life
has a Term, and that one Man's is contracted, and another's enlarged according
to their Works.

Besides all these Places, that have been produced, that in Samuel is very
observable, where David speaks these words, 1 Samuel 26.10. As the Lord lives,
the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend
into Battle and perish; from whence it is very plain, that either Providence,
Nature, or Chance may be the Cause of a Man's death, as I shall show by and by.
And it is likewise evident, that every Man has a certain day, in which this
Life must be changed for a better. These things I thought fit to premise, that
I might establish the Truth of what I am about to discourse of.

SECT. 2. Having clearly proved from the Sacred Writings, that there is a
certain and definite Term of Man's Life; I shall in the next Place explain, how
this Term is to be understood.

And first we must know, that wise Men do not agree about this thing, but
differ in their Judgments, according to those Principles of Science, which they
have entertained. The Astrologers affirm, that the Term and continuance of Life
depends upon the Stars; and this was the Opinion of Aesculapius. Now, say they,
if the whole Earth receives a vital Energy from the Influence of the Stars,
(and for that Reason some Part is fruitful, and some barren) and likewise if
the Times and Seasons are determined by them, why may not also every Man's life
and death depend upon them too? Other Men (that think a little closer) are of
Aristotle's mind, and assert that the Sun and Man engender Man. And they will
have it, that not only the Sun, which is the chief of all the Planets, but that
all the rest of the Stars do concur to so Noble, so excellent on Effect, as
the Formation of Man. Hence they divide the Operations, and various Offices
among the Planets In the first Month of Conception, they say Saturn dries up
the first Mass; in the second, Jupiter kindly prepares and augments it; in the
third, Mars separates and quickens it, and so every Month the Planets execute
their respective Offices, as may be observed in Plato, apud Marsil, i^ Atlon.
l. 3. and Thomas Aquinas, contra^ Gent. q 84. From thence it comes to pass*
That that Conjunction or Disjunction of the Stars which predominates at the
Conception of the Faetus, produces the Seeds of future Affections, Life and
Death, Good and Evil; and they quite discard every thing else from the
disposing of Men's destiny. This was the Opinion of the Stoics, who
obstinately maintained, that the immutable Fate of Men chiefly relied upon the
Influence and Virtue of the Stars, There are others who attribute all that we
have taken notice of, to the Position and Efficacy of the Stars, which happens
at the Birth, not at the Conception, of the Child; but this is frivolous,
because, all of them ascribe prosperous and unfortunate Events to the Celestial
Signs.

The Hebrew Doctors confess, That inferior Bodies act by the Virtue of heavenly
ones; and Maimonides affirms in his Epistles, That there is no one among the
Learned Jews, or the Philosophers that doubts of it. Therefore, though they may
dissent about the Creation of the World, (while some say it is Coeternal with
God, others that it was created out of pre-existent Matter, and others out of
Nothing) yet they all agree in this, That the Generation of Sublunary things is
effected by the Stars; but what that Virtue of the Stars is, or how it
influences the Bodies, or Minds of Men, is still dubious and uncertain. The
forementioned Rabbi in his Epistles stiffly denies it; these are his Words:
Some of the Philosophers, (who admit not of Providence) attribute all humane
Events to Chance, some of them to the Efficacy of the Stars. On the other side,
some referr all to a fatal Necessity of the heavenly Constellations, and will
have it, that the Riches and Poverty, the Prosperity and Adversity of all Men
depends upon the Position and Virtue of the Stars; which are incident at the
time of their Nativity; and this Law they averr to be inviolable. Both these
Opinions are very false; because, that which imputes all to Chance, denies the
P^^^dence that is so much celebrated in Holy Writ; that which allows so great
Power to the Stars, and follows judicial Astrology, is foolish. In the first
place (says he) I have looked over all the Arabic Books that treat of this
Science, and at last discovered it all to be mere Vanity and Madness. The truly
wise G^aecians neglected this Study, and none of them have written any thing
about it, The Persians also esteemed it idle. The Chaldaeans, Egyptians, and
Canaanites only were addicted to this Vanity, because their Religion consisted
in it for some time. Afterward offering at clearer Reasons, he says, That our
Law, and all the Philosophers acknowledge Free Will, and that Man is endowed
with an absolute Power of pursuing Good, and abstaining from Evil; as on the
other side, of obeying his sensual Appetite, and disregarding the Dictates of
Reason. Now if the influence of the Stars is so great over Men, where is that
Liberty? If it is impossible for Men to avoid the virtue and impression of the
Stars, why are there Precepts? What does it signify to endeavor to extirpate
vicious Habits, and to become virtuous, when Heaven had determined when we were
born, what we should be as long as we lived? If Men's liberty depend so much
upon the Stars, all their Care, and Solicitude is to no purpose. Therefore says
Maimonides, we ought to attribute all this to Providence; for Sin is the Cause
of a Man's poverty, and his Repentance may make him rich. Prosperity and
Adversity are to be imputed to every Man's works, because we see God promises
Life, and Temporal Blessings to those that observe his Commandments. But if it
sometimes falls out otherwise, that a just Man meets with Afflictions, we must
submit to God: Because he only knows the Secrets of our Hearts, and the Reasons
why he punishes and rewards. We may now evidently discover, how repugnant the
Judgment of Maimonides was to that of the Astrologers, and what his Sentiments
were concerning judicial Astrology.

SECT. 3. A great many very Learned Doctors are of a different Opinion, and
unanimously affert, That some Virtue is derived upon Newborn Infants from the
position of the Stars, and that Life and Death, Wealth and Poverty are ordained
after the same manner. This is the Fate of the Jews, which is called by them,
the Ordination of the Stars; and is usually proved by these following Reasons.

1. It is manifest by Experience, that the Prophecies of Astrologers commonly
correspond with the Events, and that they have often foretold a short Life, or
a long one, a happy or a miserable one. Therefore these things are ordained by
the Stars. 2. Every one is sensible, that the Generation and Corruption of all
Sublunary things depend upon the Motion of the Heavens. For we may discern, as
the Air is more tempestuous or calm, so it insinuates it self into Men's
Bodies, and as it is attracted for respiration, so it affects their minds.
Therefore without dispute the Heavens have some Power over humane Bodies. 3.
The third Reason is drawn from Authority. For the Scripture speaks thus of the
Sun, and the Moon, Genesis 1.18. And God made two great lights, the greater light
to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night; he made the stars
also. Here R. Moses Gerundensis asks, What is meant by that Dominion? It is
that Dominion, says he, which the Stars have over the Bodies of Men; upon which
they impress several Virtues, according to their favorable or malevolent
Aspect. It is said in the Book of Judges, Chap. 5.20. They fought from heaven,
the stars in their Courses fought against Sisera. Likewise in Isaiah, 47.13.
Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy Counsels: Let now the Astrologers; the
Stargazers, the monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these
things that shall come upon thee. Also Job says, Chap. 3.3. Let the day perish
wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, There is a Man child
conceived; where he refers all his Evils, to the time of his Conception, or his
Nativity. From all these things the Virtues of the Stars are collected. The
Talmudists also, in Tract. Moed. Katam. cap. ult. seem to entertain this
Opinion. For they say that Children, Life and Food depend upon the Stars. And
in another place, they affirm the same thing: For there Vices and Virtues, are
attributed to the Efficacy of the Planets, under which every Man is born; and
they take notice of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc. In the same place it is
disputed, whether or no the Reason of these things is to be found out at the
Birth or Conception; here their Sentiments are plainly discovered to us.
Notwithstanding all this, we must take notice, that although this Opinion may
be introduced among the Jews, yet they unanimously consent that the Stars do
only incline, but not necessitate the Will and Choice of good Men. Brad^^ (...)
behinat Olam) an eminent Orator among them, has these, When, says he, You look
toward Heaven, and consider the Stars above, never imagine or believe, that
they have any Power over the Will, as the ancient Astrologers fansied, for they
have no Authority at all over those things that depend upon Free Will. As to
such things which are out of the Power of Man, viz. Life, Honor, and Riches,
all agree, That they who obey the Commandments of God are out of the reach of
the Planets. And R. Moses Gerund. says, That God is above all, and can Act,
See, Dispose of, and Govern all things according to every ones Desert. For this
Reason, the Talmudick Doctors in one place, deny, that there is a Planet
belongs to Israel, and in another affirm it. Admitting a Distinction, they are
both true (...) as Aben Ezra remarks upon Exd. chp 34. no Planet reigns over
the Fews, while they observe the Law, but when they neglect it. Likewise the
Prophet Jeremy says, Chap. 10.2. Be not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, for
the Heathen are dismayed at them. He that is desirous to know more of these
things, may consult the 18th. Book, chap. 2. of Josephus's Antiquities of the
Jews. For where he treats of the Sect of the Pharisees (whose Opinion I confess
I am of) he subjoyns these words. They ascribe all things that are acted to
Fate, but however they grant the Assent of Man's Will, alleging that God uses
this moderation, that when all things are made by his Counsel, yet Man has the
Liberty of embracing Virtue or Vice. In another place, B. 16. c. ult.
(Discoursing of the unhappy Death of Alexander and Aristobulus, the Sons of
cruel Herod,) he says, It is reasonable to doubt whether that Crime is to be
charged upon the young Gentlemen, by which they had long incurred their
Father's Displeasure and Hatred, or upon the old King's Cruelty, and immoderate
Desire of Glory and Sovereignty; or upon Fortune, whose Power the Reasons of
the wisest Men cannot oppose. Hence we are persuaded, that she has settled
beforehand all humane Actions which must necessarily come to pass; and this is
the Power which we call Fate, because there is nothing but what it can
accomplish. So much for Josephus. Here we may take notice, that by Fate he
means the Virtue, or Influence of the Planets, and he observes notwithstanding
these, Man has the Liberty to be virtuous or profligate; and a little after,
that no humane Reasons can resist it is Power: But Divine and Supernatural ones
can, such as servent Prayers, Alms Deeds, sincere Repentance, and the like. He
that has a mind to see a more accurate Discourse upon this Subject, may be
satisfied by the famous and incomparable Gerard Jo. Vossius, in the Second Book
of his most Learned Treatise of Idolatry.

Now I have showed the Opinions of our Learned Doctors, and of the Astrologers,
concerning the influence of the Planets; I proceed to my Dispute about the Term
of Life, which according to some of the Jews, is that which is determined by
the influence of the Stars. Thus R. Bahye very often says, That a Man's Life is
decreed by a Planet, in reference to that of 1 Samuel 26.10. Or his day shall
come: But especially the ancient Doctors in Tanchuma, are of this Opinion, who
by those words in Gen 1.14. and for days and years, allegorically understand
the days, and years of a Man's Life, which the Sun and Moon mutually govern.
Thus much for the Opinions of the Astrologers.

SECT. 4. The Physicians are of another mind, for they (following Galen and
Avicenna, the chief of that Profession) maintain, that Life and the
Preservation of a Man's Body, consist in the Harmony and Proportion of the
Qualities which result from the four Elements, out of which it is compounded,
but especially in a due Proportion of heat and moisture. So that a Man lives as
long as the natural heat continues; for being of a Fugitive Nature, it consumes
the Radical moisture, and when that is dried up and the other extinct we die;
so Avicenna says, It is impossible that we should die, unless the Radical
moisture is absorpt, and the nutural heat consumed. According to this Opinion
every ones Life depends upon a good Temperament, and from thence Physicians can
foretell the Dispositions and Manners of Children that are to be born, not by
gazing upon the Heavens, as the Astrologers do, but by observing the Fortune
that attends the Mother while she is pregnant, but principally that of the
Father: For Hippocrates affirms, That Children inherit the Vices and Temper of
their Father; so that a Phlegmatic or Choleric Father, begets a Phlegmatic,
or Choleric Son; besides, says he, The very shape of the Fathers is impressed
upon their Children. So that all that are born in the Lake Moeotis, have large
and prominent Heads: And Aristotle thinks, that the Lameness of an Arm, or Leg
may be derived upon the Child. There is no necessity to assert with
Theophrastus, That the very Substance, and every thing that belongs to the
Child proceeds from the Body of the Father, As the Head, and Hands of the
Child, from the Head and Hands of the Father; but it is enough to know, that
Children are like their Parents in their Countenance, Actions, Manners, and,
what is strange, in their Infirmities.

There are others that ascribe the good and bad Constitution, to the Virtue of
the Planets, which Infants receive by means of the Air at the time of their
Birth; and in my Judgment it seems probable, because the Sun moves the
Elements, from whence those four Qualities flow, in which Life and the
Preservation of the Body consist: This Definition of the Term of Life pleases
the Jewish Doctors very much. The Learned Aben-Ezra declares his Approbation of
it, and expresses himself after this manner. We know that there is a certain
time appointed for every Man, which lasts in Proportion to the quantity of
natural heat and moisture; and a little after he adds, That this is the Term
which David speaks of, 1 Samuel 26.10. His day shall come. R. Joel ben Sueb. upon
those words of David, Psalm. 39.4. Lord, make me to know my end, etc. comments
thus, My end, according to my Constitution. R. Isaac Abravanel, upon the 38th.
Chapter of Isaiah says, That a Man's Life is determined by his Constitution,
and the quantity of Radical moisture. Thus we see, that the Hebrew Doctors, and
other Authors understand by the Term of Life, a certain Period, which in one is
shorter, and in another longer, according to their different Constitutions.

SECT. 5. A great many Learned Jews generally consider this Term in respect of
the Times. R. Solomon Jarchi, upon Eccl. 3.1. says, The time to be born is nine
Months, and the hour of Death is uncertain. For the understanding of this, we
must take notice, That our Life is limited to several Times. In the beginning
of the world Men lived 700, 800, or 900 years, consisting of 12. Months, as
Josephus, Lib. 1. Antiq. Lactan. Div. Instit. 2. and Augustine, de civ. Dei l.
15. affirm. Afterward God reduced this Life to 120 years, Genesis chap. 6.3 And
the Lord said, my Spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that he also is
Flesh: Yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. I remember there are
other expositions of this place, but (as two great Doctors observe) they are
foreign from the Text. God shortened Man's Life for his Sins, judging it
necessary to do so, that he might awaken his Conscience, by the Consideration
of his short Life; and that he might not have so many occasions to Sin. As for
Sem's living 500 years after the Deluge, Arphaxad, Salem and Heber above 400,
and Abraham about 200, R. Isaac Abravanel makes this Answer: It is not usual to
leap from one Extreme to another without observing a Medium; so we must suppose
that God would diminish Man's Life by degrees, and bring it within the Compass
of 120 years, though scarce any (by reason of their Carelessness in eating)
except Moses, arrived to that Age: For which Reason the Talmudists say, That
Moses is meant by the words, For that he also is Flesh, because the Hebrew
numbers (...), 345. make up Moses. Lastly, God shortened the Life of Men in
David's time, upon which Account the wise Men in Gemara Yebamoth say, that in
his time the Years were shorter. For thus it is written, Psalm. 90.10. The days
of our Years are Threescore Years and Ten, etc. Though the Inscription of this
Psalm ascribes it to Moses, yet they will have him to be another Prophet, not
the Lawgiver, or that David indicted it in Moses's Name. But for all this,
Moses may be the Author, for as much as he, by his prophetic Spirit, foretold
how short Man's life should be.

Nevertheless, Experience demonstrates, that Man's life is more contracted, and
those Persons who attribute this Alteration to the Substance of our Food, the
Position of the Heavens, etc. are mistaken; because, as I told you before, it
was by a Divine Dispensation; and this Reason Chrysostom Hom. 2. in Genesis Philo
de Gigant. and Lactant. l. 2. c. 5. allow of. What Pliny relates of
Agarthonius, Epimenides, Pictoreus and others, is not repugnant to our
Assertion, because he tells us, the Year of the Arcadians was but three Months.
No doubt but some People, computing after this manner, have told us such
strange Stories of old Men. Valor. Taren. B. 6. makes mention of an old Man,
who at an hundred Years of Age, changed his Teeth, Skin, Hairs and Nails, and
after that looked very young, and lived as long again. A Frenchman named John
Estampis, alias Joannes de Temporibus, is reported by Paulus Aem. de rebus
Franc. l. 5. to have lived 300 Years. Cardan relates the same of a Turk, and
likewise of an Indian that lived 340 Years. Though Nature has now and then her
Monsters and Excesses, yet we must not easily give credit to these things, when
they are chiefly founded upon humane Authority. I do not believe that the Seres
lived 200 Years, as Strabo reports, or that the Aethiopians live as long again
as we do, as Solinus imagines. There is no doubt but some Countries are more
healthful than others; yet for all this difference of Climates, which make our
Life longer or shorter, few People nowadays exceed the Age of 120 Years
Berosus extends it to 110, Solon. to 84, and David to 70. and this is agreeable
to what Trebellius says, That the Mathematicians averr, that an Age cannot be
extended beyond 120 Years. From all which we may conclude, that the Term of
Life is to be understood according to the Ages, in which there are more or
fewer Years.

SECT. 6. These are the general Sentiments of the Hebrews concerning the Term
of Life, and these three Opinions in my judgment may be easily reconciled; for
there is no question but the heavenly Influences which are derived upon Infants
contribute much to their Constitutions, which vary in several Ages. Upon this
Account the Learned Aben Ezra ascribes the length of Life sometimes to the
Temper, sometimes to the Planets, because both Causes hold good. And R. Mehiri
in lib. Mehir. Tehilot, says, There are two Causes of Man's life, (one in
respect of Time, (which proceeds from the Spheres) and the other is natural
Heat) which changes in several Ages.

After all, the Jews do not believe that this Term is precisely and unalterably
determined beforehand by Divine Providence, for these following Reasons.

1. Because God promises long Life upon the Observation of some of his
Commandments, as Exodus 20.12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days
may be long upon the Land, Deuteronomy. 4.40. and 32.47. Now if our days were decreed
by God from all Eternity, this Promise would be vain, and no Body could exceed
them, much less can God deceive us. Therefore it is in the Power of Man to make
his Life long or short, as I shall show hereafter. 2. We find several Persons
earnestly desiring God to spare their Lives. So Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.2, 3. Then
he turned his Face to the Wall, and prayed unto the Lord, saying, I beseech
thee, O Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a
perfect Heart. And David, Ps. 61. Cain, being afraid of Death, says, Genesis
14.14. Every one that finds me shall stay me. There are others that have
desired to die, as Elies, 1 Kings 19.4. It is enough now, O Lord, take away my
Life for I am not better than my Fathers. And Jonah, Chap. 4.8. He fainted and
wished in himself to die, and said it is better for me to die than to live Now
if the Term of Life was absolutely predestined, the Prayers of Hezekiah, Cain
and David were vain, and those of Elias and Jonah superfluous. Hence the
Talmudists in Guemara Berachet, say, That if any one comes into a City, and
finds it in an uproar, he may lift up his Voice, and pray to God that he would
avert that Evil from his Family: Or, if any one should desire, after his Wife
is with Child, that it may be a Male, certainly such Petitions are frivolous,
because when a thing is done it cannot be altered. This we may apply to our
present purpose; for if all things were decreed from Eternity, it is absurd to
be sollicitous or careful about any thing. 3. The truth of this Argument is
mightily confirmed by the words which God spoke to Solomon, 1 Kings 3.11, 12,
13, 14. From whence it is evident, that Solomon might ask for Life as a
contingent thing, and when God conferred on him Wisdom, Riches and Honor, he
promised him Life too, not absolutely but conditionally, If thou will walk in
my ways, etc. 4. If the Term of Life is unalterably settled, no Man can prevent
Death: And yet we find God exhorting Man to beware of Dangers, and the
Occasions of Misfortunes, Deuteronomy. 20.5, 6, 7. and in another place, Chap. 22.8.
When thou buildest a new House, then thou shall make a Battlement for thy Roof,
that thou bring not Blood upon thine House, if any Man fall from thence:
Therefore it follows that the Term of Life is not fixed by an absolute
Predestination. 5. David himself says, 1 Samuel 27.10. As the Lord lives, the
Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into
Battle and perish. If by those words, or his day shall come to die, he
understood the Day that was decreed by God, it was superfluous to mention the
three kinds of Death: For which soever had happened it would have been
appointed beforehand. And if so, it is plain those words were false; for Saul
might have been smitten by the Lord, as well as slain in the Battle. 6. There
is not one place in the Old Testament, which affirms this Predestination; but
we may only collect from the forecited Passages, that there is a Term of Life,
which (as I have explained it depends upon the Times, the Heavens, and the
Constitution. So Job says, Chap. 14.5. Thou have appointed his bounds that he
cannot pass; by which he means, that all Men must die. And David, Ps. 89.49.
What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? And in another Place 1 Chronicles. 29.15. Our days on Earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding. As
for Job's saying, Chap. 14.5. The Number of his Months are with thee; he means
nothing else but God's Pre-science, because God knew and foresaw all things
from Eternity.
BOOK II. Whether the Term of Life is alterable or unalterable?
SECT. 1.

HAVING in the former Book proved, that there is a Term to every Man's Life; I
shall in the next place enquire, whether this Term is so fixed, that it is
impossible to exceed or prevent it, or on the contrary, whether it is mutable?

All the Jews unanimously consent, that this Term is alterable, though it
depend upon the Planets, the Constitution, or the Variety of Times. Hereupon,
R. Bahye says, that there is a more Eminent Power, above that of the Stars,
which orders things by Reward and Punishment. The same is confirmed by Aben
Ezra, upon Exodus Chapter 23. Where (assigning the dependence of Life upon the
Temper of the Body) he says, that the Natural Heat and Moisture of every one
that serves God) is augmented, and then a Man exceeds the Term of Life.
Therefore according to this Opinion, the Term of Life is alterable.

This is the Reason that Men take such Care to preserve their Health, and when
it is impaired, to recover it. This makes them so often change the Air. This
makes them drink those medicinal Potions, that are to nauseous. In a word, this
first makes Men study, and then Practice Physic. And indeed, as it is very
ridiculous to aspire to that Preferment, which by no Pains or Industry can be
procured; so I think it exceeding simple to be careful about the Preservation
of our Life, when the Term is immutable, and it cannot be prolonged. Nay, it
would be to no purpose, for the Forth to bring forth Plants, and Herbs (by the
Bounty of God) for no other Design than the use of Physic.

But that we may establish this Opinion better, let us consult the 3d Chap. of
Eccl. and the 1st. Verse. In which place Solomon affirms, That the Term of Life
is alterable There is a time to be born, and a time to die. Here we see, that
our Birth and Death are paralleled, forasmuch as they have both a certain
time. Now if by the hour of Death, that Term of Life is understood, which is
unalterably decreed by God, then the same may be said of the hour of our
Nativity. But if this is granted, the very Name of Nature is destroyed; for by
this means we are obliged to acknowledge, that God decreed the Birth of
Abraham, his long Life, his Marriage which Sarah, her Conception and Delivery
of a Son, which is absurd; when common Experience makes it appear, that these
things depend upon Free Will. If any one enquires, how we must understand, that
there is some time of Life appointed? Rabbi Solomon answers, The time of our
Formation is completed in nine Months, but that of Death alters, according to
the Diversity of the Age. And as I said before, this is commonly the space of
70 years. This being premised, I conclude that the space of 70 years, or rather
the Term of Life is uncertain and mutable, when the space of nine Months, or
the time of Pregnancy, is so too. The time of our Birth is doubtless uncertain,
for though the Talmudick Doctors do averr, That the Foetus's of dumb Animals
are formed within a limited time, yet they do not own the same of young
Children. They make the time of Parturition threefold, one at the ninth Month,
which is common and usual, and this they will have meant by the word
Conception, which in the Hebrew contains the number 271, for there are so many
days in nine Months. The second time that a Woman is with Child, is seven
Months; hence in the Jerusalem Targum upon these words, Genesis 3.16. I will
greatly multiply thy Sorrow, and thy Conception, etc. the Commentators say,
That the word in multiplying, according to the numerical Letters of the Hebrew,
makes up 212 days, which are equivalent to seven Months; agreeably to this, the
Philosophers Empedocles, Plotinus, and Macrobius, say, That a Child cannot live,
that is born before the seventh Month. Some of the Rabbis are of an Opinion,
that every one of the seven Planets performs an Office in the Production of
Children.

The third time of Parturition is extended to the 12th. Month. Agellius B. 3.
chap. 16. reports, that a Woman was brought to Bed at Rome, the 11th. Month
after her Husband's Decease. The Emperor Adrian, (by the Consent of Physicians
and Philosophers) maintains that this thing is possible. Bernard mentions a
Woman (which is scarce credible) that was 16 Months with Child. Thus we see,
that it is ordinary for Women to be with Child nine Months, yet extraordinarily
they may be Delivered before, or after that time; so the ordinary Term of Man's
Life is 70 years, yet very sew live so long. Therefore the Term of our Life is
not so precisely Fixed, but it may be changed.

SECT. 2. Man's Life may be shortne'd several ways, viz. by Divine Providence,
Chance, or Nature. These three Causes I put instead of the three fatal Sisters,
to whom the Heathens ascribed the Boundaries of Life. Thus a Man's Life is
shortn'd by Providence, for Example, when a Man is cut off from the People,
which Punishment the Scripture makes mention of; and by which the Cabbalists,
Aramban, and Isaac Abravanel affirm, a Man's Life is taken away in the midst of
his days, and the Soul after its Separation from the Body, is deprived of the
sight of God.

Hence it is manifest, that our Life may be shortn'd by Sin, and prolonged by
Virtue. But I shall Illustrate this Argument by some Examples. The Rabbis say,
That Abraham lived 175 years, which are five less than his Son Isaac, because
he should not see the Impiety of his Kinsman Esau. Rachel also did not live out
her days. For that which proceeds out of a righteous. Man's mouth, is the same
as if it came out of an Angels. Jacob, not knowing that she had stolen her
Fathers Idols, cursed her, saying, With whom soever thou sindest thy Gods, let
him not live, Genesis 31.32. So they say, though Joseph lived 110 years, yet he
died before all his Brethren, because he had exercised a great deal of Severity
toward them; Abijah is said to be slain by the Lord for the Sin, by which he
polluted himself, saying, Ye be a great multitude, and there are with you
Golden Calves, which Jerobeam made you for Gods. 2 Chronicles. 13.8. With this
agrees what Isaiah says, Chap. 6.5. We is me for I am undone, because I am a
Man of unclean Lips, and an Angel came, and touched his Lips (with which he had
offended) with a Coal.

There are more clear Examples beside these, (in Saul and his Sons) which the
Scripture expresses after this manner. 1 Chronicles. 10.13, 14. So Saul died for his
Transgression which he committed against the Lord, even against the word of the
Lord, which he kept not. God smote Nabal with a sudden Death, 1 Samuel 25.38. And
it came to pass about ten days after, that the Lord smote Nabal that he died.
Here the Jewish Doctors note that those were the ten days which are between the
beginning of the Year, and the Day of Expiation; which we, call penitential
days, because every one ought then to Examine his Life, and consider what he
has said, or done amiss. Jeremiah foretold the Death of Hananiah the false
Prophet, Chap. 28.16. This year shall thou die, because thou have taught
Rebellion against the Lord. But what shall we say of that vast multitude, which
perished in the Deluge? of those that were consumed in Sodom, and Gomorrah? of
Korah, Dathan and Abiram, and their wicked Accomplices whom the Earth swallowed
up alive? Of that grievous Plague which swept away so many Israelites in
David's time? Is it not manifest enough, that their Lives were shortened by
Divine Providence? Pertinent to this are the words of David, Psalm. 37.22. Such
as be blessed of him, shall inherit the Earth: And they that be cursed of him
shall be cut off; and of Jeremiah, Chap. 17.11. He that gets Riches and not
by Right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, which R. Kimchi expounding
says, He shall die before his time. Job says, Chap. 36.12. If they obey not
they shall perish by the Sword. And Solomon Eccl. 8.13. It shall not be well
with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, Chap. 7.17. Be not overmuch
wicked, neither be thou foolish, Why should thou die before thy time? Upon
which places the Chaldee Paraphrast says, They shall shorten their days,
because they shall die before their time comes to die. Because God used to
punish Sinners with untimely Death, therefore David prays, Psalm. 102.24. That
God would not take him away in the midst of his days. The Cabbalists upon that
place of the Proverbs, Chap. 13.23. There is that is destroyed for want of
Judgment, say, That it is certain, that Men often die before their time. Hither
may be referred those Persons that are punished for their Crimes, as Joab,
Shimei and many more. Concerning these Solomon observes, Prove. 19.16. He that
despises his ways shall die, upon which words the Learned Aben Ezra comments,
Before his time, because the Council shall put him to Death.

SECT. 3. There is another way likewise, by which Life may be shortened, and
that is by Chance or Fortune. For this Reason R. Judah Levita, upon those wards
of Samuel, Or he shall descend into the Battle and perish, etc. says, That is
an accidental Death. And R. Joseph Albo affirms, that it signifies a Death,
that happens by Chance, and without any antecedent Offense, and merely by the
Power of a Celestial Sign. But that I may explain this thing more clearly, I
shall show, what the Jews meant by Chance and Fortune.

And in the first place, they usually distinguish between Fortune and Chance.
The latter of which they attribute to inanimate and insensible Creatures. For
instance, if Tyles fall from a House, when the Wind blows and kill a Man. Here
we have two things, 1. A natural Cause; for it is natural for the Wind to blow
2. That which may be properly called Chance, for it is casual indeed that a
Tyle should drop off, and kill any one. Sometimes they use it more strictly,
and ascribe it to sensible, and animate Creatures, that Act by Instinct.

Fortune they call Hizdamen, and will have it to belong only to Men, or
rational Creatures. Though these two things do differ, yet the difference is so
small, that they are both very often comprehended in the same Definition; for
according to some of the Rabbis, Chance and Fortune are defined after this
manner, they are such things as come by accident, not naturally, or by Order
and Design. For Example, if a Man by digging a Pit should find a Treasure. That
Claudius endeavoring to conceal himself, should be discovered by a Soldier,
and created Emperor. That Caligula (as Suetonius testifies) walking out after
Supper, should be unexpectedly slain by the way. These and such like things the
Hebrews call Chance and Fortune, from whence they that have good or bad
Fortune, are called fortunate or unfortunate.

Hereupon, R. Judah Levita, R. Isaac Arama, and R. Solomon Jebet have divided
all our Actions into four Classes, viz. Divine, natural, casual and voluntary.
For all things that come to pass in the World, proceed either from God's
Providence, Nature, Chance, or Man's Free Will. This is certainly a very
accurate, and elegant Distinction. The Hebrews likewise affirm, That God often
deserts Men for their Sins and Iniquities, and then they are exposed to Chance
and Fortune; this they prove out of Levit. chap. 26.27, 28. i. e. (as Abravanel
and all others expound it) If ye walk not constantly with me, and uprightly,
then will I leave you (that were before guarded by my Providence) subject to
the mis-chances and accidents of the World.

These things happen to those whom God forsakes, as it is written, Deuteronomy 31.18.
I will surely hide my face in that day, that is, my Providence and my Favor:
Thereupon the Jews are wont to say, That any Vice or Sin (though not Mortal) is
enough to make a Man obnoxious to Chance, which thing is confirmed by them out
of the Scriptures. For Moses advertising the Israelites, least they should be
hurt by the destroying Angel, speaks thus. Exodus 12.22. None of you shall go
out of the door of his house until the morning. And in another place. Deuteronomy.
20.5. What man is there that has built a new house, and has not Dedicated it?
Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle. Also, 22.8. Thou
shall make a Battlement for thy Roof, that thou being not Blood upon thy house.
From which places it appears, that it is in Man's power to avoid Danger, or run
into it; for as a King does not regard the Promotion, or Advancement of a
person that is not his Subject: So neither has God a particular Care of those
who neglect the obedience of his Laws, but resigns them to the Scorn and
Contempt of Fortune. The same also is maintained by R. Levi Ben Gerson (in his
Milhamot a sem B. 4. c. 2.) in these words, It is not reasonable, that we
should allow such a Providence, that makes it impossible that wicked Men should
be capable of receiving that good which the Stars have ordained for them. I
only affirm, That such People are liable to those misfortunes which the
heavenly Signs incline them to, and that God does not protect them from those
Evils that the Planets have designed. For this Cause the Talmudists say, A Man
should never run into Danger, and then desire a Miracle for his relief; because
he may be disappointed of that.

But here we must take notice, That many things may seem to fall out by Chance
and Fortune, which nevertheless are ordered by the special Care and Direction
of Providence. And therefore the Rabbis (commenting upon that Text, in Exodus
21.13. If a Man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand) say, That
God takes Opportunities, (as if it were by Chance) to execute his Judgments;
which they illustrate by this Example. Once upon a time there were two
Murderers, one had killed a Man by Chance, and the other designedly, but no
body yet knew when they did it. Now what does God do in this Case? Does he
suffer these Crimes to go unpunished? No; but behold! God orders it so, that
both of them should come into the same Inn, where he, that slew the Man
accidentally, climbed up a Ladder, and tumbling down killed the other, but he
that sell down (recovering himself) flew to a placo of Refuge, that he might be
secured from Prosecution, and so both of them were punished. There is another
way by which Chance and Providence may concur, as in the Death of King Ahab;
for though it was foretold by the Prophet, yet the Scripture records, he was
undesignedly slain by an Archer. We conclude therefore, that Men's Lives may be
sometimes shortened by Chance, or unexpected Events. Soldiers are in the
greatest Danger of these; for as Solomon observes, The Battle is not always to
the strong, Eccl. 9.11. so R. Bahye notes upon Deuteronomy. 20.5. Lest he die in the
Battle, i. e. says he, before his time: From whence it appears that he who dies
in War, dies before his time.

SECT. 4. A Man's Life also may be shortened by natural means. As 1st. By an
ill Habit of Body, which often proceeds from the Parents; for Hippocraetes
says, a Phlegmatic Father, begets a Phlegmatic Son, and a Colerick Father, a
Colerick Son. 2d. By unwholesome Air. 3d. By the disorders of our Affections,
and a debauched way of Living. Hence Philo the Jew, (In his Book of the
Creation of the World:) says, That several sorts of Meat are apt to hurt and
oppress the Stomach; Chrysostom. (in contra lux. and crap. Orat) against Luxury
and Drunkenness, says, as a Ship that is over Laden will sink, so a Man, that
eats too much, hastens his Death. The Physicians too are of Opinion that much
Meat, and of serveral sorts are prejudicial to the Body, and shorten Life; as
it is reported, that Vitellius and Julian eat Variety of Victuals often in a
day. Lastly, A great many Infirmities, which are the Cause of a short Life,
proceed from an ill Digestion; these Infirmities the Talmudists say are 903,
which are noted in those words of David. Psalm. 68.20. The Issues of death. We
offend against the Rules of Health, by the quantity and quality of our Food,
and in the time and manner of Eating. Hence David says, Psalm. 34.21. Evil shall
slay the wicked; i. e. Such Persons do as good as kill themselves; and hither
may be referred all that do so, as Achitophel and others. All these Causes of a
short Life, are best remarked by Maimonides, in Yada hazaka, for in that Book
where he had prescribed most useful Receipts for the Preservation of Health; he
adds this, Whosoever observes these Rules which are laid down by me, I dare
avouch shall never be sick all his Life, or want a Physician, but die of mere
old Age; except his Body was infirm from his Birth; or a Pestilence, or a
Famine infest that part of the Country where he lives. Here we may discern by
what Causes Maimonides declares our Life may be shortened, viz. by an ill
Complexion, by a loose Course of Living, by Divine Providence, by Plague or
Famine. I proceed now to show that our Life may be prolonged.

SECT. 5. God, in several places, Promises long Life to good Men, and those who
obey his Laws, as Exodus 20.12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days
may be long in the Land. Likewise in Deuteronomy. 17.20. and 22.7. and in Psalm. 91.16.
With long Life will I satisfy him. Prove. 28.16. He that hates Covetousness
shall prolong his days. 9.11. for by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the
years of thy Life shall be increased. And in many other places this Promise is
expressly given by God, to Holy and Religious Men. But for all this there is a
great Dispute (among our Doctors) about the quality, and form of this Promise.
R. Moses Gerund. thinks it is extended to old Age, i. e. 70, or 80 years; for
which Reason upon those words, Exodus chap. 23.26. He says the meaning is, He
shall not die in Battle, or by Pestilence, or by Change of Air, but by old Age.
R. David Kimchi is of the same Opinion, and declares it upon that Text in 2 Samuel 7.12. When thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers,
i. e. when thou art old, and have lived the longest time, which is usually 70
years. Therefore, whenever that Expression of Augmentation occurs in Scripture,
we must understand some Infirmity, or ill Temper, from which a Man is
delivered, as in those Places, Prove. 9.11. and 10.27. For if a Man keeps the
Commandments of God, though he should be very sick and weak, yet God can
recover him and prolong his days, as may appear from the forecited Texts. And
if God does grant it, he is Happy, and arrives to the Term of 70 or 80 years.
Hence, R. Joel Ben Sueb (in lib. Norah Thehilot.) upon those words of David,
Psalm. 61.6. says, That David desires no more than the ordinary time of Life;
but R. Solomon is more exact, and says David means by Generations 70 years, for
twice 35 years makes up two Generations, or 70 years. This was the Opinion of
R. Aqutha, (before these two) that by Virtue and good Actions Life was
increased; so Hezekiah lived 15 years longer upon the Account of his
Repentance, for he was but 29 years old then, and had reigned but 14 years.

Hereupon the Rabbis say, That God's Augmentation is more than the Principal,
for all those computed together, make up but 58 years; so that he did not live
to the ordinary Term of 70 years. This indeed is a great Punishment, but it is
such an one, by which it may appear, that those Persons may have the Grant of a
longer Life, who deserve it. To these things belong that Saying of some of the
Ancients, That God has a particular regard for those who live justly and
righteously for the sake of their good Deeds, and therefore their Life is
proportionable, i. e. he daily increases their Life. Hence (upon those words of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.2.) They say, Now my days are fulfilled, this day I was born,
and this day I shall die; for Moses was born, and died, upon the seventh day of
the Month Adar. So likewise the 365 years of Enoch, which he lived upon Earth,
were proportioned to the 365 days of a Solar year; whose Age being (as I may
say) proportioned, he was translated into Heaven. After this manner God usually
consummates, and compleats the days of the Just. Therefore David says, Psalm.
37.18. The Lord knows the days of the upright; as if he took a particular
Account of every day. According to these Men, the Reward of a long Life is
nothing else, but the Completion of 70 or 80 Years, which some of them say no
Body can exceed.

But there are other Men who dissent from these: For R. Nissim, R. Joseph Albo,
Isaac Abravanel, and others, believe that all the Promises of the Mosaic Law
are Supernatural, and for that Reason maintain, that the Promise of long Life
is not limited within the Compass of 70 or 80 Years; and that a Man may live
longer. Hence a certain Rabbi says, If a Man deserves it, his two Generations
shall be augmented, if not, they shall be diminished. This opinion is most in
vogue among the celebrated Authors.

Hereupon, those Doctors who approve of the Sentiments of the Astrologers, say,
that wherever the word Augmentation occurs in the Scripture, it is meant
beyond the End determined by the Planets. They who think the Term of Life
depends upon the Constitution, say, that God by a certain Divine Power
increases the Radical Moisture. Hence Aben Ezra remarks, that our days are not
appointed before, but are natural, and that Nature is wonderfully enlarged by
good Works. The same thing is taken notice of by R. Mehir in lib. Urim and
Vetumim. for this Reason, says he, the Recession of the Sun upon the Dial, was
given by God as a Token to Hezekiah of the Continuance of his Life, because the
Sun is the Fountain of all natural Heat; upon this Account, the Sun receeding
and re^^cting his Rays together with his natural Heat; he that through Age had
impaired this, might have it restored, and as it were grow young again.
According to this Opinion (which I think the best) the prolongation of Life
which God promised, does exceed any Term, whether Complexional, Planetary, or
Secular.

SECT. 6. In the next Place let us see, how Virtue and Piety are the means to
promote the Radical Moisture in Men. As the Happiness of the Soul consists in
Goodness, or in the Knowledge of Virtue, and what is most commendable: In like
manner, a Man's life is increased and renewed by good Actions and Meditation on
God's Law. Now that Life is enlarged by Piety may be evinced by the words of
Solomon, Prove. 10.27. Here the Talmudists say, this is evident from Experience
The fear of the Lord prolongeth days: He says this in respect of the first
Temple, which lasted not above 410 Years, and under which there were not above
13 Priests: And the years of the wicked shall be shortened. He speaks this in
reference to the second Temple, which continued 420, and there were above 300
Priests under that; by this number, they mean a great many. And they further
add, that they lived longer under the first Temple, than they did under the
second, because they were more holy.

Furthermore, our Doctors assert, that there are 113 Bones and Nerves in a Man,
to which the 113 Precepts of the Law correspond. Hence the Cabbalists say, that
Men (by Religion and keeping God's Commandments) not only purify their Body,
so that of Terrestrial and Gross, it becomes Celestial and Spiritual, but even
corroborate and augment the natural Heat so much, that it sometimes becomes
immortal, as Enoch's and Elias's did. And this is not contrary to Reason: For,
if according to Galen, good Diet preserves Health, and consequently prolongs
Life; may we not allow the same Efficacy, nay greater, to the wise Government
of the Soul? Now the Body receives Life from the Union of the Soul; therefore
if this be managed according to the Rules of true Holiness, (which are not
prescribed by Galen, or Hippocrates, but which we learn from Heaven) no Man can
deny, but it is most reasonable to expect long Life, from a perseverance in
that. I remember that I have read of a certain Rabbi, that wondered that Men
should live so long in Babylon, when it is situated so low, (which Places
Avicenna takes notice are very unhealthy) but, when he was informed that they
often frequented the Synagogues, he was very well satisfied. The like I met
with in Guemera de Tahanit, c. 4. where some People asking how they might
prolong their lives, the wise Men answered, that it might be done partly by a
natural Cause, and partly by a moral one, viz. The fear of the Lord. I have
read also of a Merchant, (who lived in the Island of Cyprus) that ordered it to
be proclaimed, that he had abundance of sweet Spices to sell that were
excellent to preserve Life, and when a great many People came to purchase them,
he pulled out a Psalter out of his Bag, and showed 'em the 34th Psalm, where
David says, v. 13, 14. What man is he that desires life, and loves many days,
that he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking
guile; by which he would intimate that Piety, was the best Aromatic to procure
long Life. Besides, the Meditation upon God's word is the means to prolong
Life, and restore the natural Heat. This is strongly confirmed by Solomon's
Exhortation: For that most wise King (where he speaks about the Law) says,
Length of Days is in her Right Hand, and in her Left Hand Riches and Honor,
Prove. 3.16. Also Chap. 9.11. By me thy days shall be multiplied; and in another
place, Chap. 3.8. It shall be health to my Navel, and marrow to my Bones. The
Reason is, because the Scripture says, Man shall not live by bread only, but
by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 83. From
hence it appears that Men are nourished by Spiritual, as well as Corporal Food.
And this I believe is the Reason why Solomon compares the Law of God to the
Tree of Life, Prove. 3.18. because as the Tree of Life (which was in Paradise)
had such a Virtue, that whoever tasted the Fruit of it, grew young and vigorous
again. So the Law of God (which is like the Tree of Life) has the same effect.
In like manner, if Adam had not sinned, (though his Body was compounded of a
mixture of the four Elements) he might have lived a great many Years longer,
and at last his Soul, together with his Body, might have been translated into
Heaven, as it happened to Enoch, and Elias, and all others would have enjoyed
the like Privilege who had lived in perfect Obedience to the Law.

Hence the Rabbis believe, that when the Law was given to Moses, God placed
the Israelites in the same State that Adam was in before the Fall. But that
happy Condition lasted not long, by reason of their abominable Idolatry in
worshipping the Calf. Therefore David says, Ps. 82.7, 8. I have said ye are
Gods; and all of you are Children of the most high: But ye shall die like Men,
etc.

What I have mentioned already does notably illustrate and confirm that
singular Example (which is recorded in Guemera Jebamot, c. 12. of a certain
Family in Jerusalem, out of which, whosoever was born seldom lived above
Eighteen years; which thing being related to R. Johanan Ben Zachay, and being
asked what was the reason of it, he bid them enquire, if they were not of Eli's
Posterity, whom God had threatened, saving, 1 Samuel 2.33. All the increase of
thing House shall die in the flower of their Age. And it was discovered that
they were derived from him. Upon which, he admonished them, that if they
desired God would grant them longer Lives, they should very diligently meditate
upon his Law. This wise Man's advice had its effect and experience showed it.
And our of gratitude the Family would ever after be called by his Name. Our
Rabbis likewise report, that the Sabbath Day on which David died, he was very
intent in meditating on God's Law; which when the Angel Samuel (who is the
common Executioner of Death) perceived, he could not execute his Office.
Wherefore he contrived this Stratagem, that a high Wind should vehemently shake
the Trees that grew in David's Court, that might occasion his coming abroad,
which it did; but as he was going down some steps, he missed one of them, and
fell down; upon which the King (being in a Consternation) did not think upon
God's Law, so his Meditation ceasing, his Life ceased also.

The Rabbis in this place are of opinion, that David obtained such Favor from
God by his Sanctity, and his devout Hymns, that Death could have had no Power
over him, if he had not committed Adultery, and Murder. Save only in the Matter
of Uriah, says the Scripture, 1 Kings 15.5. This is enough to show that our
Life may be prolonged by observing God's Laws, and meditating thereon; so that
if any one would perfectly and constantly observe the Law, it is probable that
(like Elias) he would never die. For I believe this may be miraculously done
two ways: First, by preserving the Radical Moisture in its due State. Secondly,
by preserving the Virtue of our Food. As to the First, it is confirmed by the
Example of Moses, who lived forty Days in Mount Sinai, without Meat or Drink;
then the Divine Law (which was instead of Food) preserved the Radical Moisture
in its due Vigor and Strength. The other is confirmed by the Example of Elias;
for the Angel said unto him, Arise and eat because the Journey is too great for
thee, 1 Kings 19.7, 8. And in the next verse it is added, That he went in the
strength of that meat 40 days and 40 nights: For the virtue in the Meat was
preserved as if he had but just eaten it, so that he was not sensible of any
Fatigue all those 40 days and Nights. We must not forget the wonderful Story
of Elias, and the Woman of Sarepta; for we read how the Prophet said unto her,
1 Kings 17.14. The Barrel of Meal shall not waste, neither shall the Cruise of
Oil fail. And so it came to pass, for as much as was taken out one day, was
restored the next: Thus the Radical Moisture, (which is like Oil) is
miraculously preserved, in its due quantity and quality, by a constant Course
of Piety. I say miraculously, because it cannot be naturally. And when I
proposed this Question to Zacuthus (a very learned and worthy Physician among
us) he courteously answered (in a particular Treatise) that it was above the
Power of Nature, and proved it by Reason, and the Authority of several Authors.
Wherefore we justly ascribe it to the Omnipotent Power of God, and conclude
that it cannot be effected without a Miracle.

SECT. 7. This is a proper place to treat of the Jewish Ceremonies about the
Sick. As soon as any one is taken ill, we immediately send for a Physician, in
order for his Recovery. This we all know is lawful, for God himself uses means
in natural Actions; and which I will show by this Example.

Though God was able to deliver Samuel out of the hands of Saul, nevertheless
he says, Take an Heifer with thee, and say I am come to Sacrifice to the Lord,
1 Samuel 16.2. By which means he might conceal his Design of anointing David to
be King, who, when he was anointed, industriously endeavored to escape the
hand of Saul. So Gideon made use of Trumpets, as natural means, Judges 7.16.
Elisha also the Prophet, (when he sent one of the Sons of the Prophets to
anoint Jehu King,) commanded him that he should do it privately in an inner
Chamber, 2 King. 9.2.

Now if Physic is good and lawful, we may doubtless send for a Physician to
cure the Sick. There were a great many Eminent Physicians formerly among us, as
we read in the Talmud of Samuel (a skilful Physician, and Astrologer) who Cured
R. Jehuda of the Toothach, which he had been troubled with for several years,
and we read in another Place, that he Cured the same Man's Eyes. There goes a
remarkable Story of R. Ismael, and R. Aquiba; who (traveling near Jerusalem
with a Countreyman in their Company) met a sick Man, whom they presently Cured
with an infallible Medicine. The Countryman seeing this, asked them who was the
Cause of that Man's Sickness? They answered, God. Why then (says he) are you so
presumptuous to meddle with another Man's Business; God (as you confess) having
made him Sick, and will ye pretend to Cure him? But they (to apply themselves
to his Capacity) asked him what Profession he was of? Don't you see (says the
Countryman) by the Instrument that I carry in my hand, that I am a Farmer? Who
then (say they) made your Land? and who is the Cause of the Fertility of your
Vineyard? God, replied he. Why then (say they) do you concern your self with
another Man's work, and ear those Fruits that God has made? O! (says the
Farmer) if I do not Plow, and Cultivate, and weed my Ground, I am sure I shall
have no Crop. Well then, (say they) honest Friend, have not you read in the 103
Psalm. v. 15. That the days of Man are as Grass: Now Man is like a Tree; the
Dung which is laid to it, to make it thrive, is like the sweet Spices and
medicinal Potions, and the Husbandman represents the Physician; so they
pleasantly convinced him of his Error.

From this it appears, That the Ancients approved, and made use of Physic,
whenever God afflicted any Person with a Disease. The Cabbalists are of the
same mind, for (commenting upon that Place of Deuteronomy. 32.10. He found him in a
desert Land.) They say a sick Man is like one that God finds in a Desert,
wherefore a Physician is to be consulted, who may cure him by Purges, or
opening a Vein, and then prescribe a regular Diet which may preserve his
Health. Hither we may referr, what several great Rabbi's have said; that when a
Person has procured a License from the Magistrate to practice Physic, he is
obliged to cure the Sick, and he may lawfully demand a Fee. But after all, we
must not rely too much upon the Physician, and so forget God: For we must
earnestly and devoutly call upon him; in which Aben Ezra agrees with me; but he
so far dissents from my Opinion, that he will not allow of a Physician in
internal and secret Distempers, but wholly submit to God. R. Vidal has
admirably confuted him, and commended the Use of Physic. But here are two
things that deserve consideration, one respects the Physician, and the other
the Patient. As to the first, a Physician ought to be very careful about his
Patient's recovery, otherwise he may lose his own Soul. For upon this Account
the Talmudists say that the best Physicians sometimes go to Hell. For there are
some that pretend to cure a Distemper which they do not understand, others do
not take notice of the proper time to administer the Physic; and there are
others that leave all to Chance, and care not whether their Patient lives or
dies. It often happens that a sick Man loses his Life while the Physicians are
disputing about the Nature of the Disease. And perhaps, for this reason
Physicians are sometimes called Murderers: May be Alexander too was of that
mind, when he commanded Glaucus the Physician to be execured, because he did
not recover his Friend Hephaestion* I speak only of bold, ignorant Quacks, for
the skilful and honest Physicians are called in the Scripture Heads.

That Consideration which should affect the Patient, is, that he must not too
confidently depend upon the Physician, or natural Means, but chiefly put his
trust in God; for this Reason is Asa reprehended for placing too much hope in
the Physicians: For so says the Text, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. In his Disease he sought
not to the Lord, but to the Physicians. The Prophet does not reprove the King
because he sent for them, but because he expected a Cure only from them, and
never regarded God. Thus the Talmudists, among their Praises of the good King
Hezekiah, reckon this deserves a place, because he hid a Book of Physic. Some
think the Author of it was Solomon, others that it was a Book of Magic, and
therefore hid by Hezekiah, because some People in those Times used to consult
it for (...) are of their Diseases, and so neglected to implore God's Aid and
Assistance. For God is the true Physician, and he that puts his Trust in
him, may expect Ease and Comfort in time of Sickness: Thus it is said, in Exodus
chapter 15.26. I will put none of those Diseases upon thee, which I have brought
upon the Egyptians; for I am the Lord that heals thee.

SECT. 8. The Talmudists say, there are four things which incline God to alter
his Decrees, viz. Alms deeds, fervent Prayer, a Change of the Name, and a
Change of Works. And these are the four means which the Jews make use of in a
dangerous Distemper; so they commonly secretly relieve those Persons who are in
the greatest Exigencies: For as Money does, as it were, give life to a poor
Man, so they hope that God will grant them their Life when they desire it. For
this Reason, the Jews frequently collect Alms for the Poor that live in the
City, or for those that live in the Holy Land, or for those that are in Prisons
and Dungeons, or for any other charitable Uses.

This they believe is meant by those words of Solomon, Prove. 10.2.
Righteousness delivers from Death, etc. 12.28.21.21. And it is confirmed by
Experience, for R. Aquiba's Daughter being almost stung to Death by a Serpent
(which the Astrologers had foretold) was recovered upon the Account of her
generous Charity. Hence comes the Rabbinical Proverb, Whoever says, I give this
Money, that my Children may live, is perfectly just. The meaning of which is,
though we owe our Life and Goods, and all that we possess to God who gave them:
Nevertheless, whosoever relieves a poor Man, in expectation of obtaining God's
Favor, he ought not to be esteemed simple, but perfectly just: So much for
Alms.

The next Remedy is fervent Prayer. By this means Hezekiah prevailed so much
with God, that he granted him a longer Life, though he had determined his
Death. From hence comes that saying of the wise Men, Though a Man sees a sharp
Sword clapped to his Throat, yet he must not despair* of God's Mercy. By which
they understand, that Prayer has such a Power, that it can reverse the Sentence
of Death, which was pronounced by God against him. Therefore, when David says,
Ps. 107.6. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered
them out of their distresses. The Psalmist understands this of the time of the
Egyptian Captivity: For the Israelites lifting up their minds to Heaven,
humbly prayed that God would release them before the appointed time. This is
the chiefest Remedy the Jews make use of when they are dangerously sick. And
because the Prayers of many, are usually more acceptable, it is appointed that
the Sick should be prayed for in the Synagogues. I have read of R. Hanina Ben
Dossa, a very pious Man, who used to judge of the Life or Death of those Sick
Persons that he prayed for. For, says he, if I pronounce my Prayer smoothly,
and easily, it is a sign of its Acceptance, and that the Person will recover;
but if it is in the least interrupted, or I hesitate, it is an infallible Token
that he will die. This did truly once happen to R. Gamaliel's Son, who being
very sick, his Father sent two Servants to R. Hanina, to desire him to pray to
God for his recovery; which when he had done, he told the Messengers their
Petition was heard, and so dismissed them; and after that the Fever abated, and
great hopes of his recovery appeared. The Scripture likewise informs us, that
the Widow of Sarepta's Son was recovered by the Prayers of Elias, and that
Elisha by his Prayers restored the Shunamite's Son to Life: Therefore without
doubt fervent Prayer is exceeding effectual for the preservation or recovery of
Health.

The third Remedy is, a Change of the Name. And this is very common among the
Jews, when they are in great danger of their Lives; and it is performed in the
Synagogue with extraordinary Ceremony, and they always add the Name, to the
word Life. The reason of their doing it, is this; for, say they, though the
Change of the Name does not alter the Substance; yet notwithstanding it causes
some variation, in as much as every one is distinguished by his Name. Besides,
they will have this signify an affection of the mind, and a resolution of
amending their Life, which was so bad before, that they did not deserve to be
heard by God. Some are of opinion, that when they change their Name, they
change their Fortune; as appears in the Example of Abraham; for he was not so
rich when his Name was Abram, as he was, when he was called Abraham. While he
was Abram, he was only the Father of Mesopotamia, but when he was Abraham, he
was Father of the Kingdoms of the World. So while his Wise was called Sarai,
she was only a private Mistress; but when she took the Name of Sarah, she was
Mistress of the World. In like manner Jacob after his Victory over the
Edomites, was called Israel, in token of his future Conquests: For while the
Captivity continued, the People were Jahacob, i. e. trodden down by the
Gentiles. So Moses when he sent the Spies to Canaan, changed the Name of Osca
into Jeshua; because foreseeing (by his prophetic Spirit) Joshua's Success,
he said to him, the Lord shall preserve thee from the Malice of the Spies. No
doubt but there are other proper Names in the Scripture, which have a peculiar
Signification. So Esau said to his Brother Jacob, thou art truly called Jacob,
that is, a Deceiver, for thou have deceived me twice, Genesis 26.36. So Abigail
truly called her Husband Nabal, that is, a Fool, 1 Samuel 25.25. Likewise, Naomi
( Ruth's Mother-in-Law) said, call me not Naomi, i. e pleasant, call me Marah,
i. e. bitter, for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me, Ruth, c. 1.20.
After the same manner, sick People have great hopes of their recovery from the
Etymology of Life, if other means are used besides.

Lastly, The fourth Remedy is a Change of Works. This is last in order, but
ought to be our first Care: For certainly the Repentance of our past Sins
prevails much with God: Nineveh was to have been overthrown within forty Days,
but upon their Repentance God turned the Evil from them. So King Ahab upon his
Repentance, entreated God that he might not see the Evil in his Days. Hence the
Talmudists say, that Repentance prolongeth Man's Life. And in another place,
speaking of the Efficacy of Repentance, they say, that God by reason of it will
revoke. and alter his Sentence. These are the four supernatural Means of
recovering Health; to which some add fasting, whether it be by those of our own
Family, or the Poor whom we have obliged with our Alms. For when Haman
threatened the Israelites with inhumane Usage, Hester and Mordecai, and all the
Jews fasted very strictly. Ezra also approved of it, and frequently practiced
it. And it is said to Daniel, chapter 10.12. From the first day that thou did set
thine heart to understand, and to chasten thy self before thy God, thy words
were heard. Here we must take notice, that by a revocation of a Sentence or a
Decree, R. Joseph Albo does not mean a Divine Decree, but a Celestial Sign. And
therefore, when any great Misfortune is threatened to a Man by the influence of
the Planets, that danger (says he) is removed by virtuous Actions. For
instance, by the Power of the Planets the Ship, that a Man designs to go into,
will certainly be cast away: Now God hinders this Man from his design by
sickness, or some other way; in the mean time the Ship is lost, and the Man
escapes. Aben Ezra is of this opinion; for upon the 34th Chapter of Exodus he says,
Suppose by the influence of the Planets certain Ruin attends any City, and the
Inhabitants thereof by sincere Repentance appease God's Wrath, what shall come
to pass? Shall they be involved in the common Destruction of the City? No, God
shall put them in mind to go up into the Mountains and high Places, that they
may secure themselves: After which the Fields shall be overflowed with a mighty
Torrent of Water, and the City shall be destroyed. So by this means the Event
shall answer the Determination of the Planets, and yet the People escape too.
For as David says, Ps. 33.18, 19. Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him, and upon them that hope in his Mercy; to deliver their Soul from
Death, and to keep them alive in Famine.

Which way soever the Sentiments of the Rabbis are explained, this is
certainly true, that Piety is much more efficacious than the Planets; so that
when the Sentence of Death is pronounced (as it happened to Hezekiah) that is
not ineffectual, except God has altered it before. I shall conclude all here
with the formal Speech, that the Scholars of Pombeditha use when they go out of
the School, May he that is the Auther of Life, grant unto us a long, happy, and
an honest Life.

BOOK III. Concerning God 's Prescience, and Man's Free Will.
SECT. 1.

I Am obliged now to speak something concerning God's Prescience, and those
Arguments which are urged against Prognostications, because some of a contrary
Opinion have made Objections against what I treated of in the former Books.

Thus they Reason: If God exactly knew all things, and disposed them in such
Order, from Eternity, how can it be in the Power of Man to prolong or shorten
his Life? For Example, if God infallibly knew from all Eternity, that Abraham
would live 175 years, by reason of that sound and healthful Constitution which
he had given him, it is very plain that Abraham could not alter that
Determination. Now if this be true, it is demanded how God's Prescience, and
Man's Free Will, (two such contrary things) are consistent together? I must
confess, That I am very unwilling to engage in so nice and intricate a
Controversy. Euclid once being asked many things about God, only replied, This
I very well know, that God abhors those that are too curious, and inquisitive;
nevertheless, by the assistance of the Scripture, I believe I can illustra^^
and explain these things.

There were some Men heretofore, who, when they could not reconcile God's
foreknowledge, with Man's Free Will, denied both; as Cicero, who, that he might
maintain the Freedom of humane Actions, would allow no Prescience in God, which
is well observed by St. Augustine. Cicero, says he, That he might make Men
free, made them Sacrilegious. There are others that deny Man's Free Will, that
they may establish the foreknowledge of God. Wherefore I design to confirm and
settle these two things, before I proceed to a Re-conciliation. And in the
first Place, to prove that God knew all future contingent things from Eternity;
after that, I shall maintain that a Man may prolong, or shorten his Life as he
pleases.

SECT. 2. The first is plain and indisputable, says Maimonides, That all
Perfections may be found in God; but all Imperfections must be removed from
him. And it is very evident, That the Ignorance of any thing is an
Imperfection, and that God is ignorant of nothing; for it may be clearly proved
out of the Scripture, that God had a particular* knowledge of Adam, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses and several others, Genesis 18.19. Exodus 3.7, Deuteronomy.
29.18. upon this Account Moses, and Aaron thus address themselves to God. O
God, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, Numb. 16.22.

If we look into the Prophets, we shall find that they testify the same thing.
Isaiah 48.8. I knew that thou would deal very treacherously. Jer. 1.5. Before
I formed thee in the Belly I knew thee, chap. 12.3. Ezekiel. 37 3. Dan. 2.22. He
reveals the deep and secret things, he knows what is in the darkness, and
the light dwells with him. But the most eminent Testimony of God's
Prescience* is recorded in the 139 Psalm, for says David, v. 1. O Lord thou
have searched me, and known me, i. e. Thou did know from Eternity, as well as
now, all my Actions. v. 2. Thou know my down sitting, and mine uprising, i.
e. all my particular Actions. Thou understandest my thoughts afar off, i. e.
you know my Works so exactly from Eternity, that you also knew my very
Thoughts: Then he concludes, v. 7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or
whither shall I flee from thy Presence? i. e. When thy Knowledge and
Providence, O God, are above every thing, there is no place for me to fly unto,
for thou art every where; from whence it follows, That God takes Care of every
one. Hither we may refer, that which some of the Ancients report of the three
Men, which God convinced of their mistake, because they thought that he did not
know every thing. The first was Cain, who, when God asked him, where his
Brother Abel was? (as if he did not know that he had killed him) answered, Am I
my Brother's keeper? Genesis 4.9. The next was Balaam, who, when God said unto
him, What Men are these with thee? Replied, Balak the Son of Zippor, the King
of Moah, Numb. 22.9, 10* The last was Hezekiah, who, when Isaial asked about
the Ambassadors, which Berodach-Baladan had sent to him, saying what said these
Men, And from whence came they unto thee? answered, They are come from a far
Country, 2 King. 20.14. Though it might seem to be a small Fault, for the King
to offend against the Prophet, yet he should have considered, that he was a
Prophet of God, who knows all things before they are transacted.

SECT. 3. I shall proceed now to show God's foreknowledge of things that are
future. And a great and invincible Argument of this, are God's Predictions of
future contingent things, which were afterward fulfilled. As for instance:
First, God said to Moses, Exodus 3* 19. I am sure that the King of Egypt will not
let you go; and so it came to pass.

2. God foretells the Destruction of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4.25: When thou shall
beget Childrens Children, and shall have remained long in the Land. Here the
Phrase remained long, according to the Hebrew, makes up the number 846. for so
long they enjoyed the Holy Land, and then were expelled for their Iniquities,
which depended upon their Free-wills.

3. The 28th. Chap. of Deuteronomy. contains some Prophecies, which were fulfilled
under the first and second Temple. I have treated largely of these in my Book,
of the Divin. of Moses's Law, from whence I shall borrow some things now: The
28th. Chap. of Deuteronomy. wherein the Curses against the rebellious Israelites are
inserted, is divided into two parts, beginning at the 15. v. and so to the
49th. and from thence to the end. Thus they begin, Cursed shall thou be in the
City, etc. the Reason is presently added, v. 20. Because of the wickedness of
thy doings, whereby thou have forsaken me, i. e. for Idolatry, which was
notorious under the first Temple; for that Phrase to forsake, always signifies
in Scripture to forsake God, and to worship Idols. So it follows, The Lord
shall make the Pestilence cleave unto thee, etc. The Lord shall cause thee to
be smitten before thine Enemies, thou shall go out one way against them, and
flee seven ways before them, which did not happen under the second Temple, (for
then they were strong and valiant) but under the first. Hence Isaiah,
(lamenting the great weakness of the People) says, Chap. 22.3. All that are
found in thee are bound together, which have fled from far. As to what relates
to the other Curses, the Jews were sadly sensible of their Events, in the first
Calamities that fell upon them, as in the Captivity of Reuben, Gad, half the
Tribe of Manasseh, and in other Captivities of the Tribe of Judah. Then was
fulfilled that Curse, v. 30. Thou shall betroth a Wife and another Man shall
lie with her. But when it is said, v. 36. The Lord shall bring thee and thy
King, which thou shall set over thee, unto a Nation which neither thou nor thy
Fathers have known; and there shall thou serve other Gods, Wood and Stone, no
doubt but this must be understood of Zedekiah, and Jehoiakim, who were Captives
in Babylonia, which was a Land unknown to them, and where they worshipped Idols.
And though after the Conquest of the Holy Land, a remnant of the People was left,
yet it is said concerning them, v. 38. Thou shall carry much seed cut into the
Field, and shall gather but little in, etc. v. 43. The stranger that is within
thee shall get up above thee very high; which must be understood of the
Samaritans, who the King of Assyria, drove out of Samaria, and the adjacent
places. Because Moses here leaves off speaking of the Destruction of the first
Temple, he subjoyns the Cause of so great an Evil, v. 47. Because thou servedst
not the Lord thy God, etc. so much for the first part of the Chapter.

The 2d. part begins thus, The Lord shall bring a Nation against thee from far,
from the end of the Earth, as swift as the Eagle flies, a Nation whose Tongue
thou shall not understand; a Nation of fierce Countenance, etc. It is
observable that the word Nation is here thrice mentioned; for three times
Jerusalem felt the Power of the Romans, (when they bore an Eagle for their
Ensign.) First when the Romans desired the assistance of Hyrcanus and
Aristobulus, (the Sons of Alexander) against Pompey. Afterward when Sosius
succor'd Herod against Antigonus, the Son of Aristobulus. Lastly, when the City
was besieged, and together with the Temple utterly destroyed, by Vespasian and
his Son Titus. Wherefore when Moses, says, A Nation shall come from far, it
must be understood of Rome; and from the end of the Earth, it must be
understood of those Nations, which Vespasian sent for to assist him, out of
England, France, Spain and other parts of the World. In these Wars, all the
Evils and Calamities that were foretold, happened to the Jews. 1. Famine, v.
53. 2dly. Great Distress, v. 5, 7. 3dly, Plagues, v. 59. 4ly. a vast Diminution
of the People, v. 62. 5ly. a Desolation, v. 63.
To which may be added, the 6th. Evil, a Forgetfulness of their Religion, v.
64. which is chiefly come to pass, in this present Captivity, by Reason of the
sad Calamities which the Jews undergo in France, England and Spain. Lastly, he
says, v. 68. The Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships. Though
Vespasian banished the Jews into several Countries, yet Egypt only is named to
their Disgrace, as if he would say, ye shall be carried Captive into that Land,
out of which ye came with Triumph. Here Moses makes an end of the Curses of the
People, but returns to them at the 39th. Chapter. Afterward at the 30th.
Chapter, he Comforts them with the hopes of Blessings, and a return from the
utmost parts of the Earth, v. 4. In this all the Prophets imitate Moses, who,
after a Repetition of a Catalogue of afflictions, that shall come upon them,
subjoyn some consolatory Hopes; upon which Account the Talmudists report, That
R. Aquiba laughed at the Destruction of the Temple, when all the rest of the
wise Men lamented. And being asked the Reason of it, he answered, After a Storm
comes a Calm, when these Evils are over we may expect some good; for God as
certainly brings one as the other.

4. That came to pass which God foretold to Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.16.

5. God foretold that the Song which Moses was to speak to them, should not be
forgotten, Deuteronomy. 31.21. And this has been verified in their Posterity to this
day.

SECT. 4. We read in the Scripture of many things that came to pass, which were
foretold several years before.

1. In Joshua 6.26. which happened many years after in the Reign of Ahab. 1
King. 16.34. In his days did Hiel the Beth-elite build Jericho; he laid the
Foundation thereof in Abiram his first born, and set up the gates in his
youngest Son Segub.

2. The building of a Temple in Egypt was foretold 600 years before it was
begun. This Prophecy was fulfilled in the time of Onias the High Priest, who
having obtained leave of Ptolemy, and Cleopatra erected a Temple at a place
called Bubastus. F. Josephus (in his Antiq. of the Jews B. 13. c. 6.) thus
relates the words of Onias, May it please your Majesty's to grant me the favor
to purify that Temple which is Dedicated to no Deity, and is fallen down, and
to build another in its place, to the most high God, in the same form and
bigness of that which is at Jerusalem, where we shall pray for the safety of
you and your Children, that the Jews, who live in Egypt, and resorting thither,
for their own Convenience, may be more useful to you. For Isaiah the Prophet
foretold, that there should be an Altar to the Lord in the midst of the Land of
Egypt, Chap. 19.19. In this Circumstance our Rabbis agree with Josephus, for
they refer these words to this Temple. But in Seder Olam they are of a contrary
Opinion; there they say, That after the Victory which God gave them over the
Assyrians, great part of them that were left were carried Captive to Jerusalem
by Hezekiah. Now these Forces Sennacherib had levied out of Aethiopia and
Egypt: Hence it came to pass, that these Men being convinced by the Greatness
of the Miracle embraced the Jewish Religion, and returning into their own
Country, erected an Altar to the Honor and Glory of God. And when Friendship
and Commerce began to increase among them, and the Jews, they by degrees
acquired the knowledge of our Language, according to that of Isaiah, Chap.
19.18. In that day shall five Cities in the Land of Egypt speak the Language of
Canaan. Thus this Prophecy was plainly fulfilled.

3. Long before the Restoration of the Jews, and the building of the second
Temple by the Command of Cyrus, King of the Persians, it was thus foretold of
this Cyrus, Isaiah 44.28. That says of Cyrus he is my Shepherd, and shall
perform all my Pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built; and to
the Temple thy Foundation shall be laid, he says to the Temple, Thou shall be
founded, not thou shall be built: The Reason is this, because of the
Accusations, and Complaints of Rehum and Shimshai (in the Reign of Cyrus) the
Temple was not finished, (only the Foundation laid) till the second year of
Darius, which was 22 years after. But when Cyrus had given abundance of Gold
and Silver toward the Re-edification of the Temple, and had released a great
many Slaves; therefore it is said in the next Chapter, v. 13. I have raised him
up in Righteousness, and I will direct all his ways, he shall build my City,
and shall let go my Captives, not for Price, nor Reward, says the Lord of
Hosts.

4. It was likewise foretold by the Prophet, that the Temple should be
destroyed by the Jews themselves: For after the tedious Lamentations of the
People in the time of the Captivity, he adds these words, Chap. 49.14. But Zion
said the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Thy Children
shall make haste; thy Destroyers, and they that made thee wast shall go forth
of thee, v. 17. This was fulfilled when Simen and Jonathan, and others by their
intestine Seditions, hastened the Destruction of the Temple. Whence F. Josephus
speaks thus of the Wars of the Jews, B. 7. c. 4. Who is ignorant of the
Writings of the ancient Prophets, and their Prophecies, wherein this wretched
City is foretold to be destroyed by those that being born Jews, murder our own
Nation, and now not only the City, but the Temple is full of the dead Bodies?

5. Isaiah the Prophet says, Chap. 54.17. No Weapon that is formed against
thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in Judgment,
thou shall condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their
Righteousness is of me says the Lord. This Prophecy was also fulfilled, for
almost all Nations have opposed the Jewish Law, some by Arguments, and some by
Force. Therefore it is said, no Weapon (of War) and every Tongue, etc. For
Writers in the midst of their Endeavors have wanted Success. Then says the
Prophet, shall not Prosper, etc. This is manifestly verified in the Example of
Nebuchadnezzar, who seduced all the Jews to worship Idols, except Daniel,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, who did not renounce their Religion. But what
was the Consequence? God inflicted condign Punishment upon the King, and Truth
was restored again. The Graecians also were no less cruel and severe to the
Jews: For they compelled them to profane the Sabbath, and omit Circumcision,
but what was worse, to write upon their Garments, We have no Portion in the
Lord God of Israel. And these words they were forced to burn into the Horns of
their Oxen, if they would make use of them. After this manner the Jews were
persecuted for 52 years; at last God revenged himself upon Antiochus, and all
the Graecians, by the Subversion of the Empire and the Laws, while the Jews
preserved theirs. In remembrance of so rigorous a Persecution, the old Men,
whenever they relate, the Edicts of the Graecians against the Jews, always
conclude with this Speech, And let Peace be upon Israel. And here I may speak
of Emanuel, King of Portugal, What Advantage was it to him, to compel the Jews
by Cruelty to become Christians? He was so far from advancing his Interest by
it, that it was a vast Prejudice to his Kingdom: For the Nation was almost
depopulated, the Jews retiring into such Countries, where they might be more
Civilly treated, and where they might more freely exercise their Religion.
Besides, he died within a few years after; and after all, he did not obtain so
much Honor by it as he expected. Osorius, the Kings Historiographer, lib. 1.
seems to rebuke him very sharply, and freely for that thing, when he says, This
was done neither out of Law or Religion. What then? Do you endeavor to oblige
a Contumacious People to believe those things, which they so much despise and
abhor? Do you pretend to abridge the Freedom of Man's Will, and check unruly
Minds? But that is impossible, neither does Christ, the most Holy God, approve
of it. He desires a voluntary, not a compulsive, Sacrifice from us, neither
would he have our Consciences imposed upon, but that our Wills should be
invited, and courted to the Practice of true Religion; and in another place, he
calls this Action wicked and unjust. See how the Prophets Prediction is
fulfilled in him, shall not Prosper, viz. while he endeavors to compel the
Jews to renounce their Religion. Hither may we refer what is mentioned in
Solomon's Song, Chap. 6.13. Return, Return, O Shulamite: Return, Return, that
we may look upon thee. What will ye see in the Shulamite? As it were the
Company of two Armies. It is four times said Return, in respect of the four
Monarchies, under which the Israelites lived: For the Jews are this perfect
Shulamite. For as much as the Gentiles endeavored to divert us from the
Worship of the true God, by the Promises of honorable and noble Rewards; yet
the Shulamite courageously answers, That he does not value all the Honors they
propose: For they are much inferior to those Honors, which were exhibited on
Mount Sinai, to which the Hosts of Israel, and the Angelick Choire approached,
as David expresses himself, Psalm. 68.17. This is very remarkable, that the Laws
of Plato, Lycurgus, and other such wise Men are quite decayed, while Moses's
Statutes continue to this very time, and whose Rites and Ceremonies are
observed by several People.

6. Many things likewise have come to pass which where foretold by Ezekiel long
before, as that in Chap. 22.15. And I will scatter thee among the Heathen, and
disperse thee in the Countries, and will consume thy Filthiness out of thee.
This must be understood of the Jewish Captivity under the Romans, not
Nebuchadnezzar: For then the Jews were not dispersed into all parts of the
World, neither were they free from Pollution, by Reason of their Marriages with
Strangers, and the Profanation of the Sabbath and other Sins: Wherefore they
were once more lead into Captivity by the Romans, and then scattered all over
the World, after that the Romans had subdued other Nations, and reconciled them
by the Mildness of their Government: Otherwise it would have been no easy
matter to vanquish the Jews by force. After the Romans had Conquered them, and
turned 'em out of Doors, they settled themselves in Spain, Italy, Africa,
England, and other Countries; so that it might be justly said of them, (as it
was of the Trojans) that they should esteem it an Honor to be banished out of
their own Country, For before their Dominion was confined, but now they were
Lords of all the World. In the same manner the Jews after their Banishment,
(like Plants which are removed) were admitted into the most populous Cities,
and seated in the securest Parts of 'em. We know by Experience that those
Cities have flourished most, where the Jews have lived, upon this Account,
because they are very much inclined to promote the Trade of Merchandise. Thus
we see that the Trade of Lisbon has mightily decayed since the Jews were
banished from thence.

7. So Ezekiel in Chap. 36.13. seems to foretell that Calumny which was
fastened upon some of the Jews, that they Sacrificed Children, and then drank
their Blood. But this slander is not unlike that which the Gentiles cast upon
the Christians, of their eating Infants, and drinking Men's Blood, as is plain
in Tertullian's Apology, Pineda's Eccl. Hist. B. 11. c. 32. and Justin Martyr,
who for this Reason wrote an Apology for the Christians to Antoninus. Eusebius
Bishop of Caesarea, (B. 5. c. 1.) also relates, that some People in France used
to asperse the Christians for eating Man's flesh. But thus it is, Ambitious and
envious Men are easily provoked to slander. Therefore let John Langius (in the
71st Epist. of his first B.) say what he pleases. But I solemnly protest before
the God of Israel, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, in whose Presence I stand,
that the Jews are so far from Sacrificing Children, or eating Men's Flesh, and
drinking their Blood, that they have no Sacrifices at all, and utterly abhor
the use of any Blood. Though indeed the Law of God does not prohibit abstinence
from all kind of Blood, but only that of Beasts and Birds; yet in obedience to
the Doctrine of the Rabbis, they even abstain from that of Fish. Nay, if they
perceive the least Particle of Blood in an Egg, they throw it away. And if
while they are eating discern the least Drop of Blood on their Meat, or Bread,
(which may proceed from the Tenderness of their Gums) they will not touch it
any more, till it is cleans'd, or rather, they fling it away. How is it
probable then, that they would drink the Blood of Men, when they cannot endure
any Blood in their Victuals?

8. That prediction was verified which is spoken of in Hosea, c. 3.4. For the
Children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince,
and without a Sacrifice, etc. And this seems to be their condition at present;
and because this was to continue many days, therefore Zion says, The Lord has
forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me, Isa. 49.14. Thus David also sadly
complains of this thing to God, Psalm. 89.20. to the End.

9. The Prophet Amos foretells the miserable Captivity of the Jews under Titus,
Chap. 1.9. This prediction is meant of those, who escaping the Hands of Titus,
and flying by Palaestine, and the Borders of Tyrus, were apprehended by the
Tyrians, and sent back to Edom, i. e. to Titus and his Army: They forgetting
the Covenant which their Fathers had made with the Israelites, whom they called
Brethren, as is expressed in 1 Kings 9.13. What Cities are these which thou
have given me, my Brother?

10. Jonas said, Chapter 3.4. Yet forty days and Nineveh shall he destroyed. This
Prophecy also had its Event; for it was conditional, viz. unless it would
repent. Now their Repentance was the Cause of God's altering his Sentence, and
averting that Destruction which he threatened.

11. Haggai the Prophet says, Chapter 2.9. The Glory of this latter House shall be
greater than of the former, says the Lord of Hosts, and in this place will I
give Peace. Some understand, by the latter House, a third Temple, which the
Jews expect. For they think if the Prophet had meant Esdras's Temple, he would
have said the Second, not the Latter; because by saying the Latter, he implies
a Middle one: Another reason of their Opinion is, because it is said, In this
place will I give peace: Now, say they, under the Second there were a great
many Wars. Others understand it of the second Temple, among whom are R. David
Kimchi, and most of the Ancients. For this seemed to excel the former; First,
in respect of Duration, because that lasted but 410, and this 420 Years. 2ly,
in respect of the great Esteem it was in among Foreign Princes. Lastly, upon
the Account of the great Presents that they made to it. For Darius and
Artaxerxes generously bestowed several Gifts toward building the Temple, and
Divine Sacrifices. Alexander the Great highly reverenced the Chief Priest, and
desired that he would offer Sacrifices to God for him. No body can be ignorant
of Ptolemy Philadelphus's Bounty toward it. Antiochus King of Greece, (by a
public Edict) forbad all Strangers to enter the Temple, and profane that
Place, which the Jews had consecrated for the Service of their Religion; the
same was done by Demetrius. To this we may refer, what was urged (among many
other things) by a Jewish Priest in defense of his Cause, at the time when the
Jews and the Samaritans disputed, before Alexander the Great, about the Honor
and Dignity of the Temple; says he, This Temple has been much reverenced by all
the Kings of Asia, who have bestowed upon it many noble Donatives. We read in
F. Josephus contr. Appion, that Ptolemy Evergetes, after his Conquest of Syria,
offered Sacrifices at Jerusalem after the Jewish manner to the true God, and
not to Idols. Pompey the Great did not dare to touch, much less to rifle, the
Treasury of the Temple. It was a Mistake of Cicero's (in his Orat pro Plan.)
and St. Augustin's too, to say that he did not do it, because he would not be
thought too ambitious. I am sure this Reason is too absurd; for he might have
done it, if he pleased, by the Law of Arms. But the true Cause of his
forbearance, was the mighty veneration which he had entertained for the Temple
Philo the Jew, out of a Letter of Agrippa's to the Emperor Caius, reports
these things. Caesar Aug. (out of respect to the Temple) commanded that a
Sacrifice should be offered every day out of his own Revenue. And Julia
Augusta, his Consort, bestowed several magnificent Gifts upon it. It was also
much obliged to the Generosity of Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt. Tiberius every
Year of his Reign commanded, that a Sacrifice should be offered to God out of
his Tribute; and so did Nero. But when Eleazar very imprudently refused to
admit of Nero's Sacrifice, the Emperor changed his mind, and grievously
persecuted the Jews. I shall not make mention of those, who, seeing the
Religion of the Jews, were converted to the Worship of the true God. It is very
remarkable, that all the time that Herod was building the Temple it did not
rain, which was done (no doubt) for the greater Honor of it. All that I have
said here was to show, that the Prophecy of Haggai is to be understood of the
Second Temple.

SECT. 6. There are other Prophecies likewise which were exacily fullfill'd.

1. Daniel not only foretold the four Monarchies which should Rule over
Jerusalem, but he expressed the very Qualities and Nature of them. For one part
of that Image (that was represented to him compounded of four several Metals)
which was Gold, denoted the Kingdom of Babylon, and that exceeded all the rest
in Power. That part which was Silver signified the Kingdom of the Medes, but
this was not so extensive. That which was Brass signified the Grecian Empire,
whose Fame (by the Exploits of Alexander the Great) was diffused all over the
World, like that which makes the greatest sound. That part which was Iron set
forth the Roman. And for as much as the Feet and Toes were part Clay, and part
Iron, that signified the Roman and Mohammedan Empires, which would always be at
War, and never make Peace, like Clay and Iron which cannot be mingled together.
And it seems to be intimated in Chap. 2. v. 43. that these two Nations would
never agree. All these things we have seen fulfilled. But here we must take
notice, that the Prophet immediately mentions the Golden Statue which
Nebuchadnezzar set up, on purpose that his Subjects should worship it. Now this
was not without a Reason. For the King considering that the Image which he had
seen in his Dream, denoted the four Monarchies, and that the first was his own
which he now enjoyed, resolved to frustrate the Design of Heaven; upon which
Account he ordered a Golden Statue to be made, and commanded his Subjects to
worship it, thinking by this means he should engage the Hearts of the common
People, aad not only eternize his own Name, but establish his Kingdom for ever.
But, alas! God's designs are not so easily disappointed by humane Contrivances.

2. Daniel interprets Nebuchadnezzar's Dream of the Tree after this manner, C.
4. v. 25. They shall drive thee from Men, and thy dwelling shall be with the
Beasts of the Field, etc. and so it came to pass: For not long after, the King
falling into a great fit of Melancholy, left his Palace, and shunned the Sight
and Conversation of Men, and lived seven Years in a Wilderness, taking no care
at all of himself: So that his Hair was grown like Eagle's Feathers, and his
Nails like Bird's Claws. This is the true meaning of the Prophecy, not that he
was really turned into a Beast as some imagine, like the Fables of Ovid, and
other Poets. For if that had been, he would not have thought of God, of
Repentance, and Amendment of Life, and earnestly implored the Mercy of God,
which he afterward obtained; this is the Act of a rational mind, which he
would not have had, if he had been a Beast. Because a rational and irrational
mind cannot be in one and the same Subject, at the same time.

3. While Belshazzar was feasting with his Lords, an Angel's hand was seen
writing upon the Wall; this the wise Men could neither read nor understand,
because they read it the wrong way.



But when Daniel came he read it right, and interpreting it, said to the King,
God has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it. Thou art weighed in the Balances
and art found wanting. Thy Kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and
Persians, Dan. 5. And these things truly came upon him, for abusing the Vessels
of the Temple. For the Eunuchs believing the Prophecy, cut off his Head the
next Night, and carried it to the Persians, (who had been vanquished the day
before) and advised them to seize upon the Government. The Persians discerning
God's Providence, and the Virtue of Daniel, were very favorable to the Jews
upon this Account.

4. After a consideration of the four Monarchies from the Vision of the Lion,
the Bear, the Leopard, and the terrible Beast, Chap. 7. he says, the second
Beast (which fignified the Persian Empire) had three Ribs in the Mouth of it,
in as much as the Persian, Median, and Babylonian united into one. Now because
Cyrus was suckl'd by a Bitch, therefore he says, his Subjects would say by
reason of his Cruelty, Arise, eat much Flesh. The third Beast (which
represented the third Monarchy) he says had four Heads, which denoted the four
Generals that succeeded Alexander the Great. The fourth and fiercest Beast
(setting forth the Romans he says, had ten Horns, because from Julius Caesar to
T. Vespasian (who destroyed Jerusalem) there were ten Emperors. Some there are
who by the little Horn, which was in that Beast, understand the Pope of Rome.
Thus likewise was this Prophecy fulfilled.

5. After this, Daniel prophesies no more in the Chaldee Tongue but in the
Hebrew, because both the Babylonian Empire, and the 70 Years Captivity of the
Jews were expired. In this Language he relates the Vision of the Ram, c. 8
having two Horns, which represent the Persian Empire, under Darius, and the
Median under Cyrus. This Ram (which came out of the East) he says, waged War
with the other three parts of the World; and so it came to pass. For out of the
West it was opposed by an He Goat, which was Alexander the Great; who may
justly claim that Surname, if we compare him with Darius, whom he conquered.
The Prophet intimates the Power of Alexander by the notable Horn that the Goat
had between his Eyes. And he smote the Ram, in as much as when he was both in
the flower of his Life and his Kingdom, he lost them both. When he was strong
the great Horn was broken: For Alexander the Great (as Plutarch informs us)
being at Babylon, and having given Audience to several Ambassadors, was there
poisoned by Antipater's Sons. The Prophet adds, that four notable Horns came up
in the room of that which was broken, by which he means the four Generals, who
succeeded Alexander. Again, he says, that out of one of these came forth a
little Horn, which represents Antiochus Epiphanes, who took Jerusalem and slew
the Priests, and the Holy Men, and took away their daily Sacrifice, which is
noted in these words; It cast down some of the Host of Heaven.

6. In the next place follows Daniel's Prophecy of the 70 Weeks, of which there
are various Explications; for Authors wonderfully differ in reckoning their
Number. See Dan. 9.24. to the End, where the Prophecy is set down. In order to
some Explication of it, I must needs say, that by comparing this Prophecy with
the precedent ones, Daniel seems to be much troubled about the four Monarchies,
and those Calamities which were to fall upon the Jews, and besides, because he
received this Command, c. 8. v. 26. Shut thou up the Vision, for it shall be
for many days. The next words denote his Concern, v. 27. I fainted and was sick
many days. He tells us likewise, He was astonished at the Vision, and that none
understood it. On one side he was considering the Expiration of the 70 Years,
when the Jews would be released from their Captivity; on the other side he was
thinking of the dismal Oppressions of the Jews under the four Monarchies; and
then he was afraid, that the Captivity would last longer by reason of the
Wickedness of the People. Then it follows, c. 9. I Daniel understood by Books
the number of the years, whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the
Prophet, that he would accomplish 70 Years in the Desolation of Jerusalem.
Immediately after this he prayed, v 4. And I prayed unto the Lord my God,
because God is sometimes moved by Prayer to revoke his Decrees. As Soon as he
had done praying, an Angel stood by him, and said, I am now come forth to give
thee skill and understanding, v. 22. Then he speedily adds, v. 24.70 Weeks are
determined, etc. Here he is informed of the present Liberty, and the future
miserable Captivity of the People, by which they should be cleans'd from all
their Iniquity; for the Babylonian Captivity continued but 70 Years, which was
inflicted for their Evil ways in not observing the 7th Year, and not giving
rest to the Land. But the 70 Weeks of Daniel make up 440 Years. Therefore when
he says, they are determined upon thy People to finish the Transgression, and
to make an end of sins, be means, that after the End of 440 Years, the
Captivity of the People shall ensue, by which they shall be purged from
Idolatry, Murder and Adultery, which are the three greatest Sins. After this
shall succeed Eternal Righteousness, i. e. there shall be no more sin, as
Isaiah says, c. 60.21. Thy People shall be all Righteous. And this all the
Prophets confirm. Daniel moreover adds, to seal up the Vision and Prophecy; as
if he would say, that all the Prophecies should be fulfilled, or else he means
that there would be more Prophecies. For God says in Joel, c. 2.28. I will pour
out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy.
Daniel also says, to anoint the most Holy, i. e. the Holy of Holies; for under
the second Temple it was not anointed, because it was not to continue for ever.
And after the End of these things, Daniel says, Prophecy and Sacrifices, which
we have not new shall be restored.

The Holy Scripture divides these 70 Weeks into three Parts. The first contains
7 Weeks, which make up 49 Years: For from the Destruction of the first Temple,
to the building of the Second, (which was done by Cyrus's leave) were 49 Years.
Now by the anointed Prince, which he speaks of here, he either means the
High Priest, who used to be anointed with Holy Oil, and is therefore called
Messiah; or else Zerubbabel Governor of Judah, and a Prince of the Family of
David; or else of Cyrus himself, for Isaiah thus says of him, c. 45.1. Thus
says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus

The next Division is into threescore and two Weeks, when the Street shall be
built again, v. 25 i. e. from the first Building of the second Temple to the
beginning of its overthrow (which was when Vespasian came into Judaea) shall be
434 Years: For the 13 Years of Cyrus (under whom they began to build it) the
six of Artaxerxes, and the two Years Reign of Darius (in whose last Year it was
finished) make up 21 Years. Then the Babylonian Captivity took up 70 Years
more. Now if we compute the 414, which were between the second Year of Darius,
and the coming of Vespasian into Judaea, the whole Number of 434 Years are made
up, which are the 69 Weeks of Daniel. As for the expression, in troublous
Times, the meaning was explained by the Event. For when the Jews went to
rebuild the Temple, and laid their Arms down by them, they were so terrified,
that the Enemy obliged them to desist. And they were very sensible of the Fury
of their Enemies, when the Graecians and Romans assaulted them. Daniel, further
says, That after sixty and two Weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for
himself, which is meant of Agrippa the last King of the Jews. For he was slain
at Rome by Vespasian, as his Son Mumbas was three Years and a half before the
Destruction of the Temple, as Josephus testifies; the Expression, not for
himself, signifies the End of the Kingdom, for after him the Jews had no other.
Then it follows, the People of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the
City and the Sanctuary. Experience also showed this: For both the City and the
Temple were destroyed by Titus; but the Cause of the Destruction of the Temple
was ascribed to the Soldiers, because the Emperor all along showed a Desire to
save it. Next is added, The end thereof shall be with a Flood, and unto the End
of the War Desolations are determined. For from the beginning to the End of the
War (especially while the Seige lasted) the Jews suffered on all sides, both
without and within. For not only the Besiegers, but the Besieged destroyed the
City, till at length it was quite burnt down.

The last distinction of the Weeks is implied in these words, And he shall
confirm the Covenant with many for one Week. For Titus very often made
overtures of Peace to the Jews (in those 7 Years that the War continued) upon
condition they would obey, and become Tributaries to the Romans, as Josephus
relates: And in the midst of the Week he shall cause the Sacrifice, and the
Oblation to cease. This likewise so fell out, for by reason of the constant and
terrible War the Priests omitted to offer Sacrifice for three Years and a half
together. And for the overspreading of Abominations he shall make it desolate.
Thus, that place which before was consecrated to the Service of God, shall
become a Receptacle of Filthiness and Idolatry. Here this Revelation concludes,
by which God informs Daniel, that the Captivity of Babylon was now over, but
notwithstanding that, the Jews were to undergo a severer Slavery, and to endure
all the dismal Calamities and pressing Evils, which were foretold should fall
upon them under the fourth Monarchy.

The Jews of this Age interpret this Prophecy several ways, but when we reflect
upon the obscurity of it, we need not wonder at their various Opinions. There
were some who imagined, that after the Conclusion of the seventy Weeks, the
Messiah would appear, and deliver to them the Dominion of the whole World. This
was the Opinion of those who engaged against the Romans at that time. And
though they were exposed to many great Dangers and Hardships, yet their
Expectation of the Messiah continued, because they fansied, that he would come
in the midst of all their Afflictions. Wherefore those words, To finish the
Transgression, they so expound, as if after the end of the seventy Weeks, their
Sins should be forgiven them. Others that dissent from these, understand the
Prophecy of the Destruction of the Jews; and for that Reason would not fight at
all. But when Titus was Successful, they acknowledged him for their Sovereign.
And these the rather seem to accommodate the Prophecy to Vespasian, because of
the unhappy Fortune of their Country. F. Josephus is of this Opinion, in the
Wars of the Jews, B. 7. c. 12. His words are these: That which chiefly
encouraged them to go to War, was an obscure Prophecy (recorded in the
Scripture) that one of their Neighboring Princes, should be Master of all the
World about that time. Some understood it of themselves, and many wise Men were
deceived by this Interpretation: For in truth, the Prophecy clearly meant the
Empire of Vespasian, who was created Emperor in Judaea. But there are some Men
that cannot avoid their fate, though they foresee it. So some interpreted the
Signs one way, and some another, till their Folly was confuted by their own,
and their Countries ruin. To this belongs the Observation of Tacitus, B. 5. of
his History. A great many were persuaded, that the Priests in their Writings
foretold, that about this time, the East should grow powerful, and that the
Jews should be Lords of the World: Now these obscure places only meant F.
Vespasian, and Titus. But the common People, (as Men usually wish) interpreted
this mighty Success to themselves; in Case it should so fall out in the midst
of their Calamities. Suctonius also takes notice of this Prophecy, in the Life
of Vespasian c. 4 It was (says he) firmly believed all over the East, that, at
this time, the Jews should enjoy an universal Dominion. This ( though foretold
of the Roman Emperors, and was verified in the Event) the Jews understood of
themselves, and so rebelled; and having slain the Governor, they also routed
the Forces that the Deputy of Syria, was bringing for his Assistance. Servius
likewise (in his Commentaries upon Virgil's Aeneids, B. 4.) tells us, That
Suetonius (in his Life of Caesar) says, That the Oracles all over the World
declared, that the invincible Emperor was born.

Now most of the wise and prudent Men, being of this Opinion, Josephus (who was
a discreet Man, and understood the Scriptures very well) thought that after
Jotapata was taken, the Power of the Jews was quite extinct. Therefore he
acquainted Vespasian (as if it had been revealed to him from Heaven) that the
Prophets foretold he should be an Emperor. Not that I believe Josephus had the
Spirit of Prophecy, for that no one had (as the ancients affirm) under the
second Temple, but he said this, to ingratiate himself with Vespasian. For when
Jotapata was taken within forty seven days, according to his Prediction, and
when by a wonderful Sagacity he foresaw that the Romans would take Jerusalem,
he so managed his Discourse and his Affairs, that he was sure his Prophecy
would be Credited. Several of the Jews believed that Jerusalem could not be
taken, but by one that was to be an universal Monarch. Hence we read in the
Talmud, that R. Johanan Ben Zachai making his Escape out of the City (for fear
of the Seditions that were within) was apprehended, and being brought before
Vespasian, he saluted him Emperor; but when the Emperor denied that he was
the Person, he told him, That he was, and that he was appointed so by a Divine
Prophecy. For Isaiah says, Chap. 10.34. And Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one,
i. e. by one that Rules over all the World. Thus we see the Completion of this
Prophecy.

7. Now while Daniel was much troubled about the Afflictions that would fall
upon the Jews under the four Monarchies, God was pleased to raise his sinking
Spirits, by the Prophecy of a particular happy Condition that they were to
enjoy, Dan. 11.2. Behold there shall stand up yet three Kings in Persia, and
the fourth shall be far richer than they all. i. e. There shall be but three
Kings of Persia after Cyrus. Some Men pretend to prove out of History, that
there were fourteen Kings of Persia, others that there were but seven. But
their mistake proceeds from this, because they make Cyrus to be the first, when
he was the Eleventh; to whom succeeded Cambyses, Artaxerxes and Darius, and
these are the three which the Prophet means. Now Darius descending from the
Jews by his Mother's side, he gave them leave to build the Temple, and
commanded Ezra to teach the People out of the Law of Moses; and Nehemiah was to
take Care of the building of the Walls. But Darius affecting the Empire of
Greece, was unfortunately slain by Alexander the Great. Furthermore, Daniel
says, v. 2. A mighty King shall stand up, (i. e. Alexander) and shall be
divided toward the four winds of Heaven, v. 3. i. e. in respect of those who
succeeded him. The Prophet also foretells several other things, as concerning
Seleucus, the King of the Assyrians and Babylonians, and Ptolemy Lagus. This is
enough concerning the Completion of some Prophecies, whose Events certainly
depended upon Man's Free Will; from hence we conclude, That God not only
foreknows those things, which he determined to do after some extraordinary
manner, but likewise future Contingencies.

Hither we may refer what Josephus says, B. 10. c ult. Daniel wrote after the
same manner, concerning the Roman Empire, and the Destruction of Jerusalem. All
these things that were revealed to him by God, he wrote down, and left to
Posterity; that when they saw what he foretold, was punctually fulfilled, they
might wonder that God should have so signal a Regard for him; and that the
Error of the Epicureans might be confuted, who will not allow of Providence,
and deny that God governs the World, but only assert that it moves by a natural
Impetus; now if this wanted a Director (as they say) even as we see Ships cast
away for lack of a Pilot, and Chariots overturned and broken that have none to
guide them, so would this also be destroyed by its own immoderate Motion.

For this Reason, when I reflect upon the Prophecies of Daniel, I cannot forbear
condemning the Ignorance of those Persons, who deny God's Providence over
humane Affairs; for how could his Prophecies be fulfilled, if all things were
carelessly, and indifferently managed? This is my Opinion, and if any Man be of
another, let him enjoy it.

I have but briefly mentioned these things, but if any one desires to see all
the Controversies of the Jews, about the Explication of Daniel's Prophecies; he
may read Abravanel's Treatise, which the Learned Buxtorf has translated into
Latin. But this must be acknowledged, that all Prophecies are obscure, and the
meaning of them cannot be understood, till the Completion of them. It is God's
Pleasure that they should be so, that there may be room for Free will in all
our Actions. For if Men knew that any thing would necessarily, and inevitably
fall out, according to God's decree, they would despair of good, and be
careless about that which was Evil; but that they might never be dejected, God
is pleased secretly to Act with Men in his Prophecies.

SECT. 7. Some there are, who deny God's Prescience, upon the Account of these,
and the like Expressions, that we meet with in the Scripture. Now I know that
thou fear God, Genesis 22.12. And the Lord came down to see the City, 11.5. and
in another place, I will go down and see, 18.21. from these Passages they
Fancy it may be proved, That God does not foreknow future Contingencies. But
if the Reader pleases to look into my Reconciler upon Genesis, he may meet with
Satisfaction concerning such sort of Phrases. This I must repeat in short, that
wise Men usually express themselves after this manner, when out of two Evils
they would choose the least; and this is the Case here. For, when God knows all
things before hand, that which be foreknows, he must either publicly and
particularly discover it, or propose it under ambiguous Phrases. If the first,
then Men, knowing the Decrees of God, would be very careless about their Life.
If the latter, then Expressions, less becoming God, must be used; now which
method does he prefer? Why, he chooses rather to speak, as if he was ignorant of
what will come to pass, because he would condescend to our Capacities, and use
a less accurate form of Speech, that he might not abridge the Freedom of our
Actions. After the same manner the Scripture ascribes to God, Eyes, Hands, etc.
not because he has such Members (for he is incorporeal) but only to denote his
Providence and his Power. Maimonides and others say, that the Law speaks after
the manner of Men, that it may be the better understood. Another sort of Men
object, that if God knows all future Contingencies, and takes care of the
World; why then do good Men suffer and wicked Men Prosper? This was answered
before out of the Prophets. The Psalmist also takes notice of this, Psalm.
73.11, 12, 13, etc. and Malachy, Chap. 3.14.

But David expresses himself thus, Psalm. 94.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. They stay the Widow
and the Stranger, and Murder the Fatherless. Yet they say the Lord shall not
see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. Understand, O ye brutish among
the People; and, ye Fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the Ear, shall
he not hear? He that formed the Eye, shall he not see? He that teaches Man
knowledge, shall not he know? Upon this, Maimonides in his Directory tells us,
That two eminent Physicians (who wondered at these words) said, If we may argue
after this manner, it would follow then that he who made the Mouth may eat; he
that formed the Lungs may speak, etc. But pray observe, (Courteous Reader) and
I will inform you, how much they mistake the Sense of this Argument.

It must be granted, that an Artificer can make no Tool, unless he knows the
use of it: As for instance, A Needle-maker could not make a Needle in that
shape, which is fit for sowing, except he knew the use that it was to be put
to, and the same may be said of other Instruments. Now some of the Philosophers
imagined, that God cannot apprehend some particular things, because they are not
the Objects of Sense. To these I answer, that God's Perception of things is not
sensual, but intellectual. Therefore I Will deduce my Argument against them thus,
from the Existence of the Senses. If God was ignorant how Vision is performed,
how could he form the Eye? Is it probable, that all the various Humors of that
Organ, should be contrived by Chance? In a word, can any wise Man believe, that
all the Humors, Coats, and Optic Nerves, (which are so nicely disposed, and
perform the Act of Vision) could be sinuated in that posture accidentally; No,
they are thus designed by Nature, as Physicians, and Philosophers confess. Now
Nature, they also acknowledge, is not endu'd with an Intellectual, and
commanding Faculty. But this Order, this Management, (which is like that of an
ingenious Workman) proceeds, they say, from an intellectual Principle, and
according to my Opinion, is the result of an understanding Being, which is the
Author of all the natural Faculties, that Creatures are qualified with. Now if
this Intellectual Being, is ignorant of this thing, and does not perceive it,
how could Nature be derived from it, that designs an Effect which she knows
nothing of? Therefore David justly calls these Men Brutes, and Fools, Psalm. 94
8. Hitherto Maimonides. As for what relates to the Adversity of good Men in
this Life, I have largely Discoursed of it in my Reconciler upon Genesis.

SECT. 8. Three things remain, which I shall dispatch with Expedition. 1. I am
to prove that Man is created with a Free Will, and that it is in his Power to
make Choice of Life or Death. 2. That God's Concurrence is necessary in humane
Actions; for, a Divine Assistance, besides Man's endeavor, is required in
order to Salvation. 3. That God wisely governs our Actors, and directs them to
such an end, that makes us capable of Rewards or Punishments.


Reason is enough to convince us, That Men are endu'd with Free Will.
Maimonides says, Why are there Laws? Why Affirmative, and Negative Precepts? Do
not these plainly show us, That if Man pleases he may obtain Salvation by
virtuous Actions, or utterly ruin himself by vicious ones? No Body ever
threatened to inflict Punishment upon him, who was unable to obey, or was
compelled to transgress the Law. Therefore it would be unjust for God to punish
Men for that, which they must necessarily do. If there is no such thing as
Free Will, the Care of preserving Life would cease, Admonitions would be
needless, and we must deny all Guilt. Let him then that is destined to be
Hanged, Killed, or Drowned, dispatch himself as soon as he can. But after all,
we see that God does not always bless the slothful and careless, but the
diligent and industrious. Man's Condition (says St. Cyril) would be worse than
that of Brutes, if these acted by instinct, and those by force. What signify
(says Cicero) Laws, Friends, and good Advice? There Is no Man (says R. Joseph
Albo) who would take care of his Life, or regard his Actions, if he had not
Free Will. But Experience evinces the contrary, for Houses, Towns, Arms,
Traffic, Husbandry and such like are not Signs of Security, but Solicitude.
The Scripture likewise attests this, because in that we read, that Adam at the
beginning was endu'd with Free Will, and for that Reason excelled all other
Creatures; for the Sun necessarily, and always shines, the Fire burns, and
Water moistens; but Man can do what he pleases. In this respect also Man is
said to be made after the Image of God. Neither is it usual for God to command
the performance of any thing, which is not in Man's Power to do or let alone.
Therefore it was necessary that Adam should have a Free Will, when God forbid
him to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, lest I should say God was
unjust (which is Blasphemy to imagine) when he punished him, if he had it not.

This is the Opinion of all the Talmudists, and for this Reason they say, We
find from the Law, the Prophets, and other Holy Writers, that a Man can walk in
which way he pleases.

It is thus proved by them, First, out of the Law, where God had said to
Balaam, Numb. 22.12. Thou shall not go with them, Thou shall not Curse the
People; nevertheless he knowing that he was resolved to go, permitted him. Then
out of the Prophets, Isaiah 48.17. I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee
to Profit, which leads thee by the way that thou should go. As if he should
say, I will always Conduct you in the right way, but if you will not regard me,
and will go wrong, I will leave you to your Free Will. Lastly, out of the Holy
Writers, Prove. 3.34. Surely he scorneth the Scorners, but he gives Grace unto
the lowly.

From whence it appears, That God hates impious Men, for their Impiety; but he
confers his Grace on the Godly and Religious. Hither also we may refer that
saying of the Talmudists, Shall an idle Person think to leave the Care of his
Affairs to God? No; for it is said, Deuteronomy. 15.10. For this thing the Lord thy
God, shall bless thee in all thy Works, and in all that thou put thine hand
unto. For this Reason they advise us, that we should be careful to avoid Evil,
and choose Good; because they are both in our Power.

Hence this is a common Proverb among them, When the Pestilence rages in the
City, make have and get out of it. And they believe, that this is intimated in
the words of Isaith, Chap. 26.20. So it is twice repeated in the Proverbs,
Chap. 22.3.27.12. A prudent Man foreseeth the Evil, and hides himself, but the
simple pass on, and are punished. Upon this Account the Jews are exceeding
industrious in the time of a Plague, to take Care of themselves, for which they
incurr the Censures of some.

Plato, Aristotle, and other Philosophers, (who had only the Light of Nature)
were of this Opinion. Plato says, that Free Will is the Privilege that Men have
above all other Creatures. Therefore we see that all Men are very diligent in
their Professions, that they defend themselves against their Enemies, and by
all ways shun Evil, and follow that which is Good. We see also, that a Man is
blamed or commended (and that justly) upon the Account of his method of Acting,
the end that he proposes, and the means that he uses. We never find fault with
a Child, or one that is asleep, or a Fool, for doing any Body a mischief: but
if we Judge by the Event, they deserve Reprehension as well as other People;
from whence it follows, that all Men agree, That no Person is to be praised, or
reproved, but he that Acts voluntarily and deliverately. So that if a Man has
not Free will, Advice, Reproof, Reward and Punishment are vain and ineffectual.

When therefore it is said in the Scripture, Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all
things for himself; some interpret it, that all the works of the Lord manifest
his Perfection and Power. Maimonides says the meaning is, According to his
Will, then is added, yea even the wicked for the day of Evil. As much as to
say, God has created all things for his own Glory; and therefore when he
punishes wicked Men, he manifests the Glory of his Justice But in my Judgment
the meaning is, God created all things for himself, i. e. That they might serve
him; for the wicked is like a Rod in the hand of God, with which he chastises
the ungodly: Such an one was Nebuchednezzar, by whom he Corrected the
rebellious and disobedient Jews.

But lest any one should be imposed upon by the saying of R. Jebuda, That from
our Formation in the Womb, our Marriage with such a Person, is unalterably
determined. We must take notice, that Maimonides affirms that Matrimony is
reckoned among the Precepts, and therefore no one is compelled to Marry such or
such a Person, because God has not precisely predestined any one to the
observance of the Precepts. Besides, it is expressly* commanded in the Law,
Deuteronomy. 20.7. That a Man that has betrothed a Wife, and has not taken her,
shall not go in the Battle, lest he die, and another take her. Now if this
Marriage was immutably determined, how could his Wife be married to another?
Furthermore, we must understand, that the Cabbalists are of Opinion, that at
the beginning of the World, Souls were made by Pares, i. e. a Male and a Female
together; and for this Reason they affirm, that Matrimony is either allotted as
a Reward, or a Punishment according to Men's Actions. So if a Man is religious
and deserving, he is joined to that Person, who was created with him. But if
not, (for his Punishment) he is wedded to one that is very disagreeable to his
Humor, and proves a Scold, and a Trouble to him as long as she lives.
Therefore, they say, That Parents sometimes sell all that they have, to marry
their Children to a discreet and sober Person. And that whosoever rather
marries for Virtue and Honesty, than for Beauty, God blesses him, and sends him
many Children. Now all this actually depends upon Man's Free Will.

SECT. 9. So much for Man's Free Will; I shall now treat of God's Concurrence
with humane Actions. All the Jews agree in this, that God concurs with virtuous
Actions, both by assisting them, and promoting them; for his Aid is necessary
to their Perfection. Hence our Rabbis say, That as soon as ever a Man sets
about a good Action, he has God's assistance. Hence comes that Saying of
their's, when they speak about the Contest* which is between the rational and
sensual Appetite, Without God's succor, it is impossible to subdue the sensual
Appetite. To this agrees what Hosea says, Chap. 13.9. O Israel thou have
destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help. There the Prophet shows that
wickedness springs from a Man's self, but that every good Action is from God,
as the assisting Cause; upon this Account the Psalmist addresses himself thus
to God, Psalm. 79.9. Help us O God of our Salvation, and Jeremiah, Lament. 5.21.
Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned. So Solomon, Prove.
20.24. upon which a Learned Rabbi says, though Man has understanding,
nevertheless God's assistance is necessary for him. Thus David says, Ps. 37.23.
The steps of a good Man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way,
as much as to say, God indeed perfects our Actions, but Man also has a Duty to
perform. Because we owe all the Good we have to God; therefore we are obliged
to Honor him with it, Thus the Psalmist rightly observes, Psalm. 65.4. Blessed
is the Man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that be may
dwell in thy Courts, i.e. in Heaven, and in the Company of Saints. Give me
leave to explain this by an Example. I will pitch upon Joseph and Tarquin. This
being in love with a pretty Lady, committed Adultery with her; the other seeing
the Beauty of his wanton Mistress, bravely and piously refused to lie with her.

Now what was the Cause of the different and contrary Motions in these two
Persons? Without doubt the regular Appetite of this, and the depraved one of
the other; for because Tarquin was wholly lead away by his Lusts, and despised
Chastity, God left him to his vicious Desires; but because Joseph's
Inclinations were virtuous and chaste, God discovered to him the Filthiness of
the Act, the Injury to his Master, and the Torments of Hell; and by the
Consideration of these things, God assisted him, and prevented the Commission
of so notorious a Sin: Hence the Rabbis used to say upon those words, Genesis
39.10. He hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her: He would
not lie with her in this World, lest he should suffer with her in the next. Now
because these Actions depended upon both their Free-wills, therefore one
deserves Eternal Praise and Glory, and the other Everlasting Disgrace and
Ruin. If we allow any such thing as Rewards and Punishments, we must
necessarily admit of Free Will. Wherefore God always supports and helps those
Persons that mind their Duty, and are industrious, but disregards the Lazy and
Slothful.

SECT. 10. As to the third thing I am to prove, Maimonides affirms, that if
men's Sins are very heinous and notorious there is no room for Repentance; and
in confirmation of his Opinion he used to allege that of Isaiah 6.10. and 2 Chronicles. 36.16. So that according to him, God hardened the Heart of Pharaoh for
his Sins, Exodus 14.4. Likewise Sihon and Og King of Basan were so wicked, that
their Repentance could not avert their Punishment. Agreeable to this Opinion it
is, that God sometimes takes away Free Will from Sinners. Certain it is that
God deprives Men of their Estates, Honors, Life and Liberty for their
Iniquities. The Ancients too were of this Mind. But what we read in Tanhuma, is
worth our Observation. Three things, says the Author, God has put into our
Power, viz. our Hands, Feet and Mouth, and there are three things which are not
in our Power, viz. our Eyes, Ears and Nose; for we see, hear, and smell many
things that are offensive to us. God oftentimes debars us the use of those
things which are in our Power, by reason of our Sins. Thus God withered the
Hand of Jeroboam, which he reached out to seize the Prophet; and made Balaam
bless the Israelites, whom he designed to curse. Therefore it is evident, that
God very often obstructs Men's Actions, and can abridge their Power. Hence
Abravanel confesses, that when God intends to reward or punish any Person,
nothing can prevent it. An instance of this he says we have, in the Infatuation
of Achitophel, because God was resolved to punish Absalom. To this belong the
words of Jerem. 10.23. 2 Samuel 17.14. Isa. 14.27. Isaac Arama is of opinion,
that Repentance is never too late: For, says he, it is always acceptable to
God. But he affirms, that for the Murder of our Neighbor, Repentance is
ineffectual, and therefore we cannot escape Punishment for that.

If I may have leave to declare my Judgment in this Case, I do firmly believe
that God never forces, or takes away the use of our Free Will, but always
mercifully disposes the means, as they are more or less agreeable to our
inclinations; like the primum mobile, which carries round the inferior Orbs,
yet every one of them has a distinct Motion. I shall illustrate my meaning by
this Example, God designed that the Israelites should continue in the Egyptian
Bondage so many Years, and that Joseph should be advanced above all his
Brethren Now God compelled no body to accomplish this Design; but he only so
ordered the means, that Joseph might be sold to the Midianitish Merchants, and
then this way he might come into Egypt. In like manner God intended to display
the miraculous Signs of his Power among the Egyptians, but how? by hardening
Pharaoh's Heart, so that he should have no use of his Free Will? No, but by so
contriving it, that the King might have occasion, by the free Use, or rather
the Abuse, of his Will, of hardening his Heart. Thus when he saw his own
Magicians work the same Miracles which Moses's did, he disregarded them. He
perceived that the Plagues could be easily removed, and so was not much
concerned at them; but obstinately refused to dismiss the People, till he was
surpised with the Slaughter of his Son, and all the Firstborn of his
Subjects. Thus we must understand, that God hardened the Hearts of Sihon and Og
the King of Basan: For the Israelites had sent Messengers to the Edomites, the
Ammonites, and the Moabites, to request a Passage through the Borders of their
Country, but being denied, they went another way. Now Sihon and Og expected
that they would do the same to them, but when they saw they would not, they
took up Arms and stiffly opposed their Passage, but unhappily, for they were
presently conquered. Here God only gave an opportunity to their perverseness,
but did not in the least force their Wills, that he might punish them. God also
determined to divide Solomon's Kingdom, but which way did he effect it? not by
compelling Rehoboam, but by giving occasion, that by the Advice of his young
Counselors (by whom he was directed) he might refuse to lessen the People's
Taxes, and so Abijah's Prophecy was fulfilled. Thus I think all the Places,
where God seems to deprive Man of his Free Will that he may punish him, may be
explained.

For as Princes know how wisely and prudently to manage their Affairs, that
they may obtain their Designs: So does God (who is the King of Heaven and
Earth) in like manner dispose all things (without impairing our Free-wills)
that he may effect his Resolutions, that he may mercifully recompense some, and
justly punish others. To this belong the words of Solomon, Prove. 21.1. The
King's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of Water, he inclines
it whithersoever he will. He does not say, he forces, but inclines; and this
is all that I proposed to prove.

SECT. 11. There still remains one difficult and intricate Question, which I
will endeavor to solve; and it is this. How can Man's Free Will and God's
Foreknowledge be reconciled together. This seemed inexplicable to Cajetan,
very crabbed to Vasquez, and the Jews unanimously confess, that it is very
abstruse. Hence Maimonides says, that God's Knowledge is not an Accident (as
Man's is) but is the very Essence of God. Wherefore as Men cannot comprehend the
Essence of God (according to that in Exodus 33.20. There shall no man see me and
live: (So neither can they apprehend how God fore-knows things, Isaiah 55.8. It
is evident (says the same Author) that Men have Free Will, and no Body doubts
but God knew all things from Eternity, but it is still a Question how God knows
things, and yet Man have the Liberty of his Will. For to enquire which way God
knows things, is as much as to desire the Knowledge of God himself, both which
cannot be attained in this Life. To this belongs the Answer of Bias, who was
asked how God was acquainted with humane Affairs and Actions? It is certain,
says he, there is a God, whose Providence is over all; and it is likewise
certain that we have a Free Will; but how God knows our Actions, is easy to
conjecture, but difficult to explain.

R. Abraham Bar David, (a Rival of Malmonides says, that Maimonides indeed did
propose the Question, but did not answer it, and therefore he had better have
let it alone. Wherefore this Rabbi (offering his Opinion to explain the manner
of God's Prescience) says, That the Astrologers, by looking upon the Stars, can
guess at a great many things that will come to pass; in like manner God knows
what will happen to Men by the Course of the Planets, which he has ordained
already. Now when it is in Man's Power to avoid the influence of the Stars by
his good or evil Actions: He says, that God fore-knows that Act or Motion of
his Will, and which way he designs to direct it. Which Prescience, he affirms,
necessitates, no Body's Actions. But this, (as the Author himself acknowledges)
is not a satisfactory Answer to the Question.

Wherefore R. Isaac Bar Se^at in my mind, advances the clearest Solution. God,
says he, from Eternity ordered all the Affairs of the whole World, and by his
Divine Wisdom and Sagacity saw all the Effects that ever would be produced;
which though they may depend (I speak of humane Actions) upon Man's Free Will, to
exist, or not to exist; yet nevertheless, God infallibly and certainly
foresaw, and foreknew them. Man does not act after this or that manner,
because God knew beforehand that he would; but on the contrary, because Man
acts so and so, therefore God knew it from Eternity. This is the Opinion of R.
Isaac Arama, Justin Martyr, Origin, Damascene, Chrysostom, Hierom, Augustine,
and Cyril. This Solution I firmly embrace my self. Here is the Case, if a
Person being placed upon an high Tower, or Mountain, sees one Man go from South
to North, another from North to South; by this Act of Vision he does not
necessitate the voluntary Motion of those Men; so it is here. For God's
Eternity is correspondent, to the distance of Places; for he knew all things
from Eternity, as if they were but just done. I will explain it by another
Similitude; let us suppose a Circle, from whose Center may be drawn several
Lines to the Circumference; Now in respect of this Circumference we may
consider a first and a last, or a distance between these Lines which in respect
of the Center is none at all; so in reference to God, there is no such thing as
first and last, past and future, but all things are present to him. And this, I
believe, Mercurius Trismegistus means, when he compares God to a Center, and a
Circumference, in respect of his wonderful Prescience. And if we reflect upon
what Maimonides said before, that our Knowledge is not like God's; he means
nothing else, but that God knows things after a more excellent manner, than Men
do; for he equally sees things that are past, future, and present, but we only
those that are present. Therefore he says, it is very difficult for a humane
Understanding to comprehend the manner how God fore-knows things, because his
Knowledge is not distinct from his Essence.

SECT. 12. Because the Authority of the Sacred Writings are to be preferred
before all Reason and Experience, I design for the Establishment of this
Opinion, to produce the Words which God spoke to Moses, near the Time of his
Death, Exodus 31.16. And the Lord said unto Moses, behold thou shall sleep with
thy Fathers, and this People will rise up, and go a whoring after the Gods of
the Strangers of the Land, whither they go to be amongst them, and will forsake
me and break my Covenant which I have made with them.

Here is a plain Instance of God's foreknowledge: And that the People might
never forget it, he adds, v. 19. Write ye this Song for you, and teach it the
Children of Israel, etc. That God's Prescience does not interfere with our
Free Will, or impose any Necessity upon it, is plain from v. 21. For I know
their Imagination which they go about even now, before I have brought them into
the Land which I swear. Behold how God's Prescience and Man's Free Will exactly
agree together. That the Will is not forced, is manifest from the Punishments
which are insh^ed on the Sinner, v. 21. When many Evils and Troubles are
befallen them. That is a same us Saying of the Rabbis, All things are seen,
and yet Liberty is granted.

To conclude, I will now compendiously sum up what I have treated of in this
Book.

1. I have showed, that our Life has a Term. 2. That this may be considered
according to the Constitution of the Body, or the Planets, which variously act
on the Body; or as some will have it, in general, In respect of the present and
the past Times. 3. That the Term of Life is alterable. 4. That man's Life may
be contracted several ways, viz by the Providence of God, by Nature, and by
Chance. 5. That our Life may be prolonged by the Meditation on God's Law, and
the Observation of his Precepts; one of which belongs to the Mind or Theory;
the other to the Will or Practice. 6. That man may freely make use of Remedies
and Physic when he is sick. 7. That though God fore-knows future
Contingencies, Nevertheless, every one may act virtuously or wickedly if he
pleases.
FINIS.

