The MANNER of the PROCLAIMING OF King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY, At WHITE HALL,
and in the City of LONDON, Feb. 13 1688/9.
ABout half an hour past Ten in the Morning, the Lords and Commons came from
Westminster to White Hall, in their Coaches, and alighting at the Gate, went up
into the Banqueting House, where they presented the Prince and Princess of
Orange with an Instrument in Writing, for Declaring their Highnesses King and
Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging; desiring them to accept the Crown pursuant to the said
Declaration, which their Highnesses accepting accordingly, the said Lords and
Commons came down again to White-hall-gate, preceded by the Speakers of their
respective Houses, each attended with a Sergeant at Arms; where they found the
Heralds of Arms, the Sergeants at Arms, the Trumpets, and other Officers, all
in readiness, being assembled by Orders from the Duke of Norfolk, Earl-Marshal
of England. And Sir Thomas St. George Knight Garter, Principal King of Arms,
having received a Proclamation, and an Order from the Lords House to the Kings
Heralds and Pursuivants of Arms, for Publishing or Proclaiming the same
forthwith: The persons concerned, disposed themselves in order before the
Court-gate, for making the said Proclamation; And the Trumpets having sounded a
Call three several times, the last of which was answered by a great Shout of
the Vast Multitudes of People there assembled; the Noise ceasing, the said
Garter, King of Arms, read the said Proclamation by short Sentences or Periods,
which was thereupon proclaimed aloud by Robert Devenish, Esquire York Herald, being
the Senior Herald, in these words:

Whereas it has pleased Almighty God, in his great Mercy to this Kingdom, etc.

Which being ended, and the Trumpets sounding a Flourish, was answered by
several repeated Shouts of the People.

And Directions being given to proclaim the same within Temple Bar, in
Cheap Side, and at the Royal Exchange, the Proceeding marched in this manner:

First, the several Beadles of the Liberties of Westminster; Next, the
Constables of the said Liberties, all on foot, with the High-Constable on
horseback; After them, the Head Bailiff of Westminster, and his Men, all with
white Staves, to clear the way, on horseback; Then the Knight-Marshals Men,
also on horseback; Next to these a Class of Trumpets, Nine in all, viz. 2, 2,
2, and 3 followed by the Sergeant-Trumpeter, carrying his Mace on his shoulder,
all likewise on horseback; Then a Pursuivant of Arms single; Then a Pursuivant
and a Sergeant at Arms; Another Pursuivant and a Sergeant at Arms; Then four
Heralds of Arms, one after another, each with a Sergeant at Arms on his left
hand, the Heralds and Pursuivants being all in their Rich Coats of the Royal
Arms, and the Sergeants at Arms, each carrying his Mace on his shoulder, and
all on horseback; Then Garter King of Arms in his rich Coat of Arms, carrying
the Proclamation, accompanied by Sir Tho. Duppa, Knight. Gentleman Usher of the
Black Rod, in his Crimson Mantle of the Order of the Garter, and his Black Rod
of Office, likewise on horseback.

The^^ immediately preceded the Marquess of Halifax, who executed the Place of
Speaker in the House of Lords, in his Coach, attended by Sir Rog^^ Harsnet,
eldest Sergeant at Arms, with his Mace. Then followed Henry Powle Esquire Speaker
of the House of Commons, in his Coach, attended by John Topham Esquire Sergeant at
Arms to the said House, with his Mace. After the two Speakers of the Houses,
followed the Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal, and Primier Duke of England, in his
Coach, with his Marshals Staff in his hand. And next to him all the Peers in
order in their Coaches, And last of all the Members of the House of Commons in
their Coaches. In this Order they proceeded toward Temple Bar; and being come
as far as the Maypole in the Strand, two of the Officers of Arms with a
Sergeant at Arms, and Two Trumpets went before to Temple Bar, and the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, being by this time arrived there, and having
ordered the Gates to be shut, the Herald at Arms knocked thereat, whereupon the
Sheriffs being on Horseback, came to the Gate, and the said Herald acquainting
them, That he came by Order of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal assembled at
Westminster, to demand Entrance into that Famous City, for the Proclaiming of
William and Mary, King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; and therefore required their
speedy Answer. The said Sheriffs ordered the Gates to be opened. Whereupon
leaving the Head-Bayliff, Constables, and Beadles of Westminster without the
Bar, the rest of the Proceeding entered, where they found the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, Recorder, and Sheriffs, all in their Formalities and on Horseback,
except the Lord Mayor who was in his Coach, attended by the Sword Bearer, and
other of his Officers, who joyfully receiving them, they made a stand between
the two Temple-Gates, and Proclaimed their Majesty's a second time. From whence
they marched toward Cheap Side, a Class of the City-Trumpets, and the Lord
Mayor's Livery-men leading the way, and the said Aldermen, and Lord Mayor
falling into the Proceeding: And near Wood-street end (the place where,
Cheap-side-Cross formerly stood) they made another stand, and Proclaimed their
Majesty's a third time. And arriving at the Royal Exchange about Two of the
Clock, they Proclaimed them a fourth time; and at each Proclamation the vast
multitudes of Spectators who thronged the Streets, Balconies and Windows,
filled the Air with loud and repeated shouts and expressions of Joy. Within
Temple Bar, and all along Fleetstreet, the Orange Regiment of the City Militia,
lined both sides of the way, as did the Green Regiment within Ludgate and St.
Paul's Churchyard; the Blew Regiment in Cheap Side, and the White in Cornhil.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1689.


