OF HOLY LIVING FIRST A Serious Exhortation thereunto.

SECONDLY Choice Directions therein, both for every WORKING, and for every
LORD'S DAY.

Job. 36.2. Suffer us a little, and we will show thee what we have yet to speak
on Gods Behalf. LONDON, Printed for William Grantham at the Black-Bear in
Westminster Hall, and are to sold by Robert Eveleigh, Bookseller in Exo^, 1668.

A SERIOUS EXHORTATION TO HOLY LIVING.

By Thomas Mall.

Isa. 46.8. Remember this, and show your selves Men. LONDON: Printed for
William Grantham at the Black-Bear in Westminster Hall, and are to be sold by
Robert Eveleigh, Bookseller in Exon. 1668.

THE DEDICATION, TO THE SINNERS and SAINTS IN ENGLAND, especially in EXON and
TIVERTON.

The AUTHOR'S

(As a public and permanent testimony of their unfeigned desires, that they
may be found walking in the narrow way, that leads unto life, and that so
they may be saved)

Devote the ensuing EXHORTATION and DIRECTIONS,

Earnestly beseeching the God of all grace, that their Patronage may be the
living influences of the quickening Spirit, who only is able to protect them
from unprofitable reading, and forgetful neglects, and to make them effectual
to their Desirable, and Desired ends.

AN ADVERTISEMENT To the READER.
AFter the following choice directions were given me by their Author, I had
some thoughts of getting Mr. Thomas Wadsworth his serious, (Argumentative, and
Pathetical) Exhortation to an Holy Life, from Matthew. 5.20. Printed by Andrew
Kemb, 1661. to be reprinted, and prefixed before them, not only because of its
conciseness but because the Heartthoughts of Sinners (especially) against an
Holy Life, are therein so familiarly discovered, and movingly removed: But that
might be injurious to the Stationer, though not to the worthy Author, by reason
of the many Pages transplaced in that Edition, so that that useful manual can
scarce be used by ordinary Readers. However I have now chose to show thee how a
Scholar may write after his Copy, and do assure thee, that ( in eo gaudio
aliquid discere, ut doceam: Sen. Ep. 6.) I am glad to learn, that I may teach.

Farewell.
A Serious EXHORTATION TO HOLY LIVING, FROM
Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as
Wise; Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
The Introduction.
THese words are both a Serious Exhortation, and a Gospel-Directory, to an holy
life.

First, They are a serious Exhortation to an holy life, rationally inferred
from the Exhortation, verse 11. There the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians to be
Christian Reprovers of others for their unholy lives: Here he exhorts them,
even therefore, ((...) signifies then, or therefore) to be very careful to live
holy lives themselves; See then, or therefore, that ye walk circumspectly, etc.
q. d. Because you are to reprove others, see that ye be unreprovable your
selves.

Secondly, They are a Gospel-Directory to an holy life, rationally inferred
from the Exhortation, Verse 8,9, etc. There the Apostle exhorts the believing
Ephesians to live holy lives; Here he directs them (especially) how to follow
that Exhortation, q. d. Seeing it is your duty to walk as children of the
light, i. e. a very holy life, in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth;
(as it follows) proving (yea approving) what is acceptable unto God; and
avoiding, yea, in word and deed reproving what is displeasing to him, etc. And
that because your state is altered, ye were darkness, i. e. ye were ignorant,
and under the reigning, and condemning power of sin; But now are light in the
Lord, i. e. now are enlightened, and justified, and sanctified: See therefore
that ye walk circumspectly, etc. This is the only way wherein you can walk as
children of the light.

I shall at present speak to the words as a serious Exhortation to an holy
life; and that both to Sinners, and to Saints.

PART. I The Exhortation to Sinners.
FIrst, To Sinners; See that ye walk circumspectly, etc.

Chap. 1. Way made to the Exhortation, by six serious Questions.
HEre, before I proceed any farther, I shall ask such these six serious
Questions.

Quest. 1. Seeing it is certain (1) that you consist of mortal bodies, and
immortal souls: (Heb. 12.9. Matthew. 10.28.) (2) that your souls and bodies
must be separated for a time: (Heb. 9.27.) (3) that there shall be a
resurrection of your bodies: (John 5.28, 29. Acts 24.15. 1 Cor. 15.52, 53.) (4)
that at the resurrection there shall be a general judgment for your souls and
bodies reunited, as well as a particular judgment for your souls, as soon as
they be separated from your bodies: (2 Cor. 5.10. Heb. 9.27. compared with Job
5.4. -- Cap. 19.28.) (5) that there is an Heaven, and an Hell; an eternity of
happiness, and an eternity of misery after this life, to one of which places
and states all shall be adjudged: (Matthew. 25.34, 41.) To which eternity would
you be adjudged? Would you have the eternal love of God, or the eternal wrath
of God, for your portion in the other world? If you are, and resolve to
continue, Gallio's in this matter, I should be sorry you should read farther;
because the following exhortation will undoubtedly be the savor of death unto
death unto you.

Quest. 2. Is it not plainly revealed in the Bible, that they only that live
an holy life here, shall live an happy life hereafter? If you doubt of this,
take your Bibles, and turn to the Chapters and Verses: How read you in ( Matthew.
5.20?) Do not you there find these words of Christ, I say unto you, that except
your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
you shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven? How read you in ( Luke
13.3, 5?) Do not you there find these words twice, Except you repent, i. e.
except your life be changed from an unholy, to an holy life, you shall all
likewise perish?) How read you in ( Heb. 12.14?) Does not the Apostle Paul
there require you to follow after holiness, i. e. to live an holy life even
upon this very account; because without holiness no man shall see God, i.e. no
man shall have the beatifical vision and fruition of God?

Quest. 3. Is this assertion, that is so plainly revealed in the Bible, true or
false? What think you? Do not you own the Bible to contain the word of God? and
dare you be guilty of such blasphemy, as to give the God of truth the lie?

Q. 4. If you do believe that you can never be happy hereafter, unless you live
an holy life here, and that because the Scripture says it: Must not you also
believe that that holy life, which you must live here, must be such a life as
the Scripture calls for? Can you any other ways know what that holy life is,
that is of absolute necessity unto salvation, then by the Scripture, the Word
of God? And is not that holy life called for in the Text, under these
expressions, See that ye walk circumspectly, etc? Is not this evident both in
that the Apostle, before he lays down the Exhortation in the Text, premiseth,
verse 6. that the wrath of God will come upon all the children of disobedience,
i. e. upon all that will not be persuaded to hearken to the (and therefore to
this) Word of God? And in that the Apostle backs this Exhortation in the Text
from the folly of not living so holy a life, as he therein exhorts unto; Does
not he clearly imply (if not expressly assert) that there is no other way to
secure the everlasting happiness of the other world?

Quest. 5. Will you give it under your hands that you do verily believe, that
unless you see to it, that you live as holy a life as you are exhorted to in
the Text, you shall have no inheritance in the Kingdom of God and of Christ;
but the wrath of God will come upon you for your folly and madness in
neglecting your main interest? If you indeed believe thus, I have but one
question more to ask you, before I show you what an holy life is called for
from you in the Text.

Quest. 6. Will you solemnly engage that you will heartily endeavor to live so
holy a life, as shall be plainly made known unto you to be called for from you
by God in this Word of his? And why should you not? What, do you verily
believe, that you cannot possibly enjoy love, and avoid his wrath, unless you
live the life you are exhorted to in the Text? and yet will ye not promise to
see to it that ye live that life? Are ye resolved to sit down short of Gods
love, and to continue under his wrath? This is wilfully, and not ignorantly, to
destroy your selves. Be not afraid that I would engage you to live a holier
life then the Apostle calls for in the Text: If it be not demonstrated even to
your own consciences, that all the following particulars are rationally
inferred from the Apostles words, your promise does not bind you thereunto. I
desire you only to promise that you will heartily endeavor to live such a
life, as shall be rationally evinced from these words, to be the will of God,
and your duty. I shall therefore take your promise for granted, and no longer
delay acquainting you what an holy life you are exhorted to in the Text.

Chap. 2. The particulars contained in the Exhortation.
1. THe holy life, that you are exhorted to in the Text, is a provident life:
it is a thoughtful, careful life: in living this, we must be considerate and
forecasting souls: the eyes of our souls must be much, yea continually,
employed. This I gather from the first word in the Text, (...), See, etc. He
that follows this exhortation, has his eyes in his head, as in a Watchtower
( Eccl. 2.14.) His eyes are useful for guiding and ordering his ways, that he
may not err, wander, stumble, fall, mistake, miscarry, etc.

2. It is an active life: you are exhorted to walking, See that ye walk etc.
walking is opposed to sitting, yea standing still: he that walks is in motion;
walking and doing are the same, (1 King. 11.38.) The whole life you are
exhorted to is a busielife: not only the eye, but every faculty of the soul,
and every member of the body must be in motion. There is no sitting still, yea
there is no standing still in living this holy life.

3. It is a voluntary life: it is such a life as you may choose, or refuse to
live: not such a life as you must live, whether you will or no. No motion is
more voluntary then walking. You are not only exhorted to move in the ways of
holiness, but to move therein willingly, yea to delight in such motions, as you
do in walking, and Christ did ( John 4.24) such motions should be your
recreation.

4. It is an habitual life. In walking, steps are reiterated and multiplied: A
motion or two accidentally or occasionally in the ways of holiness, will not
evidence that you live this holy life: your motions must be frequently
iterated, and become customary, yea evidenced to be (I do not say become)
habitual: that you are habitually ready to every good work, ( Tit. 3.1.) God
esteems none a Saint for some particular carriages, but for a general course.

5. It is an everlasting life. Walking is a constant motion: If at any time
there be no moving, there is no walking for that time. In walking you are still
going forward, till you come to your journeys end. Your motions in the ways of
holiness must be constant: as you must not stand still, so you must not turn
back: your hearts must be still inclined to perform Gods statutes always, even
to the end, ( Psalm. 119.112.) It is twice said of Enoch, he walked with God, (
Genesis 5.22.24) to intimate that as he began betimes, so he persevered therein
unto the end. It is the End crowns all antecedent acts.

6. It is a growing life, walking is a progressive motion, wherein we are still
getting ground, and getting nearer and nearer to our journeys end. Your motions
in the ways of holiness must be progressive: your obedience must be more and
more: you must still get nearer Heaven, (Non progredi est regredi) not to go
forward is to go backward: not to grow better, is to grow worse. They that live
this holy life, go from strength to strength ( Psalm. 84.4.) shining brighter
and brighter till perfect day, ( Prove. 4.18.)

7. It is not a life absolutely perfect in holiness. You are exhorted to
walking, not to resting: not to be perfect, but to be walking toward
perfection. Perfection of holiness will be your life at your journeys end; but
is not your life in your walk. Here your seize cannot be greater then
Paul's were; and his highest attainment was to be still moving onwards. Brethren
(says he) I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth to those things
that are before, I press toward the mark, ( Phil. 3.13, 14.) you are followers
of the Apostles Exhortation in the Text, if you be still going onwards, though
you be not come to a full rest. There remains a rest for the people of God.

8. Though it be not a perfect, yet it is a very regular life. You are exhorted
not only to walk, but to walk exactly, by line and by rule, as it were in a
frame: See, look, how ye walk: yea (...), See how circumspectly, how strictly,
how precisely, how accurately, how regularly you walk: See that you be
Peripateticks, that you walk round and round in the whole circle of good works:
See that you keep all Gods Commandments, and how you keep all. The word (...)
intimates not only that this holy life is a very strict and precise life, but
wherein its strictness and preciseness does consist. It is translated
accurately. It seemed good unto me when I had (...), accurately, or exactly,
searched all things, ( Luke 1.3.) It comes from (...), to go to the utmost, to
the height, to the top. You are exhorted to go to the utmost in keeping Gods
Commandments; to go to the height, to the top of holy living; to the utmost of
the rule of holy living, both the external, and spiritual, and inward part
thereof: and to the utmost of your strength and light. To avoid the most
spiritual, as well as the outward sins forbidden: and to perform the most
spiritual, as well as outward duties required: yea, to perform the outward
duties spiritually: and that to the utmost of your knowledge and ability you
conform to every command, and to all of every command. See that ye walk
circumspectly. Though you cannot attain to a perfect conformity to so perfect a
rule, yet let such an exact walking be your aim: See to it; Let it be in your
eye. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all (and to all of
every one of) thy Commandments, ( Psalm. 119.6.)

9. It is a discreet and prudent life. One piece of wisdom is particularly
mentioned, and that is right timing of actions. See that ye walk circumspectly,
not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time. See that ye walk wisely in
practically knowing all the times, seasons and opportunities for action, so as
to do continually not only what is lawful, but what is expedient: what is best
to be done, (1 Chronicles. 12.32. compared with Isa. 53.2. Est. 1.3. Eccles. 8.5.6.)
See that ye be not only fruitful in good works; but that ye bring forth your
fruit in your season, ( Psalm. 1.3.)

10. It is a thrifty life. See that ye redeem the time: See that ye lose no
time, at least no opportunity of receiving or doing good, especially in evil
days. Though all this may not be your attainment: yet be sure that it is your
aim, that it is in your eye. See to it.

Chap. 3. The Exhortation set home by six moving questions.
THus I have briefly showed you, what an holy life you are exhorted to in the
Text. I shall now, in order to the prevailing with you to follow this
Exhortation, ask your consciences these six following questions.

Quest. 1. Are there not motives enough in the Text (to wave all others) to
prevail with you (if you will but act rationally) to follow this Exhortation,
to live this considerate, active, voluntary, habitual, everlasting, growing,
and though imperfect, yet very regular, wise, and thrifty life?

Motive 1. Can you act rationally, and yet remain fools, and continue to refuse
true wisdom. See that ye walkcircumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, i. e.
because to walk thus circumspectly, is to walk not foolishly, but wisely: the
particle (as) after the manner of the Hebrews, does not always make a
comparison; but sometimes renders a reason. Here it does both. See that ye live
this life; because so you live in the purest exercise of reason. Is it not most
reasonable, that the reasonable creature should live in subordination to the
highest reason, and the primitive and perfect wisdom? And what is that but to
see that ye walk thus circumspectly? Is it not most reasonable, that the
reasonable creature should choose that which is good, before that which is
evil; a real good, before a seeming good; a lasting good before a transitory
good; the chief good before a less and subordinate good? And what else is holy
living, but such a choice evidenced in suitable endeavors? For what have you
reason, if not therewith to serve, and please your Maker, and so to prepare for
your everlasting state? Is it not folly, yea madness, to prefer a lump of flesh
before your own immortal souls; and the dung of a transitory World before God
and endless Glory? to sell Salvation for so short, so small, so filthy a
pleasure as sin affords; and to procure hell, and damnation, by so much pains
and cost, as you expend in following the World and your lusts? Has your course
any better titles from the God of wisdom in the Scriptures, (2 These. 3.2. Jer.
4.2. Eccles. 7.25. 2 Pet. 2.12. Psalm. 92.6. -- 94.8. Jer. 10.8, 14. Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Psalm. 73.3, 22. 2 Samuel 14.10.) then unreasonable, foolish, sottish, brutish,
etc.? Not to live this life, is to live a mere brutish life, a life of
sensuality; wherein the sensitive powers are predominant, their ends being
preferred before the ends of the rational faculties: and a life of sensuality
in men is not specifically, but gradually only distinct from the life of mere
Bruits. O fools! When will ye be wise? O Bruits! When will ye be men, When
will ye cease living as Bruits? When will ye live as Men, as reasonable
creatures? When will ye regard your main interest? When will ye prevent your
greatest danger?

Motive 2. Can you act rationally, and yet make the times, which are bad enough
already, worse? Can you act rationally, and yet not provide any thing to bear
up your hearts in such perilous days? That is the Apostles second Motive; See
that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time,
because the days are evil; i. e. though not naturally, or inherently, yet
adherently and concomitantly, made up of a complication of sins, snares, and
miseries. The word (...) signifies not only ungodly, but unquiet and
troublesome. If you do not live this life, you do (as it were) more and more
infect even time it self: you have nothing that can really comfort you in such
evil days: The testimony of conscience, as to living this life, being the
only really cordial rejoicing in such days, (2 Cor. 1.12.) yea, if you will
not be persuaded to live this life, you shall have no inheritance in the
kingdow of God and of Christ; but the wrath of God will come upon you, as upon
children of disobedience, (the word comes from the privative (...) and (...),
to persuade; such as will not be persuaded ( v. 5, 6.) and can you act
rationally, and yet be careless whether you pass out of these evil days into a
blessed or miserable Eternity?

Quest. 2. What are you now resolved to do? are you heartily resolved to have
your eyes in your heads; to stand still in the ways of holiness no longer, but
voluntarily, frequently, yea constantly to be moving forward therein? and
though you cannot attain to legal perfection, yet, that you will aim at it, and
be restless till you be Evangelically perfect in your walking to the utmost of
the rule for the matter, and to the utmost of your strength and light for the
manner of your obedience: that you will do your best in holy living; that you
will live as prudently, and as thriftily as possibly you can? Will you now make
good your former promise, that whatever the holy life were, that is called for
in the Text, you would endeavor to your utmost to live it? If you will not,
but will rather be promise-breakers, Gods soul will have no pleasure in you,
but your drawing back will be unto perdition, ( Hebr. 10.38, 39.) But if you be
fully resolved, if your resolution slows from an inward root (...) inclination,
( Psalm. 119.112.) If it be bottomed on a firm assent to the truth of
Scripture-revelation: If it be founded on the highest reason, and if it be the
fruit of mature deliberation, you are not far from the kingdom of God, yea you
have taken some steps in the way to life.

Quest. 3. Can any of you yet think that the holy life you are exhorted to in
the Text, is more then needs? Is it not absolutely necessary that God should be
pleased and enjoyed? And is not all, that is called for in the Text, absolutely
necessary to the pleasing and enjoying of God? Has not enough been hinted
already to convince you hereof? And shall not such an argument as necessity,
and your own necessity turn the scales, and fully resolve you, and put you past
any farther deliberation or delay? Sure, if this were indeed believed, it were
impossible but it should. ( Ubi necessitas incumbit, non ultra disputandum est,
fed celerrime and fortiter agendum,) Reason is but folly, when it pleads
against necessity. (Omni art, omni ratione efficacior est necessitas:)
Necessity is that weapon that natural reason takes to be unresistable. Had you
been one hour in Heaven, would you not say, there is an absolute necessity of
getting thither? Had you been one hour in hell, would you not say, there is an
absolute necessity of escaping it, and that there is no necessity to this? And
would you not thereupon, without delay, set in good earnest upon the use of the
necessary means thereunto? Verily, thus it would be with you, if you did indeed
believe the Scripture-record; for faith is the evidence of things not seen, and
the substance of things hoped for, ( Heb. 11.1.) i. e. faith sees that which
supplieth the want of presence and visibility: there is that in faith which
effectively is equal to visibility, and a present subsistence. Do you yield,
that an holy life is necessary; But question whether such a life, as has been
exhorted to, deserves only the name of an holy life? Ask your souls one
question; Is there any more in all the particulars contained in this
Exhortation, then what is comprehended in the Scripture-notion of holiness?
Does not holiness, according to the use of the word in Scripture, exclude sin,
uncleanness, all filthiness of flesh and spirit, (2 These. 4.7. 2 Cor. 7.1.)
which is a nonconformity to the will of God, (1 John 3.4. (...),) and include
conformity to the will of God? ( Romans 12.1, 2.) Does not legal holiness include
perfect conformity unto the will and holiness of God man fested in his Law? and
evangelical holiness include a true conformity unto the will and holiness of
God manifested in his Son, as Mediator? ( Romans 8 29.) what then can you
apprehend in the Scripture-notion of that holy life, that is absolutely
necessary to salvation, less then to see that ye walk circumspectly, not as
fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil?

Quest. 4. Are any of you hindered from hearkening to this Exhortation by
conceits that few, yea, none do, yea, none can live so holy a life? It is
indeed certain, few do: Christ has told you so much. Though there be many
seekers, yet there are but few strivers to walk in the narrow way that leads to
life, ( Mat. 7.13, 14.) But this is no discouragement. You shall not want
company in the way to heaven, no, not good company, ( Prove. 12.10.) nor find
comfort in your company in the way to hell. If you would indeed have the number
of holy livers to be greater, why do not you increase it by joining with them?
Though Christ's flock be very little, yet all that be of his flock, do live this
holy life. Does not the Apostle tell you, By this we know, that we love the
children of God, when we love God, and keep his commandments; for this is the
love of God (herein it consists, hereby it is evidenced) that we keep his
commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous? (1 John 5.2, 3.) Is it not
hence evident, that such as do sincerely love God, not only may, but do keep
his Commandments? yea, that it is easy and pleasant to them to live so holy a
life? If you say you cannot however live thus; I ask you, how do you know? Did
you ever try what might be done in this case? Did you ever set in good earnest
about it? Have you not only sought, but strove to walk in this narrow way? If
you have not, you have dreadfully mocked God, in pretending that it is
impossible for you to live so holy a life. O! remember, God will not be mocked,
( Gal. 6.2.) you cannot deceive his eye, and he will not be put off with
mocking services.

Quest. 5. Are any of you hindered by hopes of coming to heaven in some other
easier way, that is not revealed in the Bible? What is this, but to be hindered
from changing your life, in hopes that Christ will be found a Deceiver, and God
a Liar? Has not God by Christ ( John 12.49.) told you, not only that there is
no other way revealed, but that indeed there is none other, neither can there
be any other. I say unto you (says Christ, Mat. 5.20.) except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no case. (Mark, in no case, i. e. by no means, in no way whatsoever) enter
into the Kingdom of heaven. And can you live more holy lives than the Scribes
and Pharisees (who were the strictest professors of holiness among the Jews,
Acts 26.5.) lived, unless you see that ye walk thus circumspectly? Sinners, ask
your hearts who has given you these hopes? sure not God; for he cannot
persuade you that his own word is false: it must therefore be the Devil, who
will deceive you. And now! what, will ye any longer hope to be saved whether
God will, or no? will any of you hope for impossibilities any longer? will ye
hope to be saved without the one thing necessary to salvation, ( Luke 12.4.41,
42.) without an heart set upon it, and a life employed for it? O! how shall you
escape if you neglect so great salvation? ( Heb. 2, 3.)

Quest. 6. Are any of you bindred from following the Apostles Exhortation, by
fears lest the Devil, the World, and the Flesh will never suffer you to live so
strict and precise a life? I must indeed tell you, that if all the Devil can
do, those principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places:
If all that the World can do, the men of the world, and the things of the
world: If all the flesh can do, the carnal reasonings, and fleshly lustings of
your own corrupt hearts: If all that all these together can do, can hinder you,
you will never be persuaded to set in good earnest upon living so holy a life:
yet your condition is not hopeless; but the more serious and hearty your fears
be, the more hopeful. All the weapons of this Apostles warfare (and therefore
this Exhortation backed with such motives) are not carnal, but mighty through
God for the pulling down strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every
high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, (1 Cor. 10.4, 5.) I shall
therefore once more beseech you for the Lords sake, for your souls sake, to
suffer the words of the Apostles Exhortation, See that ye walk circumspectly,
not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil: But
still remember that of Christ, Without (separated from, not united to) me, ye
can do nothing, ( John 15.5.) and that of the Apostle: It is God that works
in you both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, ( Phil. 2.12, 13.) Work
out therefore your salvation with fear and trembling, i. e. Shake off sloth,
and unite all the powers of your souls, that you may intend this business (as
the word (...) signifies.) Do not only work at it, but work it out: work while
it is day, ( John 9.4.) whilst the Spirit breathes, fearing lest if the present
gale be neglected, you never have a gale more.

PART I. The Exhortation to Saints.
SEcondly, to Saints. Having addressed the Apostles Exhortation to Sinners in
the former Chapter, I shall in this desire you, who come not under the former
member of the distribution, to suffer the words of his Exhortation: See then
that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, etc. And indeed to you
in an especial manner is this Exhortation directed. There is an emphasis in the
word (ye) See that ye, etc. q. d. Though others be careless how they live, yet
so be not you: but be sure that you see to it, that you live this provident,
active, voluntary, habitual, growing, Evangelically (though not legally)
perfect, wise, and thrifty life. There is also, besides the motives mentioned
in the former Chapter, one more in the Text, peculiarly belonging to you,
whereby it is evident that the former motives do as much concern you, as any,
yea, more; and that is taken from your estate. What that is you may see by
retiring to verse 8. Ye were sometimes darkness, not only in darkness, but
darkness it self: ye were sometimes altogether in the darkness of ignorance and
unbelief, of guilt and misery, of sin and enmity: But now you are children of
the light, you are persons enlightened and enlivened: yea, you are light in the
Lord, you are persons full of the light of knowledge and faith, of the love of
God and peace, of grace and holiness: See then that ye walk circumspectly, etc.
This is a comprehensive motive, as you will see in the following particulars.

Chap. I. Motives thereunto from their knowledge.
FIrst, See that ye walk circumspectly, etc. seeing ye are enlightened with
saving knowledge. That is part of the meaning of being children of the light,
and light in the Lord. Sometimes light is in Scripture (because of its
discovering quality, ( Ephesians. 5.13.) put for knowledge, as ( Dan. 5.11.12.) where
it is said, that Daniel had light, understanding and wisdom found in him. Thus
you are children of the light, yea, light in the Lord: See then that ye walk
circumspectly, etc. And good reason there is why you (what ever others do)
should live this holy life, even upon the account of your knowledge.

Motive 1. Hereby one great hinderance of living this life is removed out of
your souls: and that is ignorance and blindness. Ignorant souls are indeed
alienated from the life of God, (Ephesians. 4.18.) they cannot endure to live such a
life as God lives, or as he commands them to live: they cannot endure to be
holy as God is holy, or as he calls them to be holy, viz. to be holy in all
manner of conversation. But will you also be alienated, thus alienated from the
life of God? Shall your alienation continue, though your ignorance does not
continue?

Motive 2. Hereby you are more than others obliged to live this life. Others
are indeed bound to live this life, though they do not know it to be their
duty; but you much more, seeing you know the nature, necessity, and excellency
of this life, and that not only notionaly, but intuitively and experimentally.
Your very knowledge is an obligation upon you: you are bound not only by the
law without, but by the law within you: you are bound in your spirits, ( Acts
20.22) your light does lovingly constrain you, (2 Cor. 5.14) necessity is laid
upon you thereby (1 Cor. 9.16.) and you can do no other (unless you will offer
violence to your own consciences) then live this life, which you know God
charge upon you, as your duty, ( Acts 4.20.)

Motive 3. Hereby you are helped to live this life; for (1) Hereby you see the
reasonableness of the Scripture motives to live thus circumspectly, which
others do not, at least have not such a sight thereof as you have. I shall
instance only in those two mentioned in the Text, and briefly spoken to in the
former Chapter. You see both what folly and madness it is not to live this
life; and how much it is your concernment, and therefore wisdom, thus to live:
as also what cogent motives there are in the days being evil, thereunto. You
know the folly and madness of following any course or way of life, short of
this holy life: you know, that calamity and destruction are in all such ways, (
Romans 3.16.) yea, and damnation too, (2 Pet. 2.2.) you know that you will not be
gainers, but losers, though you should gain the whole world thereby, because
thereby your souls will be lost, ( Mat. 16.26.) you know that it is your main
concernment, and therefore wisdom, to live this holy life. You know that in the
way of righteousness is life (and it tends to life, Prove. 11.19.) and in the
pathway thereof there is no death, (Prove. 12.28.) you know that this holy life
is the best life, the most excellent life, ( Prove. 12.26.) the most rational
life, ( Prove. 14.8.) the safest life, ( Prove. 1.33.3.23. Psalm. 50.23.) the
honestest and most truly virtuous life, ( Luke 8.15. 2 Timothy, 2.2.) the most
prositable and useful life, (1 Timothy 4.8.) the most honorable life, ( Isa.
43.4.) the most sweet and pleasant life, ( Prove. 3.17. Psalm 36.8.) God says
all this, and you believe it: yea, you know it by experience: See therefore
that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, etc. You are also
convinced that the Apostles second motive, taken from the days being evil, is
very cogent. Though others looking on it with a carnal eye, think it is
inconsequent, and better able to bear a contrary conclusion, viz. The times are
bad, therefore there is no living in the world, unless we yield a little: the
Oak is rent to pieces with the fury of the wind, when the Willow by bowing and
bending is secure. Yet you see that it is very reasonable, that you should be
the more careful to live this holy life, because the days are evil: Both
because the customs and manners of most are so wicked, that they have even
tainted time it self, and corrupted the very days: And because the days are
very dangerous, by reason of temptation and persecution: That so the times may
be bettered by your means; and that you your selves may be secured from the
dangers and snares thereof: and that you, hearts may be born up under the
persecution you meet with therein. See therefore that ye walk circumspectly,
not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil. (2)
Your light cannot but be urging what you know to be your duty upon your
conscience. It cannot but be putting you upon doing what you ought; it cannot
but be a spur in your sides to make you go, yea run the ways of Gods
commandments. (3) Hereby it becomes harder for you (then for others) not to be
persuaded to follow this exhortation. It is far easier to sin without light,
then against light. It is not easy for you to put by the motions of your own
knowledge and keep down your own light; But it is harder to go contrary
thereunto. Yea (4) If your knowledge be indeed saving, it has a very great
power in it; Both a transforming power, (2 Cor. 3.18.) and a fructifying power,
( Romans 12.2. Col. 19.10.) Teaching (and therefore knowledge) is the means,
whereby Christ, as a Prophet, helps souls to live this life: Hence he is said
to speak life into his People, ( John 6.63.) and his words are called, The
words of life, (John 6.68.)

Motive 4. If you will not be persuaded to see to it that you live this life,
you cannot have assurance that you are children of the light; yea, you may on
Scripture-grounds conclude you are not: If your light were indeed saving, you
would be very careful that your life be holy. Give me understanding (says
David, Psalm. 119.34.) and what then? why, I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall
observe it with my whole heart. Would you not be glad to have assurance, that
your knowledge is such as accompanies salvation, i. e. such as cannot be
separated from salvation? See then that ye walk circumspectly, etc. Hereby we
know, (we do not only think, or hope; but know assuredly) that we know him, (
i. e. savingly) if we keep his commandments, (1 John 2, 3.) It as but a form of
knowledge that brings forth but a form of godliness.

Motive. 5. If you will not be persuaded to follow this exhortation, your
knowledge will be an aggravation of your sin, and an heightner of your
condemnation: Verily, you can have no cloak for your sin, ( John 15.22.)
Others think that their ignorance is some excuse or extenuation of their sin,
(though most are therein mistaken; because their ignorance is a supine and an
affected ignorance; and such ignorance is one of the highest aggravations of
sin:) But to be sure, you cannot so much as think, that you have any such
excuse or extenuation of your sin. That servant which knew his Lords will, and
prepared not himself, nor did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes; though he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes shall
be beaten with few stripes; for unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be
much required, ( Luke 12.47, 48. If you neglect your known duty, your light
cannot but break in upon you, and smite you both here, and hereafter. But so
much for the Motives, from your being children of the light, as it signifies
your being enlightened with saving knowledge.

Chap. 2. Motives from their Justification.
SEcondly, See that ye walk circumspectly, etc. seeing you are enlivened with
saving grace. In Scripture, light is often taken for life, ( Job 33.28, 30.
Psalm. 36.9. -- 49.19.) Thus here, Ye are light in the Lord, i. e. ye are not
only enlightened, but enlivened, made partakers of a double life, the life of
justification, and the life of sanctification; See then that ye walk
circumspectly, etc.

First, You are made partakers of the life of righteousness: In Scripture, life
and righteousness are taken for the same, (2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9. Romans 5.17, 21.)
Because sin, by reason of its guilt, does immediately make a man dead in law, (
John 3.18.) And when a capital offender is pardoned, we say, his life is given
him. Thus are you made alive: in your justification the sentence of
condemnation is reversed, ( John 3.18.) you enjoy peace and reconciliation with
God, and his love and favor, ( Romans 5.1.) And in Scripture, light, upon the
account of its diffusiveness and communicativeness, and comfortableness,
signifies sometimes peace; sometimes love and favor. I form the light, and
create darkness, is explained in the next words, I make peace and create evil,
( Jer. 13.16.) The light of the Kings countenance and his favor are equivalent
expressions, ( Prove. 16.15.) See then that ye walk circumspectly, etc. And good
reason there is, why you should, even upon the account of the pardon of your
sins, and the justification of your persons: For,

Motive 1. Hereby another great hinderance of your living this life is removed;
and that is guilt; Sins binding over the Soul to the wrath of God. No wonder
that others do not live this life, which is a walking with God, (Genesis 5.24.)
Can two walk together, except they be agreed? (Amos 3.3.) No wonder that they
fly from God (so our first Parents did, ( Genesis 3.8, 10.) as an enemy: So he is
to their souls, and they are children of his wrath, (Ephesians. 2.3.) But your
guilt is taken away, and God of an enemy is become your friend, ( Col. 1.20,
21, 22.) You can indeed find no pleasure in the company of an enemy; and if an
enemy employ you about any thing, you will not go about it if you can choose;
and if you do, you go about it grudgingly: But what! Will not you walk with
your best friend? Shall it not be the delight of your souls to be employed by
him?

Motive 2. You are upon this account more bound to live this life, then others
are: For (1) The way of your justification does strongly bind you hereunto; for
this holy life is the end of justification by faith; and therefore this way of
Justification is appointed to continue only till you are brought to live
perfectly holy lives in Heaven; for then there will be another way for your
acceptance, though the glory and honor of all will be given to Christ. (2)
Your discharge from the Covenant of Works in your Justification, does also
strongly bind you hereunto. When you are justified, you are not bound to a
personal, perfect, and perpetual keeping of the Law, as the condition of life,
( Gal. 4.21, 22.) But, yea therefore, you are bound to be the more careful
sincerely to observe the Law, as a Rule of life. So long as you were under the
Covenant of Works, you might indeeed be discouraged from endeavoring to obey
the Law, because that Covenant accepts of nothing but perfect obedience, (
Gal. 3.10.) gives no power at all to obey, and therefore called the Letter, (2
Cor. 3.6.) yea causes accidentally the abounding of disobedience, ( Romans
5.10.) and therefore compared to an husband, and a sinful heart to a wife, (
Romans 7.4, 5.) But now being under the Covenant of Grace, God is engaged to
forgive your transgressions, (Jer. 31.34.) and to accept your imperfect
obedience: ( Mal. 3.17.) yea, to give you power and strength to do what is
required, and to abstain from what is forbidden, (2 Cor. 3.6. Mica. 7.19.) O!
What an obligation is this upon you, to see to circumspect walking? Verily,
Gods promising in the Covenant of Grace to enable you to walk in his Statutes,
does not shut out your endeavor, but engage you to endeavor; for God only
promises to help you, if you endeavor in the use of the means, (whereof
Prayer is one,) ( Ezekiel. 36.27. compared with Verse 37.) (3) The grace of God in
your justification binds you hereunto, (Tit. 2.11, 12. Romans 6.12, 13, 14.)
Hereby God has done more for you then others; and therefore you should do more
for him then others, ( Matthew. 5.47.) Considering how great things he has done
for you, (1 Samuel 12.24.) (4) Your relations, upon your Justification, bind you
hereunto: Being justified, you are Christ's and Gods, and therefore should see
to it that you live to God and Christ, (1 Cor. 6.20.) Others are not under your
bonds: they may indeed be more under the bond of slavish fear; but you are more
under the bond of love, and the bond of love is stronger then that of fear.

Motive 3. You have upon this account more encouragements then others, to live
this life: For, (1) There are some motives more cogent upon you, then upon
others; To instance only in two: That the grace of God teaches souls to deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly,
(Tit. 2.11, 12.) And that not to live this life, is to turn the grace of God
into wantonness, (Jude 4.) cannot but have greater influence upon your souls,
then upon others. (2) You are more assured of help to live this life then
others, and that upon a double account; Both because the more a man does
forsake any thing of his own for Christ, the more Christ is engaged to give of
his good things to that man: And therefore seeing when you become justified by
faith, you lay down all your own righteousness, Christ is engaged to give you
his righteousness, that righteousness which he works in souls: And because,
upon your believing for Justification, you are estated in the Covenant of
Grace, and so God is engaged to enable you to live this holy life, as you heard
under the former particular.

Motive 4. If you will not be persuaded to follow this exhortation, your sin
is, upon this account, greater then the sin of others: For, (1) Hereby you
cross Gods grand design, in his decree of election, in his sending his Son into
the World, in Justification, in all his Ordinances and Providence, more then
others. What ever others are, if you be indeed justified, you are predestined
to live this life, (Romans 8.29, 30.) Christ came, not only to redeem you from
the guilt of all iniquity; but to purify you from the filth of sin, and to
make you peculiar people to himself, zealous of good works, (Tit. 2.14.) In
your Justification you are therefore delivered out of the hands of all your
enemies, that you might serve God without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him all your days: (Luke 1.74, 75.) The design of God in all his
Ordinances and Providence is your good, that you may live better and better, (
Romans 8.28.) And what! Is it nothing to you, even to you, to cross Gods grand
design in the World? (2) Hereby you gratify the Devil more then others: Though
he is against holiness in any; yet he is not so much rejoiced that others will
not live this holy life, as he is, if he can but persuade a Justified person to
be unwilling thereunto; and that appears in his rage against such as will not
be persuaded by him: he will by some means or other stir up sharp Persecution
against them, (2 Timothy 3.12.) (3) Hereby you turn the grace of God into
wantonness, more then others, ( Jude 4.) Others turn the Doctrine of Free Grace
in ^ustification into wantonness; but you turn the Grace of Justification it
self into wantonness: and therefore your sin is against more mercy, and by
consequence does more grieve the Spirit then others unperswadableness. (4)
Hereby your unperswadableness becomes more inexcusable. It is not indeed
unpardonable; for you are not under the Law, but under Grace; (Romans 6.14.) But
yet it is altogether unexcusable, even because you are under Grace; and by
consequence, if you would be persuaded to set upon living this life, you should
find God coming in to your help, according to his Promise in the Covenant of
Grace.

Motive 5. If you will not be persuaded to live this holy life, you cannot have
assurance that you are indeed justified: And is that nothing to you? yea, you
cannot but conclude, that you are mistaken in thinking that you are justified:
Are not the Apostles words plain? If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth, (1 John 1.6.)

Chap. 3. Motives from their Sanctification.
SEcondly, See that ye walk circumspectly, seeing ye are children of the light,
i. e. Seeing ye are made partakers, not only of the life of righteousness, but
of the life of holiness: You partake of the Divine nature; Christ is formed in
your hearts; you are made habitually holy; all the Commandments of God are
writ in your inward parts; the Holy Ghost dwells within you; is an abiding
principle of holiness; See therefore that you walk circumspectly, etc. And good
reason there is why you should, even upon this account, upon the account of
your Regeneration, Conversion, Sanctification, Being made new creatures, etc.
For,

Motive 1. Hereby another great hinderance of this holy life is removed; and
that is the want of an inward principle. We cannot live a natural life without
an inward principle, without a natural heat, with the fountain thereof, by
which the body is made operative: Hence, in living creatures the heart first
lives; because it is the forge of spirits, and the fountain of heat. ((...)
Arist. de respir. c. 8.) No more possible is it to live this spiritual life
without an inward principle. If the watch be not of the right make, it will
never go true: Till you were converted the Flesh was predominant, and therefore
it was impossible for you to live any other then a flesbly life; for every
thing will act according to its predominant principle: But now the Spirit is
the predominant principle within you; Should not you therefore live a spiritual
life? Should not the Law of God written in your hearts be legible in your
lives? Should not your lives be according to the tendency of your hearts?

Motive 2. Hereby your obligation to live this holy life is increased; For this
is the very end, why the principle of this life is infused into your souls,
that so you may live this life; for you are his workmanship; his (...); his
curious and exact piece, created in Christ Jesus unto good works; by an
almighty power, of unfit and indisposed, you are polished and inclined; of
impotent, you are made able; of averse, you are made willing to good works; and
the end is that you may be wholly employed in good works: If you be not, you
make inherent grace a mere vanity. (Frustra est potentia, quae non educitur in
actum.)

Motive 3. You have upon this account also more encouragements, then others, to
live this life; For (1) Hereby many Scripture motives to holy living become
cogent upon your souls, that are not upon others. Though others be not, you
cannot but be prevailed with to live an holy life; By the pleasure God takes
therein, ( John 8.29. Col. 1.9, 10.) By the honor that redounds unto God
thereby, ( Matthew. 5.16. where (...) may be taken (...), noting the event, and
not (...), noting the scope.) By the influence of an holy life to stop the
mouth of blasphemy, (1 Pet. 3 16.) to convince gainsayers and blasphemers, (1
Pet. 2.12, 15.) to convert sinners, (1 Pet. 2.12, -- 3.1, 2.) and to rejoice
and edify the souls of Saints. (2 Cor. 1.14. 1 These. 5.11.) (2) Hereby you are
intended, inclined, yea fitted for this holy life; for the Law is writ in your
hearts; your hearts are already subjected to the Law of God; your wills are
already melted into the will of God: And what! Will ye cross your own
inclination, as well as Gods grand design in the new Creation? (3) Hereby you
come under the promise of fresh influences from the Holy Ghost continually. I
will put my spirit (says God, Ezekiel. 36.27.) within you, i.e. my spirit shall
be an indwelling principle of holiness within you: and then it follows, and
cause you to walk in my statutes, etc. i.e. the spirit shall quicken and
actuate that grace that is infused.

Motive 4. If you will not be persuaded to see to it, that ye live this life,
you will upon this account also be more unexcusable then others; For you cannot
plead that it is impossible for you to live this life; yea, you cannot plead
that it is so difficult for you, as it is for others, to live this life. The
principle of this life is infused into your souls in your Regeneration: and
you are delivered from the reigning power of the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, ( Luke 11.21.) Those great enemies, and hinderers of so strict a life
have received their mortal wound: And will ye be hindered, yea, overcome by a
conquered Foe? Though the commandments of God be impossible to others, yet they
are not grievous to you, (1 John 5.3.) This holy life is a thing correspondent
to your new nature, and any other kind of life; a brutish, sensual, worldly
life is repugnant to your vital principle. Are any of Gods commandments
grievous to you, when he commands you nothing, but what he promises to make
you able to do, so far as shall be needful for acceptance, so you will
endeavor your selves?

Motive 5. If you will not be persuaded to live so strict a life, you cannot be
assured that you are regenerated and converted: yea, you cannot but conclude
that you are still dead in trespasses and sins. The Apostle is peremptory, He
that does righteousness, i. e. He that lives according to the whole word of God
evangelically, though not legally, he is righteous, i. e. he is not only
interested in righteousness imputed, but inherent: He, that does not
righteousness, is not of God, i.e. he is not regenerated, he is not born of
God, (1 John 3.7. 10.) A child is known by his doing, says Solomon; and the
tree by his fruit, says Christ; and every gracious soul by this walk. Where
God changes the nature, there he makes the person change his course of life.
And is this nothing to you? Would you not be glad to be assured that you are
converted, and truly gracious? Are not all Gods Promises to godliness exceeding
great and precious in your eye? And would you not rejoice, to be assured, that
they do all belong to you? Would you not live comfortably in the saddest days?
And would you not be assured that you shall die comfortably, and give up you
account with joy? See then that you walk thus circumspectly, (1 Timothy 4.8. 2
Cor. 1.12. 2 Kings 20.3. Isa. 38.3.) And now what shall I say for

The Conclusion?
Is it not evident from the former hints, that this holy life is rational, more
expected from you, then from others? Are not more eyes upon you then upon
others? Do not the eyes of Devils, infernal and incarnate, watch more for your
haltings, then for the haltings of others? Are not the eyes of God, Angels and
Saints, mostly upon you, looking that you should walk worthy of your state and
profession? Are not wise actions rationally more expected from wise men, then
from fools? ( James 3.13.) You are through grace made wise unto salvation:
others are left in their natural folly, and madness: See then that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, etc. What! Will you, even you,
deceive all the expectations of Saints and Angels, yea of God himself? Does not
God himself make his boast of you? Surely they are my people, children that
will not lie, (Isa. 63.8.) i.e. they will not deal perfidiously with me, ( Genesis
21.23. Psalm. 44.17. Hab. 3.17.) At your first believing you have covenanted
with God, that you would never more live a worldly, sensual life, and that you
would make it your main business, to live this holy and strict life: And will
you break Covenant with God? Will you thus be found liars? Shall God, even
your God, be made ashamed of his boast of you? God forbid. But so much
concerning this Text, as A Serious Exhortation to Sinners and Saints, to live
an holy life here, as ever they would avoid eternal death, and enjoy eternal
life, hereafter.

FINIS.

