THE Present State OF EUROPE BRIEFLY Examined and found Languishing, Occasioned
By the Greatness of the French Monarchy: For Cure whereof a REMEDY (From former
Examples) Is humbly proposed to His Royal Highness William Henry Prince of
Orange, And to the GREAT CONVENTION Of the LORDS and COMMONS Now Assembled at
Westminster. Wrote upon Occasion of the House of Common's Vote to raise 800000
l to Equip a Fleet for the Year 1671, moved thereunto by the Pretended March of
the French Army toward the Marine Parts of Flanders.

By THOMAS MANLEY, Esquire

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey.
MDCLXXXIX.

READER,
IT is now Seventeen Years since these Papers were Framed and intended for
Public Consideration, but the unhappy Temper of our Counsels, and the
Malignity of the Public Licenser prevented their Appearance till this Juncture.

The State of Europe briefly Examined and found Languishing, etc.
THE present designs, and puissance of France both by Sea, and Land, being at
once both the Wonder, and Dread of Europe, has possessed me with so many sad
Reflections on that Subject, that I who am but dust, and ashes, and dwell in
the shades of Obscurity, cannot refrain to form, and meditate how Bars may be
put to such approaching Dangers, especially since the honor, safety, and
welfare of our Prince, and Country ought to be the bent, and study of the most
retired Subject.

The present State of Europe I might fitly resemble to the Body of a Man,
wherein all the Members either languish, or are viciously affected; some
through self-mischiefs, others oppressed by their Fellow Members. Spain,
(heretofore the great Pretender to the Western-Monarchy) droops through her own
Follies, whereof if she expire, a Jury will undoubtedly find her a Felo de se,
whilst her Neighbor Portugal, instead of holding her sick-head, and pitying
her case, is ready on all occasions to knock out her Brains. Italy and Germany
are troubled with one Disease, through the windy humors of her many, and
ambitious Princes, whose continual Jealousies fill them with frequent Gripings,
and Disquiets: England and Holland are desperately bruised through mutual
buffetings, to which France cunningly loo'd them on, intending, like Simeon,
and Levi, to suppress these Shechemits, when sore, and unable to resist; all
which Mistakes and Calamities have been to France as so many Indulgent Nurses
to feed, and pamper her, who like unruly Cattle, trespass most on that
Neighbor whose Fence is lowest, and Quarry best without fear of impounding,
whereby (like the Head in a Body Rickity) she grows to an unproportionable, and
dangerous bigness, whilst her erring Neighbors (like the Members) wast, and
languish; of whose sudden, and prodigious growth I will not now insist on,
(which yet is none of the least dreadful considerations) nor tell how our
Cromwell seemed a Dictator there, nor record how 6000 English Red-Coats was, at
that time, more essential then Humanity, and Protection to an oppressed King of
the Blood of France; for now the Scene being altered by the admirable Conduct of
a Prince, whom therefore his Subjects ought to reverence, I cannot but observe
how Christendom, instead of a generous Resentment, and defense of the
Oppressed, Shrinks, and Faints at every undue seizure made by that haughty
Monarch, as if they fancied such softness could secure their own Peace, or
charm an ambitious Conqueror into Modesty, or put a stop to his Career, whose
utmost end is the Western-Monarchy, whereunto, with spread Sails, he now
apparently hastneth; whereas they ought rather to be powerfully persuaded that
such tameness must at once enable, and encourage him to devour them also.

What Prudence can justify such procedure? can Time and Patience repare the
Mistakes? or may such easy Conquests glut his Appetite, or possess him with
Compassion to spare the rest? or does not rather one Conquest beget a Stomach,
and ability to more, and greater? who can suppose the seizure of Lorain will
immerge him in Ease, and Voluptuousness? or his Successes in Flanders serve as
an Atonement to secure the rest? must not these unrevenged Conquests rather be
as so many prosperous Gales to transport him to greater Achievements? Seeing
the like drousiness in relation to Christian Princes gave occasion formerly to
the growth of the Ottomon Greatness, and is like still to add to his Triumphs;
and as an Historian observes in the like case of the ancient Britains, Dum
singuli pugnant universi vincuntur.

Remarkable then was the former Policy of these Western-Princes, when, with the
hazard of their Ease, and Lives, they maintained the power of Christendom in an
equal Balance, dexterously throwing their Arms into that Scale which appeared
lightest, knowing they secured thereby their own Peace, and Government: On this
account England, and France are thought to have wisely fomented the revault of
the Low Countries, and were, in effect, as fond, by that means, to lessen the
Grandeur of Spain (who then Alarmed Europe, as France does now) as if they
themselves had made new Conquests; hence it was that Philip the Second, by way
of requital, and our Elizabeth (to whose Ptudence, and Memory we owe our
remaining Glories) threw Oil, and not Water into the long Troubles of France;
with which Council the same Philip was so transported, judging it the best
expedient to improve his grand design of the Western-Monarchy) that to carry
the War into France he apparently (but not wisely) neglected his own Affairs in
the Low Countries; thereby spoiling a most sovereign Antidote by an
unseasonable application. Nor was the costly attempt of 88. any thing but
carrying Fire into an Enemies Kingdom, the better to extinguish the Flame made
by that Foe, in his Country; Kingdoms (like Houses, in a dreadful Fire) being
best secured by blowing up the next dangerous Neighbor: Hence the French are
supposed (by no Fools) to have been both the Midwife, and Nurse to our late
Scottish, and English Wars; begot the several costly Wars between us and
Holland. Conteind, and fostred the revaults both in Catelonia, and Portugal,
and of late assisted that King both with Men, and Money.

Cromwell, indeed, was an unparalled Sinner against this ancient King-craft,
when post-poning the general tranquillity to his own wretched Humor and
Interest, he assisted France, at such a time, that all the World judged her too
powerful for her Rival Spain, who then lay drooping under her own Wounds and
Follies, in relation, principally to the ill Conduct of her Treasure, which
alone will founder the strongest Empire; and had this Nation no other Crime to
charge on that ill man, (who, like the greatest Mortals, must, living or dead,
be exposed to the severest censure of the people) it were alone sufficient to
render him an impolitick and hateful person to all Generations: Whereas on the
contrary, we owe great Reverence to the Wisdom of His Majesty in espousing the
Triple Alliance, and entering generously into other Leagues in order to secure
the Peace of Christendom: But yet, I humbly conceive, it is not enough for a
cheap, sure, and lasting Peace, so long as the Balance remains so unequal
between the two great Pretenders; and France, through her Military Grandeur,
continues so Armed, Able, and daring to give perpetual Frights, and Alarums to
the whole Neighborhood; whereby Peace, through a just, and necessary Jealousy
becomes as costly as War itself, consuming those that are suspicious of her,
and the daily motions, and buzzings of her Armies oblige the Neighbors, with
Sword in Hand, to an Eternal Watchfulness, least unawares the blow be given;
which continual bendings inevitably must draw so many dreadful weaknesses on
the parties concerned, as must, at length, without a Miracle, improve both the
Designs, and Glories of that Prince, which is so obvious to all considering
Men, that some of his own Subjects have had the vanity of late, to boast even
in this Kingdom, what Charge their King would put us unto by marching his Army
(mighty, and in perpetual Pay) yearly near our Coasts, before really he would
attack us: and certainly great must the advantage be which France has now over
us (whereby in Estimate may be taken of our decay even in the midst of Peace)
if when the humor possesses that daring Monarch (whose Armies like Birds of
Prey are always on the Wing) to move toward us either in pretense, or reallity
(which by the event is only determinable) we must equip, at least our Fleet, at
six or seven hundred thousand Pounds Charge to prevent the mere fear of an
Invasion; and when we are wearied, and consumed by so many fruitless, yet
necessary Armings, and laid to slumber after so many false Alarums, who can but
easily foresee what dreadful Effects may ensue? wherefore I conclude with that
great States man Cicero, Pace suspecta tutius Bellum.

But suppose, that whilst the United Provinces, and Spain maintain their Posts,
we were able both to resist his Attempts, and bear the Expense, yet it is fearce
deniable, but if he devour those Countries by Peice-meals, and pluck up that
glorious Commonwealth by the Roots (which, without effectually Assistance,
infallibly he will) we must also receive a Law from him; for what can then keep
us, with the rest of Christendom from Subjection to that Crown? since we
already see the very clapings of his Wings beget Amazement: Join the Power, and
Riches of Holland to him, and all the known World must bow to his Scepter.

Again, should France attempt, and reduce us to severe Terms whilst our
Neighbors stand with their Arms across, it would only expedite their
Confusion, and draw on them a more certain Conquest.

I will not therefore doubt but as the Safeties of us and our Allies are
floating in one common bottom, and fortified by Mutual Interests, (the only
true Cement of Leagues) so our joint Designs, when once put into Action, will
be vigorously pushed on till the Balance of Christendom be reduced to its
proper Standard. And whereas it must be granted that no Conquests can Saciate,
Bonds tie, nor Leagues charm this great Pretender, whereby the Milky ways of
Peace may felicitate Europe, without the costly, and terrible Guards of Armies,
so long as the Odds remains so unequal, and this Mighty Hero (Armed and
Victorious) is able thus to affright the World, Hector his Neighbors, impose
upon the Weak, and on every feeble Pretense ransack their Countries without
revenge; nothing remains justifiable by the just Rules of Policy, but with the
joint Arms of all Parties concerned (which indeed is all Europe) attack this
Illustrious Man upon the very first just Provocation, and by dint of Sword
carry the War into his own Bosom; and from the Example of wise Princes, make
his Country at once both the Seat of War and Desolation; whereof the Romans in
the War of Carthage, are a puissant Instance; whereas on the contrary, the
States, and Princes of Europe, Italy especially, neglecting of late to Assault
the Turk powerfully before Candia, are now justly expecting him, with horror
and amazement, at their own doors: He that fights in his Enemies Country, does
in effect fight at his Enemies Cost, and when Peace is clapped up, leaves his
Enemy, for that Age, Poor, and Miserable, as we have, not long since, beheld in
poor Germany: The French K. therefore commonly makes himself the Assailant,
maintaining half his Wars at his Adversaries Charge, by fighting in their
Countries; where, if he receive a Blow, has his own unharrassed Kingdom either
to receive, or recruit him; and our Heroic Elizabeth (who knowing that Virtue
and Justice were the only Ligaments of her Peoples Love, governed her Affairs
with miraculous Wisdom and Huswifery, made her Payments sure to a Proverb, and
was accordingly adored) studied by all Arts imaginable to fight her Enemies on
their own Soil, whereby at once she imprinted thereon the terrible marks of
Desolation, and preserved her Country as proper Fuel wherewith on all occasions
to consume her Adversaries. Nor was her Sister Mary intentionally her inferior
in this particular, when the loss of Callice (which in her hand was so ready an
Inlet to assail either of the great Pretenders, as common Interest directed)
was supposed either to have occasioned, or hastened her Death. For this reason
all our Kings from the glorious Edward the Third, to Queen Mary, being 210
Years, with infinite care and cost, preserved Callice against all Comers, as a
Sacred Jewel of the Crown; however a sort of new Policy seems of late to have
been introduced. He that fights out of his Country, seldom ventures any thing
besides an Army; but he that is assaulted, and beat upon his own Dunghill,
commonly loses that with the Victory, or at least suffers ten thousand
Calamities, besides the usual terrors of Invasion: Whereof the Sweeds Descent
into Germany, by virtue of her King's Courage and Alliances (such as I drive
at) is a wonderful Example; wherein a puissant Emperor (armed and victorious
as France is now) was courageously set upon, and after a fierce War of sixteen
Years, and the death (as is supposed) of three hundred thousand Germans, torn
to pieces by so many eager Confederates, (whereof France was none of the small
ones) who by the deep Counsels of those mighty Oracles, Richelieu, and
Oxenstern (guided peradventure by a Divine hint) pursued this Method as the
likeliest way to chastise and humble that haughty Family, who otherwise,
possibly, would by piece-meals, or drowsy Peace, have swaggered, if not
subdued Europe. Let brave Princes for the common safety of Christendom, repeat
this Counsel on another Theater, the Scale may soon be turned, and France most
justly be chastis'd with her own terrible Scourge forty years after; otherwise
it must be a long, and unlucky War managed by France on the Soil of other
Princes to make her miserable so long as she enjoys Peace at home; allow her
that, and she may tug hard with Christendom; like Spain, who by virtue of the
Domestic Peace, contended, in effect, with all Europe for eighty years, and
put them shrewdly to their Trumps: Nothing more, then Peace at home, enables a
Prince to manage Wars abroad; he then that will humble his Enemy, must throw
Wild fire into his Bosom, carry the War into his Country, and strike home at
the Head, and Heart.

Nor are the ill Humors, which, peradventure, may be found in every Country,
the meanest Argument to excite an Invasive War; since poor Germany received the
deepest Wounds from his own Weapons, and France by her Arbitrary Government,
and Intolerable Impositions (to omit the natural fickleness of her People, the
oppressed Hughenots, and the lofty, and never dying Pretenses of the House of
Conde) has probably prepared combustable matter wherewith at any time to
consume herself, when once, especially her Neighbors, with powerful Arm, bring
Flames unto it, which otherwise (as we have there often seen within this thirty
years) is, in effect, as soon extinguished as begun.

Why then does Europe slumber, and meekly suffer such dangerous Clouds to
increase, and impend, till of themselves they break about their Ears? Our
common Safeties invocate our common Arms to assail this Lion in his Den, pare
his Claws at least, and abate his fierceness, and instead of expecting him in
ours, attack him vigorously in his own Country on the next just Provocation,
since nothing is more certain then that delays, and softness fortify the
Danger, and improve that, which, in Prudence, is now resistable, into a folly
to withstand: Slight distempers, at first despised, prove oftimes deadly;
whereas to meet with a Disease, e're it come to the Crisis, is a probable means
to ascertain the Cure, and Venienti occurrite Morbo may be as choice a Maxim in
Government, as Aphorism in Physic. Pax queritur bello was a shrewd Motto of a
bad Man, and ought, more justly, on this occasion, to be wrote in Capital
Letters on all the Confederate Standards of Europe: In fine, he that sees not
an absolute necessity of embracing speedily a Confederate War to abate the Edge
of this Illustrious Pretender, has either not duly weighed the Danger, has
some vile, and by-ends, Bedlam mad to introduce some Heresy, or is resolved to
truckle. Tanti Religio potuit suadere malorum.

I should tremble to sound a Trumpet to War (which is always accompanied with
fearful Circumstances) did I not from my Soul believe that a Supreme Peace,
like an incurable Gangreen, would create greater Calamities, and introduce both
a certain War, and the hazard of a total Subversion; for, if whilst we become
mere Spectators of our Neighbor's Losses, and Calamities, this Prince, either
by force, or subtilty improve his Dominions, we can expect no other favor but
the miserable satisfaction either to be last devoured, or shamefully imposed
upon; which sounds so dolefully in every freeborn Ear, that to prevent it,
nothing can be esteemed too dear; whereas a speedy Arming of all the
Confederates may not only repel, but force the Infection into his own Bowels,
and make him experimentally feel those Miseries, which, merely to aggrandize
his Name, and Kingdom, he has incompassonately brought on others; whereof I may
not doubt, when I consider how one of His Majesty's three Kingdoms by the
proper Virtue of her Kings (which were truly Heroic) and the slender help of
some one Confederate, has more then once made terrible Impressions in France,
and turned up even the Foundations of her Government; for which those brave
Princes will be eternally celebrated, whilst the Memory of the Sloathful, and
Voluptuous perish, who by forgeting their own, and their Nations Honor, have
taught their own, and future Ages to forget and dishonor them; so true is it,
that that Prince who Reigns without Honor, lives in Contempt, and Danger, and
has his Tomb, at last besmeared with Reproaches.

Men cannot be wanting for so honorable, and necessary a War, whilst these
three Kingdoms enjoy Peace at home; nor Money, (the Soul of War) if prudently
managed; since the Issue of such a War must, with the Divine Blessing, secure
the Subjects in their Beds, and establish such a Peace as may be a lasting
Happiness to the Christian World; they will therefore certainly tear open their
Breasts, and give the King their Hearts, and with them their Hands, and Purses,
whilst with Cato they esteem nothing too dear for the Peace of the
Commonwealth, according to the Dutch Motto, Defend us, and spend us.

And although we must not expect a cheap War, yet certainly it cannot be dearer
then a watchful, suspected, and languishing Peace; since if His Majesty
maintain; for his share, maintain 14 or 15 thousand Foot, and 4000 Horse, the
pay whereof will not exceed five hundred and thirty thousand Pounds per Annum,
nor go beyond a yearly Tax of 10 pence in the Pound; a Sum, which otherwise
(with much more) must be yearly spent in watching a seeming Friend that he
become not a real Enemy, and yet not be able to prevent it at last. Nor needs
this Treasure be exported in Specie, (which by all imaginable ways ought to be
avoided as part of our Lifeblood) but the value thereof transported in the
Growths, and Manifactures of England, (besides Clothes for the Soldiery) which
either His Majesty's Ministers may there expose to Sale, or our Confederates be
obliged to answer quarterly at a certain Rate; being assured the Sweeds
maintained that long War in Germany without drawing any Silver out of their
Dominions, but contrariwise enriched their Country with the choiceth Spoils of
their Enemies, as by woeful experience we have found the Scots wisely to
practice upon us.

I know it will be Objected, that we are in an untoward pickle to begin a War,
after so many hideous Calamities, grievous Impositions, and universal fall of
our Rents, occasioned by a thousand Follies; and why shall we throw off Peace a
moment sooner then we must needs loose her, seeing with the loss of her, our
Trade must be miserably interrupted?

To which I answer, That were the continuance of Peace, and Trade to be always
at our Option, and that probably, the power of no Neighbor could ever part us,
he were beyond the Cure of Hellibore that would propose War in their stead; but
seeing the Case is quite contrary, Peace, and Trade were better suspended for
some years, with probable hopes to enjoy them plentifully afterward, then
after a short enjoyment, to humor an unreasonable fondness, loose them and
freedom eternally. Not but that I am powerfully persuaded, that the very
commencement of such a War, may be so far from interrupting our Trade a moment,
that it may be, at once, the only means to enlarge ours, and beat the French
out of hers: Whereas we now plainly see, how during this present uncertain
Peace, she dilates her Commerce, and thrives on the Ocean; which with the very
first approaches of a Confederate War, must in all probability vanish; whilst
the Dutch and We have thereby so many advantages both to beat her out of Sea,
and increase our own Navigation and Traffic. This is certain, such a War
cannot prejudice us, by hindering our Trade with her; it being notoriously
known that our Commerce there, is, at once, mischievous to us, and strangely
advantageous to her, whether you respect the open, or clandestine Traffic:
First, in the Quantity, by the vast overbalance of her Commodities. And
Secondly, in the Quality of them; those which she receives from us, being such
as are necessary, and useful to her, and infinitely disadvantagious to us, as
our Wool, etc. whilst we import nothing thence but what we were a thousand
times better to be without; and such as if we consume them not, must, in
effect, perish on their hands, to the infinite prejudice of her King, and
People, as we know they now suffer by the Dutch late prohibition of Brandy,
Salt, etc. and which, to gratify our ill tutred Humors, and Appetites, subdue
our Rents, corrupt and impoverish our Nobility and Gentry, destroy our
Manufactures, and snatch the Bread out of the Mouths of our Artificers, and by
consequence increases our Poor, and render us the most vain and luxurious
Creatures in Europe.

And although I cannot magnify our present condition, and fitness for War, yet
certainly it is safer enterprising her abroad (as shaken as we are) with the
help of powerful Confederates (whose Shoulders may bear part of the burden)
whilst there remains fresh hopes of Victory, then slumber in a dangerous Peace,
till invincible Mischiefs awake us, our Neighbors subdued, our Trade expired,
War brought to our Doors by a triumphant Enemy heightened by Conduct, and
Successes, and Cockpit Law against us; hoping now by a reasonable Army, (such
as the Nation may maintain in Pay, and Courage) and the joint Force of
Confederates, to reduce the Scale, and confirm that Peace which thrice their
numbers, and treble Charge at another time cannot procure; and of all Evils the
least is always to be chosen.

If I be asked what Assurance can Princes have of Alliances, since all Ages
afford untoward Instances of foul play therein, to the Ruin, commonly of the
most sincere, and daring?

Not to distinguish between the dissimulation of the South, (where under the
Name of Prudence, and Circumspection, Falsehood, and Frauds are daily
reverenced) and the sincerity of the North, (where most of our Alliances are:)
Nor debate the difference between Leagues commenced by Revenge, Passion, or
some frivolous Capricio, (which are no sooner patched together then rend
asunder) and those led on by the exact Rules of common Safety and Government
(whose results are immortal) I answer, That honorable Leagues hold commonly
Inviolable until the several Fundamental Interests of the Confederates are
secured: Now it is almost impossible that any Princes true Interest can be
secured whilst France remains so Mighty, and Rampant: Let a League hold till
her swaggering Fit be over, her Nails pared, and she reduced to terms of
Modesty, and good Neighborhood, and then let the Allies fall off as they
please: I know in all Leagues of this nature, differences from several little
Interests have risen, how far it has been safe, or necessary to weaken the
common Enemy; wherein some have always been fiercer for a total Subversion then
others, as in the miserable Case of Germany, wherein nothing would satisfy the
Sweed, and French, but dividing the very Carcass of the Emperial Eagle, whilst
the rest of the Confederates were contented to cut off her Beak, and Tallants;
yet they all agreed in this, that she was to be reduced and weakened: But
suppose that Allies should prove false when once a War is commenced, what would
it do else but at once hasten the ruin of them all? And in the mean time
instruct the deserted Prince to yield to larger terms, out-bid the Apostates,
stoop to the Pretender, (who, as a generous Conqueror must pity such) and with
him, in revenge, set upon the perfidious, and make them eternally repent such
unworthiness, unless safe Counsels in the mean time present.

Again, it may be objected, that Peace ought to be preserved as long as may be,
in hopes that this busy, and dangerous Prince may expire e're his haughty
Designs are accomplished, and the Affairs of France fall thereby into the hands
of an Infant, or a lazy and effeminate Prince, (that is worse than a Child)
accompanied (as commonly) with corrupt, faithless, or factious Counselors, and
Flatterers, the Vermin of Court, and Plague, and Ruin of Crowns and Sceptets,
whereby (without the hazard of a War) her huffling, and prosperous condition
(as frequent examples tell us) may be rendered languishing enough.

I answer, That that which may be, may not be, and either this active Prince,
who is now but 32, may live (without a powerful Confederacy) to give Europe a
woeful conviction of the Folly of such lazy Counsel, or leave a Successor to
tread in his glorious Steps, till that be accomplished, which all but
Frenchmen ought to abhor, whatever their Religious Persuasions are; and what
wise man will expose, even his little private Affairs to such a Risque, when
safer Remedies are at hand.

If it be said, That in case our Neighbors think fit to invade us, we have
store of Sampsons to give them Warlike Entertainment, whereby we may defend our
own without concerning our selves in Affairs abroad.

I answer, First, This is clearly against the practice of our renowned
Ancesters, and of all wise States in all Ages, who have chosen to fight their
Enemies on an Enemies Soil at any rate, rather then suffer the Terrors and
Desolations of an Invasion, though the Enemy should have perished all on the
spot. Secondly, There is a Moral Impossibility to maintain England otherwise
then in a languid and frightful condition, were her Sampsons twice as many,
should France (whilst we slumber) reduce the Spanish, and United Provinces, and
annex the greater part of Germany to his Flourishing and Mighty Kingdom;
Acquisitions whereof he has too fair a Prospect. Thirdly, I dare affirm, that
nothing but invincible Necessity, or ill Counsel ever disposed a Prince to
receive an Enemy into his own Bowels instead of seeking him abroad, for which I
humbly offer these Reasons.

1. The Assailants both in their own, and their Enemies Opinion (which in War,
works mighty Effects) have commonly the Reputation of being the better Men,
merely because they have the courage to seek the Enemy at his own door. 2. The
Invador seldom ventures any thing besides an Army, which ten to one is
exceedingly strengthened (especially if his usage, or pay be good) by either
Malcontents in Church, or State, or Necessitous Persons, to whom Novelty is
welcome, and all Governments alike; a Reason which made Lycurgus fear to see a
Beggar, or a voluptuous Person, who rides Post to Poverty, dwell in Sparta. 3.
The assailed Prince, in case he has not a standing Army, and mighty Treasure,
is, by an Invasion cast into ten thousand straits in procuring Moneys, and
raising Men, when he should be fighting the Enemy, or securing the Country;
whilst the people instead of taking Sword in hand fly with their amazed
Families before the Enemy they know not where, cursing the Follies of the
Government which have undone them, whilst Invasions seldom leave other
Counselors but Fear and Revilings, whose Results are always wild and
preposterous. 4. If a Prince has not a Treasure of his own, he shall scarce
command the Purses of his Subjects upon an Invasion, when they are busier in
concealing their Money to supply their own wants in the day of Calamity, then
expend it in defense of the Public, which their fond hopes insinuate may
either be saved without it, or fears suggest is past recovery with it, as was
clearly seen in the loss of Constantinople, when taken by Mahomet the Great;
unless the Subject has an egregious Reverence for the Government, and Counsels
of the Prince, as the Results of his Justice, and Virtue, whereof the great
Queen Elizabeth in the attempt of 88 is a Glorious Instance. 5. Soldiers are
generally observed to be most warlike, and managable farthest from home, when
freed from the Cares and Addresses of Wives and Families. 6. The Prince
assailed had need stand right in the Opinion of his people in relation to his
Religion, Treasure, and Government; for if they (who in all Disasters will be
Judges in spite of Fate) have once lost all Sentiments of Veneration, and
Confidence of him through Mis-govovernment, they soon grow to despise and
naciate all his Actions, Distrust, and preindicate his Counsels, invocate the
Ghost of some glorious Ancestor, and are easily won by the next Comer. 7. The
Prince assailed does not only on a Battle or two venture his Country, wherein
if he be beaten, he is certainly Conquered, but if he subdue the Aggressors, he
has only their Carcasses to atone for the devastation of his Country (the
certain effect of Invasion, and next to a Conquest, the business of an Enemy)
which hastens Barbarity, and a certain Carelessness, and opens an easy way to
the next comer; as it fared with this Island in relation to the Danes, Saxons,
and Normans, whose Conquests and Pressures made way one for another; so true is
it, that Poverty weakens the hands, and intimedates the hearts of mankind, and
also renders Countries not worth keeping. 8. It Is the fundamental Interest of
Princes to keep the Balance even, which is not to be done without
Confederacies, and warring upon the growing and dangerous Monarch, it being
certain that Armies, Fleets, and Fortresses (though highly valuable in their
kind, and without which Kingdoms are defective) secure a Country not half so
safe, or cheap as parity of strength among Neighboring Princes. 9. A Prince,
who with his Sampsons intends only his own defense, without regard had of his
Neighbors Peace and Safety, may one day fall without the help or pity of his
Neighbors, as the Excellent Sir Philip Sidny observes, he that only stands on
his own Defense, stands on no Defense.
For these Reasons a Kingdom abounding with Sampson's ought therefore to
encounter the Philistines in the Philistines Country to prevent their marching
into Canaan; since every Prince, by the plain Rules of Discretion, ought rather
to humble the thriving Monarch by making his Country the Theater of War,
(whereon is acted nothing but Horrors, and fearful Representations) then see
his own even with Victory, a Field of Blood and Desolation

Lastly, If from the doubtful event of War it be alleged that Peace even on
any terms ought to be maintained.

I answer, That from the uncertainty of War there remains to us as much hopes
of success, as fear of miscarriage, but from a Supine Peace we have only a
certain assurance to be subdued at last, without the least rational hopes to
escape; for let France extend her Conquests and Tryumphs, whilst we bask and
wantonnize in Peace, and no imaginable softness and compliance of ours can
oblige her, till she has justly branded us with some hateful marks of
Subjection; this sort of Peace being like a Mercenary Woman, enchanting at
first, but ready enough at last to betray us to a thousand Mischiess, when once
her vile ends are accomplished: And the better to represent this Danger, we
must consider what inclinations France has to us, when during the late Dutch
inglorious attempt at Chatham (whereunto by our own nakedness and prostitution
they were invited, and by what else I know not) she was upon the point of
Invading us with a Royal Army, though Affairs seemed not then ripe for so high
an Attack; which if she had nevertheless performed, what dreadful Effects must
have ensued, I leave them to judge, who, (with my self) either saw our strange
Consternation upon the Attempt of a weak, yea and modest Enemy in June 1667, or
ever beheld a powerful Army in an Enemies Country; and although peradventue we
might have destroyed them, yet if they had stood but two months to an end, and
harrassed four or five Counties, it had been far less Charge to the Nation
(besides our dishonor and hazard of our Navy, and Naval Stores) to have born
the Expense of an Offensive War so many years together: Nor must we imagine
this haughty Design of France (where the easy Conquests of England, and her
drooping Condition is lately exhibited in print) is otherwise then wisely
deferred till she is become our Rival at Sea, and Flanders subdued; for both
which she now bids fairly, unless by some Potent Confederacy she be happily
prevented: And when in our weekly Audiences I read of the French Growth, and
Marine Preparations especially, (which our Glorious Queen though Friend enough
to Henry the Fourth, abhorred to suffer, knowing the consequence to be such
which by Experience we now find) and yet see the World inclined to slumber; I
cannot discern whether we are warned to a generous Resistance, or to prepare
our Necks for the Yoke: In the mean time the Ghost of that renowned Woman (who
yet loves her Country even in the shades of Death) reproves us for suffering
these French thus to increase at Sea; and from her profound Experience
recommends to us Justice, and Thrift in Public Treasure, (as the main Pillar
of the Government) and War in the great Pretenders Country; (as the best
Expedient to keep Peace at home) from which Rules the Prince that swerves must
end Ingloriously, and be content to be hard censured by Posterity; however out
of fear he may escape his own Generation.

FINIS.

