USURY At SIX per Cent. examined, AND Found unjustly charged by Sir Tho.
Culpepper, and J. C. with many Crimes and Oppressions, whereof it is altogether
innocent.

Wherein is showed, The necessity of retrenching our Luxury, and vain
consumption of Foreign Commodities, imported by English Money:

ALSO The reducing the Wages of Servants, Laborers, and Workmen of all sorts,
which raises the value of our Manufactures, 15. or 20. per Cent. dearer than
our Neighbors do afford them, by reason of their cheap Wages:

Wherein likewise is hinted, Some of the many mischiefs that will ensue upon
retrenching Usury;

HUMBLY Presented to the HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT Now Sitting.

By Thomas Manley, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe, and Thomas Daniel, and are to be sold by
Ambrose Isted, at the Golden Anchor over against St. D^^stans Church, in
Fleet Street, MDCLXIX.

The Preface.
I Have lately seen a Book, entitled, A Discourse showing the many advantages
that may accrue to this Nation, by the abatement of Usury; writ by the
Ingenious Sr. Thomas Culpepper: wherein if I were to be prevailed with by the
fineness of the Style, I must own, I could not stand out from being a Proselyte
to his opinion; but the tenderness I have for my Countries good, equal to his,
and I hope to any English man's, together with some Observations I may pretend
to have drawn from many dealings I have had in the world, not only in my own
private affairs, but something of public concerns, will not suffer me to yield
to his Arguments on that Subject; and if I commit a crime in opposing him, I
shall as freely, and as mode^ly as himself, put my self upon my Country for a
trial.

The lawfulness of Interest, and increase of money, I shall not at all enquire
into, but leave the scrupulous to the several Discourses made public on that
Subject. Only I shall say, that the hiring of money, for the quickening of
Trade and Commerce in the world, (seeing it cannot be borrowed for Gods sake)
is as necessary for the well being of mankind, as hiring of Land, or Houses;
the fair lender being no other than as a sure and ready casheer to the Farmer
and Trade, to supply their wants upon all emergencies.

And yet this terrible thing, Usury, especially at 6. per Cent. and upwards, is
charged with so many crimes and oppressions, that I have sometimes questioned
whether it may not be scandalous to become its Advocate, since the omitting of
every good, and committing of every evil, is attributed to it only: but justice
forbids sentence should be past, till the party accused be heard.

The charge of the late Dutch War cannot be grievous to us, through some
unhappiness, but 6. per Cent. must bear the reproach, and be sacrificed, that
the nocent may escape: this manner of reckoning resembles the old way of
Spend-thrifts, mis-use the principal, and then swear interest has undone them;
or like an unjust Judge, hang the small thieves, and let the great ones go
free. I wonder who ever thought that necessary interest rendered that War so
costly to us, till my Discourser by his own wonderful perspicuity found it
out; so quick-sighted is ill will to discern the more in his neighbors eye:
that that War was in it self chargeable, we all feel, as well as know; that
whether we, or the Dutch, were first weary in respect of the necessary charge
thereof, I enquire not after; but that 6. per Cent. did, or, at least, ought to
have made that War so costly to us, I utterly deny; and were it the Subject
of this Discourse, or an Argument becoming so obscure a person, I could,
without conjuring, lay the saddle on the right horse, and clearly evidence the
contrary, from the timely supply of money provided by the Parliament, for the
vigorous prosecution of that War; from his Majesty's Royal Revenue; from the
many and rich booties taken from the enemy; from our slow payments for
materials and wages, whereby money in all likelihood might have come into the
Treasury faster than it went out; from his Majesty's remarkable Navall stores
at the beginning of that War, the best that ever Prince had, whereby his
Majesty was enabled to set forth his first Summers Fleet, without any
considerable present money; from our gay and costly equipling our Ships, beyond
what the thrifty Dutch bestow on theirs; from our unfaithfulness, slow
dispatch, dear materials, great wages ashore, and victuals aboard, in which
last only, we spent in one Summers expedition of 30000. men, at least 40000. l.
more than the Dutch; and especially from our enormous practice of necessitating
Merchants, Tradesmen, etc. (who supply his Majesty's Navall stores in time of
War, to the value at least of four hundred thousand pounds per annum) to sell
their Bills at 20. nay 30. per Cent. loss to such Harpies, who can, I suppose,
get them paid by a mysterious trick, (else they were mad men to make a settled
trade on it) whereby it must infallibly follow, his Majesty must give 20. nay
30. per Cent. more than the market price, else no man would deal with his
Majesty's Officers therein, knowing the rates they must give to procure their
moneys. I say from these, and many more reasons, I could easily evidence both
how the Nation has been wearied with expenses, and how little Usury has, or
ought to have, contributed thereunto; for supposing his Majesty(notwithstanding
his most Royal revenue and great supplies) did at any time by reason of the
Pestilence, and slack payments of taxes, owe the Usurer six hundred thousand
pound at 6. per Cent. which in one year amounts unto 36000. l. and is 12000. l.
more than the Dutch paid at 4. per Cent. how inconsiderable a sum it to
render that War so grievous, as from thence to infer (as my Discourser does
loudly enough) that scarce any goodness of Ships, valor of Seamen, or
advantage of situation and ports, could countervail such odds.

But I suppose the plot was otherwise designed, and the unwary Reader was, in
courtesy, to have understood my Discourser in a far different sense, that the
vast disproportion (as he calls it) of our respective charges might appear,
else the large impeachment would have amounted to very little, as has been
already showed; for (says he) 3. to 6. and 4. to 8. bears the same analogy as
30. to 60. and 40. to 80. pray who knows not that? and what is this to the
sum total in the respective accounts? will the odds of 2. per Cent. in Usury
bear the same analogy as 30. to 60. in the Capital? Now the States (says he)
commanding money at 4. per Cent. could in building, rigging, etc. do that for
40. l. which cost his Majesty 80. l. designing thereby to surprise his Reader
into an imagination, as if the States by reason merely of low interest, did
perform as much in building, rigging, etc. for 40. l. as we did for 80. l. and
so by consequence spent in the whole management of that War, but just half as
much as we did, which had been an advantage with a witness; else what he means
by his analogy, or the Dutch doing that for 40. l. which cost us 80. l. I
cannot conceive; whereas indeed the odds was only in their borrowing 100. l. at
4. per Cent. for which we gave 6. and by the same proportion six hundred
thousand pounds for 24000. l. for which we paid 36000. l. whereby they saved
12000. l. as has been already confessed. And this is in truth all the vast
disproportion (as he phraseth it) in our respective charges, whereof (says he)
it is no marvel we were so weary, if we duly consider the (premised) reason:
and now; say ^, let any indifferent man judge, whether 6. per Cent. or some
body else, ought to be blamed in this particular.

If we dis-use the wearing our own manufactures, and run a whoring after
foreign inventions, destroy our timber to maintain our intemperance, and
through penury, or supineness, neglect to plant more; decline propagating fruit
trees, (where indeed we shall find no markets,) do not flood our grounds,
(where water, it may be, is not to be had;) or if we run into debt, though we
vainly or viciously squander vast sums in a night, and through a thousand
follies come to beggary, 6. per Cent. must be (forsooth) the author thereof.

If the French inhibit our manufactures, thereby at once to oblige their people
to live upon their own industry, and to suck from us our coin in exchange of
their wines, and trifles, which they know well enough we are too luxurious to
live without; if Spain and Portugal vent less of our manufactures; or if the
industrious Hollander hinder our markets of late, by bringing his manufactures
thither also; or if he be frugall, and content himself, and grow rich with the
gains of 7. or 8. per Cent. whilst 15. will not support our expensive Traders;
or if he be industrious in advancing manufactures, compelling both young and
old to work, whilst half our poor will be maintained by their neighbors, to
the infinite discouragement of industry, decline working above 3. or 4. days
in the week, when provisions are cheap, and many turn sturdy Vagabonds; or if
all Europe by custom, or making and obeying good Laws, work cheaper than we by
15 20.30. nay some of them Cent. per Cent. Usury at 6. per Cent. says my
Discourser, is the occasion of all these; though I desire the Reader to take
notice, that all Europe exceeds us in the rates of Usury, the State of Holland,
and some Commonwealths of Italy only excepted; and some or all of these are
unrestrained by their Laws, and at liberty to take as much for interest as they
can get.

Now if you will believe the Author of the foresaid Discourse, Usury at 3. or
4. per Cent may possibly make us sober, honest, and industrious, teach some of
our neighbors more manners than refuse our manufactures, and others not to
under-fell us, or disturb our markets, imp^ove our rents, double our yearly
fruit and productions, restore industry, employ our poor, prevent the fatal
destruction of our estates and timber, make the next War less costly, and set
in good order whatever at present is amiss.

But before we enter into a course of this Physic, it will be prudence
carefully to examine, whether this simple drugg of Usury, subdued, beat, and
pouned to 3. or 4. per Cent. may reasonably be thought to be able to produce
the promised effects; for though in desperate cases wise Patients may make use
of Mountebanks, yet they will not pin their reason and welfare upon the fancy
and opinion of every bold undertaker, when there is no necessity for it.

I shall here crave leave to take notice of another late Book, entitled, Brief
Observations concerning Trade, and interest of money, lately set forth by J. C.
and therein examine some few passages; having first acknowledged, that the
first 14. means, by which, as he alleadges, the Dutch have arrived to their
vast trade and riches, are most rational Observations; and do heartily wish,
that all or most of them were brought into practice here, especially that we
had a Law to naturallize all Forraigners, and indulge them in indifferent
matters of Religion, who should swear to be true to the Civil Government, and
renounce dependence upon all foreign power.

The particulars to be examined are,

1. Where interest is high, the people (says he) are poor, contemptible, and
without trade; and so on the contrary, where interest is low, the people rich,
and trade vigorous.

2. That the abatement of interest is the first and principal engine which
ought to be set on work for ballancing of trade, which his Majesty recommended
to this Parliament, at the opening of the last Session.

3. That since, or by the several abatements of interest, we have so increased
in riches, that now 2000. l. is esteemed no greater portion than 500. l. was
50. years ago, and a Knight now exceeds a Lord of those days in rich Cloth,
Plate, Jewels, etc. and that we have almost 100. Coaches now for one we had
then.

First, (says he) where interest is high, the people are poor and
contemptible, as Spain, Scotland, Ireland: what does he mean, because interest
is high, the people are poor? yes, his main endeavors are to prove this point.

Answ. Surely they are either in love with their own poverty, or else interest
would soon be subdued, if they could imagine any such thing; would Scotland,
etc. be long poor, when such a Law might make them rich? pray therefore ought
it to be alleged, that they are poor, and without trade, because interest is
high; or interest is high, because they are without trade, and poor?

Height of interest, where money is scarce, is no more the cause of poverty,
(though it does attend it commonly) than cheapness of provisions, and smallness
of wages, (which are frequently found in poor Countries) the cause of that
poverty; want of good situation, ports, money, and commerce, being the cause
thereof.

Low interest is both in nature and time subsequent to riches; and he that
says low Usury begets riches, takes the effect for the cause, the child for
the mother, and puts the cart before the horse: for certainly a Nation must be
rich before interest can naturally be low, else it seems to me they begin at
the wrong end; and he that maintains the contrary, opposes his own private
opinion against the general practice of all Europe; a famous instance whereof
we have in Holland, where riches do so abound, and many lenders, and few
borrowers, that interest has of it self sunk within this 40. years from 6. or
7. to 3. or 4. per Cent. even without a Law; which sufficiently proves low
interest to be the effect of riches, and this the effect of a well managed
trade; and should I say, the growing of grass is the cause of the Spring, and
not the effect, or the Sun approaches as the heat increases, which heat is
only consequent to the Suns approach, I should (I humbly conceive) speak as
properly, as those who say low interest is the cause of trade and riches; for
in truth, and in proper speaking, trade has not increased amongst the Dutch, as
interest has lessened; but interest has lessened, as trade and riches have
augmented; since they have nothing hinders their taking 20. per Cent. but their
vast riches, and prosperity: but here with us, and in all Countries where money
is scarce, how difficult is it to restrain interest within its legal bounds,
not occasioned, surely, so much through the rapine and severity of the lender,
as by reason of the scarcity of money, and multitude of borrowers; so ripe are
affairs with us to be wedded to higher interest, and so servent nature is to
have its course.

Besides, are not the people of Spain, and the natural Irish, ignominious,
lazy, proud, and accustomed to idleness? and yet is not Ireland greatly
improved by the industry of the late English Soldiery; (as himself confesses,
page 8.) and trade increased answerable to the vent? so that we see, it is the
people, not Usury, that makes a Country rich, or poor: though I confess I am
not for raising interest above the present rate, unless it would keep our money
at home, bring forth our hoarded treasure, prevent our excess, and luxury, and
keep us, for mere fear of the Usurer, within our proper bounds.

Again, Is not Scotland ill scited for trade, and has as few commodities, as
ports, the want of any of which is sufficient to baffle the most miraculous
industry? and here we see a Country, not Usury, makes the inhabitants poor and
needy,

Does not the Spaniard content himself to sit still, whilst others work for
him, bring him commodities for his back, and his belly, and in exchange get his
money by cleanly conveyance? here we see a people make a Country poor to will
subduing interest cure them of these follies, and mend the Site, Ports, and
Commodities, of Scotland? On the other hand, has abatement of Usury, or some
other sublime policies, obliged the French of late to set upon trade and
manufacture? J. C. dare not touch on that string, in regard that Nation has not
for many years altered interest from 7. per Cent. Does Italy or Holland owe
their trade and riches to the smallness of Usury, or to their innate frugality,
wonderful industry, many admirable arts and policies, which we want, fomented
by the fortunateness of their Scituations? Surely these have increased their
wealth, and made interest-low, as it were by a natural Law; but he that
attributes their riches to the former, shows his passion, and robs those
Nations of their proper virtues.

Secondly, That the abatement of interest is the first and principal Engine,
which ought to be set on work for ballancing trade, etc.

Having occasion throughout my whole Discourse, to examine whether interest
ought to be abated, or no, I shall not here insist upon it, only enquire at
present, whether some other matter ought not first and principally to be
regulated, in order to ballancing of trade; the which being not speedily done,
will le^ve no money to lend; and yet this is a trade which low interest for
some small time possibly might increase, but it is a trade that gnaws upon our
very bowels, and consumes our marrow; a trade that carries inevitable poverty
along with it, ruins our selves, and makes our neighbors rich, viz. the vain
and prodigious consumption of foreign commodities, which daily sucks our
treasure from us, whilst our native productions are of no estimation, and our
mechanics fit idle for want of employment, when in the mean time forraigners
inhabiting amongst us are the only workmen in vogue, and no commodity of any
value unless that, or the vender speak French, so that our industrious people
are oftentimes compelled to employ French, to sell English manufactures under
French terms.

Great are the numbers that daily come from Paris and Flanders, with Laces,
Ribbon, Gloves, Hats, Sizers, Fanns, Hair for Perriwigs, Jessemee, Persumes,
and what not, in defiance of good Laws to the contrary; all which are sold
sooner and better by these people, to our inconsiderate Gallants, (who regard
only the enjoying their own humors, else they would abhor all foreign
manufactures, for the pernicious consequence thereof) than our own traders can
sell half so much of the like English manufactures, and which is worse, the
product of these commodities is invested in our gold, and by slight of hand
conveyed abroad; just as the poor Spaniard is served: Nay, I have been
informed, that our Posts weekly bring out of Italy 7. or 800. l. worth of
Points, or needle-work'd Laces, the materials whereof not costing them 5. l.
which draws from us so great a sum, all the rest being only for art and
labor, whilst in the mean time our own people that can work those Laces,
(though happily not altogether so cheap) want employment.

Must we not come to inevitable ruin by consuming 7. or 800000. l. per annum
in French Wines, Salt, Linen, Silks, Stuffs, and unnecessary trifles, (which
our own mechanics could abundantly supply us with, would we content our selves
with our home commodities) much of all which are brought in by our proper coin,
(which being of greater value abroad, than at home, encourages the Merchant to
convey it away, wherein there is no hope of redress, until we raise the value
thereof from time to time, as our neighbors advance theirs, or else find some
other expedient) whilst liquors, and manufactures of our own Nation, which is
the only support of our rents and estates, lie on our hands.

Object. Yea but admit a stop upon foreign gayeties, good Wines, etc. we
should all turn mighty husbands, and become thrifty, (which Sr. Thomas says,
he is not in love with, when it is rendered so necessary) pray who shall
maintain his Majesty's Revenue; or if our foreign trade decay, what will
become of Navigation?

Answ. As for his Majesty's Revenue, pray whether is it better to save a
shilling, and give his Majesty a penny by Land Tax, Poll, or Subsidy, or spend
a shilling upon foreign superfluities, (which otherwise I can be well enough
without) that his Majesty's Customs may increase a penny: the great Marcus
Cato, by the report of Plutarch, thought any thing too dear, whereof he had no
need, though it cost but a farthing, and yet was very liberal to the
Commonwealth.

Again, I do not at all argue against unnecessary consumptions, but against
consumptions of foreign commodities, unless they be brought in by our native
growths, or manufactures: I say, (speaking as a man) it is no wrong to the
Commonwealth, if men of estates drink, drab, live profusely, and dye beggars,
as long as every penny comes to the natives, or whether families be new or
ancient; not but that I esteem all well-born men, whose manners are answerable,
yet it is all one to the public whether John at Noke or John at Styles be the
rich man, the mischief only is, when forraigners are the better for this
disorder, for that does insensibly ruin the Commonwealth. Whatever the first
resembles, the latter (I am sure) is like a broken vein that bleeds inwardly,
which if not timely stopped, brings inevitable death.

As for that other Objection, If foreign trade decay what shall become of
Navigation, which is our only security: I hope no man intends by a prudent ad
justing trade, to ruin trade, or by putting bars to our intemperance and
luxury, to destroy Navigation; only I would have our neighbors in our debt at
the foot of every account; which if we cannot, by reason of our excess in
foreign commodities, I dare avow it, it were better to fit still, and not
trade at all, but debauch, and riot it (if nothing else will serve the turn)
upon our own growths and manufactures, and bey that spend most pay most to his
Majesty's Revenue, to maintain a Fleet of War for our defense only, for by
that means we should at feast keep amongst us what already we enjoy, which it
seems is more than by our present trade we can do.

The third and last Argument of J. C. which I am to examine is, That since the
several abatements of interest, (he means, by the several abatements of
interest, or else he says nothing, for if it be only since, low Usury has no
share in it) (no more than Coffee had in the late Rebellion, about which time
that black Broth was first seen in England) we have so increased in riches,
that 2000. l. new is esteemed no greater portion than 500. l. 50 years ago, and
that a Knight now exceeds a Lord of those times in rich Clothes, Plate, etc.
and that we have almost 100. Coaches now for one we had then, etc.

Answ. Indeed our portions in the Southward parts are in a good measure
increased, but not so largely as is alleged by much, unless amongst the
traders: and for the North and West, I do appeal, whether the Gentry there, of
5. or 600. l. per annum, having five or six children, do now commonly give
above 6. or 700. l. portion with a daughter, being well informed, that a
Gentleman of the like estate, with as many children, gave 5. or 600. l. 40.
years ago: and I verily believe, they were as well able to give as large
portions then, as at this present, only it was not customary nor requisite, in
regard that 500 l. then at 8. per Cent. was almost equivalent to 700. l. at 6.
per Cent. for we may be confident, that as interest decreaseth, portions must
increase, or our Daughters must turn Chambermaids, or set up the laudable
trade; and this increase of portions, where the issue is numerous, shall hurt
our Gentry more, than ever subduing interest shall do them good any other way,
and has been already a great means of decaying estates and families.

As for the excess in our apparel and furniture, most certain it has
increased, and diffused it self like a contagion through all sorts and degrees
of men, especially in the Towns, and meaner sort of people, within these 20. or
30. years. And who knows not, that excess and riot has its fluxes and refluxes
in States and Kingdoms, as well as other vices and virtues too? and therefore
I may as truly say, that mere reducing interest has occasioned this delicacy
and excess, as that it has begot trade and commerce, or that Tenderden Steeple
caused Godwin Sands, or Hops brought heresy into England, because immediately
before the Reformation began here, that plant was first known amongst us, which
occasioned that jesting Proverb; whereas the very truth is, our excess and
luxury have been enlarging their dominion over us these many years, and they
have created trade, which has increased just so, and no otherwise, but as our
vanity has given it nourishment.

If our Exchange (as J. C. tells the world) has now many more rich Merchants
than what were 50. years ago, (though I am credibly informed there are now many
fewer than what were within these 20. or 30. years) they are, I am afraid, made
rich merely by the excess and vanity of our own people, who are but so much
poorer in the Country, where most certainly we want many of the rich men we
had 30 or 40. years ago; and where in stead of a very wealthy yeoman, we have
now a Knight or Gentleman plunged in debt: and thus what we gain in the City we
lose in the Country, whereas indeed nothing makes us properly rich, but what
we gain from the forraigner.

And upon this account needs must we have a trade (such an one as it is) to
make some men rich, and our Gentry change place with the Citizen, when we
yearly spend in French Wine about 20000. Tun, according to a late report made
to the Honorable House of Commons by the Farmers of the Customs; who, I
suppose, see not all the liquor that goes by their mill, or else made not an
exact report thereof; for I have been informed, (and I verily believe it) that
a far greater quantity is yearly imported; now 20000 Tun, reckoning 240.
gallons to the Tun, at 2. s. 8. d. the gallon, which is 8. d. the quart, the
allowed price (much more being daily paid, besides the new duty of 4. d. the
quart) amounts unto 640000 l.

Were the like computation made of Spanish Wines, Rhenish, the Wines of the
Islands, and the Levant, which far exceeds the former, and an account taken of
our Tobacco, (which I am willing to spare for the good of our own Plantations)
Coffee, and all the other new brought-over drinks, and a just enquiry made what
we spent annually therein 50. years ago, it may be easily judged, whether the
increase of debauchery and excess, or abatement of interest, has increased our
consumption herein: and be it so, as J. C. would fain have it, that Usnry
subdued brought on this thriving trade, (that is, fuddling) and by the like
farther reduction may increase it still, no doubt but we owe great thanks to
the promoters thereof; but if excess and luxury, without regard had to low
interest, trade, or riches, introduced this monstrous consumption, (as I
conceive all unprejudiced men will confess, since this excess has reduced
infinite numbers amongst us to the last farthing) and a becoming temperance
once again take pl^ce, must not the effect ce^se also, let Usury be what it
will: so that the quickness of trade has not been the effect of subduction of
interest, as all the patrons of this design, cunningly but unduely allege,
but the effect of our excess, and daily increase of our intemperance; unless
they durst say, that men, to the great improvement of trade, have been
imboldened to increase their expense and extravagancies, just as interest
lessened, and the fear of the Usurer taken away. And upon this account it was
well observed by a right worthy and judicious Kentish Baronet, with whom I have
had the honor to discourse this Article, that we might have a vast increase of
trade, and yet the Nation decrease in riches; that is, such a trade, begot by
an unreasonable expense of foreign, vain, and luxurious commodities, whilst
our own are neglected, as may easily be imagined to lead on a most certain
decay: and that our consumption of foreign growths and manufactures does
vastly exceed the exportation of our native commodities, I freely appeal to the
Farmers of his Majesty's Customs; and if so, our Coin must undoubtedly be
conveyed abroad to pay the debt, for debts must be paid, which let it be what
it will, we remain yearly so much the poorer, for all our braggs, imaginary
trade, and riches.

To conclude, if our Coaches, and gayities, excess, and luxury, be the
undoubted arguments of trade and riches, (as is alleged) what is the reason
of the general complaint of deadness and decay of trade, running into debt of
most, and poverty of all sorts and degrees of men, prodigious increase of our
Parish Poor, and failing of our native manufactures, so that infinite numbers
formerly maintained thereby, sit now in want and idleness. Let J. C. cajole the
world as he pleases, I shrewdly suspect it is with us in our excess and
delicacies, as some men report merrily of themselves, that when they have least
money, wear their best clothes, and appear finest; for surely our greatest
present trade is naught else but the vast consumption of foreign and luxurious
commodities, much whereof are imported by our proper Coin; so that if our
riches and trade must be measured by our finery, excess, large portions, etc.
J. C.'s Argument will hold, otherwise it is deceitful and hollow; and smells
strong of the honest Country fellow, who being newly come to Town, concludes
all men here rich that look big, and are fine.

And now I proceed to examine the most material passages in Sr. Thomas his
Discourse, with this protestation, that being in quest of the cause of the
debts of our Nobility and Gentry, the hinderance of improvements, and ingenious
projects, the destruction of our timber, the decay of our manufactures, and
obstruction of trade, I have endeavored (I hope, not like an ignorant
Constable, with Hue and Cry, seize upon all he finds, without distinction; nor
like one, who by virtue of his Office, revengeth himself upon the score of an
old grudge, but) like a downright and honest Physician, to discover what I
find upon apparent grounds to be the original cause thereof, without which
method, according to the rules of Physic, the cure would be uncertain: he that
will perfectly cure our hurts, must dress the weapon that gave the wounds, and
apply the remedy to the proper place; in pursuance whereof, my hope is to find
none so disingenious, or in love with a disease, (especially amongst men of
Honor, whose servant I am) as to be offended, when, for the good of the whole,
and in order to a cure, I have searched to the bottom, detected the nocent,
and let the innocent go free.

For what remains, I have this only to offer, that these Papers having been
conceived and formed near these fifteen months, and shaped as affairs then
stood, without full resolution to bring them to the birth, (supposing no Brat
of mine worthy of public view) the dextrous encouragement of some Friends has
played the Midwife, and prevailed with me at last to expose them, in this
juncture, to the wide World; with what deformities, I modestly submit to the
Verdict of my Country.

The Propositions laid down by Sr. Thomas Culpepper in his Discourse, and
examined and answered by the Author of this present Treatise.
1. IT will ( says Sir Thomas) supply his Majesty's present wants, even by a
Land Tax, (if better expedients be not offered) which both the Landlord and
Tenant may afford (once more) to admit, being eased and recompensed another
way; the Usurer (who could never yet be taxed to any purpose) in effect,
contributing equally with him. 1. 2. It will, in a short time, double, if not
trebble, the yearly fruit and product of our Lands, (the only solid Basis of
our wealth and trade) by enabling, encouraging, and even enforcing improvements
of all kinds: whereby we may afford to under-sell our neighbors, who now
under-soll us. 9. 3. It will revive our dying Manufactures, by making the stock
of it cheap, and the Market quick. 22. 4. It will plentifully relieve the poor,
by setting all our heads and hands on work; in the Countries for improvement of
Land, and in the Cities and Towns by the way of Manufacture and Trade. 34. 5.
It only can prevent the fatal destruction of our Timber. 40. 6. It will pay
the Debts of the whole Gentry, by timely sales, and yet leave them (one with
another) better Estates than now they have. 48. 7. It will make Money so easy
to be borrowed, that even the Lender must shortly pay the Broker and
Conveyancer. 1. By diminishing the number of Borrowers. 2. By clearing the
encumbrances of Borrowers. 3. By enlarging the security of Borrowers.
56. 8. It only can rebuild London, profitably as to the Builder, speedily as
to the public. 69. 9. And lastly, It will inviolably establish the Crown of
England. 1. By the advancement of all his Majesty's Revenues. 2. By the welfare
of all his Majesty's Subjects. 3. By making Land (which is in safe hands) the
over-ballancing Scale of wealth and power.
72. The Mischiefs summed up, which low Interest will bring. 77. A particular
Discourse concerning the raising the value of our Money, and making foreign
Coin as valuable here as it is abroad. 82.
His first Proposition examined and answered.
It (that is, reducing Usury)) will supply ( says Sir Thomas) his Majesty's
present wants, even by a Land Tax, if better expedients be not offered, which
both Landlord and Tenant may afford once more to admit, being eased and
recompensed another way, the Usurer (who could never yet be taxed to any
purpose) in effect contributing equally with him.
WEll then, a Tax we must have, be it only to dispose Authority to subdue
Interest: The question is, which way at present to raise moneys, so as may most
agree with equity, and conduce to the ease and benefit of the Commonwealth.

Many expedients are put into the balance by my worthy Discourser, and all
found too light, either in respect of time or mode, and at last he runs upon
the rock (as he terms it) of a Land Tax.

But can the Land bear it? yes, says he, provide him but a crew of
money-mongers, who may (in effect) contribute equally with the Land.

We may once more (cries he) endure the burden of a Land Tax, mitigate but the
grand pressure of Usury; that is, (being translated into English) those who are
actually in debt can pay one Tax more, in case one third of their growing
Interest were abated, thereby (it may be) gratifying one of them with the
abatement of 2. or 300. l. per annum, to eternity, out of an honest Creditors
purse, for the payment (possibly) of 200. l. to the public for a year. Is not
this robbing Peter to pay Paul, and cutting large thongs out of other men's
hides? a fine way of paying debts, and raising Taxes: no better expedient in
the world for men in debt; for be sure, if all the other fine things promised,
fail, one thing will hold, interest will be less'ned, and the Usurer will (in
effect, yea, and with a vengeance too) contribute equally with them: nay pray
reckon the poor man right, whatever your payments are; for to my knowledge he
shall (thus) pay fifteen times as much; and which is fifteen times worse, be
jeered to boot, by persuading him it is to do him good, even against his will,
as my Discourser has it in his Preface.

This is a witty way to rid us quickly of all Usurers, and send them hastily
into the other world.

And good reason, for they are (if you will wink and believe my Discourser) the
grand Excise-men of our Land and trade, a burden that makes the Land groan.
Pray not so eager. Who laid this Excise upon our Land or trade; the Usurer, or
Borrower? was it done by mere legerdemain of the Usurer? he swears he sought
not for the Gentleman or Trader, he had, something else to do with his money,
if they would have let him alone; for he is a Merchant himself, a Freeholder,
(Usury is not his calling, as Sr. Thomas in Drollery terms it) or an
industrious Tradesman, nay a Gentleman, (to save my Discourser the trouble of
making him one) and what would you have him do, let his neighbor sink, go to
prison, sell his goods to Lurchers at 20. per Cent. loss, break off the
marriage of a daughter, and for these kindnesses to his fellow-Gentleman,
fellow-Trader, etc. he is now by their Champion defied to his face, rewarded
with hard language, and terms of comparison, which no worthy borrower will
thank him for; and endeavors are used to defeat him of his Interest, yea and
(I think) of his principal too, by wishing he may not thrive in lending
thereof; because, forsooth, his betters do not thrive by the borrowing of it;
which peradventure, some of them never would, were money lent them gratis: thus
it commonly proves when men demand lent money: these sort of wishes (whereof
this is not the first I have, on this occasion, seen published within these
forty five years) seem to be of an odd and distempered nature, and have a
strange tang with them.

Object. Pray then why takes he so much Usury? is not 3. or 4. per Cent. enough
in all conscience? and what though the borrower by his industry and skill makes
20. or 30. per Cent. or winds himself out of trouble by the money; it is the
conduct of the man, not the money, that does the feat.

Answ. 1. This money the lender got by great industry, and kept it by him
useless these six months, and now his neighbor having urgent occasion for
such a sum, borrows it, when peradventure the lender within ten days after
might have got 15. l. by a bargain himself, in case he had kept his money by
him, and borrow suddenly he cannot; Or 2. this money is the whole livelihood of
a Widow, Orphan, etc. who lending it to a man that gains 15. per Cent. (for so
much I believe all traders do) is it not reasonable the lender should have at
least one half thereof, as well in respect of the hazard he runs, as of the
benefit the borrower makes; for as it is true, money of it self increases not,
without the conduct of the man, so the skill of the man, without the help of
the money, would signify little; as the lame man and blind man mutually
assisted one another. 3. Can any man repine at the giving 6. per Cent. when the
advantage thereby supports him and his all his days, and enables him to appear
in the world as a man of repute? 4. No man will keep money by him with
intentions to lend for so poor a praemium as 4. per Cent. which will hardly
reward the telling in and out, and make good the brass money; much less answer
the hazard of lending, which is so considerable in this deceitful age,
(wherein persons and estates bid defiance to our Laws at some seasons of the
year) that I persuade my self the Insurance-Office would demand above 30. s.
per 100. l. to secure the moneys lent on security in England. 5. and lastly,
Scarce any man in the whole Nation complains of 6. per Cent. but the Gentleman,
who of all mankind has the least reason; for were it not (generally speaking)
his own fault, he has the least occasion of any man to borrow; tradesmen must
borrow, and make advantage, but I am yet to learn what puts our Gentry upon
considerable borrowing, except such things I am not willing to record; since
not one in seven borrows to advance any laudable improvement.

There is another sort of men ( viz. Gentlemen not in debt) concerned in this
conditional Tax, who are not to expect present advantage by subduing Interest,
but are to solace themselves with an assurance of future improvement of their
inheritances in value, as certain as if it were in their purses, says my
Discourser; what stomachs these Gentlemen will have to swallow these
sweetbitter pills, compounded of a large Tax certain, and profit uncertain, I
refer to their midnight thoughts, and leave them casting about how they may
improve their Lands and Tenements, or raise a Farm (now) 100. l. per annum, to
at least 130. l. in the future, or when they have a mind to sell it, how they
may have 25. years purchase upon the improved Rent. These are fine things to
shorten a long winters night, when a man cannot sleep; but I am afraid they
cannot hit on it; both ends will not meet, and my worthy Discourser must be put
upon a new task; we must have a Book of new fashioned improvements, for our old
ways will hardly keep up our old Rents; and when we see the happy effects
thereof, the Author shall be to us Great Apollo.

But our happiness is, we have a third sort of Landlords, (which Sr. Thomas did
not please to think on) and I hope the one third of the Landlords in England,
at least in weight, who are so far from being in debt, that by a happy conduct
they are masters of considerable sums, and that upon Usury, (as he in
severity calls it:) Now to deal alike with the Landlord-lender, and
Landlord-borrower, in levying this imaginary Tax, is monstrous unequal; lay
the same. Tax upon the Land of a Gentleman-Usurer, (if Sr. Thomas will admit
the term) and sink one third of the income of his money, (which peradventure is
half his estate) is to undo him quite; and for the Landlord-borrower, to tax
his Land once more, and abate one third of his Usury, is (possibly) to
recompense him 10. or 15. fold at another man's charge, and allay (peradventure)
the violence of the disease for a while, but death lies at the door, and
without better remedies, on his part, then mere abating Usury at last enters,
and so two men are undone without saving either.

And this will be the consequence of our fine Tax, cunningly proposed to make
the intrigue of subduing Usury go down the glibber with some body; which I
humbly conceive were much better to keep up, and find out a way like that of a
Register, (so long and passionately desired) which at once might enable the
solvent Gentleman to borrow easily (which now he cannot do) on all occasions,
reasonably secure the money lent, affright men from running greatly into debt,
lest their nakedness appear, prevent ten thousand frauds, and as many
Lawsuits, dis-serve none but the insolvent and ill-minded men, and direct the
State upon all emergencies to lay impositions on it, equal to the Land-Taxes,
(if they must continue, as God forbid they should) whereby the burden thereof
may be greatly easy, and nothing done but what is agreeable to justice.

His second Proposition examined and answered.
That it will (says he) in a short time double, if not trebble the yearly
fruit and product of our Lands, (the only solid Basis of our wealth and trade)
by enabling, encouraging, and even enforcing improvements of all kinds, whereby
we may afford to undersell our Neighbors, who now under-sell us.
THat the improvements of our Lands, as far as the nature of them will permit,
and the capital charge secured, is (as Sr. Thomas well observes) the only
solid Basis of our wealth and trade, I think no man so mad as to deny: since
traffic that does not contribute thereunto, is but making our Neighbors rich,
and undoing our selves, as has been, I hope, fully remonstrated in the
Introduction to this Discourse.

The Question is, what compass we shall steer by to arrive at the Haven of
these imaginary improvements; whereby we might raise the productions of our
Lands to so great an increase and cheapness, that we might afford to under-sell
our Neighbors, who now under-sell us, and force the people of every Country
to throw their plow and wheel, and all industry into the fire since they can
buy Corn, Cloth, Fruit, Fish, Flesh, and what not, cheaper of us, than make or
provide them at their own homes: Why, says my Discourser, sink Interest,
that is his medicine for all maladies, to 3. or 4. per Cent. and it does the
feat I warrant you: for having nothing else to do with our money, we shall be
forced upon laudable improvements, we shall so dung and manure our Lands, (
like a late project we had to propagate 200 grains of wheat from one) corn
shall increase; to undersell Dantzick. Our Sheep must needs multiply, yea, and
magnify too, says my Discourser, through the richness of our pastures, that
our Grasier, and by consequence our Clothier, may afford cheap pennyworths. We
shall have fruit not worth gathering, fish to beat the Hollander out of his
markets; and for flesh, our thrifty neighbors shall not need (as now they do)
to feed upon Roots, Colworts, and red Herrings, we will sell them flesh better
cheap. Holstein, Juitland, and Germany too shall yield to our markets, for
Ireland shall be our nursery for Cattle, and we will sat them for the
slaughter. These are, I conceive, either expressly or implicitly contained in
this second Proposition, which before I come to examine, I must crave leave to
ask a few questions of my Discourser.

Does he really believe that height of Interest, and not dearness of wages,
which is almost the whole charge in improvements, hinders all laudable designs
and projects? if he do, he must maintain that 2. or 3. per Cent. in Usury must
hinder more (and that seems somewhat strange) than 15.20.30. per Cent. does in
labor and wages, for so much are we dearer therein than all forraigners, and
(which must be of most pernicious consequence) 12. or 16. per Cent. dearer than
our selves were within these 16. years.

Where is now the treasure of the Nation? lying idle? locked up in the misers
chests? if it be now at 6. per Cent. much more will it be at 3. or 4. If it be
now employed upon some good occasions, either by the owners or borrowers, (as I
think no man will deny, it being so scarce to be borrowed; or else it is carried
out of the Nation, both by the Merchant and some body else, and this I conceive
is truest) it can be but employed, reduce Usury to what you please, only the
borrower shall have 2. per Cent. more profit, which concerns not the
Commonwealth at all.

For the better examining this Proposition, we will enquire,

First, Whether subduing Interest will operate at home to those wonderful
degrees promised; that is, double, nay treble the yearly fruit and product of
our Lands, and secure the capital charge laid out upon them, whereby we shall
be enabled to under-sell our neighbors, who now under-sell us. And then,

Secondly, Whether it will oblige forraigners to fit still, and take their food
and raiment of our providing, granting it best cheap, whilst we get into our
hands all the wealth and navigation; for unless this be the consequence of our
increase, the mere increase it self would signify little.

1. Whether subduing Interest to 3. or 4. per Cent. will force our people upon
new improvements, the yearly fruit of our Lands shall be doubled, nay trebled
profitably to the imployer.

I wish it may: but I rather fear it will make him careless of his Coin, having
been used to greater profit, he will venture all to try conclusions, and so
between unskilfulness, discontent, and necessity, ruin one; I fear this will
be the consequence of forcing men upon business to which their education and
genius never led them: for if the pretended improvements fail, as most men of
judgment assure me they will, I am sure decay must follow.

But should I grant the design to prosper, and the fruit and product doubled
for a year or two, yet may be occupier have no cause to bragg of profit, when
he has summed up the charge and wages of men and cattle.

Land may be made to yield treble increase, and yet not answer the charge,
without reckoning much Usury. It Is well known most of the Lands in England are
either upon their best improvements, or our discreet Farmers are to seek in
their calling; unless I should grant (what in strictness is true) that Land is
of that nature as never to be at its full improvement, as long as the Occupier
will bestow yet greater charge upon it; and in this sense, every acre may be
made as good as the best Gatdens about London: but still the question remains,
how the improver shall be recompensed; nay I should judge the man ripe for
Bedlam that attempts it, though Interest were at 2. per Cent. the mending of
some Lands may be like the making a fine dish of meat of a Shooe-soal, where
other chargeable ingredients have the dominion, it will never quit cost: the
doubt is not so much whether Black Heath will answer Interest at 3. or 6. per
Cent. as whether it will honestly return the capital charge bestowed on it.
Could I accomplish that for 60. l. which now costs me 90. l. merely in respect
of dear wages, I should find other sort of encouragement than by abating of a
little Usury; for then, what might not be expected from industry thus armed?
for though the Interest of 60. l. at 6. per Cent. cost me as much as 90. l. at
4. per Cent. yet should I save 30. l. of the capital in the improvement or
project, whereby either the success would be then more gainful, or the
miscarriage not so fatal. And this is the advantage the forraigner has over
us.

It Is dear wages then, and not Usury, nor want of ingenuity, that makes projects
and improvements so unsuccessfull amongst us, whilst they thrive with our
neighbors, as a worthy and judicious Scotch Commander, well known in England,
and experienced in several foreign Countries, was pleased within these eight
months to observe to a near Relation of mine, alleging, that the dearness of
our wages, compared with other Nations, was alone sufficient to discourage all
improvements, and destroy manufactures; so that either we must have more
efficacious Laws to retrench wages, or else all industry must suddenly cease;
so vain is it to cut channels, as long as the fountain and springs are stopped
up.

And yet in this very thing of projects and industry, let me be excused, if I
prefer many forraigners before our selves, and do appeal to those who know the
fens in Lincolnshire, etc. whether the French, Dutch, and Walloons, inhabiting
those parts, do not manure those Lands with greater ingenuity, thrift, and
industry, and grow richer thereon, (number for number) than their English
neighbors, who through easiness content themselves with one crop in the year,
whilst the other by their industry make some greater advantage: besides, who
knows not that these Lands were gained principally by the skill and ingenuity
of these people.

What ways soever we take to pursue improvements, labor is almost the whole
charge: Pasture is to be mended either by Dung, Sea-Sand, Clover, Cinque-Foyle,
or the like; Tillage by Dung, Sand, Lime, Chalk, Marl, burning the Turf or
Stubble, etc. in most of which labor is the principal charge; now for any of
these, I would appeal to the impartial and industrious, whether the
consideration of 6. per Cent. be it their own, or borrowed of the Usurer, has
discouraged improvements, or whether they have not rather feared a cheap year,
want of vent, (as at this time) dear wages, and impairing the capital, and
thought of Interest, as Tradesmen do of paper and pack-thread.

Let Usury and industry be what you please, improvements so as to double the
yearly fruit are not so easily accomplished, as some men fondly imagine. It Is
the Philosophers Stone, and the dull Farmer cannot find it out: all his skill
can hardly raise the yearly product, to answer the rent he is now racked at,
though he pays not a penny Usury. I could name a witty man projectingly given,
that used to say the Farmers were fools, whilst he pursuing new ways of
husbandry after his own invention, employing many laborers, and teams at dear
rates, setting, planting, and sowing foreign seeds and commodities, (some of
the very same improvements my Discourser aims at) under the notion of
improvements; keeping his Corn, Cattle, Timber, etc. for imaginary markets, and
other wilful and conceited projects, wherein debauchery had no share, nor
Usury, (as far as I could learn) till the latter part of the day brought 1500.
l. per annum to a trifle.

Force or flatter men by 3. or 4. per Cent. upon such improvements, and we
shall have, no doubt, a rich world often.

As for improvements by Plantations, my Discourser is pleased to say, the
benefit thereof is scarce credible, and that the pasture (if trees stand not
too thick) is rather better, and that oft-times a planted acre yields more
profit (without charge) than many acres of the best tillage, and yet (which is
scarce credible) but that he says it) at the next line he affirms, we forfeit
this improvement, merely because it will not answer forbearance at 6. per Cent.
the truth whereof let us here examine, and judge of the rest as we find this.

To plant an acre of ground requires 140. trees, I mean Cherry-trees, being
ungrafted, (which is best) the cost at 4. d. per tree is 2. l. 6. s. 8. d. and
planting 6. s. Having planted them, you may use your ground either to gardening
or tillage, having respect not to come too near the tree or root with the plow,
keeping the roots from colds and heats, with muck or straw. The third year you
may graft them, which shall cost 2. s. still continuing tillage, with great
care of the roots; and thus you may do till the seventh or eighth year: this, I
think, is all the charge, besides the fences, in planting an acre of ground,
viz. 2. l. 14. s. 8. d. Indeed I have heard that some have given the ground
five or six years together, upon condition to garden it, and preserve the
trees, but then the Land is poor, and remote from some good Town, which in six
years at 6. s. the acre is 36. s. whereby my charge in this case is now become
4. l. 10. s. 8. d. After the sixth or seventh year I am sure to hire the
blossom of this acre for thirty or forty years, if it be well seited, and apt
to bear, for about 30. s. per annum, besides the Turf; and now let any one
judge if 6. per Cent. be the criminal, and if the hubub be not raised on a
doughty occasion.

But the complaint is prosecuted farther, according to the honest rule, accuse
lustily, and something will stick: Plantations are confined in effect to four
or five Counties, and there but thin, but if Usury were subdued would soon
become general: what, whether the soil or air be proper or no, or vent to be
had? what should we do with more than each County would spend? we should find
no great markets abroad for such trash, nor vent for our Pippins, though a
lasting and delicate fruit. Our Cherry ^^^^ations in Kent would soon be
destroyed but for the neighborhood of London, for when her mouth was stopped by
the late Contagion, that fruit was scarce worth gathering. However, we have
vast quantities of fruit in many parts of England, (where the soil and air by
experience are found proper) for our domestic occasions; and more we might
have, without reducing Usury, would our Gallants spend more of their time and
money upon laudable improvements in the Country, instead of wasting so much in
London: and that my Discourser may see how well one remote County is planted,
which plantations were certainly made when money was at 10. l. per Cent. I do
assure him that in June, July, and August, 1654. I bought about 1100. hogsheads
of old Cider within 15. or 16. miles compass of Plymouth, and surely that part
would have afforded at another season much more; since that, I have been
informed, one Parish, nine miles from Plymouth, wherein Sr. Francis Drake then
lived, has in a plentiful year yielded 800. hogsheads of that commodity: so
that here is great cry and little wool.

But should I grant (which I shall never do, till I have better evidence) that
were Interest at three or four per Cent, our yearly fruit and product would be
doubled, and the Capital maintained, which was employed to propagate this
increase, whereby we should be enabled to under-sell our neighbors, will it
therefore follow that the forraigner will sit with his arms acrosse, and take
his food (and raiment too) of our providing, whilst we get into our hands the
Wealth and Navigation of Europe: if this would have done it, I wish we had had
the experiment before the late Dutch War, it might have saved us Blood, and
Treasure to a wonder.

But in good earnest, shall we under-sell our neighbors? and will they long
endure it? by what rare arts shall we keep the knowledge of this hidden vein
from them? will not the cause of our underselling them be apparent enough? and
will not they, if that will do, take the same course, and shall not we then be
just where we were before such retrenchments? me thinks I see our neighbors
smile at us, whilst we, like children, winck and fancy our selves invisible.
Will the Hollander, who lives cheaper, in food and raiment, works cheaper,
sails cheaper, builds Ships cheaper, Navigates cheaper, and has a Noble for our
nine pence, be ever undersold in the same commodities they have in common with
us? shall we ever hope for such crops to oblige Holland and Dantzick to pull
down their Granaries? why then want we plentiful Markets abroad for our Corn
(for most certain, Markets we want) now wheat is not worth above 2. s. and 2.
s. 4. d. the Winchester bushel, in many parts of England? and though it is true,
we cannot afford to sell at that price, yet shall we at the Rents we sit at,
(which our alleged must be higher, when Usury is lower) and wages we pay
(though Usury were at three per Cent.) ever hope to have such crops, that we
might cheerfully afford to sell at that price? he that maintains this
proposition, is either highly confident of his own abilities, or of the
credulity of others.

The Dutch are not the men I take them for, if they let fall their Navigation,
and Manufactures, be worm'd out of Trade, give way to any Rival, and let their
people beg about their streets. A poor man must use miraculous industry to beat
a rich man out of Trade: has the French King lately spied out the secret of
Trade and Manufacture, and drives on Jehu-like, and will this new project of
our nip him in the bud? make him revoke his frequent edicts against our
Drapery, suffer his people to sit idle, eat our Bread, and wear our
Manufactures, merely in regard of cheapness? a good argument, I confess,
amongst the ignorant and brutish people, who see not a yard from them, to
discern the sad consequences of so great a folly: but wise men see farther, and
reasons of State, and Government are laid much deeper. If abating Usury will
really do these feats, I am for reducing it to what you please.

But if upon the whole matter, it will, bona fide, neither treble nor double
the yearly fruit and product of our Land, and secure the Capital, so as we may
under-sell our Neighbors, and defy all Interlopers; much less assure that our
Neighbors will sit still (without countermining, and fighting us at our own
wespon) whilst we thus imaginarily prosper, there is little reason to lose a
certainty for an uncertainty, quite ruin Trade and Farming (which are now bad
enough) by destroying the sure way of borrowing, which gives vigor to both,
discourage just partimony, take so great a sum out of the purses of sober and
provident people (surely this is not to make good the gentle robbery he
elsewhere speaks of) either to try hollow experiments, or merely to repair the
mistakes (at best) of other men; which I heartily fear, is, in effect to hazard
in many the fulfilling Pharaohs dream a second time, wherein the lean Kine eat
up the fat, and yet they themselves remained as poor as before.

His third Proposition examined and answered.
It will (says he) revive our dying Manufactures, by making the Stock of it
cheap, and Market quick.
THat the restoration and supportation of our decaying Manufactures would be
of infinite benefit to this Nation is on all hands acknowledged; the which
notwithstanding, runs by our own folly, (more ways then one) as well as by the
industry of our neighbors into daily decay: The numbers the sole Manufacture
of Wool has maintained is almost incredible, many whereof are now Parish
charges, either for real want of employment, their own demerit, or refusing to
work for such wages the imployer could afford them.

This decay has been creeping upon us many years by many apparent ways, viz.
the Dutch falling upon the same Manufacture to a great height, since the Peace
of Munster 1647.

The French, who formerly wore much of our Woollens, have wisely of late made
edicts against them (and which is sadder, convey now to us much of their Silk
and Woollen Manufactures, to our present reproach and furure ruin.) Our vent
into Spain and Portugal is greatly less'ned. So that in part or in whole we
have lost three principal Markets. Add to these our deserting our own Drapery,
fince the excessive wear of Silks, Chamlets, French Stufs, etc. And would the
Parliament be pleased to oblige the quick, as already they have done the dead,
to the constant wearing of English Cloth, and Stufs, I humbly conceive they
might thereby happily obtain their excellent design: For where vent fails,
Manufactures must decay, though the first materials be never so cheap,
otherwise I cannot see why we should have quick Markets for our Drapery, when
Wool was at twelve and four-10. d. a pound, as within these twelve years, and
want vent when it yields but 6. d. or 7. d. a pound, as now it does: Now if we
can neither afford our Wool at 7. d. the pound, nor yet find sufficient
Markets for our Drapery after that rate, I must leave it to any unbias'd man,
to judge how far abating Interest two per Cent. will mend the matter.

Yes, says my Discourser, reduce Usury to the same standard with our
neighbors, and we shall revive our dying Manufactures, to employ all our
heads, and hands, that no doubt but we shall under-sell them all, retrive our
loft Markets, weary the Dutch in their industry, make linen as cheap as French
or Flanders, vie with the Swede in his Iron Trade, and oblige them all to take
our Commodities, because they shall be cheaper then their own. All which
(without resembling them to Montebanks Bills, or the Devil shearing of Hogs) I
flatly deny, (but wish heartily the experiment might hold,) and refere the
Reader to this, and the precedent Chapter for satisfaction.

But granting Usury were now to be abated, to what neighbors standard would he
have it adjusted: to the French? no sure; they pay more then we; and yet who
knows not that the French paying seven per Cent., under-sell us
notwithstanding, in all manner of trifles, and Linen (which is one of our
great consumptions) at least twelve or fourteen per Cent. besides Freight, and
Custom: no marvel then the Shop is in our light, since we can buy it there,
almost as cheap as Flax and Weaving cost us at home, besides spinning; Nay the
very French who within these ten years wore mostly our Gloves, are themselves
fallen on this very Manufacture to that degree, that now they have in a manner
beat us out of the Hambourgs Trade as to that commodity, merely by
under-selling us therein, to a great proportion, being favored by their cheap
labor only: now to propose the abatement of two per Cent. in Usury as a
suitable remedy for this mischief, and to balance the odds in wages, which is
above twenty per Cent. is like propping up a falling house with Bull-rushes, or
the Ren pissing in the Ocean.

Surely then we need not be long in quest after that which gives the forraigner
this great advantage over us, since I believe we have as good mechanics, and
as lusty Laborers to dispatch work, as any of them; how can we then avow any
other reasons then cheapness of provisions, course diet, and worse drink,
parcimonious living and small wages, whereby, through a constant practice, most
forraigners do that for four pence, which our people will not willingly perform
for six pence: how thankful is a Barber at Paris for three solz; while one of
ours in London will hardly be content with six pence; and at Brussels a poor
man shall bless you more for the fourth part of a farthing (a coin not known
here) then a beggar in England for a penny.

Overvaluing our wages then, as has been already said, to maintain good eating
and drinking, is the capital reason that all forraigners under-sell us, and
ever will (till labor be cheaper;) and this we find true even amongst our
selves, where our Northen parts by reason of cheapness of victuals, course
diet, and small wages, can profitably under-sell our Southern parts ten or
fourteen in the hundred, though Interest be the same; our noble Workhouse in
Clerken-well is like to run a hazard of decay, merely because it cannot in
respect of dear wages, great sallaries to Overseers, and other incident
charges, which overswells the account (not reckoning Interest) afford its
Manufactures as cheap as the forraigner.

For example, he that borrows 100. l. at 16. l. 13. s. 4. d. per annum, and
hairs his workmen at ten pence a day may afford his commodities at the very
same rates, as he that borrows his money gratis, and gives twelve pence a day to
his workmen.

Now let him compare the rates of wages amongst us and our neighbors, nay
Amsterdam it self, and if he does not find us at least two pence in a shilling
(nay six pence more then some) which just answers Interest at 16. l. 13.4. d.
dearer then any of them, which must needs operate upon the rates of commodities
far more then subduing Interest can possibly remedy, I will give him leave to
charge six pence with what crimes he pleases. And when he or any man else
gives me a sufficient raeson why wages should be dearer within twenty or thirty
miles of London then in Holland, I will for ever hereafter hold my tongue.

Will our fuel and labor, which is the main charge of Iron, be ever as cheap
as in Swede-land, though we knew not what Interest meant? my Discourser can at
once acknowledge, that the Swede by undervaluing their Wood and work, can
afford Iron much cheaper then we, and yet fearing (I suppose) the Reader might
take the cheapness of theirr Wood and work to be the reason of the cheapness of
their Iron, (which if it be not, I wonder what is, since their Interest is
higher then ours,) can direct him to six per Cent. for imformation therein, who
knows no more then the man in the Moon. Is not this to direct the blind out of
the way; or at best, to send my neighbor on a slevesless errand?

The general conspiracy amongst Artificers and laborers is so apparent, that
within these twenty five years the wages of Joyners, Bricklayers, Carpenters,
etc. are increased, I mean within forty miles of London, (against all reason
and good government) from eighteen and twenty pence a day to 2. s. 6. d. and 3.
s. and mere Laborers from ten and twelve pence a day unto sixteen and twenty
pence, and this not since the dreadful fire of London only, but sometime
before.

A journey man Shoemaker has now in London (and proportionably in the
Country) fourteen pence for making that pair of Shoes, which within these
twelve years he made for ten pence, and within these thirty years for seven or
eight pence, as several Masters of that Trade assure me; and that their men
have but just so much the more to spend in tipple, and remain now poorer then
when their wages was less: the like complaint might be justly made of most
other sorts of Journey men; whilst in the mean time, wages of most Artificers
in Holland, or at least wise the gain made of their daily labor, have within
these douzen years, either by their own prudence to quicken the vent of their
commodities, knowing that light gain makes a heavy purse, or by some other
accident been less'ned above a fifth part.

Nor has the increase of wages amongst us been occasioned by quickness of
Trade, and want of hands (as some do suppose) which are indeed justifiable
reasons, but through an exacting humor, and evil disposition in our people
(like our Gravesend Watermen, who by some temporary, and mean pretenses of the
late Dutch war, have raised their ferry double to what it was, and finding the
sweet thereof keep it up still) that so they may live the better above their
station, and work so much the sewer days by how much the more they exact in
their wages, else I cannot suppose but that they should be so much the richer
by how much the more they have raised the value thereof; which that they are
not, I conceive may be justly maintained.

I know that want of employments, and very low wages are the common marks of a
poor nation, yet can I not well allow, when I look about me in our Southern
parts of England, that dear wages, and scarcity of people, willing to work, are
always the signs of a rich and thriving Commonwealth; because I know we have
thousands of people miserably poor, yet will not work on such moderate terms
the imployers can cheerfully afford them, nor honestly earne six pence, because
they fondly imagine their labor worth nine pence, and so sit idle, without
considering that something is better then nothing; nor are we without ten
thousand youths who are never taught to get a penny, except by some unlawful
gaming, to our great reproach: I confess indeed it were happy (as some allege)
that wages were dearer amongst us, and diet too; provided always the same
proceeded from quickness of Trade, that our whole stock of people might be duly
employed, and that the rates of our Manufactures would bear in foreign
Markets; otherwise the consequence thereof would be most pernicious.

And now whilst our mechanics (whose numbers are not lessned) thus frequently
raise the rates of their wages, Usury has been reduced, provisions grown
cheaper, vent for our Manufactures daily less'ned through the excessive wages
of our Artificers; and they with the whole Nation dwindle into greater poverty,
which sufficiently proves increase of wages to be a notorious prejudice to the
Commonwealth, not to be cured by subduction of Interest.

Yea, says my Discourser, reduce but Interest ( which like a Horse eats day
and night, says he, as if Rents of Houses and Lands did not the same thing)
and these people would work cheaper; for do we not see, says he, that at six
per Cent. our poor Artificers, and Tradesman ( though peradventure not one in
ten ever borrowed 25. l. on Interest, which at six per Cent. is but a penny a
day) without improvidence fail in great numbers. If he knows one provident man
undone by Usury, I am sorry for it: I hope it is only a hasty word broke out in
passion, and on calmer inquiry may be better informed the reasons of such
decay: sure I am I know many who now live well, and borrow, who might probably
sink, were they deprived of the means of borrowing; and ten Sots (nay twenty)
for one sober man that come to beggary; and hardly ever knew just Interest
only, without some worse tricks, undo any man, however fix per Cent. must bear
the reproach, and be used like my Ladies Dog upon an ill savor.

Sir Thomas becomes an Advocate for every man, rather then six per Cent. shall
escape, so sharp set is he in the quarrel; the poor Fisherman who never owed
above 20. l. on Usury, cannot neglect to catch Fish for a foreign Market or a
Frydays dinner, but six per Cent. sticks to his Boat like the Fish Remora, and
hinders his industry; the Dutch under-sell him abroad, and the Butcher at home;
it seems the Butcher is a happy man, he either has his flesh dog-cheap, or
borrows no money of the Usurer, else how he should under-sell the Fisherman,
who has all for his labor, I see not.

And should I now grant that our people were industrious, House-rents easy,
wages, and materials as cheap as amongst our Neighbors, and Usury as low as in
Holland, yet if our Merchants and Traders live at so great a rate as now they
do (one of ours worth two or 3000. l. spending more in diet and apparel in one
year then a Hollander of 50000. l.) how is it possible we should thrive on as
easy gains as those who spend so much less, and trade so much more?

Peradventure, now it may be replied that indeed we see dear wages, and
excessive living raises the value of our commodities above what our Neighbors
can afford them, the more reason we have to bring down Usury, that so we may
have the advantage of them by that means to balance the odds the other way.

Answer: 1. The difference is so great the other way between us and them, that
two or three per Cent in Usury will not at all mend the matter, and as good
never the whit as never the better.

2. If this way will do, all forraigners will take the same course, rather then
lose an inch of Trade.

3. Remove obstructions first from the source and Fountain, which is dear
wages, profuse living and the money Trade, and then open the Channel as
occasion shall serve.

4. And lastly, such respect must be had to abatement of Interest, that Trade
which (like the Sun) gives at once both life, and luster, be not totally
destroyed thereby; it being most certain that Trade must cease as soon as sure,
and speedy borrowing is obstructed, as will be proved in examining the seventh
Proposition: and if subduing Interest to four per Cent. do not destroy quick
borrowing, there is at present a strange hoarding up of money, when many men on
good security, and six per Cent. cannot borrow 2. or 300. l. in two months time.

So that, upon the whole matter, it is impossible to revive our dying
Manufactures, or make the stock, of it cheap, or Market quick, until first we
consume more of our own, and less of foreign Manufactures, spend nothing from
abroad, whereof we have the like at home, subdue our wages, retrench our
excess in diet and apparel, Traffic with the forraigner Ware for Ware, and
keep our money at home; as for abatement of Interest (the great Diana of my
Discourser) it may do like a chip in Pottage, or operate at best like those
vulgar Medicines prescribed by every good womnn for Ague and Toothach; do one
man no good, and another much mischief.

And now waving the main Argument of the lawfulness of Interest, let me ask my
Discourser a sober question or two: who shall judge what moderate benefit the
borrower may cheerfully afford the Lender? the Lender? that is unequal, Interest
may sway him: the Borrower? he is a party also: Besides it may be alleged (as a
great man has already done) that the same standard cannot serve indifferently
for the Gentleman and Trader, Sir. F. Bacon
whereby they may cheerfully afford the like premium: the Gentleman commonly
borrows with design to make no great advantage; the Trader has a lucrative
calling, shall he pay no more then the Gentleman?

After all, if my Discourser would have his Neighbor who is sober, and
provident (for none else are Lenders, nor all those neither) keep his money
constantly by him to accommodate the Gentleman, Merchant, Farmer, Artificer,
etc. for the quickening of Trade and Commerce, run hazards as great as an
East India voyage, disserve (it may be) his own occasions, go to Law to recover
his own, and often times lose it, let him by way of gratitude and requital,
willingly allow such liberal reward as the Lender, who runs all the risque, may
cheerfully afford to pleasure him in his extremity, without any indirect or
un-Gentleman-like dealing.

His fourth Proposition examined and answered.
It will (says he) plentifully relieve our poor, by setting all heads and
hands on work in the Countries, for improvement of Land; in the Cities and
Towns, by way of Manufacture and Trade.
ANd in good time, for we are heavily charged with them; but he that reads the
two precedent Chapters, will find little hopes to be eased by the ways
proposed, or that our Lands shall be upon any great improvements, and the
capital stock secured; and as little hopes to have our moneys and fruit of our
Lands put forth to Manufactures, whereby our idle hands shall be set on work,
as long as over-valuing our labor renders our commodities so much dearer than
those of our neighbors, who have been ever careful to prevent increase of
wages, knowing thereon only depends the cheap sale of their Manufactures.

And now, as I cannot but lament, with my worthy Discourser, on the one hand,
the inefficacy of some of our Laws concerning the poor, in not preventing,
rather than correcting enormities; so on the other hand, I cannot but blame the
maladministration of many good Laws we have in this particular: else what
means those swarms of lewd and idle persons, who prowl about in every part of
the Kingdom? or those gangs of Gypsies that appear amongst us at noonday?

My Discourser brings in the Beggar, saying, No man has hired him, but ask his
neighbor (who is more to be believed) and he will tell you, he always was a
lazy and lewd companion, and would not be hired: next he introduces the
Hedge-breakers, and Wood-stealers, alleging, The weather is cold, fuel dear,
and they know not how to earn a penny; but the truth is, they are idle, and
delight in those sort of practices, and to my knowledge some of them might earn
a groat honestly, whilst they are getting two pence by this lewd trade: then
comes in the Thief, to whom my Discourser allows the stale plea of misfortune,
which let him talk of, as he pleases, we know his greatest mis^ortunes are his
vices, and that he was first a wicked profuse person, and rather than dispose
himself to live suitable to his present condition, will venture a hanging.
Besides these (who are the vermin of the Commonwealth) we have housed poor,
who secretly relying on Parish-maintenance, as their main reserve, are too
proud to beg, too lazy to work, when it is either too hot or too cold, and will
choose their own time and wages, or you may do your work your self; but if you
have any charity to bestow, they are ready to receive it, and will spend it in
better bread and tipple than he that gave it, hating to pinch when they have
it, and when they have it not; and when sickness comes the Parish is sure to
hear of them.

Were our poor industrious and frugall, and wages reasonable, which, I fear,
will never be, until the abused crutch of Statute-maintenance be rescinded, or
better regulated, they could not want employment, though Usury were at 8. per
Cent. nor fall into extreme poverty, but by abundance of children, long
sickness, or the like, in which sense only they are God Almighty's poor; the
rest, which are three times the number, are of their own making; whereof I have
so many instances amongst my own neighbors, (how well the good husband lives
on the same (or worse) trade, which suffers the idle and drunken person to fall
into extreme poverty) that I am persuaded few men come into great poverty but
by their own idle, irregular, and wicked courses; as either by cramming all
immoderately into their bellies, or at once both losing their time, and
spending their moneys in Alehouses, gaming, drabbing etc. resolving (as some
of them have not stuck to say it) the Parish shall be their Hospital at last;
like young Heirs, whose extravagancies are too often fomented by assurance of
future estates; and so make an ill use of a well-intended Law; else it were not
easy to believe that rational creatures should pull poverty so wilfully on
them; as I am sure by woeful experience we in Kent generally find; and
particularly my own poor Parish, where, within these thirty five years, merely
in regard of idleness trusting to certain relief, we have increased for
maintenance of our poor from 6. or 7. l. per annum to above 100. l. The late
Royal Aid, which was so great a Tax, charging us yearly but with 89. l. 12. s.
8. d.

And now who can but admire, that whilst our poor are thus lazy, wastfull, and
disorderly, that the Dutch and Walloons, who for just an 100. years have
inhabited amongst us, and live under the same Laws, should notwithstanding by
some innate virtue, or peculiar rules of their own, preserve themselves in
their ancient simplicity, be so remarkably industrious, that to our great
benefit (as if God would bless every action of that wise and great Queen
Elizabeth, who settled these people amongst us, anno 1569. upon the barbarity of
the Duke of Alva in the Netherlands) every Town where they inhabit, as
Colchester, Canterbury, Sandwitch, Maidstone, Southampton, etc. are by their
industry and Manufactures made the trading and thriving places of the Nation,
and so regular and frugall in their living, that, as few are poor amongst them,
so I think it will be hard to produce one of those people begging at our doors;
much less do any of their poor come upon our Parishes for relief, and yet at
the same time they do contribute to maintain ours.

So that upon the whole matter, it is not subduction of Interest that can
relieve our poor, but the reduction of them to their former industry, wages,
and moderate way of living, that so they may be more cheerfully employed in
Town and Country, without turning charity into legal oppression.

His fifth Proposition examined and answered.
It only can (says he) prevent the fatal destruction of our Timber.
OUr Fathers could count one, two, and three, and some of them pay 10. per
Cent. for money, and had sons and daughters too to provide for, and yet
suffered thriving Timber to stand to its full growth, (which is all that can be
desired from the wisest and richest men) and thrive themselves by a happy
conduct: we, now Usury is at 6. per Cent. pluck up, even our thriving Timber by
the roots: was that preservation, and this devastation, in respect of high or
low Interest, or from a provident temper in the one, and destructive humor in
the other? Had my Discourser duly considered the different practice, he might
have made some question (though now he does not) whether many Gentlemen
encouraged by small Usury, would either suffer their thriving Timber to stand,
or plant new groves for posterity; nor can he well hope, that any thing, but
severe Laws, can make half the Nation wise in this particular. Our best Laws
for preserving Timber were exhibited, when prodigious plenty, and little use
thereof, seemed to defy all future scarcity, so immensely careful were our
Ancestors for its preservation: had this wisdom been improved in our Fathers
days, when, within these 50. or 60. years they began to build in a large
manner, and the same been prosecuted by us, by providing new Laws, as well for
propagation, as preservation, as our old Laws become scanty in their design,
through a general devastation, we might have had some millions of thriving
trees more than now we have, and thereby secured our posterity from the danger
approaching: Trees are like men, if we have not a young brood, death will soon
unpeople a Nation. It Is not plucking up, but not planting, that hurts the
public, and must end in her destruction, and a spirit of supineness, ill
steerage and penury, and not Usury, that hinders such excellent undertakings;
else I cannot imagine, why our best buildings, our greatest nurseries both for
fruit and timber, and generally all our improvements, should have been carried
on when money was at 8. or 10. per Cent. or dearer, and yet all run to ruin
and destruction now money is at 6. nor can I believe that 4. per Cent. can cure
us herein: and therefore to me it seems most absolutely needful, to lay all
men under a severe Law for propagating of timber, over and besides our present
Laws relating thereunto; a short model whereof I here offer to consideration.

That every Proprietor, etc. of 25. acres of Land, and so proportionably for a
greater or lesser quantity, be obliged to plant, either in one entire piece of
ground, or else dispersedly, at the option of the Planter, (his ground being
proper for it) once in every five years, 25. young Elm, Ash, Walnut, Chestnut,
and Oak especially, as is most agreeable to the soil, of the best and likeliest
for timber, and the same preserve, maintain, and supply from time to time, to
the intent the number of 25. trees may in every five years be nursed up on every
25. acres of Land; all which numbers shall be preserved until they be at least
ten inches diameter, unless in the mean time the top boughs decay, after which
the tree never prospers; nor shall the Oak be lop't or shrou'd at any time.

And in case the Planter shall think fit at any one time to set Acorns, or
Nuts, or plant so many trees as may answer the number to be planted in 10.15.
or greater number of years, it shall be accounted a compliance with the Law.
With such other farther directions, and provisoes, and under such inspections
and penalties as Authority shall think fit.

That this or the like course being duly observed, would bring mutual benefit
to the Commonwealth, and Planter, I refer my self to those, whose ingenuity and
public spirits have obliged to planting timber on proper soil: especially I
commend the Reader to the worthy John Rodds, Esquire, near Excester, who some
18. years ago sowed 30. acres of Land with Acorns, as a nursery for timber
only, and is now (I hope) assured (besides the great content of seeing his
labor prosper) that his grandchild may reap from thence some thousands of
pounds worth of timber. If this or some such course be not speedily taken,
farewell timber, trade, and security after an age or two; a miserable progress
wherein we have already made, and that only since Usury has been subdued, which
surely could not have been made worse, had money continued at 10. per Cent.
which strongly implies Usury not guilty therein.

I know not how well we are vers't in Arithmetic, (though my Discourser
concludes our knowledge great therein) but our skill, me thinks, appears very
little, to live beyond our estates, run into debt, and then cut down improving
timber to pay the reckoning; and which is almost as bad, either neglect, or not
be able, to plant more, without borrowing of the Usurer. Could men, either
before, or in their extravagancies, ruminate upon the worth of the Capital, as
my prudent Discourser does upon the consequence of Interest, or could we
practice that reasonable and easy rule in Economy, of cutting our coat
according to our cloth, I presume we should soon find our selves in a more
temperate and richer world, than so improvidently (as he alleadges) to strip
our estates to the last stick, either to pay debts, or marry our daughters.

And now admitting it prudence to preserve our Timber, until we had sufficient
nurseries of young Trees, I cannot see why we should so dreadfully apprehend
the sending to our neighbors, for Timber, now money is at six per Cent. and
yet admit (for so my Discourser does) we might fetch it from thence were money
at three or four per Cent. and build for most of Christendom, as the Hollander
does. Is it sending the principal abroad makes it so dangerous that it is a
question whether that, or London could best be spared? why that is the same
thing, whether we lose the Capital at three or six per Cent. or else my
Discourser has spun the third of his argument so fine my pur-blind reason
cannot discern it.

To conclude, I will ask but one question, whether height of Interest, or our
urgent occasions in point of building causes the destruction of our Timber. I
must not believe the augmenting of our Fleets, and Navigation falls in by
chance (like the cursed Instruments of Powder and Guns) or that the felling of
Timber to pay debts puts us daily upon building, but building puts us upon
felling of Timber, so that whether we be in debt or no, or Interest low or
high, our occasions must be supplied either at home or from abroad; if from
home, down goes Timber though Interest be subdued, if from abroad we must have
it what ever it cost.

So that upon the whole matter, it appears that our disorder, and ill conduct
has hurried us into debt, and our debts have at once put us upon felling our
thriving Timber, and into an incapacity of planting more; of which distempers
it is scarce imaginable, that subduction of Interest will ever cure us, as is
alleged; since nothing but our better conduct, and frugality can occasion
planting faster then plucking up, and thereby prevent the fatal destruction of
our Timber.

His sixth Proposition examined and answered.
It will pay (says he) the debts of the whole Gentry, and yet leave them (one
with another) better estates then now they have.
WHat improvident actions (besides the calamities of the late ill times) have
contracted great debts upon many of our Gentry, etc. is too apparent for any
one to cover with Fig Leaves. The cessation of Hospitality, the ruin of
Estates, etc. is not (as is insinuated) primarily to be charged upon
encumbrances of Estates (which seldom fall from the sky) but to ill conduct,
excess, supineness, and these other practices whereof we may justly be ashamed;
to these we truly owe our debts, and encumbrances, so much cried out upon, the
decay of Hospitality, the eclipse of honor, degenerating our blood, and
supplanting many of our noble and ancient Families: and sure I am, nothing more
argues a Nation ripe for destruction, then intemperance, corruption of manners,
and exorbitancy of expense in all degrees of men: now a receipt (whereof my
Discourser speaks) that would cure us, and secure the Nation would be worth
getting.

And no great pains, though Sir Thomas wincks and will not see it, but cries out
shame to Usury, and six per Cent. He that adjust's his expenses by the right
rule of Economy, may maintain a just Hospitality, and bid defiance to the
Usurer, and his Broker too; he that slights it, reduce Usury to what you
please, shall soon find himself in an uneasy condition.

Indeed I believe there are many worthy men that know the rule of frugality,
and approve; it but custom, emulation, the mode of the times, their own
generous easy or careless hearts render it impracticable, and therefore I
conceive, my Discourser, who is himself a wise and provident man, ought neither
to have furnished Gentlemen with arguments for their mistakes, nor put them
into so desperate an opinion of their condition as to insinuate, nay daringly
to maintain, that such who have once less'ned their Estates, (especially if
they have Families) can ever live within compass afterward; whereas the truth
is, he that has less'ned his Estate must better Husband the remains, according
to that sure rule of Seneca, quod cessat reditu, ex frugalitate suppletur, that
which becomes defective in our revenue is to be supplied by frugality and
thrift, or he may come to beggary at last.

But it seems to bode ill, that Sir Thomas who for frugality may be to others a
Pattern, should yet proclaim to the world he is not in love with thrift,
although it be so necessary to our subsistence; yet do I hope no prudent man
will be the less in love therewith, (I mean a necessary and just thrift,
without which we should have but few solvent men.) Thrift, who can live long
and happily without it? its actions are of a true temperature, it is the
cornerstone that keeps together the whole building; the safe boundary, beyond
which are precipieces and confusion; one of Cato's best revenues; a virtue near
Allied to liberality, and the head-spring thereof; for none without it can often
be bountiful.

And for the question my Discourser put in case parcimonie were admitted, what
shall become of his Majesty's revenue. etc. I refer the Reader to the Preface
for answer.

But that our debts may be paid without this sneaking frugality, hateful to
this generous age, Calias sobriety and good conduct, I recommend nothing else)
he is sure ((...) ^st) that reducing Interest will do the feat: a pretty way of
encouraging men to run into debt, under pretense of showing a way how to get
out again, and not a pin the worse: this is to touch pitch, and not be defiled:
the rich secret vein found out by J. C's own sagacity, and more fully
discovered by my worthy Friend and Discourser, for the consolation of all such
who cannot keep within compass: for, says he, he is confident, (and confidence
you know does much) he that has 600. l. per annum, and owes 3. or 4000. l. may
readily clear himself with the sale of 200. l. per annum, (nothing more sure)
and the remaining part, viz. 400. l. per annum, shall in a short time advance
to as much in real value and purchase, as the whole would have yielded before;
nothing more unlikely. Credat Judaeus appella, non ego: he that believes this,
may the next time swallow a Gudgeon.

If by real value, he means, the improvement of Rent, shall advance from 400.
l. to 600. l. per annum, I suppose every man's reason may abundantly satisfy
him to the contrary, besides what I have offered in the precedent Chapters: but
if by real value, he means an advancement of years in point of purchase, so
that 400. l. per annum shall upon subduction of Interest, sell for as much as
600. l. per annum will now yield; I conceive, examples in this kind are the
best arguments, and that which holds true at one time, and in one Country, may
rationally be supposed to hold true at another time, and in another Country:
thus experience may best reform notions, and practice sometimes regulate
demonstrations.

The Hollander then has found no such improvements of Land in purchase, upon
falling of Interest; for when money was at 6. or 7. per Cent. (as within these
35. years) Land there yielded 35. or 40. years purchase; and now Interest being
fallen to 3. or 4. per Cent. it sells for little or nothing more: where note,
that Land is so dear with them, in regard of their infinite stock of money,
smallness of their Country, and miraculous numbers of men, there being scarce
six feet square of Land for every inhabitant.

In France, where money is at 7. per Cent. those Lands te^m'd noble, as giving
titles of honor, etc. are worth 34. or 35. years purchase; and the vulgar or
ordinary Lands 25. years value, the revenue whereof answers but 4. per Cent.
the reason of which I shall not now enquire into, more than that Interest of
money exceeds the purchase of Land there, as by good reason it should, in
recompense of the hazard of lending; and also observe, there is no certain
method and proportion kept between Interest of money, and purchase of Land, but
that other local and peculiar reasons operate every where, more than the
consideration of high or low Interest, otherwise every man might conclude that
when money yields so much, Land must needs sell accordingly; which is the great
mistake these Gentlemen run upon: for have we our selves been any more than our
neighbors sensible of improvements of Land in purchase, proportionably to the
several retrenchments of Usury; which when it was at 10. per Cent. Land was
worth (as several discreet and aged persons inform me) 15. or 16. years
purchase: when money was at 8. per Cent. (within which time we were in the
greatest prosperity this Nation ever yet enjoyed, Gold being equally plentiful
to Silver, and both greatly abounding) Land yielded but 17. or 18. years
purchase, and not frequently 20. unless from the consideration of situation,
timber, or some great convenience; but never did pretend to rise in the least
upon the reduction of Interest to 6. per Cent. which by my Discourser's and J.
C's rule should have started to 24. or 25. years purchase: but as we have
declined in our prosperity since, and our treasure wasted, and conveyed abroad,
to pay the debt made yearly by ^ur unhappy expense of foreign growths and
Manufactures, ^ver and besides our native commodities exported, and a
su^cession of Taxes great and heavy, like the waves of the sea, and our
Landlords in debt, and many borrowers, and few ^^nders, Land is fallen to 16.
or 17. years purchase, where it is ^^kely to continue for ought I see, (though
interest were re^^c'd) till we have more money, and fewer borrowers, and ^^ss
Land to sell; for if subduing Interest would have done the ^^sired feat, it is
strange to me, that falling from 10. to 6. per ^ent. which is almost one half,
should not appear ere now so ^^sibly, as to stop the mouths of all gainsayers.

But should I grant that we have received adv^ntage, by bringing Interest from
10. to 8. and again from 8. to 6. per Cent. (which solemnly I cannot app^ehend,
viis and modis) (...) therefore follow that reducing it to 3. or 4. will be yet
greater, and f^rther ^dvantage to us: this is but ill arguing from one extreme
to another, since too much severity in a Law may do much more hurt on the one
hand, then good on the other; like an indiscreet School-ma^^er that with
immoderate whipping slupesies that boy which otherwise might have been docile
enough, or like an unskilful Gardener, who instead of pruning the Tree, lops
off all the fruitful branches; moderate heat makes the sweetest m^ult; excess
commonly does advantage a few, and hurts the generality: a Law is most grateful
when it suits with the several Interests, and greatest concerns of the people,
seasonable to the time and concurring circumstances; otherwise it will succeed
no better then with the Ass in the I able under her several burdens of Salt
and Wool, were our ladings and concerns all alike, and had we no body to
provide for but the borrowing Gentlemen, the dispute might easily be
reconciled; but the lending Gentlemen, the Widows, Orphans, and impotent
persons are too great a number not at all to be regarded; And Trade especially,
which is the great concern of the Nation, must likewise be secured, which
certainly cannot be by lessning Interest to a trifle, in regard the hopes of
sure borowing will be utterly lost; unless we were (as they are in Holland)
better provided, that so by the Law of plenty we might be sure always to be
readily supplied: Sir F. Bacon conceived, and rightly, that the Usurer would
sooner descend from ten to eight in the hundred then give over his Trade, and
go from certain gain to gains of hazard; for, says he, where the abatement is
but small (and the reward tolerable) it will no whit discourage the Lender;
which is a full concession, that where the abatement is great, and the reward
mean (at four per Cent.) it will altogether destroy borrowing. Three or four
per Cent. will certainly do as much hurt as peradventure some imagine six or
eight has done good, or ten per Cent. mischief; for as at ten few would borrow,
but upon sure and urgent occasions (and yet so far I believe it did good, by
keeping some sort of men in awe) so none will lend at three or four but upon
some other special consideration, whereby all Commerce must necessarily decay,
and Trade (to the infinite loss of the Nation) ingros't by a few who have
prodigious sums at command, to the excluding of all small-stock'd Traders, and
young beginners with little money t thus Trade would slyly and cunningly be
betrayed into the hands of a few, by a fawning salutation and a kiss: this is
so to order matters, that craft might suck the breasts of industry with a
witness; and draw more milk from thence in one day, then a Son of idleness gets
thence in seven years; like an old Cat, which laps more milk then half a douzen
young kits.

It Is a pretty and almost contradictory observation of my Discourser in his
Preface, that the Junto at Westminster, anno 1652. did at once reduce Interest
from eight to six per Cent. with intent (says he) which I do not allow for
granted, to bring it yet lower, and yet designed no good to the Landlord
thereby: it seems (even by his own confession) they conceived reducing Usury to
three or four per Cent. would not double, much less treble the real value, and
purchase of Land, for if they had I verily believe they would never have done
it; since it had, been enough to have restored the ruined Fortunes of our
Nobles and Gentry, which, as things then stood, I suppose that power had reason
to have suppressed; and nursed up a new Brood.

But I am about to believe the matter is not much, whether I and rise or no, or
Trade be ingros't by a few; if Interest down (which was, is, and ever will be
grievous to needless borrowers) we that pay a 100. and 20. per annum to the
Usurer, shall then be sure to pay for the same principal, but 60. or at most
80. l. per annum, and that is gain enough, considering how easily we shall
obtain it; and if we keep our Lands, the Rents will answer more then Interest
and Taxes too: thus might we sleep as sweetly in debt as on Bed of Down: This
is in truth one of the main things in Prospect and hidden vein, not so much
found out as managed by admirable Sagacity as well by the crafty as by the
borrowing men, under the title (I love them so welll, I am sorry the project
will not answer the expression) of the greatest blessing to King, and Kingdom.

And now, perceiving my Discourser is for selling, and being out of debt, I
must acknowledge it the best Proposition in his Book, and not run hazards by
Tenants, pay Taxes of all sorts for what is really none of his, and be a sort
of Bailey to the savage Usurer; for if Interest were at four per Cent. a
Gentleman that should lie long, and greatly in debt, should scarcely thrive
either in Estate or credit: And let me presume to give him this advice:
(because I both honor and pity all worthy persons, whose generosity, good
nature, or misfortunes have cast behind hand) that when he is once out of debt,
he strive by all possible means to live within compass of whatsoever remains,
(let my Discourser say what he please to the contrary) lest a worse thing
happen unto him; whilst in the mean time six per Cent. or three per Cent. or
any body else, who lives regularly, and within his tether, shall in conclusion
appear to be the wiseman.

So that, upon the whole matter, nothing can pay the debts of our Gentry, but
timely sales and better conduct; which infallibly shall without the severity of
a Law invest their next heirs into better estates then now they have: And for
our Lands, if we would have a greater value put upon them in point of purchase,
the only way is to keep out of debt; that so a farm may not be purchasable in
twelve months time, and then not out of necessity, but at the Option of the
Vendor; for nothing is more true then that the scarcity of a good commodity
puts an estimation and price upon it, which, by the rule of contraries, is the
main reason our Lands are at this day so undervalued.

His seventh Proposition examined and answered.
It will make Moneys (says he) so easy to be borrowed, that even the Lender
must shortly pay the Broker and Conveyancer. 1. By diminishing the number of
Borrowers. 2. By clearing the encumbrances of Borrowers. 3. By enlarging the
security of Borrowers.

IN the fourth Chapter it was alleged, subduing Interest would set all heads
and hands awork upon improvements, Trade, etc. and in this, he supposes there
will be few Lenders at the rate proposed: how moneys now will be so easy to be
borrowed that even the Lender (contrary to the custom of all Contracts, wherein
the Hirer and purchaser bears all charges) shall pay the Broker and
Conveyancer, will be worth the knowledge of such who delight even in the most
abstruse speculations.

Why, if you will please to believe my Discourser, subduing Usury ('it is even
pity it were not reduced to a Welch-man's button, rather then hinder so many
good things) shall so increase our Trade, that in spite of the world we shall
so undersell our Neighbors, that all mankind shall buy of us, and we will
vent more then bring back to consume, and the balance of our Trade shall be
answered by the importation of Bullion, and then we shall tumble in money;
which I confess I heartily wish to see.

This Trade (says he) must needs make our Lands highly improve both in annual
profits and purchase. Borrowers (says he) will be few, either no man (say I)
will be so mad as to lend at that premium, or we shall be so rich, wise, and
industrious, no man I warrant you will be so vain as run into debt, live beyond
his bounds, drink, drab, or dice. Exigents (says he) will be fewer; we shall
so guide our affairs (say I) that we need not to fear surprises, our conduct
hitherto has been so remarkable. Debtors (says he) will pay all they owe,
Mortgages, Statutes (with all their cursed gang) shall be canceled; though
debtors, it may be (say I) are not worth half they owe. Debtors (says he)
shall no more cosen their Creditors; the world will no doubt (say I) grow
honest, when the premium is so reasonable, it is pity to deceive the Usurer: And
who can tell, but high Interest, which is no better then Injustice and
oppression (as my Discourser has it) though the Law tolerate it, be the secret
reason why so many debtors defeat their creditors, since to deceive the unjust
and injurious is no deceit, or may at worst pass for a Doctrine of probability.

A golden age no doubt: pray God these goodly promises prove not like
Mountebanks Bills. Had my Discourser been of Counsel against eight per Cent. no
doubt but we should have had all these fair advantages promised upon reducing
Interest unto six per Cent. and yet who can justly maintain we received any,
except those who were at that time actually in debt.

Land it did not improve, either in rent or purchase; as has been already
showed; Manufactures it did not revive or advance, but they have certainly
decayed since; and Trade (I mean a right stated Trade) it has not quicken't,
for that was more vigorous thirty years ago then now.

Much less has subduing Interest prevented our Gentry from running into debt,
but rather encouraged them to be bold therein; since the sharp tooth of Usury
has been filled out.

The fear of a loath some disease rather then virtue, may deter some men from
vicious practices: I dare avow that since Interest became so tame, we have two
Gentlemen now in debt, for one that was before; many of whom have borrowed and
squandered away the principal, judging six per Cent. could do them no great
hurt; and it is this number of borrowers, and no other reason else, which has
prepared the matter in England for an abatement of Interest, J. C. would have
us wink and fancy something else; but tell us he will not: Interest at eight
and ten per Cent. was a formidable beast, and none durst play with it; few then
lay soaking deeply in debt, unless the Trader who made greater profit, or the
thriving purchaser, to answer the later part of a payment.

And now admitting Usury reduced (as God forbid but it should, would it produce
the promised felicities; and God forbid that it should, if it be only to
repair the errors of other men) in which sense it can never be welcome to our
men of honor though in debt) since it is only to rob Peter to pay Paul, and
as bad as stealing Sheep, and giving the Trotters to the poor for Gods-sake,
(as the Spaniards speak) will it therefore follow that most men will be
desirous to borrow, be it to squander, Trade, or improve; and will it therefore
be that because many will desire to borrow, and few inalyn'd to lend (as my
Discourser himself supposes) but almost all will be employing their own money
upon some laudable improvement, that money will be so easily borrowed as is
alleged.

Sir Francis Bacon says, [in his Essaies,] it is a vanity to conceive that
there would be borrowing without profit, that is a proportionable reward for
the disservice the Lender often times gives himself, and hazard he runs. It is
impossible to conceive (says the same great man, whom all the world knows was
no Usurer) the number of inconveniences that will ensue, if borrowing were
cramped (which if it would not be at three or four per Cent. cut off its legs
the next bout) there must be therefore, says he, encouragement proposed that
monyed men may be invited to lend to the Merchant, Farmer, etc. for the
continuing, and quickening of Trade and industry. Now my Discourser (far
different from this great Oracle of reason) argues, as if he meant to husse the
Usurer out of his Interest; the Usurer says, rather then venture at three or
four per Cent. he will keep his money, and once in a year get more by lurching,
(for that will be the Trade I dare prophecy, when sure borrowing is
ham-string'd) my Discourser tells him it is a Bugbear, and scar-Crow, and that
he fears it not, and that he will lend and pay the Broker and Conveyancer too;
(else the next time I can tell him; he is like to have the sin of Onan laid to
his charge) and if he be not so contented, my Discourser hopes he may in time
come to lend (even the rich) in pure charity, and thus Hectors the poor man out
of his Interest, as the borrower too often defrauds him of his principle.

Again, Interest thus lessned, I believe few will sit down so contented, having
been used to greater profit, but will rush upon several projects and
undertakings, which for want of due skill to manage may probably redown'd to
the equal hurt both of themselves and Commonwealth; whilst in the mean time
it may be justly feared experienced men in Trade and Tillage may miscarry in
their well-stated affairs for want of money, which before such abatement they
might liberally have taken up at a days warning; for as the great Sir Francis
Bacon (in his Essaies) wisely observes, were it not for this (sure and) easy
way, borrowing upon Interest (which then was ten per Cent.) men's necessities
would draw upon them a most sudden undoing, in that they would be forced to
sell their means (be it Land or Goods) far underfoot; the greatest part of
Trade being driven by young men with hired money, and so whereas Usury does but
gnaw upon them (and that but gently now at six per Cent.) bad Markets would
swallow them up; judging it better to give 5. l. for the loan of 100. l. for
six months, and stay the season for the best Markets, then sell their concerns
at twenty per Cent. loss to these Lurchers that will lie at catch to take such
advantages, (this is to such the breasts of industry till blood come) which
will certainly appear more visible then than now, if you put a general stop and
dryness upon borrowing; to avoy'd which I am sure my Merchant, Farmer, or
Artificer, will with all his heart give after the rate of six per Cent. for
three or six months, and pay both Broker and Conveyancer too, what ever my
Discourser can allege to the contrary.

And now I will present the, Reader with an Objection made by my Discourser,
and his courteous answer thereunto.

Object. But what will become of Widows, Orphans, and other impotent person
(and I may add younger Brothers and Sisters brought up to nothing, who are a
vast number in the Nation, who want judgment, or faculty to Trade or purchase.

His answer is, There are likewise Widows, etc. that have Lands, who betwixt
the fall and loss of Rent, and deduction of Taxes do now suffer more (I fear)
in proportion (what then sinking one third of the Interest of moneyed Widows,
etc.) and yet who ever dreamed of providing for them: and thus are they
answered with a short and comfortless question. But pray whose fault was it
that those poor Landed Widows, etc. were no more considered.

If this (says he) be not an answer to their importunities, supposing they
might be earnest for their bread) they, meaning the moneyed Widows, etc. must
know, that it is fair for them if they be not oppressed: which I perceive by
his Doctrine can scarcely be until they are defeated of their principal,
reducing Interest to three or four per Cent. might have a lively resemblance of
it, especially when more are likely to receive evil then good thereby.

Yea, but the Widow, etc. who would not willingly be oppressed, should not (save^
my Discourser) think of oppressing others, which they certainly do, by exacting
more profit for the use of money than either Land or Trade will regularly bear;
or as J.C. says, in capital letters, (thinking to have riveted the Argument)
idleness should not suck the breasts of industry.

Truly I believe oppression a great and crying sin, which the just Judge will
one day severely punish; and that there are a great many sorts of oppressions;
amongst the rest, this ^s one, that whilst I endeavor to make my own burden
as ^ight as possibly I can, I care not who is sunk with the weight of it, so I
can pretend any excuse, or cry up for the Commonwealth, with the like sincerity
as the Silver-Smiths did for Diana; otherwise I see not why present Interest
(which with us is the lowest by Law in Europe) should be called oppression, or
a burden greater than Land or Trade will regularly bear, unless it be because
one sort of (many) borrowers say so; which if that be a sufficient proof, I
would then ask my Discourser, if either he, or any other Landlord, will sink
his Rent, merely because his Tenants complain of hard pennyworths.

That Trade will regularly bear present Usury, who has not observed that the
careful managers thereof have had a thriving time of it, (witness the
prodigious riches of London) until the unlucky Dutch War, the dreadful
conflagration of our Mother-City, and the pernicious money-trade into foreign
parts, whereby I verily believe, we have been, and shall be (if not prevented
by raising our Coin, or by the honest Clippers thereof) more impoverished than
by the other two: nor does our Traders yet employ their industry without very
competent gains, as may be conjectured from their plentiful way of living; nor
did our Farmers sow in fear, or reap in sorrow, until dear Rents, excessive
Wages, heavy Taxes, and very bad Markets, did all confederate to swal^ow them
up.

And for the Land, which of the owners thereof owes 100* l. for which he pays
6. per annum, but may readily pay it by the sale of 6. l. per annum Land, and
have something over besides; and if so, I am then to seek where the burden and
irregularity lies, though my Discourser please himself by maintaining the
contrary: besides, I would rather have 5. l. 5. s. 1* year in Land once surely
settled, whereby I should only venture my Rent, which is commonly secured by a
stock on the ground, than 100. l. in money at 6. per Cent. sometimes tumbled
and tossed at Usury, like a Ship in a tempest, and utterly lost, and sometimes
remain useless by me like a vessel be-calm'd, whilst the Landlord seldom runs
the least hazard, especially in respect of the Capital; and gain is always
expected and allowed, proportionable to the Risque and greatness of the
adventure; which by the arts and iniquity of this depraved age, is so
considerable, that with due reverence to Solomon the wise, I may invert his own
words, and affirm, that lenders now are servants to the borrowers, and commonly
are right heartily glad when they have recovered their own again.

After all, if such who complain most of high Interest, and who (God knows)
have the least reason to be in the Usurers Books, would put on a comely thrift,
and avoid borrowing, (for these set up half the Usurers, as well as Taverns in
the Nation) my Usurer would soon either lend his money on lower terms without a
Law, to such who have laudable occasions for it, or else employ it himself to
his own and the Commonwealths advantage, which is all can be reasonably desired
from him.

As for idleness sucking the breasts of industry, (as J.C. has it) it is no
more applicable to lending money upon a valuable consideration, to them who by
industry and skill live thereon, (why others should borrow any great sums, I
apprehend not, and wish we had a Law to prevent it, whereby men might at once
be kept within compass, a thousand mischiefs prevented, and Traders supplied
with money enough) than to my Landlords hiring his Farm to the laborious
Husbandman, or to my building and hiring a Ship at a dear rate, to those who
occupy their business amidst the terrors of the deep, who cannot raise a
penny to pay his Rent without great toil and care, whilst the Landlord lies on
the bed of idleness, sucks the breast of industry, and goes away with all the
profit; and yet who knows not, that it would turn to the infinite prejudice of
the Nation, should all the Landlords in England manage their several Farms by
their own servants: On the other hand, I conceive it is neither honest nor
safe, that one, called a child of industry, should suck the breasts of
idleness, without giving the nurse reasonable satisfaction, lest peradventure
the next child that wants, starves in the street.

Here I will answer a more material Objection than any I have yet seen in
Print, made me by a Gentleman-borrower, yet no friend to subduing Usury, and
wonders that any man will lend but upon a good pawn 100. l. for 6. l. premium,
considering the vast sums that are daily lost.

Object. May not a man use his own money, and make 6. per Cent. of it, better
than he that borrows can first make 6. l. to pay Interest, and then get
something over and besides for a lively^ood; and so end all disputes about
Interest.

Answ. 1. This were very true, admitting all men were of ^quall brains and
education, to traffic in one sort or other, which is not reasonable to imagine.

2. If every man i^ployed his own stock, it would be im^ossible for poor
ingenious beginners to borrow, to enter upon trade; and how many of those
people by help of borrow^^g, become in time excellent members in the
Common^ealth, is daily seen.

3. It Is much better for the public that experienced Tra^ers hire money, and
employ it, than sit still, whilst commerce merce is managed by the unskilful;
which caused his Majesty to complain in the preamble of his Proclamation some
two years ago, concerning the Canary Merchants, alleging th^^^ unexperienced
men had spoiled that trade.

4. In all Trades there is a great mystery, which is not fully apprehended by
two in three, educated therein, how th^^ shall we suppose this secret should be
found out by then who are forced upon trade, not by their proper genius, but by
subduing Usury.

Lastly, There is that vast difference in skill and conduct amongst men, that
one will easier make 14. per Cent. in traffic, than another raise 6.

His eighth Proposition examined and answered.
It only can (says he) rebuild London profitably as to the Builder, speedily
as to the Public.
I Hope, it is an incling (and not Prophetic saying) invented at first by such
who wish the work may not prosper, that the rebuilding of London will undo more
then the burning thereof has: for if serene times succeed, I doubt not but the
Builders (or at least their posterity) will be so fully recompensed as well by
profit as convenience, security and beauty, that by a happy Omen, I hope I may
invert the jyngle by asserting, that in conclusion there may be more gainers by
rebuilding of London, then there were losers by burning of it.

The present Interest of money (admitting much were borrowed) can be no just
scar-crow to the Builders, since all Builders I have yet converst with (being
of that number my self) may have eight, nine or ten per Cent. and very good
Rents for their grounds besides.

As for those who are to build in the worst, and by-places, they are to build
the meanest Houses, and so what they fall short in Rent will be saved in
Building: besides it is not to be doubted but materials, and workmen may be much
cheaper when the capital parts of the City are rebuilt, to the great
encouragement of Builders in by-places, which are likely to be last built.

And should I grant that all the new Buildings were carried on by borrowed
money, I could not deny but Interest at four per Cent. were best for the
Builder, in case he could speedily borrow at that rate, without severe brok^ge
or shifts of Interest; but he that imploys his own money matters not much
whether it be at six or four, in regard he knows the work must be done, and he
shall find benefit and content thereby.

Yet will not, subduing Interest, hasten the work, but most assuredly hinder,
as some have confessed to me; for what ever Builder wants money (as I protest I
am one) shall lose a Summer before he knows where to borrow it without some
underhand dealing; he shall find it to his cost a contradiction, that many
Lenders and low Interest, live together in a declining Commonwealth.

So that upon the whole matter it is certain, and speedy borrowing without
unconscionable brokage (which will infallibly attend reduction of Interest)
that must rebuild London profitably to the Builder, and speedily as to the
Public.

And now for the credit of six per Cent. I will appeal to all the world, if the
rebuilding of London goes not on much faster then could be reasonably imagined
by him that shall consider the many discouragements the Builders have labored
under as fears of enemies abroad, doubt at home, wars, and rumors of wars;
fears and jealousies, true or false, at present operate a like, scarcity of
materials, dearness of Workmen* peevishness of Neighbors; grounds and concerns
intermixing differences between Landlords and Tenants, and the like; many
whereof being overcome by the prudence of his Majesty, and infinite pains and
wisdom of the reverend Judges, the work now goes so happily on, that by the
blessing of the Lord I doubt not to see that City within three or four years,
the joy of her Friends, the envy of her enemies, and the beauty of Christendom.

The ninth Proposition examined and answered.
It will inviolably establish (says he) the Crown of England. 1. By
advancement of all his Majesty's Revenues. 2. By the welfare of all his
Majesty's Subject. 3. By making Land (which is in safe hands) the over
ballancing Scale of Wealth and Power:

AS wise Generals, in the day of Battle, keep their best Soldiers as a Reserve
against the time of greatest need, so my Discourser, after he has said what wit
or skill, or passion can suggest, insinuates at last that lubduing Interest
will establish the Crown upon his Majesty's Royal House, by raising his
Revenues to such a degree, that it may be no ways doubted, but that his Incomes
may far exceed his expenses, whereby burdens by Taxes on Lands or Persons, may
cease, and with them our discontents exspire. A happy age. Welcome low
Interest, more powerful than Militia, or standing Armies: Hail thou only
inricher of King and People, Expeller of Sedition, and establisher of Sacred
Majesty. And now after all this Pageantry, what pity it is I must conclude that
having examined, and found how little likelihood there is, that subduing
Interest will increase the fruit and revenue of the Kingdom, we have small
reason to hope it will augment the Revenue of the King: And therefore if we
cannot raise his Majesty's Incomes above his Exits, let us all humbly beg of
God and the King, that his exits may not exceed his Incomes, and that is the
same thing; since every man is rich or poor, by what he expends, and not by
what he receives.

Having provided for the Crown, he turns himself to the three great Faculties
(as he calls them;) Divines, Lawyers, and Physicians, to convince them how
great advantage will accrue to their professions by reducing Usury: but because
I know they are too wise to be led by an ignis fatuus, I shall leave the whole
matter to their examination: and shall (without enlarging on that very odd,
undue and dividing expressions of Land being in safe hands, (as if all the
world but Landed men were dangerous Creatures) only observe his angry
conclusion, in case Usury be not taught to dance after his pipe, Gaolers and
Catchpoles walk Horses, and some weight taken out of their scale, that their
Interest no longer preponderate, our servitude (says he) must be (forsooth)
almost accomplished; the meaning whereof I cannot conceive, unless besides
subduing Usury, he would have tallies cut gratis between Debtors and Creditors,
or at least some notable defalcation made in the usual and necessary
proceedings against unwilling and dishonest men: for otherwise can he without
pain heartily believe that the mere reducing Usury to two per Cent. will
prevent the frequent use of those sour Instruments of the Law; or that men
will be therefore wiser, soberer, or juster, since very few (let him say what
he pleases) fall into those men's clutches, but merely through want of
sobriety, industry, conduct, or honesty: but I perceive preoccupied men may say
any thing, and venture to impose upon their Readers, in hopes to make
impressions in some, according to their own fancies.

And for the Usurer, I hope he is not so savage as to desire the hurt of any
man, much less the Nation, especially when things are offered so much (as is
pretended) for his benefit; viz. to buy Land at twenty years purchase (nay I
will help him for eighteen;) which Land, says my Discourser, he may probably
improve in Rent, but certainly in some times (ad Graecas Calendas) if he please
sell again for thirty, nay forty years purchase rather then fail: why how now
Wretch, can thou desire more then to have thy Revenue kept up in meal or
malt: 1800. l. will now buy 100. l. per annum: this new purchase will
certainly improve to 130. l. per annum, especially when once our yearly fruit
and product becomes double; and then if thou must needs turn savage Usurer
again, and will sell, assure thy self (thou have two good men's words for it,
and the World for witness) it will yield thee thirty years purchase, which is
3900. l. which at three per Cent. (because I will not deceive thee, we will
cast upon the lowest Usury) will bring thee in 117. l. per annum, which is 9 l.
more then thy first 1800. l. did at six per Cent. and for thy comfort I will be
thy Bonds-man (which is more then any man will, in good earnest be for our new
project) (...) Gallants will be mad for money, borrow faster then (...) to
lend, were it thou richer then Sutton or old Audley; ^o sharp a Spurr will cheap
Usury be to make men run into debt and excess together.

The Usurer knows not what to say to this computation; he shakes the he^d, and
fears a snake in the Flowers; I see where the shoe wrings him; he is jealous
the speculation will not hold, like most projects, appear in the Study rational
enough, ^ut fail in the practice: abate his Interest he is sure, he lose^h so
much; and then, if neither improvements of Rent or purchase follow, nor
advancement of Trade nor Manufactures, where is he and the Nation then? he
justly suspects it an kn^ck merely to lessen Usury for the ease, and
convenience of some body, and ^o crea^e a new Trade (or rather to enlarge the
old) for Lurchers and Scriveners, under the fine name of public good; which he
is so sincerely desirous of, that upon any reasonable evidence, warranted by
the judgment of un-interested men, the great things promised may take effect,
he will, I hope, readily lay aside his present conce ns and fears, and with
heart and hand promote the common good: for who is he that would, if he could
(in the words of my Discourser) (except these honest men, compared with whom,
Clippers are Saints, that send abroad five or six hundred thousand pounds per
annum for wine and trifles) maintain his own wretched way of thriving by his
neighbors hurt, and Countries ruin.

The little good subduing Interest will bring to the Nation has been already
examined; it now remains briefly to sum up a few of the many mischiefs that
will ensue upon it; some whereof having made use of in the precedent Discourse,
I have collected, and he^e insert to help the Readers memory.

1. It will draw the Treasure of the Nation into a few hands, (than which
nothing can be more pernicious) and occasion the hoarding up the same, to the
infinite decay of Trade, and impoverishment of the Kingdom; for money locked
up in the Misers Coffers is like dung in a heap, it does no good, but being
dispersed, and orderly disposed abroad, inricheth the Land.

2. It will make money very scarce to be borrowed, so that the Traders will be
to seek for supplies upon all occasions, which will put a general imbargo upon
all commerce, and necessitate men, especially the active young men with small
stocks, (who are the best Merchants) to sell their goods at great loss, because
they cannot stay for their best markets, whilst in the mean time all Trade and
Commodities would be ingrost by a few rich men, (worse than which nothing can
befall a Commonwealth) and more than which nothing can be the wretched aim of
some body; and this scarcity of borrowing my Discourser himself does suppose in
his seventh Proposition.

3. It will expose, both at the present and in the future, an infinite number
of Widows, Orphans, and other impotent persons* to great want and extremity,
who ought more to be considered, (methinks) than by telling them (as my
Discourser does) there are others (great joy no doubt) who suffer as well as
they.

4. It will encourage our Gentry to run into debt, by making most of them
bolder in borrowing (if any one will lend) and being perpetually in the Usurers
Books, to the wounding of their reputations as well as estates, there being,
it is conceived, six times more Gentry now deeply in debt, than when money was
at 8. or 10. per Cent. encouraged thereunto merely by low Interest, imagining
so small a thing could never hurt; whereas in truth, it is not Usury, but
misusing the Capital that brings destruction; like wine which hurts the
immoderate only.

5. It will oblige the Nobility and Gentry to provide greater portions for
their younger children, (to their more certain and greater damage, than
subduing Usury can otherwise possibly ever do them good;) for, if when money
was at 10. per Cent. 600. was a portion equivalent to 750. l. at 8. per Cent.
and 750 l. as valuable as 1000. l. now money is at 6. per Cent. I cannot
imagine, but that upon reducing it to 3. or 4. per Cent. the portion must be so
augmented, that the yearly income may answer the Interest of 1000. l. at 6. per
Cent. for every man of quality raises such portions for his children, if
possibly he can, that whether they marry or no, they may live as his children
by the Revenue thereof. Now if it be answered, that parents in this case may
leave portions in Land, or Rent-charges, in stead of money, it will be replied,
a thousand inconveniences will ensue thereupon, as well to parents, in
cantonizing, or incumbring estates, as to children, in matching or living
remote from their maintenance, and nothing so grateful, except some contiguous
estate, as ready money. Nor can these portions in land be practiced amongst
half the Nation.

6. It will introduce a thousand tricks amongst the rank Usurers, Brokers, and
Scriveners, whereby the hasty borrower shall be indirectly worm'd out of more
money than when Interest was at 8. per Cent. for the harder money is to be
procured in respect of low Interest, the more shall, at least by the broker, be
extorted underhand from the borrower; so that had I money, and a right brokers
principle, I should not care a straw how Usury by Law were mortified; and this
(to omit ten thousand instances daily practiced, I fear, amongst our selves now
money is scarce) was clearly seen, when in Edward the sixth his days, either
out of a rigid zeal, new fangledness, or some temporary, or State-reason, now
unknown to us, all manner of Usury and increase of money was quite taken away,
it made the matter far worse; as may appear by the preamble of the Statute made
in the 13th of Elizabeth, for repealing the foresaid Statute, and allowing
Usury at 10. per Cent. wherein it is confessed, that the foresaid Law did not do
so much good as was hoped it would, but rather the said vice of Usury, and
especially by way of sale of wares, and shifts of Interest, (devices which
unconscionable lenders and brokers then did, still do, and ever will practice,
the lower Interest is reduced) has much more exceedingly abounded: Now to me
it seems in effect the same thing, to annihilate Usury quite, (which I dare
swear the rank Usurer, Lurcher, and Broker, would keep Holiday to see) as so to
mortify it, that men may not on reasonable security speedily borrow at the
allowed rate, without some undue treatment, whereby necessitous men shall be
sure to be devoured by Hawk or Buzzard, both birds of prey; whilst in the mean
time the worthy and conscientious lender should be next undone. And upon this
account, and that of surprising necessitous traders, was this worshipful brat
of low Interest, with wonderful sag^city, begot in the crafty noddle of a
great monied man, who in time, as things shall fadge, may make a Lurcher, and a
tenderhearted Scrivener, without whose warm influence the towardly babe (says
my Author) might probably have proved an aborrive. If the conjunction of such
kind-natured Planets portend good to mankind, I will henceforth never regard
Astrology; and when I see such creatures employ their brains for the real ease
and benefit of honest borrowers, I will believe my Geese secure when the Fox
preaches against theft: In the mean time, if my worthy Discourser has made
himself a party in the intrigue, I must judge it on some other convenient
design, by remembering what himself ingeniously confesses, that being his
fathers Executor, he was under an obligation to revenge his quarrel on the
Usurer.

7. It will cause the Dutch to withdraw their money from us, to the great stop
of trade, to which, although it has been already answered by J. C. and others,
it were better he without their money, and that we only feed lean Kine for
their advantage, yet sure our benefit is also great thereby; for having a stock
of theirs, without which our trade could not be carried vigorously on, what
hurt may it be to us, (nay rather what benefit is it not?) if we paying them 6.
per Cent. gain 15. more our selves, which without their money we could not do:
but peradventure the true quarrel to this Dutch money is, that it keeps our
weaker Merchants out of the paws of unconscionable Lurchrs.

8. It only can retard the building of London, for whilst the owners of ground
within the City want money to build, and can neither quickly borrow at the
intended rate, nor willingly sell their concerns on reasonable terms to such as
have money, the carrying on of that work must needs be hindered.

9. And lastly, It will expose the Gentry who shall be in debt, at the passing
such a Law, to many and great exigents, before they shall get clear of their
(reditors; it being ten to one the debtors estates will become so many
sacrifices, ere any man will be found to come in to their rescue, though
Chancery, or the intended Act should allow them a considerable time for
redemption: So that I dare affirm, this Nation yet never saw such Seisures,
Arrests, Extents, Executions, etc. as will infallibly follow upon passing such
a Law; which mischiefs neither were, nor could be so great and inevitable,
whilst Interest continued at any tolerable rate; for then, if one man called
in his money, another was as ready to lend on the same security, whereby all
sides were accommodated, which upon reducing Interest to a trifle, will
abundantly fail; unless the number of lenders did far surmount the number of
borrowers; in which case, the sullen fit in some could not prevent the
compliance of others; but this felicity is far from the present condition of
England; so that, as it is apparent, on the one hand, the debtors will lose
their hopes of borrowing, to get clear of their present Creditors, so on the
other hand, they have little reason to believe their Lands will yield a penny
more than it would have done before such retrenchment, there being now much
more Land to be sold for payment of debts, (the plenty of a commodity must
needs make it cheap) than there is money in the Nation to purchase it, or
redeem it out of the hands of the present mortgagers: and when a Gentleman
(deprived of all apparent means of borrowing) is left in the hand of a severe
Creditor, his condition is like to be sad enough, be it only (now) by way of
retaliation.

AN Appendix.
UPon finishing my Task, a worthy Friend gave me a small Book without perfect
beginning or enduing, Printed Anno 1622. the title and Authors name being worn
out; however I find the design of the Treatise is to show the causes of the
want of money, decay of Trade, and remedies for restoring the same, which
agreeing so much with what I have ventured to offer to the World, I could not
forbear to give the Reader a taste of it, that so truth might be confirmed by
two witnesses, with this addition, that what he then complained of, we now have
much more cause,

The immediate reasons of the want of money in England (says this worthy
Author) are either such as hinder the importation, or such as cause the
exportation thereof; and both these are occasioned by the under-valuation of
his Majesty's coin to that of our Neighbor Countries: for who will procure
License in Spain to bring Reals into England to sell them here at ten per Cent.
gain, which is less then the Exchange from thence will yield, when he may have
for the same twenty five in the hundred gain in Holland: Here five Reals of
eight, which make twenty shillings Sterling, will commonly yield twenty two
shill. or there abouts; and the same in Holland will yield 42. s. 6. d.
Fleminsh, which is twenty five shill. Sterling (and about fifteen per Cent.
more then they yield here.)

And how can we choose but want money in England (says my Author) when Jacobus
pieces are current at so high a rate in Holland (to which I may add, at most
times, in France, Flanders, etc. for there they go at twelve gilders eight
stivers the piece, which is 24. s. 9. d. sterling: and after this rate his
Majesty's other coyns of gold and silver are there of respective value. Where
note that King James, in the eleventh year of his Reign, (which was nine years
before this Treatise was published) raised the prices of all his gold, for the
better keeping it within the Realm; ordaining the piece of gold called the
Unity, which then went for 20. s. to be thenceforth current at 22. s. and all
other pieces of gold to rise in value accordingly; and yet this did not do the
work but at that the present; so that we must from time to time raise our Coin,
as we find it current abroad; and make foreign money as valuable with us as it
is in other Countries, otherwise it will be impossible either to keep our own
at home, or draw foreign money hither; and what honest Interest can be hurt by
the doing thereof.

But I proceed with my unknown Author, who says that although by the
Proclamations of those parts, the Jacobus pieces, and other Species of Gold and
Silver are there set at indifferent rates answerable to their valuation here
with us respectively, which they call Permissie-gelt, Placcaet or Proclamation
money; yet have they other devices to raise money, and draw it away at their
pleasure; as either by their Banks, when the Bankiers will for their occasions
give a greater price for money then the Proclamation suffers, and then it is
called Bank-gelt, or else by slack pay Masters, that for their own advantage in
the raising of Money will pretend not to make present payment of their debts,
unless you take their money at a higher rate then either the Proclamation
money, or Bank money; which being paid and received, produces a third kind,
which they call Current-gelt, and so by connivance of the Magistrates (who may
be did so themselves, or found advantage to the Public) the same goes from
man to man, and at last becomes current at an excessive value; and all these
devices for the raising of money in their Country, are merely to draw dry the
current of his Majesty's coin.

And thus (says this judicious Author) the Hepatitis of this great body of
ours being opened, A stone like the Liver.
and such profusions of our lifeblood let out; and the Liver and Fountain
obstructed, and weakened, which should succor the same, needs must this great
Body languish, and at last fall into a Marasmum. Hectic Fever.


I am not ignorant that there has been great abuse in culling his Majesty's
Coin here at home (this is practiced at this day, and ever will, till money be
coined lighter, notwithstanding our having good Laws to the contrary) and in
melting the heavy money into Plate: And that there is a great superfluity of
Plate, generally, in private men's Houses more then is necessary, and far beyond
any example of former times, which must needs also cause scarcity of money: yet
on the other hand I cannot deny, but that it is better to have the same in
Plate as a Treasure of the Kingdom, then turned into Coin, and so turned out of
the Kingdom by the under-value thereof.

And here I cannot but take notice of an opinion I have lately heard stiffly
maintained even by wise and worthy men (hoping now they are better informed)
affirming that liberty of exporting money out of this Nation would be of great
advantage to us; for as the case is now (say they) money is in Prison, and be
sure the Merchant, Native, or Forrainer will not import it, because he may not
at his pleasure export the same, when once it is melted into English money; and
alleges that the liberty of exporting, as well as importing, is one great
means of making the Dutch rich.

To which I answer, that the liberty which the Hollander gives of exporting
their money is a thing rather of name then use, and looks like giving a man
leave to hang himself, he will hardly thank you for it, since they are so vigilant
to raise their coin to so high a value above their Neighbors, that no man
shall find advantage by carrying it from them: And for the foreign money which
comes amongst them, the arts and contrivances of them are so succesful in this
kind, that no forrainer, who values his money lower then they, gets it home
again but to his loss, and the advantage of those people: For example, if an
English Guinee valued here at 21. s. 9. d. gets abroad, and be valued at 23. s.
this piece (if in the mean time it scapes melting) seldom comes back to the
benefit of the Importor, and returns into it is own Country as unwillingly as a
man who is in great esteem abroad, does, who is sure to be less valued at home:
so that if we will imitate the Dutch in permitting the exportation of Coin, let
us withal be sure to imitate them in their other contrivances, and value it so
high as may encourage it to return again, otherwise it will be like a Fox broke
loose, and will hardly be recovered.

And for foreign money, it is not to be imagined that Merchants will ever be
invited to bring much hither, where they know it goes for less then in the
Country where they receive it, and must needs be losers by the importation; as
we sometimes see in French Gold, which sells for less here then in France, and
therefore we have little thereof brought in, but for traveling charges,
whilst mighty sums of ours have been conveyed thither for profit: And to this
purpose I have a notable instance of Portugal money, which some seventeen or
eighteen years ago, viz: about Anno 1651. I knew to be imported hither in good
sums by Plymouth-Merchants for want of better returns (where note that all
Portugal Merchandise sell for loss in England) which when they came to vent
here, returned to very bad account, and went off not under eight or ten per
Cent. loss, whereby the Merchandise of bringing those moneys hither is seldom
attempted, otherwise we should have decoyed great store of their money hither:
Now if our moneys yielded no better gain abroad, neither our people nor
forraigners would steal so much out of the Nation as now they do, but export
our native commodities in it is stead, to our great advantage, and the increase
of his Majesty's customs; for goods exported are sure to pay some duty, but
money stolen abroad pays nothing, unless to the corrupt Officer to connive at it.

And now I proceed, with my judicious Author, who says, that the general
remote cause of our want of money is the great excess of this Kingdom in
consuming the commodities of foreign Countries, which prove to us
discommodities, in hindering us, at once, from spending our own growths and
Manufactures, and preventing us of so much Treasure which otherwise would be
brought in in lieu of those toys, (and trifles which nourish our excess, and
luxury) for now a days most men live above their qualities and callings, and
promiseously step forth vice versa into one another ranks (like an Army falling
into confusion:) the Country-mans eye is upon the Citizen, the Citizen upon the
Gentleman, the Gentleman upon the Nobleman, and by these means we draw unto us,
and consume amongst us, that great abundance of the Wines of Spain of France,
of the Rhine, of the Levant, and of the Islands; the Raisins of Spain, the
Currants of the Levant, the Lawns and Cambricks of Hannault and the Netherlands,
the Silks of Italy (and Persia too) the Sugars and Tobacco of the West Indies,
and the Spices of the East Indies, (if this was a just complaint forty six
years ago, how much more cause have we now, who spend ten times as much:) all
which commodities are of no necessity to us, and yet are bought with ready
money which otherwise would be brought over in Treasur, if these were nor. (Nay
now we send our own current Coin for many of these superfluities, which it
seems forty six years ago were brought in by the product of our own growths and
Manufactures.

A Commonwealth (says this Author) is like unto a Family, the Father or
Master whereof ought to sell more then he buyeth, according to old Cato's
Counsel, Patrem Familias vendacem non emacem esse oportet, otherwise his
expense being greater then his Revenue, he must needs come behind hand: even so
a Commonwealth that excessively spends Foreign commodities dear, and
utters the native fewer and cheap; shall enrich other Countries but beggar it
self: where on the contrary, if it vented fewer of the foreign, and more of
the Native, the residue must needs return in Treasure.

Passing over other reasons, not material to our present occasion, which he
gives for the decay of Trade, I will come to the efficient causes of the decay
thereof, as he alleges, which are either Usury at ten per Cent. or unnecessary
suits in Law: in the former of which, says he, I am prevented by him that
wrote a little Treatise against Usury, which it seems for modesty he refused to
own. I conceive my Author means the Book now reprinted by J. C. and annexed to
his discourse, the Author whereof was (I perceive by his Son) Sir Thomas
Culpeper Senior, a worthy and good man.

But I proceed, with my unknow Author, who, says he, has a word to his Usury.
That it is not an Usury of ten per Cent only that wringeth this Commonwealth,
but an extorsion. also of 20, 30, 40. nay of Cent. per Cent. per annum as the
Italians speak, given and taken on pledges, and pawns, and that on poor peoples
labor in London especially. Which is a biting Usury indeed (destructive to the
Nation) and a fearful crying fin before God: which I do as freely confess and
abhor, as any man that is for three per Cent. Yet this will be more and more
practiced the lower Usury by law is reduced.

My unknown Author having alleged the premised causes (amongst others, not
here material to dilate upon, as false making, and false sealing of our
Drapery, ill Government in Trade, Monopolies, etc.) proceeds to offer remedies,
which (says he) present themselves.

First, By raising his Majesty's Coin from time to time equal to what it is
current abroad.

Secondly, By making current amongst us foreign Coin, at equal value to what
it is in it is own Country.

Both which may be done (says he) by his Majesty's Princely and prudent
Negotiation with the Princes of our Neighbor Countries, the States of Holland
especially, to keep a more constant course in the value of their Coin.

Then he proceeds to answer some Objections made against the raising of money;
which (says he) are principally, either the continual raising of it, to follow
the rising of foreign coin; or else the inevitable loss that will thereby
fall upon men, in the endearing of all things, and particularly upon Land
lords, and Creditors in their Rents and Contracts.

His answer: For the continual raising of money, that will be needless, if the
means be sufficient for executing the Statute for employments (meaning I
suppose employing the poor for the carrying on of Manufactures) whereby money
may be kep't within the Land when we have it: and for the dearness of things
which the raising of money brings with it, that will be abundantly
recompensed unto all in the plenty of money and quickening of Trade in every
man's haad: and that which is equal to all, when he that buys dear shall sell
dear cannot be said to be injurious unto any: and it is much better for the
Kingdom to have things dear with plenty of money, whereby men may live in their
several callings, then to have things cheap with want of money, which makes
every man complain.

And as for Landlords and Creditors, their loss is easily to be prevented by
proviso; that the Contracts made before the raising of moneys shall be paid at
the value the money went at when the Contracts were made; according to the
disposition of the Civil Law in this case: Valor monetae considerandus and
inspiciendus est a tempore contractus, non autem a tempore solutionis.

The raising also of the Coin would raise the price of Plate, whereby there
would be less superfluity that way, and our old Plate (which perhaps in some
men's hands is kept up for Treasure) would be certainly brought out and melted
into Coin: (to which I may add, it would undoubtedly b ing forth our hoarded
Treasure, which is conceived to be great.)

As for our immoderate consumption of foreign toys and Commodities, that may
be restrained (says he) by Laws Vestiary and Sumptuary, according to the
example of Germany, and other our Neighbor Countries.

The remedy against high Usury, which then was ten per Cent. may be (says he)
plenty of money: and he that offers any other cure (say I) violates nature, and
commits a rape) for then, says he, men will have no such cause to take up
money at Interest, as when money is scant and their expenses great: for as it
is the scarcity of money (and many borrowers) that makes the high rates of
Interest (just quite contrary to what our new lighted Politicians maintain,
when they affirm that high Interest only makes moneys scarce, and Kingdoms
poor) so the plenty of money and few borrowers will make the rates low, better
(and without any underhand tricks, whereby the Broker commonly gets more then
the honest Lender) then any Statute for that purpose will do: a famous instance
whereof we have in the United Provinces, where it is lawful for a man to take
twenty in the hundred if he can get it (wherein it seems the Author of the
Tract (meaning that annexed to J. C. mistaken observations, viz: Sir Thomas
Culpeper Senior, against Usury was mistaken) and yet notwithstanding money is
commonly to be hired there at 6, or 7. per Cent. by reason of plenty of money:
and now Anno 1668. for the like greater plenty, and not by virtue of any Law,
as is unjustly alleged, it is to be borrowed for once asking at 3. or 4. per
Cent., and how vast the difference is between the kindly workings of nature,
and the violent acting of a Law, when the matter is not prepared for it, I
leave to every man to judge. Put us then into as thriving a humor (from which
now we seem very far) and as rich a condition as the people of Holland, whereby
we may have as many Lenders, and as few borrowers as they, and I dare avow
Interest without a Law will be every jot as cheap with us as with them: In the
mean time to force Usury as low amongst us, a needy and declining people, as it
is naturally amongst those who are so thriving and prodigiously rich, is as
unreasonable as to expect as great a Crop from a barren and impoverished Field,
as from the most fruitful and enriched piece of ground; or to imagine that one
of Pharaohs starved Kine in bad Pasture should yield as much milk as one that
is lusty and well fed.

FINIS.

