THE SOLICITOR.

Exactly and plainly declaring, Both as to KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE, how such an
Undertaker ought to be qualified. As also, His Parts, Qualities, and fitting
Endowments for such a weighty Employment.

In a more special manner then has ever been heretofore published by any hand
whatsoever.

Showing further the particular Of Suing a person Privileged; And how the same
may by course of Court sue any Forrainer.

Being truly useful for all sorts of persons who have any important Business
in Law or Equity.

By T. M. Esquire twelve years a Practitioner, and now of the Middle Temple London.

The Second Edition Corrected.

Hor. -- Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
London, Printed by J. Streater, 1663.

To the Honorable Sr HENEAGE FINCH, Knight and Baronet, His Majesty's
Sollicitor-Generall.
AMong the several varieties produced by this Age, wherein almost every man
endeavors in his own way the management of his particular Affair, I come,
Athenian-like, with an Aliquid Novi (as I suppose) in my hand. I cannot be so
vain to imagine that there is any Circle, Star, or Meteor in the Sphere of the
Law, but what you are exquisitely able to make the world know, you can take the
height of, and to discover its proper or Excentrical Motion. To the candor
therefore of so great and learned a Judgment, I could not but offer this small
Essay: which though in it self not able to draw aside your eye to glance on ir,
yet happily to the generality it may prove in some measure helpful and
advantageous. And though the meanness of the gift may not merit your
acceptance, yet your goodness I hope will over-balance the same; and thereby
give encouragement to him who desires to approve himself,

SIR, An Honourer of your Name and Virtues, T. M.
Mid. Temp. Nov. 20. 1662.
To the READER.
THe desire of the public benefit will no doubt so readily appear in the very
Frontispiece, that it will save an unnecessary labor of boasting of this
endeavor, or complementing your acceptance. Things of this nature affect not
any dress or preparatory shows, as not beholding to any Ornament for the
commendation of their use, which answers the accessional Fancies of Language.
Practice and the plodding head is the subject of this Treatise; to which Fancy,
and other polite Curiosities, are very incompetent Auxiliaries: yet will you
find a tincture and accost of such pleasing delight, even in the short turns
and inobservant Dispatches of this our Solicitor, which may tell you the Book
was painfully labored to accommodate it self to his most express Character.
All I shall add is this, That it may be confidently presumed, that the frequent
abuses and miscarriages in this Employment will both be rectified, wilful
Delinquents terrified, the Clyent certified, and such an unerring Reputation
obtained, that the Law shall recover and maintain its honor free from the
affronts and injuries of ignorance and impudence; Justice will be triumphant;
and the Clyent find the benefit of them both, with ease, assurance and
expedition.

Vale.
By some inadvertency of the Press, the manner and method of suing any
Courtier, or other protected person, having been omitted; it is added at the
end, by way of Appendix.

The Complete SOLICITOR.
CHAP. I. Of the Carriage and Demeanor of a Solicitor.
MAn is not born to live with his arms across; but rather, as one of the most
necessary members of this beauteous Frame of the world, he must conferr and
contribute his whole travel and pain, to the conduction and conservation of
that civil society in which he is placed; not only to the good of himself, but
of others also. But because that in the choice which men make of a Calling,
their happiness in the managery thereof does depend; and that nothing so much
avails to the leading a contented life, as when they find themselves fit for
the same; they ought before all other things, to take a trial of their own
strength, and seriously bethink themselves of that charge they are about to
embrace; because usually we presume too much upon our own strength, and attempt
more then our ability is fit to atchieve: and this error we see is incident
almost to all our actions. Hence it is, That some will spend more then their
estates may well bear; others, in laboring and toyling, go beyond their
abilities: some are not masters of their passions; others there are, that in
dalliance and sporting, waste their time: and another sort there are, who are
so vehemently Satirical, that they will not spare any person, no not the
Prince, although thereby they incurr the hazard and penalty of loosing their
heads. Some are unapt to manage public affairs, as being of a sullen and
solitary humor, or of a slack and slow disposition; and others as unfit for
all employment, as any of the aforementioned, for that they be either obstinate
in opinion, or discourteous and boorish in their behavior and carriage. And
that which makes us to fall into these faults, is, for that we do not
thoroughly see and look into our Selves. Whence it comes to pass, That thus
neglecting to take a true trial of our own towardness and strength; we do often
undertake business of such gravity and weight, as that afterward we must
either abandon them with ignorance and shame, or else to go on with them, we
must needs suffer much grief, pain and displeasure.

Now that a man may the more warily weigh an affair before he put his had to
the plough, (as we say) or his back to the burden, let him remember, hat the
Bearer must always have more pith then the Burden: for if it be too great or
too heavy, who sees not but that the Undertaker shall be constrained either to
leave it, or else to sink and fall under it, ere it be long? It behooveth us
also to consider, That there are d^vers kinds of affairs; some whereof are
hard, uneasy and difficult; not so much, for that they be weighty and important
of themselves, as for that they be matched and mingled with a multitude of
other toylsome and troublesome businesses which continually attend and wait
upon them. I speak not this to dismay, or so to discourage any man, as to make
him decline and eschew the undertaking of necessary and needful. Employments,
(such as is this of our Solicitor) because of the many Encumbrances and Cares
wherewith they may be accompanied; so that not daring to intermedle with any
matter of moment, he should abide without business: But this is my whole intent
and meaning, that seeing a man's life is naturally subject to pains, troubles
and cares; it behooveth a man so wisely and warily to demean himself, that if
it be his fortune to undertake the managing of any businesses, he neither be so
feeble-hearted as to shun or relinquish them for their difficulty; nor yet so
foolhardy as to undertake such affairs as go beyond the reach of his ability.
It behooveth therefore diligently to consider every undertaking; for, for want
thereof, many have fallen into such kind of Employments, as have been painful
for them to bear, and yet more uneasy to be abandoned: which being a case of
so great difficulty, does require both much prudence and patience; the two only
proper remedies to lighten and ease an evil: with which two virtues, our
Solicitor ought in an especial manner to be endued, as being to encounter a
hard and difficult study to gain the Knowledge of the Law in some reasonable
measure, before he can, or rather ought, to be admitted to the practick part;
which as it has in it something of gain and profit, so has it also its
extraordinary toil and labor; which, its true, at the first seems very
irksome and tedious; but, by continual usage, becomes even as a natural habit.
Just like poor Prisoners, who suffer with great pains and torment at first the
weight of the fetters that are put upon their legs; but after they are once
accustomed thereto, necessity teaches them, by the constant wearing thereof,
not to think the same so burdensome. By which it appears, there is no manner of
life, how strict, hard, and laborious soever it be, which has not some kind of
sollace and refreshment, one or other, to sweeten the same. And truly there is
not any one thing wherein Nature has so much favored mankind, as this, That
she makes us find the remedy and mitigations of our misfortunes, cares, toil
and labor, even in the very sufferance and undergoing of the same.

The case then so standing, as it does, that man is born obnoxious and subject
unto all manner of miseries, and that his whole life is nothing but a
servitude, wherein every one ought to take good heed how to demean himself in
his Calling, and how he may content himself therein, winking at that which is
evil in it, and applying himself to that which is good: for there is no Calling
(as I faid before) howsoever painful and toylsome it be, wherein the patient
soul does not find some contentment and gain; though that cunning and skill be
more exquisite in time of Adversity, than of Prosperity: for when as
difficulties do present themselves, then must we gather all the forces of our
wits together, and set our whole vigor and virtue against such eminent and
present evils.

Moreover, Envy and Ambition are the two Cankers that corrupt all that are once
tainted therewith, and blear the eyes, so that they cannot see to perform their
duty aright, and as they ought to do. And therefore our Solicitor must not
bear envy against such as are in higher place than himself, but ought to
content himself in his proper station. For it is a main step to attain both
Practice, Love and Preferment, when he does prudently and discreetly carry
himself in that Estate and Calling which he has made choice of, taking
patiently the evils that fall out therein, and endeavoring to redress such
Accidents as cross his desires. And for this cause Plato did compare the life
of man to the play at Dice, whereat whoseever does play, ought always to
strive to have a fair throw, and yet should content himself with any Cast that
comes. The want of this satisfaction, makes men of weak wit, upon the
fortunate success of any business, so to be elated and transported, that they
scarcely know they do; they grow so insolent, that no man can keep them
company; they can abide no body, and no body can abide them: but if either by
neglect, want of management, disfavour, or ill fortune, they are crossed in
their designs, (though never so contrary to Reason) they are so enraged or
amazed, that you shall see them like unto one sick of a long and languishing
disease, which can neither abide heat nor cold.

The Philosopher Theodorus was wont to say, That he gave his Scholars
instructions and lessons with the right hand, but that they received them with
the left. And so does it fare oftentimes with not a few, who with the left hand
take hold of that luck, which Providence reaches to them with the right. It
were much better, in my judgment, discreetly to imitato the wise diligence of
the Bees; which of Thyme, that is but a dry and harsh herb; extract and confect
sweet and pleasant honey: so should every man in his station, out of the
troubles and sollicitudes of his life, draw whatever is good therein; and in
the mean time, chase away what is evil, or so ease and over it, that it may not
be discerned. And who knows not, but that such as exercise themselves in the
actions of virtue, can by a secret and supernatural kind of Alchymy, draw good
out of evil? Diogenes was banished; but he made good use of his banishment, in
that he did in the mean time betake himself unto the study of Wisdom. And this
shall not be so difficult and hard to do, as it seems to be, if by frequent
exercise he do endeavor to acquire the habitude and settled custom of living
content in his condition. Can ye not abide in the houses of Princes or great
men? Content you then with your own. Do ye find your self incapable to govern,
or sit at the Helm in the Commonwealth? Play then the good Citizens part, and
be content to obey: for it is expedient, that he that will undertake to be a
Solicitor in every way complete, must hold and keep a certain stayed and
settled manner of living, and must not vary and change with every wind. Ye may
see many, much subject to this Vice (for so I must call it) of changing their
manner of living from day to day, so that they cannot ground or settle
themselves upon any thing whatsoever. They appear like Proteus, never long in a
shape: modo Causidicum, modo Rhetora, as the Poet speaks; wherein they resemble
such as have never been accustomed to the Sea, who as soon as they begin to
sail, run out of one Vessel into another, leaving the bigger to put themselves
into a lesser, and by seaving the lesser to return to the bigger again. And
thus they continue in changing, until what time they know clearly that nothing
can fit them, because that whithersoever they go, their queazy stomachs do
still keep them company, and consequently their vomiting-disease.

Likewise those that bring their passions with them unto their affairs, do seek
incessantly after a new manner of living, and never accomplish what they have
once begun. All things go against their stomachs, all things displease them;
whether to be idle, or to be employed; to serve, or to command; to be married,
or to be single; to have children, or to have none at all: finally, nothing
does fit their fancy, nothing does satisfy their desire, save only that which
they have not: and such methinks must need, live miserably and restlesly, as
Prisoners fettered in perpetual pain.

There is likewise another manner of men not much unlike the former, that
cannot keep themselves quiet, nor be at any settlement, in any time, or in any
place. They cease not to go and to come; always intermedling with affairs,
without being thereunto called; and busying and bestirring themselves about
that which in no wise concerns them. These men, when they go out of doors,
they run along the streets; they haunt the public places, and then they return
home full of vexation and weariness, without any design: for there is nothing
that does so much irk and weary men's minds, as to labor in vain. They are like
unto the little Ants, which do creep upwards upon Trees; and after they have
mounted up to the top, have but the pains to creep down again the same way that
they went up, without bringing down with them any good at all. Many live in
this manner, whose life is nothing else but a boiling leisure, full of tumults
and toyls. Ye shall see them posting on with such vehemence and speed, as if
they would carry away with them all that they find before them. The public
places, the Churches and Markets, are ordinarily full of such Folks. These be
they which forge and frame News at pleasure: They will be scanners of all men's
worths, and the givers of Garlands: They will talk lavishly of other men's
lives, and discourse of other men's offices. But the actions of a well-advised
man, (such as a complete Solicitor ought to be) tend always to some certain
end; neither does he burden himself with more businesses then he can with
convenience turn his hand to, and put in execution: according to that of
Cicero, Omnis Cogitatio motusque animi aut in co^sil^is capiendis de rebus
honestis, and pertinentibus ad been beateque vivendum; aut in studiis scientiae
cognitionisque versabitur: Omnes enim trahimur and ducimur ad cognitionis
scientiae cupiditatem: in qui excellere p^lchrum putamus; labi autem, and
crrare, nescire, decipi, and malum and turpe ducimus: That is: Every thought
and motion of the mind ought to be employed either in consulting of honest
things, and such as may lead to a good and happy life; or in the study of Arts
and Sciences, and the way to gain knowledge: for we are all drawn, or, as it
were, led by the hand to a desire of getting knowledge, and bettering our
understanding: wherein to excel, is accounted an excellent thing; but to stray,
deviate, be ignorant, and easy to be deceived, not only by others, but also by
our selves, is counted a great stain to reputation.

CHAP. II. Of the Qualities wherewith a Solicitor ought to be endowed, to make
him complete.
THe former Chapter having treated in general of the necessity of knowledge to
be sought and acquired by all men, we shall in this now descend to
particularize the qualities wherewith every one ought to be endued, that
intends to take on him the business of Solicitation. To which purpose, we
shall observe five things:

First, He ought to have a good natural wit. Secondly, That wit must be refined
by education. Thirdly, That education must be perfected by learning and
experience. Fourthly, And lest, Learning should too much clate him, it must be
balanced by discretion. And, Fifthly, To manifest all those former parts; it is
requisite, that he have a voluble and free tongue to utter and declare his
conceits.
First, He ought to have a good natural wit, nor too slow nor too quick. Not
too slow: for men of slow capacity are for such weighty undertakings altogether
unfit; their conceit being so tough, that neither the Rules of Learning' nor
Precepts of Wisdom, nor habit of Virtue, can make any Impression. Tardis
mentibus virtus non committitur, says Cicero; for the^r dullness is an enemy to
Wisdom, and their slowness hurtful to the moments of occasion.

Some I have heard of, I confess, That in their choice of one to manage their
affairs, have elected a man of this disposition; surely contemptu magis quam
gratia: for I see no ground to allow their Opinion; since those ought to be
preferred who are good, and know why they are so; whereas these simple wits are
easily both altered and deceived.

And as they should not herein be too slow, so neither should their wit be too
pregnant and sharp, lest it become like a Razor, whose edge the keener it is,
the sooner it is reba^ed; or like soft wood, which is ready to receive the
impress of the Limner; but is regard of its warping, is unable to keep it, and
therefore is not fit for any worthy Portraicture. Men of this dispofition are
of a more quick than sound conceit, in all their actions unstayed and fickle:
one while embracing an Opinion, as seeming the best; then again looking more
nearly, and not able to answer the doubts which are ready to enter an open
invention, fall to a strange kind of uncertainty. In their negotiating of
business, they decree that of other men's proceedings, which in their own case
they would do: and in this security are oftentimes so overreached by their
Adversary, that they cannot return without great disadvantage and loss.
Commonly they follow rather subtle than wise counsels; which, for the most
part do not speed, being only prima specie laeta, thing of appearance, and no
substance, tractu dura: for by how much the subtilty is greater, by so much it
is necessary that the handling be very curious and exact, else they sort to no
end; being like a Clock, which most artificially composed, is soonest
disordered, and put out of frame: and then they are Eventu tristia; so odious
and unsavoured, that they are always waited on by a sinister success. And
therefore wit may in this case be said to resemble the Sun, which so long as
his beams wander abroad, and disperse according to their natural liberty, does
gently warm and cheen the earth; but when they are by a violent reduction
contracted and drawn together in the hollow of a burning-glass, consumes what
only should be refreshed. In brief, then such should and must be the wit that
is fit to negotiate affairs, whose over-pregnancy must be tempered with a
measure of solidity; by which means becoming actu otiosis simillimi, they
dispach their business with much moderation. And with such a wit our Solicitor
being endued, will even in the execution perceive; and upon present occasion
determine and take counsel, as Fencers do in the Lists, whom the countenance of
the Adversary, the bending of his Body, and the moving of his hands, does
admonish how to proportion the distance, how to offend where is least ward, and
how to defend where there is likely to be made the strongest assault.

1. But it is not enough for our Solliciror to have such a wit, unless the same
be further refined by education. Now education (as the Philosopher speaks) is a
good and continual meaning of the mind: this being indeed the principal
foundation of all humane happiness, and as this is the formal cause of our
life; so the efficient both of a clear Understanding, and so consequenly of a
good life: without which, meh are burdens and eye-sores to the Commonweal;
nothing but a cipher -- Et fruges consumere nati. Now Education may be
achieved as well by association as inculcation: for good Company is like a
wholesome Air; a man may profit much even by the changeable interview of a good
man. This is a thing of a very great consequence in young minds, according to
that of the Poet, Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem -- Testa diu --
They are apt to be seasoned either with good or had Resolutions, and to receive
the impress of any custom, which their first company shall by the silent
persuasions of their acti^ns impose upon them. So then, though company is a
great matter, and will prevail much; yet evil customs may be deleted, at least
altered or amended by inculcation; which must not be done with terms of
affected indignation, but in a more moderate way, mixing reprehensions with
fair persuasions, and laying before the eves of their Understanding the
gentrous Examples of several persons: so by recording tractable and officious
dutifulness, to enslame them to imitate and surpass them.

3. Having thus both by Precept and Example received the benefit of Education
toward the refining of his natural wit; it is in the next place necessary,
that our Solicitor should be perfected by Learning. Now, although Learning
have a private and pleasing end in it self, as being the harbor where the free
and untroubled Consideration has a delightful repose from the Sea of more
unquiet thoughts; yet it is but a servingquality, preparing the mind to a
nobler end of well-doing: for Knowledge or Learning teaches not her own use,
but as a necessary mean enableth us to good actions: and it ought to be
measured by Virtue; and if loved for any rhing, it must be because it informs
us to do virtuously. It is an excellent Commendation that Pliny gives to
Trajan, Praestas quaecunque tibi praecipiunt, tantumque eas literas diligis,
quantum ab illis probaris. We must use the Precepts of Learning as the Laws of
our behavior; we must remember, that the glory and increase of Knowledge
consists in the exercising of Goodness; and the masculine and active power of
the mind must be joined thereto, to make us perform good and great things. But
as it is to be followed, so it is not to embraced with too vehement fervency:
but let that saying of Cato be remembered, That active minds cannot be with a
more honest idleness, then the study of Letters, corrupted; not idleness by any
greater or more dangerous policy find easy entertainment in a well-governed
Commonweal.

This Learning will at length teach to lay hold on another most excellent
branch of her self, which is, Experience: and indeed it is the most entire part
of Learning, without which, the most absolute Scholars and learnedest men
cannot attain to any degree of perfection in civil actions. For there is more
of certainty in the Principles of Practice, then in the most necessary
Demonstrations or clearest discourses of Reason. And these men that are
intendants, (as our Solicitor ought to be) and practiced in the Occurrents of
Courts, are fitter for any active employment, and can with better easiness
dispatch any business: Quoniam enim habent oculum ab ipsa experientia, vident
ipsum principium. These become as it were Trusty Oracles, on whose judgment a
man may safely repose his whole fortunes: they are on earth, instar praesciorum
numinum; whose advice a man ought to take, before he engage himself in any
action.

For the mean by which Wisdom enableth to foresee a success, and accordingly,
after due Consideration, rule the present, is Conjecture; which by comparing
things passed, presupposes out of the same causes the same effects. Now in
this obscure and uncertain deliberation upon the future, our Solicitor being
experienced, is like him, who having tried a dangerous passage in his own
person, and noted the by-turnings which might divert him into an Error, can in
the darkest night, with a secure and forward alacrity, go the same; and
overcoming all difficulties, arrive at the appointed place: whereas another,
though furnished with the soundest directions, (yet never having proved it)
quaketh at every shadow; and having his spirits shut up in amazement, plainly
hazardeth his person. Now the Rules to perfect this Experience in our
Solicitor, are, to frequent the Courts of Justice, as Free-Schools of civil
Learning; to endeavor to understand all Occurrences therein; to confer thereof
with men expert, real, of a deep insight, such as are not carried away with
apparences, but can spy day at a little hole, (as the Proverb speaks) and make
judgment out of matters themselves, and discern between truth, and truth's
likeness, and know when covert designs are the foyls of more eminent
intentions.

4. And now our Solicitor being thus forward toward perfection, lest he should
be too much elated and puffed up, all those his foregoing parts must be balanced
and kept eaven, by the unbyassed Rules of a sound Judgment and solid
Discretion, which should be the balance in which he should weigh all his
actions.

The first part hereof is Deliberation; in which he must neither resolve with
haste nor affection: the one not giving time enough to discuss those things
which ought to be considered; the other so occupying the mind, that no thought
can creep in, which does not in all regards conform it self to give sufferance
to that passion. He must promise himself nothing, before his Conceptions are by
great presumptions assured of success: for the fervency of hope makes men
somewhat more retchlesly negligent; insomuch that when they are disappointed,
they are as impatiently grieved, as if they had fallen from an essential
felicity. Like Novice-Marchants, who fore-counting great gains, and failing of
their fresh expectation, are suddenly embarked in that irrecoverable mischief
of Debt.

Another point of discretion which he ought to make use of, is, Principiis
obstare, to provide at the beginning, and not linger till he be surprised both
in his business and judgment; And what he cannot compass at the first, it is
best by timing and waiting to expect an opportunity: for often, things by time
receive contrary revolutions, and conclude clean different from their appearance
and likelihood. And although he may sometimes wait long, yet he must continue
in Action, and managing of the matter: so may new businesses arise out of the
former, both by reason of the coherency and way that opens one to another.
Herein must be observed that of Cicero; he must non solum animis, sed etiam
oculis servire civium: he must not think himself discharged, except he
accompany his actions with fair likelyhoods. This, if it be not affected, sets
a splendor, and gives a grace to our actions; teaching us to put a difference
in persons, and with diverse natures to treat diversely, applying to every man's
humor.

Some men are so incapable, that they make small things great, easy businesses
impussible: and enter prize nothing, which through their perverseness, is not
with difficulty accomplished; whose folly a man may compare to the
unskilfulness of some Chirurgions, who in stead of healing, fester a wound; and
in stead of mitigation, make the torments more grievously dangerous: whereas
expert ones do with gentle Lenitives redress the malady, before the Patient
have any through sense or feeling of pain. So our Solicitor being thus guided
by discretion, and having his spirit awaked to all circumstances, does manage
matters with a more delicate deportment; and by certain premised Preparatives,
so disposes the mind of the other Agent, as it may be apt to receive any form
which shall be imposed; using the same Consideration which good Players at
Tennis have, who, not to suffer a rest, do not only stand attentive to send it
to their Companion, but with like heed provide to retake it, by accommodating
their person, and expecting it in the likelyest place: so he, to avoid all
hindrances, does not only suit his own words, but also gives favorable
Constructions to the speeches of the other Agent, by dissembling the
discontentments which might arise. In brief, some few other Rules for our
Sollicitor's discretion, may be these: He must avoid sudden changes, for that
does hold of violence; and, Nullum violentum est diuturnum. Again, he must
settle more assurance in him that does expect, than in him who has received, a
benefit; for by speeding in suits, men become slack waiters; when hope of
gaining will certainly keep them in due devotion. He must also be wisely
diffident, and put on a judicial distrust: put on, I say, because there is
nothing less familiar and easy to honest men, then to suspect warily.

Having thus far trained him up in the way to perfection, and laid him down
some few Rules to walk by, come we now in the last place to show how,

5. He shall manifest the same, and comment on his actions. To which purpose it
is necessary that he have a free and voluble tongue to utter and declare his
conceits; in the use whereof, it is necessary that he avoid affectation, and
that his speech be honest, comely, significant, expressive, proper, and void of
all fear and effeminate terms, without any dissimulation: for doubtful and
ambiguous words, with particular ceserves, cafgues a base mind, and imbecility
of spirit. He must not always show himself a Scholar, but sparingly, and when
sit occasion requires it: for sometimes to use conceits of Learning as
Embroideries, is requisite; but then it should be in an hidden manner, like as
Apparel does represent the proportion, but not the barrenness of our members:
but generally, it is the greatest wisdom rather to attend others, then to be
an eloquent Merchant of self conceits: for men expert and practiced, can out of
another man's words deduce great consequences, and take light of matters of
great importance.

With these five Qualities so rectified as aforesaid, our Solicitor being
rightly, adorned, he shall he able with credit to run through all the hazards
and difficult nies which in his practice he shall or may meet with.

Object. But here I meet with an Objection viz. What need is there of all this
coil and ado about a Solicitor? Do not all men know, there are many
Sollicitors who have much practice and great dealing, that have never been bred
to any of those things? simple follows, who had not wit or honesty enough to
learn a mean Trade, and in truth cannot write their own names, and yet are
accounted brave fellows in that business?

Answ. To this I answe: True it is, and to the shame both of the Law and the
Professors thereof be it spoken, that will suffer such fellows by their
ignorance and deceits to abuse so many as they daily do. It Is by the means of
these cheating devouring Caterpillars, that the honorable Professors of the
Law are so often cried out upon for bribing and taking excessive Fees; and it
will be no wonder hereafter if Ignoramus be revived, when such a company of
simple (...) shall be admitted or suffered to usurp (and therein abuse and make
vile) the worthy name of a Lawyer. It is an abuse well worthy to be inspected
by the discerning eyes of the learned Judges of the Land, and some severe
course to be taken for the remedy thereof; whereof, under favor and
permission, I shall make bold only of one small hint, as follow.

Whereas now every idle fellow, whose prodigality and ill husbandry has forced
him out of nis trade or employment, takes upon him to be a Solicitor; and
thereby not only by their multitudes and swarming in every corner, they who
have been at great labor, expense and study, either can have no practice at
all, or at best so little that it is not worthy their looking after; and not
only so, but the Clyent also receives a double damage; first, in the tedious
delay, and sometimes the loss of his cause; and then in the vast expense of his
money, whereof he can have no account: for remedy whereof, it would be well
that it should be declared, That no man should dare to undertake to be a
Solicitor, either at Common Law or in Equity, unless he had for five years
before at least been of some of the Inns of Court, or Inns of Chancery, and
shall be legally admitted and entered in a Roll for that purpose, to be kept in
the Pettybag-Office in Chancery, under a certain pain and punishment; and that
no Clyent do entertain any other than one so qualified; by which means, if any
abuse be offered, the Court may take a Cognizance thereof, and punish the same.
This shall suffice to have spoken in answer to that Objection: I shall now
proceed, and show the dury of our Solicitor, both in what he ought to do, and
what he ought to know. But for that, I shall refer you to the next and
following Chapters.

CHAP. III. What our Solicitor ought to know, the better to enable him in his
practice.
AS we suppose, our-Sollicitor to be chiefly, if not wholly concerned in
matters of Equity; so we shall to that purpose inform him, that he must of
necessity be knowing in Courts of Equity: whereof the Chancery in this Kingdom
being indeed the chief and only lawful Court, if so be that he be truly
instructed therein, it will be sufficient to guide him in all the rest.
Therefore.

In this Court the Lord Chancellor of England is the chief Judge; who in case of
sickness, infirmity, or other extraordinary business, may depute one of the
Judges to sit in his place at any time: but in the Terms, the Master of the
Rolls is equal with, him, and sits at Westminster Hall in the mornings; and
three days in every week, during the continuance of the Terms, sits alone,
assisted by two Masters of the Chancery, in the Chapel of the Rolls: and these
in their several places, in manner aforesaid, do make Orders and Decrees.

The subordinate Officers of this Court are many. The twelve Masters in
ordinary, which are Assistants both to the Lord Chancellor and Master of the
Rolls, as aforesaid, and sit with them; and to whom References are made, and
before whom Deeds and Recognizances are acknowledged, and Affidavits made. This
formerly might have been done before any Master at his own bouse, by the option
of the party concerned: but now, by an Act of Parliament made in the thirteenth
year of King Charles the second' s Reign, there is a general Office erected for
the said Masters, wherein there are at certain hours every day, at least two
Masters attending to dispatch the said business; which may not be done
otherwise, or other-where, but by special Order.

The Register of the Court, who has diverse under him that sit in Court, and
take notice of all Orders and Decrees made in Court, either before the
Chancellor or Master of the Rolls; and accordingly afterward, at the request
of the party concerned, or his Solicitor, draw up those Orders and Decrees
which are afterward to be entered in the said Office, in a Book of Entryes to
that purpose kept; and being so entered, they must be returned to the Register;
who having set his hand thereto, the same thenceforth are authentic, and may
not be altered without especial order from the Court. In this Office also are
filed all Reports from the Masters, and all exceptions taken to any of the same
Reports.

The six Clerks, in whose Office all proceedings upon Bill and Answer, unto the
very Decree, yea, and after Decree, are acted; and from whom likewise issue
some Patents, as for pardon of a man for Chance-medly, Pattents for
Ambassadors, Commissions for Bankrupts: and these are done by their sitting
Clerks, of which each Six-Clerk keeps a set number.

The Cursitors of the Court, who were incorporated, by Queen Elizabeth, by the
name of the Twenty four Cursitors; amongst whom all the business that lies in
the several Shires is severally distributed. These make all Original Writs in
the Chancery, which are returnable in the Common Pleas; and all Writs of Entry,
and Covenants.

The Masters of the Subpoena-Office, the Clerk of the Affidavits, where all
Affidavits are to be filed which you would use in Court. Heretofore they used
them in Court, and after filed them; but now they must be first filed, and a
Copy thereof taken to be read in Court, or else they signify nothing.

The Clerks of the Petty-bag, who have many Clerks under them; and these Clerks
have much variety of business that comes through their hands, and requires very
much knowledge and experience for the managing thereof: for this Office has the
making out of all Writs of Summons to the Parliament. To this Office are all
Offices that are found post mortem, brought to be filed. In this Office are all
Pleadings of the Chancery concerning the validity of any Patent, or other thing
whatsoever that passes the Great Seal. And these Pleadings are all in Latin,
although most of the rest of their Proceeds were in English. If any question
arise about the acknowledgment of any private Deed between Subjects, which is
acknowledged in Chancery before the Lord Chancellor or Master of the Rolls, or
any of the Masters in Chancery; and all Statutes and Recognizances taken before
any Officers to that purpose deputed, are transmitted hither, and here
prosecuted. Here also are all suits for or against any person privileged in
the Court. And lastly, It is a hand whereby to transmit diverse things from the
riding Clerk and the Inrolment-Office, to the Chapel of the Rolls.

The Examiners are Officers of this Court, who take the Depositions of
Witnesses, and are to examine them, and to make out Copies of the Depositions.

There are likewise Clerks of the Rolls, who sit constantly in the Rolls to
make searches for Deeds, Offices, etc. and to make out Copies thereof.

The Ushers of the Court has the receiving and custody of all moneys ordered
to be deposited in Court, and makes Certificates thereof, and pays the same
back again by order of the Court, and not otherwise.

The Sergeant at Arms, who carries the Mace before the Lord Chancellor; to him
all persons, standing in high contempt, are brought up by his Substitutes as
prisoners.

The Warden of the Fleet likewise is bound to attend this Court, to receive
such prisoners as stand committed by the Court to him.

The Court consists of a double power, ordinary and extraordinary: the ordinary
power is (as in the cases of Scire facias) to repeal Patents in case of
Traverse, Endowment of a Woman, and the like: and herein the Court is limited
and confined to the Rules used in Common Law. The other is extraordinary and
unlimited, (as in cases of Equity) wherein relief is to be had by a Suit here
by way of Bill and Answer.

By the power of this Court are issued forth Commissions for charitable Uses,
Bankrupts and Sewers. In some cases Commissions have been here granted to
examine Wastes, to set out meet ways for Passages, to prove a Child
legitimate, to prove Customs, and to examine Witnesses in perpetuam rei
memoriam.

It proceeds by way of Bill and Answer, and gives relief in many cases besides,
and beyond the Rules of the Common Law: whereof practice will show many
experiments.

And to this purpose, it is necessary for our Solicitor to read Tothills and
Caryes Reports.

CHAP. IV. Of the whole duty of our Solicitor in his Practice.
HAving in the former Chapter gone through the most necessary things which our
Solicitor ought to know barely; it remains now, we should come to the practick
part of it; wherein we shall set down plain and easy Directions for the
greatest part of their manner of proceedings; wherein, for methods sake, we
will begin with their first Process, called a Subpoena.

This Writ of Subpoena is the leading Process of this Court, as to the
procedure, by Bill and Answer; and is a close Writ, and does require the
Defendants appearance in Court at a certain day, and under a certain pain
therein limited, to make answer to the complaint of the Plaintiff, which is
indeed the Bill: which in former times was wont to be put in, before the
Subpoena sued forth; but now of long time has been otherwise used. This first
Subpoena is called Subpoena ad respondendum; and is distinguished by that name,
because there are several other Subpoena's in order to further proceeding; as,
a Subpoena for Costs, a Subpoena to make a better answer, a Subpoena to rejoyn,
a Subpoena for Wi^nesses to testify, a Subpoena to hear Judgment, and a
Subpoena ducens tecum, for Writings, Evidences, etc. Touching the Subpoena to
answer, you must be very careful that there be no mistake in the body of the
Writ; for that may prejudice the Plaintiff; and the Defendant may take
advantage thereof, if he find it: but if there be a mistake only in the Label,
no advantage can be taken by it. In none of these Writs may there at any time
be put more then three names.

This Writ may be returnable two ways: either upon the common days of Return,
as die Jovis proxime post tres Michaelis; or else upon any day certain, which
now is the most usual course. And it is to be served before the Return thereof
be past: and this is to be done either by the delivery of the Writ it self
under Seal to the Defendant in person, or by showing to him the Writ under
Seal, delivering him a Note or Label of the day of his appearance. And this
last course is most usual, because oftentimes there are more persons than one
in the Subpoena, and then the body of the Writ is reserved to be left with the
last. Neither indeed is it at all required to serve this Writ personally: for
it has often been declared a good Service, when the Writ or Label thereof has
only been left at the Defendants Dwelling House, with some relating to him, and
Affidavit thereof made; otherwise, no contempt can be grounded thereon. And
where a Defendant does hide himself, or refuse to be spoken with, it has been
allowed to be good service, to leave the Writ hanging upon the door of the
House, or to put it into the house under the door, or in at the window of the
house of his usual Residence. Also it is taken for a good service, although it
be served on the fame day, it is returnable, if it be served before Noon of
that day, or before the rising of the Court. Where a Subpoena is had against
Husband and Wife, and the husband alone is served, and has notice, that it is
against him and his wife; this is a good service to both; and for want of an
appearance, an attachment may be had either against the wife only, or both. The
Subpoena being served as aforesaid, the Bill must be put in, in due time; or
else the Defendant will have costs: to prevent which, you must take notice what
time is prefixed for the exhibiting the Bill, after the return of the Subpoena:
which is thus; If the Subpoena be returnable upon a general Return-day, as
Crasti^o Octabis, Tres Men's. etc. post, etc. then has the Plaintiff time to
put in his Bill until the second day before Noon next following, being the
fourth day following every of the said Returns; and you must account the
Return-day, and the fourth day after it, for two of the said four day. But
where the Subpoena is returnable upon a certain day of the Month, then the Bill
must be filed the second day after before Dinner. And if the Bill be not filed,
(the Subpoena being returnable on a certain day of any month) then the
Defendants appearance being entered, his Clerk in Court may prefer costs the
next day after: and if the Bill come not in the next day after costs so
preferred, before Noon, or presently after Dinner; then the Defendant is
discharged with such costs as a Master of the Court shall tax him. But where
the Subpoena is returnable on a Return day, the next day after the fourth day
is costs day: and if the Bill come not in the next after the costs day, as
aforesaid, (the costs being preferred the day before) then the Defendant is
discharged from attendance, as aforesaid, with his costs.

Where the costs are not voluntarily paid for want of a Bill, by the Plaintiff
or his Clerk, to the Defendant or his Clerk; in such case the Defendant may
have a Subpoena for the said costs, which must be personally served on the
Plaintiff: and if thereupon the costs be not yet paid, then the Defendant may
(upon Affidavit made and filed, that the said Subpoena was served) have an
Attachment directed to the Sheriff of the County where the Complainant lives,
to attach him for the said costs: and if the Sheriff make return, upon the
attachment, that the Complainant cannot be found, then a Proclamation may be
sued out against him; and that also being returned with a Non est inventus,
then a Commission of Rebellion may be taken forth.

On the other side, if the Plaintiff do in due time file his Bill, and the
Defendant appears not the next day after costs day; then the Complainant,
upon Oath made, That the Defendant was served with the Subpoena, may have an
Attachment; and if the Sheriff return Non est inventus thereon, he may sue out
a Proclamation and Commission of Rebellion in manner aforesaid, successively
one after another.

The Affidavit that must be made of the service of the Subpoena, must be made
according as the manner of the service was: for if the Affidavit made, do not
prove a good service, as before is set forth, then no attachment can be had
upon it: for there can be no attachment regularly made out against the
Defendant for not appearing, until there be a certain and positive Oath made
of the time, place, and manner of serving the Subpoena, insetting therein the
Return of the Writ.

And where any person served with a Subpoena does injury or wrong, either by
word or deed to the party who acted in the service of it, or does set at naught
or contemn the Writ it self, or the Authority of the Court from whence it
issues; upon Oath made thereof, and motion thereupon, such person will be
committed to the Fleet.

Where there is appearance made by the Defendant within the time limited, and
the Bill also filed; in such case, upon a Rule given by the Plaintiffs Clerk to
the Defendants Clerk, and the same entered into the Register, the Defendant is
to answer to the Bill by the same day seven-night then next to come: which if
he fail to do; and do not otherwise in that time satisfy the Court, by showing
sufficient cause of such his delay, then the Complainant's Clerk may make out
an Attachment against him.

Now this Writ of Attachment cannot be duly had, unless the Subpoena
before-going were duly obtained: for if the Subpoena be counterfeit, or if
true, not legally served, the Attachment is irregular; and the Defendant
arrested by it, upon disclosing the matter to the Court, will be discharged
thereof: whereas an Attachment duly gotten, may not be discharged till the
Defendant have first paid 25 s. costs; and every succeeding Process, double so
much; and upon account thereof, he is discharged of course.

The Husband appeared, and the Wife not: an Attachment was granted against
both. Ab^lls Case; 19 Eliz. Caryes Rep. 65.

So he alone appeared, and put in a Demurrer in both their names, without
excusing her: Attachment was granted against both. Spicers Case, Caryes Rep. 39.

The Defendant made Oath, He could not answer without sight of Evidences, and
had time given him, and afterward put in a Demurrer: Attachment went out
against him Pasch. 21: Eliz. Farmers Case.

Where the Defendant is served with a Subpoena; and afterward, for not
appearing, an Attachment issues against him, if he do not appear thereon, but
suffer a Non est inventus to be returned, there will go out Proclamation of
Rebellion against him. Yet note, That the Process of Contempt, and all
Attachments in Process, are to be discharged upon the Defendants payments of
the ordinary costs of the Court to the Plaintiffs Clerk, or his tender thereof
to the same, and his refusal to take it, and filing of the Plea, Answer or
Demurrer, as the case merits, without any motion: and if the Plaintiff do
prosecute the Contempt afterward, the Defendant will be discharged with costs.

Where an Attachment is had, if the Sheriff do not make his Return, a day will
be given; and if he do not by that time, the Court will set an Amerciament upon
him.

Where any party is attached, and afterward proclaimed, and he comes not in,
but stands further out in contempt, in such case a Commission of Rebellion may
be issued forth against him, for the apprehending of him, and bringing him into
the Fleet, (the proper Prison of this Court) and this Commission of Rebellion
is sometimes directed to the Sheriff, and sometimes to private persons; as in
the Case of Gage and Etrington, Trin. 38. Jacob. Tethil. 37. This course is
likewise taken against those that perform not obedience to Orders or Decrees to
pay costs, or the like.

Where private persons are made Commissioners, and to take the person in
contempt; if they suffer him to escape, the Solicitor may by motion get them
committed, till they bring him in; as in the Case of S^chevorel against
Sachevorel, Hill. Term, 18. Jacob. Tothil. 38.

If any person rescue one taken by a Commission of Rebellion, the Rescuer may
be gotten to be committed. And if the Commissioners, upon such a Commission,
let the party in contempt go where he list, whereby he make an escape, they may
be procured to be committed to the Fleet, till they pay the Debt. See Nelsons
Case against Yelverton in Trin. 18 Jacob. Tothil. 39.

If a party appears not, but stands further out in contempt, a Sergeant at Arms
may be sent out to take him: and if he cannot, either by reason of his hiding
or resistance; or having taken him, he escape, and so persist higher in his
contempt; in such case, a Sequestration may be obtained, upon a motion and
Affidavit thereof, of his Land: and if the Suit be for Land, a Sequestration
and Injunction for the profits of the Land, to be delivered to the Plaintiff by
the Sheriff, or other Commissioners for that purpose: as in the Case of Boles
against Walleg and his wife. Caryes Rep. 38, 58, 105, 109.

In all these Cases, it behooves a good Solicitor to be careful, watchful, and
diligent, that he may not slip any opportunity that may work for the advantage,
benefit, and behoof of his Clyent and his Cause.

SECT. 2.
THe next part of our Sollicitor's practice, is to be skilled in Bills and
Answers, and the several proceedings thereupon: wherein he must observe, That
the Plaintiffs Bill is in effect the same that the Declaration, after an
Appearance had, is, either in the Kings Bench or Common Pleas, and lays down
the cause of his Complaint in Chancery, being usually such as is exempt from
remedy at Common Law; and therefore they commonly insert in the Bill these
words, That the Plaintiff has no remedy at Law. And this Bill, by continuance
of such practice, may be put in after the Subpoena, is both taken out and
served, so as it come in within the time before limited in the former Section,
to prevent costs.

This Bill in Chancery, and all subsequent Pleadings and Proceedings upon it,
must be succinct and short, and not stuffed with repetitions of Deeds, Writings,
or Records, (in haec verba) but the effects and substance of so much of them
only as it is pertinent and material to set down; and that in brief terms,
without long and needless traverses of things not traversable, and without
tautologies and impertinencies. Neither must it contain any matter either
criminal or scandalous against the Defendant, or any other; and if it do, the
Defendant may refuse to answer it, and the Plaintiff and his Counsel (whose
hand is to it) may be punished for it; and any other party grieved may recover
costs against such Counsel.

Where any Bill contains matter not proper for the Court to give relief in, the
Bill may be gotten dismissed: and so likewise will it be, if there want
Counsel's hand to the Bill, or if the Counsel's hand be counterfeited or
disallowed.

To such a Bill rightly fitted and filed, the Defendant is to make Answer;
wherein many times he makes much delay: but in all cases of delay, he must upon
Oath satisfy the Court of the cause of such his delay; which may be in several
respects: as, First, Where the matter contained in the Bill is such, as to
which he cannot give an answer direct, without conference had with some other
person in the Bill named, or to whom the Bill refers. Secondly, Where the Bill
charge the Defendant with the having of Evidences or Writings, or Goods or
Chattels of the Complainants, to make discovery what they are: in such case the
Evidences or Writings, and Goods, being in the Country, and he in London; he
may make Oath, he cannot answer perfectly to the Plaintiff's Bill, without
sight and perusal of the Goods, Evidences, or Writings which he has in the
Country. Upon which Oath so made, the Answer will be suspended till the first
day of the next Term: but in these cases, the place in the Country where the
parties live, Goods, Evidences or Writings lie, must be above twenty miles from
London: for if it be nearer, he must answer in eight days after appearance,
unless further time be given by order.


There may also be Oath made by another person, either the Solicitor, his
Servant, or Neighbor to the Defendant, that he is sick, and cannot travel
without danger of life: and upon such an Oath, a Dedimus Potestatem (if the
Plaintiff will not consent to it) upon a motion or Petition, will be allowed to
the Defendant. But heed must be taken, that the O^der whereby it was granted,
must be carefully entered in the Registers Office; and the Affidavit upon which
the Order is grounded, must be filed in the Affidavit-Office. Where the
Defendant does not appear; or that after he has made his appearance, he does
not answer within the time limited him, nor shows any cause for the same: in
such case, an Attachment is awarded against him; which must be entered in the
House-book of the Six Clerks Office, and likewise in the Register-book,
expressing the cause of issuing the Attachment.

Where there is no day given by Rule to the Defendant to answer, in such case
the Defendant is at liberty to answer at any time during the Term: and where
the Defendant makes default within that time to answer, then an Attachment may
be sued forth against him of Course, and the same with the cause thereof must
be entered, as before is mentioned in the last Paragraph.

Where the Subpoena is made returnable so near the end of the Term, that there
cannot be a day given to the Defendant to answer; in such case the Defendant
must at his peril answer by the same day seven-night next following the day of
his appearance, although it be out of Term: for the Chancery is said to be
always open. But where the Subpoena is returnable on the last Return-day of
the Term, then the Defendant is at liberty to appear the first Return of the
Term following. But if the Subpoena, be returnable upon a day certain, although
the day be the last day of the Term, yet the Defendant is bound to appear and
answer by that day seven-night next following the said appearance.

In all Cases where the Defendant makes Oath, That he cannot answer without
sight of Writings, Evidences, or Goods, as aforesaid, or conference with some
other person, or that he have a Dedimus Potestatem, and Commission to take his
Answer in the Country; the Defendant must at his peril procure his Answer to be
put in before the day after the first costs-day of the next Term following,
unlese it be in Trinity-Term; for there it may be put in the second day after
the second return; or otherwise, the Plaintiffs Clerk may upon his default make
out an Attachment against him for not answering in time.

Where the Defendant has a Dedimus granted him, if there be cause of Plea or
Demurrer found, then the Defendant ought to move or petition the Court to have
a special Dedimus Potestatem by order to answer, plead, or demur; for that the
Commissioners upon an ordinary Dedimus have power to take and return no other
things than an Answer only.

Wh^re the Defendant does demur, or put in any just Plea that he has to the
disability of the person of the Plain^iff, or to the Jurisdiction of the Court,
under the hand of learned Counsel; it will be received and filed, although the
Defendant do not deliver the same in person, or by Commission. And if he do not
put in his Demurrer or Plea into the Paper of Pleas and Demurrers in the
Register-Office appointed for purpose, within eight days after the same is put
into Court, that so it may be argued before the Lord Chancellor or his Deputy,
as it shall sall in course; the same being so omitted to be done, the Plea or
Demurrer is overruled of course, and the Plaintiff may take forth a Subpoena
to inform the Defendant to make better answer, and another for costs for the
said overruling.

Where a man exhibits his Bill in Chancery, and dies pendente lite, whoever
has the interest in the thing complained for, whether Heir, Executor, or
Administrator, they may put in a Bill of Reviver against the Defendant: or in
case the Defendant die, the Plaintiff may exhibit his Bill of Reviver against
the Heirs, Executors or Administrators of the Defendant.

Where a Bill is exhibited against a man and his wife, and the matter contained
in the Bill, wholly concerns the wife, and they both answer the Bill, and after
answer, the husband dies; in this case, a Bill of Reviver must be brought by
the Complainant against the woman, if he intend to proceed in that Suit: and
the reason is, for that the woman shall not be constrained to abide by that
answer which she, together with her husband, or solely as wife unto the man,
has formerly made to the Complainant, for that she was at that time under
Coverture. And in case she survives her husband, and continues possessed or
seixed of the thing in controversy in statu quo, she may as she shall think
fit, make a new answer, and shall not be bound up or concluded by that answer
which she made during Coverture, or solely as wife to the man: and yet if she
thinks fit, she may stand to that former answer of hers, and proceed
accordingly in that Suit.

Where a Plaintiff exhibits his Bill against a Femme sole, and she appearing,
makes answer, and afterward marrying, becomes under coverture pendente lite:
in this case the Plaintiff may proceed against her and her husband, and shall
not need any Bill of Reviver; and her husband shall be bound by that Answer
which she made while a Femme sole, for that she shall not advantage her self by
her own act.

Whereas, on the other side, if a Femme sole exhibit her Bill, and the
Defendant answer thereunto, and afterward she intermarrieth; here there can be
no further proceeds by the husband and wife, without a Bill of Revivor, because
she has abated her Suit by her own act of marriage, of which the Defendant may
take his best advantage.

Where the man and the Wife exhibits a Bill, whereto the Defendant answers;
afwards the man dies, the woman may be at her choice, whether she will exhibit
a new Bill, or proceed upon the Bill by her husband and her self formerly
exhibited.

Where there are two-seized of Joynt-estates, or when they are Executors of one
Will, or Obligees or Obligors, and they prefer a Bill in Chancery, to which the
Defendant makes Answer; and after one of them dies; here the Survivor may
proceed in his Suit against the Defendant, and shall need no Bill of Revivor.

Note, That the Bill of Revivor must pursue the first Bill exhibited: for where
there is any variance between them, the Defendant may be discharged, and the
Bill will be dissolved.

Where there are Administrators durante minore aetate of an Infant, Executors
in the nature of a Guardian, and, they sue on the Infants behalf; and the Suit
depending, the Infant comes to age, here it seems there needs no Bill of
Revivor.

Where the Complainant has exhibited his Bill of Revivor, and has procured
thereupon a Subpoena to be served, he will be upon this in the same case, as
the Predecessor was when the Bill accrued, unless some good cause to the
contrary (as, that he is not Heir, Executor, nor has the like interest, etc.)
can by the Defendants Answer be showed.

Where a man does willingly refuse to Answer, and does stand out all process of
Contempt, the Court will take the matter of the Bill pro confesso, and decree
it accordingly. See Tothil. 69.

If the Answer be good to common intent, the Plaintiff must Reply, and prove
the matter if he can, and not insist upon insufficiency of the Answer.

No exception can be taken to an Answer after a Replication put in; for it is
then admitted to be good: but before Replication, it may be excepted against.
But where it is excepted against, the causes must be shown in Writing, and
delivered in to the Plaintiffs Clerk the same Term the Answer comes in, or with
eight days after: and if he amend it in eight days, he shall pay no costs;
otherwise he must.

Where an Answer is excepted against as insufficient, it is usually referred to
a Master to consider of the Exceptions, and he to certify whether it
insufficient, or not: if he certify it insufficient, then the Plaintiff may
take out Process for costs, and the Defendant's second Answer is not to be
received, till he has paid the costs.

The first Answer being returned insufficient, the Defendant must pay forty
shillings for single costs: if it be an Answer that came in by Commission, and
insufficient, he must pay fifty shillings costs.

The second insufficient Answer pays three pounds, the third five pounds: and
you may have a Subpoena both for cost, and for a better Answer.

In all cases of Exceptions, the insufficiency appearing in the same
Exceptions, are the point to be insisted on, and no new Exceptions may be
moved. But if the Master upon reference finds the Answer to be sufficient, and
accordingly certifies it, there the Plaintiff must pay forty shillings cost.

If the Exceptions to an Answer be put in after the Term, there shall be time
given to answer them until the fourth day of the next Term, unless the Court
hasten it.

If an Answer come in by Commission, and be not good, no new Commission will be
admitted, but upon Oath of inability of the person, and his payment of fifty
shillings costs, as before.

Where a Cause goes to hearing upon Bill and Answer, the sam: must be admitted
to be true in all points; and no other Evidence is to be admitted but what is
matter of Record, to which is provable by the Record it self. Caryes Rep. 78,
30.

SECT. 3.
THe third thing necessary for a perfect Solicitor, is, to understand clearly
the matter of Pleas and Demurrers: wherein he must observe: First, That a
Demurrer is always where there is matter defective contained in the Bill, or
where is foreign matter.

The Plea of foreign matter may be of two sorts: either where it is to the
Jurisdiction of th: Court, or to the disability of the person: as, where the
Plaintiff is Outlawed or Excommunicate, or where there is in this, or any
other Court, a Bill or Suit depending for the same cause: or, it may be, that
the Cause has been formerly dismissed in this Court, or the like; or if the
matter of it appear pear upon Record, it may be put in without Oath, otherwise
not. In case it be a Demurrer, it must express the cause of the Demurrer: yet
other causes may be insisted on at the time of arguing thereof in Court. When
if the Demurrer be overruled, the Defendant shall pay five Marks costs; and
where it is allowed, the Defendant shall have no costs.

If one plead a Plea that is insufficient, and in overruled to be, as where it
is an Out-lawry pleaded; and it is not a good Plea, he must pay five Marks
costs.

An Out-lawry is not to be pleaded, unless you plead the Record Sub pede
Sigilli. Also

A Plea of Out-lawry, if it be in a Suit for the same thing for which a man
sueth to be relieved in Chancery, is not to be allowed; but otherwise it is
allowed, and will be in force to hinder all the Plaintiffs proceedings, till it
be reversed. But when it is reversed, the Plaintiff may upon payment of twenty
shillings costs, upon a new Subpoena served, put the Defendant to answer the
same Bill.

Where the Plaintiff conceives the Plea for matter or manner naught, he may put
it to the Judgment of the Court.

Where a man pleads a former Suit, he need not set it down with the Register;
but it shall be referred to a Master to certify, (which must be done within a
Month upon the Plaintiffs procurement) and if the Master certify against the
Plaintiff, he must pay five shillings costs: if there be no Report within a
Month of filing the Plea; the Bill will be dismissed of course, with seven
Nobles costs.

If the Demurrer to any Bill be put in upon any slip or mistake in the Bill,
the Plaintiff of course laying down to the Defendants Clerk twenty shillings
for costs, may amend his Bill within eight days after the Demurrer put in, but
not after that time.

If the Demurrer be admitted by the Plaintiff to be good within eight days
after the filing of it, and he does pay the Defendants Clerk in Court forty
shillings costs, then the Defendant shall not need to attend his Demurrer; but
the Bill shall stand dismissed of course without motion, unless both sides
agree to the amendment of the same: yet such dismission is to be no bar to a
new Bill, to be exhibited by the Plaintiff.

Where the Plaintiff finds sufficient cause for an Order upon the Answer, he
may go to hearing thereupon without further proof, (of which there oughe to be
very good advice taken) in which case, he must get his Clerk to present the
same in course, to be set down to be heard upon Bill and Answer. But in case
the Court shall not find grounds to make a Decree or final Order, the Bill
shall be dismissed with costs, or the Plaintiff admitted to reply, if he
deserve it; first paying down five pounds costs within four days after such
hearing; else the dismission to stand, and the conclusion of the Order upon
hearing is to be penned by the Register accordingly: and then such dismission
shall be a good Plea in bar of any new Bill for the same matter.

Where a Plaintiff proceeds so far as to proof, and upon the hearing, it
clearly appears, that the Plain if might have had full relief upon Bill and
Answer, albeit he be relieved in the same cause, yet he shall pay costs. See
more fully these things in the Collection of Orders, and Caryes Reports, 39, 87.

SECT. 4.
OTher things in practice necessary to be understood by our Solicitor, are,
Replications, Rejoynders, and Sur-rejoynders. Now a Replication is the
Plaintiff speech, in way of a Reply to the Defendant Answer: the Rejoinder is
the Defendants Answer to the Plaintiffs Replication; and the Sur-rejoynder is
the second defense to the Plaintiffs Action, opposite to the Defendants
Rejoinder.

1. The Replication must be short, relating to the substance of the Bill; and
it must avoid superfluous and crim^nous matter. 2. The Replication must affirm
and pursue the Bill, and confess and avoid traverse, or d^ny the Answer. 3. The
Rejoinder that must pursue and confirm the Answer, and must sufficiently
confess or avoid traverse, or deny any material part of the Replication. 4. No
new matter must be put into the Replication; and so much matter only is
necessary to be there, as will avoid the matter of the Answer. 5. If upon the
Answer there be so much confessed, that the Plaintiff need not to draw into
pleading, and prove all the points; he must see to it, and reply, and go to
proof only in those particulars in question, and necessary to be proved. 6.
When the Defendant does demur or disclaim to any Bill exhibited against him,
the Plaintiff cannot reply; and if the Defendant in those cases be served with
a Subpoena ad rejungendum, having before made no other Answer, but a Demurrer
or Disclaimer, as aforesaid, he shall have costs for unjust vexation.
Where the case is such, that the parties cannot come to issue by reason of
some new matter disclosed in the Defendant's Rejoinder, that requires to be
answered unto; the Plaintiff may Sur-rejoyn to the Rejoinder, and the Defendant
likewise to the Sur-rejoynder, if there be cause.

As for the time of the Replication to be put in after the Answer; you are to
observe, that the Plaintiff has time for all that Term, and all the next Term,
and until the beginning of the third Term, to put in his Replication. The next
Term after the Answer is put in, the Defendant may give the Plaintiff rule to
reply; and if such rule be given, and the Plaintiff reply not, costs will be
given against him: but if there be no rule given, and the Plaintiff does not
reply the second Term after the Term the Answer is put in, the Bill will be
dismissed with costs of course. But in case the Plaintiff does reply, and that
the Replication be in Court, the Defendant can have no costs.

Where the Complainant has replied, the Defendant may* if he will rejoyn
Gratis, and force the Complainant to join in Commission.

Where the Plaintiff intends to go to Commission, he must serve the Defendant
with a Subpoena ad rejungendum, before he can have Commission to examine
Witnesses; and upon return of that Subpoena, and Oath made of the serving of
it, the Plaintiff may by entering Rules, force the Defendant to rejoyn and join
in Commission, or go on to the examining Witnesses without him: for having
given him seven days to rejoyn, if within that time he refuse to do it, he
ought not to be admitted to do it afterward.

Where the Defendant is served with a Subpoena ad rejungendum, and does not
upon the Plaintiff's Clerk's demand to the Defendant's Clerk deliver
Commissioners Names by the end of the Term, wherein the Subpoena is returnable,
there the Plaintiff may either without motion or petition give Names, and take
a Commission ex part. See Caryes Rep. 111. And this has brought you to
another branch of your Sollicitors duty, viz. the manner of joining in
Commission, and executing thereof.

SECT. 5.
IN the joining in Commission therefore to examine Witnesses, the Complainant,
according to daily practice, first gives four Names, and then the Defendant
gives four Names: now the Plaintiff or his Solicitor strikes out two of the
Defendant's Names, and the Defendant or his Solicitor strikes out two of the
Plaintiff's names; and the other four, being on each side two, remain the
Commissioners. This being done, and the Commission ready, the Plaintiff is to
have the carriage thereof; and he or his Commissioners must give either in
person, or by Note left in writing at the place of the usual a bode of the
other party, fourteen days notice to him of the time and place of executing
the Commission: and if there be default then made by the Plaintiff or his
Commissioners in the execution thereof, he must pay the Defendant such costs,
as he upon his Oath, shall make appear he was put to in the attending the said
Commission; and the Plaintiff must renew the Commission at his own charge, and
the Defendant shall have the carriage of it. And so on the other side shall the
Plaintiff have, if the Defendant have the carriage of the Commission, and it be
lost by default of his side. But where it becomes void by an err our of the
Clerk in making of it, the costs shall be born by him, and that side for whom
it was taken out.

Where the Defendant has the carriage of the Commission, he must give notice
to the Plaintiffs, as is before directed: and if such notice be not given,
either all the examinations will be quashed, or otherwise the Court will grant
to the other side a Commission ex part.

Where there has been Publication, there no Commission can be granted or
renewed for examining Witnesses without special Order.

Where a Commission has been to examine Witnesses, without reference and
certificate upon it, it cannot be discharged upon a bare petition.

Where a Commission is taken out by consent, and the one side at the speeding
thereof do put in no Interrogatories, nor examine any Witnesses, (unless upon a
motion, and by order of the Court) he shall never be after admitted to have a
new Commission.

Where the Defendant had Witnesses, and they being served, did not appear, but
make default, here a new Commission will be granted to the Defendant. See
Caryes Rep. 91, 45. Tothil. 3.

The next thing is the choice of Commissioners, and exceptions against them.
First, they must be men indifferent: for the Exceptions that are usually taken
against them, are, that he who is named Commissioner, is of Kindred, or Allied
to the party for whom he is named, and so may very well be deemed to side with
that patty: or that he is Master to the party for whom he is named, or that he
is Landlord, or of his Council, or Attorney for him, or one to whom he is
indebted, or one that has a Suit with the adverse party.

The Commission being to be sat upon at the time and place appointed, the
Commissioners must call the Witnesses before them; where, if they appear not,
an Attachment issues against them, unless it be where Witnesses are impotent,
and then the Commission may be adjourned to them, to examine them where they
be: and usually the Witness may demand his costs before he Answer.

Where Witnesses appear to be examined, the Commissioners or Examiners must
examine them themselves, and not leave so weighty a business to the trust of
their Clerks, or others to do it. They are to hold the Witnesses to the point
insisted upon. They should examine them but to one Interrogatory at a time, and
not to read another to them, till they have answered that first. They are to
take what comes from them, in answer to what they are examined; and not upon
their sight and reading all the Interrogatories, to let them set it down
themselves. After they have been examined, upon better thoughts they may suffer
them to amend their Examinations: They ought not neither to ask idle Questions
besides the matter of the Interrogatories, nor set down impertinent Answers.
They are to set down truly in Parchment their Sayings; and that done, they are
to set their hands to every Schedule, and send them up into Court as they are
taken, with a Certificate: and if the Commissioners meet with any obstruction
in the Work, they must certify that also.

After the Commission is duly executed, and returned up, one of them must
deliver it in Court, or they must send it by one that must make Oath, that he
received it from one of their hands, and that it is not altered to his
knowledge.

If any one of the Commissioners commit any misdemeanor about examination, the
party grieved, upon Oath thereof made, may have an Attachment against him.

Where is a disagreement among the Commissioners, or where there is any other
special cause that obstructs the Commission, they may have an Examiner sent
down on purpose to do it. See Caryes Rep. 30, 31, 40, 47, 80, 81. Tothil. 189.

The Interrogatories to examine Witnesses, must be succinct and apt: and when
Witnesses, upon such Interrogatories, are examined in Court, you cannot examine
the same Witnesses upon putting in new Interrogatories.

Witnesses ought to be examined by Examiners in Court, (if they live in or near
the Town) and not by Commissioners: for no Commission whatsoever ought to be
issued out into any place within ten miles of London.

Either party, as well Plaintiff as Defendant, after Answer put, until
Publication be past, may examine what Witnesses they please in Court, before
one of the Examiners: but before Answer, and after Publication, no Examination
will be allowed, but by special order, some special cause being showed.

Notice must be given both of the names and dwelling-places of the persons
examined, in all cases of examination.

After an Order for Publication, and that delivered to the Examiner, no Witness
may be examined in Court, though he were sworn before; and if any such be, his
Depositions may be suppressed. Caryes Rep. 27, 58, 93. Tothil. 189, 190, 192.

No Abstract or Copy of the Depositions of any Witnesses is to be delivered,
till Publication be past. Neither may any Depositions be suppressed upon a bare
Petition only, with References and Certificates upon it.

Where there are several Causes, which are merely cross Causes between the same
parties, and touching the same matter, there the Depositions of Witnesses in
the several Causes may be used at the hearing of both Causes, (being heard
together) without any motion.

Where Depositions are regularly taken, they may not be suppressed by motion:
but if any Depositions appear to the Court to be gotten by practice, they may
by order of the Court be suppressed. Depositions taken in Chancery, may by
order of the Court be made use of in any other Court. Caryes Rep. 35.56.

He that will examine Witnesses, (in perpetuam rei memoriam) to preserve a
testimony, he must first exhibit his Bill, and show his Title to the thing, and
that the Witnesses to prove it, are old, and not like to live long, whereby he
is in danger to lose it; and then pray a Commission to some Gentlemen of credit
in the Country to examine them, and a Subpoena to the parties interested, to
show cause, if they can, to the contrary: and if the party interested being
duly served, within fourteen days show cause, the Plaintiff must desist; and
if no cause be shown, he may go on alone, if the other will not join with him,
as he may, if he will: and then fourteen days warning is to be given of the
execution thereof. In this case the Court will appoint Commissioners, and give
Articles to examine upon; or they may be examined in Court by an Examiner. But
here observe, That none but aged and impotent persons may be examined upon this
Commission.

Where the Defendant takes Exceptions to the proceedings in speeding the
Commission, as, whether he did appear or not, and whether Oath were made before
them of notice given to him of the time and place of execution thereof; in such
case the Commissioners must certify up with the Commission, the Exceptions the
Defendant so took.

This testimony taken upon this Commission, is not to be published while the
Witnesses live; but in some cases, as either by consent of the parties, or upon
Oath made, that either the Plaintiff has some trial at Law, wherein he shall
need it, and that the Witnesses are not able to come to the place, or otherwise
by order of Court; and then the Commission is to be opened by a Master, and to
be considered of; and afterward it may, if the party will exemplify it, by
order of this Court, be given in evidence in any other Court.

These Depositions thus taken, shall not be made use of to be given in Evidence
against any other but the Defendant, who was warned to defend it, his Heirs or
Assigns, or some other claiming by or under him, by some interest which
accrued to him after the Bill preferred. Tothil 189, 190, 191, 192.

Where both Plaintiff and Defendant have examined what Witnesses they please,
and are ready to go to hearing, there neither of them must first give the other
a Rule for Publication: which Rule being expired, and no cause shown to the
contrary, then Publication passes. After which, neither party can examine
Witnesses, unless it be by special order of the Court; which will not be
granted without an Oath made, that the party which requires the same, nor any
of his Council, or Solicitor, have seen, read, or been made privy to any
Examinations of any the Witnesses formerly examined in that cause, by either of
the parties; and thereupon some good cause be shown, either by Oath, or
Certificate of Commissioners, why the party could not get his said Witnesses
examined within the time limited for their Examination: in which case sometimes
the Court gives liberty to examine Witnesses by a time prefixed: with this
Proviso, That the party shall not in the mean time see any of the said former
Examinations.

After Publication is had, the Plaintiff, or, if he neglect, the Defendant may
procure a day of hearing of course to be set down by his Clerk at the end of
the Term, when either the Lord Chancellor or Master of the Rolls do set down
Causes to be heard.

The days must be set down according to the priority of Publication; neither
must any Cause be presented for hearing, the same Term that Publication passes.

All Process to hear Judgment must be returnable six or seven days before the
day of hearing, except it be in the beginning of the Term, when the time will
not bear it: and the Writ must have on the back of it the very day of hearing;
at which day, if the Plaintiff do not appear, the Defendant is to be dimissed
with costs. Caryes Rep. 45.

SECT. 6.
OUr Solicitor having thus far, with diligence, managed his Clyents business,
and brought his Cause to a hearing; the next point of his care will be to get
the Decree drawn up; which should be done as short as with convenience it may,
and not r^cite the Pleadings at large, but the sum thereof briefly. And if it
be made before the Master of the Rolls, or any of the Judges, it ought, being
drawn, to be first signed by them, and afterward by the Lord high Chancellor,
and then it must be enrolled; which Signing and Inrolment ought to be done
before the first day after the next Michaelmas or Easter-Term, after the making
of i^.

Where the Decree concerns Lands or Leases, it must be entered into the
Registers Docker-Book, within six Months after the making of it; otherwise it
shall not prejudice the Purchaser of the Land: neither indeed shall any Decree
be binding to any but those who are served with Process ad audiendum Judicium,
or that did appear Gratis.

The Purchaser that comes in by Conveyance bona fide from the Defendant, before
the Bill exhibited, and that is no party by Bill or Order, shall not be bound
up by any Decree. But where a man becomes a Purchaser, pendente lite, and
without any color of privity, or allowance of this Court, there it shall
regularly bind him: yet in such case, if there have been any intermission of
the Suit, or the Court be acquainted with the Conveyance, then the Court is to
give order and direction in it.

No Decree made by the Court can be crossed, altered, or explained upon: a bare
petition only; and yet thereby it for some special Reasons may be stayed for a
while, till it can be moved in Court.

A Decree once enrolled, cannot be reversed or altered but by a Bill of Review,
unless it be in case of mis-casting, where the Case is demonstrative; and then
it may be done by Order.

A Decree will bind the person of a man: for where any do refuse to obey it,
the Court will imprison them, till they conform. It binds also the Rights and
Titles to Lands and Goods: for, the Court by Order of Sequestration and
Injunction, will dispose of the possession thereof for ever to him to whom the
Court judges the right to belong in conscience.

Where a Decree is to be made upon a pretense of Equity against the Judgment of
another Court, that Judgment is first read; and then the Decree is not to
vacate the Judgment, but to order the unreasonable party.

The Decree being this obtained, our Solicitor may sometimes meet with
stubborn and perverse people: it is most requisite therefore, that he be
instructed how the Court does use to enforce Obedience to their Decrees, and to
punish the breach of them; that so he may the better know which way to take to
procure the Court to do the same in his Clyents behalf: And that is to be
obtained thus.

First, he must serve the party with the Decree it self, under the Seal of the
Court: and if he yield not obedience thereunto, but stands obstinate, then
proceed to take out all the Processes of contempt against him one after
another; and the party being taken, will be straightly imprisoned, and not set
at liberty, till he yield obedience to it; that is, that he perform that part
of the Decree which is presently to be done, and give security to perform the
other part which is to be done in the future. Also the Lord Chancellor may for
his contempt fine him what he please, and afterward the same may be estreated.

Where the Decree is for Land, and the party remains obstinate or wilful after
his imprisonment, the Court upon motion will grant an Injunction for the
possession: and this being disobeyed, after it is served, and Oath made
thereof, the Court, in that case, will grant a Commission to some Justices;
and, if need be, a Writ of Assistance to the Sheriff to put him in possession.
Caryes Reports 23, 34, 36.37. Tothil 56, and 57.

Where this Injunction is granted for possession of the Land, and the party
sits out all Process of contempt, and cannot be found by the Sergeant at Arms,
or make a Rescue; there the Court being by Oath upon motion informed thereof,
will grant a Sequestration of the Land. Tothil 107. And this Sequestration is
granted sometimes as well of the Goods, as of the Profits of a man's Land; and
that for his wilfulness in standing out in contempt, and disobedience to the
Court, as well where it is for discharge and payment of Debts and Duties, as
where the Decree is for payment of a sum of money. Tothil 175, 176.

SECT. 7.
IN case of contempts upon force or ill words, used upon any that serves
Process, or other words of scandal to the Court; if they be proved by
Affidavit, the party forthwith upon motion will be committed, if the words
spoken deserve it.

For other contempts against the Orders of the Court, take in short, as
follows. First, An Attachment goes forth upon Affidavit made of the contempt;
then the party being taken, is to be examined upon Interrogatories; which is
many times upon motion referred to one of the Masters of the Chancery.

The Contempter coming in Gratis, of upon Process, should give notice to the
Clerk of the other side, of his appearance: and if there be not Interrogatories
put in within eight days, or being examined, if no reference be of the
Examination, nor Commission taken out of the other side, or Witnesses examined
to prove the contempt in a Month; the Contempter shall be discharged, and shall
recover costs, to be taxed by a Master without any motion. But if after he have
appeared upon the contempt, he depart unexamined, he must stand committed, till
he be examined and cleared; and if it be sound, he must clear it, and pay costs
ere he be discharged.

Such as stand committed for contempts upon Attachments, or Commissions of
Rebellion, must enter into Bond to attend from lay to day, and not to depart
without leave of he Court. Caryes Rep. 9, 44, 70, 71, 82.

Imprisonments upon contempts for matters past, may be discharged ox gratia,
after sufficient imprisonment; or, it may be otherwise dispensed withal. But
where the imprisonment is for nonperformance of any Order of the Court in
force, then the person so in contempt ought not to be discharged, except he
first obey; only the Court may dispense with the contempt for a time.

After all this, and a Decree performed, or else the party in prison for
nonperformance, as aforesaid; yet ought our Solicitor to understand, that his
Clyent for all this may be a great way off from an end: for, upon performance
and obedience to the Decree, a Bill of Review may be brought. At the putting in
of which, the party that prefers it, must enter into a Renognizance, with
Sureties for the satisfying of Costs and Damages for the delay, if it be found
against him.

Where a Cause is dismissed upon full hearing, and the dismission signed and
enrolled, it cannot be retained again, but by a Bill of Review; and that in
some special cases too: for,

No Bill of Review is grantable but upon Error in Law, appearing in the body
of the Decree it self, without averment or further examination of any matter or
fact which might have been had at the time of the Decree, unless he show some
new matter which has risen in time after the Decree, whereof the Plaintiff
could not have advantage before; and then, upon Oath made, that there is a
discovery of such new matter; this Bill (by the leave of the Court) may be
exhibited, giving security as before.

Where the Decree is to yield the possession of Land, deliver Writings, or to
pay money, he must first perform that before a Review: but if the Decree be to
extinguish a Right, convey Land, release a Debt, acknowledge satisfaction, or
to cancel Records or Evidences, or the like; it may be stayed by the Cour's
order, till the Bill of Review be determined.

No witnesses which either were or migh have been ex^mined upon the former Bill
shall upon this Bill of Review be examined (...) any matters. Tothil 173.

CHAP. V. Showing our Solicitor several other Incidents which be ought to be
skilled in, and much relating to his Practice.
HAving now in the former Chapter, and the several Sections thereof, passed
through the general proceedings of the Chancery, upon Bills, Answers, and all
other things, even to the Decree and Review thereof; there are yet some things
remaining, which, in many cases, are not only incident, but even essential to
those affairs wherein our Solicitor ought to be particularly skilled. And the
first of these is concerning Injunctions.

And this is looked upon in the general Acceptance, as a main and chief branch
of the power of the Court, for that it makes stay of Procedings at Common Law;
and, as before is said, is many times granted to gain possession of Land, and
so becomes subsequent to the Decree.

Where it stays proceedings at Law, in some cases it gives leave to go to Trial
and Judgment, but stays Execution; and where the matter of Law is tried, it
bars them from Judgment, as the cause may be.

Or where there is a Judgment, and that executed, it will stay the money in the
Sheriffs hand, after the party is arrested at Law for the money.

This Writ is commonly procured, either upon some Writing or matter of Record
plainly appearing, or upon a very old Debt that has long slept, Creditor and
Debtor being both dead: or in such cases, where the Defendant does not appear,
but fits an Attachment; or if he appear, either Answers not the Bill, or
confesses not so much thereof as is sufficient.

Where either the Defendant is beyond the Sea, or being in the Kingdom, does
absent himself, so that he cannot be served; or where upon any pretense he has
gotten time to answer; the Court does usually in those cases, upon motion,
grant an Injunction to stay suit, till the Defendant does appear.

Where a Commission is granted to take an Answer in the Country, an Injunction
upon motion will be granted to stay the Defendants Suit at Law (if any be) till
the Answer come in: and of this the Defendant is bound to take notice, though
he be not served therewith.

Where there is a Verdict at Common Law in an Action of Debt, and a Bill be
afterward here exhibited for Relief, the money must be deposited in Court,
before an Injunction can be obtained, unless in some cases, where some special
matter in Equity appears by the Defendant's Answer, or in some former Decree.

Where a person privileged in this Court, is sued elsewhere, that Suit may be
stayed by an Injunction.

Where Timber is unjustly felled, ancient Meadow-ground plowed up, ancient
Pastures that have not been plowed up in twenty years before, or for the
Maintenance of Enclosures kept in twenty years before, an Injunction is
grantable according to the case.

Where an Injunction is granted to quit a possession, it is granted of Houses
and Land only, and not of a Rent, or suchlike thing: and it is not to be
granted before the hearing of the cause, unless upon an Oath, that the
Plaintiff was in possession at the time of the Bill put in; and then only of
that possession he had then and three years before, and at the time of the
motion, and not be extended to the possession of those from whom he claims. And
this shall not hinder the Defendants Suit in Law, making of a Lease, taking of
a Distress, etc. And this Injunction will soon be dissolved again, if the
Plaintiff delay his Suit.

Where it is to stay or remove a Suit by Certiorare, Bond must be first given,
that the Bill has matter sufficient in it to bear it, and shall be proved true
within fourteen days after he has the Writ; and if it be not done in that
time, after Certificate of his neglect from the Examiners, it shall be
dismissed with costs, and a Procedendo granted.

Where the Injunction is to be obtained by motion, for matter in the Answer,
there the case must be put in writing to the Court.

Where it is granted upon the merit of the cause, or upon special cause in
equity, it is to stand till the hearing, unless the Plaintiff delay his Suit.

This Writ thus obtained, must be served either on the party himself, his
Counsel, Attorney or Solicitor, etc. as the case requires; and the manner of
serving is much like to that of serving a Subpoena.

A bare Petition only will not dissolve an Injunction; nor, if it be had by
motion, can it be dissolved without a motion of the adverse party.

Where an Injunction is granted till the Answer be put in, and no order be made
to continue it within fourteen days after the Answer come in; in this case, it
shall be dissolved upon the Register's Certificate thereof only. And if no
Motion be made that Term, or at the next General Seal after the Term, to
continue it for insufficiency of, or matter confessed in, the Answer; it is of
course dissolved: so where it is to stay a Suit at Common Law, and the
Plaintiff does not proceed for three years together.

Where the Injunction is disobeyed, (if you would force obedience thereunto)
upon Oath made thereof, all the Processes of Contempt are to go out against him
one after another; and being taken, he is to be imprisoned till he yield
obedience to it, or give security to do it. Nor is he to be heard in the
principal case, till he yield obedience in every thing to the Injunction.
Tothil 107. Caryes Rep. 112, 113.

SECT. 2.
Another material point is about Dismissions, and how they are to be managed
and attained. Concerning which, he is to know, That this is prayed by motion,
and had upon Plea to the Bill, or at the hearing of the Cause; but not after
Examination of Witnesses before hearing, but upon a discontinuance of
prosecution, and then by motion and order.

Where the Plaintiff discontinues his Prosecution, after all the Defendants
have answered by the space of two Terms, the cause is to be dismissed the third
Term upon course: but after a Replication put in, it cannot be dismissed
without an Order upon a Motion.

Where a Cause is dismissed upon a full hearing, recorded and certified by the
Lord Chancellor; it cannot be again retained, nor a new Bill admitted, but
where there is new matter.

Where the Bill is duly dismissed of course, or by order, no motion will be
heard to retain it, till the costs assessed upon the dismission be paid, and
certified from the Clerk on the other fide, that it is done.

No Dismission, or retainer upon a Dismission, will be granted on a bare
Petition only.

In cases of Dismission not upon a full hearing, to a new Bill this may be
pleaded.

But generally for all causes of Dismission, the Court will retain and dismiss
it as they see cause, as daily practice and experience does plainly manifest.
See Caryes Rep. 34, 43, 74, 76, 110.

SECT. 3.
A Third point much and frequently incident to practice, are References to the
Masters of the Court, and their Reports thereon. Which happen upon several
Occasions: As,

Where there is a Demurrer to the Jurisdiction of the Court, there no Reference
may be had to a Master upon it, but it must be heard before the Lord Chancellor
himself.

After examination of Witnesses is past, there can be no Reference had to a
Master to end and determine, unless it be in case of near kin, poverty, or
consent of parties.

A Reference of the state of the case is sparingly granted, unless where there
is the consent of parties. The examination of Court-Rolls is to be by
Reference; but there it must be by two Masters at the least.

No Reference shall be made of the insufficiency of an Answer, without
Allegation of special causes. The Reports of the Masters upon References, must
not exceed the order of Reference, whereby the same is referred. And after the
Master has seen the order, he usually grants our a Warrant, which is shown
unto the other side, whereby he gives notice of the time of his hearing the
Cause; where the other side, with their Counsel or Solicitor, or both, may, as
they see cause, attend.

The Report it self is usually brief of what only they find; wherein the Master
ought not to certify his own opinion, but leave the same wholly to the Judgment
of the Court: and if the Cause be very doubtful, then must he set forth the
special case.

No Order can be had to confirm the Report, till it be first filed with the
Register, under the Master's hand, and a day given to the other side for seven
days at least to speak to it in Court. But where it does not ground a Decree,
and it be positive, it does usually stand; and process may be taken out for the
performance thereof, unless the adverse party, upon notice thereof, do within
eight days after (if it be in Term time) or if at the General Seals for
motions, or if after them, within four days of the beginning of the next Term,
file exceptions to the same. And in such case the party that so filed
exceptions, must deposite forty shillings with the Register, and a day will be
set for the Judgment of the Court: and if the Court do not allow the
exceptions, the other shall have the forty shillings, and what more the Court
shall think fit: if otherwise, the money is to be restored.

The matters chiefly under Reference, are either insufficient Answer, matters
of Account, contempt, or abuse of the Court.

Where a Master upon a Reference to him, Reports an Answer insufficient, the
Complainant may take out two Subpoena's against the Defendant, the one for
twenty shillings costs, and the other to make a better Answer.

SECT. 4.
THere are many Occasions intervening in a cause, which do require a Motion to
set them right: now every motion procures an Order, (now it behooves our
Solicitor not to lead his Clyent into unnecessary and chargeable motions) and
eve^, Order must be drawn by the Register who sa^e then in Court, and took
Notes thereof (when the same was pronounced) into his Book; by which, to draw
up some more full remembrance of that which passed in Court. Which, that it may
the better he done, our Solicitor after the rising of the Court, ought to
repair to the Registers Office; and there finding the Notes, and showing them
to the Register or his Clerk, to have instruction for the drawing up of the
said Order for his Clyents better advantage.

Where any Order shall be made, and the Court not informed of the last material
Order formerly made, no benefit shall be taken by such Orders, as being
surreptitiously procured; and therefore the Register does always mention the
last former Order, in the Order that he draws up at present.

An Order made out of the general Rule, must set down the special Reasons of it.

No Order shall be explained by petition, but by public motion, both parties
being heard.

No Order but final Orders and Decrees may be received to be entered after eight
days after the pronouncing thereof, that day being included.

The Register is to keep Copies of the Orders he does deliver, and he is to
mark the same; which done, it is to be entered by the entring-Clerk, and so
brought back again to the Register, for his hand to be put to it, and then it
is authentic.

The Register after a hearing and reference to a Master, is to set down in the
Order of Reference what was the Opinion of the Court, unless the Court do
direct it to be drawn otherwise.

All Orders drawn up by the Registers, are to be entered under the Registers
hand in due time; and after they are once so entered, they may not be in any
manner, upon any occasion whatsoever, altered, without a special Order and
direction of the Court to that purpose.

It was an ancient piece of practice, but I think now almost super annuated,
that the Register within ten days after the end of every Term should certify
the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper for the time being, what References depend
in the hand of any Master, and how long they have depended; that so if any of
them have depended overlong, the Court may require an account thereof from the
Master, and quicken him to a speedy dispatch.

SECT. V.
IT does often fall out, that some persons may have right to an Estate, yet not
wherewith to prosecute the same; or else may be made parties to a suit, as
knowing much therein, yet have not wherewith to make either a defense or
discovery: in such Cases the party making Oath before a Master of his poverty,
and exhibiting the same either to the Lord Chancellor or Master of the Rolls,
together with a Petition, they, or one of them, will admit him to sue in forma
pauperis, and assign him such Counsel, Six Clerk, etc. as he shall desire.

But here it is necessary for our Solicitor to know, that there are many
Paupers who bring only vexatious suits; which if he can discover, and inform
the Court thereof, they shall not only be dismissed, but punished: however such
thing be made appear, the Counsel and Clerk assigned as aforesaid, may not
refuse, but must attend their business, unless they show cause to the Court why
they cannot so do.

They must always have their Order of Admission with them; and first move that
before any other motion: and indeed it is no hinderance at all to them; for if
they have any other motion, they may make it afterward.

Where the Register finds he is not in Pauper, he shall not draw up any Order
upon the second motion, but the Pauper pretended shall lose the fruit of it.

No Counselor, Attorney, Solicitor, or Officer of the Court appointed to be
for a Pauper by the Court, is to take any thing of, or contract for any thing
with him; and the Pauper that can be proved so to have given or contracted, is
to be dis-paupered for ever.

If a Pauper fell or contract for his suit, or any part of it, his Bill shall
be dismissed, and never after retained.

No Process of contempt shall go out for a Pauper, until it be signed by the
Six-Clerk who deals for him; and he must see, there be cause for it.

In all Offices where he has any occasion to pass any thing, he must still
show his Admission.

Touching Petitions: for the avoiding the multitude of frivolous ones, drawn by
persons who are altogether ignorant of the practice and course of the Court,
and the true state of the Petitioners business, it were to be wished that none
but able Sollicitors, such as are described before, both for Learning and
Parts; and not every broken fellow, that can scarce write his name, be allowed
by the Court to practice, as is before mentioned, Page 27.

SECT. VI.
ANother thing fit for our Solicitor to know, is, the matter of Affidavits,
and how they are to be made, that they may be effectual. You must know then,
that Affidavits are most generally made before Masters of the Chancery: but
where it is for the serving of a Subpoena, they are sometimes taken and
certified by others.

An Affidavit may not be taken against an Affidavit: for if it be, the latter
is not to be used.

An Affidavit ought not to be taken tending to the proof or disproof of the
matter in question; nor may any such matter be admitted to be colourably
inserted into an Oath made of the serving of Process. Caryes Rep. 63, 69, 81,
82, 84, 85, 98, 99, 103.

There is also another point fit for our Sollicitor's knowledge: for many times
there may be some one belonging to the Court, who is thereby a privileged
person, by which means he cannot be sued for debt. In such Case, and against
such a person so privileged, a Declaration for debt, or any other thing
whereof the Court holds Plea, is to be delivered to one of the Six Clerks,
whom the Plaintiff makes as his Attorney; and he thereupon gives a day (as is
commonly termed, which is a week, viz. the whole next Return) to the Defendant
to answer: which day entered into the Six-Clerk's Costs-book, (in this manner,
Roberts against Johnson) a day is given from the day of St. Micha^l in one
Month, in a Plea of Privilege.

Day being thus given, the Declaration under the Attorneys hand is sent over to
the Petty-bag by one of the said Attorneys Clerks: which Declaration is briefly
entered by one of the Clerks there, and likewise the day that is given to the
Defendant to answer in a Roll there, which is called Rotulus rememorationis
Parvae-Bagae: at which day, by the course of the Common Law, if the Defendant
plead not, he is fore-judged the Court. But of late, the course has been to
allow the Defendant a day of Imparlance: that is, day till the next Return
after the Return given him to answer; which is in this manner.

The Defendant retains one or other of the Six Clerks, who imparleth or him
which is done in the Six Clerks Costs-book, (in this manner, Roberts against
Johnson, Imparlance until the morrow of All. Souls) at which day it is sent
over into the Petty-bag, to be entered into the aforesaid Roll, next under the
said Declaration.

The said day of Imparlance being past, another day, viz. commonly five days
in a week, (which is commonly called the Peremptory day) is given by the
Plaintiffs Attorney, and entered into the Petty-bag, as aforesaid, to the
Defendant to plead, or else Judgment is to be entered against him.

If the Defendant plead, his Plea is delivered by his Attorney to the
Plaintiffs Attorney; and then if the Plaintiff will proceed to a Trial, he is
to join up the Issue, (if he may, for in some Cases he cannot) or else the
Plaintiff is to reply, and give the Defendant a day, viz. a whole Term to join
up Issue, which is given and entered as the day to answer; and if the Defendant
by that day joins not up the Issue, Judgment is entered up by Nihil dicit. Here
note, That after a Peremptory day given, the Defendant cannot pray Oyer of the
Bond and Condition, or such like, as of late has been used for ^meer delay:
but if the Issue be joined up, either by the Plaintiff or Defendant, then is
the Record made up, and the same with a Venire facias is sent into the Kings
Bench to be tried, as an Action there at Issue; and upon Judgment there,
execution is thereupon there awarded.

But if the Defendant refuse or neglect to imparl at the day given him to
answer or plead (for he may plead if he will) at that day, then is Judgment
entered against him, and execution is awarded.

Upon Judgment either by default or Nihil dicit, some of these Writs of
Execution are awarded. If for Debt, the Plaintiff may have an Elegit, by
Westminst. 2. Cap. 18. or else a Levari facias, or Fieri facias: and if the
Plaintiff cannot levy his Debt and Damages, then he shall have a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, either for all, or so much as rests unsatisfied.

The Judgment being satisfied, the Plaintiff by himself or his Attorney (if the
Defendant desire it) does acknowledge satisfaction upon the Judgment in the
Petty-bag-Office.

It is to be noted, that whatsoever day is given by any of the Six Clerks, and
by them entered in their Book, is yet worth nothing if the same be not entered in
the Petty-bag.

This is the course used against a person that is privileged by a Forrainer:
but if a Forrainer be indebted to a privileged person, or incur a suit, then
you must observe this course that follows.

The Defendant being Arrested by an Attachment of Privilege, at the suit of a
Privileged person, as aforesaid, must retain one of the Six Clerks to his
Attorney, and must put in Bail to the Plaintiffs Action, according to the
course of the Court; which is, to appear from day to day until the Plea be
determined, to satisfy the Plaintiff all such sums of money as the Plaintiff
shall recover against him by reason of this suit; then the privileged man
puts in his Declaration, and thereupon the proceedings are the very same as
before against the privileged man.

By the course of the Court, the Defendant is to put in four Subsidy-men, or
sufficient Sureties, (be the Action never so small) as appears by Archibald and
Burialls Case, 23 El. wherein the Defendant is bound in 400 l. the sum of the
Action, and every surety in a hundred pounds.

If Judgment be given for a privileged person in this Court, he may, if he
will, take out Execution as before: but if he will not, then he may take out a
Scire facias against the Defendant and his Manucaptors upon the Bail: whereupon
if Judgment be upon the said Soire facias in the Chancery, then Execution is
there awarded; but if upon Issue joined and sent into the Kings Bench, and upon
Trial there, Judgment be given, then is Execution there awarded; and upon
satisfaction of the Debt, and damages, the Bail is to be discharged upon the
acknowledgment of satisfaction, as before is mentioned against the privileged
person.

If either the Plaintiff or Defendant upon Declaration of Privilege or Scire
facias demur in Chancery, the Demurrer being joined, a day is set down by the
Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper for the arguing thereof before him. And if upon
the Argument it fall out to be a Respondeas ouster, then Judgment is entered
thereupon: and if it be against the Defendant, then Execution is awarded; and
if against the Plaintiff, then it is that Nilcapiat per Billam, that he take
nothing by his Writ or Declaration.

But if it be a Respondeas ultra, then is the Defendant to pay costs, and a day
given for him to plead peremptorily, or Judgment to be entered.

Thus have I quite gone through the whole practick part wherein our Solicitor
ought to b^ versed: I shall in the next place give you a Table of Fees; which
in regard he may in dealing for Clyents have occasions for frequent
disbursments, I think it very necessary: which are in short these, and shall
make one entire Section, and the last of this Chapter.

SECT. VII.
A Table of Fees.
l. s. d. FOr all first, second, or other Copies of all Bills, Answers, and
other Pleadings whatsoever; as also of all Certificates and Examinations, made
or taken by virtue of any Commission out of this Court, and of Interrogatories
therewith returned; and also of all Declarations or proceedings by English
Bill, or according to the course of the Common Law; and for Copies of Records,
Rolls or Evidences brought in to be copyed, or remaining in the said Court; for
every sheet of paper containing 15 lines 00 00 08 For the inrolling of all
Warrants, whereby any Patents, Commissions, Licenses, Pardons, Leases, or other
Grants whatsoever, do pass by and under the Great Seal after the rate of every
skin so passing the Great Seal 00 02 00 For the inrolling of all Warrants for
Commissions of the Peace or Goal delivery, for a liberty for Oyer and Terminer,
for Pyracies, for the preservation of the Game of Swans, and for Commissions
for enquiry sued out for the benefit of any private person; for every of the
said Commissions 00 01 08 For the inrolling of all Warrants for all Commissions
of Appeal, and for the Admiralty, for every one of them 00 00 04 For the
inrolment of every Warrant, for every ordinary License or Pardon of Alienation
00 03 04 But if the same be of more then ordinary length, then according to the
length, after the rate of ten shillings the skin, and not above 00 10 00 For
inrolling all Warrants for all Commissions in the nature of Writs of Diem
clausit extremum, Mandamus, Ideota proband', Lunatio' inquirend', Melius
inquirend', for every of them 00 03 04 For inrolling the Warrants for every
Patent or Grant of the Custody of any Ward 00 08 08

But this of Wards I suppose now to be of little use, in regard all manner of
Wardships are quite taken off, by a Statute made in the 13th of King Charles 2.

For inrolling the Warrant for every Presentation, Donation, or Revocation to
any Rectory, Vicarage, Deanary, Archdeaconry, Chancellorship, Treasurership, or
Dignity to any Metiopolitical, Cathedral, or Collegiate Church; or for any
Cannonship or Prebend in any of the said Churches, or for the Mastership in any
Hospital or Ecclesiastical Living, or for the Grant of any Presentation or
Presentations, pro unica vel pluribus vicibus thereunto -- For the Inrolling of
the Warrants for every Mandamus ad Installand' -- 00 03 04 For the Inrolling of
all Warrants for all Wine-Licenses, for every life -- 00 03 04 Or such Fee not
exceeding that proportion as by the Chancellor shall be set down: though
formerly they paid if it were granted for three lives, but -- 00 06 08 For the
inrolling Warrants for every Pardon of Outlawry -- 00 03 04 For inrolling
Warrants for every Denization or Commission of Bankrupts -- 00 03 04 For
writing of every Exemplification, as well of Records in the Tower, as of any
Record whatsoever, after the rate of every Skin -- 01 06 08 The Six Clerks Fee
of every Clyent for every Term whilst his cause depends undetermined by
Decree or by Dismission, the Termly Fee of -- 00 03 04

And so if there be twenty Plaintiffs in one Bill, they all pay but one Fee for
one Term.

But for every three Defendants, reckoning the husband and Wife but for one
person, there is due for their first appearance -- 00 03 04

And upon the first appearance, if every Defendant appears severally by
himself, he is to pay the Fee of three shillings four pence; but every Term
afterward, during the continuance of the Cause, there is only the Fee of three
shillings four pence the Term to be paid for all the Defendants that did appear
in any Term or Vacation in the same Cause.

l. s. d. For a Writ of Subpoena to answer -- 00 02 06 If there be three in the
Writ, you pay more -- 00 00 06 For an Attachment -- 00 02 10 For breaking it up
with the Sheriff, and his Warrant thereon -- 00 02 04 For the return of the
Attachment -- 00 00 04 For a Proclamation of Rebellion -- 00 02 10 Breaking it
up, and Warrant -- 00 02 04 The Return -- 00 00 04 For a Commission of
Rebellion -- 00 18 02 For the inrolment of every Liberate and Allocate -- 00 03
04 The Rule which the Plaintiff gives the Defendant to make answer by a day
when the Defendant appear -- 00 00 04 For each Rule for publication after
examination of Witnesses -- 00 00 04 For entering them with the Register, for
each -- 00 00 04 The Defendants appearance 00 04 00

In which is included the Clerks Fee for the Term.

l. s. d. For the Oath made that the answer is true -- 00 01 00 And so for
every Defendan^, if they be never so many. For a Commission to take an answer
in the Country by Dedimus Potestatem -- 00 07 10 Besides the engrossing of the
Bill which is included in it, every sheet -- 00 00 06 For a Subpoena for Costs,
where the Bill is not put in by the Complainant within the time limited -- 00
02 06 For a Bill of costs, and the entry of it -- 00 02 04 For a
Joynt-Commission to examine Witnesses in the Country -- 00 07 10 The Plaintiff
pays the Defendant -- 00 06 08 For the examination of every Witness here
before the Examiners -- 00 02 06 For the Oath of every Witness that is to be
examined -- 00 01 00 l. s. d. For the Copies of Depositions returnable by
Commission 00 00 08 For Copies of Depositions taken in the Examiners Office,
for each sheet 00 01 00 For the drawing up of an Order upon motion to the
Register, for the first side 00 03 00 For every other side 00 01 06 For entering
of the same Order, every side. 00 00 06 Fees of an Injunction in all 01 02 06

If it be granted by the Master of the Rolls, then you pay two shillings more.

For a Subpoena to rejoyn 00 02 06 For a Subpoena ad audiendum Judicium 00 02
06 For a Subpoena super ordinem to show cause 00 07 02 For a Subpoena ducens
tecum 00 07 02 For a Subpoena de executione ordinis 01 00 00

For the Copy of Replication, Rejoinder, Sur-rejoynder, Rebater, and
Sur-rebater, as for Bill and Answer.

h. s. d. Fees for a Decretal Order drawing up, as in another Order; only for
the word Decree you must pay more 00 18 06 For every Writ of execution of any
Order 00 06 08 For drawing and inrolling every Decree and Dismission
respectively 00 03 04 For every Writ of Execution upon any Decree, after the
rate of every Skin 01 06 08 For writing of every Sheriffs Patent, Writ of
Assistance, Writ of Discharge, Commission to take the Sheriffs Oaths, the
Warrant of Attorney, and writing the two Oaths, and the Clerks Fee 01 02 08 For
every Supersedeas for the discharge of any Commission, or other Writ made in
the Six Clerks Office 00 06 08 For every Supersedeas of Privilege 00 06 08 For
every special Certiorare, or Procedendo, Corpus cum causa, or Habeas Corpus 00
06 08 l. s. d. For every Bail upon every Writ of Corpus cum causa, or nature of
privilege 00 02 09 For all manner of Certierare's and Procedendo's of course 00
02 09 For every Recognizance or Bond made in Court 00 02 00 For every Oath
before a Master 00 01 00 For every Report, though never so small, ten
shillings, and the Clerk five shillings; and if it be longer, them more. For
filing every Affidavit 00 00 08 For filing every Report, the like. For the
Sollicitors Termly Fee 00 06 08 And for every attendance in Court on References
00 06 08

CHAP. VI. By way of Advice and Corollary.
THus have I, with brevity, plainness, and truth, run over all the most
material and effectual things which are required from a Solicitor, or indeed
from any belonging to the Court. I suppose I shall not need to say any thing of
Solicitation in the Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas at Westminster,
neither of the Exchequer-proceedings by English Bill, they being in effect one
and the same with the Chancery, only a little more chargable. The Office of
Pleas agrees with the Kings Bench; and all other Offices belonging to that
Court, may rather be looked upon as pertaining to the Kings Revenue, then
matter of Record between private subjects. The Hustings of London are of so
quick dispatch, and little charge, that the very meanest persons in the City
understand the practice thereof, though sometimes there are some delays put
upon them by the Practisers, who keep the mystery of their dealing within their
Walls. In short, I suppose Solicitation is either only or chiefly needful in
Chancery, where always the Causes are of great weight, importance and
intricacy; and not in Courts of Law, where the Attorneys and their Clerks are
able to manage and go through much more business then they have, their
Proceedings being certain and concise, and tied to stricter Rules, then the
Chancery, being a Court of Equity, can be. But if our Solicitor will stoop to
those smaller Courts, let him know, all that he has to do there, is but to be
able to breviate his Clyents Cause, fit to instruct Counsel: for in all other
things he is but a Servant to the Attorney. Yet would I not have him either
negligent or ignorant; but, as leisure shall serve, still to have an eye to the
practice of all Courts: for by that means at one time or other he shall be
enabled either to serve his Friend or Clyent. And though by practice he cannot
assist, yet by his knowledge he may advise what may be the safest way to tread
in. So shall he merit the praises of a knowing and industrious person; making
good that of Cicero in his first Book de Offi^iis, to wit, Nulla vitae pars,
neque publicis, neque privatis, neque forensibus, neque domesticis in rebus,
neque si tecum quid agas, neque si cum altero contrabas, vacare officio potest:
in coque excolendo sita est vitae honestas omnis, and in negligendo turpitudo.
And in another place of the same Book: Praeclare scriptum est a Platone, Non
nobis solum nati sumus, ortusque nostri partem patria vendicat, partem amici.
Atque ut placet Stoicis, Quae in terris gignuntur ad hominum usum emnia creari,
homines autem homiaum causa esse procreatos, ut ipsi inter se alii aliis
prodesse possint. In hoc Naturam debemus sequi ducem, and communes utilitates
afferre in media commutatione officiorum, dando, accipiendo, tum artibus, tum
op^ra, tum facultatibus devincire hominum inter homines societatem. It was most
excellently written by the divine Plato, (says he) that we were not born for
our Selves only: for of our Being, our Country challenges one part, and
another our Friends. And, as the Stoics said, That as all things that were
bred by the Earth, were brought forth for the use of man: so men were born for
the sake of one another, that one might help and be profitable one to another.
And herein indeed we should follow our great Commandress Nature, by giving and
receiving, To do common good, by all the Arts, Ways, Means and Endeavors that
they can possibly find to oblige and tie men together one to another in civil
society, of bond of friendship. But every man is not fit for this; Ex quovis
ligno non fit Mercurius: therefore it is fit, that none should meddle in
Affairs belonging to Law, but such as have found discerning Judgments, and know
what they go about; lest they become not only punishable, but ridiculous. As it
once happened to Megabyzes the Persian, a man otherwise of great Reputation and
Valor, who having upon a time entered into the Lodging, where the famous
Painter Apelles did ply and practice his Art, began to discourse touching the
same; and would needs give him to understand, that he knew the nature and
secrets thereof: To who Apelles, as being a wise and well-conditioned man, thus
answered, Truly, Megabyzes, before I heard you speak, I held you for a discrect
man; for your silence did grace your brave apparel: but since ye have meddled
to talk of my Trade, trust me not, if the very smallest Boy here that brayeth
the Oker, will not mock at, and flout you, for your labor. Which may teach
every man to keep himself within the compass of his Calling, and not every
foolish Fellow to undertake so weighty a profession as that of a good
Solicitor ought to be. This was inculcated by the Poets, when they feign that
their gods do content themselves each within his own Sphere; Mars medleth with
War, Minerva with Arts, Mercury with Eloquence, Cupid with Love, Neptune with
the Sea, Pluto with Hell, Jupitur with Heaven. Hence we may gather, That all
things do not befit all men: The Horse is fit for riding and running, the Ox
for laboring the Ground. Yet there are a sort of men (and I wish they were
not) who without leaving any part of their idleness and vices, would be as wise
as the Philosophers, that have both Night and Day studied so much. But in
these, and such other Occurrents, which at the present cannot be helped, let us
take occasion to be more watchful and wary, lest we become one of those that
forget to carry our selves discreetly, and while we blame others, run into the
same fault our selves.

An Appendix. Because of those many clamours which are frequently and
industriously raised against the Court, by persons, no doubt, no way concerned,
and who have no occasion of such rude complaints further than to scandalize the
Government; I have presumed to do the most Honorable Household the right and
Justice (besides what is due to the strict commands of our Sovereign for the
execution of the Laws against all persons how nearly soever attending on him)
as to give an account how, and what proceedings may be had against them,
without incurring any danger or trouble.
PErsons that have Protections from the. Law, have them either as ex Officio,
or ex Favore.

Persons by Office are such as relate by service to the King, Queen, and Royal
family; all who are menial servants to Peers, and to Members of Parliament, and
all Privy-Counsellors.

Persons by favor, are such as having no relation by service, are yet, out of
respect, friendship or Alliance, protected by any person enabled to give a
Protection; or else have a Protection-Royal.

Leave is to be gotten against Kings servants below stairs, from the
Green-cloth. If they be above stairs, either from the Lord-Chamberlain or Groom
of the Stool. If they be Gentlemen Pensioners, the Captain of their Band is to
be Petitioned. If they be Yeomen of the Guard, from their Captain leave is to
be obtained. If they be of the Lifeguard, the Lord Gerard is to be sought
after. If Soldiers, their several. Colonels and Captains.

Where note, all these are to be sued to for leave by Petition: upon the
delivery and reading whereof, the usual course is to summon the party
complained against to appear and show cause why he does not or ought not pay
the Petitioner. If he can show no cause, leave is straight given: but if he
submit, then usually the person of Honor who might give leave, moderates the
matter between the Petitioner and the party complained against; and so settles
some way of payment or satisfaction, either out of their Estates, Pay, Wages,
or otherwise, as shall be thought most meet. To which Order of moderation, if
the Debtor will not submit, the Petitioner straightway shall have leave to
Arrest him: which leave is to be signified in writing under hand; and being
delivered to an Officer, is a good Warrant to him to proceed against the said
person according to Law.

All other Protections must be sought to be waived in like manner by Petition
to the Lord, or other honorable person who gave the same.

This is not to be done without charge, though there be no certainty in the
charge; but each may give or receive ad libitum.

FINIS.

