AN OFFER OF Farther Help TO SUFFERING SAINTS: OR, The best Work in the worst
Times.

WHEREIN The necessity, excellency, and means of preparation for Sufferings are
clearly evinced, and prescribed.

(...) which, as in a Glass, the people of God may see how (...) to dress
themselves for Death, or any other Suffering (...) to which the Lord shall call.

Added as an Appendix to the Sufferers Mirror.

(...) and therefore, having your loins girt about with Truth, and having on
the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.14, 15. ^^hold I come as a Thief. Blessed is he
that watches, and keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his
shame, Rev. 16.15. ^^pienti meliora sunt in votis, deteriora vero in
expectatione, Plut. de tranquil. ^^avius est vulnus quod non expectatur, and
illa aegrius tollerantur, quibus homo se non prius assuefacit, Aug. London,
Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Robert Boulter, 1665.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
TRuth is the proper object of the Understanding; which when sanctified,
relishes Spiritual Truths with a strange delight and pleasure, Job 12.11. The
soul in all its laborious researche^; and disquisitions (sometimes climbing up
from the Effects to the Causes, and sometimes descending from the Causes to the
Effects) is making enquiry after Truth.

It racks and tortures it self upon knotty Problems to find it out, and with
vehement anhelations, and insatiable longings, follows the pleasant (though
painful) chase of Truth. All the objections, doubts, and scruples it meets
with, are but the pauses of a bivious and hesitateing soul, which is at a
stand, not able to resolve whether Truth lie on this side, or on that. And as
its desires are vehement in the pursuit of Truth, so is its joy proportionate
in the acquisition thereof. For no sooner does the Understanding discover it,
but the soul runs to it as it were with open arms, to embrace, hug, and welcome
it. And though Truth be welcome in any dress to a soul that loves it for its
native excellency, yet it may be clothed with such taking circumstances and
considerations, as may commend it to the soul with greater advantage, and be to
a truth what health is to a good feature, which enammels and sprinkles it over
with a ravishing beauty.

Now amongst all those beautifying and endearing circumstances and
considerations, that of seasonableness is not the least. If it be a present
truth, as the Apostle calls it 2 Pet. 1.12. it is for that the more graceful
and highly acceptable, because it bears upon the souls present occasions, and
is of present use and service to it. Prove. 15.23. A word spoken in due season,
how good it is?

Reader, under this great advantage (for I can bestow no other ornaments upon
them) do the truths of Jesus, held forth in the following Treatise, present and
commend themselves to thine acceptance. If therefore thou be an ingenuous soul,
that love the Truth as it is in Jesus, thou will entertain these Truths in
love, which make as seasonable an offer to assist and relieve thy soul engaged
in this hour of temptation, as Joab once did to Abishai in the day of battle, 1 Chronicles. 19.12. It may possibly prove a castly Truth to thee; but be confident it
will pay thee richly for its entertainment. That great Truth which in the
following discourse is commended to thee, is the same which God is now
preaching to all the world in a louder dialect by his present dreadful
dispensations. Say Reader, Do they not all with one mouth call upon us to
prepare for fiery Trials? Is there not a dreadful sound of approaching
judgments in thine ears? and will they not be by so much the more sinking and
intolerable, as they come by way of surprise upon thee? Expected evils are the
more comportable. For look as expectation deflowreth any temporal enjoyment,
and sucking out much of the sweetness of it beforehand, we find so much the
less when we come to enjoy it, even so the expectation of evils abateth much of
their dread and terror. They seem not new or strange to a person that has
often conversed with them beforehand in his thoughts; and besides that, has
had the advantage of fortifying and preparing his spirit for them. When the
Keepers Wife came running into Mr. Bradford's Chamber, saying, O Mr. Bradford!
I bring you heavy tidings, for to morrow you must be burned, your Chain is now
buying, and presently you must go to Newgate. He put off his Hat, and looking
up to Heaven, said, O Lord, I thank thee for it, I have looked for this a long
time: it comes not suddenly to me, the Lord make me worthy of it. See in this
example the rare advantage of preparation for sufferings.

Believe it Reader, Sufferings are a very bitter Cup, and thou had need to
provide some sweething thing to drop into that Cup, that thou may be able to
receive it with thanksgiving. And though it be true, that God may immediately
do that for thee when he delivers it into thine hand, yet if thou neglect his
calls to thy present duty, thou have no ground to expect such a mercy in thy
future streights. It is an excellent thing for a Christian to prepare for
trials, as if he expected no immediate assistance; and then when the trial
comes so entirely to depend upon immediate assistance, as if he had made no
preparation for it. It grieves my heart to see how the generality of the
Professors of this Age are seized by a Spirit of slumber, and having got a
soft Pillow of Creature Comforts under their heads, are fallen asleep, and
Mundus ersceus spatitur phantasias. Gerson.
dream pleasant dreams of Halcyon golden days at hand, not considering what
storms or tempests must usher in the glory of that day, nor making provision to
grapp^e with the intercurrent difficulties that so nearly approach them, and
are their next work. That God will appear in his glory to build up Sion. And
that the New Jerusalem shall come down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a
Bride for her Husband is no dream, but a most certain and comfortable truth,
but that therefore it is needless for the Expectants of that day to make
themselves ready for the worst of Sufferings; that they may ascend in a fiery
Chariot into the glorious Kingdom above, not knowing whether ever they may
live to see this New Jerusalem come down to them: this I say is a dream which
will be of ill use to the Saints, except the Lord seasonably awake them out of
it. If this spirit of slumber, which our Lord has fore-shewen shall fall even
upon the Virgin Churches at the last days, Mat. 25.
have not invaded thee, but thou stand with Habakkuk upon thy Watchtower,
expecting and fitting thy self for a day of greater temptation and trouble;
such a discourse cannot but be welcome to thee, and thou will bless God for
affording thee any help in so important an affair as this is. Thou art not at
all the nearer death for laying thy head voluntartly upon the Block, God can
provide himself another sacrifice, and yet accept thy readiness to suffer for
him as if thy blood had been actually shed. This will reflect much honor upon
Jesus Christ in the sight of the world, to whom it will hereby appear, that
there is a reality in godliness, and that you do indeed descry something beyond
these present visible enjoyments, that infinitely preponderates and excells
them all. And as Christ will be magnified, so a double benefit will hence
result to thy self. Hereby thou will gain peace in thy spirit, and a proof of
thy spirit. Peace of spirit in days of confusion and perplexity is no small
mercy. This is ordinarily the effect and reward of a wise and provident
preparation for them, I trembled in my se^^, that I might rest in the day of
trouble, Hab. 3.16.

And this will also give thee a proof of thy spirit. Upon this account
(Christian) they may be the best days that ever thou saw. Now thou may
discover not only the truth but the strength of thy graces; being called unto
some high points of self-denial for Christ. For look as self-love is not only
a sin, but the measure of all other sins, so self-denial is not only a grace,
but the true measure and touchstone of all thy graces. Now in order to thy
attainment of this blessed and choice frame of Spirit, the eying of such
examples as these cannot but be of singular use. Here you have a Cloud of
Witnesses. And the Cloud encompasseth you round. Turn which way you will, you
may find something in them parallel to your case. Oh what cause have the Saints
of this Age, to bless the Lord for such rare Advantages. We that live in the
last Times, have the best helps.

But certainly, our applause and commendation of them, is not all the use that
God expects you should make use of them, but that you should be followers of
them, who through Faith and patience inherits the Promises; and that you take
them for an example of suffering affliction and of patience, Heb. 6.12. Jam.
5.10. It Is storied of great Tamberlain, that he never went into the Field, but
he would carry the Lives of his Ancestors with him, which he would always read
e're he gave Battle, to rouse his Courage, that he might not stain their Noble
Blood by his Cowardice: And had you but the skill to improve such Examples as
these, you would find a singular advantage thereby, when you come to be tried
in like manner. I would have you look upon all these Worthies, as so many
Soldiers returning from the ^eld with Victory and Honor, and the several
Graces in which they excelled, as so many Swords and Shields, by which they
achieved their glorious Conquests: but all taken from the Tower of David,
built for an Armory, whereon there (still) hang a thousand Bucklers, all
Shields of mighty men, Cant. 4.4. They have now put off their Armor of War,
and put on their Armor of Light, not to fight, but triumph in: if ever you
hope to be fetched off the Field in Triumph as they were, and wear the Crown of
Victory as they do, then go to this Tower of David, (i. e.) take from Christ
these Shields of the Mighty, and learn the use of your Spiritual Weapons as
they did. And see that you learn these Lessons from such glorious Paterns and
Precedents.

1. Learn by this to obviate the scandal of singularity, which Satan and his
Agents would fasten upon you, and your sufferings. Say not as Elijah, I am left
alone; nor yet as the Church in Captivity, Was ever sorrow like my sorrow?
Certainly, you are not alone in your sufferings for Christ, here is store of
good company in the suffering way with you. Oh think not strange of fiery
Trials, as though some strange thing had happened to you, 1 Pet. 5.9.

2. Learn by this to despise the shame that may attend your sufferings, be not
ashamed of the Chain and Cross of Christ. See here how those that were the
glory of the Ages, they lived in suffering more vile and ignominious things
than you do, and yet reckoned it their glory. So did the Apostles, when they
went from the presence of the Council rejoicing, (...), that they were
honored, to be dishonored for Christ.

3. Learn from hence to checque that nicence and unbecoming delicacy of spirit,
which effeminates, melts, and softens your spirits. When Flesh reluctates at
sufferings, and says, How will thou be able to endure such hardships, or
suffer such Torments, say as Elijah, Am I better then my Fathers? What better
than such Saints as these, who have patiently suffered as hard things as can
befall me?

4. Learn hence to shake off despondency and faintness of Spirit, when the
greatest sufferings approach you. Say not they are invincible, impassable. See
here how the Enemy with whom you are now to grapple and enter the Lists, has
been beaten hand to hand, how poor Women and Children have triumphed over him.
And why may not you be as victorious in the strength of Christ as they were?
They were men of like passions with you, they had the same temptations and
corruptions with you, all troubled with a busy Devil, and complaining of a
busy Devil as well as you; and you have the same Master, Spirit, Promises, and
Rewards with them. Oh therefore rouse up your Courage, and play the Men.

5. Lastly, learn hence to scare your selves unto your Duty, and tremble at the
thoughts of Apostasy. Fear least this Cloud of Witnesses should rise up to
condemn thee in that great day, if thou now follow them not. O beloved, it will
be sad to have so many Witnesses as these are, to give testimony against you
before the Lord.

Thus you see how these Examples may subserve the design and end of this
Discourse of preparation for sufferings. Now the good Lord give thee an heart
to know what a price is in thy hand, and to improve such choice helps as these,
that thou may be able to stand in the evil day, and h^ving done all, to
stand.

Farewell.
ACT. 21.13. Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart?
for I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the
Name of the Lord Jesus.
THE several motions of the Apostles were guided by the special direction of
the Holy Ghost. They could not go where sometimes they had a mind to go, but
where the Spirit pleased to direct and carry them, Act. 16.6, 7. At this time
Paul stood engaged by the special direction of the Spirit, to go to Jerusalem,
Act. 20.22. And now behold I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing
the things that shall befall me there. [bound in the Spirit] It Is an allusion,
as some conceive, to a prisoner, that is bound with Cords, and carried away by
a potent Conqueror: Or, as others, to the Watery Vapors, which are bound up
in the Clouds, and carrved by the Wind, according to the motion of the Clouds.
Even so, was the Spirit of this Holy Man effectually subdued and determined to
his Duty, notwithstanding the hazards attending it, that he could no more keep
himself back from his duty, to which the Spirit so strongly impelled him, than
a man that is wedged in with a Crowd can choose but move as it moves. So
powerfully does the Spirit of the Lord, by his convictions and secret
persuasions, subdue and determine the Spirits of the Saints to the Work God
has to do by them, Jer. 20.9. Act. 4.20.

And it was well that the Will of God, concerning this dangerous Journey to
Jerusalem, was so convincingly revealed unto Paul: For shortly after he met
with three strange Rubs in his way, able to have staggered any man that had not
an extraordinary degree of clearness and satisfaction in his own Spirit.

The first was from the Disciples at Tire, who pretending to speak to Paul by
the Spirit, said unto him, that he should not go up to Jerusalem, Act. 21.4.
The Lord by this trying the Spirit of his Apostle, much as he did the young
Prophet coming from Judah to Bethel, 1 King. 13.18.

Shortly after this, he met with another great discouragement at Caesarea,
where Agabus (whom Dorotheus says was one of the 72 Disciples, and had before
prophesied of the Famine in the time of Claudius, which accordingly came to
pass) he takes Paul's Girdle, and binding his own hands and feet with it, said,
Thus says the Holy Ghost, so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that
owes this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles, Act.
21.11. And he well enough knew, what the rage and malice both of the one and
other against him was, and what he must expect, if ever he fell into their
hands.

And then lastly, he meets with a greater discouragement and pull-back then any
of the form, even that passionate storm of affection and love wherewith his
Friends assault him, begging him with tears to decline that Journey. Oh they
could not give up such a Minister as Paul was, and therefore fell upon him with
their pathetical Entreaties, and multitudes of Tears, which even melted him
down, and almost brake his heart.

Whence, by the way, you may note, that we cannot judge our selves discharged
from any service by God, because we meet with strange hindrances, and cross
providence in our way. Divine Precept, not Providence, is to rule out our way
of Duty. Never man met with sorer set-backs and remora's then Paul here did;
but notwithstanding all this, being fully satisfied, it was the Lords will he
should accomplish that service at Jerusalem, he resolutely breaks through all
those intercurrent difficulties, with this heroic and truly Christian
Resolution in the Text, I am ready not to be bound only, but to die at
Jerusalem for Christ.

The words consist of two general parts.

1. Paul's loving and gentle rebuke of the peoples inordinate and unseasonable
sorrow for his departure, (...). What do ye? Or, as it is rendered, What mean
ye? Pray forbear your tears, restrain your unruly passion; if you continue
thus, I shall not die at Jerusalem for Christ indeed, you will break my heart
here. The words in the Greek are emphatical, (...), comminventes, breaking it
all to pieces, crumbling it into dust. Oh what a temptation was this? but it
moved him not from his purpose. They had even broken, but could not divert his
heart from the Work of the Lord.

2. The Considerations or Argument he uses to quiet them, For I am ready,
(...). I am in a ready posture, fitted for the Work, be it a Prison, or be it
Death. Liberty is a dear thing, the very Birds of the Air had rather be in the
Woods with their liberty, though lean and hungry, than in a Golden Cage with
the best attendance, says one: But I am fitted for Bonds, says Paul. Nay,
that is not all, but I am ready also to die at Jerusalem. To part with life is
the highest point of Self-denial, because all lower Self-Interests in the
World, are as it were twisted with, and wrapped up in this Interest of Life. He
that is ready to deny his life for Christ, is also ready to sacrifice all
other, even his dearest enjoyments for him also, because these are all wrapped up
in Life: Yet for this he professes to them he was ready.

But what was in this to satisfy them whose trouble it was to see him so
forward: Why there are three things hereby suggested to them, in order to the
calming of their spirits.

1. In this they might see a Divine Hand that had been at work upon his heart,
fitting it thus for that service: for certainly flesh and blood could not
produce this: And if it were of God, there was reason enough for them to be
quiet, and not strive against God: For there is nothing in the World will
sooner still and quiet a gracious Soul than this, to show him how God has
signified his Will in the thing.

2. I am ready, my heart stands fully bent to Jerusalem, and therefore you had
as good be quiet, and satisfy your selves, for I am fixed and resolved upon it:
my Will is subdued to the obedience of the Divine Will in this thing: your
Tears and Entreaties are all in vain, 'twill be but lost labor.

3. As it would be in vain to them, he resolving not to gratify them in that,
so it would be of very ill use to him. I am now ready (says he) God has fully
satisfied my Soul in the thing: and not only am I clear in this that it is my
duty, but in a good measure I am fitted for it. I have overcome the
Contradictions and Reluctations of the Flesh, and brought my heart to a quiet
submission to the Will of God. It is therefore as great a disservice as you can
imagine to do me. Now to unfix and disorder my heart again, by casting such
Temptations as these in my way, and by your tempting Tears to make the flesh
rebel, and the Enemy that is within to renew its opposition.

Thus you see the equipage and preparation of Paul's Spirit for Christ's
service at Jerusalem. And as this was not a bravado before he saw the Enemy,
but real and in earnest, appears by his acting full up to this his noble
Resolution, when it came to the trial, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. So that it was a very
glorious and excellent Spirit, by which he did exceedingly glorify the Lord:
and this readiness of Spirit was of singular use also to himself, for this
enabled him to break his way through the many and strange hindrances and
discouragements that he met withal in that Journey.

Now though the Text be pregnant, with many excellent and useful Notes, yet the
main Point that I level at is this.

DOCT.

That it is a blessed and excellent thing for the people of God to be ready for
the hardest services, and worst sufferings, to which the Lord may call them.

This is that which every gracious heart is reaching after, and aiming at, but
how few attain it? Certainly, there are not many that can say as Paul here did,
I am ready to be bound, or die.

CHAP. I. Shows that God does sometimes call his People to difficu^^ services,
and great sufferings; with a short accoun^ how, and why he so calls them.
IT must be granted, that the tenderness and compassions of our God over his
people are exceeding great, Psalm. 103.13. and yet this tenderness of God over
them, exempts them not from grievous sufferings in this World, Heb. 12.6.
Seneca (though an Heathen) could say, That God loves his people with a
masculine love, not with a womanish indulgence and tenderness. He loves them
with a Fatherly, but not with a fond affection. If need require, they shall be
in heaviness, 1 Pet. 1.6. and he had rather their hearts should be heavy by
adversity, than haughty and vainly elated by prosperity. The choicest spirits
have been exercised with the sharpest sufferings: and those that now shine as
the Stars in Heaven, have been trod under foot as Dung on Earth. What precious
and excellent men were the Apostles! they were the light and glory of the
World, like Diamonds among the common Pebbles of the World; and yet what vile
and ignominious usage had they from the World? Unto this present hour (says
Paul) we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and buffeted, and have no
certain dwelling places, and labor working with our hands: Being reviled, we
bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat; we are made
as the filth of the World, and the Offscouring of all things unto this day, 1
Cor. 4.11, etc. The Greek words have an emphasis, alluding to a Jumbril or
Wheel-Barrow, that is drawn up and down the Streets, into which all the filth of
the ^wn is cast.

And in Heb. 11.35. you have no less then nine ^^ts of cruel sufferings and
tortures, to which mul^^des of the precious Servants of Christ were ex^^sed.
And others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a
better Resurrection; (...) others had Trials of cruel Mockings; yea, more^^^ of
Bonds and Imprisonments, they were stoned, they (...) sawn asunder, were
tempted, were slain with the ^^^d; they wandered about in Sheepskins, and
Goat^^ns, being afflicted, destitute, tormented, of whom the (...) was not
worthy; they wandered in Deserts, and (...) M^untains, in Dens, and Caves of
the Earth.

And since the Earth had dried up those Rivers (...) precious blood, whereof
the sacred Records make mention, what fresh Streams have again disc^oured it?
Historiographers inform us, that during the Ten Primitive Persecutions, so many
of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus have been slain, as that you may allow five
thousand a day to every day in the whole Year. And since the Jesuits arose out
of the bottomless Pit, they give us an account of eight hundred thousand, that
were inhumanely massacred in the space of 30 years. In the French Massacre
Thirty Thousand Protestants cut off in 30 days. Farnesius vowing he would ride
his Horse up to the Bridle in the Blood of Lutherans. Those precious Servants
of Christ the Waldenses and Albingenser, who received the Light of Reformation
about the Year 1260. See the Hist, of the Waldenses, translated by Sampson
Leonard, p. 85.
when the Foggs of Antichristian Darkness had overspread the Earth; a people
of a found Judgment in the Doctrine of the Gospel, as appears by their Letters,
Catechisms, Confessions, which are extant: Especially that excellent
Declaration of their Faith, published for the satisfaction of the Reformed
Churches in the Year, 1603. a people of a simple, plain, and innoffensive
behavior: Yet what dreadful and unparalled sufferings have they been exposed
to for near 500 years space. In Calalria Alexandria (to whom Pope Pius gave the
charge of the Persecution) drove them out of their Houses into the Woods and
Mountains, except the aged and children, that could not flee, whom they
murdered in the way, pursuing the rest like Wild Beasts, and slaying
Multitudes of them. Those that could recover the Mountains, being on the height
of the Rocks, entreated for their lives, beseeched their Persecutors to pity
their Wives and Children, to remember how holily, and blamelesly they had lived
among them; beseeching them, for the Lords sake, to permit them to betake
themselves, either by Sea or Land, to the protection of God; offering to leave
their Towns and Estates to them: But the persecution was commanded to go on,
the Soldiers pursuing them through the Woods and Mountains, crying Am^ssa,
Am^ssa, that is, Kill, kill. Those that got into Caves, and Clefts of the
Rocks, there perished through Famine; and those that were taken alive, most
inhumanely tortured: Some put upon the Rack for eight hours together; others
being stripped quite naked, were beaten with Iron Rods, and afterward drawn
through the Streets, and burnt with Firebrarnds: Eighty of them had their
Throats cut one after another, as a Butcher does his Muttons; and being each
divided into sour Quarters, were set upon stakes all along the Road betwixt
Montald and Villar, for the space of 30 Miles: Others thrown from the Top of an
high Tower, and broken to pieces, among which, one Sampson, agodly young man,
lived for some hours after the fall in miserable extremity, imploring. God for
Mercy. The Viceroy passing by, and hearing him to groan out his desires to
God, ^^ve him a kick on the Head with his Foot, saying, (...) this Dog yet
alive? Throw him to the Hogs.

And thus were these dear Servants of God used, ^ill they were utterly
destroyed and exterimated ^ut of Calabria.

The like bloody Persecutions befell them in the Valleys of Dauphine, Pragella,
Fassiniere, but especially in the Valley of Loyse, where all the Inhabitants,
amounting to the number of 30000. fled from their Habitations, upon the
approach of their Enemies, to the Clefts and Caverns of the Neighboring Rocks
and Mountains, whither their Persecutors pursued them; and setting on fire
great quantities of wood at the Mouths of those Caverns, that many were forced
to leap out, and cast themselves headlong upon the Rocks below, where they
were broken to pieces; the rest were stifled within the Caverns, amongst which
were found 400 little Infants, dead in their Cradles, or in the Arms of their
dead Mothers, besides their late bloody Massacres by that inhumane Duke de A^va.

But it is enough, by this little taste, and indeed but a taste of their
grievous sufferings, you may see what hard things Gods dearest Children have
been exercised with. And what he has done, he may do again, Are we better then
our Fathers? Nay, how short do we come, and with what unequal paces do we
follow these glorious examples of faith, love, simplicity, and mortification?
Or can we imagine the rage of Satan to be abated, now that his Kingdom hastens
to its period, Revel. 12.12. It Is confessed, God does not call all his people to
the same kinds or degrees of sufferings: All have not a Martyrs faith, and all
shall not have a Martyrs fire; The God that instructs the Husbandman to beat
outthe Fitches with a staff, Isa. 28.27.
and the Cummin with a rod, and not to turn the Cart wheel upon the lesser and
more tender Grain, will exactly proportion his peoples trials to his peoples
strength, For he is a God of judgment, Isa. 30.18. but notwithstanding this,
it still remains a truth as much as ever, that all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus must suffer perfecution, 2 Timothy 3.12.

Augustine thinks that the bloody sweat which overrun the body of Christ in
the Garden, signified the sharp and grievous suffering which in his mystical
body he should afterward endure. It is a truth, that these are also called the
sufferings of Christ, Col. 1.24. and there are yet remains of them (...), his
personal sufferings were completed (...) Resurrection, and are fully full; he
poured (...) blood enough to fill that Cup to the brim; by the former the wrath
of God was fully quenched and satisfied, but the later cannot satisfy the
wrath of man. Notwithstanding the lives of millions of precious Saints have
gone for it, in his Cause and Quarrel, whose souls are crying under the Altar,
How long, Lord! how long! Yet there are many more coming on behind in the same
Path of Persecution, and much more of that bloody work is to be done before the
mystery of God be finished. And though the Church have sometimes its lucid
intervals, yet the Clouds return again after the Rain. Cain's club (as
Bucholcer says) is still carried up and down the world stained with the blood
of Abel. Thus you see to what hard things God has called his people.

Now God may be said to call forth his people to suffer, How God calls to
sufferings.
when he so hedgeth them in by providence, that there is no way to escape it
but by sin. Whatsoever providence labors with such a dialem^^a as this, is a
plain signification of Gods will to us in the case. We may not now expect such
an extraordinary call to suffering-work, as some of me Saints had of old, Genesis
22.2. Acts 9.16. but when we meet them in the way of our duty, and there is no
avoiding of them, but by stepping over the hedge of the command, God will have
us to look upon that exigence as his call to suffer.

And the reasons why he does so often hedge them in thus by his providence in a
suffering path, Why he calls his people to such grievous sufferings.
and bring them to these exigencies, may be drawn partly from his own Glory,
which is thereby singulary illustrated, and partly from his peoples good, which
is also thereby strangely promoted and carried on.

By these Sufferings (albeit Satan, and his Instruments think not so) does the
most Wise God illustrate and advance his own glory. For,

1. Thereby he vindicates his Righteousness, not only in making good the
Promises to his people under them, and so silencing all their unbelieving fears
and jealousies, Micah 6.5. but he vindicates it also from the aspersions, and
false imputations of his enemies; by this the world shall see, that how well
soever he loves his people, yet he will not indulge or patronize their sins. If
they will be so disingenuous to sin against him, he will be so just to make
them suffer for their sin, and in those sufferings will provide for his glory,
which by their sin was prejudiced in the eyes of the world, Amos 3.2. Ezra
9.13, 15. He hates not sin a jot the less, because it is found in his own
people; and though for the magnifying of his mercy, he will pardon their sin,
yet for the clearing of his Righteousness he will take vengeance upon their
inventions, Psalm. 99.8.

2. And in these sufferings his glorious Power has an opportunity to shine
forth also, and that both in their supportations under trouble, and
deliverances out of it. It is one of the greatest wonders in the world, how the
Church subjects under such violent Assaults, as are frequently made upon it. I
will turn aside (said Moses) and see this great fight, why the Bush is not
consumed, Exodus 3.3. But especially in its mavelous deliverances, which the
power of God often effects so strangely, that it overmatches the spirits of
Gods ^own people, and their souls like a Watch wound up above its height,
stands still with amazement and admiration, Psalm. 126.7. When the Lord turned
back the captivity of Zion, we were-like them that dreamed.

3. His Wisdom is triumphant in these days of Distress and trouble. Now you
may see the All-wise God going beyond a subtle Devil, and in a moment
frustrating the deepest and most desperate Designs of Hell, and that at the
very birth and article of Execution, Hest. 6.1. sometimes effecting their
Deliverances immediately by his own hand, Zech. 4.6. Exodus 15.6. Hos. 1.7. to
the end he may be exalted in his own Strength, Psalm. 21.12, 13. for he affects
not Social Glory.

Sometimes, by contemptible and improbable means, out-witting an Ahithophel, by
a plain Hushai, Haman by Hester, Sisera by Jael.

Yea sometimes by dreadful means, I mean such as rather threaten his peoples
Ruin, then seem to promise their Deliverance, Psalm. 65.5. The fiery Furnace,
the Lions Den, the Belly of a Whale, are strange means of preservation.

And as Divine Wisdom is glorified in the way and manner of their deliverance
out of trouble, so in ordering those troubles to their singular benefit and
advantage. For,

1. They are ordered to be the occasions of drawing out the magnificent Acts of
your Faith and Patience, which else could not show themselves to the world as
now they do. There are the Ordinary and common Acts of Faith, and there are its
Magnificent and Heroic Acts; that is, its Resolute and High-raised Actings, by
which it triumphs over greatest Difficulties, and enables the soul courageously
to break down all the Difficulties that lie before him in the way of his Duty.
Such were those of Hester, Job, and Daniel, Hest. 4.16. Job 13.15. Dan. 6.10.
When this holy Gallantry of Spirit appears in Believers, God is exceedingly
glorified. Poor timorous low-spirited Saints, like young Swimmers, are afraid
to venture farther then they can feel Ground (I mean some sensible
Encouragement) under their feet; but these can cast themselves into the Sea of
Troubles upon a naked Promise. From these Trials of Faith God has a great
Revenue of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.7. and these could not appear in the world, were it
not for such Troubles, Revel. 13.16. Here is the Faith and the Patience of the
Saints.

2. They are wisely ordered as means of severing and discriminating the Spirits
of Professors. By this means the Church is disburthened and rid of many
Hypocrites, which were its Reproach as well as Burden, Amos 9.9, 10. I will
sift the house of Israel among all Nations, like as Corn is sifted in a Sieve,
yet shall not the least Grain fall upon the Earth. All the sinners of my people
shall die, etc. All the heterogeneous Stuff that mingles, and embases the more
pure and noble Metal, shall be separated in this Furnace. In Times of Peace
Professors multiply apace; the Sunshine of Prosperity breeds Professors, as an
hot Summer does Flies, though Heaven will be little the fuller for this strange
multiplication of them: And this I suppose is the ground of that saying, That
it is never better with the Church, then when it has most Hypocrites in it. But
now Persecution like a windy day causes all this rotten Fruit to fall.
Lightning and Thunder is terrible weather, but it purifies and cleanses the
Air, Some of these seem to be very beautiful Flowers in the Field of the
Church, where they stand (during the Sunshine of Peace) in the Pride and
Bravery of their Professions and Gifts; but the wind passes over them and they
are gone, and their places shall know them no more. To allude to that in Psa.
103.16.

3. As God makes them separating Times in respect of Hypocrites, so are they
Times of endearing the Saints to each other. Never are Saints more endeared,
then when most persecuted: never more united, then when most scattered. Though
in Times of Liberty they will bite and devour one another, yet under common
Persecution they will die one for another. You have two pregnant instances of
this, Acts 43.2. Mal. 3.17. Certainly there is something that is engaging, in
fellowship in the same Sufferings. But there is much more in the discoveries
that Persecution makes of their sincerity, which it may be was before
entertained with jealousy. And there is yet more, in the reproofs of the Rod,
whereby they are taught the evil of their former ways, and made to cry, as
Psalm. 79.8. Oremember not against us former iniquities.

4. By these Storms they are awakened to their Duty, and taught to cry more
fervently. Ah! what drowsy Prayers? what heartless Devotions are presented to
God sometimes? But now, they cry as the Disciples to Christ, when ready to sink
in the Storm, Isa. 26, 16. O Lord, in trouble they have visited thee: they have
poured out a Prayer when thy chastning was upon them. Now they pray more
humbly, frequently, fervently. Music they say is sweetest upon the Waters; I
am sure the sweetest Melody is made by the Saints upon these Waters of Trouble.

These few Hints may suffice to show you the admirable Fruits which God aims at
in exercising his people under afflictions, and what one of these singly may
not preponderate all the smart and pain they cost you. And thus you see that
God does, as also how, and why he does call forth his people to such hard
Sufferings.

CHAP. II. Demonstrating the Excellency of a prepared Heart, for the worst of
Sufferings.
NOw to evince the Choiceness and Excellency of a ready and prepared Spirit to
entertain, and cheerfully obey a call from God to the greatest Sufferings,
thereby to set an edge upon your Desires, and quicken your Endeavors after it;
be pleased to ponder these following Particulars, wherein much of its
Excellency will appear.

1. It will bring the heart to an holy Rest and Quietude in a Suffering hour,
and so prevent that Anxiety and perturbation of Spirit, which puts the sinking
weight into Affliction. The more Care, Fear, and Trouble thou have before a
Trouble comes, the more Calm, Quiet, and Composed thy Spirit will be when the
Affliction is come indeed. It is admirable to consider with what peace and holy
submission Job entertained his Troubles, which considering the kind and quality
of them, together with the manner in which they befell him, one would think
they should (at least) have startled and amazed him, and put his Soul (though
gracious) into a strange Confusion: But you see the contrary, he is very quiet
and composed in his Spirit, little Tumult or Disorder appears in his Thoughts,
but he worships God, owns his Hand, and submits to his Will, Job 1.20, 21.
Whence was this? Surely had they come by way of Surprise, as holy as he was he
could not have carried it thus; but he had in the days of his Peace and
Prosperity prepared for such a Day as this, and so they neither came
unexpectedly, nor found him unprepared for them, Job 3.25, 26. I was not in
safety, neither had I rest, yet trouble came. The thing which he feared (as he
says there) came upon him. He laid it to heart before it came, and therefore
it neither brake nor distracted his heart when it came.

So Habakkuk he stood upon his Watchtower, i. e. recessum mentis, says Mr.
Calvin; his own retiring Thoughts, making Observations from the Word upon
probable Events. Yea, and seeing a Storm of Judgment gathering in the Clouds
of the Threatenings, he trembled in himself before it fell, Cap. 3.16, 17. And
see what advantage this was of to him, Verse. 17.18. he had Rest in the Day of
Trouble; yea could rejoice, when all outward Staves and comforts were gone.
There is a double Rest in the Day of Evil; a Rest of Deliverance, and a Rest of
Contentation; it was this later that this holy man enjoyed in that Evil Day,
and that as the consequent of his serious Preparation.

But now if Troubles come by way of surprisal, How amazing and ruining do they
often prove? It Is a sad thing to feel Trouble before we see it, and to be past
hope before we have any ^fear. Those Troubles (says one) that find men secure,
do usually leave them desperate. What advantage has that Enemy to ruin you,
that comes upon your back, and falls upon you unawares? This is the misery of
the careless World. For Man also knows not his time, as the Fishes that are
taken in an evil Net; and as the Birds that are caught in the snare, so are the
Sons of Men snared in an evil time, when it falls on them suddenly, Eccles.
8.12. Thus perished the old World: But one Noah provided for the Flood, and
only he with his Family preserved in it; all the rest were eating and
drinking, marrying, and giving in Marriage, till the Flood came and swept them
all away, Matthew. 24.38. Men will not use their foreseeing Faculties; but
because it is all well, yet therefore they conclude it shall be so to morrow.
Philosophers tell us, that immediately before an Earthquake, the Air is very
quiet and serene; and before the great Rain falls, the Wind usually lies. We
may not conclude Rest and Peace from the Report our Senses make to us, from the
posture of second Causes, (and yet what is there, look which way you will, but
speaks Troubles and Distresses coming upon the World) but rather we should make
a Judgment from the Word, upon condition of the Times; for there you have the
Decrees of God, and a Draught of the Designs of Providence, to the end of the
World, Zeph. 2.1, 2. Here you may see the Signs of the Times, and what days are
to be expected. And then, if you can upon this foresight, get into your Ark
before the Cataracts of Heaven be opened, and the Sea-Shores unbar'd, and the
Waters prevail above the Mountains; Oh what a benefit will this be! how may
thou sit ( Noah like) medius tranquillus in undis! Safe from the fear of evil,
and enjoy rest and peace in thy own Spirit, when the Earth is full of Uproars,
Tumults, and Desolations.

2. It is a blessed and excellent thing to prepare for sufferings, because such
preparations do plainly speak a truly gracious heart, that is in earnest with
Christ, and is serious in the matters of Religion. Believe it Soul, this one
thing will be the clearest discovery of the integrity of thy heart in
profession. He that makes account of sufferings, and is seriously at work upon
his own heart, to fit it for sufferings, and take his Lot with Christ where
ever it falls, this is the man that has deliberately closed with Christ upon
his own terms, and is like to be the durable Christian.

As for Hypocrites (Christ's Summer-Friends) they have either their Exceptions
and secret Reservations, to secure a Retreat, if ever it come to hot service,
or else they rush inconsiderately into the profession of Christ, never
examining the terms which he proposes to all that will follow him, nor sealing
those Indentures, Mark 8.34. upon which he only allows us to call him Master.

The necessity of a rational and advised closure with Christ upon these terms,
is by himself fully set forth in that excellent Parable, Luke 14.25, 26, 27,
28. wherein consider, (1.) The occasion, ver. 25. There were great Multitudes
with him, Christ began to grow in request among them, they flockt from all
parts to him, to hear him; but Christ knew well enough, that if once they
should come to understand their work, and what the Conditions and Terms of
their admission into his service are, it would quickly thin and diminish that
great multitude, and reduce that great Host like Gideons, into a little
handful. (2.) And therefore he resolves heartily and plainly with them: and in
ver. 26, 27. he propounds his Terms, and writes down his Conditions, the sum of
which is this, he must deny himself, that is, at least in praeparatione animi,
in the preparation of the mind, if not actually: So that this is the Hinge upon
which all our Profession turns, and the stress of the whole business lies. And
(3.) to evince the rationality of his Terms, and that he expected no
unreasonable thing at their hand, he clears it by a double instance, or
resemblance, to what men use to do in other cases. (1.) That of a Builder, no
man that exercises Reason will begin to build an House, and not be provided to
defray the Charge of it: It were a ridiculous vanity, for a man to lay a large
Foundation, and not have a stock to carry up the Walls, and complete the Work.
(2.) That of a Soldier, no man would with 10000. engage an Army of 20000. that
would be impar congressus, an unequal Match indeed; what could he expect but to
be overpowred with Numbers, and swallowed up? Possibly they may intend to face,
but no man would think they intended to fight the Enemy on such a disadvantage.

Why thus stands the case, In our engaging in the Profession of Christ, a man
must sit down and compute the cost and charges of being a Christian, and
deliberately weigh the worst, as well as the best; and having so done, if then
he be content to run all hazards with Jesus Christ, and expects to save no more
but his Soul, (for indeed he that thinks to save any thing but his Soul by
Religion, is a Fool for so thinking). If I say he be content to fore-go and
hazard all the rest for Christ and accordingly when dangers appear, and
difficult times come on, does in good earnest fit and make ready himself for
the worst he can foresee, why this is the man, that deals honestly with
Christ, and is sincere, hearty, and real in his Transactions with him. For
want of this consideration at first, and suitable preparations from time to
time, as need requires, and new troubles approach; I say, for want of this it
is, that so many faint and fall back in the day of trouble, and furnish Hell
with so many Tryumphs over Religion, and the sincere-hearted Professors of it.
It was for want of depth of Earth, (i. e.) a deep consideration, and rooted
Resolution at first, that the Stonyground Hypocrite so quickly withered, when
the Sun of Persecution began to shine fervently upon him, Mat. 13.5, 6.

And wherefore is it think you? that God does make such deep Wounds by
Conviction upon men's hearts at first, and terrify them with such dreadful
Representations of their guilt, in the Glass of the Law, Act. 2.37. Romans 7.9.
Why surely, as God aims at the unbortoming of the Man by this, and striking him
off that false and conceited Foundation of his own Righteousness, so he does it
to make Christ's Terms and Conditions appear rational and easy to him, that
being delivered out of that miserable state by Christ, he may never open his
mouth grudgingly and repiningly against Christ, whatever Troubles he shall from
thenceforward meet with for his sake, Ezekiel. 16.63.

So that it must needs be a good proof and testimony, of the sincerity of our
hearts, in the profession of Christ, when we thus fit our selves to suffer with
him, and are content to bear his Cross, as well as wear his Crown: And is it
not a blessed thing, for a man to find a fair Evidence of this in his own
heart? What can be more comfortable to him on Earth?

3. This preparation is an excellent thing, because it is that which prevents
and cuts off the scandal of the Cross, and the offense that others take at the
sufferings of Christ.

Now, by Christ's own Testimony, that Soul is blessed that is not offended in
him. Mat. 11.6. And truly, there are not many among the Throng of Professors,
upon whose Heads this blessing falls; how many in a suffering hour, are
disguised as persons that have met with a disappointment? They expected much
peace, honor, and prosperity, from Christ, as Mat. 20.20, 21. but finding now
their Expectations frustrated, and their Carnal Interests rather exposed, then
secured by their profession of him, they go back like those, Joh. 6.66. and
walk no more with him. And it is very observable, that Christ dates the offense
that men shall take at him, from the beginning of sorrows, Mat. 24.8, 9. All
these are the beginning of sorrows, and then shall many be offended. This is
the beginning of Apostasy from Christ. But now if thou be one that make it
thy business, to foresee and provide for Troubles before they come upon thee,
this will prevent thy ofsence when they come, Joh. 16.1, 2, 3, 4. Foresight of
them takes off both the strangeness and terror of them. Great peace (says the
Psalmist) have they that love thy Law, and [nothing] shall [offend] them; or,
be a stumbling block to them, as it is in the Heb. No! Why they meet with
Prisons, Death, Banishments, yea, but they shall not stumble or be offended at
these things, but pass peaceably over them, because they meet with no more then
they expected.

And is not this a blessed thing, think you, that whatever falls out in thy way
shall not offend thee, or make any alteration on thy Judgment of Christ and his
ways, but he shall be as lovely, and his ways as sweet and desirable under
Persecution, Scorn, and Contempt, as in the greatest flourish of Prosperity?
Yea, though thou be broken in the place of Dragons, and covered with the shadow
of Death, yet shall not thy heart be turned back, nor thy steps decline from
his ways, Psalm. 44.18, 19, 20. Why, this blessedness comes upon the heart of
the prepared Christian.

4. A fourth Excellency of preparation for sufferings lies in this, that it
has a tendency to convince and awaken the secure and drowsy World. O! If the
Lords people would but fall about this work in earnest, and live as people that
are providing for a Storm, and resolved in the strength of God to run all
hazards and hardships for Christ, I am persuaded it would be of more ease to
startle and convince the World, then all the Sermons that ever they heard. For
here is that which dashes and cuts the Throat of all our Labors; we preach up
Self-denial and Contempt of Life and Liberty for Christ. Now though they hear
us preach the necessity and excellency of these things, and here you profess
them as your Principles; yet when they look upon the Lives of Professors in
Times of Danger, and find no proportion betwixt your profession and practice,
when they see you cling to the World, and are as loath to give it up as others;
that Prisons and Sufferings are as formidable things to you as others, and that
you live not loose from these things, as men that are in a preparedness to let
them go, and give them up for Christ: Why then they conclude, that you dare not
trust your own Principles when it comes to the push; and how can they be
persuaded to believe, that which they think your selves do not really believe?
They have Eyes to see what you can do, as well as Ears to hear what you can
say; and as long as they see you do no more then others, you may talk your
hearts out, e're they will believe your way is better than others.

But now when Persecution arises, did they see you providing your selves for
it, and putting on your Harness to enter the Lists, carry your dearest
Enjoyments in your hands, and put on the shoe of preparation, to follow the
Lord through the roughest ways of Sufferings: this would convince to purpose,
and preach the excellency of Christ, the vanity of the Creature, the
rationality and certainty of Christian Principles, in a more intelligible and
rouzing Dialect to them, than all our cheap and easy Commendations of them
did. And hence it is, that Noah was said to condemn the World, Heb. 11.7. By
Faith Noah being warned of God, of things not seen as yet, (i. e.) of the
Deluge that was coming, though no appearance of it yet, the Heavens being as
clear as ever: yet believing the Threatening, he was moved with fear: the fear
of God, an effect of his Faith in the Word of God, moved, (i.e.) impelled him
to his Duty: Set him about his preparation-work, to provide an Ark; and this
was it by which he condemned the World, left them excuseless: For they not
only heard of an approaching Flood by his Ministry, but now saw he himself
believed what he preached, by his daily preparations against it came. O
consider this, how much it would tend to the Worlds Conviction. Now they will
see that you are in good earnest, and that there is a reality in godliness.
This will induce them to search into the matter more then ever, and remove
those prejudices they have taken up against the good ways of God, as if they
were but Phantasms and Conceits.

5. In the next place, this foresight and preparation, must needs be an
excellent thing, because the Spirit of God every where sets an honorable
Character upon it, and always mentions such persons with some singular
commendation and respect. These only are the Wisemen in the Judgment of God;
and all the rest (what great Politicians soever they are famed to be among men)
are accounted Fools, Prove. 22.3. Eccles. 2.14. The Wise-mans Eyes are in his
head; that is, he is a foreseeing man; but the Fool goes on and is punished:
Rushes on without consideration, suspecting no danger that he at present sees
not, and so smarts for his folly. Beloved, there are Signs of the Times, as
well as of the Weather, Math. 16.3. You may see the Clouds of Judgment
gathering before the Storm falls upon you: And this is the meaning of Zeph.
2.1, 2. Gather your selves together, before the Deerce bring forth, and the Day
pass as the Chaff. Where there is a Conception of Judgment, there will be a
Firth, unless the Reformations and Prayers of the Saints give it a miscarrying
Womb. But it requires Wisdom to discern this; they must be men of much
observation, that can descry it at a great distance: yet this may be done, by
considering what GOD has done in like Cases in former Ages, when Nations have
been guilty of the same sins as now they are: For God is as just now as then,
and hates sin as much as ever he did; and partly, by attending to things
present, to what fullness and maturity the sins of a Nation are grown, Joel
3.16. or what beginnings of Judgment are already upon a people, as Harbingers
and Forerunners of more at hand, Luke 2.30, 31. 1 Samuel 2.12. Or what is the
universal Vote and Cry of Gods Ministers, who are his Watchmen to foresee
danger, Ezekiel. 3.17. and his Trumpeters to discover it, Numb. 10.8. and when
these have one mouth given, certainly there is much in it, Luke 1.70. Or
lastly, by pondering those Scripture-Prophecies that yet remain to be
fulfilled: They must all go out their times, and accomplish their full number
of Years and Months; but certainly they shall be fulfilled in their Seasons.

By attending to these things, a Christian may give a near guess at the
Judgments that are approaching a Nation, and so order himself accordingly,
Eccles. 8.5. A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment. And this is
(even in the Judgment of God) a choice point of Wisdom. Whereas on the
contrary, heedless and careless ones, that regard not these things, are branded
for Fools, and upbraided with more bruitishness than the Beasts of the Field,
or Fowls of the Air, Math. 16.3. Jer. 8.7. The Stork in the Heavens, the
Swallow, Turtle, and Crane, observe their Seasons of departing, and returning,
upon the approach of the Winter and Spring, and that by a natural instinct,
whereby they prolong their lives, which else must perish. But though God has
made Man wiser then the Fowls of the Air, and Beasts of the Earth, which by
instinct will quit colder Climates, or run to the Hedge when Winter or Storms
approach, yet the Heavens may be astonished at this, to see Nature cast by
sin so far below it self, and that in reasonable Creatures.

But now, if this be foreseen, then there is a singular advantage in a man's
hand, either to use the means of preventing those approaching Calamities, Zeph.
2.3. or if it cannot be prevented, yet to take Sanctuary in Christ, Mic. 5.5.
to run to the Promises and Attributes, Esa. 26. ult. and so have a good Roof
over his Head while the Storm falls, and the Weather is tempestuous abroad. And
therefore certainly, this Preparation is an excellent thing. Whatever the
Spirit of God speaks in the commendation of foreseeing Evils, is with respect
to this Duty of preparing for them; for foresight of Evils, without
preparation, rather increases, then diminishes the misery.

6. A sixth Excellency of Preparation, lies in the influence that it has into
a Christians stability in the evil day. You cannot but know, that your
stability in that critical hour of Temptation, is a choice and singular Mercy,
in as much as all you are worth in the other World depends upon your standing
then, Rev. 21.7, 8. Romans 2.6, 7. Luke 22.28. Neither can you be ignorant how
much you are like to be tried and put to it then, whether you respect the Enemy
that engages you, Ephesians. 6.12. or your own weakness, who have been so often
foiled in lesser trials, Jer. 12.5. All the Grace you have, will be little
enough to keep the Field, and bear you up from sinking; and therefore it cannot
but be a blessed thing, to be able to stand and cope with the greatest
difficulties, in such a nick of trial as that will be. Now he that expects to
do this, must put on the whole Armor of God. See Ephesians. 6.12, 13, 14. There Is
no expectation of standing in the evil day, except your feet be shod, that is,
your Wills prepared, with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace.

It is true, that our ability to stand, is not from our own inherent grace; for
by his strength shall no man prevail, 1 Samuel 2.9. and yet it is as true, that
without grace, both inherent in us, and excited and prepared for action, we
cannot expect to stand: For these two, Grace inherent in us, and Grace exciting
and assisting without, are not opposed, but co-ordinated. Grace in us, is the
Weapon by which our Enemy falls; but then that Weapon must be managed by the
Hand of the Spirit. -- Well then, look upon this as a choice mercy, which tends
so much to your stability.

7. A seventh Excellency of a prepared Heart, is, that it is a very high
testification of our love to Jesus Christ, when we thus show our willingness to
take our Lot with him, and follow him wherever he goes. What an high
expression of love was that of Ruth, to her Mother Naomy; I will not go back,
but where thou lodgest I will lodge, and where thou go I will go. It Is
excellent, when a Soul can say to Christ, as Ittai to David, 2 Samuel 15.21.
Surely, in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in Death, or in Life,
even there also will thy Servant be. This is love indeed, to cleave to him in a
time of such distresses and dangers. This is love which the Waters cannot
quench, nor the Flood drown, Cant. 8.6. Probatio amoris, est exhibitio operis:
If you love Christ indeed, show your love by some fruits of it; and surely,
this is a very choice fruit and proof of it. There be many that profess a great
deal of love to Christ, but when it comes to this Touchstone, it appears false
and counterfeit, but a mere flourish, when no danger is near: But that Soul
which buckles on the Shoe of Preparation, to follow him through Thorns and
Briars, and over the Rocks and Mountains of Difficulties and Troubles, loves
him indeed, Jer. 2.2, 3. Beloved, it is one of the choicest Discoveries of your
love to your Master Christ; yea, it is such a testification of love to him, as
Angels are not capable of. They show their love by their readiness to do his
Will, in the execution of which they fly as with Wings, Ezekiel. 1.24. But you
only have the happiness of testifying your love, by your readiness to suffer
for him, and is not this excellent?

8. When the Heart is prepared for the worst Sufferings, it is an Argument that
your Will is subdued to the Will of God; for till this be done in a good
measure, you cannot stand ready to suffer for him: But now, to have the Will
subdued by Grace to the Will of God, is a very choice and excellent frame
indeed; for in this the main power of Grace lies: Look in what Faculty the
chief Residence and strength of sin was, in the same, the chief Residence and
power of Grace, after Conversion, is also: Now it is in the Will, that the
strength and power of sin (before Conversion) lay. See Joh. 5.40. Psalm.
81.11. Jer. 44.16, 17. And indeed, it was the Devils strong Hold, which in the
Day of Christ's Power, he storms and reduces to his Obedience, Psalm. 110.3. Oh
what a blessed thing is this! the Will rules the Man, it has the Empire of the
whole Man, it commands the Faculties of the Soul, imperio politico; and it
commands the Members of the Body, imperio despotico: Now to have Christ and
Grace rule that, which rules and commands your inner and outer Man too, is no
small Mercy: And a better Evidence that it is so cannot be given than this,
that you stand ready, or do seriously prepare your selves to suffer the hardest
things for Christ: If your Will can like that Work, it is an Argument Grace has
conquered and subdued indeed.

9. This Preparation of Heart to Duty, is an excellent thing, because God is so
abundantly pleased with it, that he oftens excuses them from sufferings in whom
he finds it, and accepts it, as if the service had been actually done. So
Abraham, Genesis 22.12. he was ready to offer up his Isaac's life to God; but God
seeing his Servants heart really prepared, and ready for that difficult
service, and high point of Self-denial, provided himself another Sacrifice
instead of Isaac. Abraham shall have his Isaac back again, and that with
advantage; for he has with him not only a choice Experiment of his love to
God, but Gods high approbation of him, and acceptance of his Offering. It was
all one, in respect of Divine acceptance, as if he had bin slain; and so the
Scripture represents it, Jam. 2.21. And in this sense, that Promise is often
made good to Gods People, who stand ready to give up their Isaacs, their lives,
liberties, and dearest enjoyments, to the Lord; He that will lose his life for
my Names sake shall save it, Luke 9.24.

Now what a blessed thing is this! you may this way have the Crown of
Martyrdom, and yet not shed one drop of blood for Christ actually. Ah how
kindly does God accept it at his poor Creatures hands, when he sees how willing
they are to serve him with their best enjoyments! It is well (says he to
David) that it was in thy heart, 1 King. 8.18.

10. And then lastly, to add no more, it is beyond Controversy an excellent
and blessed thing; because should such a Christian, after all his pains and
preparations, be overborn, and fall by Temptation, yet this preparation of his
heart excuses his fall, from those aggravations that are upon the falls of
others, and will give him both support under such a condition, and
encouragement to hope for a speedy recovery out of it. Ah! it is no small
comfort, when a poor Soul that has been overborn by temptation, can come to
God and say, Lord, thou know that this was not a wilful departure from my
duty, but contrary to the bent and resolution of my heart, thou saw my
diligence beforehand to prepare for it; thou saw my fears and tremblings of
heart about it; O Lord forgive, O Lord recover thy Servant, wash away this
spot, it is one of the spots of thy children, an infirmity, not a Rebellion:
This may much stay the Soul.

Surely in this case, thou have many grounds of comfort that another wants: For
thy sin being but an infirmity, (1.) It Is that which is common to all Saints,
Psalm. 103.11, 12, 13, 14. (2.) God has mercy and pardons for such sins as
these; else woe to the holiest Soul, Psalm. 130.3, 4. Solomon, upon this ground,
pleads for mercy for them that prepared their hearts, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. and
God has laid in sweet grounds of encouragement for such Souls, Numb. 15.27,
28. Heb. 5.2. How tenderly does Christ deal with the Disciples under this kind
of sin, Mat. 26.41. and though they forsook him for a time, yet received them
again! though they fled from him, yet they all returned again, and appeared
boldly for Christ afterward, and sealed their Confession of him with their
blood: and that which recovered them again was this, that their fall and
departure was contrary to the resolution and standing frame and bent of their
hearts; for they resolved all to cleave to him to the death, Mat. 26.35.
whereas those that engaged in a profession of him inconsiderately, and never
resolved nor prepared for the worst, fell off from him, and never returned any
more, Joh. 6.66. So then, upon the whole, you cannot but grant, that it is a
very blessed and excellent thing, to prepare thus for the greatest Sufferings
that can befall us for Christ: We come next to show wherein it lies.

CHAP. III. Evincing the necessity of a sound and real work of grace upon the
heart, to fit a man for the sufferings of Christ.
HAving showed you that God does sometimes put his dearest people upon very
hard services for him, and what an excellent thing it is to prepare our selves
to obey the call of God to them; In the next place I come to show you, wherein
this preparation or readiness for Sufferings consists, and how many things
concur and contribute their assistance to this Work.

Now there is a twofold preparation or readiness for Suffering; the one is
habitual, the other actual: That habitual readiness is nothing else but the
inclination of a Soul, to suffer any thing for Christ; which inclination
arises from the Principles of Grace infused into the Soul: But then as fire,
though it have a natural inclination to ascend, yet may be violently deprest
and hindered, that it cannot ascend actually, so may it be in this case; and
therefore, before a man can be fitted for Sufferings, as Paul was, there must
to this habitual be superadded an actual readiness, which is nothing else but
the rouzing of Grace out of the sleepy and dull habits, and awakening it to its
work in a time of need: as the Lion is said to lash himself with his Tail, to
rouse up his Courage before he fight. The former is a remote power; the latter
a proxim and immediate power. I must handle the former in this Chapter, and you
are to know, that it consists in a found and real work of Grace or
Conversion wrought upon the soul; without which I shall make it evidently
appear to you, that no man can be fit or ready to suffer as a Christian.

What ever stock of natural Courage, moral Principles, or common Gifts of the
Spirit be lodged in any man's Breast, yet all this (without special grace) can
never fit him to suffer for Christ. And had not this Work been really and
soundly wrought upon the heart of this blessed man, as indeed it was, Acts 9.3,
4, 5. he had quickly fainted under his Sufferings; and so will every soul
sooner or later do, that suffers not upon the same Principles he did.

1. For first, No man can suffer for Christ, until he be able to deny himself,
See Matthew. 16.24. Selfdenial goes in order of Nature before Sufferings.
Beloved, In a Suffering hour the Interests of Christ and Self meet like two men
upon a narrow Bridge; one must of necessity go back, or the other cannot pass
on: If you cannot now deny Self, you must deny Christ. The Yoke and Dominion of
Self must be cost off, or else Christ's Yoke and Burden cannot be taken on.

It is confessed that Self may not only consist with, but be a motive to some
kind of Sufferings: Ambition and Applause may carry a man far this way; Pride
is a Salamander that it seems can live in the flames of Martyrdom, 1 Cor.
13.3. but to be a Servant to Self, and a true Sufferer for Christ are
incompatible. Self may make you the Devil's Martyrs, but Grace only can make
you Christ's Martyrs. So that let a man be seemingly carried for a while with
never so high a Tide of Zeal for Christ, yet if Self be the Spring that feeds
it, those selfends like so many little Ditches joined to the Banks of a River,
shall suck and draw away the Water into themselves, that the lofty Stream will
sink and come to nothing ere it have ran far: So then of necessity Self must be
dethroned in the hearts of Christ's suffering Servants.

But now it is real Grace only that deposes Self, and subjects its Interests
to Christ's; for Sanctification is nothing else but the dethroneing of exalted
snf, and the setting up of Christ's Interest above it in the Soul. This is it
that alters the property of all a man has, and superscribes them with a new
Title, Holiness to the Lord, Isa. 23.18. Zech. 14.20, 21. Thenceforth a man
looks at himself as none of his own, but past into another right, 1 Cor. 6.19.
and that he must neither live, nor act ultimately for himself, but for Christ,
Romans 14.7. Heb. 13.7, 8. Phil. 1.20. He is no more as a Proprietor, but a
Steward of all he has, and so holds out upon these terms to lay it out or lay
it down as may best serve his Masters ends and glory.

All that he is or has, is by Grace subordinated to Christ; and if once;
subordinated, then no more opposed to him subordinata non pugnant. This is it
that makes him say, I care not what becomes of me or mine, so Christ may be
glorified. Let Christ be m^gnifi^d in my body, whether it be by life, or by
death, Phil. 1.20.

By Conversion Christ enters the soul, 2 Cor. 10.5.
as an Army does an Enemies Garrison by Storm, and when he is possessed of it by
Grace, he presently divides the whole spoil of Self betwixt himself and his
Church. This is the first thing that evinces the necessity of a Work of Grace
to prepare the heart for Sufferings.

2. And then in the next place, It is as evident that a man can never be fit to
suffer hard Things for Christ, until his Spirit be enlarged, raised, and
ennobled, so that he be able to despise Dangers, and look Difficulties in the
face. That low and private Spirit must be removed, and a public Spirit must
possess him. If a man be of a feeble and effeminate Spirit, every petty Danger
will daunt and sink him; Delicacy and Tenderness is as unsuitable to a
Christian as to a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2.3. They that mean to enter into the
Kingdom of God, must resolve to make their way through that brake of Troubles
betwixt them and it, 2 Timothy 3.12. They that will be crowned with Victory, must
stand to it, and play the men, as that word imports, 1 Cor. 16.13. Look over
all the Sacred and Humane Histories, and see if you can find a man that ever
honored Christ by Suffering, that was not of a raised and noble Spirit, and in
some measure able to contemn both the allurements and threats of men. So those
three noble Jews, Dan. 3.16, 17. so Moses, Heb. 11.27. and so our Apostle, Acts
20.24. and the same heroic and brave Spirit was found in the succeeding Ages
amongst the Witnesses of Christ. When Valence the Empercur endeavored to draw
Basil from the Faith by Offers of Preferment, Offer these things (said he) to
Children; when he threatened him with torments, Threaten these things (said he)
to your Purple Gallauts that live delicately. And the same Basil relating the
Story of the forty Martyrs, says, That when great Honors and Preferments
were offered them to draw them from Christ, their answer was, Why offer you
these small things of the world to us (O Emperor) when you know the whole
world is contemned by us! So Luther, Money could not tempt him, nor the fear of
man daunt him. Let me (said he in his Letter to Staupicius) be accounted proud,
covetous, a murderer, guilty of all vices, rather then of wicked silence and
cowardice in the Cause of Christ. Thus you see to to what an height and holy
greatness the Spirits of suffering Saints in all Ages have ^een raised.

But now it is Grace that thus raises the Spirits of men above all the smiles
and honors, frowns and fears of men: and no other principle but Grace can do
it. There is indeed a natural stoutness and generosity in some, which may carry
them far, as it is said of Alexander, that when any great danger approached him,
his courage would rise, and he would say, Jam periculum par animo Alexandri,
here is a danger fit for Alexander to encounter; so Pompey when dissuaded from
a dangerous Voyage, answered, Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam, It Is necessary
that I go, not that I live. But this being fed only by a natural Spring, can
carry a man no higher then Nature, and will flag at last. If applause and the
observation of the world supply it not, it quickly ebbs and fails.

But as Grace raises men much higher, so it maintains it even when there is
nothing to encourage without; when forsaken of all Creatures, and visible
supports, 2 Timothy 4.10. and this it does three ways: (1) By guiding him that
has a view of far greater things, which shrinks up all temporary things, and
makes them appear but trifles and small matters, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.18. By
Grace a man rises with Christ, Col. 3.1. It sets him upon his high places, and
thence he looks down upon things below, as very poor and inconsiderable. The
great Cities of Campania seem but little spots to them that stand on the top of
the Alps. (2) By teaching him to value and measure all things by another Rule,
then he was wont to do. He did once measure life, liberty, riches, honors, by
sense and time; and then they seemed great things, and it was hard to deny
them; Or thus to slight them; but now he values and measures all by Faith and
Eternity; and esteems nothing great and excellent, but what has a reference to
the Glory of God, and an influence into Eternity. (3) Grace raises and ennobles
the Spirit thus, because it is the Divine nature; it is the Spirit of Christ
infused into a poor Worm, which makes a strange alteration on him, transforms
him into another manner of person; as much difference betwixt her Spirit now,
and what it was, as betwixt the Spirit of a Child, that is filled with small
matters, and taken up with toys; and of a grave Statesman, that is daily
employed about the grand affairs of a Kingdom.

3. A man can never suffer as a Christian, till his will be subjected to the
Will of God. He that suffers involuntarily, and out of necessity, not out of
choice, shall neither have acceptance nor reward from God. Of necessity the
will must be subjected; a man can never say, Thy will be done, till he can
first say, Not my will.

But it is Grace only that thus conquers and subjects the will of man to Gods,
Psalm. 110.3. This is it that exalts Gods Authority in the Soul, and makes the
heart to stoop and tremble at his Commands. It Is this which makes our will to
write its fiat at the foot of every Command, and its placet under every Order
it receives from God. No sooner was Grace entered into the soul of Paul, but
presently he cries out, Lord what will thou have me to do? Acts 9.6. The Will
is to the Soul what the Wheels are to the Chariot; and Grace to is the Will
what Oil is to those Wheels. When we receive the Spirit of Grace, we are said
to receive an Unction from the holy One, 1 John 2.20. and then the Soul is made
as the Chariots of Aminadab, Cant. 6.12. Non tardat uncta rota, it runs freely
after the Lord, and cheerfully addresseth it self to every Service.

4. A man can never suffer as a Christian, until his heart be composed, fixed,
and determined to follow the Lord through all Hazards and Difficulties. As long
as a man is hesitating and unresolved what to do, whether to go forward, or
turn back again to the prosperous World, when a man is at such a pause and
stand in his way, he is very unfit for Sufferings. All such Divisions do both
we^ken the Soul, and strengthen the Temptation: The Devils work is more then
half done to his hands in such a Soul; and he is now as unfit to endure
hardship for Christ, as a Ship is to ride out a Storm, that has neither Cable,
Anchor, nor Ballast to hold and settle it; but lies at the mercy of every Wave,
James 1.8. The double-minded man is unstable in all his ways. But it is Grace
and nothing besides it, that brings the heart to a fixed resolution and
settlement to follow the Lord. It Is Grace that establishes, the heart, He^.
13.9. and unites it to fear the Name of God, Psalm. 86.11. This gathers all the
Streams into one Channel, and then it runs with much strength, and sweeps away
all obstacles before it. So that look as it is with a wicked man that has sold
himself to do wickedly, if he be set upon any one design of sin, he pours out
his whole heart and strength in the prosecution of that Design; which is the
ground of that saying, Liberet me Deus ab homine unius tantum negetii, Let God
deliver me from a man of one only Design. He will do it to purpose: So is it
also in Grace; If the heart be composed, fixed, and fully resolved for God,
nothing shall then stand before him. And herein lies much of a Christians
habitual fitness and ability to suffer.

5. The necessity of Saving-Grace in all Sufferers for Christ will farther
appear from this consideration, That he who will run all hazards for Christ,
had need of a continual supply of strength and refreshment from time to time.
He must not depend on any thing that is failable: For what shall he do then,
when that stock is spent, and he has no Provision left to live upon? Now all
natural qualifications, yea all the common gifts of the Spirit are failable and
short-lived things; they are like a sweet Flower in the bosom, that is an
ornament for a little while, but withers presently: Or like a Pond or Brook
occasioned by a great fall of Rain, which quickly sinks and dries up, because
it is not fed by Springs in the bottom, as other Fountainwaters are: and hence
it is they cannot continue and hold out when Sufferings come, Matt. 13.21.
because there is no Root to nourish and support. The Hypocrite will not always
call upon God, Job 27.10. Though they may keep company with Christ a few miles
in this dirty way, yet they must turn back at last and shake hands eternally
with him, John 6.66. These Commets may seem to shine for a time among the
Stars, but when that earthly matter is spent, they must fall and lose their
glory.

But now, Grace is an everlasting principle, it has Springs in the bottom
that never fail. It shall be in him (says Christ) a Well of water springing up
into eternal life, John 4.14. The Spirit of God supplies it from time to time
as need requires. It has, daily incomes from Heaven, 2 Cor. 1.5. Phil. 4.13.
Col. Munimur quatenus unimur.
1.11. So that it is our union with Christ the Fountain by Grace, that is the
true ground of our constancy and long-suffering.

6. And then lastly. It will appear by this also, that there is an absolute
necessity of a real change by Grace on all that will suffer for Christ; because
although we may engage our selves in sufferings without it, yet we can never
manage our sufferings like Christians without it. They will neither be
honorable, or acceptable to God, nor yet beneficial and comfortable to our
selves or others, except they be performed from this principle of Grace: For
upon what principle soever beside this, any man is acted in Religion, it will
either cause him to decline Sufferings for Christ: or if he be engaged in them,
yet he will little credit Religion by his Sufferings. They will either be
spoiled by an ill management, or his own pride will devour the praise and glory
of them. I do not deny, but a man that is graceless, may suffer many hard things
upon the account of his profession, and suffer them all in vain, as these
Scriptures manifest. See 1 Cor. 13.3. Gal. 3.4. and although you find many
sweet Promises made to those that suffer for Christ, yet you must consider,
that those pure and spiritual Ends and Motives, by which men ought to be acted
in their sufferings, are always supposed and employed in all those Promises that
are made to the external action. And sometimes it is expressed, 1 Pet. 4.16. to
suffer [as a Christian] is to suffer from pure Christian Principles, and in a
Christian manner, with Meekness, Patience, Self-denial, etc. and this only
Grace can enable you to do: So that by all this I suppose what I have
undertaken in this Chapter, viz. to evince the necessity of a Work of Grace to
pass upon you, before Sufferings for Religion come, is by all this performed to
satisfaction.

CHAP. IV. Wherein the Nature of this Work of Grace, in which our habitual
fitness for suffering lies, is briefly opened; and an account given of the
great advantage the gracious person has for any, even the hardest work thereby.
HAving in the former Chapter plainly evinced the necessity of saving Grace, to
fit a man for Sufferings; it will be expected now, that some account be given
you of the nature of this Work, and how it advantages a man for the discharge
of the hardest services in Religion: Both which I shall open in this Chapter,
by a distinct Explication of the parts of this description of it.

This work of Grace, What saving Grace is.
of which I am here to speak, consists in the real change of the whole Man, by
the Spirit of God, whereby he is prepared for every good work: In which brief
Description, I shall open these four things to you.

1. That it is a Change; this is palpably evident, both from Scripture and
Experience. 2 Cor. 5.17. Old things are past away, behold, all things are
become new; and it is so sensible a Change, that it is called a turning from
darkness to light, Act. 26.18. and a new Creature formed and brought forth. But
to be a little more distinct and particular, there are several other Changes
that pass upon men, which must not be mistaken for this: and therefore, (1.) It
is not a mere change of the Judgment from Error to Truth, from Paganism to
Christianity. Such a Change Simon Magus had, yet still remained in the Gall of
Bitterness, and fast bound in the Bonds of Iniquity, Act. 8.23. (2.) Nor only
of a man's practice, from Profaneness to Civility; this is common among such as
live under the Light of the Gospel, which breaking into men's Consciences,
thwarts their Lusts, and over-awes them with the fears of Hell: Which is no
more then what the Gentiles had, Romans 2.15. (3.) Nor is it a change from mere
Morality, to mere Formality in Religion. Thus Hypocrites are changed, by the
common gifts of the Spirit, illuminating their Minds, and slightly touching
their Affections, Heb. 6.4, 5. (4.) Nor is it such a Change as Justification
makes, which is relative, and only alters the state and condition, Romans 5.1,
2. (5.) Lastly, it is not a change of the Essence of a Man; he remains
essentially the same person still.

But this Change consists in the infusion of New Habits of Grace, into the old
Faculties; which immediately depose sin from its dominion over the Soul, and
deliver up the Soul into the Hands and Government of Christ, so that it lives
no more to it self, but to Christ. This is that Change whereof we speak: And
this Change (2) I assert to be real, no fancy, nor delusion; not a
groundless conceit, but it is really existent, extra mentem, whether you
conceit it or not. Indeed, the blind World would persuade us it is
supposititious, and fantastic; and that there is no such real difference
betwixt one man and another, as we affirm Grace makes. And hence it is, that
whoever professes it, is presently branded for a Phanatique; and that
Scripture, Esa. 56.5. Stand by thy self, I am holier then thou, etc. clapped in
their Teeth, in their absurd and perverse sense of it.

But I shall briefly offer these seven things to your consideration, which will
abundantly evince the reality of it, and at once both stop the slanderou^
Mouths of ignorant men, and silence those Atheistical Surmises, which at any
time Satan may inject into the hearts of Gods own people touching this matter.
And first, let it be considered, that the Spirit of God has represented to us
this Work of Grace, under such Names and Notions in Scripture, as if they had
been chosen purposely to obviate this Calumny. It Is called a Creature, Gal.
6.15. a Man, 1 Pet. 3.4. a New Birth, Joh. 3.3. Christ formed in us, Gal. 4.19.
all which express its reallity, and that it is not a conceited thing. (2.) It
appears to be real by the mavelous effects it has upon a man, turning him
both in Judgment, Will, Affections, and Practice, quite counter to what he was
before. This is evident, in that famous instance of Paul, Gal. 1.23. which is
abundantly attested and sealed, by the constant experience of all gracious
Souls, that are Witnesses of the Truth hereof. (3.) A Divine and Almighty Power
goes forth to produce and work it: and hence Faith is said to be of the
operation of God, Col. 2.12. Yea, that the same Power which raised Jesus Christ
from the Dead, goes to the production of it, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And if so, how
much less then Blasphemy is it, to call it a Conceit or Fancy? Does God set
on work his infinite Power to beget a Fancy, or raise an imagination? (4.)
Conceits and Whimsies abound most in men of weak Reason: Children, and such as
are cracked in their Understandings have most of them: strength of Reason
banishes them, as the Sun does Mists and Vapors: But now the more rational any
gracious person is, by so much the more he is fixed, settled, and satisfied in
the Grounds of Religion: Yea, there is the highest and purest Reason in
Religion: and when this Change is wrought upon men, it is carried on in a
rational way, Esa. 1.18. Joh. 16.9. The Spirit overpours the Understanding with
clear Demonstrations, and silences all Objections, Pleas, and Pretenses, to the
contrary. (5) It Is a real thing, and gracious Souls know it to be so; else so
many Thousands of the Saints would never have suffered so many cruel Torments
and Miseries, rather then forsake a fancy, and so save all. They have been so
well satisfied of the reality of that which the World calls a Fancy, that
they have chosen rather to embrace the Stake, than deny it. The constancy of
Christians, in cleaving to Religion, was common to a Proverb among the Heathen;
who when they would express the greatest difficulty, would say, You may as soon
turn a Christian from Christ as do it. Surely no wise man would sacrifice his
Liberty, Estate, Life, and all that is dear, for a Conceit. (6) It Is reality
appears in its uniformity in all those on whom it is wrought: They have all
obtained like precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. They are all changed into the same
Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. Three Thousand Persons affected in one and the same manner
at one Sermon, Act. 2.37. Could one and the same Conceit possess them all
together? Take two Christians that live a Thousand miles distant from each
other, that never heard of one another, let these Persons be examined, and
their Reports compared, and see if they do not substantially agree; and whether
as Face answers Face in Water, so their Experiences do not answer one to the
other? which could never be, if it were a groundless Conceit. (7) And lastly,
it is manifest, it is a reality, and puts a real difference betwixt one and
another; because God carries himself so differently toward them, after their
Conversion; now he smiles, before he frowned; now they are under the Promises,
before they were under the Threats and Curses; and what a vast difference will
he put betwixt the one and other in that great Day? See Mat. 25. Surely, if
these nominal Christians did but differ in Conceit, not really from others, the
Righteous Judge of all the Earth would not pass such a different Judgment and
Doom upon them.

By all this you evidently see, that Grace is a real Change, and not a
conceited one.

3. We say that this real Change passes upon the whole Man: he is changed in
Soul, Body, and Practice; all things are become new. (1) This Change appears in
his Soul: For by it, (1) his Understanding is strongly altered, and receives
things in another way than formerly. It did look at Christ and things Eternal,
as uncertain and light matters: The things that are seen and present, did
mostly affect, and appeared great and excellent: It admired Riches and Honors,
while Christ and Glory were over-looked and despised. But now, all these
Temporals are esteemed Dung, Dross, Vanity, Phil. 3.8. Romans 8.18. and Jesus
Christ is now esteemed the wisdom and the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. It did
look on the Saints as despicable persons, but now as the excellent of the
Earth, Psalm. 16.3. Strictness and Duty was once esteemed a needless thing, but
now the only thing desirable, Psalm. 119.14. Oh, says the renewed Soul, Where
were mine Eyes, that I could see no more excellency in Christ, his ways, and
people! (2) It stops not there (as it does in Hypocrites) but passes on
further, and reduces the Will; that strong Hold is taken, and delivered up to
Christ. It did rebel against God, and could not be subject, but now it submits,
Act. 9.6. Lord, what will thou have me to do? In the day of Christ's power, he
presents himself in all his drawing glory and lovelyness before the Will, and
cries to that stubborn Faculty, Open to me, open to me; with which Word there
goes forth an opening and subduing Power, which the Will no sooner feels, but
it spontaneously moves toward him, and says, Stand open ye everlasting Gates,
that the King of Glory may come in. Henceforth it votes for God, subscribes and
submits to his Will, as its only Rule and Law; and indeed, it becomes the
principal Seat where Grace makes its Residence; and where, for the most part,
it is more visible then in any other Faculty. For after a man has searched for
it in all other Faculties, and cannot discern it, yet here he ordinarily finds
it; to will is present, Romans 7.18. (3) The Will being thus gained to Christ,
Love comes in of course; it feeling the power of Grace also, presently changes
its Object: It seizes not so greedily on Earthly Objects as before, but is
strangely cooled and deadned to them, by the appearance of a far greater Glory
in Jesus Christ; which has so captivated the Soul, and strongly attracted this
Affection, that its now become very remiss in all its actings toward them: and
often, (especially at first) it is so weaned from all things on Earth, that the
Temptation seems to lie on the other Extreme, even in too great neglect of our
lawful Employments and Comforts. Now Jesus Christ, Cant. 1.3. his Ordinances,
Psalm. 119.97. and his Saints, 1 John 3.14. are the only Delights, and sweetest
Companions; he could sit from Morning to Night, to hear Discourses of Christ
his beloved, and could live and die in the company of his people, whose company
is now most delightful and sweet, Psalm. 119.63. (4) The Desires are altered,
they pant no more after the Dust of the Earth, Psalm. 4.6. but pant for God, as
the Heart for the Brooks of water, Psalm. 42.1. Yea, so big is the Soul with
them, that it is sometimes ready to faint, yea to break with the longing it has
after him, Psalm. 119.20. (5) The Thoughts are changed, Psalm. 119.113. and the
Thoughts of God are now most precious, Psalm. 139.47. musing, when alone, of
him; and, in its Solitudes, the Soul entertains it self with a delightful
Feast, which its Thoughts of God bring in to refresh it, Psalm. 63.5, 6. (6) The
Designs and Projects of the Soul are changed; all are now swallowed up in one
grand Design, even to approve himself to God, and be accepted of him, 2 Cor.
5.9. and if he fail not there, it will not much trouble him, if all his other
Designs should be dashed.

It were easy to instance in the rest of the Affections, and show how Grace
spreads and diffuses it self into them all, as Light in the Air, or Leaven in
the Lump; but this may suffice, to show how it passes upon the whole Soul, and
enters the several Faculties and Affections thereof.

And the Soul being thus possessed for God, the Body, with all its Members, is
consequently resigned up to him also: For the Will has the Empire of the
Members of the Body, as well as of the Passions and Affections of the Soul.
These are not any more delivered up to execute the Lusts of Satan, but are
yielded up to God for his ends and uses, Romans 6.19. And thus you have the third
thing in the Description, made out also, that it is an universal, as well as a
real Change. But then,

4. Lastly, You must know that by this change God prepares a man for choice and
excellent services; and this indeed is the main thing designed in this Capter,
and is the result and issue of all that has hitherto been said about this work
of Grace.

Beloved, can you imagine that God would employ his infinite and glorious
Power, to produce his new Creature in such an excellent nature, it being the
Masterpiece of all his Works of wonder wrought upon man, and not aim at some
singular use and excellent end? Every wise Agent designs some end; and what God
aims at he has told us, Isa. 43.21. Ephesians. 2.20. And accordingly he expects
singular things from such persons, Mat. 5.47. If God had not aimed at some new
service, he need not have made a new Creature: the old Creature was fit enough
for the old use and service it was employed in. But God has some choice
service to be done, wherein he will be glorified. He will have his Name
glorified even in this world by the active and passive obedience of his people.
But this being far above all the power of Nature, God therefore brings them
forth in a new and heavenly nature, endowed with rare supernatural and divine
qualities, by which it is fitted and excellently prepared for any service of
God by doing or by suffering, which before he had no fitness or ability for.

The very make and constitution of this new Creature speaks its use and end: As
now, if a man look upon a Sword or Knife (supposing he had never seen either
before) yet I say by viewing the shape and properties of it, he will say, This
was made to cut. Even so here, This new Creature was formed for some glorious
and singular service for God, to which it is exceedingly advantaged, whether
God put you upon doing or suffering. If you ask wherein this advantage of the
new Creature to honor God either way lies; I answer, It principally consists
in its heavenly inclination, or natural tendency to God. This is its great
advantage. For by virtue of this,

1. If God call a man to any duty, there is a Principle with in closing with
the Command without, and moving the soul freely and spontaneously to duty,
Psalm. 27.8. If God say, Seek my face, such an heart echoes to the call, Thy
face Lord will I seek. And this is it which is called, The writing of Gods Law
in the heart, Jer. 31.33. and must needs be a mighty advantage; for now its
work is its delight and wages, Psalm. 19.11. The command to such a Soul is not
grievous, 1 John 5.3. And by this it is kept from tiring in duty, and being
weary of its work; as you see what pains Children can take at play, how they
will run and sweat, and endure knocks and falls, and take no notice of it; put
them upon any manual labor, and they cannot endure half so much. When our work
is our delight, we never faint nor tire at it. This inclination to God is to
the Soul as wings to a Bird, or sails to a Ship. This carries the Soul easily
through every duty. O there is a vast difference betwixt a man that works for
wages, and one whose work is wages to him. And here you may at once see wherein
the principal difference betwixt the Hypocrite and the real Christian lies in
the performance of duty; and also have a true account of the reason why one
perseveres in his work to the end, when the other flags. Why, here is the true
account of both; The one is moved to duty from a natural inclination to it, the
other is forced upon it by some external motives: For the Hypocrite takes not
delight in the spiritual and inward part of duty, but is secretly weary of it,
Mal. 1.13. only his ambition and self ends put him upon it as a task. But now
the upright heart goes to God as his joy, Psalm. 43.4. and says, It is good for
me to draw nigh to God, Psalm. 73. ult. When the Sabbath comes, (that Golden
Spot of the Week) oh how he longs to see the beauty of the Lord in his
Ordinances! Psalm. 27.4. and when engaged in the worship of God, he cannot
satisfy himself in bodily service, or to serve God in the oldness of the
letter. He knows that this persuasion comes not of him that called him, Gal.
5.7, 8. He labors to engage his heart to approach to God, Jer. 30.21. And
hence those mountings of heart, and violent sallies of the desires heavenward.
And thus you see one rare advantage to glorify God actively, flowing from the
inclination of this new Creature.

2. But then secondly; Hence in like manner has the Soul as great an advantage
for sufferings: For this new Creature having such a natural tendency to God,
will enable the soul in which it is, to break its way to God through all the
interposing obstacles and discouragements. What are persecutions, what are
reproaches, what are the fears and frowns of enemies, but so many blocks thrown
in the Souls way to keep it from God and Duty? And indeed where this principle
of Grace is wanting, they prove inaccessible Mountains. Graceless hearts are
stalled and quite discouraged by them; but now this tendency of the Soul to God
enables the Christian to break his way through all. You may say of him in such
a case, as the Historian does of Hannibal (who forced a way over the Alps with
Fire and Vinegar) either he will find a way, or make a way. Shall Sword or
Famine, or any other Creature separate me from Christ? says an upright Soul.
No, no, it will through all to him, and that from this tendency of his new
Nature. You see in Nature, every thing has a tendency to its center; Fire will
up, do what you can to suppress it; Water will to the Sea, if it meet with
Dams, yea Mountains in its way; if it cannot bear them down, it will creep
about some other way, and wind and turn to find a passage to the Sea. God is
the cente^ of all gracious Spirits, and Grace will carry the soul through all
to him. This is Grace, and this i^ your advantage by it in the most difficult
part o^ your work. It will carry you through all; make the hardest work easy
and pleasant, 2 Cor. 12.10* And if great sufferings or temptations interpose
betwixt you and your God, it will break through all, and enable you to
withstand all; as it did Paul in the Text, who forced his way not only through
the fury of Enemies, but also through the entreaties and tears of Friends.

CHAP. V. In which the necessity of getting clear evidences of this work of
Grace in us, in order to our readiness for sufferings is held forth; the nature
of that evidence opened, and diverse things that cloud and obscure it removed
out of the way.
I Have done with habitual readiness, consisting in an inwrought work of Grace.
The following particulars are the things in which our actual readiness lies.
And of them that which comes next to be handled, is the getting of clear
evidences in our own souls that this work has been wrought on us, this will
exceedingly tend to your strengthening and comfort in a suffering hour. Blessed
Paul who here professes himself ready both for Bonds and Death, was clear in
this point, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. 2 Timothy 1.12. And indeed had he been cloudy and dark
in this, he could not have said, I am ready. No, no, he had been in an ill case
to undertake that Journey to Jerusalem: And thou will find it a singular
advantage in dark and difficult days to have all clear and ^^ght within. Now
for the opening of this, I will ^ew:

1. What the evidence or manifestation of the ^ork of Grace is.

2. How it appears to be of such great advantage (...) a suffering Saint.

3. Prescribe some Rules for the obtaining ^f it.

1. What it is. And in short it is nothing else but the Spirit shining upon his
own work in the hearts of Believers, thereby enabling them sensibly to see and
feel (...) to their own satisfaction. And this is expressed in Scripture under a
pleasant variety of Metaphors. Sometimes it is called the shedding alroad of
the love of God in the heart, Romans 5.5. sometimes the lifting up of the light
of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4.6. and sometimes it is expressed without a trope, by
Christ's manifesting himself to the soul, John. 14.21.

For the opening of it, I desire you would consider these six things.

1. That it is attainable by Believers in this life, and that in a very high
degree and measure. Many of the Saints have had it in a full measure, 1 Cor.
2.12. 1 John 3.24. John 21.15.

2. Though it be attainable by Believers, yet it is a thing separable from true
Grace, and many precious souls have gone mourning for the want of it, Isa.
50.10. This was sometimes the case of Heman, David, Job, and multitudes more.

3. During its continuance it is the sweetest thing in the world. It swallows
up all Troubles, and doubles all other Comforts: It puts more gladness into the
heart, then the increase of Corn and Wine, Psalm, 4.6. Suavis hora, sed brevis
mora; sapit quidem suavissime, sed gustatur rarissime, Bern.

4. Both in the continuation and removal of i^ the Spirit acts arbitrarily. No
man can say how long he shall walk in this pleasant Light, Psalm. 30.7^ By thy
favor thou have made my Mountain stand strong: thou hiddest thy face, and I
was troubled. And when in darkness, none can say how long it will be^ ere that
sweet Light break forth again. God can scatter the Cloud unexpectedly in a
moment, Cant. 3.4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him
whom my soul loves. There is such an observable difference in David's Spirit
in some Psalms, as if one man had written the beginning, and another the end of
them.

5. Though God can quickly remove the darkness and doubts of a soul; yet
ordinarily the Saints find it a very hard and difficult thing to obtain and
preserve the evidences of their Graces. Such is the darkness, deadness, and
deceitfulness of the heart, so much unevenness and inconstancy in their
practice, so many counterfeits of Grace, and so many wiles and devices of Satan
to rob them of their peace, that few (in comparison) live in a constant and
quiet fruition of it.

6. Notwithstanding all these things which increase the difficulty, yet God
has afforded his people a sure Light, and sufficient means in the diligent use
and improvement whereof they may attain a certainty of the work of Grace in
them. And there is a threefold Light by which it may most clearly and
infallibly be discovered.

1. Scripture Light, which is able to discover the secrets of a man's heart to
him; and is therefore compared to the Anatomizers Knife, Heb. 4.12.

2. The innate Light of Grace it self; or if you will the Light of Experience,
1 John 5.10. It has some properties and operations which are as essential,
necessary, and inseparable, as heat is to the fire, and may be sensibly felt
and perceived by the Soul, Psalm. 119.20.

3. The Light of the Spirit, superadded to both the former, which is sometimes
called its Earnest, sometimes its Seal. The Spirit does both plant the habits,
excite and draw forth the acts, and also shine upon his own work that the Soul
may see it; and that sometimes with such a degree of Light, as only begets
peace, and quiets the heart, though it do not fully conquer all the doubts of
it. And at other times the heart is irradiated with so clear a Beam of Light,
that it is able to draw forth the triumphant Conclusion, and say, Now I know the
things that are freely given me of God. I believe and am sure.

And so much briefly for the opening of the nature of this evidence.

2. I shall show you the necessity of it to a suffering Saint, in order to the
right management of a suffering condition.

And this will appear by the consideration of five things.

1. love enables him victoriously to break through all difficulties and
discouragements. The Flood's cannot drown it, nor the Waters quench it, Cant.
8.6, 7. It facilitates the greatest hardships, 1 John 5.3. And whatever a man
suffer, if it be not from this principle, it is neither acceptable to God, nor
available to himself, 1 Cor. 13.3.

But now nothing more inflames and quickens the Christians love to God, then
the knowledge of his interest in him, and the sensible perception and taste of
his love to the Soul. Our love to God is but a reflection of his own love: And
the more powerful the stroke of the direct Beam is, the more is the reflex
Beam also. Never does that flame of Jah burn with a more vehement heat, then
when the Soul has the most clear manifestations of its interest in Christ and
his benefits, Luke 7.47.

It must needs be of singular use to a suffering Saint, Paul sailed was, when
it fell into a place where two Seas met, Acts 27.41. Oh how tempestuous a Sea
does that Soul sail in, that has fightings without, and fears within! How must
that poor Christians heart tremble and meditate terror, that when he retires
from troubles without for some comfort and support within, shall find a sad
addition to his troubles from whence he expected relief against them! Hence it
was that Jeremy so earnestly deprecates such a misery, Be not thou a terror to
me, thou art my hope in the day of evil, Jer. 17.17. This is prevented by this
means: If a man have a clear breast, and all be quiet within, he is like one
that has a good Roof over his head when the Storm falls. We glory in
tribulation, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, Romans 5.3, 5.

It is a fountain of joy and comfort in the darkest and saddest hour. Romans 5.5.
and in the Christians joy in the Lord, lies much of his strength for
sufferings, Neh. 8.10. If once the Spirit droop and sink, the man is in a bad
case to suffer: holy joy, it is the Oil that makes the Chariot-wheels of the
Soul free to follow the Lord; Non tardat uncta rota. To suffer with joyfullness
for Christ is a qualification that Gods Eye is much upon in his suffering
Servants, Col. 1.11. How did these famous Worthies magnify Christ, and
glorify Religion by the holy triumphs of their faith and joy under
tribulation! One kissed the Apparator that brought him news of his
Condemnation, and was like a man transported with an excess of joy. Another
upon the pronouncing of the Sentence, kneels down, and with hands and eyes
lifted up, solemnly blesses God for such a day as that. Oh how is Christ
magnified by this! And this can not be until interest be cleared. It Is true
the faith of recumbency gives the Soul a secret support, and enables the
Christian to live; but the faith of evidence keeps him lively, and prevents all
those uncomfortable and uncomely sinkings and despondencies of spirit, 2 Cor.
4.16, 17. and therefore cannot but be of singular use to a soul at such a time.

Lastly, Heb. 11.35. Heb. 10.34. He that sees the gain and reward of suffering,
will think he is offered to his loss, when life and deliverance are set before
him upon such hard terms as sin is.

And thus you see what influence it has into a suffering condition.

3. In the next place I promised to prescribe some Rules for the attaining of
this Evidence, and the dispelling of those Doubts by which it is usually
clouded in the souls of Believers. And oh that by the faithful use of them you
may attain it against a suffering day come upon you.

And the first Rule I shall give you is this. vigorous it is, the more
evidential it must needs be, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Oh how much time
have many Christians spent in enquiring after the lowest signs of sincerity,
and what may consist with Grace; which had they spent in the diligent
improvement of the means of Grace for the increasing of it, they would have
found it a shorter cut to peace and comfort by much.

Mistake not the Rule by which you are to try your selves, Paralogism (as the
Apostle calls it) Jam. 1.22. by which a man deceives his own Soul: For that
which is a note or mark, must be proper to the thing notified, and not common
to any thing else. There are diverse sorts of marks; some are exclusive, the
principal use of which is to convince bold Pretenders, and discover Hypocrites.
Such is that, 1 Cor. 9.9. It is a most certain sign^ where these are, there is
no Grace; but yet it will not follow on the contrary, that where these are not,
there is Grace. See Luke 18.11. Others are ^elusive, the use of which is not so
much for trying of the truth; and the strength and degrees of Grace. As now
when Faith is described by the radiancy of it, or by some of its heroic acts
and promises made to some raised degrees and operations of it, as that, Ephesians.
3.12. etc. Here a mistake is easily made. Besides these, or rather bewixt
these, are another sort of marks, which are called positive marks; and these
agreeing to the lowest degree of Grace, are for the trial of the truth and
sincerity of it. Such are these, 1 John. 4.13. 1 John 2.3. Matthew. 5.3. Be sure
to try by a proper mark.

Take heed of such sins as violate and waste the Conscience: For these will
quickly raise a mist, Psalm. 51.8. etc. Such are sins against Light, and the
reclamations of Conscience.

Labor to shun those common mistakes that Christians make in judging of their
state;

1. Call not your condition into question upon every failing, and involuntary
lapse into sin. Iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou
shall purge them away, Psalm. 65.3. In short, thou need not call thy
condition into question, provided thou find thy Spirit working as Paul's did
under the surprisals of temptation: viz If (1) thou do approve of, and delight
in the Law, though thou fall short of it in thy practice, Romans 7.12, 14. (2) If
thy failings be involuntary, and against the resolution and bent of thy Soul,
verse. 25.18, 19. (3) If it be the load and burden of thy Soul, verse. 24. (4) If
the thoughts of deliverance comfort thee, verse. 25.

2. Question not the truth of thy Grace, because it was not wrought in the same
way and manner in thee, as in others: For there is great variety, as to the
circumstances of time and manner betwixt the Spirits operations upon one, and
another. Compare the History of Paul's Conversion with that of the Jailer,
Zacheus, or Lydia.

3. Conclude not that you have no grace, because you feel not those
transportations and ravishing joys that other Christians speak of. If thou
can not say as Paul does, Romans 8.38. yet bless God, if thou can but breath
forth such language as that, Mark 9.24.

4. Say not thou have no Grace, because of the high seize of some
Hypocrites, who in some things may excel thee. When some persons read the
sixth Chapter to the Hebrews, they are startled to see to what a glorious
height the Hypocrite may soar; not considering that there are these three
things wherein they excel the most glorious Hypocrite in the world. (1) That
Self was never dethroned in Hypocrites, as it is in them. All that an Hypocrite
does is for himself. (2) The Hypocrite never hated every sin, as he does; but
has still some Agag, Rimmon, or Delilah. (3) That the Hypocrite never acted in
duty from the bent and inclination of a new nature, taking delight in heavenly
employment, but is moved rather as a Clock by the weights and poises of some
external motives and advantages.

5. Conclude not you have no Grace, because you grow not so sensibly, as some
other Christians do. You may be diverse ways mistaken about this. (1) You may
measure your growth by your desires and then it appears nothing; for the
Christian aim high, and grasps at all. (2) Or by comparing your selves with
such as have larger capacities, time, and advantages then you. (3) Or by
comparing your Graces with other men's Gifts, which you mistake for their
Graces. (4) Or by thinking that all growth is upward in joy, peace, and
comfort; whereas you may grow in mortification and humility, which is as true a
growth as the former. Oh! take heed of these mistakes; they have been very
prejudicial to the peace of many Christians.

Lastly, Decline not sufferings when God gives you a fair call to them.
Pomponius Algerius, P -- Then the spirit of God and glory rests on them, 1
Pet. 4.14. That which has been in suspense for some years, is decided and
cleared in a suffering hour. And thus I have showed you how to attain this
necessary qualification also.

CHAP. VI. Discovering the necessity of an improved faith for the right
management of sufferings, and directing to some special means for the
improvement thereof.
THe next thing conducing to our actual readiness for sufferings, is the
improvement of Faith to some considerable degree of strength. This is the Grace
that must do the main service in such an hour, and has the principal hand in
supporting the Christian under every burden. This is the Grace that crowns our
heads with victory in the day of battle, Ephesians. 6.16. Above all taking the
shield of Faith. It Is true every Grace is of use, and contributes assistance:
suffering Saints have been beholding to them all. But of this we may say, as
Solomon of the virtuous woman. Though many Graces have done excellently, yet
this excels them all. In this Grace ready Paul was eminent. It was the life he
daily lived, Gal. 2.20. Oh it is a precious grace, 2 Pet. 1.1. so precious that
Christ, who seldom admired at any thing, yet wondered at this, Mat. 8.10. A
victorious Grace it is that overcomes all difficulties, Mark 9.23. By this
Sword it was that all those famous Heroes, Heb. 11. achieved all those
glorious conquests: and in every distress it may say to the Soul, as Christ to
the Disciples, John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. This is that Sword that
has obtained so many Victories over the world, 1 John 5.4. and that trusty
Shield that has quenched so many deadly Darts of temptation, as have been
levelled at the very heart of the Christian in the day of battle. By it a
Christian lives, when all outward sensible comforts die, Hab. 2.4. It Is the
ground upon which the Christian fixes his foot, and never fails under him, 2
Con. 1.24. The necessity of it will more clearly appear, by considering how
many ways it relieves the soul in trouble, and disburthens the heart of all
its sinking loads and pressures, there are two things that sink a man's Spirit
when under sufferings; viz. The greatness of the troubles, and the weakness of
the soul to bear them; against both which Faith relieves the soul; viz. by
making a weak soul strong, and heavy troubles light.

First, It makes a weak Soul strong and able to bear; and this it does diverse
ways.

1. By purging out of the Soul those enfeebling and weakening Distempers; not
only guilt in general, which is to the Soul, as a Wound upon the bearing
shoulder, Romans 5.1. The removal, when it enables the Soul to bear any other
Burden, Isa. 33.24. But it also removes Fear, the Tyrant Passion that cuts the
Nerves of the Soul. For, as Faith comes in, so Fear goes out: Look in what
degree the Fear of God is ascendant in the Soul, proportionably the sinful fear
of the Creature declines and vanishes, Esa. 8.12, 13. This fear extinguishes
that, as the Sunshine puts out fire: The Righteous i^ bold as a Lion, Prove.
28.1. The word (...) signifies a young Lion in his hot blood, that knows no
such thing as fear: And look how much of the Soul is empty of Faith, so much
its filled with fear: Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith? Mat. 8.26.
Certainly, it is a rare advantage, to be freed from the common distraction, in
times of common destruction: and this advantage the Soul has by Faith.

2. It strengthens the Soul to bear afflictions and hardships, not only by
purging out its weakening Distempers, but by turning it self to Christ, in whom
all its strength lies; and that suitably to the several Exigencies of the Soul,
in all its Distresses. Does Darkness, like the shadow of Death, overspread the
Earth, and all the Lights of Earthly Comforts disappear, then Faith supports
the Heart, by looking to the Lord, Mic. 7.7. and this look of Faith exceedingly
revives the Heart, Psalm. 34.5. and enlightens the Soul. Does God pluck away all
Earthly Props from under your Feet, and leave you nothing visible to rest upon,
in that Exigence Faith puts forth a suitable act, viz. Resting or staying upon
God, Esa. 26.3. and by this the Soul comes to be quieted and established, Psalm.
125.1, Do Temptations strive to put off the Soul from Christ, and difcourage it
from leaning upon the Promise? Then it puts forth an act of Resolution, Job
13.15. and so breaks its way through that discouragement. Or has the Soul been
long seeking God for deliverance out of trouble, and still there is silence in
Heaven, no answer comes; but instead of an Answer, comes a Temptation, to throw
up the Duty, and seek to deliver it self? Then Faith puts forth another act
upon Christ, suitable to this distress, viz. An act of waiting, Isa. 49.23.
which waiting is opposed to that sinful haste which the Soul is tempted to,
Isa. 28.16. Or does God at any time call the Soul forth to some difficult
service, against which the Flesh and Carnal Reason dispute and plead? now Faith
helps the Soul, by putting forth an act of obedience, and that whilst Carnal
Reason stands by dis-satisfied, Gal. 1.16. And hence it is, that Obedience
carries the name of Faith upon it, to show its descent, Romans 16.26. Faith
encourages the Soul to obey, not only by urging Gods Command, but by giving it
Gods Warrant for its Indemnity, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. Or does a poor Believer
find himself over-match'd by Troubles and Temptations, and his own inherent
strength begin to fail under the burden? then Faith leads him to an Omnipotent
God, and so secures him from fainting under his Trouble, Psalm. 61.2. in the
Lord is everlasting strength. El Shaddai, is a name of encouragement to a
feeble Soul, Isa. 40.29, 30, 31. And thus you see the first particular made
good, viz. What a strengthening influence it has into a weak Soul.

Secondly, In the next place, let us see how it lightens the Christians Burden,
as well as strengthens his back to bear.

And certainly, this Grace of Faith does strangely alter the very Nature of
Sufferings, taking away both the heaviness and horror of them; and this it
does diverse ways:

1. By committing the business to Christ, and leaving the matter with him; and
so quitting the Soul of all those anxieties and perturbations, which are ^e
very burden and weight of Affliction, Psalm. 37.^5. For certainly, that which
sinks us in days of Trouble, is rather from within, from our unruly, seditious
and clamorous Thoughts, then from the Troubles themselves with which we
conflict: But by committing the matter to God, the Soul is quickly brought to
rest.

2. By discovering much present good in our Troubles; the more good Faith
discovers in a Trouble, the more supportable and easy it makes it to the Soul.
Now Faith brings in a comfortable Report, that they are not only evils, as the
Troubles of the wicked are, Ezekiel. 7.5. but have an allay and mixture of much
good, Heb. 12.10. Isa. 27.9.

3. By foreseeing the end and final removal of them, and that near at hand, 2
Cor. 4.17. That which daunts and amazes men in times of trouble, is, that they
can see no end of them. Hence the heart saints, and hands hang down through
discouragement: But now Faith brings the joyful Tidings of the end of Troubles,
and says to the Soul, Why art thou cast down O my Soul? and why so disquieted
and discouraged within me? as if thy Travails were like the Sufferings of the
Damned, endless and everlasting, whereas they are but for a moment. Yet a
little, a very little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not
tarry, Heb. 10.37. Yet a little while, and then the days of thy mourning shall
be over.

4. By comparing our sufferings with the sufferings of others, which
exceedingly diminishes and shrinks them up: Sometimes the Believer compares
his sufferings with Christ's, and then he is ashamed that ever he should
complain and droop under them. Oh! says he, What is this to that which the
Lord Jesus suffered for me? he suffered in all his Members, Head, Hands, Side,
Feet, from all hands, Friends and Enemies, in all his Offices: Yea, in his Soul
as well as Body: And indeed the sufferings of his Soul, were the very soul of
his sufferings: sometimes he compares them with the sufferings of others, of
the Saints in former Ages: When he reads in Faith, the History of their
Persecutions, he is shamed out of his Complaints, and Faith. Am I better then
my Fathers? Sometimes he compares them with the sufferings of the Damned: Oh
what is this to the everlasting Burnings! What is a Prison to Hell? How light
and easy is it to suffer for Christ, in comparison of those sufferings which
are from Christ? And thus the Soul is quieted, and the terror of sufferings
abated.

5. Faith intitles Christ to the Believers sufferings, and puts them upon his
score; and so it exceedingly transforms and alters them: Ah! it is no small
relief, when a man can hold up the Bible, as that Martyr did at the stake, and
say, Here is that which has brought me hither: Or, as the Psalmist, For thy
sake we are killed all the day long: Or, as the Apostle, Col. 1.24. I fill up
that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh.

6. Lastly, Faith engages the presence of God, to be and abide with the Soul,
in all its solitudes and sufferings: It lays hold upon the Promises made to
that purpose, Psalm. 23.2. Isa. 43.2. Heb. 13.5. John 14.18. and whilst a poor
Soul enjoys this, the very sense of Troubles is swallowed up.

And thus I have given some brief hints, how Faith relieves and strengthens the
Soul in a suffering hour: The next thing is to direct you, how to improve this
excellent Grace, that it may do you such service as this in a time of need:
And, in order thereunto, I shall give you these seven Directions.

1. Attend diligently upon the Ministration of the Gospel, which is not only
the procreant, but also the conserving cause of Faith, 1 Pet. 2.2. the Doctrine
of Faith, is the Food and Nutriment of the Grace of Faith: There are its Rules,
its Encouragements, its Cordials: Thence Faith takes and treasures up its
Michtams, to which it has recourse in times of need: Every Attribute, Command,
or Promise, that shines forth there, is a Dish for Faith to feed on, all
together are a Royal Feast, Psalm. 63.5.5. Some say the Land of Judea is called
the Land of the Living, in Psalm. 27.13. in respect of the Ordinances of God
which that people enjoyed: Certain it is, they are the great Instruments of
quickening Souls at first, and preserving that life it so begat in them: But
then be sure they have Christ's stamp upon them, and that they be ministered by
his own Officers, and in his own way: And so you may reasonably expect more
Fruits and Influences from them, than from all private gifts and helps in the
World: For the Lord loves the Gates of Zion, more then all the dwellings of
Jacob, Psalm. 87.2. and all private helps may say, in comparison of Christ's
public Ordinances, as Gideon said to the men of Ephraim, Judge. 8.2. What have
we done in comparison of you?

2. Improve well your Sacrament-seasons, those Harvest-days of Faith: This
Ordinance has a direct and peculiar tendency to the improvement and
strengthening of Faith: It is a Pledge superadded to the Promise for Faiths
sake: Heavenly and sublime Mysteries do therein stoop down to your Senses, that
you may have the clearer apprehensions of them; and the clearer the
apprehensions are, the stronger the assent of Faith must needs be: By this Seal
also the Promise comes to be more ratified to us; and the firmer the Promise
appears to the Soul, the more bold and adventurous Faith is in casting it self
upon it: Oh! how many poor doubting trembling Souls have in such a Season,
gathered the full ripe Fruits of Assurance, from the Top-boughs of that
Ordinance!

3. Frequent actings of Faith, are rare and special means of improving it: To
him that has ( i.e.) that improves and uses what he has, shall be given, Mat.
25.29. This was the way by which Paul thrived in Faith, and every other Grace
so exceedingly, that he out-grew them that were in Christ before him, 1 Cor.
15.10. It Is true, that its beginning in the Soul, is not after the manner of
other Habits, either Moral or Natural: This is not of Natural acquisition, but
by Divine Infusion; but yet its improvement is in the same manner. Oh then! if
ever you would have a flourishing Faith, rouse it up out of the dull Habit, and
live in the daily exercise of it.

4. Go to Jesus Christ, who is the Author and Finisher of Faith, and cry to
him, as Mark 9.24. Lord increase my Faith: Yea, beg the assistance of others
Prayers in this behalf, as the Apostle did, 1 These. 3.10. 2 These. 1.11. Faith
animates Prayer, and Prayer increases Faith.

5. Improve times of affliction for the increase of Faith: For certainly,
sanctified afflictions do notably exercise and increase this Grace, 1 Pet. 1.7.
In times of Prosperity, we see not what stock of Faith we have: We live so much
upon things seen, that we cannot many times tell whether we have Faith or no:
But when difficult days come, then we must let out our whole subsistence and
livelihood by Faith, Hab. 2.4. Yea, then we have many Proofs and Experiments of
Gods fidelity in the Promises, which is a choice help to Faith, 2 Cor. 1.10.

6. Keep Catalogues of all your remarkable Experiences; treasure them up as
food for your Faith in time to come: Oh! it is a singular encouragement and
heartning to Faith, when it can turn over the Records of Gods dealing with you
in years past, and say as Josuah, Not one thing has failed, Josuah 23.14. When
it can say so of Promises, that have already had their accomplishments, then
they will be apt to say concerning those yet to be accomplished, as Elizabeth
said to Mary, Luke 1.45. Blessed is the Soul that believes, for there shall be
a performance of those things which are told it by the Lord.

These Experiments are the Food of Faith. Psalm. 74.14. Thou brakest the Heads
of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to thy People inhabiting the
Wilderness, ( i.e.) That famous Experience of the Power and Love of God in
their Red Sea Deliverance, where he destroyed that Sea Monster Pharaoh, and his
Host, was meat to the Faith of Gods Israel in the Wilderness afterward. We
often find Christ charging the Peoples unbelief on a bad Memory, Mat. 16.8, 9.
And hence it was, that the Lord commanded the Israelites to keep Journals of
every Days Occurrences, Numb. 13.1, 2. It Is a thousand pities, such choice
helps should be lost. Oh! if you could but remember, how the Lord has appeared
for you in former Exigencies, and how often he has shamed you for your
unbelief, it would exceedingly animate your Faith, both in present and future
Distresses, Mic. 6.5.

7. Lastly, Beware of sense, which is the supplanter of Faith. O if you live
upon things earthly, you put Faith out of its Office: things earthly have an
enmity to Faith. This is the victory by which we overcome the world, even our
Faith, 1 John 5.4. Overcoming notes a conflict, and conflicts infer
oppositions. Oh you that lives o much by sight and sense on things visible,
what will you do when in Davit's or Pau's case, Psalm. 142.4. 2 Timothy 4.16. when
all outward encouragements and stays shall utterly fail. What had Abraham
done, if he had not been able to believe against hope, (i. e.) such an hope as
is founded in sense and reason.

Reader, I advise and charge thee in the Name of the Lord; and as thou hopest
to live when visible comforts die, that thou be diligent in the improvement and
preparation of this excellent Grace of Faith: if it fail, thou failest with it;
and as thy Faith is, so art thou. Consult all this Cloud of Witnesses, and see
if thou can find a man among them, that did not atchieve this Victory by his
Faith. Had they not all been run down by the furious assaults of temptation,
and instead of a Cloud of Witnesses, been so many Pillars of Salt, and
Monuments of reproach and shame to Religion, if their Faith had failed in its
trial.

CHAP. VII. Wherein the necessity and usefulness of Christian fortitude, in
order to sufferings, is evinced; with a brief account of its nature, and the
means of attaining of it.
THe next Grace which concurs to the completing of our actual readiness for
sufferings, is Christian Fortitude, or holy courage; which must say in thy
heart in a time of danger, as Elijah once did, As the Lord lives I will show my
self. This also is a choice part of your preparation work. In this Grace our
Apostle was eminent. When he was told, Bonds and Afflictions waited for him; he
could say, That none of those things moved him, Acts 20.24. yea, when he was to
appear before the Lion Nero, and not a man would own or stand by him, yet he
stands his ground, resolving rather to die on the place, then dishonourably to
recede from his principles and profession, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. He set the world,
with all its threats and terrors, lower then it set him. Oh how conspicuous
was this Grace in all those Heroes that have past on before us! And if ever you
hope to stand in the evil day, and be fetched off the Field with honor, you
must rouse up and awaken your courage for God: And the necessity thereof will
appear upon these four considerations:

1. Because the success and prevalence of Satan's temptations in the hour of
persecution depends upupon the fainting and overthrow of this Grace. Wherefore
does he raise persecutions in the world, but because such terrible things are
fitted to work upon the passion of carnal fear, which rises with those dangers,
and makes the soul as a tumultuous Sea. This is it he aims at, Neh. 6.13. This
is a multiplying passion, that represents dangers more and greater then they
are, and so drives the soul into the very net and snare laid by the Devil to
take it. Prove. 29.25. The fear of man brings a snare; which was sadly
exemplified in Abraham, Genesis 12.12. and diverse others of the Saints. If he can
but subdue this Grace, he will quickly bring you to capitulate for life and
liberty upon the basest and most dishonorable terms; therefore the preparation
of this Grace is so exceedingly necessary.

2. Because this is the Grace that honors Jesus Christ abundantly, when you
are brought upon the stage for him.

There is a great solemnity at the suffering and trial of a Saint: Heaven,
Earth, and Hell ar^ Spectators, observing the issue, and how the Saint^ will
acquit themselves in that hour. We are made (...) spectacle, says the Apostle.
The word is (...), we are set as upon a Theater in public^ view. 1 Cor. 4.9.
God, Angels, and Saints wait to see the glorious triumphs of their Faith and
Courage, reflecting honor upon the Name and Cause of Christ. Devils and wicked
men gape for an advantage by their cowardice. Certainly very much lies now upon
the Christians hands. Should he faint and give ground, how will it furnish the
triumphs of Hell, and make Christ's enemies vaunt over him, as if his love ran
so low in the hearts of his people, that they durst not adventure any thing for
him: or as if notwithstanding their brave words and glorious profession, they
durst not trust their own principles when it comes to the trial! But if now
they play the men, and discover an holy gallantry of Spirit and resolution for
Christ, how will it daunt the enemies, and make them say as Marcus Bishop of
Aretheusa made out of Julian's Nobles, present at his torments, to say
concerning him, We are ashamed, O Emperor; the Christians laugh at your
cruelty! And how will God himself rejoice and glory over them, as he once did
over Job when he fetched him with honor off that first Field! Job 2.3. Still
he holds fast his integrity.

3. Your own peace is wrapped up in it, as well as Gods glory. Is it nothing
think you, to be freed from those Vultures and Harpyes, that feed upon the
hearts of men at such times? Surely God reckons that he promises a very great
mercy to his people, when he promises it, Prove. 1. ult. Psalm. 112.7. When
Borromaeus was told of some that lay in wait to take away his life, it troubled
him not; but he said, An Deus est in mundo pro nihilo? What, is God in the
world for naught? And like to this was the answer of Silentiarius in a like
case; Si Deus mei turam non habet; quid vivo? If God take not care for me, how
do I live? Oh this is it that brings you to an holy quietude of Spirit in times
of confusion and distraction, which is a choice mercy.

4. Your magnanimity is of special use to other Saints, who are following you
in the same path of sufferings. If you faint, it is like the fainting of a
Standard Bearer in an Army: You bring up thereby an evil report upon the Cross
of Christ, as the first Spies did upon the Land of Canaan. And a like influence
with that it is like to have on your Brethren; so that there is a necessity of
improving this Grace also, before you can say with Paul you are ready.

2. But what is this Christian fortitude, and wherein does it it consist?

I answer briefly. It is an holy boldness in the performance of difficult
duties, flowing from Faith ^n the call of God to it, and his promise to us in
^he discharge of it.

And so you have the nature of it in these four ^articulars:

1. It is an holy boldness, not a natural or sinful ^oldness, arising either
from the natural constitution, or evil disposition of the mind.

2. It is expressed about duties for truth, not error, ^erem. 9.3. for the
Interest of Christ, not of the ^esh.

3. The season in which it appears is, When duties; are surrounded and beset
with difficulties and dangers, Dan. 3.16. Dan. 6.10.

4. The Fountain whence it flows is Faith, and that as it respects the command
and call of God to duty, Acts 16.10. and his promise to us in the discharge
thereof, Josh. 1.5, 6.

And this Grace stands opposed both to the fear of man in the Cause of God,
Heb. 11.27. and to Apostasy from the Truth for fear of suffering. Thus briefly
of the nature of it.

3. In the last place I shall lay down some Rules for the promoting and
improvement of it, and so finish this Chapter.

Now there are ten Rules heedfully to be observed for the breeding of holy
courage in the breast of a Saint in evil times.

And the first Rule is this: Tim. 2.4. You meet not with a man of courage for
God, but had his heart dead to earthly things; so it was with Paul, Phil. 3.8.
Since the Apostles days we scarce meet with a greater example of holy
magnanimity then Luther; and if you read his story, you will find few men ever
set a lower rate on the world then he. All the Turkish Empire in his eye was
but a Crumb east to the Dogs. Germana est baec bestia paecuniam non curat,
Money could not tempt him.

Suffer not guilt to lie upon your Consciences: Romans 5.1, 2, 3. The Spirit of a
sound mind is opposed to the Spirit of fear, 2 Timothy 1.7. Now that sound mind is
a mind or spirit that is not wounded, and made sick and infirm by guilt. Oh
what black Fogs and Mists arise out of Guilt, which becloud our Evidences, and
fill us with fears and discouragements! Genesis 42.21.22.

Clear your Call to difficult services; Josh. 1.9. Then a man may promise
himself Gods presence and protection, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. But whilst a man is
dubious here, and cannot tell whether it be his duty or not that he is engaging
in; how can he have courage to hazard any thing for it? For thinks he, I may
suffer much from men, and yet have no thanks of God for it, 1 Pet. 2.19. And
further till a man be clear in this, he cannot commit his Cause to God. And it
is a sad thing to be cut off from so choice a relief as that is, 1 Pet. 4.19.

Get right notions and apprehensions of your enemies. magnify the Creature, as
if he could do more then he can, and thereby disable our selves from doing what
we should. Possess your souls with the belief of these five things concerning
them. (1) That they are poor weak enemies, Isa. 40.15, 17, 22. but as a swarm
of Gnats in the air. See how God describes them, Isa. 51.13.14. (2) That
little power they have is limited by your God, who has the bounding and
ordering of it, John 19.11. Psalm. 76.10. (3) They carry guilt upon them, which
makes them more timorous then you, Isa. 8.12. Their fear is a strange fear. (4)
They only use carnal weapons against you which cannot touch your souls. If
they were praying enemies that could engage God against you, they would be
formidable Enemies indeed; but this they cannot do. The largest Commission that
any of them ever had from God, extended but to the bodies and bodily
concernments of the Saints, Lake 12.4, 5. They cannot thunder with an arm like
God, nor blot your name out of the Book of Life, nor take away your part out of
the New Jerusalem; therefore fear not man. (5) Your Enemies are Gods Enemies;
and God has espoused your Cause and Quarrel. The more cruel they are, the
kinder he will be to you, John 9.34, 35.

Labor to engage the presence of God with you in all places and conditions.
Josh. 1.9. Psalm. 118.6. A weak Creature assisted and encouraged by the presence
of a great God, will be able to do and suffer great things. Poor Flesh in the
hand of an Almighty Spirit acts above it self. A little Dog, if his Master be
by and animates him, will seize upon a greater Beast then himself, though he
would run from him were his Master absent. Our courage ebbs and flows, as the
manifestations of the Divine Presence do. Oh get thy self once within the Line
of that Promise,, Isa. 43.1, 2. and thou art invincible.

Get an high estimation of Jesus Christ, value him highest, will adventure for
him farthest. Magnanimous Luther how inestimable a value did he set upon the
Truths of Christ! Ruat Coelum, etc. Let Heaven rush, rather then a crumb of
Truth should perish. Thou will never be a man of zeal and courage for Christ's
interest, until that interest of Christ have swallowed up all thine own
Interests. No sooner is the Soul acquainted with, and interested in Christ, but
he heartily wishes well to all his affairs and concernments, Psalm. 45.3, 4.
This is that which pnts mettle and resolution for Christ into the soul.

Beware you be not cheated with Maxims of carnal policy, mistaken for
Christian prudence. But a man of understanding walks uprightly, Prove. 15.21.

Look upon the inside of Troubles for Christ, and comforts that Souls
ordinarily meet with in their troubles for Christ, you would not look on them
as such formidable things.

View the issue and reward of sufferings by an eye of Faith: Heb. 10.34. Upon
this account it is the Saints have so slighted and contemned them, Romans 8.18. 2
Cor. 4.16, 17. But then see that you act your Faith, (1) Upon the certainty of
it: Look at it as a most real and substantial thing, Heb. 11.1. (2) View it as
a great and glorious reward. And (3) as near at hand: And then say to thy soul,
Come on, my soul, come on; See thou the joy set before thee! the Crowns of
glory ready to be set on thy head by the hand of a righteous God. Oh what
compare is there betwixt those Sufferings and that Glory!

Propound to your selves the best patterns and examples. Heb. 12.1. Jam. 5.10.
Who would be afraid to enter the Lists, and grapple with that Enemy that he
has seen so often foiled, and that by poor weak Christians? To this end I
cannot but judge these choice Collections in thy hands singularly useful. Oh
converse frequently with these Worthies; who being dead, yet speak to thee, and
have beaten the path before thee.

CHAP. VIII. Discovering the necessity of an Heart mortified to all Earthly and
Temporal Enjoyments, in order to the right managing of a suffering condition:
with several Directions for the attaining thereof.
THE next thing wherein your actual readiness for Bonds or Death consists,
is, in the mortification of your Affections to all Earthly Interests and
Enjoyments, even the best and sweetest of them: Till this be done, in some
measure, you are not fit to be used in any such service for the Lord, 2 Timothy
2.21. The living World, is the very Life of Temptations: The travailing pains
of Death, are stronger and sharper upon none, than those that are full of Sense
and Self. As you see in Nature, what Conflicts and Agonies strong and lively
persons suffer when they die: When others, in whom Nature is decayed and spent
beforehand, die away without half that pain, even as a Bird in the shell.
Corruption in the Saints, is like the Sap in green Wood, which resists the
fire, and will not burn well, till it be dried up. Prepared Paul had an Heart
mortified in a very high degree, to all the Honor and Riches of the World,
accounting them all but Trifles, Gal. 6.14. 1 Cor. 4.3, 4.

The need of this will be evinced by these five Considerations.

1. Unless the Heart be mortified to all Earthly enjoyments, they will appear
great and glorious things in your eye and estimation: and if so, judge what a
Task you will have, to deny and leave them all in a suffering hour. It is
Corruption within, that puts the Luster and Glory upon things without: It Is the
Carnal Eye only that gazes admiringly after them, 2 Cor. 5.16. And hence the
Lust is put, to express the Affection, 1 John 2.16. because all that inordinate
affection we have to them, arises from our high estimation of them, and that
estimation from our Lusts, that represent them as great and glorious: Therefore
certainly, it will be difficult (if not impossible) to deny them, till they
have lost their glory in your Eye; and that they will never do, till those
Lusts within you, that put that Beauty and Necessity upon them, be first
crucified. As for instance, What a Glory and Necessity does the Pride of Men
put upon the Honor and Credit of the World, so that they will rather choose to
die, than survive it! but to a mortified Soul it is a small matter, 1 Cor. 4.3.
So for Riches, how much are they adored, till our Lusts be mortified, and then
they are esteemed but Dung and Dross, Phil. 3.8. It Is our Corruption that
paints and gilds over these things: When these are crucified, those will be
lightly esteemed.

2. Mortification of Corruptions, is that which recovers an healthful state of
Soul: Sin is to the Soul, what a Disease is to the Body; and Mortification is
to sin, what Physic is to a Disease. Hence those that are but little
mortified, are in a comparative sense called Carnal, 1 Cor. 3.3. and Babes,
verse. 2. in respect of weakness. Now, suffering Work being some of the
Christians hardest Labor and Exercise, he cannot be fitted for it, until his
Soul be in an healthful state: A sickly man cannot carry heavy Burdens, or
endure hard Labors and Exercises: The sick Soldier is left behind in his
Quarters, or put into the Hospital, whilst his Fellows are dividing the
spoils, and obtaining glorious Victories in the Field. To this sense some
expound Romans 8.13. If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die; but of ye, through
the Spirit, mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. Where, as Death is
put to note a languishing state of Soul, whilst Mortification is neglected: So
Life is put to express an healthful and comfortable state; vivere pro valere;
so that upon this account also the necessity of it appears.

3. Your Corruptions must be mortified, else they will be raging and violent in
the time of Temptation, and like a Torrent, sweep away all your Convictions and
Resolutions. It Is sin unmortified within, that makes the Heart like Gunpowder;
so that when the Sparkles of Temptation fly about it, (and they fall thick in a
suffering hour) they do but touch and take. Hence, the Corruptions of the World
are said to be through Lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. With these internal unmortified Lusts,
the Tempter holds correspondence: and these be the Traitors that deliver up our
Souls into his hands.

4. Unless you be diligent and successful in this Work, though you should
suffer, yet not like Christians, you will but disgrace Religion, and the Cause
for which you suffer: For it is not simple suffering, but suffering as a
Christian, that reflects Credit on Religion, and finds acceptance with God. If
you be envious, fretful, discontented, and revengeful, under your sufferings,
what Honor will this bring to Christ? Is not this altogether unlike the
Example of your Lord? Isa. 53.7. and the behavior of suffering Saints? 1 Cor.
4.13. Yet thus it will be, if your Pride, Passion, and Revenge, be not first
subdued: For what are the breakings forth of such distempers of Spirit, but as
the flushes of Heat in the Face from an ill-affected Liver? Most certain it is,
that all these Evils are in your Natures (...) and as certain it is, they will
rise like Mud and filth from the bottom of a Lake, when some eminen^ Trial
shall rake you to the bottom; Natura vexat^ prodit seipsam.

5. Lastly, Mortification must be studied and plied with diligence; else you
will find many Longings and Hankerings after Earthly Enjoyments and Comforts,
which will prove a snare to you: What is sin, but the corrupt and vitiated
appetite of the Creature, to things that are Earthly and sensual, relishing
more sweetness and delight in them, than in the blessed God? And what is
Sanctification, but the rectifying of these inordinate affections, and placing
them in their proper Object? A regenerate and mortified Christian tastes not
half that sweetness in forbidden fruits that another does: Set but Money before
Judas, and see how eagerly he catches at it. -- What will ye give me, and I
will betray him. Set but Life, Liberty, or any such Bait before an unmortified
Heart, and how impotent is he to withstand them, as offered in a Temptation. On
these unmortified Lusts! how do they make men hanker, long, and their Lips
water (as we use to say) after these things? This makes them break Prison,
decline sufferings, though upon the basest terms: Whereas a mortified
Christian can see all these things set before him, yea offered to him, and
refuse them, Heb. 10.35. It is with them much as it was with old Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19.35. when Nature is decayed, they find but little pleasure in natural
actions, Eccles. 12.1. And look as the Body of sin decays and languishes, so do
these Longings also: It weans the Soul from them all, and enables it to live
very comfortably without them, Psalm. 131.1. Phil. 4.12. There needs no more to
be said, to evince the necessity of Mortification, and discover what influence
it has into a Christians readiness for sufferings.

It remains therefore, that I open to you some of the principal Corruptions,
about which it mostly concerns you, to bestow pains e're sufferings come. Now
look as there are four principal Enjoyments, in which you are like to be tried,
viz. Estate, Name, Liberty, Life; so the Christians Work in suffering times,
lies in mortifying these four special Corruptions, viz. First, The Love of the
World. Secondly, Ambition. Thirdly, Inordinate affectation of freedom and
pleasure. Fourthly, Excessive love of life.

1. For the love of this World, away with it, crucify it, crucify it: Down
with this Idol, and let it be dethroned in all that intend to abide with Christ
in the hour of Temptation: How else will you take the spoiling of your goods?
How will you be able to part with all for Christ, as these blessed Souls did?
It grieves my heart to see how many Professors of Religion are carried captive
at the Chariot Wheels of a bewitching World. Oh! good had it been for many
Professors, if they had never tasted so much of the sweetness of it. Sirs, I
beg you, for the Lords sake, down with it in your Estimations, down with it in
your Affections, else Temptations will down with you e're long. I shall offer
five or six Helps for the crucifying of it.

First, Consider your Espousals to Christ, and how you have chosen and
professed him for your Lord and Husband: Therefore, your doting upon the World,
is no less than Adultery against Christ, James 4.4. If Christ be your Husband,
he must be a Covering to your Eyes; an unchaste Glance upon the World wounds
him.

Secondly, The more you prize it, the more you will be tormented by it: Did you
prize and love it less, it would disquiet and vex you less: It Is our doting on
it, that makes it draw blood at parting.

Thirdly, Get true Scripture-notions of the World, and rectify your Judgments
and Affections by them: If you will have the true Picture and Representation of
it drawn by the Hand of God himself, see 1 John 2.16. It Is nothing else but
Lust that puts that Lnster upon it: It has but a Fantastic Glory, and that
also passes away: What is become of them that ruffled it out in the World but
one hundred years ago? What could the World do for them? Are they not all gone
down to the sides of the Pit? But he that does the will of God abides for ever.

Fourthly, Study and contemplate Christ, and the things above more: This would
vail all its Glory, and kill it at the Root, Phil. 3.18, 19. Just as a man that
has been gazing upon the Sun, when he takes off his Eye from that bright and
glorious Creature, and looks to the Earth, there is a Vail of Darkness
overspreading the Face of it, that he can see nothing. I wonder how such as
pretend to live above, and enjoy communion with God, can ever relish such
sweetness in the World, or have their Hearts enticed and captivated by it?

Fifthly, Remember always, that by your love and delight in worldly things, you
furnish the Devil with the chiefest Bait he has to catch, and destroy your
Souls. Alas! were your Hearts but dead to these things, he would want an Handle
to catch hold on. What has he more to offer you, and tempt you off from Christ
with, but a little Money? (...) some such poor Temporal Rewards: And how ^tle
would that Soul be moved by such a Tempta^on, that looks on it all but as Dirt.

Sixthly, Lastly take notice of the approaches of Eternity; Remember you are
almost at the end of ^ime: and when you come to lanch out into that ^ndless
Ocean, how will these things look then? It seems glorious, whilst you are in
the chase and ^ursuit of it; but, upon a Deathbed, you will o^ertake and come
up with it, and then you will see what a deceitful and vain thing it is: Stand by
the ^eds of dying men, and hear how they speak of it. On the difference betwixt
our apprehensions then, and now! Thus labor to wean off your Affections, and
crucify them to the World.

2. Mortify your Ambition, and vain Affectaetion of the Repute and Credit of
the World: Oh stand not on so vain a thing as this! judge it but a small thing
to be judged of man, to have your Names cast out as evil: Let not Scoffs and
Reproaches be such terrible things to you. It is, without doubt, a great Trial;
else the Holy Ghost had not added a peculiar Epithete to it, which is not given
to any other of the sufferings of the Saints: not cruel Tortures, nor cruel
Stonings, Burnings, slayings with the Sword; but cruel mockings, Heb. 11.36.

Yet learn to be dead and unaffected with these things; set the reproaching
World as light, and as low as it sets you: Despise the shame, as your Master
Christ did, Heb. 12.2. and to promote Mortification in this, take these Helps:

1. Consider this is no new or strange thing that has happened to you: The
holiest of men have past through the like, if not worse Trials, Heb. 10.33.
Psalm. 44.14. Reproaches have been the Lot of the best men. They called
Athanasius; Sathanasius; Cyprianus, Coprianus, a gatherer of Dung; Blessed Paul
a pestilent fellow: Doctor Story threw a Faggot at sweet Mr. Denlyes Face, as
he was singing a Psalm in the midst of the flames, saying, I have spoiled a
good old Song.

2. It may be Religion has been reproached and scoffed at for your sakes; and
if so, think it not much to be reproached for Religions sake.

3. It Is much better to be reproached by men for discharging Duty, than by your
own Consciences for the neglect of it: If all be quiet within, never be moved
at the noise and clamor without: If you have a good Roof over your Head, be
not troubled though the Winds and storms bluster abroad, 1 Pet. 4.14. Take heed
what you do, and then be heedless what the World says.

4. Always remember, that you neither stand or fall at the Worlds Judgment, and
therefore have the less reason to be troubled at it, 1 Cor. 4.3. If your
condition were to be cast to Eternity by it, it were somewhat.

5. There is a worth and excellency in the Reproaches of Christ, as bad as they
seem; and such an excellency, as is not to be matched by any Earthly Enjoyment,
Heb. 11.26. The Reproaches of Christ are of more worth, than the Treasures of
Egypt, though Egypt then was the Magazeen of the World for Treasures. The
Apostles counted them their honors, Acts 5.41. When Ludovicus Marsacus, a
Knight of France, saw those that were to suffer with him in their Chains, and
that they put none upon him, because of the Nobility of his Birth, he said to
the Executioner, Cur me non queque torque donas, and illustris illius ordinis
militem non creas? Why do you not honor me with a Chain too, and create me a
Knight of that Noble Order?

6. Lastly, should Scoffs and Reproaches scar you from Christ and Duty; then,
though you should escape the Reproaches of men, yet shall you fall under the
everlasting Contempt of God, Angels, and good Men. Therefore, Fear ye not the
Reproaches of men that shall die, nor be afraid of their Revilings, for the
Moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the W^rm shall eat them like Wool;
but my Righteousness shall be for ever, and my Salvation from Generation to
Generation, Isa. 51.7, 8.

3. Mortify your inordinate affectation of liberty, pleasure, and delicate
living: O let not a Prison seem so formidable to you. It Is true, as Christ told
Peter, Joh. 21.18. When thou wast young, thou girledst thy self, and walkedst
whither thou would; but then thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy
hands, mother shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou would not. You
have now your liberty to go whither you will, and it is a precious mercy if well
improved: The Birds of the Air (as one says) had rather be in the Woods at
liberty, though lean: and hungry, than in a Golden Cage with the richest fare.
But yet if God will call you to deny this also for Christ, see that you be
ready to be bound as Paul was, and receive the Chain and Bonds of Christ with
thanksgiving: To which end, consider,

1. That the affliction, in such cases of Restraint, is more from within, than
from without you: There Is no place but may be delectable to you, if your heart
be heavenly, and the presence of God be engaged with you. What a sweet Night
had Jacob at Bethel? Paul and Silas in the Stocks? See that precious Letter of
Pomponius Algerius.

Transtulit in caelum Christi praesentia claustrum Quid faciet caelo? quae
caelum jam creat antro. It Is your own Unblelief and Impatiency, that gives you
more trouble than the Condition.

2. No Keeper can keep the Comforter from you, if you be the Lords Prisoners,
Act. 16. If they could bar out the Spirit from you, it would be a dismal place
indeed: But ordinarily, there the Saints have their clearest Visions of God,
and sweetest presence of the Spirit: You are the Lords Freemen, whilst Men's
Prisoners: All the World cannot divest you of the state of liberty Christ has
purchased for you, John 8.36.

3. Though a Prison look sad and dismal, yet it is not Hell: Oh bless God for
that; that is a sad Prison indeed! Beloved, Men have their Prisons, and God has
his: Gods Prison is a terrible Prison indeed; Thousands are now there in
Chains, 1 Pet. 3.19. and there you deserved to have been sent long ago: If God
exchange an Hell for a Prison, have you any cause to complain?

4. How obdure and cruel soever men are to you, yet the Lord Jesus is kind and
tenderhearted to his Prisoners: he puts the kindnesses that any show them upon
his own account, Mat. 25.36. He looks down from Heaven to hear the sighings and
groanings of his Prisoners, Psalm. 102.20. He will tenderly sympathize with you
in all your Prison-Straights, and Troubles.

5. A Prison has been hansel'd and perfumed by the best and holiest of men in
all Ages, 1 Kings 22.27. Jer. 32.2. Mat. 4.12. Acts 5.18. Acts 26.10. God has
made it a settled School of Discipline to them.

6. Should you, to avoid a Prison, commit a sin, instead of being Man's
Prisoner, you shall be clapped up by God: for he has a Prison for your Souls
even in this World, Psalm. 142.7. and this is ten thousand times more dreadful,
than any Dungeon in the World. Oh it is a dark Prison! not a Cranny to let in
one Beam of Gods Countenance upon your poor Souls. What a sad exchange have you
made then?

7. Consider, what a ground of Comfort GOD has laid in that Word, Rev. 2.10.
to obviate the Fears and Terrors incident to us in such a condition: God has
limited Satan and his Instruments, both for time, number, and all circumstances
of the trial.

8. Lastly, You do not know what a Mercy may be in it: It may be a time of
retirement from the World, and the Clamours and Distractions that are abroad.
These days of Imprisonment may be your Holy Days; as a Prisoner of Christ once
called them.

4. Get an Heart mortified to the excessive and ^ordinate love of life: This, I
confess, is the highest and hardest point of Self-denial, because it wraps up
^ll other Self-Interests in it. But yet consider,

First, Though Life be very dear, yet Jesus Christ (...) ten thousand times
dearer than thy Life: If thou ^e a Saint, he is the Life of thy Life, and the
length ^f thy days; and in comparison of him, and his glory, Saints should, and
have despised and slighted their Lives, Luke 14.26. Rev. 12.11.

Secondly, Die you must; and if by shrinking from Christ, you should protract a
miserable Life ^or a few days longer, in the mean time losing that which is
better than life, Psalm. 63.3. Mat. 10.39. Oh ^hen you lie upon your Deathbed,
you will wish, that you had obeyed Gods Call, and so have departed in peace.

Thirdly, If you have cordially covenanted with Christ (as all sincere
Believers have done) then have you yielded up your lives to him, to be disposed
for his glory, Romans 14.7. So that look, as Christ both lived and dyed for you;
so, to you to live is Christ: And all the excellency you see in life, consists
in that reference and subserviency it has to his glory. I say then, if you
have understandingly and cordially transacted in a Covenant-way with him, your
care will not be, so much how to shun Death, as by what Death you may most
glorify God, John 21.19. And certainly, you can never lay them down upon a
more honorable or comfortable account than in his cause, and for his sake. It
was a great trouble to Luther, that he carried his blood to his Grave.

Fourthly, To die for Christ, is one of the highest Testifications of your love
to Christ, that you are capable of, John 13.37. Yea, it is such a Testification
of your Love to the Lord Jesus, as Angels are not capable of making.

Fifthly, Why should you decline even a violent death for Christ, when as the
bitterness of death is past, and there is no Hell following the pale Horse? It
cannot separate you from Christ, Romans 8.38.

Sixthly, Think what a death Christ suffered for you: in which the fullness of
the Wrath both of God and Man met together, so that he was sore amazed; yet
with desire, did he desire it for your sakes.

7. Lastly, Think what a life you shall have with Christ, as soon as this is
delivered up to, and for him, 2 Timothy 2.12. It is but wink, and you shall see
God.

Oh that these things might provoke you to fol^^ on, and ply the Work of
Mortification.

CHAP. IX. Therein is opened the singular advantage that suffering-Saints have,
by their skill, and in-sight into the Methods and Mysteries of Satan's
Temptations; some of those Wiles of Satan opened; and Rules for the avoiding
of the danger briefly described.
THE hazards and dangers of Christians, in times of Persecution, arise not so
much from their Sufferings, as from the Temptations that always attend, and are
by Satan planted upon their Sufferings: for the most part, Sufferings and
Temptations go together, Heb. 11.37. And therefore, it behooves such as are, or
expect to be called to Sufferings, to dive into the Mysteries of Temptations,
and be well acquainted with the Enemies Designs upon them. So was Paul, and so
he supposes all others to be, that engage in the same Cause; We are out
ignorant of his Devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. There is a manifold advantage redounding
to suffering Saints thereby.

1. He that is well acquainted with the Methods of Temptation, will be the
better able to descry the first approaches and beginnings of it; and a
Temptation discovered, is more then half conquered. It is a special Artifice of
Satan, to shuffle in his Temptations as undiscernably as may be into the Soul;
for he knows, that in vain is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird, Prove.
1.17. And therefore, he ordinarily makes a suffering season, to be a tempting
season; because as sufferings do, like Fire to Iron make it impressive and
operable, so they do ordinarily put the Soul into an hurry and distraction, and
so gives him an advantage, to tempt the Soul with less suspicion, and greater
success. But now, a skillful Christian, that is acquainted with his Wiles, will
discern when he begins to enter into temptation; a^ Christ's expression is, Luke
22.46. and so checqu^ the Temptation in its first Rise, when it is weakest and
most easily broken. Doubtless, one Reason why so many fall by Temptation, is,
because it is go^ within them, and has prevailed far, before it be discovered
to be a Temptation.

2. He that is well acquainted with Satan's Methods of tempting, will not only
discern it soone^ than another; but also knows his Work and Duty and how to
manage the Conflict with it, which is a great matter. There are many poor Souls
that labor under strong Temptations, and know not what to do: They go up and
down complaining, from Christian to Christian, whilst the Judicious Christian
plyes the Throne of Grace with strong Cries^ See 2 Cor. 12.8. keeps up his
Watch, Luke 22.46. countermines the Temptation, by assaulting that Corruption
by endeavors of Mortification, which Satan assaults by Temptation, 1 Cor. 9.27.

3. Lastly, To name no more; he that is best acquainted with the Mystery of
Temptation, and can maintain his ground against that, he shall be the
persevering Christian under Persecutions, and the victorious Christian over
them. Here lies the main Design of Satan, in raising Persecution against the
Saints. It is not so much their Blood that he thir^ steth after, as their Fall
by Temptation: and all Persecutions are designed by him, to introduce hi^
Temptations. These work upon our Fear, and Fear drives us into his Trains and
Snares, Prove. 29.25. The Devils Work in raising Persecution, is but as the
Fowlers work, in beating the Bush in the Night, when the Net is spread to take
the Birds, which he can affright out of their Coverts. He that understands
this, is not easily moved by the strongest Opposition from his Place and Duty;
and so is like to prove the most constant and invincible Christian in Times of
Persecution.

Oh then how necessary is it, that since all Persecutions are intended as means
to promote Temptation: and that skill and insight into these Designs of Satan,
so advantages us to frustrate his Designs in both? I say, how necessary is it,
that you should be all instructed wherein the strength of Temptation lies; as
also how to resist those strong and dangerous Temptations, which your
Sufferings only are intended to usher in, and make way for?

It will not be unseasonable or impertinent then in this Chapter to show you;
First, wherein the force and efficacy of Temptations lies: Secondly, what you
are to do, when in a suffering hour such Temptations shall assault you. And
first,

1 Qu. Wherein does the efficacy and power of Temptation lie?

Sol. I answer, It lies principally in three things:

1. In the kind and nature of the Temptation.

2. From the Craft and Policy of Satan in managing them.

3. From that secret Correspondency, that Satan has with our own Corruptions.

1. It lies in the kind and nature of the Temptation it self: For it is most
certain, that all Temptations are not alike forcible and dangerous. Some are
ordinarily more successful then others; and such are these that follow.

1. Strange and unusual Temptations, I mean no^ such as none have been troubled
with before us; for there is not a Dart in his Quiver, but has been let fly at
the Breasts of other Saints, before it was levelled at ours, 1 Cor. 10.13. But
by strange and unusual, I mean such, as the People of GOD are but rarely
troubled with, and possibly we were never exercised with before. These are the
more dangerous, because they daunt and amaze the Soul, and ordinarily beget
despondency, even as some strange Disease would do, that we know not what to
make of.

2. Mark them for most dangerous Temptation, that are adapted and suited to
your proper sin, or constitution-evil. For certainly, that is the most
dangerous Nick and Crisis of Temptation when it tryes a man there. Now if he be
not truly gracious, he falls by the Root irrecoverably, Luke 22.5, 6. Or if
sincere, yet without special assistance, and extraordinary vigilance, he falls
scandalously, 2 Samuel 11.2. compared with 1 Samuel 16.12.

3. When it is a Spiritual Temptation, which rises undiscernably out of a
Christians Duties. This is the less suspected, because Temptations usually come
from the strength and livelyness of Corruptions; but this, from the Slaughter
and Conquests we make of them. Duties, and enlargements in them, which are the
Poison of other Lusts, proves the Food and Fuel of this, 1 Cor. 4.7, 8. And
how much the more covert and close any Temptation is, by so much the more
dangerous it is.

2. The strength and efficacy of temptation lies much in the skill and policy
of Satan in the management of it: And hence they are called wiles, methods, and
devises, 2 Cor. 2.11. Ephesians. 6.11. and himself an old Serpent, Rev. 12.9. And
amongst the rest of his deep and desperate stratagems these following are
remarkable.

1. In employing such instruments to manage his temptations as are least
suspected, and have the greatest influence. A Teacher, Gal. 2.14. a Wife, Genesis
3.6. Job 2.9. Friends, Acts 21.13. The Devil knows it is a bad business, and
therefore must make the best of it.

2. In the orderly disposition and ranging of his temptations; beginning with
little things first, and then by degrees working over to greater. His first
motions are commonly most modest, Genesis 3.1. Should he discover the depth of his
design at first, it would startle the Soul, and make it reply as Hafael, Am I a
Dog that I should do thus? It Is far easier to gain his end by parts, then
putting for all at once.

3. In endeavoring to engage the Soul upon his own ground. I mean to tempt him
from his Station and Duty where God set and expects to finds him. He knows
while you are with God, God is with you, 2 Chro. 15.2. Whilst a man abides
there, he abides with God, 1 Cor. 7.24. Whilst he is there, the Promise is a
good breast-work to keep off all his darts: And therefore as Fishers, when they
have spread their Net in the River, beat the Fishes out of their coverts and
caverns, so does Satan.

4. In not presenting the temptation, till the Soul, be prepared to receive it.
He loves to strike when the iron is hot. He first lets their troubles come to
an height, brings them to the Prison, Gibbet, or Fire, and then offers them
deliverance, Heb. 11.35, 37. This Mirror furnishes you with many instances of
it.

5. In tiring out Souls with the long continuance of temptations. What he
cannot win by a sudden storm, he hopes to gain by a tedious siege. Forty days
together he assaulted the Captain of our salvation, Mark 1.13. And truly it is a
wonder the Soul yields not at last, that has been tried long, Psalm. 125.3.
When the rod of the wicked lies long upon the back of the righteous, it is much
if he put not forth his hand to iniquity

6. In falling most violently upon them, when they are lowest and most
prostrate in their spririts and comforts: So he assaulted Job with a temptation
to curse God and die, when he sat in that deplorable state upon the dunghill,
Job 2.8, 9. He loves to fall upon us as Simeon and Levi did upon the
Shechemites, when we are sore and wounded: And therefore ordinarily you find
times of divine desertions, to be times of diabolical temptations. So that look
as the wild Beasts of the Desert come out of their Dens in the night, and then
roar after their prey, Psalm. 104.20. so does Satan when the Soul seems to be
benighted and lost in the darkness of Spiritual troubles.

And this is the second thing wherein the efficacy and strength of temptation
lies.

3. Lastly, it lies in that secret correspondency Satan holds with our bosom
enemies. Were it not for this domestic Traitor, he could not surprise us so
easily: As you see in Christ, he could do nothing, because he found nothing to
fasten a temptation on. He was like a Crystal glass filled with pure Fountain
water: So that though he should have been agitated and shaken never so much by
temptation, yet no filthy sedement could appear; but now we have an enemy
within that holds intelligence with Satan without; and this would prove a Devil
to us, if there were no other Devil to tempt us, Jom. 1.14, 15. It Is a Fountain
of temptation in it self, Matthew. 15.19. and the chief instrument by which Satan
does all his tempting work, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Our several passions and affections are the handles of his temptations. Every
thing says Epictetus has (...), two handles to take it by. Our affections are
the handles of our Souls. The temptation of Self-confidence, and Pride, takes
hold of a during and forward disposition; the temptation of Apostasy upon a
timorous disposition, etc. These imbred lusts go over to the Enemy in the day
of battle, and fight against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. This is a more dangerous
Enemy, then the Devil. It Is true, they both work against us, but with a double
difdifference. Satan works externally, and objectively; but Lust internally,
and physically (i. e.) que ad materiale, as it is capable of physical
efficiency. Sin wrought in me all manner of concupiscency, Romans 7.8. Yea it is a
subtle Enemy that does his business politickly. Romans 7.11. Sin deceived me; it
betrays with a kiss, strangles with a silken halter, Heb. 3.13. Ephesians. 4.22.
These be his Agents sitting at the Council Table in our own breasts, and there
carrying on his designs effectually: Yea, it is a restless and perpetual Enemy,
no ridding your hands of him. Satan is sometimes put to flight by resistance,
Jam. 4.7. and sometimes ceases his temptations, Luke 4.13. but when he cease
to tempt and inject, this cease not to irritate and solicit: Where we are,
it will be; it is our sad lot to be tied to it, and perpetually assaulted by it,
Romans 7.24. We may say of it, as Hannibal said of Marcellus, That it is never
quiet, whether a Conqueror, or conquered. Yea, it is a potent Enemy too, it
hauls men away to the commission of sin, Jam. 1.14. In seizes the Magazeen of
the foul, and delivers up the Arms; I mean the Members to be (...), weapons of
unrighteousness.

Thus you see wherein the efficacy and power of temptation consists. And it
mightily concerns you that are, or expect to be Sufferers for Christ, to be
acquainted with these things, and know where the strength of your Enemy lies.

But how shall the suffering Saint so manage himself in a Suffering hour, as
not to be captivated by temptations. This brings me upon the second thing I
promised; viz. to prescribe some Rules for the escaping or conquering of those
temptations that are incidental to a suffering state. And first:

Labor to cut off the advantages of temptations before they come. Rev. 12.11.
O mortify self-love, and creature-love; let your heart be loosened and weaned
from them, and then the temptation has lost its strength.

Secure to your selves an interest in the heavenly glory. Heb. 10.34. It Is our
darkness and uncertainties about those, that make us cling so fast to these.

Settle this principle in your heart, Heb. 11.24, 25. This all will
acknowledge, but how few practice it! Oh that you would practically understand
and receive it! Sufferings is but a respective, external, and temporal evil;
but sin is a universal, internal, and everlasting evil.

Believe that God has cursed and blasted all the ways of sin, Mark 8.35.
Prove. 13.15. The way of Transgressors is an hard and difficult way. There is
no security in the way of iniquity. He that runs from suffering to sin, runs
from the apparent to the real danger; from the painted to the living Lion.

Live up to this principle, Psalm. 25.2. Job 2.3. Sinful policy never thrives
with Saints.

Consider sadly what the consequents of yielding up your selves to temptation
will be: Sam. 12.14. A fatal stumbling block is laid before the blind world, 1 Samuel 2.36. the hearts of many up-right ones made sad, Psalm. 25.3. The fall of a
Professor is as when a Standard Bearer faints; and a dreadful wound it will
be to thine own Conscience, 2 Cor. 2.7. Matthew. 25.76. One hours sleep of
security, may keep you many days and nights waking upon the Wrack of honor.

Never engage a temptation in your own strength, Ephesians. 6.10. What are you to
grapple with Spirits, to enter the Lists with Principalities and Powers? or
what is your strength that you should hope?

Let the days of your temptation, Paul, 2 Cor. 12.8. Psalm. 109.4. Your best
posture to wrestle with Temptation, is upon your knee.

Dwell upon the consideration of those choice encouragements God has laid up
in the Word for such a time. Deuteronomy. 33.3. John 10.28. (2) That whilst Satan is
sifting and trying you on Earth, Christ is interceeding for you in Heaven, Luke
22.31, 32. (3) That an eternal reward is laid up for those that overcome, Luke
22.28, 29, Rev. 21.7, 8. And now is this reward to be won or lost.

Lastly, Be content till God open a door out of your temptations, 1 Cor. 10.13.
The time of the Promise will come, Acts 7.17. Wait for it, though it tarry, and
seem to be deferred; in the end it will speak, and not lie, Hab. 2.3. There was
a secret door in the Ark, though it could not be seen whilst the waters
prevailed: And so there is in all your temptations, though at present it be not
discernable by you.

And thus I have brought you one step nearer to Paul's blessed frame. Oh give
diligence to this work.

CHAP. X. Shows that a choice part of our preparation and readiness for
sufferings, consists in the improvement of our praying abilities, and keeping
close with God in that heavenly and excellent duty in days of suffering;
wherein also of the nature and means of its improvement.
PRayer is said to be amongst Duties, as Faith is amongst the Graces. Doubtless
it is of special use and service at all times to a Christian; but yet in
suffering days it is of more then ordinary use and necessity, Heb. 4.16. Jam.
5.13. and therefore is reckoned among those choice pieces of Armor which
suffering Saints are to put on, Ephesians. 6.18. I will here briefly discover the
necessity of it, and then show you that a Christian may improve himself to an
excellent degree in it; and lastly prescribe some means for such an improvement.

The necessity of it to a suffering Saint will demonstratively appear if you
consider;

1. That this duty is the outlet of troubles, and the best way the poor
Christian has to ease his heart when surcharged with sorrow. Griefs are eased
by Groans. Such evaporations disburthen and cool the heart, as the opening of a
Vein in some cases does. Oh the sensible ease that comes in this way! When
grief in the mind, like vapors in the Air, are condensed into black Clouds,
that overspread the Soul, and darken that beautiful Light that once shone
there, then Prayer like the Sun dispells and scatters them, 1 Samuel 1.18. Many a
Saint by Prayer has sucked the breast of a Promise, and then fell asleep by
Divine contentment, in the bosom of God. A time may come, when thy heart shall
be ready to break with trouble, and not a friend to whom thou can open and
ease it: and then blessed be God for Prayer, Micah 7.5, 6, 7. That which sinks
others is, That when troubles fill and overwhelm their hearts, they try what
Reason, merry Company, or outward Comforts can do: but alas! this is to
palliate a cure, it returns again with the more violence: but this gives
sensible relief, Psalm. 102. title, Psalm. 62.8. For first, this opens and gives
a vent to troubles, Jer. 20.12. (2) It gives our troubles a diversion, and so a
cure, Psalm. 5.1. and last verse. compared. Yea (3) by praying over them, they
are not only diverted but sanctified, and so cease to be distracting.

2. As it gives a vent to our troubles, so an inlet to unspeakable comforts
and consolations. See a pregnant instance of this, Act. 16.25. For (1) hereby
they obtain gracious answers from the Lord concerning their troubles, 2 Cor.
12.9. In this also they meet the gracious smiles of God which swallow up their
troubles, Psalm. 85.8. And lastly, hereby they engage the temper of God to open
a seasonable and effectual door out of all their troubles, Psalm. 34.4, 6.

3. Prayer begets and maintains holy courage, and magnanimity in evil times,
when all things about you tend to discouragement. It is your being with Jesus
that makes you bold, Acts 4.13. He that uses to be before a great God, will not
be afraid to look such little things as men are in the face. The woman clothed
with the Sun, had the Moon under her feet. And what need you have of courage in
evil times, has been already showed.

4. This is a duty you may perform at any time, or in any condition: No
Adversary can cut you off from it. It cannot be said so of many other duties.
None can hinder the intercourse betwixt Heaven and your Souls. You may perform
it in a Prison, Acts 16.25. in a banished condition, Psalm. 61.2. and so is
fitted for a suffering condition.

Lastly, you must strive to excel in this, forasmuch as no Grace within, or
Service without can thrive without it. God has ordained the whole work of
Grace to grow up to perfection this way, Jude 19.20. He will have all mercies
fetched out this way, Ezekiel. 36.37. Jer. 29.11, 12, 13. All that comes from God
to you, or to you from God, must come in this Channel. Be convinced then, of
the need you have to improve your selves herein, as ever you hope to stand in
the evil day.

But how are these praying abilities capable of improvement in the people of
God?

Praying abilities are either external and common, or else internal and
special: Habit or Act. The Habit is given by the Spirit, when the principles
of Grace are first infused into the soul, Zech. 12.10. Acts 9.11. By being
sanctified we are made near, and by acting those principles in Prayer we are
said to draw near, Psalm. 10.17. Now in our actual drawing near to God, the
Spirit has the chief and principal hand: and his assistance therein is
threefold.

1. He excites the heart to the duty; it is he that whispers to the Soul to draw
nigh to God, Psalm. 27.8.

2. He suggests the matter of our Prayers, and furnishes us with the
Materials, Romans 8.26. guiding us as to the matter, not only to what is lawful,
but also to what is expedient for us.

3. He stirs up suitable Affections in Prayer, Romans 8.26. and hence those
groans and tears, those gaspings and vehement anhelations. But notwithstanding
all our Abilities, both habitual and actual, be from the Spirit, and not from
our selves, yet are they capable of improvement by us: For though in respect of
acquirement, there be a great difference betwixt natural and supernatural
Habits, yet their improvement is in the same way and manner; and this
improvement may be made diverse ways. For,

First, Though you have the Spirit, and can pray, yet you may learn to pray
more humbly then before: Though you rise no higher as to words, yet you may
learn to lay your selves lower before the Lord, as Abraham and Ezra did, Genesis
18.27. Ezra 9.6.

Secondly, You may learn to pray with more sincerity then formerly: Ah! there
is much Hypocrisy and Formality in our Prayers, much of Custom, etc. Now, you
may learn to pour out more Cordial Prayers. See Psalm. 17.1. Psalm. 119.10.

Thirdly, You may learn to pray with more zeal and earnestness then before:
Some Saints have excelled, and been remarkable for this, Dan. 9.19. Hos. 12.4.
James 5.16.

Fourthly, With more assiduity and readiness at all times for it, Ephesians. 6.18.
Praying always, with all Prayer. Hence Christ gives that commendation to the
Church, Cant. 4.11. Thy Lips, O my Spouse, drop as the Honey Comb: The Honey
Comb often drops, but always hangs full of Drops ready to fall.

Fifthly, You may learn to pray with more Faith: Oh the Qualms of Unbelief,
that go over our Hearts in a Duty! Faith is the Soul of Prayer, and according
to the Faith God finds in them, he accepts and values them. Now in all these
things, you may improve your selves abundantly.

1. By being more frequent in the Duty, Job 22.21. acquaint thy self with the
Almighty; in the Hebrew it is, accustom thy self: Those that have been
excellent, have also been abundant in it, Psalm. 55.17.

2. By taking heed that you grieve not the Spirit, on whose influences and
assistances, you so entirely depend: Even as much as a Ship does upon the Gales
of Wind for its motion.

3. By honoring the Spirit which enables you to pray, and that especially two
ways; (1) By dependence on him; go not forth in your own strength to the Duty,
trust not upon your own promptness, or preparations. (2) By returning, and with
thankfulness ascribing the praise of all to him: Be humble under all
Enlargements: Say, Not I, but Grace.

4. By searching your own Hearts, and examining your Necessities and Wants,
when you draw nigh to God; this will be a Fountain of Matter, and give you a
deep Resentment of the worth of Mercies prayed for.

5. Lastly, By looking more at the exercise of Graces, and less at the
discovery of Parts; by laboring for Impressions more, and pumping for
Expressions less. And thus I have briefly showed you, how to furnish yourselves
with this needful Qualification also.

CHAP. XI. Wherein is showed the necessity of going out of our selves, even
when our habitual and actual Preparations are at the greatest height; and
depending as constantly and entirely upon the Spirit, who is Lord of all
gracious Influences, as if we had done nothing: Together with the means of
working the Heart to such a frame.
THus you have seen your habitual and actual readiness for Sufferings, and
blessed is the Soul that gives diligence to this work: But now, least all that
I have said, and you have wrought, should be in vain, I must let you know, that
all this will not secure you, unless you can by Humility, Faith, and
Self-denial, go out of your selves to Christ, and live upon him daily for
supplies of Grace, as much as if you had none of all this Furniture and
Provision for Sufferings. I confess, Grace is a very beautiful and lovely
Creature, and it is hard for a man to look upon his own Graces, and not dote
upon them. But yet know, that if you had all these excellent preparations that
have been mentioned, yea, and all Angelical Perfections superadded, yet are you
not complete without this dependence upon Christ, Col. 2.10. When ever you go
forth to suffer for Christ, you should say in the Head of all your excellent
Graces, Duties, and Preparations, as Jehosaphat did, when in the head of a
puissant and mighty Army, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. O Lord, I have no might nor strength,
but my Eyes are unto thee. This was one thing in which Paul excelled, and was a
special part of his readiness. See 1 Cor. 15.10. What a poor Creature is, the
eminentest Saint left to himself in in hour of trial; the Hop, the Ivey, and
the Woodlind, are taught by Nature to cling about stronger Props and
Supporters: What they do by Nature, we should do by Grace.

The necessity and great advantage of this, will appear upon diverse
Considerations.

1. The Christians own imbecility and insufficiency, even in the strength and
beight of all his Acquirements and Preparations: what are you, to grapple with
such an Adversary? Certainly, you are no Match for him that conquered Adam hand
to hand in his state of integrity. It is not your in^erent strength that
enables you to stand, but what ^ou receive, and daily derive from Jesus Christ,
Joh. 15.5. Without me, or never so little separated from me, ye can do nothing,
all our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. Upon this very consideration it was,
that the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, to be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, (i.e.) not to de^end upon their own stock and furniture,
but Di^ine Assistances and daily Communications; for we westle not with flesh
and blood, but Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6.10, 12. in his own strength
shall ^o man prevail.

2. It is the great design of God in the Gospel, to exalt his Son, and to have
all glory attributed and ascribed to him, That in all things be might have the
pre-eminence, Col. 1.13. That Christ might be all in all, Col. 3.11. Hence, no
Saint must have a selfsufficiency, or be trusted with a stock as Adam was; but
Christ being filled with all the fullness of God, and made the (...), or first
Receptacle of all Grace: For it pleased the Father, that in him all fullness
should dwell; all the Saints are therefore to go to him for Supplies, and of
his fullness to receive, John 1.16. This fullness being a Ministerial fullness,
like that of the Sun, or of a Fountain, intended to supply all our wants. And
hence is it that Faith, a self-emptying and denying Grace, is appointed to be
the Instrument of fetching our Supplies from Christ. All must be derived from
him, that all the praise and glory may be ascribed to him, Phil. 4.14. And this
is a most wise and congruous Ordination of God; for hereby not only are his
People the better secured, but by this also the reproach that lay upon Christ
is rolled away: He was reproached on Earth, as barren, empty, weak. Can any
good come out of Nazareth? He was looked upon as a Root springing out of a dry
ground; but by this shall his Reproach be wiped away: So that unless you will
go about to cross the great design of God, in the exaltation of his Christ, you
must go out of your selves, and humbly, and constantly rely upon supplies from
Christ, and his grace to help in the times of need.

3. A Christian is constantly to depend upon Christ, notwithstanding all his
own preparations, and inherent qualifications; because the activity even of
inherent Grace depends upon him: Inherent Grace is beholden to exciting and
assisting Grace for all it is enabled to do. You cannot act a Grace without his
Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 3.5.
John 15.5. It may be said of Grace in us, as it was of the Land of Canaan,
Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11, 12. It is not as the Land of Egypt whence ye come out, where
thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a Garden of Herbs:
But a Land of Hills and Valleys, drinking water of the Rain of Heaven, a Land
which the Lord thy God cares for: his Eyes are always upon it, from the
beginning of the year, even to the end of the year. As the life and fragrancy
of Vegetables, depends on the Influences of Heaven, so do our Graces upon
Christ. And hence, he is called, (1) a Root, Isa. 11.10. (2) An Head, Col.
1.18. (3) A Sun, Mal. 4.2. (4) A Fountain, Zech. 13.1. all which Comparisons do
fully carry this Truth in them.

4. Lastly, In this life of dependence lies your security: And indeed, this is
the great difference, betwixt the two Covenants: In the first, Adam's stock was
in his own hands, and so his security or misery depended upon the unconstrained
choice of his own mutable and self-determining Will: But now in the New
Covenant, all are to go to Christ, to depend upon him for supplies, and so are
secured against all destructive dangers, Jude 1.1 Pet. 1.5. Should you go forth
in your own strength against a Temptation, either your Grace would fail, and
you fall in the Conflict: Or if you obtain any Victory over it by your own
strength, yet it is a thousand to one but your Pride would conquer you, when you
had conquered it: Like him that slew an Elephant, but was himself slain by the
fall of that Elephant which he slew. But now, by this way, as God has secured
you against the Dangers without; so also the frame and constitution of this New
Covenant is such, as prevents the danger arising from our own Pride too. Not,
Ego, and Deus meus; I and my God did this: as was once said by a profane
Mouth; But Self is abased, and the Lord lifted up in his own strength, 1 Cor.
4.7. And thus I have briefly evinced the necessity of this daily dependence.

But next it concerns you to know, what this dependence we speak of is: This
also I shall briefly open to you, laying down somewhat negatively, and somewhat
positively about it.

It is not to deny the Grace wrought in us by the Spirit; Cor. 15.10.

It is not a la^ excuse from our duty: depend, but rather dishonor Christ by
so doing. You must not say, Because Christ must do all, therefore I must do
nothing: but rather work out your salvation, because it is he that works both
to will and do, Phil. 2.12, 13. These are noi opposed, but subordinated.

But then positively, it lies in three things.

In seeing and acknowledging the infinite sufficiency and fullness that is in
Christ: Impetration procuring all, Heb. 9.12. but also by way of Application,
bringing home to the Soul all the blessings purchased by his blood, and settling
us in the possession of it, John 14.3. and so from first to last to eye him as
the Author and Finisher of our Faith.

2. In seeing the necessary dependence that all our Graces have upon him. That
look as you see the Stream depending on the Fountain, the Beam upon the Sun,
the Branch upon the Root, the Building upon the Foundation, even so do our
Graces upon Christ: On him they live, and cut off from him they die. Our life
is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. When you see this, and also see that all
your activity and striving is but as the hoysting up of the Sails, in order to
the motion of the Ship, which can do nothing till there come a Gale: When you
look upon your Grace as a Creature that must be upheld, fed, acted, and
preserved by Christ, Col. 2.19. Then you are prepared for this act of
dependence: As for instance; You can never depend upon Christ for the acting of
that Grace of Hope, until you see Christ to be the prop and foundation of it,
and that it depends upon him, as upon its cause, 1 Pet. 1.3. as upon its
object, Hebr. 6.19. and as upon its foundation and groundwork, Col. 1.27.

You can never depend upon Christ for your joy and comfort, until you see what
a necessary dependence this also has upon him, Phil. 3.3. and that both as to
its being and acting, John 16.22.

You can never depend upon him for strength in any duty, until you see how
your duties depend upon Christ, not only for the strength by which they are
performed, John 15.4, 5. but also for accettation when they are performed, 1
Pet. 2.5. It were easy to instance in any other Grace.

3. It lies in (...), Looking off to the Author of our Faith.
looking off from your own Grace, whenever you are put upon the acting off it,
(I mean in regard of any dependence upon it) and looking by an eye of Faith and
acceptance to Christ, Heb. 12.2. To the putting forth of which acts of
dependence upon Christ, holy ejaculations in our on-sets upon duty, or those
quick and vigerous lifting up of our souls to God that way are of special use,
it being a duty fitted for the purpose, when there is no room for set and
solemn Prayer. And thus briefly of its nature.

And to urge you to this duty, I shall offer these seven Considerations; which
oh that they might prevail upon your hearts, and make you for ever to clasp and
cling about Christ more then ever you have done.

You have little reason to rely upon the strength of your own Graces; for you
may be easily deceived in that matter, and think you have much more Grace then
you have. How often are the common Gifts of the Spirit mistaken for his special
Graces! The sixth Chapter to the Hebrews is able to make a man tremble in this
thing.

Suppose you have much Grace, etc.

Whatever measures of Grace you have arrived at, Abraham had more Faith then
you, and yet he fell into a sin contrary to that very Grace wherein he so
excelled others, Genesis 20.2. Job had more patience then you: which of you could
behave your selves as he did, had you been in the like circumstances as he was,
Chap. 1.2. He is renowned for it in Scripture, Jam. 5.11. yet he fell into that
sin which was contrary to this Grace also, Chap. 3. Moses had more meekness
then you: Now the man Moses was the meekest man upan the Earth. If you be but
reproved, and that justly for your faults, how Waspish are you? Yet see how
this Grace failed even in him, in an eminent trial of it, Numb. 11.13.14, 15.
Adam was much more advantaged in this respect, then you, being made upright,
and no corruption inherent in him, yet he fell: The Angels more again, yet they
fell. Oh when will you learn the vanity of self-dependance!

Nothing more provokes the Lord to withdraw his Spirit, does, Luke 14.29, 30,
31. God will teach you by sad experience your own weakness, and what frail and
vain things you be, if you will learn it by no other means.

If God permit you to fall (as doubtless he will if you be self-conceited) then
the more eminent you have been, How are the mighty fallen! What dismal
consequents will attend your fall!

Have you not sad experience of your own weakness from day to day in your
lesser trials? David once did? My feet were well nigh slipped. O my thinks this
should teach you to look more to God, and less to Self. If you have run with
footmen, and they have wearied you in the Land of peace; think sadly, how you
shall contend with Horses in the swellings of Jordan. Do not you see that you
are but Feathers in the wind of Temptation? Consult your former experiences.

Lastly, has Christ given you more Grace then others,

Well then, by all this be persuaded to cease from your selves, yea from your
religious selves; and to all other your preparations, add this as a choice
one: If you do these things, you shall never fall. And thus you see the
complete Christian in his equipage for sufferings.

CHAP. XIII. Containing the first use of the point by way of conviction,
discovering the unreadiness of multitudes of Professors for suffering-work.
YOu have seen by all that has been spoken, what the necessary prerequisites
unto a suffering condition are, and what manner of persons you must be (both
for habitual and actual readiness) if ever you honor Christ by bonds or death
for him. And I doubt not but your judgments and consciences vield to the
evident necessity of these things, wherein I have placed the Christians
readiness. But alas! where shall we find among the throngs and crowds of
Professors, any considerable numbers thus qualified and prepared? To suffer
for Christ, is a gift that few have received. We are fallen into the dregs of
time. Oh how little of the Primitive zeal and simplicity remains among the
Professors of this Age! Later times have produced a sort of Professors of
another stamp and Spirit. These have the light, but they had the love: these
see more, but they did and suffered more. How many that are an ornament to
Religion, do adorn themselves with the name of it!

Now according to this account given of a ready Christian, diverse professing
persons will be convicted of their unreadiness and inability to manage
suffering work; As first.

1. The politic and hypocritical Professors, whose hearts were never set
right at first, and therefore cannot be steadfast when trials come, Psalm. 78.8.
Their hearts were never sound in Gods statutes, and therefore no wonder if they
be not only a shame to, but ashamed of their profession, Psalm. 119.80. Never
wonder if you see that profession which began in hypocrisy, to end in
apostasy. These want their habitual readiness for sufferings, and so cannot
drink of that cup: needs must they fall when tried; and when they fall, they
fall dreadfully, and often irrecoverably; for they neither have the seed of God
in them, nor any promise of God made to them.

And are there not many such to be found in every place? For (1) how difficult
is it to persuade many of you to any duty that has loss or hazard attending on
it. Does not the sincere heart stand inclinable and disposed to all the known
will of God? Psalm. 119.6. Do Christians use to enquire more what is cheap,
easy, and safe for them, or what is their duty? Gal. 1.16. Speak Conscience,
for to thee I do appeal; Art thou not conscious of some reserves, limitations,
and exceptions? Does not the man like Naaman desire the Lord to excuse and
pardon him in this or that thing? 2 Kings 5.17. And think thou that this is
consistent with sincere obedience which excepts no duty, nor quarrels with any
command, because they all flow equally from the sovereignty of God? Jam. 2.11.
and so does what it does intuitu voluntatis, upon the sight of Gods will. Say
Conscience, Are there not great struglings, disputes, and contests betwixt
thee, and fleshly interests in such cases? and art thou not frequently
overborn? Oh search your hearts in this particular.

Yea secondly, I appeal to you, whether there be not many among you that choose
sin rather then affliction? This is always the Hypocrites opinion and choice.
He judges sufferings the greatest evils, and so orders himself in his election.
It was merely to avoid persecution that those Hypocrites, Gal. 6.12.
constrained others to be circumcised, only to gratify the Jews; that so by a
sinful compliance with them the offense of the Cross might cease. If Paul
would have done so, he might have avoided it too, but he durst not whatever he
suffered, Gal. 5.11. Oh this is a shrewd sign of a false heart, Jub 36.21. and
the contrary disposition is always found in the upright heart, Heb. 11.25.

Nay, are there not some that have, and others that are ready to throw up their
Profession, when they see into what difficulties it involves them? Whilst they
could live upon the profession of Truth, they entertained it; but when Truth
comes to live upon them, they thrust it out, and cry, Away with this
Profession, it will beggar and undo us: They then repent of their forwardness,
and secretly with they had never engaged in it. O examine whether your hearts
be not thus turned back, and your steps declined. If so, it is manifest you are
hypocritical Professors, and that it was some outward self-respect that first
engaged, you in your Profession, but can never enable you to hold out when
difficult days come. I say it is manifest by this departure from your
Profession, that some outward self-respect at first allured you to it. As now
when I behold the artificial motions of the Wheels in a Watch, and see how
regularly the Needle marks the journal hours of the Sun upon the flat of the
Quadrant, and see nothing that moves or guides it, it would cause admiration if
I had never seen it before, or did not understand the cause of that motion: but
when I look upon the other side, and there find Wheels, Ressorts, and
Counterpoises, and a Spring that causes all those motions, I cease to wonder;
certainly some Lust or other was the spring of all thy religious motions; stop
or take off that, and motion ceases: And if it be so, this Scab of Hypocrisy
will at last break out into the Botch of Apostasy. Thou can never hold out
long under Trials, Matthew. 13.21. Oh how many such sad sights may we live to see
as Trials come! Difficult times are coming on, 2 Timothy 3.1. and woe to such then
as want sincerity at the bottom of their Profession.

2. And as these have no habitual readiness for sufferings, and consequently
must be ruined by them; so there are others that may be truly godly, and have
the root of the matter in them, who are yet far from an actual readiness, and
so continuing, are like to be a reproach to Religion when their Trial comes.
For it is not a little Grace in the sleepy habit that will secure you from
falling scandalously by the hand of temptation: And although that Seed of God
which is in you, will recover you again, and prevent total and final Apostasy,
yet oh consider what a sad thing it is to enter into, and be conquered by
temptation: to be led away in triumph by the Tempter, and made a reproach to
Christ. O it is a sad consideration to think how many there be amongst the
people of God, that discover little or no actual preparation for sufferings, As
first;

1. Upon how many of the Saints is the Spirit of slumber poured out: Even the
wise as well as foolish seem now to be asleep. There is a twofold spiritual
sleep; the first is total, upon wicked men: and it is one of Gods sorest and
dreadfullest strokes upon their soul, (...)
Isa. 29.10. The Hebrew word there is the same with that which is used of Adam,
when God cast him into a deep sleep, whilst he took out his rib. And in 2 Timothy
2.26. (...)
it signifies such a sleep as that which is occasioned by drunkenness; out of
such a sleep does the Lord awaken all that are saved, and they never fall into
it any more. The other is partial, Cant. 5.2. and is incident to the people of
God, Matthew. 25.5. This is nothing else but that torpor and sluggishness of
spirit which seizes upon the Saints, and never did it prevail, I fear among
them, more then now. For where is their activity for God? Where is he that
stirs up himself to take hold of God? Isa. 64.7. Where is there such a
generation as that, Psalm. 24.6. we pray, confer, and hear for the most part,
but as men speak betwixt sleeping and waking. Where can you find, except here
and there one, that has a quick and lively sense of Gods indignation upon him,
or that trembles at his judgments? Is not that the very case of the most which
God describes? Isa. 42. ult.

2. How many are seized by a private and worldly spirit, every man turning to
his own house, and eagerly pursuing the world? Hag. 1.9. Jer. 45.4, 5. Oh! how
are we entangled in the Wilderness? how does the World eat up our time, and eat
out our Zeal, cowardice and soften our spirits, and render us utterly unfit for
the Yoke and Burden of Christ? You that see so much Beauty, and taste so much
sweetness in the Creature, will have an hard Tugg when called to deny it: You
are not yet prepared to drink of the Cup, or take up the Cross of Christ.

3. How many poor Christians are of a low and timorous spirit, ready to tremble
at the shaking of a Leaf: Ah poor hearts! how unfit are you for Bonds or Death?
This passion of fear that so predominates in you, is the very passion that
Satan assaults, and lays siege to in the hour of Temptation, as was before
noted: and commonly it is occasioned (where it flows not from the Natural
Constitution) from an excessive love to the world, or from some guilt upon the
spirit. It Is true, the Lord can so assist weak Faith, and so subdue strong
Fears, as that you may be enabled to stand the shock when it comes: (for, as I
noted formerly, our strength lies not in any thing inherent in us, but we are
strong or weak, according to the divine presence and assistances that we enjoy)
but yet if you labor not to mortify this Evil, and stir not up your selves in
the use of all appointed means, to rouse your Zeal and Courage for God, I know
no Warrant you have to expect such assistances.

Lastly, how many poor Christians among us, are to this day dark and cloudy in
their Evidences for Heaven? Had they walked closely with God, been laborious in
the disquisition and search of their own hearts, they had long since obtained a
clearness and satisfaction about the state of their own hearts: But as the case
stands with them, how unfit are they for Bonds or Death. Oh! it is a sad case,
when inward and outward Troubles meet together, as you may see, Genesis 42.21, 22.
when there shall be fightings without, and fears within: When such a pang as
that, Lam. 3.17, 18. shall come over thy heart, what will thou do?

By all that has been said, it appears, that the most of Professors are in a
very unready posture for sufferings: So that as Troubles come to an height, we
are like to see many sad Spectacles: Many Offenses will come; Religion is like
to be wounded in the house of it is friends. Oh! What a day of Mercy have we
enjoyed? What helps and choice advantages, above any precedent Age, and yet
unready? How sad and inexcusable is this?

CHAP. XIII. Containing another use of the Point, by way of Exhortatation,
persuading all the People of God, whilst the Lord respites, and graciously
delays their trials, to answer the end of God therein, and prepare themselves
for greater trials; where several Motives are propounded, to excite to the Duty.
UP then from your Beds of sloth, awake from your security, O ye Saints; get
upon your Watch-Towers, tremble in your selves, that ye may rest in the Day of
Evil, Hab. 2.1, 3, 16. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
stand in the evil day, and when you have done all to stand, Ephesians. 6. O let it
never be said of your Dwellings, as it is of the Tabernacles of the wicked. Job
21.9. Their Houses are safe from fear.

Augustus hearing of one that was deeply in debt, who yet slept heartily; sent
for his Pillow, supposing there was some strange virtue in that Pillow. I
wonder what Pillow you have gotten, O ye drowsy Saints, that you can sleep so
quietly upon it, now that all things about you are conspiring trouble, and
threatening danger. Can you sleep like Jonah, when Seas of wrath are tumbling
and roaring round about you, and threatening to entomb you, and all your
enjoyments? Behold, The Stork in the Heavens knows her appointed time, Jer.
8.7. and has not God made you wiser then the Fowls of the Air, Job 35.11. It
may be the sound of some present Judgment may a little startle you, like a
sudden clap of Thunder in the Air; but how soon does Sloth and Security
prevail and overcome you again? They say Poison by being habituated, may be
made innocent: We are so used to, or rather hardened under calamities, that
nothing moves or effectually awakens us. Lord! What will the end of these
things be? Will thou surprise thy people at unawares? Shall thy judgments find
them secure, and leave them desperate? O that God would persuade you to gather
your selves together, yea to gather together, (not in an unlawful and seditious
way) but in the way of duty, before the decree bring forth, and the day pass as
the chafe, Zeph. 2.1, 2. O prepare to meet your God, Amos ^4.12. Prepare your
faith, love, courage, etc. before God call you to the exercise of them.

And to excite you to this duty, besides all the forementioned benefits of a
prepared Spirit, consider these following particulars by way of motive.

The many calls which God has given you to this work. The Lord has uttered
his voice, one mouth, Luke 1.70. and they have warned you faithfully. (2) By
the Rod: This also has a loud voice, Micah 6.9. Psalm. 2.5. Men of
understanding will hear this voice; and those that will not hear it, shall be
lashed by it even till they are sick with smiting, verse. 13. (3) By prodigious
and portentous signs in the Heavens and Earth, such as no Age can parallel,
these have a loud voice to all that regard the works of the Lord, or the
operations of his hands. Eusebius calls them Gods Sermons to the World. (...),
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Oh that we were wise to consider what Gods ends are in these things! One
observes, That as they are the plainest and most obvious to sense, so they are
commonly the last Sermons which God intends to preach to Nations, before he
inflicts his punishments on them, if they repent not. O let not God, speaking
in ordinary and extraordinary ways to you, still speak in vain.

Your preparation for sufferings, Luke 14.28. Put on the whole armor of God,
that ye may be able to stand, Ephesians. 6. He that has first severed Christ in
his thoughts from all worldly advantages, and put the case thus to his own
soul, O my soul, can thou embrace or love a naked Christ? Can be content to
be impoverished, imprisoned, and suffer the loss of all for him? He is most
likely to cleave faithfully to him, when the case is really presented to him
indeed. And can it seem a light thing in your eyes, to be enabled to stand in
such an evil day? If you fall away from Christ, then all that you have wrought
is lost, Ezekiel. 33.13. Gideons one Bastard destroyed all his seventy Sons. This
act renders all former actions and professions vain. If you fall, you shall
thereby be brought into a more perfect bondage to the Devil then ever, Matthew.
12.23. Yea, ordinarily Apostates are judicially given up to be Persecutors,
Hos. 5.12. 1 Timothy 1.20. and are seldom or never recovered again by Grace, Heb.
6.4, 6. They that lick up their vomit, seldom cast it up any more. It is a
fall, within a little as low as the unpardonable sin, whence never any rise
again. In some cases the Judge will not allow the Offender his Book. And is it
not then a choice and desirable mercy to escape and prevent such a fall as this
is? O good Souls, ply your preparation-work close then.

3. This will best answer the Grace of God, in affording you such choice helps
and advantages as you have enjoyed. How long have you enjoyed the free liberty
of the Gospel, shining in its luster among you? This Sun which to some other
Nations has not risen, and to diverse on whom it has shined, yet it is but as
a Winters Sun, remote, and its Beams but feeble: But you have lived as it were
under the Line, It has been over your heads, and shed its richest influences
upon you. Yea, Gods Ministers, who are not only appointed to be Watchmen,
Ezekiel. 3.17. but Trumpeters to discover danger, Numb. 10.8. these have
faithfully warned you of a day of trouble, and given you their best assistance
to make you ready for it. And is not their joy, yea life bound up in your
stability in such a day of Trial? Does not every one of them call upon you in
the words of the Apostle, Phil. 4.1. Therefore my Brethren, dearly Beloved and
longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord my dearly beloved. Will
it not cut them to the very heart, if after all their spending labors among
you, they still leave you unready? Enemies still to the Cross of Christ,
impossible to be reconciled and persuaded to sufferingwork for Christ.

I remember I have read of the Athenian Codrus, who being informed by the
Oracle, that the people whose King should be slain in battle, should be
Conquerours: He thereupon disrobed himself, and in a disguise went into the
Enemies Quarters, that he might steal a death to make his people victorious.

Oh! how glad would your Ministers be, if you might conquer, and overcome in
the day of temptation, whatever become of their lives and liberties! Yea, and
if they be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of your Faith, they can
rejoice and joy with you all. Such is their zeal and longing after your
security and welfare. But if still you remain an unready people, and do become
a prey to temptation, Oh how inexcusable will you be!

4. Remember how ready the Lord Jesus was to suffer the hardest and vilest
things for you. He had a bitter cup put into his hands to drink for you, into
which the wrath both of God and man was squeezed out. Dolor Christi fuit major
omnibus doloribus. Aquin.
Never had man such sufferings to undergo as Christ's. Whether you consider (1)
the dignity of his persou, who was in the form of God, and might have stood
upon his peerage and equality with him; he is the sparkling Diamond of Heaven,
Acts 7.56. The Darling of the Fathers Soul, Isa. 42.1. glorious as the only
begotten of the Father, John 1.14. yea glory it self, James 2.1. yea, the very
brightness of glory, Heb. 1.3. He is the deliciae Christiani orbis, fairer then
the Sons of men: And for him to be so debased, below so many thousands of his
own Creatures; become a worm, and no man; this was a wonderful humiliation. It
was Jeremiah's lamentation, that such as were brought up in Scarlet, embraced
Dunghills; that Princes were hanged up by the hands, and the faces of Elders
were not reverenced. But what was that to the humiliation of the Lord of glory?
Or (2) that he suffered in the prime and flower of his years; when full of life
and sense, and more capable of exquisite sense of pain then others: Aquinas.
For he was optimae complexionatus, of a singular constitution: and all the
while he hanged on the Tree, his sense of pain not at all blunted or decayed,
Mark 15.37, 39. Or (3) the manner of his death. It was the death of the Cross;
which was as a Rack to Christ: for in reference to the distention of his
members upon the Cross, is that spoken, Psalm. 22.17. I may tell all my bones.
Or (4) That all this while God hid his face from him. When Stephen suffered, he
saw the Heavens opened. The Martyrs you see here, were many of them ravished
and transported with ecstasies of joy in their sufferings; but Christ in the
dark. He suffered in (...) Soul as well as in his Body; and the sufferings of
his Soul, were the very Soul of his sufferings. It was the Fathers wrath that
lay so heavy on him, as to put him into such an agony, that an instance was
never given of the like in nature: For he sweat (...) great drops or clodders
of blood, which fell from his Body to the ground, Luke 22.44. It amazed him,
and made him very heavy. See Mark 14.33. yea, sorrowful even to death, Matthew.
26.38.

And yet as bitter as the Cup was, he freely and willingly drank it up, John
18.11. prepared himself to be offered up a sacrifice, Psalm. 40.6.7. gave his
back to the Smiters, Isa. 50.6. yea longed exceedingly for the time till it
came, Luke 12.50.

Now, if Christ so cheerfully prepared and addressed himself to such sufferings
as these for you, should you not prepare your selves to encounter any
difficulty or hardship for him? O my Brethren, Does not this seem a just and
fair inference to you, from the sufferings of Christ for you? 1 Pet. 4.1.
Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind.

Oh trifle no longer; feed not your selves with fancies and groundless
presumptions of immunity and peace, but foresee difficulties, and fit your
selves to bear them.

CHAP. XIV. Containing the last use of the point, by way of support, and
comfort to poor trembling souls, who do take pains to make themselves ready for
sufferings; but yet finding such strength in Satan's temptations, and their own
corruptions, fear that all their labor is in vain, and that they shall faint,
and utteriy Apostatize, when these Troubles and Trials come to an height.
IN the last place, If it be such a blessed thing to be ready for Bonds, or
Death for Christ, this may minister much comfort to such souls, who though they
cannot say as Paul here did, that they are ready; yet are at work daily upon
their own hearts to make them ready, and strive in the use of all means to
conquer those corruptions that hinder it, and improve those Graces, in which it
mainly consists. O poor soul, what ever present unreadiness or indisposition
thou find, and complainest of in thine own heart, yet thy condition is safe.

Oh but I cannot be satisfied in that.

Its well thou suspectest thine own heart, was a good saying of a Reverend
Minister, Mr A.H.
now with God, He that fears to flinch, shall never flinch for fear. It Is true,
seeming grace may be totally lost, Luke 8.18. Heb. 6.4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.20. It Is
granted also, that the sins of Believers deserve that God should forsake them,
and that he may suffer grace in them to be sadly re-bated, and they may fall
before a Temptation, as Peter, and all the Disciples did. But that thou shall
never be separated from Christ, or fall Totus, a toto, in totum, utterly away
from God, thou may be abundantly satisfied upon these 5 or 6 Grounds.

1. From Gods eternal Electing love, wherewith all gracious souls are beloved
and embraced, be their graces never so weak, or their corruptions never so
strong. This is immutable, Heb. 6.18. and hence its said, Mark 13.22. They
shall deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect. Now this immutable purpose
of God, is not founded upon any mutable ground or Reason in thee, Romans 9.11.
Yea, when he Romans 8.29.
Elected thee, he saw what thou would be, and yet that hindered him not.

2. From the Covenant of Grace, in the Bosom of which thou art wrapped up:
This is all thy salvation, and all thy hope; it will afford thee abundant
satisfaction, if thou do but weigh particularly these three things about it: 1.
That the Author of this Covenant is not a fickle creature, but a faithful God;
with whom there is not yea and nay: With whom there is no variableness nor
shadow of turning; whose gifts and callings are without repentance; so that
once within the clasp of this blessed Covenant, and in it for ever. 2. That God
has established the Covenant with you in the blood of Christ; therefore the
Sacramental Cup, is called the Cup of the New Testament in his blood, Luke
22.20. the everlasting merit and efficacy whereof, gives the soul of a Believer
the highest satisfaction imaginable. Lastly, add to this, That in this Covenant
God has undertaken for us, as well as for himself: So that what is a Condition
in one Scripture, is the matter of a Promise in another Scripture, Jer. 32.40.

3. From that strict and intimate union that is betwixt Christ and thee. And
hence its impossible thou should be lost: For 1. Thy union with his Person,
draws interest in his Properties with it: What ever he is, or has, it is for
thee; for, his eye of Knowledge, arm of Power, bowels of Pity, its all for thee.

2. This union with his Person, secures thy feeble Graces from perishing, John
4.14. Thy Graces have an everlasting Spring. Whilst there is Sap in this Root,
it will ascend into the Branches.

3. It implies thy Perseverance, because by this union thou becomest an
integral part of Christ's Body, which would be mutilate and defective, should
thou be cut off and lost.

4. From the prevalent intercession of Jesus Christ in the Heavens, for all his
Saints, in all their trials here on Earth: From hence the Apostle inferres the
certainty of our Perseverance, Romans 8.34. and a pregnant instance of it you
have in Peter's case, Luke 22.32. So Heb. 7.25. speaks fully to the case. To
strengthen this, consider 1. Who it is that intercedes: Its Christ, whose
Person is most dear and ingratiated with the Father, John 11.42. 2. What he
intercedes for: Surely for nothing but what is most suitable to his Fathers
will. The will of Christ, and his Fathers, do not clash, John 16.26, 27. Yea,
what he prays for, he prays not for gratis, or asks upon any dishonorable
terms to the justice of his Father; but they are all mercies purchased and
paid for; and therefore fear not the failing of your Graces.

5. From the Spirit of Christ which dwells and abides in thee, and has
begun his saving work upon thee. I say saving, for else it would afford no
argument: His common works on Hypocrites come to nothing, but in thee they
cannot fail: For 1. His Honotr is pawned and engaged to perfect it. That
reproach of the foolish Builder, shall never lie upon him, that he began to
build, but could not finish. Besides, this would irritate, and void all that
the Father and the Son have done for thee; both their works are complete and
perfect in their kinds, and the Spirit is the last efficient in order of
working. 2. Besides, the grace he has already wrought in thee, may give thee
yet further and fuller assurance of its preservation; inasmuch as it has the
nature of a Seal, Pledge, and Earnest of the whole, Romans 8.23. 2 Cor. 1.22. So
that it cannot fail.

6. From those multitudes of Assertory, Promissory, and Comparative Scriptures;
the rich veins whereof, run through the book of God, as so many streams, to
refresh thy soul. Of Assertory Scriptures, see John 6.39. John 10.28. 1 Ioh.
2.19. Of Promissory Scriptures, see Isa. 54.10. Jer. 34.40. 1 Cor. 1.8. etc. Of
Comparative Scriptures, see Psalm. 1.3. Psalm. 125.1. John 4.14. etc. The
principal scope of all which, is to show the indefectible nature of true grace
in the Saints.

And now, how should this refresh thy drooping soul, make thee gird up the
loins of thy mind! since thou do not run as one uncertain, neither fightest
as one that beats the Air, 1 Cor. 9.26. but art so secured from total Apostasy,
as thou see thou art by all these things. O bless ye the Lord.

But the Lord seems to be departed from my soul; God is afarr off from me, Saul
was, when the Philistines made war upon him, and God was departed from him; and
therefore I shall fall.

Not so; absolute, when the Lord utterly forsakes his creature, so that they
shall never behold his face more: The other is limited and respective, and so
he forsook his own Son, and often does his own Elect: And of this kind, some
are only Cautional, to prevent sin; some are merely Probational, to try grace;
and others Castigatory, to chastize our negligence and carelessness. Now though
I have not a word of comfort to speak in the case of total and absolute
Desertions; yet of the latter, which doubtless is thy case, much may be said by
way of support, be it of which of the three sorts it will, or in what degree it
will. For 1. This has been the case of many precious souls, Psalm. 22.1, 2.
Psalm. 77.2. Psalm. 88.9. Job. 13.24, 25, 26. This was poor Mr Glovers case, as
you will find in his Story, and it continued till he came within sight of the
Stake: therefore no new, or strange thing has happened to you.

2. The Lord by this will advantage thee for perseverance, not only as they
are cautional against sin, but as they make thee hold Christ the faster, and
prize his Cant. 3.4.
Presence at an higher rate, when he shall please graciously to manifest
himself to thee again.

3. This shall not abide for ever; its but a little Cloud, and will blow over.
It is but for a moment, and that moments Darkness, ushers in everlasting Light,
Isa. 54.7.

Yea lastly, The light of Gods countenance shall not only be restored
Certainly, but it shall be restored Seasonably; when thy Darkness is greatest,
thy Troubles at the highest, and thy Hopes lowest. He is a God of judgment,
and knows how to time his own mercies, Psalm. 138.3.

But I am a weak woman, Rulers, and look great ones in the face?

Christ delights to make his Power known in such, Cor. 12.9. for he affects not
Social glory.

2. Thou shall be holden up, for God is able to make thee stand, Romans 14.4.
Thou that art sensible of thine own infirmity, may run to that Promise.

3. Such poor weak creatures shall endure, when stronger (if Self-confident)
fall, Isa. 40.30, 31. Even the youths shall faint, and be weaery; and the young
men utterly fall: but they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength.
They shall mount up with wings as Eagles, run and not be weary, walk, and not
faint.

Youths and young men are bold, daring and confident persons, that trust to
their own strength; to whom such as wait upon the Lord, stand here opposed.
They shall faint, but these shall renew their strength.

Art thou then one that waitest and dependest upon an All-sufficient God, in
the sense of thine own weakness? This Promise then is for thee.

4. You may furnish your selves at pleasure, with Examples of the mighty Power
of God resting upon such as you are.

Thomas Drowry the poor blind Boy, whose story you have Part, 1. Page 77. What
a presence of spirit was with him, when examined by the Chancellor!

Eulalia a Virgin, of about twelve years of age, see how she was acted above
those years, yea, above the power of nature! Part 1. Page 81. Tender Women, yea
Children, are above themselves, when assisted by a strong God.

And thus you have the use of all these Examples, and some help offered you by
a weak hand, in your present and most important work.

The Lord carry home all with Power upon your hearts, that (if God call you to
suffer for him) you may say as Paul did, I am now ready to be offered up, and
the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which God the righteous Judge shall give me at that
day; and not to me only, but to them also which love his Appearing, 2 Timothy 4.6.

FINIS.

