THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL Asserted, and Practically Improved: SHOWING By
SCRIPTURE, REASON, and the Testimony of the ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS, That the SOUL
of Man is capable of subsisting and acting in a State of Separation from the
Body; And how much it concerns us all to prepare for that State.

With some REFLECTIONS on a Pretended Refutation of Mr. Bently's Sermon.

By TIMOTHY MANLOVE.

(...) Plat. in Phaed. LONDON: Printed by R. Roberts for Nevill Simmons,
Bookseller in Sheffield, Yorkshire. And sold by George Coniers Bookseller at
the Ring in Little Britain, London, 1697.

To the Candid and Impartial READER.
I. IT seems an Argument (equally convictive and deplorable) of the monstrous
degeneracy of the Spirit of Man, that it should doubt its own Spiritual Nature!
and be in suspense unto which Class of Beings to annumerate it self! Whether it
be more akin to Mind, or Dust; and whether, as the latter, it should count it
self more allied to this World, which it is but to pass through; or the other,
where it is to design for it self an everlasting abode? that it should suspect
its Nature to be less similar to the Inhabitants of Heaven, than to Particles
of Earth? Or that it should any-where be found debased to so low a pitch, as to
think it self more fit to be sorted with Clods here below, than with Angels
above!

II. We are indeed carefully to distinguish, in the consideration we ought to
have of our selves, between what we are in natural, and what in moral respects.
We cannot upon the latter account think too meanly of our selves, as having
sinned, and fallen short of the glory of God. But upon the former account we
cannot judge of our selves more meanly than our proper rank in the Creation
allows, without reflecting injuriously upon our Maker. Here a mean
Self-despiciency, is most ingenerous and ungrateful. And when, upon this
natural account, we are God's Off spring, and in stiling himself the God of the
spirits of all flesh, and the Father of spirits, he intimates our near alliance
to himself, and calls us his Sons, we call our selves Sons of the Earth, we
cannot herein vilify our selves, without reproaching him. And in this respect
it might amaze one, to think it should be needful to write a Book, to prove
that a piece of Clay cannot reason! deliberate! lay Designs! form Thoughts!
deduce one Thought from another! raise Thoughts far above the whole Sphere of
Material Beings! even so high as to reach unto the Supreme being it self: Or
that it should be requisite to confute a Book that, if it have any meaning at
all, must be understood to mean as absurd a Paradox as this! Inasmuch as no
mortal man can prove that a Clod of Clay is not resolvible into as fine
Particles, as any the finest Matter whatsoever.

But since such an Antidote was become necessary against so stupifying a
Poison, and that there is reason to think too many minds may be prepared to
receive so poisonous Sentiments as the Pamphlet here animadverted on, contains,
by a stupidity in reading, equal to that wherewith it was writ; we congratulate
the Age, that it has produced the one so opportunely for the other.

But we cannot in the mean time but further pause, and bethink our selves; and
with astonishment cry out,

III. Whither is Human Nature sunk and gone, that any persons can so
solicitously brutify and degrade themselves, and be as in pangs of travel, till
they have ranked themselves amongst those Creatures, which God himself has set
so much below them, and so evidently has formed to be subjected to their use
and pleasure? 2 Pet 2.12. Souls so demonstrative of the Existence of a God, so
expressive of his Eminencies, so receptive of his Favors, so apprehensive of
his Works and Will, so useful and significant in his Creation, so fit to know,
to govern and possess themselves, and to make such great and wonderful
improvements of what occurs in the whole frame and course of things: Yea, and
so formed to, and capable and ambitious of Immortality, and so accommodated for
it; Are these only or ultimately given to keep a little Flesh from stinking? to
do some Artificial Feats and Tricks therein, and then to perish with it? These
men are great strangers to themselves, and inobservant of their own Faculties
and Capacities; and mind not the provisions which the great Original of all
things has produced abundantly, and suited to every Faculty, Sense and Member
belonging to them.

IV. Essences lie deeper than their Principles; and Principles deeper than
their Actions or Effects: And every man is nearer to himself, than any other
Beings are, or can be to him, save his God: And he that reads concerning Human
Souls, and minds not the powers and actings of his own Soul, cannot but be a
stranger to himself, and the more fit to be imposed upon both by himself, and
by others. He that forgets, and does not mind and heed himself, whilst he
consults his Books, can never be such a Proficient in Self knowledge, as
otherwise he might be. It cannot be denied, but that the Inordinacies and
Immoralities of men professing Godliness, and zealous in Polemical defending
the Soul's Immortality, have ministered greatly to the propagation of this
dangerous Error. That the Soul of man is mortal. And when men are sunk in
guilt, and find their own Convictions troublesome to themselves; to make
themselves more easy in their course of Soul-neglect, they judge themselves the
more concerned to baffle their belief of the Existence of God, of the Extent
and Exercise of his Providence, of the Immortality of the Soul, and of Eternal
Judgment. And when they have extirpated this Persuasion, they can more easily
contrive Principles, and order Practices, to serve their own particular
purposes and turns. But things are not always what, and as men think they are,
or would have them be.

V. It is true, some of the Patrons and Promoters of this Fundamental Error,
are Men of admirable Parts and Learning, and fit to make considerable Figures,
and to do great service to the Public, and eminently to serve their
Generations in Consistories, Courts, Camps, Navies, or in other Stations,
through their Sagacity, Courage, Generousness, and all the obliging Civilities
of Conversation, which the advantages of their Education might dispose them
unto. But he that can believe he has no God to adore and please, no Soul to
save or lose, no final Reckoning to make to a Supreme Judge; and so no Eternal
Retribution to expect; can have no reverence to his Conscience, no great and
noble end to influence and beautify his Actions, nor indeed any thing fully fit
and cogent to secure him against the most accommodate and strong Temptations,
in the severities and briskness of their assaults upon him. His Interest,
Honor, or Humor, and his adventitious helps from men, are now his strongest
holds; but when these things are likely to be ravish^d from him, either his
heart must sink, and break, or he will violate all the Rules of Honesty and
Order, to preserve himself; and rather sacrifice the Public Interest to his
own Concerns, than act like a thorough Votary to the Common Interest of
Mankind. And if that Maxim govern him, Dulce and decorum pro patria mori, aut
agere; yet is it his ambition of being famed in History, which mainly prompts
him to be so heroic: So that in all, it is but his own ambitious and aspiring
Self which is his ultimate end; and all that lies betwixt him and this End,
has but an inferior and subordinate contribution thereunto. And hence the
Honor, Safety, and Felicity of his King and Country are only valued by him
(even as all Creatures serviceable to him are) merely for his own sake. So good
Security and Service have Kings and Governments from him. And let but this
selfishness be everywhere, and every way, the Regent Principle, abstractedly
from all sense of, and references to Soul-good hereafter; and then he that has
the sharpest Eye, the greatest Reach, and the longest Sword, will have the most
undoubted right to all that he can get and keep, though vi and armis. And when
another shall outwit, or conquer him, and call him to an account for all, what
is the rule and spirit of this Process, but Selfishness engaged to satiate
Revengeful Thirst?

VI. But what is it that induces Persons to believe that Souls are material and
mortal, and so to perish physically with their Bodies? is it because there is
no God? or that God is not able, or not willing to create such Beings? is it
that either the production of such Beings implies a contradiction, or that God
judges it unworthy of, and much below himself, to make; and uneasy and
dishonorable to himself to mind them? or to perpetuate their Beings to their
Eternal Happiness or Misery, as they behave themselves, whilst in this World
and Body? Or do they think (a posteriori) that there want Evidences of their
Immortality? or that the present frame, and state, and course of things and
Providence, insinuates the contrary? or that God is too good to eventuate the
Eternal Misery of any Being?

As to the Existence of a God.

(1.) If ever there was absolutely nothing, then there never could be any thing
existent: For how could something be produced from nothing? What? an Effect
without an Action! or an Action without an Agent or Efficient? (2.) The
Eternity of Life, and Light, and All Sufficiency, is demonstrably more credible
than the Eternity of mere Body or Matter: For Matter in it self is universally
passive and impressive from another Nature, and all its Principles and Motions
must be derived from another, and an higher Nature. And surely that Essence
must be very fine and excellent indeed, which can comprehend and penetrate, and
so variously and harmoniously imprinciple and actuate so vast a Fahrick as the
material Universe. He that could so digest it into such an excellent and
established Order as we find it is, must needs be Great, Wise, Good himself,
and infinitely so. (3.) But supposing there be an Invisible, Infinite Spirit;
what greater, more genuine, and apt Evidences, is his Existence capable of,
than what continually face us? Rom 1.20. Can Taste be proved to the Eye; or
Sounds to the Palate; or Colors and Light to the Ear? All Faculties and Senses
have their proper Objects, and these Objects have their peculiar Evidences to
their own Nature, Use and Ends, as they respect their different Faculties and
Senses. Things Visible are best known by being seen; things Audible, by being
heard. Blind men will know Light much better, if ever their Eyes shall be
opened, by one glance thereat, than by all the most accurate Discourses upon
Light, which before were, or could be read to them; and yet before they saw,
they apprehended there were such things as Light and Vision, but not so
satisfyingly as by their own actual seeing of it. Now if seeing the vast
visible bulk and compass of the Universe, the evidently wise Contrivance of it,
with all the accurate dependencies and subserviencies of all the parts thereof,
as to their mutual usefulness each to other, and all its furniture to maintain,
assist, and please all its Inhabitants suit ably to their different Capacities,
Stations, and Concerns, be not sufficient to prove Infinite Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness in existence to the thinking mind, what can!
As to God's Ability and Willingness to produce such Beings as Immortal Souls;

(1.) There is no contradiction in the terms or thing; let them demonstrate who
assert the contrary, if they can. (2.) Souls are produced by God's Creating
Power, and breathed into Humane Flesh: And their constituent Faculties, their
vast Capacities, their noble Functions, and vivid Operations, the vast
Provisions which God has made for their Entertainment, Employment, and
Improvement; (such as the Mysteries and Treasures of Nature; the Exercise and
Issues of Universal and Particular Providence; the Openings and Advantages of a
Gospel-day; the even sensible Influences, Impressions, and Effects of
Providence and Grace upon the Spirits of Men) the Souls apparent Jurisdiction
and Dominion over it self, (yet under Law to God and Christ, whose dealings
with it would yet admit of larger Thoughts, did not the Impatient Press forbid
them) and its Ability to make all Tributary to its own advantage, as to
Self-conduct, Government, and Possession, and to reflect upon, discern,
approve, or to censure its own Actions; yea, and to look beyond what Time and
mere Matter can amount unto. All these (and much more) make it evident, both
what Souls are, and will hereafter be consigned to.
As to the (...), or God-becomingness in the Case: Why should it be thought
unworthy of him, seeing it is done so evidently by him, who works all things
after the counsels of his Will? Ephesians. 1.11. Is it so unbecoming God to create
Spirits in his own Image, to impress the Signatures of his own Name upon them;
to put them into a State of Trial, therein to govern them suitably to their
Frame and State, and so to suit their everlasting State to their present
Choice, Tempers, and Carriages, and from amongst the Sons of Men to choose and
cultivate a Seed for Heaven, and there to take Eternal Pleasure in all the
Accuracies of their completed Beings, their orderly Behavior and infinite
Satisfactions in himself; and in the Triumphs of his Grace and Son over all the
baffled Powers of Darkness? What Attribute can these things disgracefully
affect?

But how much more than all this, and incomparably better laid together, and
more nervosely argued, and more Pleas to the contrary impleaded with far
greater strength, will the Impartial (though Critical) Reader find in the ensuing
Treatise? To the Ingenious and Learned Author whereof we think the World
greatly obliged, and do offer our hearty Thanks to him, whom (with his Labors,
and the diligent Reader) we commend to the special Grace and Providence of God
in Christ.

John How, Matthew. Sylvester.
October 14. 1696.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Contrary Hypothesis laid down, with an Account how far it agrees,
or disagrees with the Philosophy of Epicurus, Lucretius, Hobs, etc. The Method
of the following Discourse. Page 1. CHAP. II. The Immortality of the Soul
proved by Scripture. Page 12. CHAP. III. The Immortality of the Soul proved by
such Arguments as are drawn from the Light of Natural Reason, and the common
Sense and Experience of Mankind. The First Argument from the Powers and
Faculties wherewith the Soul is endued. Page 25. CHAP. IV. The Second Argument
from the many gross and dangerous Absurdities wherewith the contrary Opinion is
attended. Page 49. CHAP. V. Some Subservient Considerations for the further
Establishment of the Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality. p. 67. CHAP. VI. The
Testimony of the Ancient Philosophers produced for a further Confirmation of
this great Truth. p. 79. CHAP. VII. Our Author's Objections considered and
answered. p. 93. CHAP. VIII. Of Materiality, or Immateriality as they are
ascribed to the Soul. p. 103. CHAP. IX. Directions to such as are in suspense
as to the Immortality of the Soul, showing how they may arrive at a certainty
in that matter. p. 109. CHAP. X. Directions to such as believe the Immortality
of the Soul, showing how they ought to improve so important a Doctrine. p. 131.
The Conclusion. p. 161.
THE Immortality of the SOUL ASSERTED, etc.
CHAP. I. The contrary Hypothesis laid down; with an Account how far it agrees,
or disagrees with the Philosophy of Epicurus, Lucretius, Hobs, etc. The Method
of the following Discourse.
THE Principles of sound Philosophy well tried and digested, do greatly improve
Humane Understandings; the Reasoning Faculty is cultivated, and advanced by
Exercise; by accustoming our selves to think, we learn in time to think better,
and to more purpose; and every Truth which we meet with, and really make our
own, prepares us for the discovery of some further Truth which is annexed to
it, and depends upon it: And as our Knowledge increases, so will also the
sense of our Ignorance.

Hence it is easy to discern the Reasons why, amongst so many Pretenders, there
are so few that deserve the name of Philosophers.

Some take the knowledge of Words, Terms of Art, and commonly received Forms of
Expression, for the knowledge of Things; and these they swallow without
chewing, and upon all occasions bring up again, as raw as they took them in,
and play with them, as Boys do with Bubbles, till Wise men laugh at them.

Others there are, near akin to the former, who suck in Opinions, as the wild
Asses do the Wind, without distinguishing the wholesome from that which is
corrupt.

Others can go no further than they are led by the Nose. These are (...) of a
slavish Nature, and he that can so far get the Ascendent over them, as to
insinuate himself into their esteem (which is no hard matter to do) may command
their Understandings, because they themselves never knew how to use them.

Others have Imaginations so little used to government, that they cannot six
their thoughts upon a serious enquiry after Truth, but they quickly give them
the slip, and go to play with Impertinencies. Some are so dull that they cannot
apprehend any thing that lies out of the common Road, and is not plain, and
obvious. Others are so sloathful, that they grow weary before they have half
accomplished their search. And others so foolishly conceited, that they think
it below them to alter their present Sentiments.

But the great hinderance of useful Knowledge, is an inbred, radicated Enmity
in Corrupt Nature against those Truths which have a nearer tendency to the
reformation of ill Manners, and the exercise of serious Religion. Hinc origo
mali -- And the Age in which we live, affords many unhappy Instances of the
Predominancy of this Corruption, which makes a Learned Gentleman thus to
reflect upon it, viz. That we are fallen into an Age declining from God, in
which many are fond of those things which lead us farthest from him, and seem
most to secure us against him; and the Rabble of Atheistical Epicurean Notions
which have been so often routed, and have fled before the World, are now faced
about, and afresh recruited, to assault this present Generation. Sir Chapter
Wolseley's Unreasonableness of Atheism, page 37.

A like Complaint we have in a late Judicious Philosopher, who speaking of the
Excellency of the Platonic Doctrine, because it draws off our Minds from
perishing Transitory things, to the contemplation of more noble Intellectual
Beings, further adds, Qua quidem in re infinitum prope momentum est, etc. i. e.
which is a matter of infinite moment; for we are overwhelmed with a Rout of
Philosophers, who contend that nothing but Bodies can be understood. Du Hamel
de consens. Vet. and Nov. Philos. Praefat. The like you may find in Ludovic.
Viv. de Veritat. Fidei, lib. 1. page 145.

The Knowledge of Atheists, says Van Helmont, wholly depends on a Brutal
Beginning, and they are unapt to understand those things which do exceed sense;
for that is the cause, why they exclude themselves from the Intelligible World,
page 348.

And I find that the late Ingenious E. of Rochester came at last to the same
Apprehension, viz. that, That absurd and foolish Philosophy, which the World so
much admired, propagated by the late Mr. Hobs, and others, had undone him and
many more. See his Funeral Sermon, page 26.

How far these Observations are pertinent to the matter in hand, you shall see
more by and by: For my part, I desire not to make any man's Opinions seem worse
than they are; much less to charge Atheism, or Infidelity upon a Gentleman, who
in appearance* disowns them. You shall therefore hear him speak for himself.

The Opinion which he undertakes to maintain is this, viz. That the Humane Soul
is a material Spirit, generated, growing, and falling with the Body, and rising
again with it at the sound of the voice of the Archangel, and the Trump of God,
page 1.

Hereupon he endeavors to persuade us, that the Soul is nothing else but the
inflamed glowing Particles of the Blood, called Spirits; which are, says he,
the Active Principle of Life, Motion, Sense, and Understanding in Man, and
Beast, page 10. And hence he infers, That the Soul cannot subsist, act, or
suffer any thing in a state of Separation from the Body, but that by Death the
man's Faculty of thinking is certainly destroyed, page 2, 3, 14, 15. And yet he
owns the Article of the Resurrection, and the last Judgment appointed of God
for the distributing of Recompenses, according to the behavior which men have
used in passing through the Trials and Temptations of this World, page 6.

You have here such a medly of Epicurean Dreams and Christian Doctrines mixed
together, as is not commonly to be met with. The one part of his Hypothesis is
below the common Reason and Sentiments of Mankind; the other above the reach of
the greatest Philosophers, without the help of Supernatural Revelation, I mean,
the Doctrine of the Resurrection, at the sound of the Voice of the Archangel,
and the Trump of God.

The truth is, Our Author has advanced so far into the Tents of Epicurus,
Lucretius, Hobs, and others of our trifling Atomists, that it is a wonder he
went no further; and who knows but he may yet be within call, or, at least,
that we may prevent others from being infected with the like Contagion?

Let us now see how far these Philosophers and he are agreed; (...), etc. The
Soul, says Epicurus, is certainly a Body consisting of thin subtle par^s, and
at our dissolution is dissipated, and has no longer the same Faculties, no
motion, nor sense, Diog. Laert. in Epicur. page 281, 282. The same you have
over again in Gassendus's Syntagm. Philos. Epicur. page 136.

And moreover, page 137. Exortum ergo Anima habet, a quo usque ut adolescit,
vigescit que cum corpore, sic tendat oportet ad Interitum, cum eodem senescens,
ac sensim deficiens. That is, The Soul rises, grows, decays, and falls with
the Body. It is needless to tell the Learned, how much Lucretius, and Hobs,
etc. have endeavored to cultivate, and recommend this sort of Philosophy. See
Hobs of the Kingdom of Darkness, Leviath. part. 4. chap. 44. and Gassendus
himself has too much encouraged it. Thus you see how far they are agreed.

Nevertheless there are not wanting in our Author's Book some Concessions,
which I think will be sufficient to overthrow all that part of his Hypothesis,
which savours more of the Epicurean than the Christian: As for Example.

1. He would not be taken for one who denies that there are any Spiritual
Substances, page 6. but rather supposes that the Angels are Immaterial,
Intelligent Spiri^^ page 15. and in this I must acknowledge he is more refined
than Mr. Hobs, who cannot endure to hear of any Substances, but corporeal, and
explodes the rest as mere Phantasmes, and Idols of the Imagination, Leviath.
part. 3. cap. 34. page 208. and so did his Master Epicurus, see Diog. Laert. in
Epicur. page 282. where he endeavors to make us believe, that nothing can be
understood as incorporeal, (...), except a Vacuum, an Inanity, or Empty Space
for Bodies to move in; and therefore, says he, they who say the Soul is
incorporeal, (...), talk vainly. Now, thus far our Author agrees with him, that
the Humane Soul is corporeal, but yet he denies not the Angels to be
immaterial. And this, I say, is somewhat odd, if we consider that the Soul of
man is made to know, love, and delight in God as the Angels themselves are,
(and indeed what can they do that is higher than this?) yet our Author
supposes them to be Immaterial, but the Soul to be no better than corruptible
matter. Surely it is much more rational to say, Ex operationum similitudine
colligi potest similitudo essentiae: Anima autem vim intelligendi, and volendi
cum Angelis habet communem, ergo and (...) essentiae, as Alsted observes, from
the likeness of Ope^^^ion we may gather the likeness of Esse^^e, etc. which
Consideration will weigh the more with those, who consider at how great a rate
the Soul of man was redeemed by him, who took not upon him the Nature of
Angels. And therefore I must take leave to conclude with Mr. B. Nulla mihi
obvia est ratio, quae prohibere videtur, ne Naturam totam mentalem, nobis
notam, Angelorum scilicet and Hominum, ad unam speciem in sensu generaliore,
quasi in classem unam, been redigam. Meth. Theol. part. 1. cap. 4. page 134.

2dly, He owns the Being, and Perfections of the Deity, and speaks with
Reverence of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ.

3dly, He speaks well of the Holy Scriptures, and cites several passages out of
them, which he thinks make for his purpose, and moreover is willing that the
Point of the Soul's Immateriality should be tried by their Authority, page 19.
And therefore I must say, (sans ceremony) if he refuse to submit to the
determination of the Scripture as to the Soul's Immortality, the Appeal which
he has made is no better than trifling Prevarication, ill becoming a
Philosopher, and worse a Christian. And besides, if he imagine that he can
prove the Article of the Resurrection, as laid down in his Position, without
^^e help of Scripture, I think he would do well to give the World a Specimen of
his Transcendent Sagacity in that matter; but if he fly to Scripture-Authority
where it is on his side, it will justly be accounted a piece of Partiality and
Impiety too, if he yield not to it, where it makes against him. In a word, If
the Scripture may be Judge in the case, it will be easy enough to disprove the
former part of his Assertion, viz. That the Soul falls, or dies with the Body:
And again, If he renounce the Scripture, he will never be able to prove the
latter part of it, viz. That the Body rises again at the voice of the
Archangel. So that the two parts of his Hypothesis seem to mix together like
Oil and Water. They want a tertium quid to unite them, which yet must be
neither Reason, nor Scripture.

These things being premised, what I have to say, at present, upon this
occasion, shall be digested into the following Method.

First, I shall evince by plain Scripture Proof, That the Soul of man is
immortal, and does not fall, dye, or perish with the Body. 2dly, I shall prove
the same by the Light of Natural Reason, for the conviction of such as will not
submit to Scripture-Authority. 3dly, I shall show, That the most considerable
amongst the Ancient Philosophers did assert and maintain the Doctrine of the
Soul's Immortality. 4thly, Our Author's Objections shall be considered. 5thly,
Something shall be said to the point of materiality, and immateriality which
our Author harps so much upon. 6thly, Some Directions shall be given to such as
question the Soul's Immorta^ity, that they may arrive at a certainty in this
matter. 7thly, I shall show how those, who believe the Immortality of the Soul,
ought to improve so momentous a Doctrine.
CHAP. II. The Immortality of the Soul proved by Scripture.
SO full and clear is Scripture-Evidence in this matter, that he who owns the
Authority of those Sacred Records, and yet denies the separate subsistence of
the Soul after Death, seems to be as inconsistent with himself, as those
Philosophers against whom Aristotle disputes, Metaph. Lib. 4. who affirmed,
That a thing might be, and not be, at the same time.

I shall therefore under this Head make it appear, That the Scriptures do
frequently speak of the Soul as a Substance distinct from the Body, and capable
of subsisting, acting, and suffering in a state of separation from it; and do
further assure us, That the Souls of good men shall be happy when so separate,
even before the general Resurrection, and final Judgment, and the Souls of
wicked men miserable. For the proof of these things, let us take a view of the
following places of Scripture.

We will begin with the Account of man's Creation at first.

Genesis 1.26. And God said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness, and
let them have dominion, etc. Verse 27. So God created man in his own image, in
the image of God created he him, male and female created he them. Chap. 2.7.
And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul. Where you may
observe,

First, That man was the Masterpiece of God's Workmanship; or the most
excellent Creature of all this lower World. And therefore when all things were
prepared for his happy Subsistence, a Council, as it were, is held about his
Creation, to show us how much the Wisdom of God is displayed, and shines forth
in such a Creature, who is an Epitome of all the World besides.

2dly, He was made in the image of God, after his likeness. Let us therefore
consider wherein this Image may reasonably be supposed to have consisted; and
where shall we seek for it but in the Soul, which is the noblest part of man,
and therefore most fit to be the Subject of the Divine likeness? And there you
may find it, partly in the spiritual, intellectual, Immortal nature of the
Soul; and partly in the holy rectitude of its Faculties. The former was the
natural, the latter the moral, or holy Image of God in man. This was the
health, and perfection of his Nature, some way due to it, considering the end
for which he was made, though not inseparable from it. The Fall defaced it,
Grace repairs it again, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10.

It is therefore absurd to suppose, that the words should be interpreted of
either of these, viz. the Natural, or Moral, so as to exclude the other. A Soul
made of corruptible perishing Matter, is not fit to be called an Image of the
Immortal God; neither is it a capable Subject of those Divine and Holy
Qualifications, which all speak an Immortal Nature in which they are implanted,
and point at a glorious Immortality as their end.

There is another part, also, of the Image of God in Man, and that is the Image
of his Supereminence or Majesty, in that Dominion which God gave him over the
Creatures. But this need not stop us being altogether distinct from the former
(which are principally intended) and mentioned as such. Man was first created
in the Image of God, and then had this Dominion given him. Let us mak^ man in
our image, -- and let him have dominion.

The gross Conceits of the Anthropomorphites I pass by, though the Epicurean is
as stupid as they, who would Circumscribe the Deity with the finite Figure of a
Man. See Creech's Notes on Lucret. page 4.

I only add, If it be Treason to impair or debase the King's Coin which has
his Image, and Superscription upon it; let them look to it, who are not afraid
to vilify, and cast dirt upon the Reasonable Soul, which was created after the
Image of him, who accepts not the persons of Princes.

3dly, It is observable, that the original of the Soul was different from that
of the Body. The one was formed out of pre-existent (created) Matter, the Dust
of the Ground, and so was a dead, unactive thing, till the other, viz. the
Spirit of Life (or Lives, as it is in the Hebrew) was breathed into it by the
Almighty. This was not educed ex potentia materiae, but rather created
immediately, to actuate, and inform the Body which God had prepared for it.
This is Divinae particula aurae, something nobler than the purest Spirits of
the Blood, and therefore under no necessity of perishing, or being dissipated
with them. Which will further appear from the Account which Solomon gives of
man's Dissolution by Death; Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the
earth, as it was, and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it; who is
elsewhere styled the Father of Spirits, and the God of the Spirits of all
flesh. These places do mutually illustrate each other, and confirm the Truth
which I am inferring from them.

There are many other places which speak of the Soul as a Substance distinct
from the Body. Job 14.22. His flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul
within him shall mourn; though Aristotle (as cited by our Author, page 2.)
counts it a great impropriety of speaking, to say the Soul is sorrowful. 2 Cor.
4.16. Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.
It seems then that they do not both perish together in the end, for if so, they
would both together tend alike to perishing in the way. We find also the Soul
distinguished from the Spirit, Heb. 4.12. To the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit; and elsewhere we find these two distinguished from the Body, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23. And I pray God your whole spirit, soul and body, be preserved blameless,
etc. If you look narrowly, and impartially into these places, perhaps you may
find not only a^^ Intellectual Spirit, and a Body, but also the material Soul,
or Spirits which you talk of, that are the vinculum unionis between them, and
the nearer Instruments of the nobler Spirit's Operations. But I proceed.

Matthew. 10.28. Our Blessed Savior assures us, That they which kill the Body
are not able to kill the Soul. But our Author would persuade us, That the Soul
falls, perishes, dies with the Body, page 1, 14, 15. How these will be
reconciled, I am utterly at a loss; Ipse viderit.

2 Cor. 12.1, 2, 3. The Apostle speaking of the Revelations which had been made
to him, viz. That he was caught up into Paradise, or to the Third Heaven, and
heard unspeakable words which it was not lawful, or possible, for a man to
utter; tells us withal, twice over, That whether he was, at that time, in the
body, or out of the body, he could not tell. Whence it is plain, that the
Apostle supposes the Soul capable of subsisting, and acting out of the Body,
or else he would never have questioned whether it was not his own case. But how
easily could our Author have solved this difficulty, and told the Apostle, Sir,
You need not question but your Soul was in the Body, for it cannot act without
bodily Organs. It cannot see without the Eye, etc. page 2. nor probably do or
suffer any thing at all, page 3. So true it is, That vain man would be wise,
that is, be accounted so, Job 11.12. I wonder not that some of the Predecessors
of these Philosophers encountered the Apostle, and some said, What would this
babbler say? Acts 18.17, 18.

I might further add, That the Apostle here does not only suppose that the Soul
can subsist, and act separate from the Body, but that it can act very nobly
too; which will appear, if we consider what Objects were like to be presented
to him in the Third Heaven, whither he was caught up, and what deep impressions
he received from them, retaining the memory of those things when he was in the
Body, which, for ought he knew, were discovered to him when he was out of it.

Phil. 1.21, 22, 23, 24. The Apostle tells the Philippians, that he was in a
strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, (or to be dissolved) and to be
with Christ, which (says he) is far better; i. e. it was more for his present
personal advantage. And this departing he opposes to abiding in the flesh,
which was more needful for them, viz. that they might be farther edified by his
Ministry. Now if the Soul die with the Body, I demand, what does the Apostle
mean by departing, and being with Christ? Did he not enjoy more communion with
Christ before his death, than he can be supposed ever to have enjoyed since, if
his Soul and Body perished together? And why does he say, That to dye is gain
(verse 21.) if by dying he mean sinking into an unactive state? And why does he
oppose departing, and being with Christ, to living, or abiding in the flesh, if
his Soul could not live out of the flesh, nor survive his Body? Again, I ask,
Why the Apostle was in so great a strait, as not knowing what to choose in this
matter? Had he so little regard to the Honor and Interest of his great Master,
so little love to the Service of Christ, and the Souls of men, as to question
whether he should choose to live for the edification of the Church, or fall down
into a dead unactivity? Will you say, that the Troubles and Persecutions which
he met with made him weary of his Life and Work? The Answer is easy, Himself
tells you, that none of those things moved him; that he fainted not; yea he
calls them light Afflictions, and had learnt to rejoice in Tribulations. So
that in short, you may turn and wind which way you will; either what the
Apostle says here has no tolerable sense in it, or your Hypothesis of the
Soul's dying with the Body is absurd, and unchristian.

A parallel place we have 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, to the 9th, where the Apostle
speaks of the dissolution of the earthly tabernacle; and moreover, verse 6.
While we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord; and v. 8. We are
confident, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present
with the Lord. And v. 4. He compares Death to uncloathing. What say you to
this? Cannot a man live when his Clothes are put off, and laid aside? even so
may the Soul when separate from the Body, else the Apostle's Confidence in this
matter was vain. What did you mean to appeal to the Scripture, or so much as to
name it?

The same Truth further appears in the Parable of the rich Sensualist, and
Lazarus, Luke 16.19, etc. whence you may learn the different States of separate
Souls after Death.

Object. But this is no History, but a Parable, and therefore it is absurd to
draw any Arguments from it.

Answ. I readily grant, that there are many Circumstances in Parables which
must not be too far strained, and particularly in this. But yet, I say, it was
designed to instruct, and not to deceive them. Let it therefore be considered,
that either it was the common Opinion amongst the Jews, (the Sadducees
excepted, who were a despised Sect) that the Souls of good men are happy, and
of bad men miserable, when separate from their Bodies, or it was not their
common Opinion. If not, it seems not a thing worthy the Wisdom of our Lord to
establish his Parable upon an Hypothesis contrary to the common belief of the
Jews. For this would be more likely to prejudice them against his Doctrine, as
built upon false, and extravagant Opinions, than to gain upon them.

But if it really was their Opinion, that the Souls of men do subsist, and are
happy, or miserable when separate from their Bodies, etc. then, I say, either
this Opinion was true, or false; if true, it was what I am pleading for; if
false, this Parable was like to confirm them in their Error, and so you reflect
upon him that spoke it. I mention not the Conceit of Tertullian, who will have
Herod and John the Baptist pointed at in it.

Deuteronomy. 34.5, 6. We read that Moses died, and was buried; and yet long after,
Mat. 17. we find that Moses and Elias appeared upon the Mountain talking with
our Savior, when he was transfigured; Therefore something of Moses was alive,
and capable of acting, though his Body was buried.

Again, Exodus 3.6. God styles himself the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob, long after they were dead. And yet our Lord tells the
Sadducees, Matthew. 22.32. That God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living; i. e. their Ruler, Benefactor, and Felicity; a Relation which the Dead
are not capable of, as Mr. B. observes. See his Notes upon the place. Therefore
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were in some sense living, viz. as to their Souls,
though their Bodies were dead. And besides, you must take notice, that the
Sadducees denied not only the Resurrection of the Body, but the Immortality of
the Soul, as Dr. Hammond observes, and that (...) signifies not only the
rising of the Body, but our living after this Life, when the Body is dead: And
so the force of our Savior's Argument is very discernible.

Again, Luke 23.46. our Lord commends his self-resigning Soul into his Father's
hands, having before told the Penitent Thief, To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise; and Stephen dying, prays, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Pray be so
kind as to give the World some satisfactory interpretation of those places, and
reconcile them to the Notion of the Soul's dying with the Body: For I do assure
you, most Christian Interpreters put another sense upon them; and it would be a
piece of Charity to undeceive them, if you know how; and when your hand is in,
pray write down that the Apostle meant, where he speaks of the spirits of just
men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. If by perfection you mean sleep, dissipation,
death, or perishing, you must make us a new Dictionary, which may also tell us
what your Notion of Blessedness is, that so we may know how to interpret those
words of St. John, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord --
and their works to follow, or rather accompany, them, (...), Vide Pol. Synops.
And also what Solomon means, Prove. 14.32. The righteous has hope in his death.

It is easy to produce much more Scripture Proof to establish the Doctrine of
the Soul's Immortality, or to enlarge more upon what has been already offered.
But thus much may suffice for those who are ready to submit to the Rules and
Authority of Scripture, and to be tried by them, and with open arms to accept,
and embrace the Truth, as our Author speaks, page 19. But there is no Truth so
sacred, no Evidence so clear, which perverse Wranglers will not seek to evade,
and wrest, though they do it to their own destruction. What can be more clear
against the obstinate Jews than that memorable Prophesy, Genesis 49.10. The
scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh come. And yet they have no less than Twenty six Answers for it.
See Taylor's Liberty of Prophesying, page 80. Thus the late Infamous Mr. Hobs
everywhere abuses the Scripture, with a Profanation not inferior to the
denying of it. And so do those of the Church of Rome, Socinians, Enthusiasts,
and others. See John 3.20, 21.

CHAP. III. The Immortality of the Soul proved by such Arguments as are drawn
from the light of Natural Reason, and the common Sense and Experience of
Mankind. The First Argument.
WE come now to the proof of the Immortality of the Soul, by such Arguments as
are proper for the conviction of those Persons, who will not acknowledge the
Authority of the Scripture; and they are drawn either from those Faculties and
Powers wherewith the Soul is endued; or from the gross and dangerous
Absurdities that flow from the contrary Opinion. Under each of those general
Heads of Argument several particulars will be necessarily comprehended.

Argum. I. The noble Faculties, and Capacities of the Soul, argue that its
Original is higher than our Author is willing to allow of, and that its Nature
is immortal. The excellency of any Substance must be known by the Faculties,
Virtues, or Powers radicated in it, and the excellency of those Faculties by
the Acts proceeding from them, which connotes, or takes in the Objects about
which those Acts are conversant. Talis est cujusque rei Natura qualis est ejus
Operatio, or, if you will, Operari sequitur esse, the being of things is the
root of their working. As they are more or less noble, so are their Acts; and
the Natures of all things are suited to the Ends and Uses for which they are
designed by the All-wise Contriver. Thus from the Influences, Operations, and
Effects of the Sun, we boldly conclude, that its Nature is more noble than that
of a Clod.

First, It is manifest that the Nature of the Soul is very vigorous and
sprightly. Its vital, active Power works ad intra, both in the Operations of
the Intellect, and Will; and ad extra, as excited by the Imperium of the Will.
How quick are the flights of our Thoughts into the uttermost Regions of the
Earth? How speedily do they compass Sea, and Land, and, not content with such a
Circuit, soar aloft, and lose themselves in forming Notions of imaginary Spaces
beyond the Coelum Empyraeum it self, and by and by are got as low as the very
Center of the Earth? And all this in the twinkling of an Intellectual Eye? With
what facility, and briskness can it turn it self from one Object ^o another;
and instead of being weary, delights it self in these sportful Vagaries, which
are as agreeable to its active Nature, as it is for Matter to lie still, in a
drooping senseless, unactive State? Insomuch that some good Philosophers think
that the Soul is constantly in action, without which they suppose the cessation
of its Essential form would be inferred.

And it is a great question, whether the nature of Habits (which has puzzled so
many thinking men) lies not much in some unobserved Acts, which the Soul has
intrinsecally, and in the depth of it, of which we are not conscious, till some
further Acts proceed from them, which take in more of Corporeity, and Animal
Spirits.

However, we are sure, that when the use and exercise of our Senses are
interrupted by natural Sleep, the Soul is often at work, and its Reasonings
sometimes as lofty, and solid in Dreams, as when we are awake, and, it may be,
more. Whence an Ancient Philosopher thought, that men's dreaming when asleep,
was an intimation that they should live when dead. And the Peripateticks (as
Aelian tells us, Var. Hist. lib. 3 cap. 11.) supposed that the Soul was more
sagacious, and its. Apprehensions more Prophetic in Dreams, than in the
daytime when taken up with serving, and caring for the Body. And the Stoics,
of old, thought, that Sleep was familiare, and domesticum Oraculum.

However, it is evident from all this, that the Nature of the Soul is very
active. Hence Porphyry argues, That for the Soul to die, is for life it self to
die, or for that which is, per essentiam, life to cease to be what it is. And
Cicero Tusc. quaest. lib. 1.336. Nulla est celeritas quae possit cum animi
celeritate contendere; and from this Consideration, amongst others, concludes
it must needs be immortal.

But there is one thing more under this Head which I must not pass by, viz.
That strength, and solidity of Judgment which is many times observable in dying
Persons, notwithstanding the languishing of their material Animal Spirits; now
here I demand, If the Soul be nothing else but the purer parts of the Blood
separated, inflamed, and made lucid in the Brain, how comes it to pass, that
when the Senses grow dull, and the Spirits low, Reason does not always equally
decline with them? If any of those Material Spirits be more pure, and volatile,
and so apter to be dissipated than the rest, one would think it should be the
reasoning part, and therefore that the decay should always begin there. But we
find quite contrary, that the Rational workings of the Soul are, many times,
raised above the usual pitch, when the Animal Spirits are almost dissipated and
gone, or however extremely enfeebled. Which made Heraclitus say, That the Soul
goes out of the Body as Lightning out of a Cloud, because it is many times
clearest in its conceptions, when taking its flight from this Prison.

This helped to perfect the late Earl of Rochester's Persuasion of the Soul's
Immortality, viz. When Sickness had brought him so near Death, and his Spirits
were so low and spent, that he could not move nor stir, and did not think he
should live an hour; yet he observed that his Reason and Judgment were so
strong and clear, that from hence he was fully persuaded that Death was not the
Spending or Dissolution of the Soul, but only the Separation, of it from
Matter. See his Life, page 20, 21.

And, it may be, that which we call a Lightning before Death, arises from some
sprightly efforts of the Soul (finding it self loosening from Matter) shaking
off its Fetters, and hastening to be quite disentangled. But this brings me to
a second Particular.

2dly, The Understanding is a very noble* Faculty, eager in its pursuits after
Knowledge, searching into Objects far enough remote from Matter, and above the
Sphere of Sense. It has a natural Bias and inclination to Truth as its object,
and embraces it with unspeakable delight when it has found it. Contemplative
Persons know this to be true, which makes them so unwearied in their Studies,
and pleased with any discoveries they can make for the advancement of
Knowledge. This made diverse of the Ancient Philosophers travel into remote
Countries, that they might converse with Learned Men, and glean up any
Fragments of Knowledge wherever they could find them. So did Apollonius,
Plato, Pythagoras, Thales, etc. and the Queen of Sheba came from the uttermost
Parts of the Earth, to hear the Wisdom of Solomon. Seneca thought that Man
buried alive who lived without Books. And Lipsius thought himself on the top of
Olympus, when he read Seneca* Aristippus thought a Man had better be a Beggar
than unlearned, Laert. in Arist. 50. And what unaccountable delight had Julius
Scaliger in Lu^^^ who ^^ought twelve Verses in him better than all the German
Empire? So ravishing are intellectual Pleasures.

Impressions from without are made upon the Organs of Sense, various, according
to the variety of Objects, and hence correspondent Ideas are formed in the
Imagination, and laid up in the Memory. But there is something higher, which
sports it self with these Phantasms, compounds, and divides them at pleasure,
and makes new ones out of them, as of Centaurs, Sirens, little Boys with Wings,
and what the Painter pleases, which have no pattern in rerum natura, to answer
them. What is it which, abstracting from the individuating Circumstances of
singular Beings, forms universal Notions, entia Rationis, inadequate
Conceptions of those beings, and so rangeth the World of Entities under the
several Species to which they belong, by observing wherein they agree or differ
from each other, and considering their mutual Analogies and Respects? What is
that which withdraws the Imagination from attending the Organs of Sense,
insomuch, that a Person intent upon his Studies, is sometimes as if h^ (...) in
a Dream, though awake, (...) not what you say to hi^ (...) the Time goes on,
though the Clock strike near him? What is it that from suitable Premises infers
certain Conclusions, and thus argues it self into a firm assent to many things
above the discovery of Sense, yea and contrary to sensible appearance? Of which
more hereafter.

And what say you to Mathematical Speculations? how far are they beyond the
reach of Sense or Imagination? The Ingenious Descartes, in his Sixth Meditation
de Prima Philosophia, sets himself to examine the difference betwixt
Imagination, and pure Intellection, and thus proceeds; I can imagine a
Triangle, as distinctly as if I saw it, and with some more difficulty a
Pentagone; but when I come to consider a Figure with a thousand, or ten
thousand Angles, I can form no such distinct Idea of it in my Imagination, and
yet I can easily understand that such a Figure there may be, as well as either
of the other; and so he goes on. Thus you see how soon the Imagination is
jaded, and tired out, but the Understanding can demonstrate the Properties of
those several Figures, and argue it self into a satisfactory assurance of many
Mathematical Truths, which at first seem extravagant, and unreasonable. And
ho^e it spends upon its own (...) and deaves Sense, and Imag^^^^ (...) it and
many of the Precepts of Geometry are utterly unimitable in the purest matter
that Phansy can imagine: And yet with what unspeakable satisfaction does the
Mind acquiesce in these Demonstrations so abstract from matter, and
incompetible to it? And when it has thus by abstraction (as it were) unbodied
them, it takes them for its own, and has a perfect understanding of them, and
makes both Sense and Imagination know their distance; and if they will be too
busy, it silenceth and controlls them by its Sovereign Power; and pursues its
search with so much earnestness, that it knows not how to give over. Hence the
Mathematical Sciences are called (...), the Purifications of the Reasonable
Soul. Archimedes was so intent upon it, that when the City was taken, he
observed it not; and when the Soldier (that killed him) came into the Room
where he was busy at it, he bids him have a care of disordering his Figure.

It were easy to enlarge much on this Particular; but I am very confident, that
no Mathematician, who seriously considers what hi^ (...) ^^s, when intent upon
Demons^^^^ (...) possibly persuade himself (...) a piece of folly, as (...)
^^^^le Wheat-meal, in two or three days time, should become capable of such
Speculations as these. It were every jot as irrational, as to conclude with the
Comedian, That if the Blood of an Ass was transfused into a Virtuoso, there
would be small difference between the Emittent Ass, and the Recipient
Philosopher. Shadwell.

But follow me a little further, and you shall see yet greater things than
these. The Understanding is not satisfied with the knowledge of lower, or less
important Truths, but it rises up from visible Effects to the invisible
Causes, and Springs of Action, and rests not till it come to the Ens Entium,
the Cause of Causes, the Fountain of Being, and so contemplates him who is,
(...), One, and Truth it self, as Plato speaks, Crit. page 57. It considers its
Relation to God, its Dependence upon him, its Duty to him. It understands moral
Good and Evil, Right and Wrong, Virtue and Vice, which fall not under the Laws
of Matter and Motion. It studies the Nature of Spiritual Substances, ad intimas
rerum Spiritualium quidditates penetrat, aut penetrare contendit. Scheibler's
Metaph. ^^b. ^ ^^g. 272. (...), etc. (...) of the Understanding differ (...)
sensible Objects, as the I (...) ^om Sense, Max. Tyr. Dissert. 1. page 9. We
have many abstracted Notions and Idea's of immaterial things, which depend not
on Bodily Figures: And in what Subject can these Notions be lodged, but in one
that is Immaterial? Therefore, I say, Si renunciatur tanto bono Immortalitatis,
etc. If we renounce the Immortality of the Soul, so great a good, we must also
renounce our Wit, Reason, and Mind, by which we are Immortal, Lud. Viv. de ver.
Fidei. Lib. 1. page 147.

And now let the whole Herd of our Epicurean Novelists (who cry up the
unconceivable power of Matter, and Motion) muster up their Forces, and fairly
deduce from the Principles of their Hypothesis, a rational, intelligible
account of those Operations of the Intellect, which are so spiritual, and
abstract from Matter. What say you? Can Matter and Motion contemplate the
Glorious Attributes of God? Can a Spiritual Object be apprehended without a
Spiritual Act? And can such an Act be produced without a Spiritual Power? And
can such a Power be radicated in mere Matter ^^^^^^r modified, or moved? Must
(...) be an Analogy between the (...) the Object? Can any Eye (...) ^^^h is
spiritual, and In^^^ (...) ^ho is a Spirit, and Invisible? Can Matter and
Motion contemplate that Perfection, which excludes all Corporeal Imperfection?
Is not this to act extra Sphaeram? Does not Aristotle himself (in whose
supposed Authority you seem to glory) tell you, That the Understanding is made
one with the Object understood? which yet must be interpreted cum grano salis.
No wonder if those who have gross material conceptions of their own Souls, be
suspected of Atheism it self, as Epicurus was; of whom Cicero says, he did
nomine poncre, re tollere, Deos, in word confess, but in effect deny a Deity.

And why do you not answer Dr. Stillingfleet's Demands, Origin. Sacr. page 416.
Can Atoms dispute whether there be Atoms or no? And whether the Soul be
corporeal or no? Can Atoms frame Syllogisms in Mood and Figure? Can mere Matter
argue pro and con, whether it be Matter, or something else?

Or if these Questions be too hard for you, why do you not accept the Challenge
which Scaliger, Sennertus, and others have given you, and tell the World how
Matter and Motion can produce even Sense it self, which is (...) ^^ior Nature?
What poor cont^^ (...) ^ork do Lucretius, Gassendus, (...) ^^e rest of your
Tutors mak^ (...) to solve these Phenomenon in a Mechanical way? Nil dat quod
non habet.

3dly, The self-determining power of the Will, its Acts and Objects, do further
argue that the Soul is of a Spiritual and Immortal Nature. This is that Faculty
which chooses, refuses, or suspends its Acts, as Objects appear, and are
estimated good, or evil, or of doubtful consideration. This renders a man
capable of moral Government by Laws, with their annexed Sanctions, Promises,
Threatenings, etc. This Faculty is the first Subject of Moral Good or Evil. The
whole Frame of Government. All Legislation, Judgment and Execution, Rewards and
Punishments depend upon it. And as the Understanding pursues Truth, so does the
Will Goodness; and if at any time it wills Evil, it is sub ratione boni,
under the appearance or notion of Good, in some respect or other. An
inclination to Happiness is essential to its Nature; neither can it be
satisfied with sensible, material; corruptible Objects, but mounts higher, and
reaches forth after Spiritual and Divine things, and can never rest till it
center upon the Infinite Good, the Blessed God himself. Fecisti nos ad te, O^
^^^equietum est cor nostrum donec requies^^ (...), August. Confess. lib. 1.
cap. 1. Thou have made us for Thy self, and our heart is restless till it rest
in Thee. So, Lib. 4. cap. 10. Quaquaversum se vertit Anima hominis, ad dolores
figitur alibi, praeterquam in Te. Which way soever the Soul of man turns, it
can meet with nothing but grief, till it rest in God. Hi motus animorum, at que
haec certamina. -- Now I would ask those Philosophers (for so they yet affect
to be called) with whom I have to do, How they will explain the Liberty of the
Will by the Laws of Matter and Motion? (of which more under another Head.) And
if the Soul be nothing else but the purer Spirits of the Blood, mere perishing
matter, how comes it to pass that material, corruptible Objects will not
satisfy its Desires? There is in every thing so great a tendency to union with
its like, that it is become even a Proverb, like to like, simile gaudet simili,
Earth to Earth, Water to Water, etc. And if the Soul be made of corruptible,
perishing Matter, how is it, that it so stretches it self beyond its compass,
and will not rest in Objects like it self, but must needs be aspiring after
Immortality, and will not be satisfied with the Sphere which they have assigned
to it, but is for ^^^^^rsing with the invisible World of Spirits, and cannot
rest, but in the Infinite, Eternal Good. Certissimum est signum, etc. It is
(says one) a most certain sign that the Nature of the Soul does excel all
perishing things, because none of those things can be found which will not in
time grow vile, and insipid to it: Alsted. Its Divine Tendencies and Flights
speak its Extraction and Duration too.

4thly, The Power which the Soul has of reflecting upon its own Acts, both as
to their Nature and Morality, is a further proof of its Spiritual, Immortal
Being. It not only understands, but knows that it does so. It contemplates and
reflects upon its own Contemplation. It can form Arguments, and then examine
and weigh the strength of them. It can sift its own Notions, and consider what
may be objected against them, and fortify it self against these Objections.
Thus it improves it self in the knowledge of Truth, and then reflects upon the
improvements which it has made. It can retire from its commerce with external
Objects, and take a view of its own essential Powers and Virtues. And indeed we
cannot know what our Souls are, but by these (...), their circular and reflex
Motions, and converse with themselves, which only can steal from them their own
Secrets, as a Learned Man observes, -- Smith, of the Immortality of the Soul.
And if any doubt of this reflective Power, his very doubting is enough to prove
it, for he could not doubt, but by Reflection upon himself, as Dr.
Stillingfleet.

And what say you to the mighty power of Natural Conscience, which reflects
upon our Acts under a Moral Consideration; compares them with the Law, accuses
or excuses, raises Storms, or speaks Peace, and so is in part an Executioner,
as well as a Witness, and a Judge. How bitterly does Tiberius complain of the
lashes it gave him, as Tacitus imforms us? and so does Suetonius, and Dion
Cassius. The like may be said of Otho, Jugurtha, and many more: -- Prima est
haec ultio, quod se
Judice nemo nocens absolvitur.
Juv. Thus you see how Conscience gives Men a foretast of what is like to come
after, whether they will or no. Insomuch that the greatest pleasures of the
Soul, and its most piercing troubles, are from Moral Causes. And, what have
Matter and Motion in them, that can rationally be supposed adequate to such
effects as these, yea, or so much as to the production of a thought? Debate
this Point impartially and closely with your own Faculties, and (I had almost
said) think so meanly of the Soul if you can.

Is it possible that any Man in his wits should believe, that the Notions of
Moral Good and Evil, the remorse of a bad Conscience, and the joys of a good
one, should proceed from nothing else, but the shufflings and cuttings of the
spirituous Parts of the Blood up and down the Cavities and Ventricles of the
Brain? Nothing can be imagined more absurd, unless it be that the World also
was made by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms, which is the height of Nonsense
and Extravagancy.

5thly, The Soul has a power of rectifying those mistakes to which an
over-credulous regard to Sense and Imagination too often betrays us. Thus
Reason boldly concludes, that the Oar is straight, though, when part of it is
under Water, it appears crooked, because of the Refraction of Rays through a
double Medium of unequal Tenuity; and that Snow is white, though when the Eye
is affected with bilious Humors in the Jaundice, it seems yellow; and that the
Heads of our Antipodes are as erect as our own, whatever our imagination
obstinately suggests to the contrary. Now, if the Mind was of the same nature
with the corporeal Faculties, their Judgment would be uniform. Therefore, how
much soever Matter and Motion may be concerned in these erroneous Impressions
which are made upon our Senses and Imaginations, it must needs be some nobler
Principle in us which supplies these defects, and corrects the Errors which
proceed from them. Can Matter and Motion make such gross mistakes, and rectify
them when it has done? This is to act above it self, to do and undo, and is
altogether unconceivable and incredible to those, who will not be imposed upon
by an empty sound of words. If you cannot explain the manner of Sensation it
self by mere Matter and Motion, how will you solve those Phenomenon which
transcend the power both of Sense and Imagination? What is that in Man which
will not form its judgment of things according to the rude Votes of the Senses,
but consults some clearer Principle within it self? Speak to the, purpose or
not at all.

6thly, The Soul has a Power of restraining and controlling the inordinate
Efforts of the material Animal Spirits; which argues that it is a Substance
distinct from them. The frequent Conflicts between Reason, and the sensitive
Appetite, fully prove, that there is in Man a Power superior to that of Matter
and Motion.

The material Animal Spirits are much concerned in the disorders of Passion and
Concupiscence. But, what is that Regent Predominant Principle which condemns
and checks these unruly Motions of the brutish Appetite, and chooses sometimes
the most distastful things to Sense, yea, and can give the Body to be burned
for high and weighty Reasons, notwithstanding all the Recoils and Tumults of
the Material Animal Spirits, and uses the Body as its Instrument to serve its
own Will and Pleasure? What can this be, but the Rational Intellectual Spirit,
which is capable of subsisting without the Body, or else would never so consent
to its Destruction?

But on the other hand, when the Soul of a Man is so immersed in Sensuality,
that it lets loose the Reins to Lust and Appetite, and forgets its own. Dignity
and Prerogative, we justly say the Beast rules, and not the Man. And I believe
it will prove at last, that the Soul must be accountable to its Maker for such
mismanagement, and so gross a neglect of its Duty.

To conclude this Argument. If both the Sensitive and Intellectual Powers arise
from no higher a Spring than Matter and Motion, How come these Material Spirits
so to struggle one with another, and one part of them side with Reason, the
other fight against it? If you think all this is nothing else but the striving
of the ambitious Particles of Matter for superiority and pre-eminence, you may
think so still for me. I am not at leisure to fight with Shadows.

7thly, There is in the Soul a natural apprehension of its own Immortality; and
by this God rules the World, who needs not, will not rule it in a way of
deceit. The belief of the Souls capacity of subsisting in a state of Separation
from the Body, is so apt to insinuate it self into the minds of Men, and has
been so generally received and entertained in the World, that it may justly be
reckoned amongst the Notitiae Communes, or natural Notions, which are imprinted
upon the minds of Men by the Author of Nature. It Is a Notion which has endured
the Test of all Ages, and still prevailed. Good Men believe and rejoice in it.
Bad Men cannot shake off the fears of it. Those that are of contrary Factions,
Opinions, and Interests in other respects, are yet agreed in this, That the
Soul is Immortal. The illiterate Vulgar, who are guided by the more simple
Dictates of Nature, have more deep impressions of this great truth, than some
of the Learned themselves, who by their laborious trifling have disputed
themselves into greater Ignorance, and raised Devils, which they have not the
Wit or Honesty to lay again. Not only the Civilized Greeks and Romans, but the
Barbarous Scythians, Indians, etc. have believed it: And what Salmasius says
upon another account, [de Coma] is as applicable to the matter in hand. Quanto
magis Barbari, tanto felicius faciliusque Naturam Ducem sequi putantur. Eam
detorquent, aut ab ea magis recedunt politiores Gentes.

The most Eminent of the Philosophers (who have taken pains to cultivate their
Understandings, and to rescue them from the mistakes which Education, Example,
or Inconsiderateness had betrayed them to) have still seen Reason to stand up
for this great Truth, except a few self-conceited Epicure^ns (who have been the
scorn and byword of all the rest) and the Sadducees, whom the Jewish Writers
reckon among them. Cicero observes, that there is in the minds of Men, Quasi
saeculorum quoddam augurium futurorum, Tusc. Qu. lib. 1.331. A kind of presage
of a future World.

Moreover, these Persons who have endeavored to run down the Notion of the
Soul's Immortality, have not been able to avoid the force of it in their own
Breasts, nor to secure themselves from the fear of what might befall them in a
State of Separation from the Body, finding something within themselves, which
bore witness to the Truth, in despite of their stupid Opposition. And what
Seneca says of Atheists, may be applied to these Men, viz. That though in the
daytime, and in company, they may with some show of confidence deny the
Immortality of the Soul; yet in the Night, when they are alone, sibi dubitant,
they are full of doubts about it.

The Giant, Epicurus, of whom Lucretius says, He was the first man who durst
fight against Heaven, Lib. 1. de Natura rerum, was himself as fearful, as any
man, of those things which he denied were to be feared, viz. Death, and the
Deity. As Cicero observes, de Nature. Deor. Lib. 1. and so you find him arguing
in Laertius, That Death is not a thing to be jested with, Vid. Laert. in
Epicur. 297. Whence the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet observes, How hard it is for
an Epicurean to silence his Conscience, after he has prostituted it; for
(whatever there be in the Air) there is (says he) an Elastical power in
Conscience, that will bear it self up, notwithstanding the weight that is laid
upon it, Orig. Sacr. 365.

And it is very observable, that our Author himself, though page 15. he says
positively, That by Death the man's Faculty of thinking is certainly destroyed;
yet else where he speaks more dubiously, page 3, 11, 12.

The Minds of such Persons (says my Lord Bacon) are always wavering, and
unsatisfied, never able to smother the inbred consciousness of their
Immortality, so as not to have continual suggestions of fear and scruple.

Have you not heard of some such Persons who durst not be alone in the Night?
of others, who durst not go to sleep without a Candle burning by them?

And it is further observable, how desirous men are that their Names should be
had in remembrance when they are dead, which is but the degeneracy of that
nobler Inclination which the Soul has to Immortality it self. Thus Epicurus
appointed in his Last Will, that his Birthday should be celebrated every Year,
( Laert. page 271.) pleasing himself with a vain shadow of Immortality, while
he despised the thiag it self.

Now I ask, If the Soul be nothing but some of the more spirituous parts of the
Blood, and must die, perish, or fall with the Body; how comes it to pass that
it has such forcible Apprehensions, such an indelible Consciousness of its own
Immortality? How comes this Notion to be so general, as you have heard; if it
proceed not from the common Dictate of Reason, acting alike in all Mankind,
though they know not one another's minds? and if it be from Nature, how can it
be vain or false?

How come these little Particles in the Brain to dance themselves into a Notion
so foreign to their Nature? yea, or so much as to start a Question about it?
How comes that, which according to our Author's Notion ( page 10.) was no
better than Wheat-meal, or Malt the other day, to phansy it self immortal to
day? surely it is well improved in a very little time. Si in nobis nihil esset
nisi corporeum, and caducum, unde orta esset nobis ea dubitatio, aut omnino
cogitatio de aeternis and incorporeis, magis quam belluis? Omnis enim cogitatio
(N.B.) aut ab objectis orta est, aut interii^s ex nobis ipsis suppullulat,
Vallesius de sacra Philos. page 74. But this brings me to the Second General
Argument.

CHAP. IV. Argum. II. Drawn from the many gross Absurdities which follow from
the Opinion of the Soul's dying with the Body.
Arg. II. THERE is such a monstrous Train of Absurdities which follow our
Author's Opinion, as renders it altogether incredible. If it were true, nothing
but Truth could rationally be inferred from it. Ex vero nil nisi verum. There
is a concatenation of Truths. They are linkt one to another, and so are their
Contraries. But I come to Particulars.

First, If our Author's Hypothesis be true, no man is the same this year (not
to say this Week) that he was the last. Individuation, Personality, Rewards,
Punishments, Rights and Properties, are strangely overthrown.

The Matter of the Body is in a continual flux, daily dissipated by insensible
Transpiration, etc. (of which see Dr. Glisson, Charlton's OEconomia, and
especially Sanctorii Medicin. Static.) and still recruited by fresh supplies
from the nourishment we take in: And the like may be said of the Material,
Animal Spirits; these are continually spending, and new ones made of new Blood:
So that according to this Notion, our Author has not the same Soul this Week
that he had the last, nor perhaps the least particle of Matter about him the
same that it was twenty years ago. If he say he was born Heir to any part of
his Estate, I must tell him, he is not the same Person, either Soul, or Body,
that was born Seventy years since, therefore he may either relinquish his
Opinion, or his Right to his Estate, whether he pleases. Some more permanent
thing than Matter, and Motion, must be fixed on, to make the Man the same. If
you say, That some of the more solid parts of the Body, as Bones, Cartilages,
etc. may have remained all the while, and so fix the Principle of Individuation
there. I answer, It Is pity the World was not acquainted with so improving a
Notion sooner, for we have not yet learned to call the Bones the Man.

How much better were it to say with the Platonists, Anima cujusque est
quisque, as Marsilius Ficinus argues in his Comment upon Plato's Convivium.
Quis usque adeo demens erit, ut hominis appellationem in nobis firmissimam
corpori fluenti semper, and undique permutato, potius quam animo stabilissimo,
tribuat? page mihi 264. And to the same purpose speaks Cicero, Tusc. Qu. lib.
1. Cum igitur, nosce te, dicit, hoc dicit, nosce animum tuum, nam corpus quidem
quasi vas est, aut aliquod animi receptaculum: Ab animo tuo quicquid agitur, id
agitur a te, page 340. And to this Descartes agrees, Meditat. Quart. de prima
Philosophia, Natura cogitans quae in me est, vel potius, quae ego ipse sum,
page 22. So the Scripture speaks of the Soul as the Man, and of the Body as its
Clothing, 2 Cor. 5.4. It was a notable Speech of Heraclitus, (...), etc. A man
cannot enter twice into the same River, expressing thereby the constant flux of
Matter. The Application is easy. But I proceed.

Only one thing more I would add under this Head; If the Soul be only the
material Spirits separated from the Blood, and refined in the Brain, and these
Spirits be daily evaporating, and new ones coming in their room; how comes it
to pass that our Memories are not quite destroyed and confounded by those new
Spirits which come in to fill up that vacuity which was made by the departure
of the old? Can the new Spirits know what the old were, or did, which went
before them? why do you not answer Plotinus, who tells you, (...), etc. This
new Stranger-like Soul would* always be ignorant of what the other before it
knew. And especially tell me whence it is that Old men, after so many changes
of their material Spirits, and so vast a number of Idea's which have been
imprinted upon their Imaginations, will yet better remember some little Actions
of their Childhood, than many later Passages of their more manly years, which
are better worth remembering?

To this purpose argues Dr. More. The last Faculty (says he) that I will
consider, is Memory, which is also necessarily joined with the rest in the
common Percipient; of which not only the fluidity of parts, but also their
dissipability, makes the Animal Spirits utterly incapable. For certainly, the
Spirits, by reason of their Subtilty, and Activity, are very dissipable, and in
all likelihood remain not the same for the space of a Week together; and yet
things that one has not thought of for many years, will come as freshly into a
man's mind, as if they were transacted but yesterday. See his Immortality of
the Soul, page 87.

2dly, If our Author's Opinion be true, there can be no such thing as Moral
Good or Evil among men: For the natural liberty of the Will is destroyed. If
there be no superior Principle in Man to correct the Irregularities of the
Material Spirits, and their motions, Man is not a capable Subject of being
governed by Laws in a moral way; and where there is no law, there is no
transgression. The freedom of the Will can never be reconciled to, or
explicated by, the rigid Laws of Matter and Motion; but all our Actions must
either arise from the fortuitous dances and friskings of Atoms up and down the
Brain and Nerves, or else be necessitated by the irresistible impulse of some
Superior Cause, and so there is a fatal determination which sits upon the
Wheels of these Corporeal Motions. And thus Mr. Hobs will have it, That our
Volitions are necessitated by Superior or Natural Causes, as much as any motion
in a Clock or Watch; and that it is unconceivable that any Act, or mode of Act,
can be without a necessitating Efficient Cause. Thus he also affirms a certain
connection betwixt all our Thoughts, and a necessary Fate in all things. If this
be true, we must no more say, that the Will cannot be compelled, but rather,
that it is always so; and by consequence, the man that kills another is no more
blameworthy, than the Sword wherewith he kills him, both their Motions being
alike necessitated; and the Dog acts philosophically when he bites the Stone,
but considers not the Hand that threw it. Neither is it to any more purpose to
persuade men to Virtue, than it would be to make a Learned Discourse of Harmony
to a Lute, instead of putting it in Tune. As you like these Consequences, you
shall have more of them at another opportunity. If you say your Opinion is not
so gross as that of Mr. Hobs's, I answer, it had ill hap to be so like it. Your
words are, (page 2.) We see in a Musical Organ every Pipe has its proper sound,
and function, and the same Breath acts them all, and therein appears a great
effect and power of Matter and Motion rightly fabricated and acted by the hand
of Artists; and what then may not God do with them, and by them, when he
pleases? So that if our Material Spirits be inordinate in their motions, you
are in a ready way to make God the Author of sin, by your Philosophy.

It were much better to say with Cicero [ Sentit animus se moveri; quod cum
sentit, illud una sentit, se vi sua, non aliena, moveri; nec accidere posse ut
ipse unquam a se deseratur; Ex quo efficitur aeternitas, etc. Tusc. Qu. lib.
1.341.] so be it, we overlook not the Universal concourse of the First Cause
with his Creatures, but in a way suitable to their Natures.

3dly, If the Hypothesis which I am writing against, be true, no man can
rationally believe a Future State of Retribution. You have heard already how
Individuation and Personality are overthrown by it, and by consequence there
can be no just room for Rewards and Punishments hereafter, because the Person
when he died had not the same Soul that he had a month before; and why should
one Soul be punished for another's Crimes, and that other go free?

Our Author indeed owns the Articles of the Resurrection, and Future Judgment
('it is likely to serve a turn); but what he builds up with one hand, he pulls
down with the other. He says, That Soul and Body, as they fall together, so
shall rise again together. Whereupon Judgment, Rewards and Punishments shall
ensue, according as men have behaved themselves in this present world, page 6.

But the difficulty returns upon him; Why should that Soul, which, according to
his Hypothesis, was no better than a little Wheat Flour, Malt, or, it may be,
some Cordial Julap or other, a few days before the man died, be judged and
punished for all the Faults which were committed long since? Will you say that
all the rest are past by? and that he is only accountable for the Sins of the
last Week, or ten Days of his Life? This would be to turn the Solemnity of the
Resurrection and Final Judgment into a mere piece of Pageantry.

Moreover, the Doctrine of the Resurrection cannot be known but by Supernatural
Revelation, and therefore it is an Article of mere Belief. There is much in it
above the reach of Natural Reason, and therefore I ask, What must the poor
Heathens do, who know not that God has revealed any such thing? Are they
obliged to believe, and prepare for a Future State, or no? If you say they are
not, they themselves will contradict you; and so will the Scripture too, which
makes them inexcusable for their neglects, Romans 1.20. and that they could not
be, if there lay not upon them an obligation to the contrary Duties.

If you say they are so obliged, you will be ill set to prove it according to
your Hypothesis. For if the Soul die with the Body, and the Resurrection cannot
be proved by Natural Reason, how shall they believe without Objective Evidence?
It Is true, they commonly assert a Future State of Retribution, and ground their
belief of it upon the Immortality of the Soul, which, if your Opinion be
admitted, is an unsound Foundation. Whence it appears, that Natural Light
taught them better things, than you have learnt from Supernatural and it
together. And whatever uncertain hints may be found in any of their Writings,
as to the Resurrection (derived perhaps by Tradition from the Jews, or inserted
afterward by the pious Frauds (as they call them) of some well-meaning
Christians) we are sure they speak solidly, and distinctly concerning the
Soul's Immortality.

4thly, Our Author's Hypothesis makes such a sudden descent from the Angelical
Spirits, to mere matter and motion, (denying all the active Natures that are
between) as is absurd, and not to be endured: Such Jumps as these are not usual
in Nature, which is wont to act by due and orderly Gradations, and not to take
precipitous leaps from one extreme to another. He would not be thought to deny
that there are Immaterial, Intelligent, Angelical Spirits, page 6, 15. And how
unreasonable is it to suppose, that there are no other Spirits, or active
Natures, inferior to the Angels, and differing in their several kinds and
degrees of Perfection and Virtue from each other, answerable to the several
Operations whereunto they are designed by the Author of Nature? But that all
the great and wonderful Phanemena, which we daily behold, must be reduced to,
and solved by the supposed power of Matter and Motion.

How much does the Wisdom of God shine forth in that admirable variety which is
observable in the visible Corporeal World? And are not spiritual or active
Natures as noble as Bodies? Why then should there not be a proportionable
variety in the Spiritual, Invisible World? Especially when we observe such
Vistigia or Images of the higher Natures, in those that are lower. Thus there
is something in Plants like Sense, and in Bruits like Reason, and in Men there
is somewhat which resembles the Deity. Must we therefore say, that God and the
Creature are all one? Or must we confound the inferior Orders of Creatures with
those that are Superior, and deny those active Natures which animate the
visible World, and distinguish one Species of Creatures from another? While we
cry up the mere sound of Matter and Motion. Dubium quidem nullum est
immaterialem Mundum essentiarum varietate intelligibilium, aeque admirabilem
and augustum esse, atque mundum corporeum videmus; sed in quo illa consistat
Diversitas nobis indicio certo non percipitur; says a Modern Metaphysician.
Ritschel Metaph. page mihi 43. See also Mr. Glanvill's Sadducismus Triumphatus,
page 78. Our Author has told you what Dr. More and Mr. Baxter have said in this
matter, but for reasons best known to himself, says not a word to answer their
Arguments. And it is no contemptible Observation of the Platonists, which a
late Author takes notice of, viz. They observe, That the Unity of the World is
so closely combined in all its parts, that between the Superior and Inferior
Species there are middle Natures wherein they meet, that no Vacuum might
interpose in the Series of things. And to Man they give the name of Horizon, as
uniting the Superior and Inferior Natures together; in some respects nearly
allied to the Bruits, in others to the Angels.

5thly, If our Author's Opinion be true, the best Men are most wretchedly
deceived and befooled. The wiser and holier any Man is, the more firmly he
believes and rejoices in the consideration of the Soul's Immortality. Such
will not be persuaded, that they shall ever be deserted of that Free, Divine
Goodness and Grace, which has so often embraced them, but firmly believe that
Almighty Love whereby they live, to be stronger than Death, and more powerful
than the Grave. They cannot imagine that their Souls which have been so often
blessed with the Irradiations of Divine Light, and the Warmth and Vigor of
Divine Love, shall ever fall down into a dead unactive State. Hence many of
them have died triumphantly, with raised expectations of entering immediately
into a glorious and blessed State. How cheerfully Socrates, that Philosophical
Proto-Martyr, received the Summons of Death, you shall hear by and by: Seneca
tells Lucilius with what pleasure he thought on a future State; and that when
the Soul takes a view of the Amplitude and Glory of the heavenly Regions;
contemnit prioris domicilii Angustias: It contemns the straitness of its former
Habitation. And Cicero brings in Cato crying out, O praeclarum diem, etc. O
excellent, happy day! When I shall go to that Assemby of Divine Souls, and
depart from this Rout and Confusion here below. Plotinus talks Seraphically
upon this Subject, Ennead. 4. lib. 7. chapter 10. where he tells us, That purified
virtuous Souls differ but little from Angelical Essences, and that little is
their present Inhabitation in the Body; and if Men were of this divine and
raised Temper, they would not in any sort disbelieve the Souls Immortality.
More of this kind you may find in Plato; Hierocles, Epictetus, Antoninus; not
to mention the Raptures of many dying Christians, Martyrs, and others, lest it
should be called Canting, according to the Dialect of this profane Generation.
And now, what think you? Is it rational to imagine that Men of the most
unspotted Integrity, Wisdom, and Virtue, in all Ages, have so wretchedly been
deceived in a matter which so nearly concerned them, while a few dreaming,
sensual Epicureans have been in the right? Credat Judaeus Apella. If you think
that Goodness and Purity naturally lead Men to such self-deceiving hopes of
Immortality, which Death will quickly defeat; you confound the Natures of Good
and Evil, and contradict your self in the same breath. Ni ita se haberet ut
animi immortales essent, haud optimi cujusque animus ad immortalem Gloriam
niteretur, Cic. de senect. page 202. Equidem efferor studio patres vestros quos
colui, and delexi, videndi. Ex vita ista discedo, tanquam ex hospitio, non
tanquam ex domo, commorandi enim Natura Diversorium nobis, non habitandi,
dedit. Ibid.

Validiora sunt Divinorum virorum praesagia quam aliorum, Plato, Ep. 2. 6thly,
If this Hypothesis be true, Nature has dealt worse with Mankind, than with the
Beasts themselves, by leading them into such mistakes as the inferior Creatures
are not obnoxious to. I have showed you before, how natural it is to the Soul
of Man to apprehend it self to be Immortal; and if this be a mistake, it is so
far better with the Bruits, which are not misled by any such fallacious
Instinct. They are alive to the present, but dead to the future. They may play
and sport themselves, and enjoy the Objects that are grateful to their Senses,
without being abused with the hopes, or disturbed with the dread of what may
befall them in a future State. While poor Mankind are divided between fruitless
desires, and groundless fears of what can never happen to them, if the Soul
perish with the Body. The Swan may die singing, while the pensive Emperor cries
out, Animula vagula blandula quae nunc abibis in loca! Poor wandering Soul,
whither art thou now going? Unhappy Reason! which deals so ill with those that
possess and admire it, and worst with those who take most pains to improve it.
Thus you must agree with Cotta, That God did Man a mischief by making him
Rational, Cic. de Not. Deor. lib. 3.

7thly, This Hypothesis cannot stand, but upon the supposition of a continued
course of Miracles to make it good, which is very absurd and unphilosophical.
Take his Opinion in his own Words, page 10. Every days experience shows, That
Corn ground and made into Bread, is one of the strongest supports of Life, both
for Man and Beast; that concocted in the Stomach, is converted into Blood in
the Liver, purified in the Heart, sent thence by the Arteries into the Head and
Brain, where becoming a Spirit, inflamed and lucid, it acts in all the Organs
the powers of Life, Motion, Senses, and Understanding. And this is his material
Soul. In like manner, page 12. It seems one may venture to conclude, that Corn
may be converted into a living and rational Activity, as being a proper
nourishment for Man and Beast, and for their Bodies and Souls, one as well as
the other; as being so for the Man who is a Contexture of both. To this I
answer,

1st, It Is observable, that his Anatomy and Philosophy are all of a piece: In
that he assigns the Office of Sanguification to the Liver; from which Modern
Anatomists have upon very good grounds discharged it. 2dly, If this Opinion
hold good; the Grass in the Fields, and the very Dust and Mire in the Streets
which we tread upon, may after several refinings become a Rational Soul, and
prove as wise as our Philosopher himself, and discourse as subtily of what it
once was, when it lay trodden under foot in the Streets. That which the other
day was no better than Wheat Flour or Meal, may now be making Syllogisms,
reflecting upon its own Acts, contemplating the highest Majesty, aspiring after
a glorious Immortality. These things I must confess sound a little aukwardly,
but he has a ready way to solve all, page 18. With God all things are possible;
and it seems he who made Matter out of nothing, can make any thing out of
Matter. And to the same purpose, page. 14. he enumerates several Miracles; As
of Aaron 's blossoming Rod, the staying of the Waters of Jordan, the
multiplication of Loaves and Fishes, etc. Thus you see he is so conscious of
the weakness of his own Hypothesis, that he is forced to fly to a miraculous
Power to uphold it. This is a ready way of explaining the Phenomenon of Nature.
But I reply, 1st, Is not the same Almighty Power able to uphold the Soul in a
State of Subsistence separate from the Body? 2dly, Are the ordinary works of
God in Nature, and his extraordinary miraculous Works to be confounded? 3dly,
Is it a valid way of arguing from the Power of God, to his Will? I readily
grant, That he can do all things which are Works of Power. He can do all things
which his infinite Wisdom sees fit to do; he can do all things that he will do.
But does it therefore follow that he will do all things that he can do? Is it
not horrid profaneness to prostitute the Doctrine of the Divine Power, to
serve the ends of every trifling Hypothesis, falsely called Philosophy? Do we
not know, that ordinarily God works upon, and by his Creatures, in a way
agreeable to the Natures which he has given them? And what is there in a little
Wheat-meal suitable to the production of Sense, or Reason, or Religion? It is
the part of a Philosopher humbly to contemplate what God has done, and to
admire his Perfections shining forth in his Works, and not to lay down
Hypotheses contrary to the common Sense and Reason of Mankind, and then to tell
us that God can, if he please, make these Suppositions good. Thus you see, that
our Author's Philosophy, Anatomy, and Theology, are all alike absurd; and that
he has made Miracles so common, as will render them in a great measure useless
for those extraordinary purposes whereunto they have mostly been designed; and
that he owns his Philosophy to be weak and impertinent, when he is forced to
have recourse to a supernatural miraculous Power to support it.

CHAP. V. Some subservient Considerations for the further establishment of the
Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality.
BEsides the forementioned Arguments, there are several other Particulars,
which may justly render the Opinion of the Soul's dying with the Body odious to
all Men, who have either the due use of Reason, or any sense of Religion.

1st, This Opinion is highly injurious to Human Nature, carrying in it a vile
Depression of that whole Species, or rank of Beings to which we belong. What an
unnatural thing is it for a Man to abuse his Reason, in vilifying and degrading
the reasonable Nature it self; as if he repented that God had made him a Man,
and was ambitious to herd himself among the more ignoble Animals? Praeclarum
autem nescio quid adepti sunt, qui didicerunt se, cum tempus mortis venisset;
totos esse peritos, Cic. Tusc. lib. 1.339. This is to bid defiance to the
Common Interest of Humanity, and such a Person should be looked upon as a
Traitor against the Prerogative and Dignity of all Mankind. And (which is more)
it is contrary to that Obligation and Duty which we owe to the Common Parent
and Author of our Beings; an ungrateful contempt of that Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, which has given us so excellent a Nature; a casting Dirt upon the
Masterpiece of the visible Creation, and so a robbing God of that Honor which
belongs to him upon the account of so noble a Production. Let us therefore be
more just to our selves, more thankful to our Great Creator, than so bruitishly
to abandon our hopes of Immortality, and basely desert the Common Interest and
Honor of Humane Race.

2dly, The whole frame of this unmanly Philosophy is built upon the most
precarious, unsatisfying Principles imaginable. They beg the Question all
along, and then pretend they have solved the Phenomenon of Nature. Cicero told
their Predecessors long ago, That they assigned Provinces to Atoms without
proof. And Gassendus is fain to confess that Objection to be true. And Dr.
Willis himself (in whose Authority our Philosopher seems so much to acquiesce)
rejects the Atomical Hypothesis, because it supposes its Principles without
proof, and is not suited to the Solution of Natural Appearances: See his Book,
de Fermentatione. But because these are but General Charges, we will descend to
Particulars, and show briefly what a knack they have at Philosophizing upon
difficult Points.

If you ask them how the Soul comes to be so quick and active in its
Operations, and to turn it self with such wonderful vivacity and readiness from
one Object to another: Democritus, Epicurus, and after them, Lucretius will
tell you, That the Atoms prepared for this purpose are of a smooth Spherical
Figure, (See Diog. Laert. in Democ. and Epicur. and Lucret. lib. 3. de Natura
rerum) and so (you know) they must needs be very fit for quick motion. If you
desire an account of Sensation according to their Hypothesis, they will tell
you of a vis Mobilis, Motus sensiferi, and something else (which they confess
they know not what to call) from whence it proceeds.

If you would have the Liberty of the Will explained, they tell you, It arises
from a Motion of Declination, whereby the Atoms always moving downwards by
their own weight toward the Center of the World, are carried somewhat
obliquely toward some Point different from it. And this you must know is the
Clinamen Principiorum, as Lucretius calls it. Ac nos ideo conati sumus
declinationem motuum asserere Atomis, ut deduceremus, qui posset fortuna
humanis. rebus intervenire, ac illud quod in nobis est, sive Liberum arbitrium,
minime periret.

In a word, if you ask what the Soul is; they can tell you, It is
Efflorescentia Materiae, and compare it to the Spirit of sweet Ointment, or
that it is (...), some sort of Spirit, they know not what. Nihil enim est apud
ipsos quod non Atomorum turba conficiat, Cic. Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1.

Such nonsensical Gibberish as this, they call Philosophy, and pretend to
explicate the great Works of Nature by it, and would needs (forsooth) be
accounted Wits into the bargain, when they have amused their inconsiderate
Admirers, by such an empty sound of unintelligible words.

But can any Sober, Impartial Enquirer be satisfied with such Answers as these?
And must we let go the Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality, that we may fall
down and worship that Image of Philosophy which these Men have set up? No,
surely we ought rather to be affected with a generous resentment of so vile an
Indignity done to the Nature of Man, and with just abhorrence to oppose such
wild and impertinent Extravagancies.

3dly, Such absurd Notions as these, expose Philosophy it self to the scornful
Reproaches of every capricious Enthusiast. You take the way to render it
contemptible, and to open the Mouth of self-conceited Ignorance against all
Humane Literature in General, because you make so bad an use of a very small
Part of it. There is nothing more common than for confident Ignorance to get
into the Chair, and to pass Sentence without hearing what may be said on the
other side, and so Learning shall be condemned as an airy Phansy, and those
that want it will be ready to run it down, lest they should be run down
themselves for want of it. I know the best things are liable to the greatest
abuses; but some cannot, some will not distinguish between the use, and the
abuse of them. You shall meet with some that will tell you, That not only
yours, but all other Philosophy is vain; and if an impartial Stander-by ask
them how they prove it, They will allege the vanity of yours, and infer an
Universal Conclusion from a particular Instance. This (say they) is your
Philosophy, which teaches us, that we have every Week a new Soul, and that at
length Soul and Body dye together. But if these Reflections fall into the hands
of any such Persons, I must take the liberty to tell them, That they do not
argue fairly in the Case; neither must they suppose that all Philosophers are
Vertiginous, because (perhaps) in some the Material Spirits in the Brain have a
Circular Motion. Neither is Philosophy to be worse thought of, for the
fantastic Dresses which these Men put upon it.

4thly, This impious Hypothesis opens a Door to Atheism, Infidelity, and all
manner of Licentiousness. Our knowledge of the Spirits above us, must arise
from the knowledge of our own Souls. Hence the first part of Wisdom is truly to
know our selves, that so we may understand our Duty, Interest, and End. And it
is in our own Souls, as in a Glass, that we must behold the Image of God, which
should lead us to its great Original; and the reason why we know God no better,
is, because we are so ignorant of our selves. Hence the Doctrine of the Soul is
the most useful part of Natural Philosophy, and so nearly connected with
Divinity, that it may justly be reckoned a part of it also.

Therefore they who can once persuade themselves, that all those noble
Operations of the Soul (whereof we have been speaking) proceed from no higher a
Principle than matter and motion, are in a ready way to deny the Deity; or
however, to entertain very gross and unwarrantable Conceptions of it, as the
Epicureans did; and to conclude with them, that the World was made by a
fortuitous concourse of Atoms, and that God regards not the Actions and Affairs
of Mankind, nor is either pleased with Virtue, or displeased at its contrary,
as Lucretius, etc.

Omnis enim per se Divum Natura necesse est,
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur,
Semota a nostris rebus, sejunctaque long,
Nec been promeritis capitur, nec tangitur ira.
And so said his Master Epicurus, (...), etc. The Blessed and Immortal Being
has neither any business of his own, nor creates any to others; and is neither
angry nor pleased with any man, Laert. in Epicur. A Notion more befitting
Sardanapalus than a Deity, as Max. Tyr. observes. No wonder that Ill men are
fond of such Opinions as these, which so much befriend their Wickedness.

And as for Death, they say it is nothing to us, because all Good and Evil lies
in Sense, of which Death is the privation: And such Apprehensions as these must
make our Lives pleasant to us, and take away the desire of Immortality, Laer.
ibid. And further, They would persuade us, that the Fears of Punishment after
Death arise only from Old Wives Fables, Ibid.

Moreover, the Immortality of the Soul is so clearly held forth in the Gospel,
that to deny the one, is implicitly to deny the other. And he who pretends to
evade the Evidence produced out of the New Testament (besides the Old) for the
proof of this Truth, is in a proximate disposition to disown all the great
Fundamentals of Christianity, which are established upon the same Authority.
And verily it is a gross reproach to our Holy Religion, when Persons, that
profess it, maintain such brutish Principles as Socrates, Plato, Seneca, and
abundance more of the Heathens would have been ashamed of. Which makes a great
Divine suppose, That in this Age it is one of the Devil's chief Designs to
assault Christianity by false Philosophy.

And pray consider, What can such Opinions, or any that border upon them, lead
men to, but Sensuality, and Debauchery, though (I verily believe) you design
not so? Are any men more likely to live as Brutes, than such who think they
shall die alike? You may tell them of a Resurrection, and Future Judgment as
long as you will, it is ten to one but they reply, as the tree falls, so it
lies; and if once they can so far stifle Reason, as to disbelieve the Doctrine
of the Soul's Immortality, after so much Natural, and Supernatural Evidence for
it; I do not see why they may not, far more plausibly, deny the Article of the
Resurrection, and then they will let loose the Reins to Lust, and Appetite, and
become the Plagues of Humane Society. And indeed it is observable, that many of
those who maintain these beastly Opinions, commonly live up to them, and are
not of the best Reputation in point of their Morals. And it is no thanks to
their corrupt Principles, if they be not all alike scandalously vicious, 1 Cor.
15.32. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die. A Proverb familiar among the
Epicureans, or a reflection upon them in their own Language, as Grotius, and
others observe. And therefore I must say, That those Persons who propagate such
Conceits, do discourage Virtue, but encourage Vice and Wickedness, which is
contrary to the public Peace, Tranquillity, and Felicity of Mankind: And let
them tell us, if they can, what good purpose can be pretended for the
establishment of such an Hypothesis, which can in the least compensate for
those Mischievous Effects and Influences upon the Lives of men, which it has a
manifest tendency to produce. Let the matter be well weighed on both sides.

Indeed it is not to be wondered at, that wicked men should put the Evil day as
far from them as they can; even as the Devils would not be tormented before the
time. But that any good man (except under the power of Melancholy, or
Temptation) should be fond of such Opinions as these, is hardly to be supposed.
What? Shall we fear to be made happy too soon? Shall a dead unactivity be
preferred before Communion with God in a state of sinless Perfection? But those
that are after the flesh savor not the things of the spirit, Romans 8.5. A
Turkish Paradise seems more suitable to the humor of such Persons, than the
heavenly Jerusalem. And their pleading against a more speedy admission thither,
argues their unfitness to be admitted at all.

5thly, Our Author's Hypothesis is directly contrary to the avowed Doctrine of
the Church of England. Which I the rather mention, because he professes
himself to be a Member of that Church, and looks upon those that dissent from
it as mistaken persons, page 17. Need I prove that the Church of England
asserts the Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality? See the Order for the Burial of
the Dead, where, among many other Expressions to the same effect, you find
these words. Almighty God, with whom do live the Spirits of them that depart
hence in the Lord, and with whom the Souls of the Faithful, after they are
delivered from the burden of the Flesh, are in joy and felicity, etc. Nothing
can be more express for the Immortality of the Soul, and its separate
subsistence. Now, I say, no honest man, who believes that the Soul dies with
the Body, can declare his unfeigned Assent and Consent to, or heartily join
with that Church in this part of the Burial Office which I have mentioned. And
as for those whom he calls Dissenting Brethren, if our Author's Opinion be
true, they ought to dissent from that Church more than they do.

In a word, he will find it hard to mention any point of difference between
sober Dissenters, and the Church of England, so important as that wherein he
himself differs from them; or which tends so much to induce or encourage to an
ill Practice, or Course of Life. See more of this in the Book of Homilies,
Sermon the 9th, against the fear of Death.

CHAP. VI. The Testimony of the Ancient Philosophers produced for a further
confirmation of this great Truth.
THough the Persons, with whom I have now to do, are commonly so full of
themselves, and overfond of their own Conceptions, that the Sentiments or
Authorities of others are not much regarded by them; yet since our Author has
thought meet to mention the names of Aristotle, Dicaearchus, and Pliny, as
supposing them to be of his Opinion, I must say something to confront what is
alleged from them, that his Reader may not be amused with a mere show of
Antiquity.

This Point was often weighed in the Schools of the Philosophers, the Academy,
Peripatum, Stoa, etc. They thought it worth their most serious enquiry, because
the common Interest of Mankind was so nearly concerned in it.

Pherecydes is mentioned by Cicero (Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1.) as one of the first
of the Ancient Philosophers, upon record, who defended the Doctrine of the
Soul's Immortality, (though he doubts not but others were of the same Opinion
before him.) And Pythagoras was so taken with his Discourses about it, that
thereupon he turned Philosopher, who was before an Athleta, as St. Augustine
observes, Epist. 3. ad Vollusianum. But now (says he) we all see Assyrium
Amomum vulgo nascitur, referring those words of Virgil to the Doctrine of the
Soul's Immortality, brought from Syria, or Assyria into Greece by Pherecydes,
Vid. Menag. Not. in Diog. Laert. page 41.

Pythagoras was of the same mind with his Master; and the name of the
Pythagoreans was so famous for many Ages after, that none else seemed learned
but they, as Cicero observes, ubi supra.

These Philosophers were wont to call the higher Region of the Soul (...), and
the lower (...), The one the Divine, the other the beastly part. It Is reported
of Plato, that he traveled into Italy to converse with them; and how well he
and they agreed in this Point, you shall see more by and by.

Thales was of the same mind, as may be seen in Laertius. (...).

I mention not Zoroaster, nor the Oracles of the Magi in Chaldaea, who were his
Followers, of which the Platonists take notice; nor yet what is wont to be
alleged from Hermes Trismegistus, because these Fragments of Antiquity are by
some reckoned suppositious, by others, at least, dubious. But give me leave
however to add what a great Philosopher of our own says,

So if what is consonant to Plato's School,
(Which well agrees with Learned Pythagore,
Egyptian Trismegist, and the Antique Roll
Of Chaldee Wisdom, all which time has tore;
But Plato, and deep Plotin do restore)
Which is my scope, I sing out lustily.
If any twitten me for such strange lore,
And me all blameless brand with infamy.
God purge that man from fault of foul malignity.
Dr. More 's Psychozoia, page 2. Tertullian also, in his Book de Anima,
supposes that Plato derived his Sentiments from the Writings of Trismegist in
Egypt.

Come we therefore to that Divine Philosopher, and his Master Socrates,
concerning whom we have more certain knowledge; and in comparison of them, and
their Followers, Cicero looks upon all other Philophers as Plebeian (Tusc.
Quaest. lib. 1.341.) And brings in his greatest Encomiums of Aristotle, with a
(Platonem semper excipio) page 226. And St. Augustine agrees with him in it.
Augustinus Platonem caeteris Philosophis Gentium long lateque praefert, says
Lipsius Manuduct. ad Stoicam Philosoph. page 19. But we will first begin with
Socrates.

What this Great Man thought, may be learned from his Admirer, and Disciple,
Plato, who in his Phaedo, and elsewhere, brings him in strongly disputing for,
and asserting the Soul's Immortality. Where he shows, That as Death is the
separation of Soul and Body; so the Soul can subsist of it self, when so
separate, page mihi 84. And that the readiest way to attain to knowledge, in
this life, is to abstract our minds as much as possibly we can from commerce
with the Body, till God set us free from it, and then we shall have a more pure
and sincere understanding of the Truth, (...), a corporis insipienta liberati,
as Ficinus renders it, page 89. He derides the Childish fears of those who
think the Soul is dissipated when the Body dies, as if they apprehended it
should be blown away, especially if they dye when the Wind is high, page 110.
It Is impossible, says he, that the Soul should perish by Death, except that can
die which is immortal, page 164. And smiles at his Friend Crito for asking him
how he would be buried. I cannot, says he, persuade thi^ ^^i^o, that I, who now
dispute, am Socrates, but he thinks that Carcass, which he shall see by and by,
is I: But I tell you, I shall go to a blessed State after I have drunk this
poison, and this I speak to comfort both you, and my self. Do not say, when you
see my Body laid out, burnt, or buried, that it is Socrates. Thus that
Venerable Old man conquered the Fears of Death by the hopes of a Blessed
Immortality; and drank the fatal Potion without any observable disturbance of
Mind, or change of Countenance, praying for an happy passage out of this Life
into a better. But I must not translate the whole Dialogue.

Plato speaks often of the punishments of Wicked men after Death, and tells us
in his Timaeus, That the Soul of a good man shall be kindly received by his
Creator, but the Soul of a wicked man shall be cast into Hell.

The truth is, the Platonists have improved the Doctrine of the Soul's
Immortality better than many of our own Writers (notwithstanding their greater
helps) have done; though sometimes they speak too high, as if they would even
deify the Soul, as do some of the Stoics.

Plotinus discourses excellently upon this Subject, and shows, that if we
would seriously view the Soul in its own naked essence; we should (...) doubt
of its Immortality. Let a man (says he) contemplate himself in his own pure,
and truly Intellectual Nature, divesting it of all that is alien to it, and he
will certainly know that it is immortal. He will then observe, that his
Understanding is not properly directed to things sensible, and mortal, but by
an eternal Virtue does contemplate Eternal, and Intelligible Objects, and
becomes, as it were, an Intelligible lucid World to it self.

And again he tells us, That by how much the Soul is more abstracted from the
Senses, by so much it reasons better; so that when it shall be wholly separate
from the Body, it will know intuitively, without elaborate Ratiocinations: That
now it deliberates when it doubts, it doubts when it is hindered by the Body, but
will neither doubt nor deliberate when free from the Body, but will comprehend
the Truth without any hesitation. See his Enneads, and elsewhere.

Maximus Tyrius, Dissertat. 41. handles that Question, viz. Whether the
Diseases of the Soul or Body be more grievous; and tells us, That degenerate
Souls are buried in their Bodies like Insects in their Holes, and are in love
with those lurking Places* p. 495. And withal, That the health of the Body is
but uncertain, and temporary, that of the Soul solid and immortal, page 491.

It were easy to mention more of the Platonists, who all, to a man, maintain
the Immortality of the Soul. But I proceed.

The Stoics say, That the Souls of Good men separated from their Bodies are
Heroes, as Laertius informs us in Zenon.

Plutarch says, That they call all separate Souls Heroes promiscuously, and so
distinguish Heroes into good and bad. De placitis Philosophorum, lib. 1. cap. 8.

Epictetus calls the Soul of man (...), near akin to God.

Antoninus styles the Soul, (...). And in his 9th Book, Sect. 39. -- Will thou
say to thy mind, thou art dead, or become like a Beast?

Seneca speaks too high. Quid aliud vocas, etc. What will you call the Soul but
a Deity dwelling in an Humane Body? And perhaps such boldness was one Original
of Heathen Idolatry. And elsewhere -- Animus si propriam ejus Originem
aspexeris, etc. The Soul, if you consider its true Original, descends from that
heavenly Spirit. Sursum Animum, etc. Its beginnings call it upward, there
Eternal Rest remains for it. And comforting Martia concerning her dead Son,
Ipse quidem aeternus, he is Eternal, and in a better State now, than he was
before. The Body is the Prison of the Soul. The Soul it self is sacred, and
eternal. Happy is thy Son, O Martia, who being dead, knows such things as
these. -- Nec est Ratio aliud quam in corpus pars Divini Spiritus mersa. Idem.

Plutarch says, That the Providence of God, and the Immortality of the Soul,
are so connected, that the one necessarily follows the other; de sera Numinis
vindicta. And therefore, by the way, Epicurus made thorough-work in denying
both.

Come we now to Cicero, a moderate, middle-way Philosopher. He disputes at
large for the Immortality of the Soul, in the First Book of his Tusc. Quaest.
de contemnenda Morte, as also in his Dialogue de Senectute, etc. I will cite
some Passages out of him, to the shame of those Christians who stand in need of
such Instructions from an Heathen.

Tu cum tibi, sive Deus, etc. Will thou (when God, or Nature has given thee a
Soul, than which nothing is more excellent and Divine) so debase thy self as to
suppose that there is no difference between thee and a Beast? Cic. Paradox.
page 217.

Ii vivunt qui, etc. These Men live who are escaped from the Prison of the
Body, but that which you call Life is Death, De Somn. Scip. 233. Haec Coelestia
semper spectato, illa Humana contemnito, Ibid. Reckon with thy self that thou
art not Mortal, but only thy Body; the Mind is the Man, and not that Bodily
Figure which you can point as with your Finger, Ibid.

And to the same purpose he brings in that of Cyrus, mentioned by Xenophon: I
could never persuade my self that our Souls live in the Body, and dye when they
go out of it. Nec vero tum animum esse insipientem cum ex insipienti corpore
evasisset, sed cum omni admistione corporis liberatus, purus and integer esse
caepisset, tum esse Sapientem. This is purely Platonic, De Senect. 211.

Except God deliver you from this Prison of the Body, you can never come to
Heaven. Idem.

And elsewhere he argues, from the Worship which was paid to their departed
Heroes, That the Souls of all Men are Immortal, but the Souls of good Men
Divine, de Legib.

Also Tusc. lib. 1. Ipsi illi Majorum Gentium Dii, qui habentur, hinc a nobis
perfecti in Coelum reperientur, page 329.

And so infinitely fond is he of this Opinion, that he thus concludes, de
Senect. page 213. Quod si in hoc erro, etc. If in this I be mistaken, that I
believe the Souls of Men immortal, I am willingly mistaken. Nor will I suffer
this Error, in which I am delighted, to be extorted from me as long as I live.
But if after Death I shall have no Sense, as some diminutive Philosophers
think, I fear not lest those dead Philosophers should deride my Error.

In a word, both Cicero, Seneca, and several of the Platonists and Stoics,
speak of the Soul, as if it were an Incarnate Deity. That it has many bright
Resemblances of God stamped upon it. Deum te scito esse, Somn. Scip. Because as
the Great God rules the World, so thy Soul rules and governs thy Body, as an
inferior kind of Deity.

It must indeed be acknowledged, that Aristotle speaks sometimes dubiously, and
is not consistent with himself in this matter. But his greatest Admirers have
generally believed it. And some of them take it ill that any should question,
whether their Master was of the same mind.

However the Authority of that Philosopher needs not much to move us, since he
is also inconsistent with himself concerning the Deity, as Lactant. observes.
And again, Aristoteles Deum nec coluit, nec curavit. See more to the same
purpose in Lips. Manuduct. ad Stoic. Philos. lib. 1. page 18.

Nevertheless there are not wanting, even in him, some fair acknowledgments of
this great Truth in his lucid Intervals. He confesses the Soul is something
distinct from the Elements, and makes it to be quintam quandam Naturam. And the
like they speak concerning the matter of the Heavens, which yet the
Peripateticks look not upon as corruptible.

In his Book, de Generatione Animal. lib. 2. cap. 3. (...), etc. It remains,
that the Rational or Intellectual Soul only enter from without, as being only
of a nature purely Divine; with whose Actions, the Actions of this gross Body
have no Communication. Here he speaks like an Orthodox Scholar of his excellent
Master Plato, to whose footsteps the closer he keeps, the less he ever wanders
from the Truth. Dr. More Immort. Soul, page 115.

Elsewhere he says, That the mind is (...), an impassible thing.

Xenocrates is fully of the same mind, That all Souls are Immortal, and that he
who lives piously and holily on Earth, shall certainly be blessed in a future
State, and shall enjoy more pure pleasures, than he was capable of in this
Prison of the Body.

Antisthenes, from whom were derived both the Cynicks and Stoics, tells the
Athenians, glorying, That they sprung from the Earth; that they were no more
noble than Snails and Locusts. He exhorts to Piety and Justice, as the way to
Immortality. -- Ejusmodi sibi viaticum dicebat comparare oportere, quod
Naufragium facienti simul enatare posset. And amongst many other things, he
wrote (...) concerning the Invisible State, Laert. in Antist.

I mention not the Gymnosophists, Brachmans, Druids, etc. What the Poets, both
Greek and Latin, held in this matter, is obvious even to Schoolboys. The
Elysian Fields, the Infernal Judges, the Torments of Hell, whereof they speak,
are so many Attestations to this great Truth.

Thus you see how generally the belief of the Immortality of the Soul obtained
among the Ancient Ethnicks; and shall any one who professes to believe the
Gospel, deny it? Who would not say, Sit anima mea cum Philosophis: I mean,
rather than with such Christians as these.

Object. Some of the Philosophers whom you mention, as Cicero, Seneca, and even
Socrates himself, speak sometimes doubtfully concerning the Immortality of the
Soul.

Answ. So much the more reason have we to be thankful for that clearer light,
by which Life and Immortality are so plainly set before us. But yet you must
remember, it was only a certainty which these Philosophers professed to want,
and not a probability, or Opinion that it was true. As for Cicero, he says he
dares swear the Soul is Divine, Tusc. lib. 1.343. Seneca often asserts its
Immortality. And so did Socrates, when he had to do with such as were capable
of receiving and understanding that Doctrine, as has been already proved. And
besides, such was the modesty of that Philosopher, that he was not wont to be
positive in his Assertions, but still, upon all occasions, to acknowledge his
Ignorance.

As for the Epicureans, Cicero tell us, That all Learned Men contemned them.
And Austine says, Quod ipsi Philosophi Epicurum Porcum nominaverunt.

Eusebius declares, That Lucretius wrote his Poems in the Intervals of Madness.

Your Friend, Dicaearchus, is particularly derided by Cicero himself, Tusc. 335.

I might easily mention many more of the Sayings of Ancient Philosophers, which
further hold forth their belief of the Soul's Immortality.

Anaxagoras was so intent upon his Philosophical Contemplations, that he
regarded not the Affairs of the Public; and when one asked him. -- (...); Have
you no care of your Country? Yes, (said he) the greatest care of all, (...) --
Pointing toward Heaven, Laert. page 34.

Thraseas said, Nero might kill him, but could not destroy him. And the like
said Socrates long before, concerning his Accusers.

Anaxarchus told the Tyrant, You may break in pieces the Prison of Anaxarchus,
himself you cannot hurt, Laert. 252.

Epicarmus, as cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, says, If thou be a good Man,
Death cannot hurt thee. Thy Spirit will live happily in Heaven.

CHAP. VII. Our Author's Objections considered and answered.
THAT our Philosopher may not think himself slighted, I am obliged, in
civility, to take some notice of his Objections, (such as they are) though
sufficiently answered in what has been already said.

Object. 1. The Brutes act sensibly and knowingly by a Material Spirit; ergo,
Man may perform all his Natural Functions by the means of a like Spirit, page 2.

Answ. 1. As for the Nature of Matter, I shall show you by and by, how little
it is understood by the wisest of you all; and that while you are talking so
confidently concerning it, you do but wrangle in the dark about you know not
what.

2. I cannot but observe, how poorly you shift off the most difficult part of
your Work. In the first Page we are encountered with a daring Assertion, viz.
That the Soul falls with the Body. But if we seek for proof, (as it is all the
reason in the world we should) there is scarce so much as a shadow of it. --
Parturiunt Montes. -- Not one of the Arguments which have been used both by
Ancient and Modern Philosophers, and Divines, is answered. Perhaps they were
not worth taking notice of by so transcendent a Genius. Did you expect that
your bare Word must pass for an Answer? or that any Man of Brains would be
amused with two or three obscure Quotations out of Aristotle and Pliny? You
were not born soon enough, thus to impose upon Mankind. Ipse dixit is quite out
of doors.

3. As for the Souls of Brutes, you say, they are Material, and take it for
granted that they are Mortal; from whence you would infer that the Soul of Man
is so too. But have you well considered the Answers which have been given to
this Objection by many great Philosophers? If not, you are not fit to write
about these Controversies. If you have, you ought to give some satisfactory
Reply, and not to put it off by saying, Dr. W. thinks that such Arguers deserve
not an Answer. This is but a mean way of Philosophizing.

Some of the Platonists assign to the Brutes Souls Immaterial, Beings diverse
from the Body. And the Peripateticks say, They have Substantial Forms distinct
from Matter. And Porphyry is peremptory for their Immortality. Besides what is
said of an Anima mundi.

But however these Controversies be determined, I think it is easy to
demonstrate, that the Souls of Brutes are much more noble than the Material
Spirits of their Blood. But the Immortality of our own Souls depends not upon
such Speculations as these. We need not run to the Brutes for Arguments. Let
them do so, whose Principles require it.

If you think you can fairly answer the Reasons which I have given from
Scripture and Natural Light in this Point; and when you have so done, undertake
to prove, (I do not say merely to assert) That the Souls of Brutes are Material
and Mortal, and by consequence that the Souls of Men are so too: Begin when you
please, I hope I shall not be unprovided for you. But till then, I am not
obliged to incumber my Defense of the Soul's Immortality with needless
Controversies.

4. Though it should be granted, That the Souls of Brutes are both Material and
Mortal, we are still sure that the Humane Soul is much more excellent than
they; as appears by those Operations in us, which are not descernible in them.
I think it is ill done of those Philosophers, who debase or deny the Sensitive
Faculties of Beasts, and make them mere Machines; and I deny not, that there is
something in them which looks like Reason. But, what then? These higher
Operations of the Souls of Men, which have a more immediate and direct
reference to Immortality, are such as we see no appearance of in the Inferior
Creatures. They know not God, they love him not; they have no apprehensions of
a Future State, no sense of Moral Good or Evil, as Man has; and this is enough
to distinguish us from them, and to show, that our Natures are made for higher
Ends than theirs; as the Poet, speaking of Religion, says, -- Seperat haec nos,
A Grege Brutorum, --


And therefore to argue from the Mortality of the Souls of Brutes, against the
Immortality of the Souls of Men, is (every way) to beg the Question.

5. And thus again, you carry the Controversy into the dark, (as the manner of
such Philosophers is) and plead Uncertainties, against those things which are
Certain, not knowing the premises while you will needs hold the Conclusion, and
so abuse your Reason, and lose the Truth and your Labor both together. This
method may indeed serve the ends of perverse Wranglers, but is not the way to
make any man wiser.

There is a great deal observable both in the Souls of Men and Brutes, which
the best Philosophers do not comprehend. Must we therefore deny what is plain,
because we are not agreed about more remote Difficulties? This is the way to
introduce Skepticism, and unthankfully to reject what God has made known to
us, because he has not laid open all the rest.

The words of Tertullian, in his Treatise de Anima, are very remarkable in the
present Case. Quis enim revelabit quod Deus texit? unde sciscitandum est? --
praestat per Deum nescire, quia non revelaverit, quam per hominem scire, quia
ipse praesumpserit, page mihi. 342.

Your Masters have not yet satisfied the Learned World, in any Account they
have given of Sensitive perception and Appetite, by reducing them to the Laws
of Matter and Motion. You must lay your Foundation better before you build so
much upon it. But Cicero, and Laertius tell us, That the Epicureans abandoned
Logic, and so do their Abettors. If supposing would serve instead of proving,
there would be no great difference between an Idiot, and a Philosopher.

Obj. 2. But Thinking, Arguing, etc. which you ascribe to the Soul, belong to
the whole Compositum, or contexture of Soul and Body, which is the efficient
proper cause of them, page 2, 4.

Answ. According to your own Hypothesis, each part of the Compositum is not
alike concerned in these Acts, but ( especially) the Animal Spirits, and the
Brain, which you suppose to be a materia cogitativa; but these are not the
whole Compositum; so that you must first reconcile your Philosophy to it self,
and then answer what I have said, against the Capacity of these Material,
Corruptible Spirits, for the production of such Acts, before this Objection be
at all valuable.

They very use which the Soul now makes of Corporeal Organs and Instruments,
plainly evinces, That it does exert some Action wherein they assist it not; for
it supposes an operation upon them antecedent to any operation by them -- When
therefore the Soul makes use of a bodily Organ, its Action upon it must needs,
at last, be without the ministry of any Organ, unless you multiply to it Body
upon Body in infinitum, as a Reverend Author observes, Blessedness of the
Righteous, page 205.

Nullam vim, virtutem, aut aptitudinem ad ipsum intelligendi aut volendi actum,
purum, formalem in se, a spiritibus aut a sensu animus recipit. Quomodo enim
inferius, and vilius and passivum, virtutem activam nobilem Naturae superiori,
praestantiori, and activae communicare potest, Method. Theol. part. 1.162.

Obj. 3. Matter and Motion may do much, as appears by a Musical Organ in the
hand of a good Artist, page 2.

Answ. The Instrument is not conscious of the Harmony produced by it, as the
Soul is of its own Acts; and therefore your Similitude is far from running upon
all four.

Obj. 4. Matter has a self-moving Power; for, if it be reduced to a fine
Powder, part of it will rise up into the Air like a thin Cloud, page 7. 13.

Answ. The Air is a fluid body, in which those little Particles are moved, as
Sticks or Straws are in the Water, according to its motion, and not by a
self-moving Power of their own. Though, as our Author (not observing how he
almost confutes himself) tells you in the very next words, that they are apt to
be moved with every little breath. I believe indeed they are very susceptible
of impressions from without, but have no self-moving power within them. If the
Dust in the Streets fly into you Eyes, will you therefore say it has a
self-moving power? stop it but close up in a Bottle where Wind and Air cannot
disturb it, and I will be bound for its good behavior.

As for the nature of Fire, you have light and heat, as well as motion, to give
an account of, which I fancy will put you hard to it.

Neither know you whence the Wind comes, nor whither it goes, nor what it is
that puts it in motion; and so we are not at all edified by your Assertion
concerning it.

Obj. 5. The Spirit of the Egyptian, whom David found at Ziklag in the field
famished, came to him again after they had given him Fruit and Water, page 11.

Answ. No wonder that his Material, Animal Spirits were refreshed by suitable
Nourishment; but that proves not that he had no nobler Principle in him:
Neither do I deny that these Spirits are the immediate Instruments of the
Soul's Operations in its state of union with the Body: But this is only ad
modum, not ad formam actus; and therefore to say the Soul cannot subsist nor
act in a state of Separation from them, is an Argument a Bactdo ad Angulum: And
yet it is no wonder, if it leave the Body, when these Spirits are no longer fit
to be a vinculum of vital union between them.

Obj. 6. It cannot be conceived how the separate Soul should think without the
Brain, see without an Eye, etc.

Answ. The Infant in the Womb has no conception of these Actions which it
shall perform when it is come into the World, and grown up to maturity. The
Cases are much alike.

To conclude, Except we better understood what the Soul is, and how it acts
while united to the Body, it is mere frowardness to deny its. Capacity of a
separate Subsistence, because we understand not what will be the mode of its
Operation in that State. But some men love to argue ab ignoto ad ignotius.

Mihi quidem naturam animi intuenti, multo difficilior occurrit cogitatio,
multoque obscurior qualis animus in corpore sit, tanquam alienae domi, quam
qualis, cum exierit, and in liberum coelum, quasi in domum suam, venerit. Cic.
Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1. page 339.

CHAP. VIII. Of Materiality, or Immateriality, as they are ascribed to the Soul.
THAT which our Author seems most to trust to, in the present Controversy, is
the supposed Materiality of the Soul; and this it is which he thinks gives him
so great an advantage against his Adversary, that (as the manner of some is) he
triumphs before the Victory; and yet all this Dust which he raises about
Matter, is an easily dissipated, as the Apostle shook off the Viper from his
hand; which will appear by the following Particulars.

1. Many great Philosophers and Divines have earnestly contended, that the Soul
is immaterial, and have laid great stress upon this for the proof of its
Immortality. The Reasons which they offer should have been well weighed, and
answered by our Author, before he had set up for a new Discoverer. It Is an
endless piece of work to write against those persons who will take no notice of
what has been said before.

How little alliance is there between a Thought, and any bodily thing? The more
strictly you consider this, the more reason you will see to conceive of the
Soul as a substance distinct from, and far more noble than Matter.

The Notions which we have of a Mind, i. e. something within us that thinks,
apprehends, reasons, discourses, wills, nills, affirms, denies, doubts, etc.
are mightily different from any Notions which we can fasten upon a Body. And
yet our Author thinks that Corn may be converted into a rational activity, page
12. But to that I have said enough already.

2dly, Others say, that the Soul is material, and yet are as great Asserters of
its Immortality as the former. Many of the Ancient Fathers of the Church were
of this Opinion. Tertullian, in his Treatise de Amima, disputes hotly for it.
Augustine says, that the Soul, if compared to God, is corporeal; and so does
Damascene. See many more in the Appendix to the Reasons of the Christian
Religion, where you will find that they took the Angels themselves for more
sublime purer Bodies. And the Learned Zanchy agrees with them in his Treatise
de Angelis, chap. 3.

Neither will it follow that the Soul is ^^^al, if it should be acknowledged
material. Aristotle himself supposes it to be a certain Quintessence distinct
from the four Elements, analogous to the matter of the Heavens, which yet the
Peripateticks suppose incorruptible. And it can never be proved that so simple
and pure a Substance as the Soul is, has any natural tendency to dissolution,
or separation of parts, but on the other hand the noblest Natures incline most
to union; neither is it to be feared lest God should annihilate or destroy it,
since he has given it a Nature fitted for Immortality, which shows that he has
designed it thereto.

Quid multa? Sic mihi persuasi, sic sentio. Cum simplex animi Natura sit, neque
habeat in se quicquam admistum, dispar sui, and dissimile, non posse cum
dividi; quod si non possit, non posse interire, Cic. de Senect. page 210.

3dly, The Nature of Matter is not so well understood, as that the
determination of the present Controversy should be supposed to depend upon it.
The Accidents and Modes of Matter are obvious to our Senses, but how little
know we of its intimate Essence?

Sensus infra Naturae opera subsistunt. (...) que intima illius penetrant, sed
in ext^^^^ semper facie versantur, Lud. Viv. de Ver. Fid. 151.

Rerum omnium verae germanaeque Essentiae ipsae per se non cognoscuntur. A
nobis abditae latent. In penitissimis cujusque rei, quo men's nostra, in hujus
corporis mole and tenebris vitae, non penetrat. Idem.

And to the same purpose Dr. More, Antid. against Atheism, page 15. As for the
very Essence, or bare Substance of any thing whatsoever, he is a very Novice in
Speculation that does not acknowledge that utterly unknown. But for the
Essential, and inseparable Properties, they are as intelligible and explicable
in a Spirit, as in any other Subject whatsoever.

And shall we in the midst of all this darkness talk confidently about
materiality, and immateriality, and dispute our selves into Atheism or
Sadducism, by wrangling about we know not what? Can you tell whether Matter be
divisible in infinitum, or no? Take which side of the Question you please, (and
the distinction of mentally or really divisible into the bargain) and make your
best of it. If it be not infinitely divisible, then every part of Matter is not
Matter, as not having extension, or trinal dimension. If i^ ^e, then a Grain of
Mustard Seed may be divided into as many parts as a Mountain. And shall the
Immortality of the Soul be supposed to stand upon so lubricous a Foundation as
this is? No such matter. Answer honestly and fairly the Arguments which I have
produced from Scripture and Reason, or else tell us plainly which of these two
you renounce, but do not think to shift it off by quibbling upon the word
immaterial, unless you better understood what Matter is. For this would be to
run into the dark, that you might not be seen to blush, while you talk against
Light it self.

The formal Virtues of Spirits are better known to us by their Acts, than their
Substances, yea and better, perhaps, than the naked Essence of Matter it self
is. Some great Philosophers have affirmed that the Soul is more knowable than
the Body. See Descart. princ. Philos. page 3. and his Meditat. de prima Philos.
page 4.

To conclude, The substance of our Souls differs so much from any corporeal
thing that we are acquainted with, that ^t may well enough be called
immaterial; though we know not wherein the difference of Spirits from the
finest Matter consists, excepting their formal Virtues, and unspeakable Purity.

Mihi quidem sufficit, dum aliorum ausibus nihil oppono, nec contradico, ex
virtute formali in substantia purissima fundata (sine compositione) Spiritum a
materia passiva distinguere: Qui plus praestare potest praestet. Method. Theol.
par. 1.142.

CHAP. IX. Directions to such as are in suspense as to the Immortality of the
Soul, showing how they may arrive at a certainty in that matter.
THough I have already said so much as I think may suffice to satisfy such
Persons as are willing to do their own Souls right, yet all are not alike
disposed for the reception of plain Evidence when set before them. Recipitur ad
modum recipientis; and therefore it will not be alien to the Design which I
have in hand, to lay down some Directions which will tend to make all that has
been already spoken, more effectual. And they are such as these.

Direct. 1. Be impartial in your Enquiries about this matter, and take special
care that your Understandings be not biased by the Interest of your Lusts,
which will dispose you to hate even Reason it self, and to shut your eyes
against the Light.

Socrates, discoursing concerning the Immortality of the Soul, warns his
Hearers to take care that they be not (...), haters of Reason, than which a
greater mischief could not befall them, Phoedo, page 133.

Atheistical Inclinations in men's Wills and Affections do commonly set their
Understandings on work to frame Principles suited thereto, and to defend and
maintain those Principles; and a Mind thus depraved, is like a Corrupt Judge,
who will hear nothing against the Party that has bribed him. When the Soul has
so far degraded it self, as to become a Slave to the Sensual Appetite, the
consciousness of its own guilt makes it willing to suppose it self no nobler a
Substance than those Material Spirits which have led it captive all the while,
that so it may die with the Body, and not be called to an account for its
unnatural self-abasement. Alii deliciis immersi ac voluptatibus omnia cuperent
cum illis pariter concidere, hoc est, cum corpore, nec esse ullum Judicem qui
vitae hujus rationem a nobis reposceret, Lud. Viv. de Ver. Fid. lib. 1.145.

It is worth your while to examine, whether something of this nature be not the
Spring and Fountain of these brutish Principles; and if so, you have reason to
suspect them, as proceeding from so vile an Original.

It is also possible, that some thinking Persons of a sober conversation, may
have an Ingenium Haereticum, and affect singularity in Opinions to make
themselves more taken notice of, and admired by such who have not Wit enough to
detect their Sophistry. But ordinarily it is Men's love to their Lusts and
sensual Pleasures, their neglect of God and Religion, their wilful despising
the Concerns* and Interests of a future State, which disposes them to wish
their Souls were Mortal, for fear of what may come after, and then to believe
(though not without a great deal of wavering and hesitation) that they are so.
(...), says Hierocles. A wicked Man would not have his Soul to be Immortal,
lest he should be punished for his wickedness, yet he anticipates the Sentence
of his Judge, condemning it to Death beforehand. Malunt extingui quam ad
supplicia reparari, Minut. Felix.

Direct. 2. Be not overfond of your present Conceits. It becomes you to suppose
that you may be mistaken, because many (as wise Men) have been so before you.
He knows little of the weakness of Humane Understandings, not of the
unsearchable depths of the Works of God, who sees not how necessary a
qualification Modesty, and a promptitude to suspect his own Judgment, must
needs be in a Philosopher. And though this must not be so far strained as to
make us turn Scepticks, yet it ought to restrain us from an over-forwardness to
vent uncouth Opinions, and from passing an hasty judgment on things, before we
have well weighed what may be said on both sides. These things which appear
difficult to you, may perhaps be easy to another; and those things which you
look upon as Demonstrations, to a more discerning Person will, it may be,
appear no better than Dreams; and Self-conceit will make you slight the
weightiest Reasons which are brought to awake and undeceive you. Some of you
value your selves upon the account of a natural quickness of Wit, with some
acquired Scraps of Philosophy; but take care that this do not make you set too
high an esteem upon your little crude Notions, which a small time may discover
to be mere trifles, and Death will terribly confute for ever.

Direct. 3. Let your Diligence and Seriousness in these Studies be answerable
to the weight and consequence of those Truths you enquire after. It Is a matter
that nearly concerns you, to know whether the Soul be Immortal or no. If after
all the pains you have taken to make your self believe, that the Soul dies
with the Body, you should at last find your self mistaken; where are you then?
What will you do when Death has drawn aside this Vail of Ignorance, and placed
you in the Society of wretched Spirits, forsaken of God, and past all hopes of
recovery? Will not this be a dreadful disappointment? If I saw a Man cut a
little too deep when he was pairing his Nails, perhaps I might laugh at him for
his rashness; but if I see him attempting to Stab himself, that is no laughing
matter, and I am guilty of Murder, if I do not endeavor to prevent it; and
therefore I say again, be serious. Let me tell you from a Person of as
comprehensive a Genius, and as high a Station as the best and greatest of you
all, (the great Cardinal Richlieu) That the Soul is a serious Thing, and must
be either sad here for a moment, or sad for ever.

It Is an easy matter to get some crude, undigested Notions, and Terms of Art to
play withal; but solid and satisfactory Knowledge must be the fruit of
Industry; and hard impartial Study: And you have reason enough to question all
those Opinions which are the Offspring of unthinking sloathfulness, though
none are usually more confident than such Triflers, who like drunken Persons
boast of their Wit to the increase of their shame. The best way to know that
the Soul is Immortal, is to keep its noblest Faculties indue Exercise, and then
they will speak for themselves.

Direct. 4. See that your Ends be right in these Studies, i. e. suitable to the
tendency of those Truths you search into. Study the Dignity of Humane Nature,
that you may walk as becomes Men, worthy the Faculties of that Rational
Immortal Spirit which God has given you. Right ends will help you in the use
of means; but if you study these things merely to please your Phansy, this is
but a more refined sort of Sensuality, and then it is no wonder if you miss of
the Truth, nor indeed any great matter whether you find it or no, for any great
good it is like to do you.

An honest manly Design in these Studies, will prepare you for the
entertainment of the Truth. Indeed it is a noble Employment to enquire into the
Works of God, and especially into our own Souls, that we may know him, and love
him better, and discharge our Duty toward him more faithfully; and in so
doing, we may humbly expect some such Afflatum divini Numinis; (as our Author
speaks, page 15.) which may enlighten our Understandings, and lead us into
those Truths which we seek after. Otherwise it is to small purpose to talk of
the Immortality of the Soul to such Persons, who are resolved to gratify their
Lusts, though they lose their Reputations and Souls too in the Adventure. Thus
Bias the Philosopher, being asked by some vain Fellows, What that Piety he
talked of meant? Answered, It was to no purpose to speak to a Man of those
things which he never intended to practice. See Laert. 22.

Direct. 5. Proceed orderly in your Studies; and do not begin at the wrong end.
Lay down the most plain and certain Truths first, and so ascend gradually to
those that are more difficult. Try those things that are uncertain, by (and do
not plead them against) those that are clear and certain, unless you have a
mind to bewilder your selves, and to know nothing, because you cannot know all.
There are many Questions concerning the Origin of the Soul, its Union with the
Body, its moving of it, and Direction of the Spirits, its different Mode of
Operation when it shall be separate from the Body, its Reunion with the Body at
the Resurrection, etc. which will puzzle you when you have done your best, and
peradventure yea, peradventure no, is very often the wisest Answer you can give
to them: To such matters the sayings of Xenophon in Varro, is pertinent,
Hominis est haec opinari, Dei scire. God only knows them, and we conjecture.
But must we therefore renounce or undervalue that Knowledge which is
attainable? What if I know not how the Child is formed in the Womb, (after all
that Dr. Needham has said, de formato Foetu) must I therefore deny that the
Child is formed there at all? This were ridiculous. You may easily apply it.
Remember that which is greater, cannot be comprehended by that which is less.
The Soul fettered in the Body, is in some respect less and weaker than it self;
as Duplessis observes. Shall we quarrel with the Almighty, because he has
hidden some of the Secrets of his Workmanship from us? Or (like froward
Children) cast away what is given us, because we may not have all we would
desire, though never so unfit for us. Plurimorum enim infelicium ingeniorum
inde orta est ruina, quod dum nota and necessaria plane negligunt, ant
sensualitate and vitiorum mole obruunt, and absconditis inutilibus enixe
student, idque ingenio superbiente, caliginis suae non satis conscio, quando
frustra se non patefacta quaesivisse comperiunt; fatigati and desperantes, de
certis etiam, and necessariis dubitant, and ipsam animorum immortalitatem
negant. In tanta scilicet mala stultos, perversus studiorum ordo praecipitat.
Method. Theol. Part 1. page 155.

In order therefore to your satisfaction in this Point, give me leave to
recommend to you the following Method.

1st, Digest well those Arguments which demonstrate the Being and Perfections
of the Deity. That there is a God, and that the Souls of Men are Immortal, are
Truths so nearly linked together, that he who denies the one, may justly be
suspected of a Disposition to deny the other. Atheism and Sadducism spring from
the same Root, and must both be attacqued together.

The invisible Things of God are clearly seen by the things that are made, even
his Eternal Power and Godhead. What think you? Can there be an Effect without a
Cause? Could this glorious Fabric of Heaven and Earth be reared by Chance?
Could the Sun, Moon, and Stars, have any Light, but from the Father of Lights?
Could the Earth be hung upon nothing, but by him who upholdeth all things by
the Word of his Power? Is it not demonstrable that something must needs have
been Eternal? If you should suppose a time or space (call it what you will) in
which there was nothing, will it not necessarily follow that there never could
have been any thing, because nothing could have produced nothing?

Moreover, there can be no excellency in the Effect, which is not some way or
other in the Cause; and therefore, since so much Power, Wisdom, and Goodness,
shines forth in the Greatness, Order, and Usefulness of the several Parts of
the Creation, and their Aptitude and Tendency to the Beauty, and Perfection of
the whole; and so much that is unsearchable in the meanest Creature; and since
in the Enumeration of Causes, it is absurd to run in Infinitum, you must needs
come up to a first Cause, Eternal, and of Incomprehensible Perfection, who has
more Excellency than all subordinate Causes put together; for they have none
but what he gave them, and it is not possible any Creature should be so perfect
as he that made it.

2dly, Study well the Doctrine of Divine Providence, and consider what full and
clear Evidence we have, that the World is ordered and governed by it. Epicurus
denied, That God was the Creator of the World. Eximendum imprimis est a
sollicitudine, ac labor Mundi extruendi Divinum Numen, Gassend. Syntag.
Philos. Epicur. 72. And upon the same account he denied Providence. Non enim
cum felicitate congruunt negotia, sollicitudines, irae, gratiae, etc. 78. The
like you have in Laert. page 285. In Epicur. and page 300. And Lucretius treads
in the same Steps. Now, this is, in effect, to deny the Being and Perfections
of the Deity, or to measure his Perfection by our Imperfection, and to leave
both the Creation and Government of the World to blind Chance, or to that empty
Nothing, which they call Nature. And yet they speak contemptibly of Fortune
too, though they say the World was made by Chance, Gassend. Syntag. 49, 50. So
ill do the Principles of this Philosophy hang together. How much better is it
to say with Cicero, Deo nil praestantius, ab eo igitur necesse est mundum regi.
De Nature. Deor. And again, Whoever doubts of Providence, may as well doubt,
whether the Sun shine or no, Ibid. It Is all one to a Being of Infinite
Perfection, to regard the Motions and Actions of every Creature, as if he had
but one to mind. God has not made a World greater than himself, and it is
dishonorable to him to suppose, that he is only an unconcerned Spectator of
the Affairs and Transactions of his Creatures. Besides, it is Nonsense to think
that the Creatures can either Subsist or Act without him. His Name is I A M,
and all created Beings compared with him, are but Non-Entities, as Plato
observes, Id solum esse quod est aeternum, and immutabile, caetera potius non
esse, quam esse. In Timaeo.

And it is observable how Nature it self prompts us to look unto him for relief
and help in Exigences, and to lift up Hands and Eyes to Heaven when we know not
what to do. Thus it bears witness to the Divine Providence.

And the Checks of Conscience for secret Sins, in like manner evince, That
there is an All-seeing Eye upon us. And so Natural Light prepares for
Supernatural.

3dly, See that your Souls be possessed with awful Apprehensions of so great a
Majesty. This or nothing will make you serious, and restrain your Thoughts from
those masterless Vagaries, in which Irreligious Philosophers are wont to
indulge themselves to their own Destruction. Dare you take his Name in vain? Or
vilify his Works to his dishonor? Does not his Excellency make you afraid, and
his dread fall upon you? Look up to the Heavens which are higher than you. The
Sun in its Meridian brightness, is but a shadow of him who is LIGHT, and in
whom there is no Darkness at all. Millions of Angels continually adore him: The
whole Host of Heaven is at his beck; should he give Commission but to one of
his Angels to destroy ten thousand such as you, how quickly would it be done?
His Power is Omnipotent: His Wisdom Infinite. Who would set Thorns and Briars
in array against him? He would pass through them, and consume them. How much
better is it to lay hold of his Strength, that you may be at peace with him? Be
not deceived, God is not mocked. You may flatter and befool your selves for a
while, but what will you do in the end thereof? When your mournful Friends
stand about you, and your Physicians give you up, as past hope of recovery? How
dismal will the thoughts of Eternity then be? How severely will Conscience pay
you home for all the Tricks and Abuses you have put upon it? And whither will
you fly to avoid it? Do you think your dreaming Philosophy will then stand you
in stead? Will it secure you from the amazing Apprehensions of what is like to
come after? Or will you not rather curse the Day that ever you became
acquainted with these brutish Principles? Well, if none of these things move
you, The Lord have mercy on you, for all good Men are deeply affected with
them. However remember you were fairly warned of your danger.

4thly, Abstract your Minds as much as possibly you can from things Corporeal,
that you may converse more intimately with your own Souls. Divest your Spirits
of all that is foreign to them, that you may better behold their naked Beauty
and Perfection. Let sensible Objects keep their distance, and suffer not any
tumultuous Passions to interrupt your more calm, retired thoughts, or to raise
Mists before you. And then you will quickly find, that the more deeply you
contemplate the noblest Acts of your own Souls, the greater evidence will
appear of their Spiritual, Immortal Nature. All those Discourses, which have
been written of the Soul's Heraldry, will not blazon it so well as it self will
do, as a Learned Man observes. When we turn our Eye in upon it, 'twill soon
tell us its Royal Pedigree and Noble Extraction, by those Sacred Hieroglyphics
which it bears upon it self. Smith's Discourses, page 66.

Many Philosophers have spoken well of this Abstraction of our Minds, and
retiring into our selves; but none more divinely than the Platonists, and
Plotinus in particular.

This made them say, That Philosophy is Mortis Meditatio; because that as in
Natural Death the Soul is actually separated from the Body, so in these
Philosophical Contemplations we must abstract it from coporeal Commerce as much
as we can. And though this saying is commonly (and particularly by Plutarch)
ascribed to Plato, yet St. Jerome tells us Pythagoras was the first Man who
said, Philosophiam esse meditationem Mortis quotidie de carcere corporis
nitentem educere Animae libertatem. See Lypsii Manuduc. ad Stoic. Philos. And
this (says Clemens Alexandrinus) Pythagoras meant by the five years silence
which he enjoined his Disciples. Ut scilicet a rebus sensilibus aversi nuda
mente, etc. However Plato discourses excellently about it: See his Phaedo,
where he brings in Socrates telling his Friends, That of all Men Philosophers
should not be unwilling to dye, who have been endeavoring all their lives long
to abstract themselves from their Bodies as much as they can. (...), atque ad
animam se convertere. And should they therefore be unwilling to be set free
from those Bodies which have been such an hinderance to them in their searches
after Truth? And thus he sums up the matter, page 89. (...), etc. If while we
are in the Body, we can discern nothing purely, it must either follow that we
shall never attain to knowledge, or that we shall do it after Death; for then,
and not before, the Soul will subsist without the Body, and while we live here,
the less commerce we have with it, the nearer approaches we make to knowledge.

Antisthenes being asked what good he had got by Philosophy? Answered, (...),
He learnt by it to converse with himself, Laert.

Aristotle himself owns the necessity of this Abstraction, and makes it the
peculiar Privilege of some Men, more abstracted than others from Corporeal
Commerce, to improve their Understandings in the steady Contemplation of Truth.

And so does Cicero in those excellent Words, Magni est ingenii revocare mentem
a sensibus, and cogitationem a consuetudine abducere, Tuse. Quaest. lib. 1.333.
and again 350.

And to the same purpose speaks Van Helmont, page 342. though in a Dialect
almost peculiar to himself.

And so Descatres (how ingeniously soever he talks elsewhere of Matter and
Motion) when he comes to consider his own Soul, thus he begins, (See Meditat.
3. de prim. Philos.) Claudam nunc oculos, aures obturabo, avocabo omnes sensus,
meque solum alloquendo, etc.

Wonder not that I insist so largely upon this, for the Life of Philosophy (I
had almost said of Religion too) consists in it.

But when all is done, those Persons who have long suffered their Minds to be
immerst in things Corporeal, must take a great deal of pains before they can
extricate them from those unhappy Complications, which have betrayed them to so
many mistakes, and kept them so ignorant of their more noble Faculties and
Powers.

5thly, So live, that you may not be afraid of the Doctrine of the Soul's
Immortality. I have showed you already, that the Interest of men's Lusts will
strangely biass their Judgments, and therefore keep the Sensitive Appetite at
an under: Yield not to its extravagant demands. Accustom it to be frequently
controlled, and let it feel that you have something nobler than Material
Spirits within you. The Soul never more forgets its own Dignity, than when it
suffers Sense and Appetite to turn Dictators, and carry all before them. This
disposes it to terrene and sordid Conceptions concerning it self. Vicious
Inclinations are the Root of corrupt Principles: Men will hardly love those
Doctrines which Prophesy no good concerning them, but evil.

On the other hand, If you so live that your Consciences cannot upbraid you
with an Atheistical Contempt or Forgetfulness of him that made you: If you
contemplate his Excellencies, and delight in him as the chiefest Good, and pay
that Homage which is due to him in your Religious Worship and Attendances upon
him, such Exercises as these will soon convince you, that your Souls are no
such Earthly Material Things, as you are ready to imagine. The thoughts of a
glorious Immortality will be refreshing to you, and you will have some
Anticipations of it in the serenity of a virtuous Mind, and the testimony of a
good Conscience. You will quickly see that Vice and Wickedness debase the Soul,
and that Goodness and Piety are things too noble to be subjected so meanly as
in a few corruptible, perishing, material Spirits. If your Souls have once the
Image of the Divine Holiness imprinted upon them, it will dispose you to
discern and acknowledge that Natural Image of the Spiritual, Immortal Deity,
which is antecedent to the other, because there must be an agreeableness
between the Faculty and the Object, and such Divine Qualities must be seated in
a Subject suitable to them.

6thly, Take notice of that certain and full evidence, which we have of a world
of Spirits. How near many of them are to us, and how often concerning themselves
about us. The Books which have been written about Witchcrafts, Possessions,
Apparitions, etc. do all prove, That there are multitudes of Malignant Spirits,
which seek the Ruin and Destruction of Mankind, and carry on a Warfare against
the Interest of God and Religion in the World. They know well enough that the
Souls of Men are Immortal, elfe they would not take so much pains to destroy
them. I need not name the Authors who Treat of those things, Fernelius, Wierus,
Glanvill, More, Baxter, and many more.

And on the other hand, Ambrose, Lawrence, Zanchy, etc. will show you, That
there are benign Spirits, which guard and watch over good Men, and Minister for
them. If you disbelieve all the Testimonies which these Learned Persons have
given in the Case, you forfeit your own Credit, and cannot reasonably expect
that any Man should believe you.

As to the Matter of Apparitions, even about Monuments and Sepulchers, Socrates
makes mention of them. Phaedo 117. and supposes them to be the Souls of bad
Men in a State of punishment for the wickedness of their Lives, 118. and Cicero
in his Tusc. Quaest. takes notice of such Apparations, Visis quibusdam saepe
movebantur, hisque maxim nocturnis, ut viderentur, ii qui vita excesserant,
vivere.

St. Austine makes mention of one Gennadius, a Physician, and an excellent
Natural Philosopher, and withal very charitable to the Poor, who falling into
doubt concerning the Immortality of the Soul, was instructed concerning it in a
Dream by a conspicuous young Man that appeared to him.

The famous Story of Evagrius the Philosopher, who appeared to Synesius the
Bishop after his Death, you may find in Baronius's Annals, ad Annum 412. where
he also relates the Story of Michael Mercatus and Marsilius Ficinus, intimate
Friends, and both addicted to the Platonic Philosophy. Who after many Debates
about the Immortality of the Soul, and a Future State, mutually agreed, That
whether soever of them died first, should, if the Laws of the Invisible World
would admit of it, appear to the Survivor, and give him an account of these
things. Thus, says Baronius, they swore to one another. Not long after
Marsilius dies; and appears to his Friend, and tells him, those things were
true, which the Christian Faith taught concerning the Immortality of the Soul.
This Baronius says he had from the Grandson of the fore-mentiond Mercatus. And
the same is reported by many other Writers.

A like account you have of the Apparition of Major George Sydenham to Capt.
William Dyke, (who had made such an agreement as the former) telling him, That
there was a God, and a very just and terrible one, and that (if he did not turn
over a new Leaf) he will find it so. See Glanvill's Sadduc. Triumph. 408. But
those that regard not the Sacred Records, will not be convinced, tho one come
to them from the load.

However, such passages as these have been believed by wise Men in all Ages,
and by Persons as capable of discerning Truth, and distinguishing it from
Impostures, as any of the Pretenders of this present Generation, who care not
for hearing any news from the Invisible World.

7thly, If your Genius incline you to Philosophy, you may easily find nobler
things than Matter and Motion to entertain your selves with, if you will but
consult the Writings of Plato, Plotinus, Epictetus, Cicero, Seneca, Antonine,
etc.

But above all, if you believe that God regards the Affairs and Actions of
Mankind, then look unto him for Direction and Light in this matter, and he that
so seeks after the Truth will hardly miss of it in its more weighty and
important Instances.

CHAP. X. Directions to such as believe the Immortality of the Soul, showing
how they ought to improve so important a Doctrine.
THUS far I have proved that the Soul is Immortal, and laid down some
Directions for those that hesitate in the Matter, in order to their better
receiving of the proof that has been given. But since there are many who
profess to believe this great Truth, and yet live as if they believed it not,
and so encourage those of the contrary Opinion, and harden them in their
Impiety; I must not let go this point, till I have drawn some more practical
Inferences from it, which if those that believe it would live up to, 'twould
conduce more effectually to the Conviction of the Irreligious sort of
Philosophers, than the most accurate Reasonings are like to do. There is
somewhat in an holy Life which commands Awe and Reverence from the worst of
Men. Thus Herod feared John the Baptist, knowing that he was a just Man and an
holy, Mark 6.20. Good Examples many times prove more powerful, than either
Doctrines or Precepts.

What will it avail any Man to believe well, and to live ill; to be Orthodox in
his judgment, and Scandalous in his practice; to own the Dignity of Humane
Nature, and yet live as if Man was only a more subtle kind of a Beast to rule
the rest?

To this purpose you have a very observable passage in the Preface to Mr.
Baxter's Reasons, etc.

I often think what one told me, That an Infidel answered him, when he asked him,
How he could quiet his Conscience in such a desperate State? says he, I rather
wonder how you can quiet your Conscience in such a common careless course of
life, believing as you do? If I believed such things as you do, I should think
no care, and diligence, and holiness could be enough.

And the late E. of Rochester told an intimate Acquaintance of his, There was
nothing that gave him, and many others, a more secret encouragement in their
ill ways, than that those who pretended to believe, lived so that they could
not be thought to be in earnest, when they said it. (See his Life by Dr. Burnet
page 120). For he was sure Religion was either a mere Contrivance, or the most
important thing that could be: So that if he once believed, he would set
himself in great earnest to live suitably to it. Ibid.

Therefore that you may not destroy your own Souls, and contribute so much to
the ruin of others, even while you profess to believe the Immortality of the
Soul; take these following Directions:

Direct. 1. If you believe that the Soul is Immortal, let it be your great care
to secure your Eternal Interest. If there was no more than a bare probability
that the Souls of Men must be for ever either happy or miserable, it would yet
be a point of the highest Wisdom to take the safest side, and to prepare for
Eternity, as much as possible. But when there is so full evidence, both Natural
and Supernatural, as puts the case beyond probability, and makes it certain, it
must needs be the most stupendous folly to neglect the Interest of our Souls,
which are daily hasting to their Eternal State. If the Soul be Immortal (says
Socrates) we had need to take care of it, and the danger is dreadful if we
neglect it, Phaedo, 167.

And here let me ask you, Do you not know that the Life of Man is short and
uncertain? That the deceitful pleasures of the Flesh will soon be at an end;
and that the more delightful your accommodations are here below, the more
unwilling ('it is likely) you will be to leave them? -- Haec sunt quae faciunt
invitos mori. And can you choose but fear what will follow after Death? Do you
not know that the time of this present Life is given us to prepare for another?
And what are you in pursuit of, that can justify so stupid a neglect of your
greatest concerns, or that will make amends for the loss of your Immortal
Souls? Have you not sometimes thoughts of repenting hereafter? Why, in so
thinking you implicitly own the Necessity of Repentance; and is it not the
height of madness to delay the doing of that which must be done, or you are
undone and lost for ever?

In a word: Are you not doing violence to your own Consciences all this while,
and putting away far from you that which most nearly concerns you? Be persuaded
therefore at length with a manly Resolution to lay aside every weight, and the
Sins that do so easily beset you, and run with Patience the Race that is set
before you. And if you be so resolved, you may proceed as follows:

1st. Labor to understand what it is that must make your Souls happy, if ever
they be so. You may know by the acts of your Understandings and Wills, as
before described, what Felicity and Perfection your Souls are fundamentally
capacitated for: Nothing but the highest Truth, and the chiefest Good can
satisfy them. You may divert them for a while with variety of lower Objects,
but they quickly grow weary, and run from one thing to another; which may show
you that they are not yet got to their Center. You may charm them with the
Delights of Sense and Appetite, and some more refined Speculations too; and yet
you do but degrade them all the while, and so they will tell you, if you take
them apart, and freely converse with them. Suffer them to act according to
their nobler Tendencies, and you will soon find them conversing with the World
of Spirits, to which they are so nearly allied; and reaching forth toward
Immortality as a thing suitable to their Nature, and designed for them by its
Author. They will be looking to their great. Original, and he will meet them
with the Attractive Influences of his Grace. This is the way to ennoble them
indeed: This is something worthy the Nature of a Man. These are delights which
you may justify, while the sordid pleasures of the Flesh leave a sting behind
'em.

The Life which I am exhorting you to, has something in it not only manly, and
rational, but also Divine, viz. To exercise your selves in contemplating and
admiring the Perfections of the Deity, till correspondent impressions be
wrought upon your own Spirits, transforming them into the same image from glory
to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. And when once you have learnt to relish these spiritual,
intellectual Pleasures, you will look down with a generous disdain upon those
Husks which you were once fond of. You will scorn those empty Notions, which
before you were in love with, and have a clear testimony of your Immortality
within your selves. You will detest being so profane as to sell your
Birthright for a morsel of unsatisfying, transitory Pleasures. You will then
be fully convinced that true Holiness (which consists in separating our selves
from that which is common, and unclean, that we may be devoted to the Love and
Service of God) is perfective of Humane Nature, and essentially necessary to
its Happiness; and that it is a perfect contradiction for an unholy Soul to be
truly blessed, because nothing but knowing, and delighting in God, can make us
so, and in these consists our Holiness.

And what is there that can justly offend you in such a Life as this? Can you
be better, or more honorably employed? Do not even the worst of men, when they
come to die, wish they had thus lived? and the best bewail that they have
fallen so much short? Lord, pardon mine Omissions (said Bishop Usher.) Can you
be too diligent and serious in the Service of him who has done all the good
that ever was done for you? and must do all that ever shall be done to make you
happy? He needs not you: The loss is your own, if you turn your backs upon him.
Consider how much patience he has already exercised toward you. O do not
slight the offers of his Mercy and Grace, and then think to complain of him as
unmerciful in destroying you. Thus did that wicked and slothful servant, Matthew.
25.24.

I know indeed that the carnal mind is enmity against God, and prejudiced
against these things which lead toward him; but I know also that this is the
disease of Corrupt Nature, which, wherever it is, must be cured, or the Party
is ruined for ever.

Neither is it sitting still, and complaining, that will cure it, much less
pleading it as an excuse against our Duty. A willingness to be healed, is in
this Case a great step toward it. But I proceed.

2dly, Humble your selves for the gross neglects you have hitherto been guilty
of. What have you done since you came into the World that is worthy the Nature
and Capacities of a man? Have you not been making provision for the flesh to
fulfill the Lusts thereof, while the Immortal Spirit has been almost starved for
want of its proper Food, viz. Knowledge and Virtue. Nascitur enim ex prudentia
sapere, ex temperantia sobrium esse, and pietate Deum colere. Hae sunt cibi
animae propie, quae idonea est ad sugendum, etc. Philo Judaeus. 127.

Is it a light matter that you have debased so noble a Nature all this while,
and at once sacrilegiously robbed God of that Honor which was due to him from
the Rational Creature, and unnaturally set your Souls to sale for every trifle?
What if he (whose you are, whether you serve him or no) should demand of you an
account, what you have done with his Creature, how you came to prostitute your
Souls (which are more his) at so vile a rate? What if he had long since, in the
midst of your carnal Security, called you out of that Flesh in which you
breathe, and sent you into a Place where the Immortality of the Soul, the
weight of Divine Wrath, and the evil of Sin, are better known? Are you not
ashamed to live as if you were mere Impertinences in the Creation? while the
Inferior Creatures round about you answer the Ends of their respective Beings.
Can you suppose that you were born for no higher purposes, than to eat, drink,
sleep, sport, talk, and make an appearance for a while upon the Stage of the
World, and then go off with satisfaction, as if you had very well performed
your part?

If you would be ashamed to own such monstrous Conceits as these, live not as
if you did own them.

Consider seriously (for you can think, and think again about matters that less
concern you) how wretchedly you have been befooled, and led Captive all this
while by the great Deceiver, who has carried on his design against you
underboard (though you observed him not;) and when you are past hope, will
readily let you know, that you have lost, and he has got the game. Let me
conclude this Head with the words of a most Excellent Poet,

In cooler thoughts consider what you have done,
And think that each of you has killed a man,
Stabbing with murderous hands
That noble Reason by which Mortals are
Most like their Maker, and do bear
Their great Creator's Superscription.
Think lastly on the World's great Doom,
When guilty Souls must to an Audit come;
A far more heavy reckoning than e're You met with here,
More true by far, and yet far more severe.
Think on all this, and think on it soberly,
And then perhaps you will say, as well as I,
Your mirth is madness, Wine a poison fell,
Your Paradise is Bedlam, if not Hell.
3dly, Trifle no longer, lest death overtake you unprepared for it. Now is the
accepted time. Now is the day of salvation. Seek the Lord while he may be
found. Call upon him while he is near. Which words, though encouraging to true
Penitents, yet carry in them an awful intimation of the necessity of being
speedy in our Repentance, and that because the time is coming when God will not
be found, when they shall call, and he will not answer, Prove. 1.28.

The longer you delay, the more will your Guilt be increased, the habits of Sin
strengthened, the Spirit of God grieved; beside the hazard you run of perishing
in the mean time before you are aware. And if hereafter you should be awakened
to think of repenting, and preparing for another World, it is ten to one, but he
who has abused you so long, will then tempt you to believe it is too late.
Methinks the Consideration of Eternal Misery should even overwhelm you, and
make you tremble at that Justice which you can neither resist nor escape.

Bear with this plainness. Your Case makes it necessary. If Complements and
smooth words would serve the turn, you should have them. But alas! while I am
writing, and you reading, Time is running on, and Eternity is almost upon us,
though we too little consider it.

How little a part of Time can you call your own? The time past is no longer
yours. Of the time to come you are utterly uncertain. And as for the present
time, the (...), it is gone while you are naming it, and Philosophers are not
(...) greed to call it a part of time, because of its indivisibility. What
shall I say? O that I knew but how to persuade you; how joyfully would I do it,
though I lost Estate, Liberty, yea, or Life it self in the Action. But it is sad
to think that I should leave you under greater guilt than I found you. The Lord
pity you, and teach you to pity your selves.

And here I will take liberty to transcribe the words of a Reverend Person, so
well suited to the present Occasion.

The State of the Case speaks it self, that there is no sitting still here.
This is no Condition, Soul, to be rested in, unless thou be provided to
encounter the Terrors of Eternal Darkness, and endure the Tortures of
Everlasting Burnings. And yet am I not unapprehensive how great a difficulty a
carnal Heart will make of it to bestir it self in order to any redress of so
deplorable a Case. -- They esteem our strongest Reasonings (as Leviathan does
Iron and Brass) but as Straw, and rotten Wood, and laugh at Divine Threatenings
as he does at the shaking of the Spear. Yea, and when we have convinced them,
yet we have done nothing; though we have got their Judgments and Consciences on
our side, and their own, their Lusts only reluctate and carry all. Mr. How Is
Blessedness of the Righteous, page 344, etc.

4thly, Understand aright wherein the Life and Power of Religion does consist.
1 Cor. 4.20. The Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. We read of
Persons that have a name to live, and yet are dead, Rev. 3.1. And, among the
Monsters of the last Times, some are mentioned that have a form of godliness,
but deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. And now let us enquire seriously what
this power of Godliness is.

It cannot be supposed to consist merely in an adherence to this or that Party.
Nay, it is so far from consisting in this, that it is scarce consistent with a
dividing, censorious, uncharitable Frame and Disposition. Siding into Parties,
judging and despising one another, and crying out, -- Who is on my side, who?
has long been the shame of Christians, and one of the greatest Obstructions to
the Interest of our common Lord. This Temper began early to show it self, even
among the Disciples themselves, Mark 9.38, 39. -- Master, we saw one casting
out devils in thy name, and he followed not us; and we forbad him, etc. From a
like Disposition you find ver. 34. they had been disputing among themselves who
should be the greatest; and when our Lord questioned them about it, ver. 33.
they were afraid to tell what they had been talking of.

How quickly shall we all be ashamed of our childish Wranglings? Is this to
become as little Children in a Scripture sense? Is this to demonstrate that we
are his Disciples, by loving one another? Or is it not rather to proclaim to
the World, that we know not what manner of Spirit we are of?

Tertullian in his Apology, cap. 39. page 47. glories in that Love and Unity
which was among those Primitive Christians, and which the Heathens observed,
crying out with Astonishment. -- Vide ut invicem se diligant, and pro alterutro
mori sunt parati. See how they love one another, and are ready to dye one for
another. Hence he takes occasion sharply (as his manner is) to upbraid the
Heathens, that they hated one another, and were more ready to destroy one
another.

The Learned Grotius mentioning this passage of Tertullian, makes the following
Reflection upon it. -- Quid nunc illi dicerent, etc. What would those
Christians now say, if they saw our times? If they saw not merely sharp
Contentions; but even cruel Wars amongst Christians; and quas ob reculas? for
what trifles? If they heard all other marks of the Church brought in with a
great deal of clamor, rather than that ( viz. Loving one another) which was
assigned by its Master.

Neither can the power of Godliness be supposed to consist in a customary
Attendance upon the public Worship of God. Herod heard John gladly, and did
many things. The Pharisees made long Prayers, and Fasted often. And the Prophet
speaks of some, Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. who came and sat before him as God's people;
yea, they would hear his words, but not do them. With their Mouth they have
showed much love, while their Heart run after their Covetousness.

Moreover a Man may be able to Discourse very well of Religion; may be very
just in his dealings; very charitable to the poor; quiet and peaceable among
his Neighbors, free from gross and scandalous pollutions; be no Extortioner,
Adulterer, unjust Person, Luke 18.11. and yet be a stranger to the Life and
Power of Christianity all the while. I know this will go ill down with those
who have built their hopes of Salvation upon no better grounds than these. But
there is no helping them without undeceiving them.

In a word therefore, these following places of Scripture (if you be willing to
learn) will show you wherein the power of Religion consists.

Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Matt. 22.37, 38. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind. This is the first, and great commandment. Chap. 10.37. He that loves
father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: or, as Luke has it, cannot
be my disciple. Romans 8.9. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his. 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature. Ephesians. 2.10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works which God has before ordained that we should walk in them. Tit.
2.14. -- Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Col. 1.2.
Giving thanks unto the father which has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saints in light. 2 Cor. 5.5. Now he that has wrought us for
the self-same thing, is God, who also has given unto us the earnest of the
spirit.

Think not that I have here picked together a few places of Scripture merely to
serve a turn; I tell you the whole Strain of the Gospel runs this way; and if
it be hid, its hid to them that are lost.

Now if this Gospel be true, certainly the Nature of Christianity is little
understood, or considered, by multitudes that yet affect to be called
Christians. It Is no such easy matter to be a Christian indeed, as too many are
apt to imagine. Running, Striving, Wrestling, taking the Kingdom of Heaven by
Violence, do all imply that we have many difficulties to conflict withal, and
must either be in good Earnest, or else lose all our labor.

It Is further observable, that there must be a mighty change wrought upon us by
the Spirit of God, else Christ will never own us as his Members.

And it is as clear, that this great change consists in turning our Hearts from
the love of the Creature, to the Predominant love of God, and Holiness. This is
the Life, the Soul of the new Nature, which must animate all our other Graces,
and be in us a continual Spring of holy Obedience.

In a word; In this consists our fitness for Heaven; and without it Heaven
would not be Heaven to us, were it possible we could be admitted thither. These
things are so plain, that I need not further enlarge upon them, unless it be to
bring them nearer to your own case, and help you to try your selves by them.

Let us therefore ponder the matter a little. Can that Man be said to make
Religion his business, who will not be persuaded soberly to exercise his Reason
about it? Nor so much as to put the question to himself, -- What was I Created
and Redeemed for? What shall I do to be saved? Degenerate Souls! To what end
was your Reason given you? Was it, think you, only to enable you the better to
care, and plod, and provide for the Flesh? Alas! that you should know your
selves no better!

Can that Man be supposed to love God with all his Heart and Soul, who cares
not how little he thinks upon him? has no delight in his Service, but is glad
when it is over? No Zeal for his Honor and Glory in the world; no concern when
his Name is blasphemed and profaned by the ungodly? who allows himself in a
course of wilful Rebellion against him, and will not be persuaded to renounce
his Lusts, nor to set up the Worship of God in his Family and Closet, how
plainly soever the Scripture enjoins it. In a word; who could be willing enough
to continue on Earth for ever, might he but enjoy Fleshly prosperity, fullness,
and ease, though he should never know more of God, nor love him better than now
he does, which is next to none at all.

And what shall we say of those who turn Religion into matter of ridicule and
contempt? whose heart rises against any thing that is serious? They set their
Wits at work to put Nicknames upon it, and yet the Wretches have the front to
usurp the Christian name. Prodigious Insolence!

Is that man regenerate, think you, who, if you ask him what Regeneration
means? what it is to be a new Creature? to be led by the Spirit of God? cannot
answer you three words of sense about it? nay; perhaps, knows not that there
are any such Expressions in the Bible.

Or can it be imagined, that a Person whose heart is set upon the world, and
has no relish, nor savor of better things, but is quite out of his Element
when employed in any thing that has a nearer Relation, and tendency toward
Heaven; can such an one (I say) be imagined meet for that Inheritance, or to
have any treasure there, where his heart is not?

I could wish to know what Notion such Men have of Heaven; What think you? How
are the Saints and Angels employed there? Do they love God or no? Are they not
wrapped up in admiring his Excellencies and Perfections? and filled with
continual Emanations, and Influences of Light and Love from him, and even
transformed by that blessed Intuition? While the impure Spirits of the wicked
are doomed to a blacker Region, and placed in the Society of the Devils that
deceived them. And can you believe two States so vastly different hereafter,
and yet not consider that there must be some suitable preparation while we are
here? something in the very disposition of our minds which may point out to us
whither we are going? And since your Eternal Happiness lies upon it, is it not
worth your while to enquire, whether your Spirits are formed to any such
temper, as comports with the description of Heaven which has been set before
you, and which you must be forced to allow of, unless you will renounce both
Reason and Scripture?

And yet I deny not but the best of Men may have many Infirmities; Who can
understand his errors? If we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves. But
still you must observe, the sinful weaknesses of good Men are matter of
continual grief to them: They watch and pray, and strive against them, and
heartily desire to be rid of them, and long for that blessed State, in which
they shall be perfectly so, Romans 7.24.

But on the other hand, wicked men love their Lusts; plead for them, endeavor
to extenuate them, cannot endure to think of parting with them, would rather
have them gratified than mortified (as Austin confesses of himself before his
Conversion): so that they are under the power of Sin, and Strangers to that
Life of Grace which would make them see and feel the evil of it.

However, this consideration should make religious persons the more
circumspect, because others are so apt to take encouragement from their
failings.

These are no Singularities of Opinion, nor Fanatic, Enthusiastical Notions,
but words of Truth and Soberness, in which all judicious good Christians (of
what denomination soever) are fully agreed. Would to God the serious
consideration of them, and a suitable practice, did more generally obtain among
us, and then we should quickly see our little differences vanishing as smoke,
and the Churches of God in these Nations become a praise in the whole earth.

5thly, Study carefully the Reasons of the Christian Religion, as they are
excellently set forth in a Book which bears that Title; where I dare be
confident to affirm (ringentibus licet viri celeberrimi adversariis) you will
find such a complication of Learning, Perspicuity, and Piety, as all the
Atheists, Infidels, Sadducees, and Epicureans in the world, will never be able
to withstand.

The light of Reason indeed, well employed, may help you far in discovering
your Nature, Faculties, Duty, Interest, and End. But when you have done your
best; many things will remain (appertaining to these already mentioned), as to
which you will still be in the dark, without the assistance of supernatural
Revelation. For instance, How the nature of man came to be so universally
vitiated, and depraved; as we certainly find it is, and the Pagans themselves
have often acknowledged: How Divine Justice may be satisfied, and yet offending
Sinners pardoned, and received into favor: How humane Nature must be purified,
restored, and fitted again for its proper use and end. Quae quidem Purga^io,
(says Porphyry) omni homini adeo necessaria est, ut fieri non pessit quin Deus
universalem aliquam purgandi humani generis rationem procurarit. This indeed is
high; but you must remember he was a Philosopher, (...), of the sacred
Succession, out of the School of Ammonius at Alexandria.

But that of Plato is yet more wonderful. Alcib. 2. Sect. 11. where he brings
in Socrates instructing Alcibiades concerning Prayer: And after he had showed
how little we know what is fit for our selves, and how dangerous it is to pray
for things unsuitable for us, at last tells him, (...), etc.

It Is necessary that you wait, till ONE come, who will teach you how to behave
your self both toward God and man. When will that be (says Alcibiades), and
who shall this Teacher be? For I would gladly know him whoever he is. It Is he,
replied Socrates, who cares for thee. But to me it seems that, as Homer tells
us, Minerva took away the mist from the eyes of Diomedes that he might discern
God from man: So the darkness must be taken from thy mind. At that day, says
Alcibiades, will I make Offerings, and it will come e're long; let him take off
the mist from mine eyes, or what else he pleases, for I am prepared to omit
nothing which he shall command (whoever he be) so that I may be made better.

The poor Heathens were sensible of the need of supernatural Revelation, which
made them so fond of their Oracles, and of the Books of the Sybills, and the
several ways of Divination that obtained among them: And those of them who had
great affairs in hand still pretended to take in the special help of some
supposed Deity, or other. Thus Numa makes show of consulting with the Nymph
Egeria; Lycurgus, Minos; Solon with Jove: And the like is reported of that
great Man Scipio Africanus: Caligula with Castor and Pollux; and after all,
Mahomet pretends to receive his Instructions from the Angel Ga^^iel.

Look therefore into all the pretenses that have been made to supernatural
Revelation, and see if you can find any, which may stand in the least
competition with these sacred Records which we have in the holy Scriptures.

The Fragments of Zoroaster, the Chaldaean Oracles, the Books of the Sybills,
the Alchoran of Mahomet, will all appear uncertain, or frivolous if compared
with the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Never was any Doctrine so suited to the
raising of men's minds above this Earth, and fitting them for Glory and
Immortality, as the Christian Doctrine is. Our way and our end are here plainly
set before us: And the very design and tendency of the Gospel may tell you its
Author.

It could not be the Invention of wicked men, or Devils, for it every where
declaims against Sin, yea, even these inward Corruptions, which are not
discernible to the eyes of men.

It could not be a mere contrivance of good men or Angels, for they would never
have dared to arrogate to themselves a Divine Authority, or to father their
Writings upon God; and therefore it must needs be from him who has owned it
with Success, confirmed it by Miracles, and preserved it in despite of the
subtilty and malignity of its enemies to this day, and still makes it his power
to the Salvation of Sinners. The better any man is, the nearer he comes up to
the Rules of Christianity; and had the Gospel been a lie, or device of
deceivers, the God of Truth would never have made it an Instrument of so much
good in the world, as he has done.

Direct. 2. If you believe that the Soul is Immortal, be not over-fond of the
Body. Keep it under; bring it into subjection; use it as a Servant to the Soul,
that both the one, and the other may be fitter for the Service of him that made
them. Keep it not so high as to make it Masterless, nor so low as to unfit it
for duty. A Servant when he rules is one of the things which the Earth cannot
bear: The Body is a good Servant, if well managed, but a bad Master. Keep your
Minds as much as you can above the power of Corporeal Impressions: Let not the
Objects of Sense and Appetite prevail too much upon you. These two will quickly
plead prescription, and put in for Sovereignty, if too much indulged: They have
ever been disposed to rebel, since our First Parents gave them that fatal
advantage; and the sway they bear over their degenerate Posterity carries in it
the mark, and brand of that first Apostasy. It Is this which threatens our ruin
a second time: And shall we split upon the same Rock again, after so dreadful a
warning? Suspect all those pleasures in which the Body is much concerned, lest
the Spirit be debased by them, and begin to put too high a value upon them, and
so contract a terrene, sensual disposition, and disrelish those noble delights
which are perfective of its Nature. Make not your Prison too strong: Think how
quickly this Flesh must be laid aside as useless and offensive. Why then will
you cherish it, and make an Idol of it, a^ if you thought you must never leave
it? What relief will it be to your miserable Souls to remember, that in this
Life you had your good things? Or if it were reasonable to suppose, (as some
have done) that the Souls of the wicked hover about the places of their Bodies
Interment, what satisfaction would it be to such a Soul to think, Here lies
Dust, which while I studied to pamper, I forgot, and lost my self? A cutting
Reflection to a desolate forlorn Spirit, stripped of all those Vanities which
before inveigled it, and destitute of those Virtuous Principles, which would
have enabled it, to mount aloft into a purer Region.

It is therefore a great point of Wisdom to sit loose to the accommodations of
this present Life: And if at any time we find our Minds disposed (as they are
too apt to be) to an overgreat pleasure in our worldly enjoyments, it is fit
that we remember, this is not our home; our highest Interests are above; and
the Relation which we bear to the world of Spirits, whither we are going,
should make us look more shily upon these temporary, perishing things, as
foreign, and extrinsick to us, and no way suitable for the Immortal Spirit to
rest in: And if the least thought should insinuate it self, -- That it is good
for us to be here; we ought to reject it with disdain, and turn our Minds to
nobler Objects, till the powerful sense of them has awaked us out of our
dream, and showed us the vanity and emptiness of it.

Neither should we be overmuch concerned at any crosses or disappointments
which may meet us in our passage through this world. Do not give them the way;
suffer them not to come too near you, (...), etc. Epictet. Enchir. Cap. 10. It
is not the things themselves which trouble men, but their Conceits and Opinions
about them: At least they grow heavier by weighing, and so we create, and
multiply troubles upon our selves, by our anxiety and solicitude about these
things, which to a calm serene temper, would have been but light afflictions.

Are your Circumstances low and mean in the world? you are less in danger of
growing in love with it, and so being ensnared and undone by it: Besides,
Nature is content with a little, though men's Lusts are insatiable.

Are Friends and Relations unkind, selfish, unfaithful, or otherwise unsuitable
to you? Who bad you overvalue them, or promise your selves too much from them,
or repose too great confidence in them? you may thank your selves in this case
(as in most others) if you be answered according to your Idols.

Is your Body afflicted with pain, sickness, or languishing? you knew it was
mortal before, and to what purpose have you lived all this while, if not to
prepare for such a time as this?

Are you vilify'd and reproached by men (as it often falls out) for keeping close
to your Duty? You ought no more to stop at it, than a man, in a race for his
Life, should be daunted at the braying of an Ass, or the gagling of Wild-geese.

Our Life on Earth is but a dream: It passes away as a vision of the night:
Men are startled at phansied dangers, but not duly apprehensive of real ones.
It Is not amiss sometimes to suppose (as Marsilius Ficinus directs) forsitan
haec non vera sunt, forsitan in praesentia somniamus; and as there is more of
truth in such a supposition, than most men consider; so it will prevent our
being overmuch lifted up with prosperity, or dejected with adversity, since
they are both alike parts of a dream, and the invisible World of realities is
so very near us, whither, when we are once arrived, we shall think as
contemptibly of the far greatest part of the Transactions of this world, as men
are wont to do of their dreams, after they are well awake.

The CONCLUSION.
THUS I have endeavored to prove, That the Soul is Immortal; and laid open the
Absurd and Mischievous Consequences of the opposite Hypothesis, and withal I
have showed what improvement ought to be made of so important a Doctrine. A
great deal more might have been said on this occasion, but what some will think
too little, others will think too much; and therefore, to prevent
misunderstandings on both hands,

I shall only add Two or Three particulars more.

1st. If any say, That I have undertaken a needless piece of work, and that
such a Discourse deserved not to be answered but with scorn and contempt: I
must tell them, That the degeneracy of this Atheistical Age, is a sad, but
sufficient Apology for what I have done. It can never be unseasonable to put
men in mind of a Future State, much less now: And though I look upon our
Author's Cause to be stark naught, yet his management of it (perhaps) is not so
contemptible as some may think: However, I am sure the effects of it upon
others are not so.

2dly, Others, it may be, will think I have been too severe in the Remarks
which I have made, considering the Quality of the person with whom I have to
do: To which I answer, I hope they will not accuse me of any rude personal
Reflections; and as for his Opinion, to answer it, is to expose it. He has
publicly debased all Mankind, and himself among the rest, and therefore ought
not to think much at any rational endeavors to right both him, and them.

And the figure he bears in the world makes an answer so much the more
necessary. When a person of considerable Note, a sober Life, and one that has
the reputation of a studious thinking man, shall vent such Opinions as these,
the Infection is like to spread so much further. Nullis Aconita bibuntur
Fictilibus.

Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto Major, qui peccat habetur.
3dly, Some perhaps will object, That I have not laid stress enough upon the
Immateriality of the Soul in the present Controversy. I would have such to
consider, that over-doing is undoing; and to argue a minus notis, is not the
way to defend the Truth, but to open the Mouths of its Adversaries. If I have
proved that the Soul is no such perishing, corruptible Matter, as our Author
supposes, this is what I undertook; and if the use of the word Material will
please him, let him take it, for me, so long as he draws no brutish Conclusion
from it: And as for those that have more refined Notions of Immaterial
Substances, I envy not their improvements; let them rejoice in their greater
Light, provided they take not up with Arbitrary Conceits instead of solid
Knowledge; nor injure more plain, and certain Truths, by pretending to know
these things, which, to a Soul in Flesh are hardly, if at all, intelligible,
how true soever.

It seems clear to me, that our Author has over-shot himself, by pretending to
prove the Soul Mortal, because he fancied it was hard to prove it immaterial,
and this he thought gave him the advantage; but (to use his own phrase page
12.) I judge he has taken a wrong Sow by the ear.

And though I desire not to contend with any man, yet if he himself, or any of
those who have espoused his Sentiments, shall think it convenient to Answer
what I have written, they may expect a Reply if they deserve it. For, as on the
one hand, I think not my self obliged to follow any one, who impertinently
rambles from the matter, and seeks sorry little Shifts and Evasions, to avoid
the force of plain evidence: So on the other hand, I think it worth my while,
to allot a considerable part of my remaining Life (if just occasion be given
me) to the Defense of the Soul's Immortality, and the running down of these
unmanly Notions, which ought to be exploded and hissed out of the World by the
meanest of Human Race.

FINIS.

