BEATAM AETERNAM

CLARIOR E TENEBRIS

CELI SPECTO

ASPERAM AT LEVEM

CHRISTI TRACTO

In verbo tuo Spes mea

MUNDI CALCO

SPLENDIDAM AT GRAVEM

Alij diutius Imperium tenuerunt, nemo tam fortiter reliquit.

Tacit. Histor. Li^^. 2. c. 47. p. 417

THE HISTORY OF THE Rebellions IN England, Scotland and Ireland: WHEREIN, The
most Material Passages, Sieges, Battles, Policies and Stratagems of WAR, are
impartially Related on both Sides; FROM The YEAR 1640. To the Beheading of the
Duke of Monmouth in 1685.

In Three Parts.

By Sir ROGER MANLEY, Knight. late Governor of Land-Guard-Fort.

-- Quaeque ipse Miserima vidi. LONDON, Printed for L. Meredith at the Angel in
Amen-Corner, and T. Newborough at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's Church Yard.
MDCXCI.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
IN regard the Reputation of Histories, is generally raised on the Worth of
their Authors, I thought it convenient to acquaint the World, That the Compiler
of This, was a Gentleman of known Integrity, bred in the Church of England; for
whose Cause, joined with that of the Royal Family, he was a valiant and zealous
Champion: having been Personally engaged in the most considerable Battles,
which his Royal Master, King Charles I. fought against his Rebellious Subjects.

You are not therefore here to expect, the Reversion of other Men's Labors; no
borrowed Fragments, or Scraps of Records; no patched, or imperfect Collections;
but, an entire uniform History, with great Impartiality, and, for the most
Part, of his own certain Knowledge.

Yet, to free him from Suspicion of any Mistake in these Memoirs, it is
sufficient to observe, That he collected* them in those Troublesome Times,
whose Iniquity would not admit the Publication of them; which he reserved, till
there was a clear Stage for Truth to appear on. And, having survived this Great
Rebellion for many Years, he has added to the History of that, an Account of
all the Remarkable Transactions, with the Conspiracies, Insurrections and
Tumults, that happened in the Reign of King Charles II. And concludes, with the
Invasion and Overthrow of the Duke of Monmouth in the West.

I shall say no more, but that this Gentleman dying soon after he had finished
these Commentaries, the Publication of them was entrusted with me. Which I did
very readily undertake, since I had the Honor to know the Author so well, that
his very Name was a sufficient Recommendation of the Work. And, all honest Men
that knew Sir Roger Manley, were very desirous of a History from his Hand,
whose Pen was a^ ^oyal and Just as his Sword.

Reader, honor the Memory of this brave Man, and think not ill of the
Publisher, who, like a faithful Executor, presents thee with this his last
Legacy. And, if thou take my Pains in good part, it is all the Acknowledgment I
expect from thee. Adieu.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
BOOK I. THE Union of the Kingdoms of Great Britain. The State of Affairs in
England. The Scots Tumults, and their Causes. They Rebel, and Arm. The King
Marches against them, but concludes a Peace. They break it, and enter England
with an Army. The Little Parliament called, and dissolved. The Treaty at
Rippon, referred to the Parliament which met in November 1640. The Preludes to
their ensuing Rebellion. Strafford Impeached and Beheaded. The Fatal Act of
Continuance. The Scots dismissed. The King follows them into Scotland. The
Irish Rebellion breaks out. The King upon his Return, is pompously received by
the Londoners. The King enters the House of Commons. The Bishops accused of
High Treason. The King forced by Tumults, retreats Northward. Contests about
the Militia. His Majesty is repulsed at Hull. p. 1.

BOOK II. The King attempts Hull in vain. Propositions sent to his Majesty to
York. Most of the Lords, and many of the Commons repair to his Majesty. He
erects his Standard at Nottingham, and raises an Army. Essex, the Rebels
General at Worcester, at Keynton. The famous Battle of Edgehill. Fight at
Branford. The King fortifies Oxford. Some Actions in other Provinces. The Queen
lands at Burlington. Goes to Oxford. The Battle of Lansdowne; Of Rownday Down.
The Siege and Relief of Gloucester. The great Battle of Newbury. The Parliament
invite the Scots to their Succor. They enter England. The Siege of York. The
fatal Battle of Marston Moor. The Fights at Brandon Heath and Copedry-bridge.
Essex defeated in the West. The second Battle of Newbury. Alexander Carew, and
the Two Hothams beheaded. Mac-Mahon and Macquier executed. The Archbishop of
Canterbury martyred. The Treaty at Uxbridge. Essex discarded, and Sir Thomas
Fairfax made General in his Place. 38.

BOOK III. The Continuation of the Irish Rebellion. The Lords of the Pale, side
with the Rebels. Their Model of Government. The Cruelty of the English in
Ireland. Ormond makes first a Cessation, then a Peace with the Irish. Delivers
Dublin to the English. The King vindicated from any Correspondence with the
Irish Rebels. Fairfax marches Westward; recalled, besieges Oxford. The King
relieves Chester. Takes Leicester. The Fatal Battle of Naesby described. The
King's Cabinet taken, and published Fairfax relieves Taunton. The Fight at
Langport. He takes Bridgwater, Sherburne and Bristol. The King's Travels and
Labors. The Scots besiege Hereford. They quit it. The Fight at Rowton-Heath.
Digby and Langdale defeated in the North. Barclay-Castle, the Devizes, and
Tiverton taken. Cromwell takes Winchester and Basing-House by Assault. The
Fight at Torrington. The Prince passes into France. The Lord Hopton disbands
his Army. Distructions at Newark. The King returns to Oxford. The Lord Ashley
defeated. 84.

BOOK IV. The King leaves Oxford, and goes to the Scots Army. Hereford is
surprised, and Chester surrendered. Oxford besieged, and taken. The other Royal
Garrisons follow. Massey's Forces disbanded. Contests with the Scots. Their
barbarous Usage of the King. They sell him. He is imprisoned in Holmbey-House,
The History of the Scots Rebellion, and valorous Actions of Montross.
Independency triumphant. The Army mutinies, and seize upon the King at Holmbey.
They court him, but deal treacherously with him. He flies to the Isle of Wight.
122.

BOOK V. The King in the Isle of Wight. His Message for Peace. The Four
Dethroning Bills. The Votes of Non-address. Cap. Burleigh attempts the King's
Delivery; Rolfe his Life. The King appeals to the People. They rise in several
Parts of the Kingdom. Are suppressed. Pembroke taken. The Scots defeated, and
Hamilton a Prisoner. Colchester surrendered. The Treaty in the Isle of Wight
broken by the Army. They seize upon the King. Garble the Parliament. The
perjured Remains of the Commons, assume the Supreme Power. Constitute a
pretended Court of High Justice. Arraign, Condemn and Murder their King. His
End and Elogy. 169.


PART II.
BOOK I. The Regicides prohibit the proclaiming of the Prince of Wales. They
abolish the House of Lords, and the Government by Kings. Choose a Council of
State. Displace and Fine the Lord Mayor for refusing to publish the Act for
abolishing of Monarchy. Declare they will maintain the Fundamental Laws. Erect
a High Court of Justice. Hamilton, Holland and Capell, condemned by it and
murdered. Several Acts of State. The Scots proclaim Charles II. Some Actions
of the Levellers. The King leaves Holland, and goes by Brussels into France.
The Duke of Gloucester banished. Continuance of the History of Ireland. The
King at Jersey. Prince Rupert Sails from Kinsale to Portugal. Loses his
Brother Prince Maurice, by a Hurrycane. The King at Breda; Treats and Concludes
with the Scots. Montrosse's unfortunate End. Fairfax routed, and Cromwell
General. His Actions in Scotland. The Scots barbarous Usage of the King. They
are defeated at Dunbar. The King crowned at Schone. He enters England. The
Battle of Worcester. The King's miraculous Escape. 109, 110.

BOOK II. Cromwell enters London Triumphantly. Continuation of the Irish
Affairs. Ormond leaves Ireland, and Clanrickard, his Deputy there. Ireton dies
of the Plague. Monk takes Sterling, Dundee; and Subjugates Scotland. The Isles
of Scilly, Barbados, Garnsey, Jersey, and that of Man, surrendered to the
Regicides. Their Greatness. They are courted by the Neighboring Kings and
States. They send a solemn Embassy into Holland. Cromwell Cabals. Turns out the
Mock-Parliament. Chooses another. Is chosen Protector. The Wars with the United
Provinces. The various Sea Fights betwixt the Two States. Cromwell makes a
Peace with them, and a League with France. The Expedition of San Domingo and
Jamaica. Blake's success at Tunis and Santa Cruz. Dunkirk taken. The Death of
Oliver Cromwell. His Character. 249.

BOOK III. Richard succeeds his Father in the Protectorate. He is deposed by
the Army. The Rump restored! Lambert defeats Sir George Booth. Montague returns
with the Fleet out of Denmark. Lambert turns out the Rump. Monk dissents, and
declares for the Rump. Lambert marches against him. Being deluded by Treaties,
he is deserted by his Army. The Committee of Safety routed, and the Rump yet
again restored. Monk marches to London. Readmits the Secluded Members. The
Parliament dissolved by its own Act. An Abstract of the King's Actions and
Motions abroad. He is proclaimed by the Parliament. Returns into England. His
glorious Reception. The End of our Troubles. 278.


PART III.
BOOK I. The REBELLION breaks into new Flames. Some Millenaries secured.
Venner's Insurrection, and End. The Presbyterians stickle for new Elections.
Several Seditious Tumults detected and punished. The Plague consumes the
People. The Conflagration of the City. Tumults in Scotland. Oate's Plot. The
Parliament insist upon removing the Duke from the King's Presence and Councils.
It is dissolved. Another Parliament called. The Duke retires from Court. A new
Council chosen. The Parliament refuse the King Money, and insist upon the Bill
of Exclusion. It is also dissolved, another being Summoned. A new Rebellion in
Scotland. The Archbishop of St. Andrew's inhumanly butchered. The Rebels are
defeated at Bothwel-Bridge. The King sick. He recovers. The Duke returns to
Court. Monmouth Cabals, and is outed of his Employments. The Lord Stafford
beheaded. The Parliament dissolved, and succeeded by another at Oxford, which
is likewise dismissed. College is hanged, and Shaftsbury tried. The strange
Increase of the Fanatics. Their Insolence and Power in the City. They form a
Conspiracy. The Council of Six. The Plot to Murder the King and Duke. The
Providential Fire at New Market. Keeling discovers the Conspiracy. Russel and
Sidney are executed. Monmouth absconds, but upon his Submission is pardoned. He
again transgresses, and is banished. The King dies of an Apoplexy. The Duke
succeeds. 312.

BOOK II. The Rebellion breaks out in Scotland under Argile, in England under
Monmouth. Both are vanquished, taken and executed. The Final Ruin and End of
the Rebellion. 336.


COMMENTARIES ON THE REBELLION OF England, Scotland and Ireland.
PART I.
BOOK I.
The Union of the Kingdoms of Great Britain. The State of Affairs in England.
The Scots Tumults, and their Causes. They Rebel, and Arm. The King Marches
against them, but concludes a Peace. They break it, and enter England with an
Army. The Little Parliament called, and dissolved. The Treaty at Rippon,
referred to the Parliament which met in November 1640. The Preludes to their
ensuing Rebellion. Strafford Impeached and Beheaded. The Fatal Act of
Continuance. The Scots dismissed. The King follows them into Scotland. The
Irish Rebellion breaks out. The King upon his Return is pompously received by
the Londoners. The King enters the House of Commons. The Bishops accused of
High Treason. The King forced by Tumults, retreats Northward. Contests about
the Militia. His Majesty is repulsed at Hull.

THE Kingdoms of Great Britain being United under the Dominion of one Prince,
and the Animosities and Emulations, which usually disorder Neighbour-Nations,
thereby removed; gave a sudden Rise to a very great and formidable Power, which
could not be destroyed but by it self. The Moderator of this vast Empire, was
JAMES VI. King of Scotland, and First Monarch of Great Britain, undoubted Heir
to both, as well by Right of Succession, from Margaret the only Daughter of
Edgar Atheling, the last of the Saxon Princes, as by that of Force, derived to
him from the Norman Conqueror. This Wise and Learned Prince, Charles I.
succeeds to the Crown.
being gathered to his Fathers, the loss which his Dominions suffered by it,
however great, was abundantly repaired by the Succession of his Son CHARLES;
who being truly Heir to his Father's Greatness and Virtues, as well as
Scepters, did excel all his Predecessors, in the more severe Disquisition of
what was Fit and Just; so that our Tragedies will scarce find Credit with
Posterity, whilst the Ages to come, mistrusting the Reports of such enormous
Villainies, will look upon our unheard of Vicissitudes, but as the Fancies of
Poetry, and the Decoration of Theaters. For, how is it possible to believe,
that the Best of Princes should meet with the Worst of Subjects, on whom he had
conferred more Graces, than the whole Series of his Ancestors? and that he, who
valued his Kingdoms and Life, at a lower Rate than the Happiness of his People,
should by a Judicial Parricide, be sacrificed to the ambitious Violence of a
prevailing Faction in their Representative: and that, under the pretense of
Usurpation and Tyranny? But these things happened, an everlasting Reproach to
the Nation, and not to be atoned for by any Resentment, or Hecatombs of Victims.

King James left a flourishing Kingdom behind him, but an empty Treasury, and
his Successor engaged in a War with Spain; and, what was worse, the Parliament
that obliged the Father to Arm, abandoned the Son, when they had exposed him.
Nor were the succeeding Parliaments more Obsequious, or forward in supplying
his Necessities, how great soever; either in recovering the Palatinate, or
rescuing the French Protestants, though undertaken in Defense of the Reformed
Religion. It Is true, his Third Parliament voted him Five Subsidies; but we must
own also, The Petition of Right
that the Petition of Right, being a Condescension even to Supererogation,
deserved their best Acknowledgements; for, raised with that Grant, they, that
very Session, questioned the Tribute of Tonnage and Poundage, though
perpetually enjoyed by his Predecessors, Kings of England; affirming; That he
had resigned what Right he could pretend to it, by that very Concession; which
they urged with so much Violence, that forgeting the Rules of Modesty, the King
was forced to Dissolve them, and to punish some of the most Factious of that
Seditious Convention.

But the Causes of these Heats must be further sought. In the Reign of Queen
Mary, a great Number of People withdrew themselves out of England, whereof
many, Some pretended Causes of Sedition.
infected with the Discipline of Geneva, upon Queen Elizabeth's Assumption to
the Crown, returning, brought that uneasy Preciseness with them, which
suddenly grew to that height, by the Carlessness, or Pusillanimity of the
Magistrates, under King James; that it did not only insinuate it self, under
the veil of Piety, amongst the People, but even into the Court, and
Parliaments; where joining it self to those of Anti-Monarchic Principles, it
endeavored to diminish the Prerogative, and subject the King to those
Necessities which might force him to unusual Ways of supplying them: Which also
happened; for, being pressed by the indispensible Exigence of his Affairs, and
perceiving no hopes of Subsidies from Parliaments, he began to have an Aversion
for them so Constituted, and search for Refuge in his Prerogative. And yet he
had so much Reverence for the Laws, that he would act nothing contrary to them,
as appears in Ship Money; which Tax however it were imposed to vindicate the
Honor of the Sea against Pirates, and our Potent Neighbors, he would not
exact it, till it was adjudged to him by all the Judges of Westminster, and
that under their Hands. But the Common People despising the Moderation of their
Prince, and instigated by those who desired a Change, crying out, That their
Laws and Liberties were endangered, mutinied; attributing all the Errors and
Misfortunes in the Government (for the Undertakings Abroad had not been very
successful) to his Counselors, that they might transversly smite him, and
blast his Reputation. To this the exuberant Power of the Clergy, that pretended
Exemption from the Jurisdiction of the Laics, did not please. The unusual
Introduction of Ceremonies, as they cried out, and the placing of the
Communion Table at the East End of the Church, with the more severe Imposition
of Rites, however indifferent (except in the Command) did trouble them, and
were the occasion of very great Tumults in many Parishes. But nothing did
equally move their Choler, and Pity, as the Punishment of some Seditious
Scriblers against Ceremonies, and the Bishops their Authors, by Incarceration,
and cutting off their Ears; who, however Guilty, and deserving what the Rigor
of Justice could inflict, were yet thought to be hardly dealt with, considering
the serene Tranquillity of those Halcion Days. And truly, Peace, and its
Concomitant, Plenty, flourished amongst us, to the Envy of our Neighbors,
continuing to the Fourth Luster of the King's Reign; The Flourishing Condition
of the Nation.
which might have been perpetual, being inexpugnable from Abroad, if it had not
been destroyed, by the more than Civil Rage of our Mischievous Dissenters.
Nothing seemed wanting to our Felicity, before it was disturbed by these
nefarious Tumults; and, our People, if they could have seen their own
Happiness, were, considering the inexhaustible affluence of all Things, the
Liberty of Commerce, and the free Enjoyment of what they had acquired, the
happiest of any Subjects, under any known Government in the World. But our
Luxury increasing with our Abundance, we grew wanton, and fell into such a
Surfeit, that nothing but a violent Bleeding could effect a Cure. The true
Cause of these Evils, had its Rise from the noxious Indulgence of our
Physicians, who neglecting to stifle the Factious Humors of the Puritans in
their Infancy, gave such force and boldness to this Contagion, that it
unhappily Infected the whole Body Politic, to the Ruin of Hierarchy, the best
of Spiritual, and Monarchy, the best of Temporal Governments.

It Is scarce conceivable, that there were found any in so happy a State, that
should seem to desire a Change. And yet such there were; amongst which, Who
they were who desired a Change.
the chief Ringleaders were the Presbyterians, who had their Missionaries and
Lecturers in all the Quarters of the Kingdom; and those swarms of Sectaries,
their Brood, who contended for an equal Liberty in Civil, as well as Sacred
Things. The Catholics wished for the Dominion of Rome in Spirituals. But the
Gentry, and Lesser Nobility, which composed the House of Commons, out of
Contemplation of their own Greatness whilst they sat there, preferred
Democracy before all other. In the mean time, this disguised Impiety grew up,
under the plausible pretense of Sanctity, seducing the Vulgar with a Show of
Religion, into a Reverence of it. It is not imaginable how far this Sacred
Novelty prevailed, by the seditious Fury of its Preachers, and their
uncontrouled railing against the received Rites of the Church, and the lawful
Power of the King. It had bewitched the Town, the Country, and Private Families
into an Opinion of it; nor were the great Representatives of the Kingdom,
exempted from its Contagion, which the King had abundantly Experimented in all
the Parliaments he had summoned: For in them the Novellists, and Democraticks,
pretending the Liberty and Defense of Religion, against the Designs of the
Court, and Popery, oppressed the Prerogative to advance their own; endeavoring
to raise the Authority of the People, whose Vicegerents they were, upon the
Ruins of the King. To this, they branded with the Odious Title of Papists, all
that opposed them, by which means they deceived the People, who are still the
more addicted to their Superiors, by how much they observe them the more
Zealous for the Advancement of Religion. And truly, the depravedness of the Age
was so great, that whatever was said in behalf of the King and his Ministers
against Popery, had no Credit; but on the contrary, whatever was affirmed, to
persuade the People, that the Court did Favor Superstition, was greedily
swallowed down without any regard to Reasons of State, which sometimes obliged
to a Compliance with the Desires of Foreign Princes and Ambassadors. But the
true Source of our Miseries came from Scotland; this Embryo of Rebellion,
gathering Strength from Foreigners, upon this Occasion.

The Nobility in the Infancy of King JAMES, had, by the Connivance of Murrey
the Governor, The Scots Tumults.
usurped the Lands and Possessions belonging to the Cathedrals and Monasteries
of that Kingdom; which they also enjoyed, until King Charles, pressed with
foreign Wars, and but ill supplied from Scotland, resolved, by the Advice of
his Council there, to reunite the said Possessions to the Crown again; which he
did by an Act of Revocation, with a Commission of Surrend'ries of Superiorities
and Tithes. But those Nobles resolved to turn all upside down, rather than part
with their Usurpations, and be deprived of the Vassalage of the Ministers, and
Land-owners. And so conspiring against the King himself, designed to oppose his
Authority, both Sacred and Civil, in the next Parliament he should call.
Moreover, there were some other Malcontents, who by reason of their
Disaffection, had been denied such Titles and Honors, as they pretended to at
his Majesty's Coronation, who all joined together; and because there are no
Pretenses more specious than those of Religion, nor more charming Bates to
ensnare the Vulgar, it was thought most proper to be insisted on. Nor was it
long before the Depravedness of the times, furnished them with Opportunities to
manifest their Resentments.

The pious King was pleased to send the Liturgy and Book of Common Prayers,
signed with the Blood of the first Reformers of our Church, The King sends the
Liturgy into Scotland.
to the Kirk of Scotland; for he desired, to unite in the same Opinion in
Spirituals, those People who were subject to the same Empire in Temporals. King
JAMES had formerly proposed the same thing to his Countrymen at Aberdeen, who
willingly assented to it; and having framed it there, and adapted it to the
Church of Scotland, it was sent into England, where it lay; till by the Advice
of the Privy Council at Edinburgh, and persuasion of some others nearer him,
though very unseasonably, his Majesty returned it to them, with Command to have
it used in all the Churches and Chapels of Scotland. This Advice, however
laudable, was ill timed, for the growing Factions took thence an Occasion to
rebel; and it is scarce credible, with what contumacious Fury the Presbyterians
(who would sooner sin against Religion its self than its Rites) did oppose it;
crying out, that the King introduced Superstition, and profane Forms of
Worship into the Church. Rumors were also spread abroad by the dissatisfied
Nobles beforementioned, who abhorred nothing equal with the Restitution of
what they had usurped; as also by others of the Cabal, who longed for a Change,
of reducing Scotland into a Province: So that the People thinking their Civil
as well as Sacred Liberty were in danger, became obnoxious to the Artifices of
every Faction. And this occasioned the Sedition of Edinburgh, and the zealous
Madness of the Rabble against the Liturgy.

The Sedition of Edinburgh. Jul. 23. 1637.
The Dean that officiated, as also the Bishop who should have preached, had much
to do to escape with their Lives; their wild Auditors throwing their Books,
Stools, and whatever else their Fury could seize on, at their Heads. Nor did
they stick here; for, the prime Conspirators who had thus infatuated the lowest
of the People, and incensed them against the Liturgy, engaged them also, the
better sort now consorting with them, in a Covenant, under pretext of
vindicating their Religion, to abolish it; and gaping after the
Church-Revenues, to extirpate the Hierarchy of- Bishops. Moreover, they took up
Arms, being instigated thereto by the Puritans of England, whom they had
cajoled with a Declaration, as they called it, to vindicate their Actions, and
Intentions; and renouncing their Duty and Allegiance, they seized upon the
King's Castles and Revenues, for their Use, and Support in the War. Having
raised an Army, but distrusting their own Strength, they courted Assistance
from the French, and writing an humble Letter to Lewis XIII. of that Name,
implored the Assistance of a foreign Prince, The Scots implore Assistance from
the French King Car. Richlieu.
against their own, whom they had so cruelly offended. And thus a great Mystery
was discovered, teaching the World how to extirpate the Religion of Rome, by
consulting with a Roman Cardinal, and by joining Forces with a Catholic
Monarch.

The King had sent Duke Hamilton to allay these Troubles; but he acted so
remissly, that he seemed rather to encourage than suppress their fury; which is
no wonder, if what is reported of him be true, that their first Motions had
been secretly directed by his Counsels. The King therefore incited by the
Insolence of his Subjects, resolved, Mar. 27-1639. The King marches toward
Scotland.
seeing his clemency was neglected, to chastise them by force, and raising a
great Army marches toward Scotland. But there was nothing performed in this
Expedition worthy such extraordinary Preparations. For, many both of the
Nobility and Gentry, would hardly be persuaded to invade Scotland, which
likewise cooled the Soldiers. Nor is it to be wondered at, since their chief
Officers, as Essex, who was Lieutenant General, and Holland General of the
Horse, with others, proved afterward to be the prime Heads of the Rebellion in
England. They had forgot the Animosities of old, betwixt these
Neighbour-Nations, fearing as had been suggested to them, That Scotland being
conquered, the Forces that served to subdue it, might in process of Time be
made use of to enslave England. But the remoteness of this Project, renders it
very Chimerical. However, the King warned by the Perfidy of his own Men, Makes
Peace.
was necessitated to consent to a Peace with the Rebels, upon no equal Terms.
Which he the rather did, as being sensible, That nothing can happen more
pernicious to a Prince, than Civil Discord.

But the Scots quickly violated the Peace they had procured; for they did not
disband according to the Articles of the Treaty, but kept all their Officers in
pay. Neither did they demolish the Fortifications of Leith, as they should have
done; but adding Infidelity to their Rebellion, did also publish a Libel,
entitled, Conditions of his Majesty's Treaty with his Subjects of Scotland,
which for its Falseness by inserting Articles never assented to, was burnt by
the hands of the Common Hangman. The Scots break it, and invade England.
High with their late Success, and looking upon the King's Indulgence, as an
Argument of his Easiness, not his Goodness; being also instigated to it by the
English Puritans, they arm a Second Time, and sleighting the Sanctions of the
Treaty, rush into England, and unexpectedly possess the Towns of New Castle and
Durham. They had sent their Declaration before them, intimating, That what they
undertook, was for the Glory of God, and that their Arms were only Defensive,
and not intended against England, but against the Canterbury- Faction, and to
endeavor to unite both Nations in one, as to Religion.

The King seeing his Clemency abused, and his Authority prostituted by the
Rebels in Scotland, and to repress the Insolency of his Subjects, who had by
Leagues, Oaths and the Seizure of his Castles and Forts, and the like,
conspired against him; and also that the Decrees of Parliament might not be
rescinded by those of the Assembly, nor the Three States be mutilated by the
abolishing of Episcopacy; seriously resolved to vindicate his offended Majesty,
and reduce his so often Rebelling Subjects to their Duty again. The Little
Parliament
He therefore summoned a Parliament to meet at London, which he had deferred
for some Years past, to give those boisterous Spirits leisure to cool. And now
he acquaints them, with the Invasion of the Scots and their Indignities toward
him, and very earnestly demands Moneys of them to carry on the War; assuring
them, that if they would liberally comply with his Necessities, he would not
only consent to remedy all their just Grievances, but remit his Right to
Ship Money for ever, though adjudged to him by all the Justices of the Kingdom.
Nor did he thus obtain his desires, the Parliament opposing them; not only
declaring that Tribute to be illegal, but were also, dissolved.
if they had not been prevented by their Dissolution, upon the point of voting
against the War they so much abominated. There were many good Men, who were
much troubled at this unexpected Dismission of the Parliament, fancying that
the Heats and Differences betwixt the King and his People, might have been
dispelled by the Continuance of the Assembly, which seemed now on the other
side highly exaggerated. The enraged Commonalty, exclaimed mightily against the
Authors of this Counsel. Some attributed it to Marquess Hamilton, the ambitious
Son of a Mother wholly devoted to the Covenanters. Others to the Earl of
Strafford. But the greatest Crowd, would have it to be the Archbishop of
Canterbury; and to be revenged on him, about five Hundred of the Apprentices
and Rabble, furiously assault his Palace at Lambeth, though without Success.
But the true Authors, were the subtle Contrivers of the following Rebellion.
For, Sir Henry Vane, one of the principal of them, then his Majesty's Principal
Secretary, being ordered by his Master to move for a Supply of Twelve
Subsidies, with Power to descend to Eight; he, when the House by an Offer of
Five, nay Six were mentioned, to advance toward a Compliance, peremptorily
told them, that less than Twelve would not do; whereby he not only irritated
the Seditious, but the more modest part of the Assembly, which seemed to be his
Design by the Effect.

The factious were not displeased with the King's Necessities, The King's
Necessities.
which they themselves did from time to time contribute to, since there were no
Subsidies to be obtained, but upon Conditions ruinous to Monarchy it self; or
by exposing his best Friends and Ministers, to their Rage and Slaughter. And
thus they constrained the King, though unwilling, to unusual ways of supplying
his wants, that they might thereby expose him to the Contempt and Odium of an
irritated People. But the King raised Moneys by other means; his Council, the
faithful Nobility and Gentry, His Friends contribute to his Supply.
the Judges, but more eminently the Clergy, who contributed a fifth of their
Revenues (whence it was called the Bishops War) largely supplying him. The Earl
of Strafford subscribed 20000 pounds, which the Duke of Lenox also did, as
likewise others proportionably; except Hamilton, who pretended Poverty, though
the Author of his Memorials, against the current of the English Writers,
delivers that he also subscribed 20000 pounds.

Being thus furnished, the King raises another Army, and marches against the
Scots, but slowly, not supposing them so forward, who had already passed the
River Tweed, near Berwick. The Earl of Northumberland was General, and
Strafford Lieutenant General of the King's Army; but they being both absent,
the Lord Conway, General of the Horse, commanded, lying with 3000 Foot and 1200
Horse to keep the Passage of the Tine at Newburne. Lesley the Rebels General,
desired permission to pass with his Army, with a Petition to the King, but
being denied, he attempted the Passage with Three Hundred Horse, which were
repulsed. Hereupon he plies his great Guns with such Success, that the English,
Lesley forces his Passage at Newburne.
being for the most part Raw and Unexperienced, throwing down their Arms, ran
away. Commissary-General Wilmot made stout Resistance with the Horse, till
overpowered by Numbers, he was forced likewise to retreat. The Scots possessed
themselves of New Castle the same Day, being abandoned by Sir Jacob Ashly, who
sunk his Great Ordnance in the River for haste, whilst the whole Army retreated
in much disorder toward York. Two Days after, they took Durham with the same
Facility; and putting the Northern Counties under Contribution, forced them to
supply their Needy Troops, with Provisions and Moneys in abundance.

The King Summons the Peers to York. Makes a Truce with the Scots.
The King straightened with these Pressures, summoned the Peers to meet him at
York; by whose Counsel, or rather Faction, a Treaty was commenced, and a
Cessation of Arms concluded upon very dishonorable Conditions. The Four
Northern Counties being allowed the Rebels for their Winter Quarters, and 850
Pounds per diem during the Truce, for their Maintenance. Nor could it be
otherwise hoped for, since Eleven of those Sixteen Lords which the King had
appointed to treat with the Scots, were either Principal Leaders, or Assertors
of the Rebellion in the following War.

It will not be from the purpose to mention, what further happened in this
Convention. The Scots seemed to wonder, that they appearing in Arms upon the
Invitation of the English Lords, none of them, unmindful of the Favor, had
made any mention of it; affirming, they had not come without the invitation of
their Letters. The English Lords surprised with this Reproach, assured them,
That they had made them no Invitation at all. The Scots being highly moved with
this denial, produced an Instrument subscribed with most of their Hands, which
strangely surprised them; until, upon a strict scrutiny, they found it to be an
Invention of the Lord Savil's, who had really sent them the said Invitation,
counterfeiting the subsigned Hands; which being now discovered by his own
Confession, it was thought fit, seeing the Cheat had succeeded so well, not to
publish it.

Strafford alone did dare to advise against this sordid Compliance with the
Enemy, urging, That the Scots were to be forced back with Steel, not Gold. He
further advised the King, to grant them no Conditions unworthy himself, or the
English Nation. Let him but give him leave, and he would upon peril of his
Head, oblige them to return to their Country, and Duty to their Prince again.
This vigorous Advice did so far irritate the Scots, that they prosecuted the
Author of it to Death. On the other side, Hamilton, suspected to favor his
Countrymen, persuaded a Peace, to which the rest of the Peers did also assent;
upon a supposition, that a Parliament, and an Agreement, were the securest
Remedies against the impending Evil. The Cessation being thus concluded, the
main of it was referred to the Arbitration of a Parliament, Nov. 3. 1640. The
Rebel-Parliament meets.
which the King had already summoned to meet at Westminster. And this is that
fatal Convention, which, by the Predominancy of the Puritans in it, consummated
their Impiety and Disobedience, by ruining the most Apostolic Church under
Heaven, and Murdering the best Prince that ever swayed the English Scepter.

The King might have expected better treating from this Meeting, seeing he did
not call it (to use his own Words) more by others Advice, and the Necessity of
His Affairs, than by his own Choice and Inclination; who always thought the
right way of Parliaments most safe for his Crown, as best pleasing to His
Subjects and People. In the mean time, the King tells them in the House of
Lords, the Commons present, What had intervened in the War, and what else He
judged necessary to be done; and presses them to supply Means whereby the
Rebels might speedily be driven Home again; whereunto He also would contribute
His Endeavors; assuring them further, That that being done, they should find
him most ready to remove all their Grievances. But they did not in any kind
comply with the King's Desires, but seeming displeased with his calling the
Scots Rebels, resolved not to send them Home, with whom they had long since
conspired, before they had acquired every thing that they judged necessary for
the Support of their designed Usurpation. With this assurance, the Commons
purge their House of such as they thought might oppose their Designs; and to
show themselves good Patriots, entertained such Petitions, Preludes to the
ensuing Rebellion.
as they themselves had for the most part framed, inveighing against Grievances
from several Parts of the Kingdom; and omitting entirely what they were
assembled for, imputed all the Misfortunes and Errors of the Government,
obliquely to the King, through the Sides of his Counselors and Servants. And
yet they will seemingly flatter him, under pretense of inspecting his Revenue,
which they pretended much to desire, promising, not only to augment and settle
it, but to make his Majesty one of the Richest Princes in Christendom. In the
mean time, to try his Patience, and their own Power with the People, they
ordered Pryn, Burton, and Bastwick to be released out of Prison. Who in
defiance of Justice, and the King's Authority, made a pompous Entry into
London, attended with many Thousands of pretended Zealots. And now they
encourage, and receive Petitions against the Hierarchy of the Church, resolving
indeed to change both the Government thereof, and also of the State, by drawing
the Supreme Power by little and little into their own Hands: Daring, in order
to it, not only to slight, but to question the Lawfulness of the Royal
Authority it self. But the King's Friends, and such who were addicted to
Monarchy, were to be removed out of both Houses; which they endeavor by
Threats, by Tumults, and by affixing their Names upon Posts; and, in time
effected. For, several of the Nobles, and many of the Lower House, since they
could not Vote with Liberty, absented thence altogether; whilst they who
stayed, being either enslaved to the Faction, or unequal to them in Numbers,
durst say nothing. The Lord Keeper, and Secretary Windebank, with diverse
others, withdrew themselves into Holland and France. The Bishops were
Imprisoned and Ejected, against Magna Charta, and the immemorial Custom of past
Ages, which allowed them a Legislative Power before Parliaments were
Instituted. The Judges also, who had Voted Ship Money to be Legal, were
themselves voted Guilty of Treason, whilst the weight of their Indignation fell
upon the Earl of Strafford, who, by the Instigation of the Scots, was to be
taken away.

The Earl was then in the North, having been advertised by his Friends in the
House, as also by his own Reason, of the Danger; and therefore advised not to
appear in Parliament, as knowing the Hatred and Envy, both That, and the Scots
bare against him: Who if he kept himself out of their Sight and Reach, might
perhaps be forgot, or at least being less prosecuted, make a secure retreat
into Ireland, which was at his Devotion; or beyond Sea, till better Times. But
he relying upon his own Innocence, and unwilling to seem Guilty by a Retreat;
and the King being unwilling to Part with a Person, whose Counsel he should
want, in his most abstruse Affairs, came up to London. Yet so armed, that he
had himself designed to Impeach some of his Chief Enemies, being sufficiently
provided with Matter for an Accusation. But they were too nimble for him; The
Trial of the E. of Strafford.
for he had scarce taken his Seat in the House of Lords, but he was accused by
the Commons of High Treason. And yet; there were some Motions made in order to
his Preservation, in Case the King would consent to advance some of the
Grandees of the Faction, to the great Offices of the Crown. But That being
delayed, or denied, did so incense the Disappointed, that, joining with the
Scots, they became more implacable against him.

The Articles against this Great Man, were Twenty-eight in Number; whereof the
chief were, That he had Subverted the Fundamental Laws of the Land, Introduced
a Despotick Power into the Kingdom, and endeavored to destroy the Ancient
Privileges of Parliament. To these, Sir Henry Vane's Memorials were produced,
wherein the Opinions of Strafford, and some others, given in Private to the
King, were set down; which, as they added Weight to the Accusation, so they
added Infamy and Infidelity to the Secretary, which he could not clear himself
of, by pretending, his Son had stolen his Notes out of his Closet. But nothing
of these were lawfully proved; although they had invited Witnesses and Accusers
out of Ireland, too prone of their own accord to destroy this Great Man; that
he being removed, they might attempt that Rebellion which they had long
designed. For, refuting the Arguments produced against him, the Faction began
to conceive, that if they did not destroy him, they should hazard their own
Reputation, especially seeing the King had declared, in an Excellent Speech to
the Two Houses, That he could not apprehend him Guilty; and that it was very
probable, that the Lords would also acquit him. Being therefore incensed
against him, they resolved to destroy him, Voting him, by a Special Bill of
Attainder, Guilty of High Treason; for that he had endeavored to infringe the
Laws, and had by accumulative Crimes, rend'red himself more than sufficiently
obnoxious; thereby, making themselves his Accusers and Judges. And, thus he was
Condemned, by a New Law, made since his Transgressions: For Crimes not yet
perpetrated: Not for the Ill he had already committed, but that he had enabled
himself to do what he pleased. But they wisely cautioned, that this should not
be made a President, whereby they might secure themselves against that
Retribution of Injustice, which they had used toward him. By this they plainly
acknowledged, the Injuriousness of their Sentence; for had it been otherwise,
He is Condemned.
what harm could there have been in the Example? Whilst they were thus
employed, the Tumults without, fomented by the Chief of the Conspiracy, raged
horribly, especially against their Dissenting Colleagues, whereof Fifty-nine
had their Names posted up for Straffordians; that is, Public Enemies; that
thereby they might be exposed to the Madness of the Rabble: Though, in truth,
they deserved to have their Names inserted in Gold, for daring so generously to
assert oppressed Innocence. Of these, the Lord Digby was one, who had been as
severe as any in the Prosecution of the Earl, till convinced of his Error, by
the Luster of the others Virtue, he generously recanted; whereby he lost
himself in the Opinion of the Faction, particularly by that admirable Speech
which he made in the House upon passing that Fatal Bill.

The incensed Multitude flew to that height of Violence, that, amongst other
Insolences, they did dare to assault the Spanish Ambassador's House, upon
Pretense of his sheltering of Papists; and, certainly he had run great hazard
of being forced, if he had not been timely rescued from their Fury, by the then
Lord Mayor; insomuch, that he did not doubt to question, whether they were a
Civilized People or not, seeing they so barbarously violated the Law of
Nations. The Lord's House enforced by the Tumults, did also, after much
Reluctance, assent to the Bill of Attainder, not considering, that their
Authority would sink with the King's, seeing it was not probable, that these
Men would spoil the Crown, to adorn the Nobles. But the King himself satisfied
of the Innocence of the Prisoner, resisted longer, slighting the Uproars of the
Populace, who, by Instigation of the Factions, perpetually cried out for
Justice. Neither did he much value the Opinion of the Judges, their Compliance
being occasioned by their Fears; against whom he also complained, That instead
of easing him of his Doubts, they amused him by their ambiguous Answers. The
Bishops also, who were to satisfy his Scruples in point of Conscience, seemed
to refer him to the Judges, save only, that Doctor Juxton, the then Bishop of
London, had told him, That he should do nothing against the Dictates of his
Conscience, upon any Consideration in the World: Which he afterward remembered,
to the great Honor of that Excellent Prelate. Nor did he comply with the Fears
of his Friends and Family, until overcome, not persuaded, by the Earl's own
Importunity, and Letters; who desired it, out of Hopes his Death might satisfy
these Blood-thirsty Men, and atone betwixt the King and his People. murdered,
and
He then, however unwillingly, subscribed; though by a Candor not to be
imitated, he did all his Life after, as also at his Death, blame this too easy
Assent, even in himself. In the mean time, he would make one Attempt more; in
order to which, he wrote a Letter to the Lords, all with his own Hand; which he
also sent by his own Son, the Prince; wherein he desired, That, seeing he had
assented to the Justice of the Parliament, his Clemency might also take Place;
which some affirm, was promised before he Signed the Bill, but that was but to
extort it by any means; for now they tell him, by a Deputation of Twelve of
their House, That it could not be done, without the extreme Peril of the Royal
Family. lamented by the King.
He will however solemnize his Obsequies with Tears; for, when the Archbishop
of Armagh gave him an Account of the Exit of this Illustrious Innocent; adding,
That he had never seen so white a Soul restored to its Creator, he could not
forbear weeping. And, thus fell this Great Person, being then also Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, Second to none for Wisdom, Loyalty, and Greatness of
Mind; and who, as the King affirmed in his Divine Soliloquies, was a Gentleman,
whose great Abilities might make a Prince rather afraid, than ashamed, to
employ him in the greatest Affairs of State. He fell, as is said, by a Decree,
a post facto, but shall rise again, by a Posthume Law, upon the Restoration of
King Charles the Second; he being then by a more Righteous Parliament, restored
also to the Glories of his Honor and Innocence.

Nor was it by this Act only that the King contributed to his own Ruin, by
removing so Excellent a Servant, and so firm a Pillar of the State, but he also
gave his Consent to that of Continuance of this Parliament, The Act of
Continuance.
during the Pleasure of both Houses; depriving himself, by this Fatal
Indulgence, of one of the Principal Flowers of his Crown, which was, the
Disposal of the Meeting, Proroguing, and Dissolving of these Conventions at his
Pleasure. For, this signal and unusual. Concession of his, was abused to that
height by these most Ungrateful of Men, that they took occasion hence, not only
to ruin their Benefactor, but wholly to subvert the Government; which they
also effected.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, had been already Impeached, and was now close
Prisoner in the Tower. And seeing he was the Chief Pillar of the Church of
England, as appears in his Admirable Book against Fisher, the Jesuit; and he
having converted Two and Twenty from the Romish to the Protestant Religion, as
he asserted in the House of Lords, when he was accused there of Popery; he was
also to be removed: For, since the Ecclesiastical and Civil Governments were to
be extirpated, it was thought proper, that the Principal Asserters of both,
should be sacrificed to the Ambition of the English and Scottish Novelists.
Neither did the Fates of these Great Men, suffice to dispel the pretended Fears
and Jealousies of the Commons; for, being elated, not satisfied, with these
unexpected Concessions, they only increased their Appetites; and, seeing now
they were feared, and that, by the Madness of the People, whom they had
bewitched with an Opinion of their Sanctity, there was a way laid open to
greater Matters; they did not blush to attempt the King's Royal Person and
Family: Who, though he had granted more to the Petitions of the Parliament,
than ever any Subjects had demanded, he would yet have yielded to more, for the
Good of his People, provided it did not entrench upon his Honor and
Conscience. But these Concessions did not suffice them, who would have all,
though they did not yet declare so far. In the mean time, they looked upon what
the King had so generously bestowed upon them, but as Dues, interpreting them
to have proceeded from his Necessities, not Inclinations; so that nothing he
could either say, or do, could gain the Favor of this Ungrateful Faction.

The King's Concessions.
After the Death of Strafford, his Majesty had denied them nothing that they had
not been ashamed to ask. The Star Chamber, the Archbishop's Court, as also that
of the Northern Borders, were taken away. Other Courts, as those of the
Stannary, and of Ludlow, etc. were circumscribed in narrower Bounds. Monopolies
were entirely condemned. Ship Money, and those other Maritime Revenues, that
never Prince had as yet parted with, were suppressed. To all this a Triennial
Parliament (lest any should dare to offend for the future) and the Continuance
of this, during the Pleasure of the Two Houses, as is already said, was
unhappily assented unto. And further, to witness the Candor of his Intentions,
he admitted several of the most popular of the Faction, of his Privy Council;
the Lord Say, being made Master of the Wards; Essex, Lord Chamberlain; Holland,
Groom of the Stole; Leicester, Lieutenant of Ireland; and St. John, Solicitor
General. But what Retribution did they make the King, for all these Graces and
Indulgences of Favor? They gave him no Money, nor any Thing else, save the
empty Promises and Dreams of a Glorious Principality.

The Scots having been kept thus long by the Parliament, to awe the King, and
now sufficiently Burthensom to the Kingdom, the Parliament having served their
Turn of them, were to be sent Home; The Scots dismissed.
and are now dismissed, having exacted by Contibutions, Rapines, Spoils,
Gratuities and Stipend, above a Million of Money from the English, and their
Representatives. Posterity will certainly blush, when they shall consider the
inglorious Actions of their Predecessors, in receiving and treating the
rebellious and invading Scots, as Friends; which makes it manifest, that their
Coming was an Invitation, not Invasion. Nor would our grave Senators, have
honored them with the Title of Dear Brethren, or procured an Order to declare
them faithful and loyal Subjects, (having been proclaimed Rebels by the King)
and that in all the Churches and Chapels, upon a Thanksgiving day; nor have
contributed so largely to their Subsistence, but that they had conspired with
them, and propogated their Councils, by the same manner of rebelling: For it
would have cost less in Money, and Honor, to have forced them, as Enemies, out
of our Borders, than to retain them in England by a sordid Compliance, as
Friends? By allowing them Quarters, they impose a Burden upon the Country,
which they ease by a Taxation upon the Subject. But their Design had always
been, to keep the. Treasury low, and involve the King in Debts, which should
necessitate him to agree with the Parliament, for the ruining of Strafford, the
Extirpation of Episcopacy, and the perpetuating of their own Session.

About this Time, the Armies in England and Ireland were Disbanded, the Noise
of War ceasing with their Dismission. But, lest the Irish, who had been raised
against the Scots, to the Number of Eight Thousand, should attempt any
Commotions, the King had given leave to the Spanish and French Ambassadors, to
transport them for their Masters Service. But that was opposed by the
Parliament, upon the earnest pressing of the Irish Commissioners, who having
now removed Strafford, resolved to add to that Rebellion they had Designed, by
the Accession of those Common Soldiers.

The King goes into Scotland.
The King followed his Countrymen into Scotland, where he not only confirmed the
Concessions they had extorted in England, but graciously conferred upon them
whatsoever they demanded of him; not considering, that degenerate and
ungrateful Persons, are not to be obliged with any Favors whatsoever.

Nor was it in England only, Oct. 23. 1641. The Irish Rebellion.
that Discord had displayed her Arts of Faction and Tumult. The Irish following
the detestable Example of the Scots, who had attained by Arms what their
Ambition had designed, outwent them only in this, That they Rebelled more
bloodily. It Is strange with what industry, so universal and so nefarious a
Conspiracy was concealed, which was scarce discovered, but with the inhumane
Slaughter of an Hundred Thousand Persons. And it is scarce conceivable, that
those who were at the Helm of Government, should be so negligent or supine, as
to suffer a Plot of this horrid Nature, to gather to a Head, and break out, to
the Infection of the whole Body Politic, without any the least Discovery, or
penetrating into it. Especially seeing his Majesty, whose Eye was still awake
for the Preservation of his People, Mar. 16.
had Cautioned the Lords Chief-Justices, Parsons and Burlace, of some dangerous
Designs in agitation in Ireland; and that, Six Months before this fatal
Eruption, which His Majesty also signified to them he had been acquainted with,
from his Ambassadors and Agents in Foreign Courts. Nor was the Information of
Sir William Cole, who certified them Twelve Days before it broke out, of
unusual Resorts and Concourses of suspicious Persons amongst themselves, so
despicable, but that it ought to have been inquired into; and such Means and
Preparations should in common Prudence have been used, as might have checked any
sudden Attempts or Insurrections whatsoever. And truly, the great Supineness,
and Security of the English in general, did not a little contribute to their
Ruin. For they could apprehend no Danger, considering the perfect Intelligence
betwixt them and the Irish, cemented by inter-Marriages, and all other
imaginable Ties of Friendship; which seemed the more secure, seeing the
Catholics were permitted the private Enjoyment of their Religion, and had
obtained, not only a considerable Abatement in their Subsidies, but many
advantageous Redresses from the King's Favor, in all their Concerns; so that
they were, at this present, in a more flourishing Condition, than they had yet
enjoyed since their first Subjection. In this Security, the Irish Army had been
disbanded, but the Soldiery not disposed of, according to the King's Intention,
and Promises to foreign Ambassadors, who for want of other Employment, proved
very assisting to the designed Rebellion, by engaging in it.

But the Irish, who had so often and for so many Ages endeavored to vindicate
their Liberty, and shake off the heavy Yoke of the English, thinking now the
Occasion (by the Death of Strafford, Their Reaesons.
and the disbanding of the Army he had raised) very inviting, they eagerly laid
hold on it, hoping to emancipate themselves from the Slavery they groaned
under; or at least, in Imitation of the Scots, acquire by Arms, as they had
done, new Immunities and Privileges. But the main thing insisted upon, was
their Religion, which had been derived to them by an immemorial Series of
Ancestors, and which they always adhered to, with inexpressible Bigottry: so
that observing it to be extremely persecuted in England, and fearing the like
Measure at Home, it served for the main Pretense of their Rebellion. Nor is it
absurd to believe, but that the Conspirators in England, contributed equally to
these Tumults, as they had done before to the Scottish Commotions, since
Clotworthy, Pryn, Parsons, Loftus.
some of their Party affirmed, That the Conversion of the Irish, was to be
effected with the Sword in one hand, and the Bible in the other. Ireland could
not do well without a Rebellion, to the end the Remnant of the Natives might be
destroyed. They would not leave a Priest in Ireland, but extirpate their
Superstition and Nation. So that it was thought by many, that the Irish were
forced by the English, by these Provocations, to take up Arms, that they might,
upon so plausible a pretext, be entirely ruined, and rooted out, as Rebels and
Traitors. What other Reasons they gave, as Oppression, Grievances, Privileges,
etc. common to all Rebellions, may pass as such; but that they should pretend
to vindicate the King's Prerogative by destroying it, is only proper to them,
and those nefarious Regicides who did so naturally copy them. But whatever were
the Pretenses of the Revolters, it is but rational to believe they had never
broke out, but for the Prospect they had of a Breach (which they could not but
know from their Committee at London, most whereof were Catholics, and many, as
the Lord Germanston, etc. prime Actors in the Rebellion) betwixt the King and
Parliament. For, they could have had no Aid from abroad, France and Spain being
engaged in a War, and the Pope, though he might wish well, remote and not over
liberal; so that they must necessarily have been ruined by the Forces of
England and Scotland.

The Conspiracy being brought to Maturity, many of the Gentlemen first, The
Conspiracy is discovered.
and afterward most of the Nobility, as also the entire Multitude of the
Romish Religion, joined in it; and with unheard of Secrecy, assaulted,
suppressed, and took most of the Towns and Fortresses of the Kingdom; and
sparing none, these barbarous Traitors massacred, without Respect of Sex, or
Age, them of the English Nation and Religion, filling all Places where they
came, with Ruin, Rapines, Burnings, and infinite Slaughters.

Dublin, the chief Seat of the Government and Kingdom, was not surprised, being
saved by the seasonable Infidelity of one O Conall, an Irishman; who, being
convinced by the horridness of the Fact, or greatness of the Reward he hoped
for from its Discovery; lays open the whole Conspiracy, acquainting the
Chief-Justices with the Design, the Night before it was to have been put in
Execution. Londonderry, Colrane, Tredagh, with some other Towns and:
Fortresses standing upon their Defense, escaped the Danger, which with the
Arrival of some few Forces from England, occasioned a very long and very bloody
War.

The Lords Justices having secured the Castle of Dublin, where the King's
Magazines were, Dublin secured.
and the City as well as they could, with armed Men; they the next Morning
apprehended Hugh Mac-Mahon, Grandchild to the late rebellious Earl of Tyrone;
who by his unwary Confidence, or rather divine Providence, had occasioned the
Discovery, by entrusting O Conalli with the Secret. Being brought before the
Council, he boldly avowed the Conspiracy, affirming, That as it was universal,
and to be put in execution that instant Morning; so it was not humanely
possible to be prevented. Some of the Conspirators taken.
He acknowledged himself their Prisoner, and being in their Power, they might
use him as they pleased; he was sure to be suddenly revenged. The Lord
Macquier, another of the principal Conspirators, was also taken, but few more
of Quality; the rest of the Undertakers, as Roger More, Plunket, Birne, and
others having escaped. The Citizens, with such as could be confided in, were
immediately armed, and Proclamation made, and sent into all Quarters, of the
Discovery of this flagitious Rebellion, and their Disappointment of their
Attempt upon Dublin; as also to exhort all good Subjects to betake themselves
to their Defense. Upon this Proclamation, the Lords of the English Pale being
of British Extraction, and who in all former Rebellions, had been true to the
Crown, pretending Ignorance of any Plot before this public Notice, repaired to
the Council, with Assurances of their Fidelity, and offer of their Service. And
they were not only entrusted, it being dangerous to suspect them in this
Juncture; but had also Arms delivered to them upon their Desires, and
Commissions to levy Men for their own Defense, and that of their Provinces.

The standing Forces in Ireland consisting of scarce 1000 Horse and 2000 Foot,
were dispersed in the several Fortresses of the Kingdom; but so remote, that it
was not possible, the ways being intercepted by the Rebels, to draw them to a
Body: besides, many of them being Catholics, revolted, and others were
surprised or intercepted, so that few of them could be brought to Dublin. The
City was in the mean time fortified, with all imaginable Industry; being also
daily filled with Numbers of such, who fled from the cruel and inhumane
Barbarities of the Rebels. Of these, and the neighboring English, two
Regiments were formed, whereof Sir Henry Tichburne had one, together with the
Government of Tredagh, and Sir Charles Coot, the other, with the Command of
Dublin. These two Places being the principal Fortresses of the Party.

The Justices and Council dispatched an Express to the King, who was then in
Scotland, and to the Parliament at Westminster, of the Discovery and Progress
of the Conspiracy. His Majesty highly perplexed, as most concerned, with this
monstrous Rebellion; offers all his Assistance for the suppressing of it;
acquaints the Parliament of Scotland with it, and demands their Aid in it;
conjures the two Houses at Westminster, and empowers them to use the utmost of
Force and Counsel to prevent the Progress of the Rebellion, and deliver his
Protestant Subjects, from the Calamities that threatened them. Nay, sometime
after he offered to go in Person, and raise 10000 Volunteers for that Service,
if the Parliament would but pay them; all which they refuse, under pretense of
not exposing his Sacred Person to so eminent Danger; but in truth, preferring
their own Fears to the Solace of so many desolate Sufferers: and lest, when he
had conquered those Rebels, he might be sensible of the Injuries done him, and
being armed become formidable to the Parliament it self. The Houses indeed
voted a powerful Relief of Men, Money, and Provisions, but they were but slow
in Performance, retarding the Supplies they had so eagerly ordered, with their
undutiful Disputes, and Quarrels with the Court, till the whole was well nigh
lost. Bleeding Ireland was the Subject of their Discourse, not their Care,
being too much taken up with the Management of their own Designs at Home, so
that they went no farther, besides exclaiming at the Obstacles, they themselves
created; and that by a Calumny black as the Rebellion it self, they cast the
Odium of those Delays, upon the unsulliedst Innocence in the World, the King:
than whom, no Prince could be more sensibly affected with the greatness of the
Calamity, nor desired the Welfare of his Subjects with more Affection.

The King returns out of Scotland.
The King having appeased Scotland, returned to London, where he was received
with the general Acclamations of the People, and all the Pomp imaginable, being
met by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and royally feasted together with the Queen
and Prince at Whitehall. But the Parliament being much disturbed with this
solemn Entertainment, had prepared another reception for his Majesty. They had
used all their Arts to hinder his going into Scotland, lest peradventure he
should tamper with his Army by the way, of which they had already created to
themselves several Jealousies, it being as yet but in disbanding: or that he
should gain too much upon the Scots-Parliament by his Concessions and Favors.
But, what they more openly acted was, to press the King to substitute a
Lieutenant in his absence, who might personate him, not obscurely designing the
Earl of Essex for this honor; by which grant, they might have divested him of
every thing but his Title before his return, which he perceiving, wisely
refused them so ruinous a Concession. And yet he commissioned him General on
the South Side of Trent, with Power to raise Forces in case of Necessity. But
the Faction impatient of every Repulse, in revenge, framed a Remonstrance in
his absence; wherein, whatever was defective in the Government, was, as
usually, attributed to his Counselors, with the usual Reflections upon
himself. But, the Misfortunes, and what Errors were committed, ought truly to
be laid at their Doors, which they were not ignorant of, seeing the Parliament
absolutely denied to supply the Necessities of the Crown, both at Home and
Abroad, whereby things often miscarried, The Parliament publish their
Remonstrance.
and Money was sometimes raised by extraordinary Ways. But the King, informed
of their Design, and not ignorant of the Force of ingenious Calumny, had
desired them not to emit the said Remonstrance; not that he feared the Truth,
but that he apprehended the Poison of plausible Malice. But these modest Men
refused to comply in so small a matter with their King, which produced an
Answer from his Majesty, no less just, and reasonable to all Men of Sense, than
that monstrous Libel was fertile of falsity and imposture.

The Commons, to gain Credit to the Terrors wherewith they had exagitated the
People, and lest they should have the least Suspicion of hazard to the Service
of God, 1641. Frame the Protestation.
had in May framed a Protestation and Oath, without acquainting the King or
House of Lords with it, which rendered it ipso facto illegal, which was
swallowed by most Men; none of the Lower House, nor scarce any of the Upper
refusing it, and afterward imposed upon the whole Kingdom, which generally
took it, without observing the Poison hid under it. This Protestation appeared
very plausible at first sight, promising to defend Religion according to Law,
and the King according to Religion; if it had not administered occasion to those
fictitious Bug-bears of Fears and Jealousies; or planed, and ushered the way,
to that rebellious Confederation called the Covenant, betwixt these perfidious
Wretches, and their no less perfidious Brethren, the Scots. The Faction also in
process of time, explaining this Protestation, affirmed their meaning to be,
That by the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations, contrary to the
same Doctrine, is meant only the public Doctrine professed in the Church, so
far, as it is opposite to Popery, and Popish Innovation: and that the said
words, are not to extend to the maintaining of any Form of Worship, Discipline
or Government; nor of any Rites, or Ceremonies of the said Church of England:
so that upon the Matter, it seems manifest, that the Hierarchy of Bishops, and
the Liturgy, were plainly designed for Extirpation.

The other Arts, whereby the Bell-weathers of the Faction daily incensed the
People, were the feigning, and then themselves detecting of Plots and
Conspiracies, and imaginary Designs, wherewith they strangely troubled and
afrighted the giddy Rabble; who, by an implicit Credulity, believed all that
was told them, to the prejudice of the King or his Friends, whom they
stigmatized with the odious Characters of Papists, and Malignants. Nor was it
an Artifice of less Cunning in them, to procure Subscriptions from the
unthinking Crowd, to occasional Petitions of their own framing; pretending
Grievances and Dangers, and demanding Remedies against them, as in public
Calamities.

On the other side, the King hitherto patient, seeing his Clemency more and
more abused, by the Contumacy of his Adversaries, resolved to punish these
Disturbers of the Public Peace: And, being informed, that some Members of
Parliament had private Meeting and Caballing with the Scots, who also had
countenanced the late Tumults; he gave Warrants to seize their Papers, and
secure their Persons; but they being withdrawn, he caused One of the Upper
House and Five of the Lower, to be accused of High Treason. His Majesty had had
Advertisement of their Caballing when he was in Scotland, but had forbore them
hitherto, upon hope, that his Indulgence might have laid the Storms these Men
had raised; but finding the contrary, he caused them to be Impeached by his
Attorney General, Sir Ed. Herbert, and sent a Sergeant at Arms to demand them
of the House, which they were so far from complying with, that they immediately
voted, That no Person whatsoever, should offer to Arrest, or Detain, any Member
of that House, without Order from the House. But they had forgot their own
Resolves in Sir George Ratcliff's Case, who being a Member of the Parliament in
Ireland, had it determined against him, That no Privilege of Parliament there
nor here, should reach to Protect him in Case of High Treason. The King
therefore entering their House in Person, The King enters the House of Commons.
required they should be delivered to the Law. The Crimes objected against them
were; That, amongst other Things, they had endeavored to subvert the Laws; had
invited Foreigners ( the Scots) to Invade the Kingdom; that they had raised
Tumults, and Seditions, and had alienated the Subjects Affections from their
King. But these Traitors, having private Notice of the Design against them, by
one of the Countess of Carlisle.
Court Ladies, withdrew themselves into Westminster Hall; where, hiding
themselves that Night, they in the Morning fled into the City, from whence they
in a few Days returned, with no less Pomp than Impudence.

It Is scarce credible, with what Bitterness the seditious calumniating Spirits
in the Commons House, traduced this Act of the King's. They cried out, Their
Privileges were destroyed, and that never such Violence had been offered to so
great a Court, by any of his Predecessors: Not considering, That there is no
Sanctuary for Rebellion, which was the present Case, and they themselves will
hereafter turn out the whole Body of the House. During these Traverses, the
tumultuous Uproars being encouraged by the Puritans, grew daily more
licentious; insomuch, that a Preaching Iron-monger, dared to throw a Libel,
entitled, To your Tents O Israel, into his Majesty's Coach, the Multitude
bellowing without ceasing, Privileges of Parliament, Privileges of Parliament.
The Parliament hereupon transfer their Session into the City, their Adjournment
being to keep up the Belief, that they did not Sit in Safety, and to
countenance the Attempt upon the Militia, which they now were designing; where,
infusing into the People, gave them also a false Alarm by their Emissaries, who
running through the Streets of the City at dead time of the Night, cried
terribly, A terrible Alarm in the City.
That the King was coming with an Army of Papists to destroy them; which
wrought so effectually, that the Inhabitants, raised with the Horror of the
imaginary Danger, took Arms, and in an instant got into a Body of no less than
Forty Thousand Men; whilst the Women also filled the Streets with Benches,
Stools, Tubs, etc. to hinder the Passage of the Horse, and provided scalding
Water to throw upon them. The Nonappearance of these Soldiers in the Air,
could not undeceive the People, being kept warm with successive hourly
Discoveries of Plots and Dangers; so that the Parliament which was returned,
guarded by great Numbers from London to Westminster, as it were in Triumph,
importuned the King again for Guards, and that under the Command of Essex;
pretending Danger, from I know not what Ambushes and Conspiracies. But the
King, though he showed the Vanity of these imaginary Terrors, and offered his
own Person Bayl for their Security, was not heard. Nay, he offered them Two
Hundred of the City Militia, under the Command of the Lord Chamberlain, whose
Province it was to take care of the Parliament; which they rejected, ordering
Two Companies under Skippon, a Slave to the Faction, to attend them; whilst an
infinite Number of the enraged Rabble, as it were assaulting Whitehall and
Westminster, crying, No Bishop, Down with Antichrist, etc. forced the King's
Friends, who would have entered the House, to retire. And, these Fellows, being
for the most part such whose Domestic Affairs were, either inconsiderable, or
desperate, and consequently, as usual, most busy, and most concerned for the
Public; exclude and force away the Bishops, knowing them to be immovable in
their Loyalty and Obedience to the King and Government. Twelve Bishops
committed to the Tower.
And when this Sacred Order had protested against this Violence, the Houses
enraged at it, sent Twelve of them, whom they had voted Guilty of High Treason,
to the Tower; whereby they secured themselves from their Votes, destroying
afterward, as much as in them lay, their very Function. Nor did these
Miscreants forbear, to vomit their Gall against the Sacred Person of the King
himself, by villainous and licentious Speeches; some of them crying out, That
he was the Traitor; others, That the Young Prince would govern better; and a
prime Leader yell'd out, That the King was not fit to live. Insomuch, that his
Majesty perceiving their unbridled Rage, which was cherished by those Sons of
Violence in the Houses, and having, though in vain, attempted all ways to
appease their Fury, he removed with his Queen and Children to Hampton Court.

After some Stay there, his Majesty and the Queen went to Dover, with the
Princess Mary, married some Time since to the Prince of Orange, from whence the
Queen passed into Holland, The Queen goes to Holland.
under Pretext of conveying her Daughter to her Husband, but truly, to secure
her Person; which was not meanly threatened, upon Account of her Religion, and
Conjugal Affection. At Canterbury, being every where importuned by Messages
from the Parliament, he was persuaded, though much against his Will, to Sign a
Bill for taking away the Bishops Votes in Parliament. But no Concession could
satisfy Unreasonable Men; insomuch, that his Majesty being returned to
Greenwich, he went thence with the Prince and Duke of York to Theobalds, and so
Northwards.

This Conduct, as it happened, proved Fatal to the King. And some prudent Men
did then wonder, that his Majesty would leave the City, the Seat of his
Kingdom, which had been also that of his Predecessors; filled with Multitudes
of his Friends, abounding in Riches, and all Military Provisions, and the only
proper place both for Peace and War; The King leaves Whitehall,
and withdraw himself into the Country, where all these Advantages were
wanting. But the Terrors wherewith his Followers, and particularly the Royal
Family, were agitated, and the Apprehensions his Majesty had entertained upon
their Account, as also the Hopes that these Animosities and Heats in the Lower
House might cool in Time, seem to excuse his Retreat. Nor was the King so
abandoned by his People, but that many honest and brave Men, as well of their
own Accord, as very many more by Gurney, the Lord Mayor's Procurement, mingled
themselves with the Rabble, with design to defend the King's Sacred Person,
from the Insults and Violence of the Crowd, if they should presume to attempt
any thing against him. Nay, the whole Society of Gray's Inn (which showed, That
the Law as well as Reason was for him) coming to Whitehall in order, offered
themselves to guard his Majesty; which seasonable profession of Duty, drew from
the King, both his Acknowledgements and Thanks; though he otherwise waved the
offer supposing those popular Heats and Insurrections, might be best allayed by
removing, and yielding; and lest also, he might be thought to meditate a War.

But the Parliament to add Credit, at least Color, to the Terrors they had
imbued the People with, gave Power to the Sheriffs and Justices of Peace in the
Counties, to suppress all seditious and suspected Assemblies, and seize upon
all Arms and Instruments of War, and secure the same. Amongst other terrible
Triflings, it was affirmed, That the Lord Digby and Colonel Lunsford, had
appeared in Arms at Kingstone with great Numbers, though their Cavalry amounted
but to a hired Coach with Six Horses, which they ordered to be suppressed, and
the Colonel was taken and sent to the Tower.

After this, they follow the King to Royston with an insolent Petition, and
goes Northward.
wherein they demanded the Tower, the Fortresses, and Militia of the Kingdom to
be delivered to them. But these, being inseparable Flowers of the Crown, were
not to be parted with to any; and his Majesty being again pressed to it,
continued immovable, telling them in short, That their Fears, and Doubts, and
Jealousies, which he looked upon as wild and irregular, were such, as he would
take time to satisfy the World of; but that his own were not trivial,
occasioned by the many scandalous Pamphlets, seditious Sermons, sundry public
Tumults hitherto uninquired into, and unpunished. But the Faction seeing the
Constancy of the King, formed a Declaration, wherein, after a nauseous
Enumeration of Grievances, Fears and Jealousies, they again peremptorily demand
the disposal of the Militia; and being again refused, resolved to extort it
from their King, with all their Force. Nor was it absurd in them; for, being
conscious of their Crimes and Deserts, they could not imagine how to secure
themselves from the Punishment due to their Guilt, but by asserting the Power
of the Sword in their own Hands. They therefore passed their Ordinance for the
Militia, though with solemn protesting, That they had not the least Intention
or Purpose of any War with the King (but how falsely!) which made it swallowed
the easier. They then seized upon the Fleet, The Parliament arm, and the King
is excluded at Hull.
appointing the Earl of Warwick their Admiral, and possessed themselves of
Hull, lest the King should secure the Magazine there: by whose Governor, his
Majesty, when he would have entered the Town, was shut out by an unheard of
Insolence, and manifest Disobedience. And this is that Hotham, the unhappy
Monument of improsperous Infidelity, who falling from one Inconstancy to
another, suffered at length Punishment (together with his Eldest Son, who, to
aggravate his Misery, was executed before him) due to so flagitious a Crime,
being beheaded by those for whose Sake he had so desperately rebelled.

The Dye of War being thus cast at Hull, the Parties flew out into open Action;
but, lest they should not pretend Justice, the Cause was defended on both Sides
with Declarations, Apologies, and other public Writings; which, because they
are extant, I will only add, That as the King had the better Cause, so it was
also asserted with a better Pen, however otherwise unfortunate.

BOOK II.
The King attempts Hull in vain. Propositions sent to his Majesty to York. Most
of the Lords, and many of the Commons repair to his Majesty. He erects his
Standard at Nottingham, and raises an Army. Essex, the Rebels General at
Worcester, at Keynton. The famous Battle of Edgehill. Fight at Branford. The
King fortifies Oxford. Some Actions in other Provinces. The Queen lands at
Burlington. Goes to Oxford. The Battle of Lansdowne; Of Rownday Down. The
Siege and Relief of Gloucester. The great Battle of Newbury. The Parliament
invite the Scots to their Succor. They enter England. The Siege of York. The
fatal Battle of Marston-Moor. The Fights at Brandon Heath and Copredy-bridge.
Essex defeated in the West. The second Battle of Newbury. Alexander Carew, and
the Two Hothams beheaded. Mac-Mahon and Macquier executed. The Archbishop of
Canterbury martyred. The Treaty at Uxbridge. Essex discarded, and Sir Thomas
Fairfax made General in his Place.

Hotham proclaimed Traitor.
HIS Majesty, upon Hotham's insolent Refusal, caused him instantly to be
proclaimed Traitor. On the other side, the Parliament declare they will defend
him; and complain highly, of the Breach of their Privileges therein; as if the
King had violated his Subjects Immunities, by pretending to the Possession of
his own Town, and the Magazine he had purchased with his own Money. They
further, sent some of their Members, to disturb the King's Preparations at
York; which they did so effectually, that he lost the Opportunity of raising an
Army in that County. Perceiving then the Danger his Person was in, by the
Enemies forwardness, he demanded a Guard of the Gentry and Freeholders of
Yorkshire, which was easily assented to. Whereupon, the Parliament declared,
That the King, seduced by evil Counselors, did design to make War upon his
Parliament; forgetting, that they had done the same, being exagitated with
their fictitious Terrors Eight Months before.

The King, with his said Guard, and the feeble Assistance of the Trained Bands,
attempted Hull; but, The King attempts Hull in vain.
finding it an Enterprise of much Difficulty, would not spend that Time which
was so precious, in so hazardous an Undertaking. But the Parliament, confident
now in their Numbers and Power, (for the City of London and the neighboring
Counties were at their Devotion) sent a Remonstrance, with Nineteen
Propositions, to the King; by which, they demand in Effect, Nineteen
Propositions sent to his Majesty.
that he should surrender all his Regal Power into their Hands: tho they
disguised as much as they could their Intentions, with a Mixture of some Things
really to be approved of by every honest man; others specious and popular; and
some already granted by his Majesty. All which, as the King well observed in
his Answer, were cunningly twisted, and mixed with other Things of their main
Design of Ambition and private Interest.

But, the Propositions the Parliament made to the People, were of another
Nature; for, they invited them by an Order, to bring in Plate and Money to
Guild Hall, for the Restitution whereof they should have the public Faith, and
all under pretense of rescuing the King out of the hands of Papists and
Malignants; for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the Privileges
of Parliament. And never any Contributions were granted with more earnest and
mistaken Zeal, than those that were thrown into their Corban by the London and
Neighboring Puritans, under the pretext of Godliness; but to their own Ruin,
as it happened. The Richer Citizens, gave their Money and Plate with Joy, and
the Women offered their Jewels and Earrings, to this Calf of Presbytery. Nay,
the Poorer, both married and Maidens, gave their Wedding Rings, their Bodkins,
and their Thimbles to promote this Holy War. They were all hurried into this
mad Humor, by the fantastic Ardour of their Levites. These being the
Boutefeus of Rebellion and Tumult, who bellowing in their Assemblies, that
Religion would be overwhelmed with Popery, and their Liberties supplanted by
the Approaches of Tyranny, declared, that there was no Deliverance to be
expected, but from the Parliament.

With these Arts, and Moneys from the City, that Nursery of Rebellion, The
Parliament raise an Army, under the Command of Essex.
a great Army was raised under the Command of the Earl of Essex, and sent forth
to destroy the Malignants, (for so they called such, who by the Principles of
Honor and Duty, adhered to their Prince) and to rescue the King, as they
gloried, out of the Hands of his wicked Counselors. The Title of King, was as
yet held in great Veneration by the People. It pleased them therefore, to
entitle their War to the King and Parliament, though nothing more contrary to
both. They had not as yet separated Kingship from the Person, which shortly
after happened; for, distinguishing betwixt the Politic and Private Capacity
of the Chief Magistrate, they dared impudently to affirm, That the King was
Virtually in the Parliament, though Personally absent at York. Nay, they went
further, as there is still a plus ultra in villainous Rebellion, contesting,
That the supreme Power is primarily in the People, and in Kings but by a
delegate and fiduciary Commission; and therefore as being inferior to the
Whole, though superior to every particular, to be reclaimed by Force if they
should transgress against Religion and Liberty. But, to omit these seditious
Impertinences, sufficiently refuted in the repeating of them; the King,
understanding the Progress and Preparations of the Adversaries, and how they
had seized his Navy, Fortresses and Magazines, being himself destitute of all
Help, except such as those Generous and Loyal Lords and Gentlemen, who followed
his Fortune, Essex and his Adherents proclaimed Traitors. The King sets up his
Standard at Nottingham.
did contribute; he declared Essex and his Adherents, to be Traitors and
Rebels; and appointing the Marquess of Hartford, General of his Forces, erected
his Royal Standard at Nottingham, inviting thereby all his loving Subjects to
his Assistance. It was observed, that a Gust of Wind did at the same Time blow
down the Colors, which though looked upon as Inauspicious by some, did not yet
hinder, but that several Thousands repaired to them. And, his Majesty having
received Money and Arms from the Queen, grew by these Supplies, and the
Accession of his Friends, (most of the Lords and very many of the Lower House
repairing to him) formidable. Insomuch, that this great Defection of the
Members, amongst whom was the Lord Keeper with the Great Seal, as they added
Life and Reputation to the King's Affairs, being for the most part Persons of
whole Estates and great Abilities, so they did a little raise Apprehensions in
them that remained, which appeared by their Vote and Impeachment of the
Fifteenth of June.

The Queen proclaimed Traitor.
The Queen, in the beginning of the Troubles, retired with her own and the
Crown-Jewels, some whereof she had pawned for these Supplies, into Holland,
under pretense of conducting (as is already observed) her Daughter, the Lady
Mary, to the Prince of Orange her Husband; for which pious, and just Fact, (tho
they formerly looked upon it as a Scandal, when it was rumoured that they had a
Design to accuse her) she was proclaimed Traitor, by these barbarous, and worst
of Rebels. Some were of Opinion, that the Faction was not ignorant of the
Conveyance of this Treasure, but connived at it, upon a Supposition, that the
King, upon the Confidence of it, might be more refractary to their Demands, and
consequently engage in a War against them, which they mainly desired, as the
plausiblest way to ruin him.

His Majesty, notwithstanding the Accession of his Friends and Power, desired
the Ways of Peace, not War. Earl of Southampton. Earl of Dorset.
But all his Messages and gracious Offers, though sent to them by the Principal
Nobles about him, were rejected with Scorn and Insolence: For, the impetuous
Faction in the House, having a great Army on Foot, and abundance of Treasure,
would hearken to no Accommodation. This obliged his Majesty to intend his
Safety the more, so that levying Soldiers in the Counties he passed, he daily
increased, even beyond Expectation. For, having made a solemn Protestation at
the head of his Men at Wellington. The King's solemn Protestation,
viz. That he would defend the Protestant Religion as by Law established, The
Laws of the Land, and the Liberty and Property of the Subject, his Numbers
visibly augmented. Passing through Chester into Wales, having made a Pathetick
Speech to the Inhabitants thereof, and gained entirely upon their Affections,
naturally inclined to serve their Prince; he went thence to Shrewsbury, where
the Country being assembled by his Order, he at the Head of them made this
following Oration; which for its Excellency, and that it contains the Ground
and the Truth of the Quarrel, I thought fit to insert here.

Gentlemen,
and Speech to the Gentry and Inhabitants near Shrews-bury.
IT is some Benefit to me from the Insolence and Misfortunes which have driven
me about, that they have brought me to so good a part of my Kingdom, and to so
faithful a part of my People. I hope neither you nor I shall repent in coming
hither. I will do my part that you may not; and, of you, I was confident before
I came. The Residence of an Army, is not usually pleasant to any Place; and
mine may carry more Fear with it, since it may be thought, robbed and spoiled
of all my own, and such Terror used to fright and keep all men from supplying
of me, I must only live upon the Aid and Relief of my People. But, be not
afraid. I would to God my poor Subjects suffered no more by the Insolence, and
Violence of that Army raised against me, though they have made themselves
wanton even with Plenty, than you shall do by mine; and yet, I fear I cannot
prevent all Disorders; I will do my best: and this I promise you, no man shall
be a loser by me, if I can help it.

I have sent hither for a Mint. I will melt down all my own Plate, and expose
all my Lands to Sale, or Mortgage; that, if it be possible, I may not bring the
least pressure upon you. In the mean time, I have summoned you hither, to do
that for me and your selves, for the Maintenance of your Religion and the Laws
of the Land, by which you enjoy all that you have, which other men do against
us. Do not suffer so good a Cause to be lost, for want of supplying me with
that which will be taken from you, by those, who pursue me with this violence.
And whilst these ill men sacrifice their Money, Plate, and utmost Industry to
destroy the Commonwealth, be you no less liberal to preserve it. Assure your
selves, if it please God to bless me with Success, I shall remember the
Assistance that every particular man here gives me, to his Advantage. However,
it will hereafter (how furiously soever the minds of men are now possessed) be
Honor and Comfort to you, that with some Charge and Trouble to your selves,
you did your part to support the King, and preserve the Kingdom.

With this Speech, and the Majesty and Reverence of his Person, the People, as
it were inspired, listed themselves by Troops in this Sacred Warfare; so that
the King being, in a little time, become Master of considerable, and formidable
Forces, dared to provoke that Enemy whom he had hitherto avoided.

Essex goes to his Army.
Essex was waited upon in great State by the Parliament-Members out of Town,
and with quick Marches hastens to Northampton the Rendezvous of his Army,
consisting of Fourteen Thousand Men, high and confident, seeing they were to
combat fresh and for the most part undisciplined Soldiers. Amongst other
Instructions, Essex had received a Petition from his Masters to be presented to
the King, wherein they desire, That his Majesty would desert his Followers, who
were REBELS and TRAITORS; and suffer them to be suppressed by the Earl of
Essex. But his Majesty abominating so sinful a Thought, The King marches
toward London.
leaving Shrewsbury, marched with Six Thousand Foot, Three Thousand brave
Horse, and Two Thousand Dragoons, toward London. This unexpected Motion of the
King, perplexed the City, and Senate, not a little before disordered with the
Success of Prince Rupert, who had broke and destroyed a Wing of their Horse
near Worcester, and killed Sands the Colonel. Both Houses therefore, to obviate
the Danger from the King's Army, and lest he should attempt the City, where it
was supposed the Parliament might easiest be suppressed; exhort the
City-Militia to stand upon their Guard, to watch, to raise such Fortifications
as could suddenly be made, to make Batteries for their Cannon, dig Trenches,
and set up Courts of Guard for the Soldiers, omitting nothing for their
Defense against the King's feared Approach. They also sent Ten Companies to
secure Windsor, whilst they Imprison such of their Citizens, as were suspected
to Favor the King's Party. Essex, in the mean Time, came to Worcester, quitted
by the Royallists, where he continued whilst the King passed by, without giving
his Majesty any Interruption. But the Rebels followed close in his Rear, which
he perceiving, turned short upon them, lest he should be enclosed betwixt the
Rebels and the Rebellious City of London. This occasioned that memorable
Battle, the first of these Unhappy Wars, which was fought in the Vale of
Red-Horse; not absurdly called so, considering the streams of Blood which were
spilled there that Day. The Parties fought with equal Courage and Fortune,
though both pretended to the Victory, which had been infallibly the King's, and
the Rebellion stifled in its Infancy, if the Right Wing of our Horse had not
pursued the Enemy farther than they ought to have done. But God, who was not
pleased that our Sins should be expiated at a Common Rate, determined otherwise.

The Battle of Edgehill. Oct. 23. 1642.
The Royallists descending Edgehill in Battalia, and very Cheerful, had a Sight
of the Enemy, who were busy in ordering their Army in the Valley below. The
King viewing of them, being asked, what he intended to do? answered briskly, I
never saw the Rebels before in a Body. I am resolved to fight them; God and all
good Men assist my Righteous Cause. Prince Rupert commanded the Right Wing;
Lieutenant General Willmot, to whom the Earl of Forth was added, the Left; and
the Earl of Lindsey, General of the Field, led the Main Battle on Foot, with a
Pike in his Hand; and each Division had their Reserves. Essex, who had
Quartered at Keynton, drew his Army into Battalia in the Vale, saluting, or
provoking the Adversaries with Three great Shot, and as many Shouts of his
whole Army. This Summons was answered by Two great Guns, and being advanced
nearer, the King observed the Rebels Army to be drawn up as follows: Two
Regiments of Horse composed the Right Wing, commanded by the Two Colonels,
Balfore and Stapelton, and the Lord Fielding had his Regiment in their Rear for
a Reserve. Essex commanded the Battle, at first also on Foot as the adverse
General; and the Left Wing, consisting of Twenty Troops of Horse, was led by
Colonel Ramsey, a Scot. And now the Cannon began to play on both Sides, but
without any considerable Execution. Prince Rupert charged Ramsey with so much
Courage, that he not only forced him from his Station, but off the Field also;
and the Brigade of Foot next to them, frighted with the Flight of their Horse,
and surprised with the Defection of Sir Faithful Fortescue (who mindful of his
Duty, went over with his Troops to his Majesty) threw down their Arms, Colonel
Essex, who commanded them, retiring to the Main Body. But our Horse following
the Chase too far, and their Reserves commanded by the Earl of Carnarven, and
hurried with the same Violence, suffered the Victory to slip out of their
Hands, by their too much eagerness to overcome. For, if they had charged their
Flank, bared of their Horse, they had probably much incommoded them. Essex was
more cautious, who sending Fielding's Reserve, with others under the Command of
Hurrey, did much disturb the King's Foot, destitute by the Absence of their
Horse. The Left Wing had not the same Success, for Balfore had forced Willmot
to a disorderly Retreat, and breaking Two Battalions of Foot, left naked by the
Flight of their Horse on that Side, opened a passage to the King's Standard.
The Foot by this were all engaged, and the Fight growing very hot, the Standard
it self was seized on, Sir Edmund Varney that carried it being Slain; but it
was recovered again by Sir Jo. Smith, for which generous Act he was by the
King, the best judge of Merit, Knighted upon the Place, and honored with the
bearing of that Standard he had so bravely recovered. The Earl of Lindsey was
slain there, having performed all the Parts of a great Captain; and, his Eldest
Son hastening to his Assistance, was taken Prisoner. The Battle being restored
by the Accession of fresh Supplies on the King's Side, and the Evening
approaching, they left combating as if by consent, both Sides being weary, and
the Rebels also in want of Ammunition. Both Sides therefore rallying their
shattered Forces, drew up into Battalia, as at the Beginning. By this the
Prince was returned, who, if he had not amused himself in that vain pursuit,
and Plundering of the Enemies Carriages at Keynton, the War had been ended at
this first Blow.

Essex was strengthened in the Field with Colonel Hamden's Regiment; and
presently afterward by Colonel Hollis his Foot, and the Lord Willoughby's
Regiment of Horse; who meeting Prince Rupert's Wing in the Lanes pursuing of
Ramsey, forced him back into the Field. Although Essex was more numerous by the
Addition of these Three fresh Regiments, he did attempt no farther upon the
King, considering also, that the Prince's Horse, of whose Bravery he had had
Experience, were fresh and entire. Night being come, the King withdrew to the
Hill, from which he had descended, where he lay all Night in his Coach with the
Prince of Wales, (the Hopes, and future Glory of our Nation) the Camp shining
with Fires.

The next Morning, the King sent off his Foot toward Ayno, and having stood
sometime in Battel-array with his Horse, did also follow. Essex lay in the
Field where he had fought, and however recruited with the Accession of Three
entire fresh Regiments, attempted no farther upon the Royallists, but
retreating to the Banks of Avon under the protection of Warwick-Castle, Essex
retires to Warwick.
suffered the King to march whither he pleased. The slain on both Sides, were
at first believed to amount to near Five Thousand, though the Country, by a
stricter Enquiry, affirmed, they had not buried above a Thousand; which is the
more probable, seeing Slaughters of this Kind are ordinarily magnified. On the
King's Side, the General bravely performing the Duty of his Place, as also that
of a private Soldier, was slain, together with the Lord Aubigny, and Sir
Edward Varney, who died in this Field of Honor. The Rebels lost Colonel Essex,
(who signalized himself by his Bravery) Lieutenant Colonel Ramsey, and the Lord
St. John's, who being taken died of his Wounds. Both Parties attributed to
themselves the Honor of the Victory. The Essexians said, That the Field and
Dead were left to their Disposal. The Royallists likewise gloried, that they
had done what they designed, by removing the Obstacles that hindered their March
toward London; The King continues his March.
adding farther, That the Rebels however strengthened with Three Regiments,
durst not oppose themselves to the King's Passage, the next Day. And truly,
though the King's Forces were much shattered, they grew accidentally more
formidable than before, to whom it proved no small Victory, considering his
Discouragements not to have been vanquished: For, many Eminent Persons, who
stood at gaze before, seeing the Party equal, ranged themselves now without
difficulty on the better Side, where their Duty and Inclination invited them.

How fair this Enemy behaved themselves in other things, may be guessed by
Letters taken amongst their Baggage in the Battle, discovering the Treasons of
one Blake in the King's Army, Blake's Treason and Punishment.
who daily gave Intelligence of what passed, to the Rebels, and particularly in
what part of the Army the King fought, that they might direct their Bullets
with more Certitude at so Illustrious a Mark. Perhaps thus designing, as they
had Religiously affirmed, to defend the King's Person. But the unhappy
Contriver of this nefarious Treason, expiated his Crime with his Life, being
hanged on the next Tree.

O. Cromwell 's first Adventure.
I cannot omit what is affirmed of Cromwell, then a Captain of Horse in Essex
his Regiment, who absented himself from the Fight. He had observed from the Top
of a Steeple in the Neighborhood, the Disorder of the Right Wing of their
Army, wherewith being greatly terrified, he slipped down for haste by the
Bell-Rope, and taking Horse, ran away with his Troop; for which Crime he had
been cashiered, had it not been for the powerful Mediation of his Friends. I
mention this of this so famous Chieftain in the following Wars, to show, how
the Temperature of Body and Mind may, by Use and Ambition, be entirely altered.

The King takes Banbury-Castle, etc.
The King continued his March, having the Town and Castle of Banbury surrendered
to him in his Way; the Two Regiments of Foot, and Troop of Horse which
Garrisoned there, putting themselves under his Majesty's Protection and Pay.
Broughton, the Lord Says House, was also delivered; and now, the King, with
many Prisoners and Captive-Colonels, entered triumphantly into Oxford. Enters
triumphantly into Oxford.
But he did not stay long there; for, Prince Rupert, with a great Body of
Horse, swiftly moving up and down the Country, infested all the Ways and
Avenues to London on that Side; and the King following with the rest of the
Army, assaulted and forced Brentford, Hollis and Hamden's Regiments, with part
of the Lord Brookes's, routed at Brentford.
breaking Two of the Enemies best Regiments there, taking Eleven Colors and
Thirteen Pieces of Ordnance; which were sunk, by reason of their Encumbrance,
in the adjoining River. Many were slain and drowned, and Five Hundred were made
Prisoners; but the King gave these their Liberty, upon their Engagement, never
to bear Arms again against his Majesty. But, the Parliament, loath to lose so
many brave Men, ordered Stephen Marshall, a fierce Presbyterian Minister, to
absolve them from the Religion of their Oaths, which he did, with a more than
Pontifical Authority. The Consternation this blow occasioned, filled the City
with Terror. They shut their Shops immediately upon the News, and mustering
their Trained-Bands and Auxiliaries, joining with such Forces of their Army, as
were nearest; Essex drew them all up in Battalia upon Turnham-Green. Essex at
Turnham-Green.
Three Thousand who lay at Kingston, were also sent for; for which their
General was after blamed, for abandoning so considerable a Post, which might
have distressed the King, if made good: For, his Majesty having Intelligence of
the numerous Strength of the Rebels, and indeed wanting Bullets for a Skirmish;
lest he might be surrounded by them, retreating over Kingston-Bridge,
abandoned, as is said, broke it down after him; and having garrisoned Redding
in his Way, returned triumphantly to Oxford.

Whilst these Things were a-doing, the City and the Two Houses apprehending the
King's Advance, had sent for Essex, to whom they had given Five Thousand Pound
as an Acknowledgment for his great Services at Edgehill, to hasten to their
Succor. But, the King being gone, the Citizens returned to their Labors, and
the Essexians to recruit their shattered Regiments with new Levies. The King
being come to Oxford, The King returns to Oxford, and Fortifies it.
and finding it a Place very commodious to make his head Quarters of, it being
in the Heart of the Kingdom, and not far from London; commanded it to be
Fortified (which the Rebels had seasonably omitted to do) and surrounded with a
deep Moat and Bulworks, according to the Modern Practice, which was done with
all imaginable Diligence and Haste.

In the mean Time, the War was carried on in other Provinces of the Kingdom,
with no less Courage and Vigor. Not only the Towns and Counties, but most of
the best Families divided in their Opinions; many engaging according to their
Interest, but most according as they affected the Parties. But, the various
Battles, Fights, Velitations, Sieges, and the like, as they deserve no
Triumphs, happening in a Civil War, so they merit a better Description, than is
yet extant; for, they were for the most part eminent for Courage, famous for
Conduct, and by so much the more severe in their Actings, by how much the
Parties were the more excited with the Opinion of doing well. I do not
therefore design to relate the whole War, as being above my Force. I will leave
that Province to the Writers of Histories, and content my self to describe the
Chief Actions of it, and those Things I my self for the most part saw, but with
designed Brevity.

Whilst the Armies were in their Winter Quarters, they were not so idle, but
that many Horse-Skirmishes, Excursions, Velitations, Beating-up of Quarters,
and the like Feats of War, were daily practiced, and that with various Success.
The King's Affairs had hitherto succeeded well, considering his Circumstances,
although he never received any Advantage without Sorrow, seeing it was gained
from his Subjects. And hence it was, that as often as his Arms were Successful,
his Thoughts were intent upon Peace, pressing and inviting the obdurate Faction
to it, by reiterated Letters and Messages, though to no purpose; for, those
Puritans relying upon the Assistance of their Brethren, the Scots, were wholly
averse from it. They had indeed formerly sent Propositions to the King at York,
but more severe than any Denunciation of War: Several fruitless Attempts for
Peace.
The Chief were, That the Chief Officers of State, should be of their naming;
and the Militia by Sea and Land, at their disposing. That the King should
disband his Forces, abandon his Friends, and not dispose of his Children, but
by their Consent.

His Majesty did not refuse an Answer to these Demands (although they seemed
rather Impositions of Slavery, than Peace) which he sent by the Marquis of
Hartford, and the Earl of Southampton, Two Eminent Noblemen, with Command to
deliver it in the House of Lords. But, being refused Admission, they returned
without having effected any thing. Neither were the Mediation of the French and
Dutch, though offered by both, (how sincerely I know not) accepted by the
Houses; who answered, That they could not suffer, that any Foreign Prince, or
State, especially the French, should interpose in their Affairs. And, to show
how little they valued the Monsieur, his Coach was stopped and searched for
Letters, as he was passing to Oxford; his Complaint of that Insolence, being
slurred over with a faint Excuse. The Parliament would admit of the Scots,
their Brethren in Iniquity; whom the King did justly reject, as equally Rebels.

They had indeed formerly, after the Battle of Edgehill, upon the King's
Advance with his victorious Army toward London, apprehending his Approach,
sent Two Lords and Three Commoners to stay him, under Pretense of treating;
which, when they could not, they seemed, in Revenge upon his Majesty's Retreat,
to resolve to treat no more; though afterward, upon the Instance of some of
the more moderate amongst them, they again sent Twelve Delegates to Oxford,
with Demands rather than Propositions; the Chief whereof were, Jan. 30. 1642.
That his Majesty should Disband his Army; Return to the Parliament; Abolish
Episcopacy; Abandon the Militia to their Disposal, etc. The King on the other
Side, demanded, His Revenues, his Magazines, his Cities, Navies, Fortresses,
etc. and, that whatever they had done contrary to Law, should be Abrogated. But
nothing was concluded, save that the Commissioners were forced to confess, That
the King (for, The King's rare Wisdom.
they were commanded by their Masters to treat with no Body but his Majesty
alone) did excel in Sharpness of Wit, in most accurate Understanding of Things,
and in Quickness of Judgment. That he also heard the contrary Objections and
Arguments, with unimitable Patience: Unhappy only in this, That he attributed
more to the Advice of others, than his own Opinion.

The Parliament had long since seized upon all the King's Castles, Forts, Arms,
Governments, Ships, Revenues, Treasure and Ornament. But, to show their
Intentions for Peace, they Denounce War with an Oath, declaring, They will not
lay down Arms as long as the King had an Army, under whose Protection, Papists
[that is, Royallists] and such who were obnoxious to the Law, might find
Sanctuary. Nay, they came to that pitch of Boldness, that they presumed by
their own Authority, to summon a National-Synod. Where, rejecting the ancient
Forms of Councils, they empower this, composed of Presbyterian and Independent
Clero-Layicks, to establish Religion, and the Forms for Government in the
Church. They also falsified the Great Seal, by making another instead of that
which was with the King, and use it publicly. Thus, this Pacifick Tribe seeks
for Peace, and immolates to injured Majesty, by rendering, as much as in them
lay, the Differences irreconcilable. But, this Counterfeiting of the Great
Seal, was voted Treason by the Parliament at Oxford some time after.

The Earl of Newcastle in the North,
During these Traverses, the Earl of New Castle raised an Army in the North, to
whom the Earl of Cumberland joined himself. On the other Side, the Two
Fairfaxes, Father and Son, were for the Parliament. The first material
Encounter they had, was at Tadcaster, where the Rebels were beaten, the
Royallists having forced them out of Town; after which they also took Bradford.
But the Fairfaxes being afterward recruited, they took Leeds; and Colonel
Cholmley and Boynton, routted and took Colonel Slingsby at Gisburg. The Younger
Fairfax gained also a notable Victory at Wakefield, against part of Newcastle's
Army; but he did not enjoy the Sweets of it long; for, his Forces were
afterward quite broken by the Marquiss's, who over-spreading the Country with
his Power, Victorious;
and having received great Stores of Arms, Cannon, and other Military Utensils,
with the Colonels Goring and King from Holland, drove the Rebels quite out of
the Field, and shut up the Lord Fairfax, Besieges Hull.
and his Remnants in Hull; where he besieged him. This was a fatal Oversight;
for, if he had carried the War into the associated Eastern Counties, humanely
spoke, he had not only added those Rich Provinces to his Victories, but by
intercepting the Contributions of Money and Men, which those Rich Countries
perpetually furnished the Rebels with, put an End to the War it self, and that
without Blood.

The Queen Lands at Burlington.
Early in the Spring, the Queen landed at Burlington, with many Officers and
Commanders of Note, as also great Stores of Arms and Provisions for War. In
this Place, and in her Quarters, her Majesty underwent no less hazard than at
Sea: for, an English Man of War coming then into the Bay, fired into the Town
with so much Fury, that she was forced to abandon her Lodging, and seek for
shelter behind the Hedges. But, being received magnificently by Newcastle, and
with Honors due to so great a Princess, she was attended by him to York; Goes
to York.
into which City she entered in Triumph, her self being the most pompous part
of the Show.

The Earl of Montross, eminent for his Youth and Nobility, and of high Esteem
in his Country; having deserted the Covenanters, because he found them
designing to Ruin the Church and Monarchy, came, accompanied with the Lord
Ogelby and One hundred and Twenty Horse, to wait upon the Queen at York; where
he informed her Majesty, of the Covenanters Preparations in Scotland, and, that
they would in a very little Time, Invade England with a great Army. Hamilton
came thither also to salute the Queen, and with his known Arts refuting
Montross's Assertions, prayed her to give no Credit to One so Young and Vain:
which she unhappily inclined to. Sir Hugh Cholmley, Governor of Scarborough,
with Three hundred Men, came also in at the same Time, returning to his
Obedience to his Sovereign. Which the Two Hothams seemed also to attempt,
though unfortunately; so dangerous Rebellion is, that it often Ruins those who
would return to their Duty again.

The Marquess of Hartford having Command of the Western Counties, and assisted
by the Lord Pawlet, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Bevil Greenville, Sir John Stowell,
and others, all eminent for Courage and Loyalty, performed many great Actions.
On the other Side, Major General Chudley, and the Earl of Stamford were very
Active. But Hopton, not to be named without an Epithet of Honor, harassed
these in several Encounters. He routed Chudley at Lanceston, beat him at
Chafford, and defeated both him and Stamford in a great Fight at Stratton.
Hopton defeats the Rebels at Stratton;
He took here One thousand and Seven hundred Prisoners, besides many slain,
Thirteen Brass Cannon, Seventy Barrels of Powder, etc. This Victory restored
the Neighboring Provinces to their Duty to the King; and Hopton himself, for
his eminent Services, was created Baron of Stratton, where he had fought so
bravely. The Rebel-Chieftains fled to Exeter, where they were besieged, and
forced afterward to surrender to Prince Maurice. Hopton, after his Victory,
marched into Somersetshire, encountering Sir William Waller, a famed Champion of
the Rebellion, Fights Waller at Landsdowne.
at Landsdowne near Bath. The Fight was brave, contested with equal Valor and
Obstinateness, and continued till late in the Night. The Enemy at length drew
off into the Town, leaving lighted Matches in the Hedges, and Walls (to amuse
the Royallists) behind them. The Enemies greatest Loss was in their Foot; and
ours, in that of the Noble Sir Bevil Greenville, who with a Stand of Pikes, had
sustained the reiterated Charges of the Roundheads, and repelled them. He was a
Person of no less Loyalty than Courage, which made him equally lamented by the
Brave, as well as the Good. The Rebels Loss was greater than ours, as well in
Officers as Soldiers, though abundantly compensated by the Death of the said
Greenville, and the blowing up of our Powder; fired, as was believed, by One of
the Prisoners. The General himself was much endangered, being hurt by the Flame
of it; the which, together with the Want it occasioned, obliged him to shut
himself up in the Devizes, until he could be recruited with new Stores. Waller,
intent upon Opportunities, followed him close, and blocked him up in the said
Town, where they were forced to use their Bed-cords for want of Match. But, the
Siege lasted not long; for, the King, admonished by the Danger these brave Men
were in, sent the Lord Willmott, to whom was joined Prince Maurice, the Earl of
Carnarven, and the Lord Byron, excellent Persons all, with Fifteen hundred
Horse to their Relief. Being advanced near the Town, Battle of Roundway-Downe,
July 13. 1643.
the Horse were drawn up upon Roundway-Downe, in One entire Line; save that a
Forlorn-Hope advancing before the Body, encountered and beat another of theirs
up to their Army, which stood in Battalia upon the Hill. A Valley divided the
Two Armies, which, by reason the Enemy kept their Ground, and the Advantages of
the Height they stood upon, we were obliged to pass; which was done with
Resolution, notwithstanding the continual Discharges of the adverse Cannon, and
in very close Order; and charging their Horse, most of them being Curiassiers,
we bore them before us, broke and entirely routed them. We had only Two small
Fieldpieces, which were also Discharged but once from a high Hill upon our
Left Hand, being guarded by a few Dragoons, to give Notice to the Town of the
Approach of their Relief. The Enemies Foot, notwithstanding the Flight of their
Horse, stood firm; nor would be broken, until they perceived our Foot marching
out of Town, who advanced but slowly for fear of Ambushes; and then they threw
down their Arms, and dispersed, but to little purpose, being well nigh all
killed or taken. There were Eight hundred slain, Two thousand taken, Four Brass
Pieces of Ordnance, with all their Ammunition, and great Store of Provisions;
besides Eight and Twenty Foot Colors, and Nine Cornets of Horse. The Loss on
the King's Side was very small, except that about Thirty young Gentlemen, most
Volunteers, (whereof the Relater, being sorely wounded in the Head and Right
Hand was one) being too far engaged in the Pursuit, were taken, and carried
Prisoners to Bristol, from whence they in a little time were relieved; for,
that City being ill defended, was surrendered by Colonel Fines, the Governor,
to the conquering Army; for which Act, as savouring of Pusillanimity, he was
tried by a Court-Marshal. But he had approved himself Valorous against the
Unfortunate; having cruelly hanged and murdered Robert Yeamans, Yeaman and
Bouchier murdered at Bristol.
and George Bouchier, Two prime Citizens, and eminent for their Loyalty, upon
Pretense of their Designing to deliver the City to Prince Rupert;
notwithstanding the King's and the King's General, the Earl of Forth's Letters,
Admonitions, and Menacing to the contrary.

Waller and Hazlerigg fled to Bristol, but apprehending a Siege, went thence to
London to recruit; and the Citizens, out of the high Opinion they had of
Waller, easily consented to supply him. At the same time of the Bristol-plot,
there was another Conspiracy discovered at London. Mr. Waller, by his ingenious
Confession, and the rare Eloquence of Ten thousand Pounds, Chaloner and Tomkins
at London.
saved his Life. Chaloner and Tompkins, more loyal, and deserving a better
Fate, were hanged before their own Doors.

The King's Forces were very successful also in other Places, though the
Victory gained at Hopton-Heath, where Gell and Brereton, Hopton-Heath Fight.
Two of the Rebels Champions, lost their Cannon and the Day, was very dear; for
it cost no less than the Life of the most Noble Earl of Northampton, who being
unhappily fallen from his Horse, amongst Concy-Borrows, was barbarously
murdered. After this, Prince Rupert joining his Forces with these, thus
destituted, having forced Burmigham, a very Receptacle of Sedition, though with
the Loss of the old Earl of Denbigh, took Leichfield-Close. The Lord Brooks, a
fierce Zealot of the Party against Bishops, in the attempting of it before,
upon his Advance to it, had inauspiciously implored a Sign from Heaven, of the
Divine Approbation of his Design; for, whilst he was ordering his Battery,
though completely armed, a Bullet glancing near him, The Lord Brook killed at
Leichfield.
shot him into the Eye and Brain, upon St. Chad's-Day, the Patron of that
Cathedral. Some time after, Essex having recruited his Army, besieged Redding;
and having repelled the Cavaliers designed for its Relief, at Causum-Bridge,
had it surrendered to him by Fielding the Lieutenant Governor; Sir Arthur
Aston, who commanded in hief, being sore hurt. They were startled at Oxford at
this Surrender; and there wanted not them, who blamed Essex, for not moving
that way with his Forces now victorious. But others again excused him, fancying
that he designed to put an End to the War by a Peace, not a Conquest. Taunton
and Bridgwater fell likewise into the Rebels Hands. On the other side, Prince
Rupert beat the Roundheads at Chalgrave Field, where many of them of Note,
were killed and taken Prisoners. Colonel Hambden (one of the Five Members who
commanded.) was slain in that very Field, where he first rendezvouz'd his Men
against his Sovereign.

Very many other Fights and Skirmishes happened with various Success, in the
several Counties of the Kingdom; which, to (...) ^rolixness, I have designedly
omitted, or but slightly mentioned, contenting my self to be particular in
those only, which seemed decisive as to the Fate of the Kingdom.

The Queen having raised an Army in Yorkshire, and the neighbouring-Counties,
leaving a considerable Force with Sir Charles Cavendish for the Defense of
Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire, marched with the rest, consisting of about
Four Thousand Men, Six Fieldpieces and Two Mortars, toward the King, The
Queen meets the King at Edgehill.
whom she met at Edgehill; not more famous for the Battle fought there, than
for this Royal Congress. The Joy after so long an Absence was very great, as
may be justly presumed, since the Passions of Affection and Esteem never
appeared more eminent, than in this Pair-Royal of Lovers. And now, with joined
Forces and Desires, they marched toward Oxford.

After the destroying of Sir William Waller's Army at the Devizes, and the
taking of Bristol, the King was absolute Master of the Field. The Marquess of
Newcastle having also ruined Fairfax at Bramham-Moor, and subdued the whole
North, having shut up the Remains of the Enemy in a few Garrisons, was likewise
at Liberty to act what he pleased. But the King, contrary to his own Sentiments
and Advice, being overborn by his Council of War, or rather betrayed by his
Fate, and the Perfidy of some pretended Friends, omitting London the Head of
the Rebellion, miserably squandered that Time which was irrecoverable, in the
unfortunate Siege of Gloucester, whilst Newcastle amused himself about Hull.
Whereas, if they had joined their Forces, the Rebels having no Army then in the
Field to oppose them, he might not only have routed the pretended Parliament,
who were already upon the Point to dissodge, but have given Law to that proud
City, the Source of the Rebellion and his Misfortunes. But, it seemed otherwise
good to Providence; and, the Two Houses, who were in a desponding Condition,
raised with this unhoped for Opportunity, recruited their empty Regiments well
nigh ruined with Sickness and Sedition, with all imaginable Speed; and,
alluring to their Assistance the City-Forces, they not only relieved Gloucester,
but raised their declining Cause to a Balance with the Kings. But of these in
Order.

Essex marches to the Relief of Gloucester.
Essex mustered his Army, the Members of both Houses being present, upon
Hounsley-Heath, which did not exceed Ten Thousand Men; too weak for the
Expedition they were designed: but being much reinforced by the
City-Auxiliaries, and Trained-Bands, marched that Night to Colebroke, and so
forward. Gloucester, seated upon the Banks of Severne, was, with the Addition of
some Works, and the River, esteemed strong. Colonel Massey, an active and
vigilant Commander, was Governor, strengthened with Two Regiments of Foot and
Two Troops of Horse: who, however vigorously attacked, did no less vigorously
oppose Force to Force, Sallies to Assaults, and Countermines to the Mines from
without. But, in truth, neither understood the Methods of besieging, or
defending as yet; that Part of War being but in its Infancy amongst us. But, we
must allow the Defensive to have carried it here, seeing they held it out,
until the Arrival of their Succors. The King being advertized of the Enemies
Advance, sent Prince Rupert with all the Horse to retard their March; which he
did, by continual Excursions, Velitations and forcing of Posts and Quarters. At
Stow in the Wowld, the Prince drawing all his Horse in one continued Line, upon
the Side of the Hill, made a very great Appearance. On the contrary, the Rebels
march up the Ascent in Battalia. Lieutenant Colonel Bailey, with the
City-Regiments, were in the Left-Wing; and, Colonel Harvey, with his Regiment
of Horse and Two of Foot, being somewhat advanced in the Right, the Prince
sent a strong Party, with orders to endeavor to get betwixt them and Home;
which being perceived, Three Regiments more were presently sent to his
Assistance; the which, with the Thunder of their Cannon, obliged the Royallists
after some skirmishing to retire to their Body, which being composed only of
Horse, did also give way to this great Army which advanced upon them.

The King preferring the Blessings of Peace, before the Triumphs of Victory,
sent a Trumpeter with Propositions to Essex, who answered crudely enough, That
he had Orders to relieve Gloucester, not to treat; which he also did, the King
rising from the Siege at his Approach, and passing the River, with a Resolution
to fight the Rebels* upon their return. And this seemed another Omission; The
Siege of Gloucester raised.
for, if the King had fought them before they reached the Town, he had probably
either beaten them, or impeded their Progress; both, or either of which, would
infallibly have obliged them to surrender. Essex having relieved the Town, his
next Care was to preserve his Army, especially the Londoners, the Chief
Strength of it; which he in a great Manner did, by his Surprizal of
Cirencester, where he found Store of Provisions, which he much wanted. The
Royallists obstructing the Enemy in their Return, upon every Occasion, fell
into their Rear upon Auburne Chase with all their Horse, forcing it up to their
Main Body. They charged them a second Time, with the same Success; but having
no Foot, by the Advance of their Enemies and the Night, they retreated with
little loss, save that of de Vieuville, a French Marquess. The Rebels lost
many, as well slain as taken.

The next Morning, the King's Army being drawn up near Newbury, having the
River on their Right Hand, expected the Rebels there. The Battle of Newbury.
There was a little Hill Five Hundred Paces from the Town, which the Cavaliers
had possessed and fortified with Guns. Essex perceiving it, and having no other
way to pass, he himself with his own Regiment and C. Barclay, and Holborne's
Brigades, attacks it bravely, being as bravely received by the Royallists.
Stapleton, with his own Regiment and that of the General's Guards, charging the
Earl of Carnarven, was repulsed, but the Earl pursuing too far, was killed by a
Shot, in the Head of his own Men; a Person no less remarkable for his
Fortitude, and Fidelity to the King, than for the Nobleness of his Extraction.
Prince Rupert valiantly charging the Right-Wing of the Rebels, who were rallied
again, did again disorder them, driving them to the Entry of the Lane by which
they were come. But, the Cavaliers were forced to make as much have back,
having been saluted with a Volley of Shot from the adverse Foot, posted there,
and not without loss. The King's Right and the Enemies Left-Wing, being hindered
by Hedges and Enclosures, fought only by small Parties and light Skirmishes.
Nor had the Foot, though they fought stoutly, any signal Advantages of each
other; the Earl of Brentford, on the King's side, and Major General Skippon on
the Rebels, behaving themselves with equal Courage and Vigilance. The
Royallists had taken some Fieldpieces, which they were forced to quit again
with loss. The approaching Evening put an end to this bloody Contest, and the
King's* Army rallied and drew up again, as at first, in the Field where they
had fought, with design to renew the Combat in the Morning; which yet they did
not, being content to send Major General Harvey, who had lately deserted them,
with a strong Party of Horse and Foot to fall in their Rear. They had also
stood in Arms all Night, not retreating before the Morning, at which time they
were close followed, and charged; their Rear-guard, commanded by Stapleton,
being forced up to their Foot with considerable Loss. There were slain on the
King's Side many eminent Persons, as the Earls of Carnarven and Sunderland, the
Wise Lord Faukland and Colonel Morgan, with others. The Rebels also lost many,
but of no great Quality, being most Plebeians. And this was the End of the
famous Expedition of Gloucester, wherein Essex and his Party had gained much
Honor, if they had not fought against their King. Nor did the Royallists
behave themselves less Valiantly, though more Commendably, as having the Better
Cause.

The Rebel Parliament invite the Scots to their Aid.
The Men at Westminster, being heightened with this Appearance of Success (which
carried more Noise with it, by reason of the Loss on the King's Side, of so
many Noblemen, whereas they had but few to expose) they yet prudently
considering the Equality of the Balance, not over-confident in their own
Strength, invited the Presbyterian Scots to their Assistance; and to oblige
them the more strictly to their Party, being not to be gained by the ordinary
Stipend of Mercenaries, they mutually oblige themselves by a Solemn League and
Covenant, contrary to all Laws, Humane and Divine, to extirpate Episcopacy and
the Liturgy, and to obtrude in their Places, the Scottish Ecclesiastical
Discipline, built upon the Basis of Rebellion and Tumult. Moreover, Archbishop
Laud, retained hitherto in the nauseousness of a Prison, was now, as Strafford
had been formerly, to be immolated a Sacrifice to the Malice of these
Hirelings; and, the Revenues of the Church, to be divided amongst these
Sacrilegious Confederates, as will shortly appear. This best of Princes, might
have expected better Things from the Scots, as being his Countrymen as well as
Subjects. Nay, he had heaped so many Graces upon them upon his being in
Scotland, having refused them nothing they had demanded of him; that their
Parliament, taken with so great Indulgence, had decreed, That if any whosoever
should levy Men, or take up Arms upon any Pretense whatsoever, except by the
King's Express Order, he should be guilty of damnable Treason. Nay, they
profess farther upon Oath, That in Case the King's Person should at any Time be
endangered, they would defend his Majesty's Cause and Honor, as they were in
Duty bound, with their Lives and Fortunes. When the King was at Edinbrough, he
had advanced Two very Ungrateful Persons to great Honor. Lesley he made an
Earl, and Hamilton a Duke. The First exstasied with the Greatness of the
Favor, protested solemnly (perjured Wretch!) That he would never bear Arms
more against his Majesty. And the other, if we may believe public Fame,
betrayed all his Master's Counsels to his Enemies, but perfidiously concealed
Theirs, though a Privy Counselor, from his King.

It may not be unworthy Notice to declare, what farther happened at the same
Time. There was a great Noise rumored, A pretended Conspiracy against Hamilton
and Argyle.
of a Conspiracy against the Lives of Hamilton and Argyle, with some others,
contrived by the Earl of Crawford and his Party. This Report, however
fictitious and imaginary, gained such Credit, that the King himself was not
obscurely reflected upon: Which his righteous Soul took in such Scorn, that he
could not forbear to tell Hamilton (when, as the Custom is, he delivered him
his Patent in Parliament, whereby he was created Duke) That he did not deserve
to be suspected by him, who could not choose but remember, That at that very
Time when he was accused to him of High Treason, he suffered him that very
Night to lie in his Bedchamber. After this, the Wars growing Hot in England,
the King advertised his Privy Council in That Kingdom, of the State of his
Affairs in This, demanding their Advice, and Aid; who returned an Answer full
of Duty and Loyalty, but with a Resolution to perform nothing they had
promised: For, the Business being known at London, they of Westminster caressed
their lately acknowledged Brethren so effectually, that they did not scruple to
declare, That they would act nothing against the Parliament, no not in Favor
of the King himself; which they also, perfidiously faithful, did perform. Nay
more, these Ungrateful Wretches, forgetful of their Honor and Allegiance,
invade England with a Great Army, causing that Fatal Change in the Kings
Affairs, till then very Prosperous, that cost him his Life, and them their
Liberty, to those whose Increase they had so obstinately pursued.

The King perceiving how furiously the prevailing Faction did drive on, and
that it daily received Strength from London, resolved to remove the Parliament
to Oxford, which he did by public Proclamation; where most of the Lords, and
amongst them, the Earls of Holland, Bedford and Clare (who were lately come in
to the King, though they left him again with the same Levity) and near Two
Hundred of the Commons, met at a Day. The rest, in Scorn of their Duty,
continued at Westminster, until they were outed thence by their own Servants.
The first Business that the Parliament at Oxford undertook, was, to admonish
the Scots by Letters, That they should not hostilely Invade England, it being
no less than High Treason to attempt it. But this, as also the King's
Dissuasory Message, was to no purpose. Nay, they were so rudely impudent, that
they caused a Letter writ to them, and Signed by all the Lords, to be Burnt by
the Hands of the Common-Hangman.

The Scots enter England, March 1.
They therefore Invade England, the Year being far spent, with Eighteen thousand
Foot, Two thousand Horse, and One thousand Dragoons; and, passing the River
Tine, send their Declaration before them, pretending, That they designed,
nothing, but the Reformation of Religion, the King's Honor, and the Peace of
the Kingdom.

The King extremely surprised with this Invasion, having been still kept up
with a Belief, that the Scots would not enter England; finding himself deluded,
committed Duke Hamilton, and his Brother Lanerick (who were newly posted out of
Scotland, as afrighted with the News they brought) to Prison. The former being
accused of several other Treasons also, Hamilton sent to Pendennis-Castle.
was afterward sent to Pendennis-Castle: His Brother escaped to London, and so
to Scotland, which he lately abandoned as unsafe; whereof he was Secretary,
though the Court-Signet had been taken from him.

But, to march with the Scots into England, where the Parliament had long since
seized upon the King's Castles, Forts, Arms, Ships, Revenues, Treasure,
Ornaments, etc. they now, to Complement their new Allies, urge their impious
Covenant so far, that the Subject must either forfeit his Faith or Estate. But
Religion was always pretended, and all their Undertakings veiled with the
Masque of Godliness. They divest her of her Ornaments, under pretense of
dressing her; and, with Impious Hands, profane her Monuments, transferred to
us from our pious Ancestors, who sealed the Faith we own with their Bloods.
Their zealous Fury extends to our Churches, destroying whatever was in them,
either Reverend for Antiquity, or to be Esteemed for its Artifice. They turn
Temples into Stables, and the House of Prayer into a Den of sacrilegious
Impurity. Amongst other Acts and Triumphs of their Reformation, they demolished
Charing and Cheapside-Crosses, eminent for their Beauty and the Artificiousness
of their Structure; converting the Superstitious Metals they were composed of,
to their own Use.

It may not be from the Purpose, to relate a Story of ludicrous as well as
impudent Boldness. Harry Martin, H. Martin Inspects the Regalia.
who had said in the House, That the Felicity of the Nation, did not consist in
the Family of the Stuarts, (for which he then, to palliate the Impudence, had
been confined) was ordered to Survey the Regalia; which he did: for, breaking
the Iron Chest wherein they were kept, he took out of it the Crown, Scepter,
and Vestments belonging to Edward the Confessor, wherewith the Kings of England
had since been always inaugurated; saying, though falsely, with a scornful
Laughter, There will be no more Use of these Trifles. With the same unmannerly
Impudence, he caused George Withers, a pitiful Poet, then present, to be
dressed in those Royal Vestments; who being also Crowned, walked at first
stately up and down, but afterward putting himself into a Thousand Mimick
Postures, endeavored to expose those Sacred Ornaments, to the Contempt and
Derision of the Bystanders. These afterward, as also the Robes and Plate
belonging to the Church, were sold. Nor could they be persuaded, to leave one
Silver Cup, to be used at the Communion, affirming, with barbarous Sacrilege,
That a wooden Dish would serve the Turn. Nor is it any wonder, That these
Sacred Vtensils were thus abused, when the Sacred Function of Ministers, was so
Inhumanely treated; of whom a Hundred and Fifteen in the City and Suburbs were,
for their Fidelity to the King, according to the Laws, and their Zeal to the
Established Religion, according to their Conscience, together with their Wives
and Children, The barbarous Usage of the Loyal Clergy.
Ejected, Plundered, Spoiled, and barbarously Consumed in Prison, in Exile, and
with Hunger. To relate all the Inhumanities committed against the Loyal
Orthodox Clergy, their Usurpations upon the Revenues of the Church, and their
Dilapidations and Ruins of the Houses of God in the Land, would require a vast
Volume, and might deservedly employ a very good Pen* which I purposely omit, as
wanting Ability and Leisure for so Great a Work.

The Scots being entered into England, the Marquess of Newcastle (for he had
been made such, for his Eminent Services) marched with his Army to oppose the
Progress of this new Enemy. He had kept them at Bay for some time, by frequent
Encounters and Velitations, till the taking of Selbie by Fairfax, and Lincoln
by the Earl of Manchester. Both which, especially the Latter, being very
numerous, moved after him. So that, Newcastle unable to fight them all at once,
and lest he might be enclosed by their Three Armies, retreated to York, where
he was surrounded and besieged by their United Forces.

The King being very sollicitous for the Safety of so good a Man, and so good
an Army, sent Prince Rupert with great Forces to their Relief. The Prince had
some Time before relieved Newark, having slain a Thousand of Sir John Meldrum's
Men, who besieged it, and reduced the Rest to a Necessity (though Six Thousand
strong) of parting with their Arms and Baggage. High with these Successes, he
marches toward the North, and taking Stopford and Leverpoole in his Way,
relieved the Illustrious Countess of Derby in La^hame House, where she had been
long Besieged. Bolton daring to defend it self, was at the second Assault
forced; Eight Hundred of the Garrison, most Townsmen, being slain. For, relying
upon their Numbers and Works, they had not only abused the Prince by scurrilous
Language, but hanged One of his Captains whom they had taken, which occasioned
this not undeserved Severity. After this, continuing his March, he came without
any Opposition to York, where he joined with Newcastle, the Enemy having raised
the Siege upon his Approach, with a Resolution to engage them. The Besieged,
upon the Rebels drawing off, did some considerable Execution upon their Rear,
but being secure, had no mind to try the Hazard of the War any farther. They
had been wearied with a long Siege of Nine Weeks; and, supposing that their
Deliverers were also tired with their long March, thought it better to leave
the Enemy to their own Dissentions (for, their Generals did not well agree
about the Command in Chief) than to occasion their Uniting, by so hazardous an
Adventure. But, the Prince fatally resolved, and not thinking he had done
enough in relieving the City, if he did not also beat the Scots, the only
Obstacle to the King's Victories, marched after the Rebels, and found them
drawn up in a Corn-field on the South side of Marston-Moor, Four Miles from
York. The Enemies Three Armies, contracted in One, was commanded by the Three
Generals.

The Battle of Marston-Moor July 2.
The Two Fairfaxes, Father and Son, had the Right-Wing; Manchester the Left, and
Leven the Main Body, consisting all of Scots; and each Division had his
Auxiliaries and Reserves. The Prince observing the Adversaries Order, ranged
also his Army in Battalia; and, reserving to himself the Left-Wing, gave
Newcastle the Right, entrusting the Command of the Main Battle to Goring,
Lucas, and Porter. And, as no Field since these Unhappy Wars, did produce so
Great Armies, so none had been fought with greater Valor. Rupert charged the
Fairfaxes with so much Resolution, that he broke them, and the Scots their
Reserves; but, pursued them (to his own Ruin) too far. Our Main Battle did
also repel the Scots. But, Affairs went otherwise in the Right, the
Mancesterians having routed the Royallists, and not following them too far,
fell upon the Prince's and Goring's disordered Troops, hindering them to Rally,
and quite dispersed them. It is affirmed, That the Three Rebel-Generals quitted
the Field, leaving to Cromwell, Manchester's Lieutenant General, the Honor of
the Day; for, he keeping his great Reserve of Horse in a firm Body, followed
the Cavaliers so close, that he hindered them to Rally and Embody again.

The Fight lasted from Seven, till Ten at Night, with great Courage and
Slaughter on both Sides; though the Victory fell to the Rebels, as also the
Cannon and Spoil of the Field. There were Two of Newcastle's Regiments, called
his Lambs, being old Soldiers, who fell not unrevenged. For, the rest being
fled, they casting themselves into a Ring, did alone resist Cromwell's
Assaults; nor could they, however abandoned by their Friends, and surrounded by
their Enemies, be broke, until, being shot at like Fowl at a Distance, and
overwholmed with showers of Bullets; not then perishing, without Slaughter of
their Enemies, scarce any of these miserable Bravo's escaping, though worthy of a
better Fortune. The slain were computed at Eight Thousand; the Slaughter made
by Cromwell, being compensated in that made by the Prince upon the Fairfaxians,
and especially the Scots, being most animated against them. His Highness being
returned from his Pursuit too late, rallying what he could of his dispersed
Troops, returned with his Remains into Lancashire; whilst the Marquess
retreating to York, left that also; and, with his Two Sons, and very many of
his Principal Officers, leaving England to its Dissentions and Tumults, sailed
for Hamburgh.

York surrendered July 23.
The Royallists being thus dispersed, York is again Besieged by the Three
victorious Armies; but, wanting Powder, wherewith they had furnished their Camp
before the Fight, the City was delivered up by Sir Thomas Glenham, the
Governor, upon Honorable Terms; most of the Northern Counties, following her
Fortune.

But, the King was more successful in other Places, especially where he
commanded in Person. Waller having lost his Army at the Devizes, had raised
another in London; the Citizens, that they might contribute to this Holy War,
defrauding their barking Stomachs of one Meal by the Week. His first Exploit,
was the Recovery of Arundel-Castle, sometime before taken by Hopton. Being
joined with Balfore and Hazelrig at Winchester, not unmindful of his Defeat at
the Devizes, he did now in some Sort bravely revenge it upon Hopton himself at
Branden-Heath near Alsford, Branden-Heath Fight, Mar. 29.
the Lord John Stuart being mortally wounded in the Fight. The Foot stood
bravely to it at push of Pike, till the Royallists being outnumb'red, were
forced to give Way. The Earl of Forth having sent the Cannon away before to
Winchester, and that he might likewise save the Horse, wheeled about with them
to Basing, and so to Oxford. There fell of the Royallists in this Combat, near
Five Hundred, besides the abovementioned Lord; as also Sir John Smith, and the
Colonels, Sandys, Scot and Manning. The Rebels acknowleged scarce One Hundred
of theirs slain; besides Colonel Delbier, and Colonel Tompson, who were
wounded. Nor did Waller insult long; for, his Forces being joined to Essex's,
both were designed to besiege Oxford.

The King having Notice of the Enemies Intentions, sent the Queen toward the
West, and himself (having left a strong Garrison in the City) with Three
thousand Horse and Four thousand Foot, marched toward Worcester. The Two
Generals follow the King, with Two distinct Camps; but, meeting again at
Burford, Essex joining Massey to Waller, sent them a King-catching, as they
termed it; whilst he himself moves with his Army into the West, to subdue those
Counties. By this means, they were both defeated; for, the King slipping by
Waller, returned with quick Marches to Burford, where he met his Cannon and
Ammunition from Oxford; and afterward encountering Waller at Copredy-Bridge,
Eleven thousand strong, overcame him. Copredy-Bridge Fight, June 20.
The Enemy had possessed themselves of a Hill, from whence watching the
Royallists Motion, they bravely attempted them in their Passage of the Bridge;
but, being as bravely recieved by the Earls of Northampton and Cleveland, who
commanded the Rear, they were beaten and routed. The Rebels lost their Cannon;
near a Thousand wounded and slain, besides several of their Officers.

Waller being ruined, the King hastens after Essex; and came with his Army to
Liskard, Eight Miles from Lestithiel, where the Rebels lay Encamped. Essex had
taken Taunton and Weymouth in his Way; and, being advanced near Exeter, the
Queen, who was brought to Bed in that City of the Princess Henrietta, sent a
Trumpet to him, to desire him to forbear from Hostility for some little time,
till she was recovered; but she was denied. A while after, she sending again to
him for a Pass to go to the Bath, was brutishly refused, with this Answer;
That, Essex his Rudeness to the Queen.
if she would go to London, where she might be furnished with every Thing
necessary for her Health, he would send her a Convoy; adding, he knew no other
way. Whilst Essex was upon his March, it was sharply contested at a Council of
War, Whether he should proceed in his Journey Westward, or return and fight the
King, who was not far off; lest if he continued his March, he might, when he
came into the Straits of Cornwall, be enclosed betwixt him and Prince Maurice,
then in those Parts. And, this was the Opinion of the wisest part of the
Council, but did not prevail; for, the Lord Roberts was earnest to advance, and
relieve Plymouth, which had been a long Time besieged; which done, he shows
them Cornwall, where they might quickly be recruited, by means of his
Dependants and Friends, and obtain an easy Victory of Prince Maurice, who
would be in no competent Condition to oppose them. And, this Opinion, the worst
by the Sequel, carried it. The Royallists fierce with their late Victory,
demanded to be brought to the Enemy. But the King, though not without
commending their Ardor, thinking to gain a bloodless Victory, commanded all the
Passages and Avenues to the Camp to be shut up. The King himself, who joined
Prince Maurice near Exeter, lay at Boconnock, sending Sir Richard Greenville to
Bodmin, and Sir Jacob Ashly to Hule. Goring with Horse, and Sir William Basset
with Fifteen Hundred Foot were sent Westward, with strict Orders, to stop and
cut off all manner of Provisions from the Besieged; so that the Enemy, reduced
to great Wants and Distress; were willing to treat; which was no less willingly
assented to by his Majesty, to whom no Victory was more grateful, than when he
overcame his Enemies by their own Consent. The Horse commanded by Balfore, He
leaves his Camp to the King's Mercy, and flies. Essex defeated, Sept. 1.
under pretense of Skirmishing and drawing out to Fight, broke through the
Intervals of our Quarters, and came safely to Saltash, and thence to Plymouth,
leaving their Foot and Cannon to Mercy. The General himself, with Roberts and
some others, secured themselves likewise, taking Boat at Foy for Plymouth. But
yet he could not escape the Obloquy of some, who wond'red, that so great a
General should leave so brave an Army, in such certain Danger; though others
excused him, he having thereby conserved himself, and his Chief Officers and
Soldiers, for the Service of the Commonwealth. But all Men blamed Waller,
Manchester, and especially Middleton; because they seemed to loyter, when they
should have made all imaginable Haste to his Assistance. The Foot being thus
abandoned, sent Commissioners to the King to treat about the Surrender of the
Camp; which was easily assented to, Quarter being granted to all, and their
Swords and Pistols to all above the Degree of Corporals. There were found in
the Camp, Forty Brass Pieces of Ordnance, Two hundred Barrels of Powder, and
Arms for Nine thousand Men. Several Hundreds of the Foot, took Arms with the
Victorious; and the rest, had Liberty to go where they pleased, upon Condition
they should serve no more against the King. But these, as well as they of
Brandford, broke their Words, violating their Promises with the same perfidious
Levity; for, being come to Basing, they were again armed. And, it was observed,
that none fought so eagerly against the King, as those very Fellows. An usual
Testimony of their Gratitude.

The King raised with no Success, but in order to Peace; did now again from
Tavestock, as he had formerly done from Evesham, court the Two Houses by a
Message to them, earnestly desiring, they would appoint some Commissioners to
treat; but all to no purpose. His Majesty had likewise invited Essex, when
besieged at Lestithiel, very graciously, to join Forces with him, that so they
might jointly procure what they both so earnestly contended for, the Peace and
Happiness of the Kingdom. Wherein also, he should lay an Eternal Obligation
upon his King; and if any should oppose their Pious Endeavors, they would
render them happy, whether they would or not. But he wretchedly neglected this
amicable Summons, affirming, That his Orders were to fight, not to treat.

Essex being strengthened by the Accession of his old Foot, by several
City-Regiments, by Manchester's Army, as also other Forces under the Commands
of Waller, Brown, and other Chiefs of the Party, grew suddenly so numerous,
that he again attempted the King at Newbury. He had designed before any more
Action, to repair to the Parliament, and give them an Account of the Misfortune
of his Expedition, as also to excuse it. But, they perceiving his Design, writ
to him, that they were satisfied, that nothing happened by any Omission of his;
and therefore being assured of his Fidelity and Courage, they desire him not to
despond, but cheerfully to prosecute the War; adding further, that he should
endeavor with all his Power, to hinder the King's Return to Oxford, and rather
hazard a Battle than suffer him to pass thither; which he also did, and it was
fought on both Sides with equal Conduct and Bravery until the Night parted them.

The second Battle of Newbury.
The King had possessed himself of the Town of Newbury; but being far short of the
Enemy in Numbers, he fortified the Avenues of it, drawing up the rest of his
Army in Spean-Field, an opportune place betwixt the Town and the Castle. Where
he expected Prince Rupert, who was absent; with Three Thousand Horse, and the
Earl of Northampton, who had relieved Banbury, with a Thousand more. When the
Enemy saw they could not allure the Royallists to engage by Skirmishes, and
that they durst not attempt them without Manifest Danger, they divide their
Forces, sending a good part of them with Waller, Balfore, and Skippon to
Cheveley, on the other side of the Town, with Resolution to attack the King's
Camp from both parts at once; which accordingly they did; and, after a brave
Fight, both highly animated, whilst the Royallists thought to revenge their
Loss at Marston-Moor, and the Roundheads theirs of Cornwall, the latter
prevailed; insomuch, that they forced the Cavaliers to abandon the Ditch, and
Nine Pieces of Ordnance. Nor did the Fight end so, until the Night and Darkness
parted them. There were slain on the King's side Three Thousand Men, amongst
which, were Charles the Lord Goring's Brother, St. Ledger, Trevillian, and
others. The old Earl of Brandford was shot in the Head, Sir Jo. Greenville,
Campfield the younger, Walgrave, etc. wounded; and amongst the Prisoners, the
brave Earl of Cleveland was of Chief Note. Nor was the Slaughter, much
inferior on the Rebels side, theirs amounting to no less than Five and Twenty
Hundred. And yet, we must not deny the Enemy the Advantage of the Fight, by
reason of the King's going off by Night; who leaving his Cannon and Baggage in
Dennington-Castle, marched without Interruption (which showed he was not
vanquished, though worsted) with his Army to Wallingford, and thence to Oxford.

Dennington-Castle bravely defended.
The Royallists being retreated, the Essexians having swallowed the great Booty
in their Thoughts, besiege Dennington-Castle, but not with the same Success;
for, Boys the Governor, having been thrice summoned, and thrice assaulted, did
as often reject and bravely repel those Insults of the Rebels; preserving
himself and the Treasure deposited with him, until the King, having brought
back his Army from Oxford, after some sharp Encounters, did not only relieve
the Place, but also brought off his Guns, possessing himself of Newbury, a most
convenient place for his Winter Quarters.

The Members at Westminster, being dissatisfied with the Proceedings of their
Army, appointed a Committee to examine their Errors and Omissions, especially
those that were committed since the Fight at Newbury, and at the succouring of
the Castle, their Forces being double the Enemies in Numbers.

The Faction suspecting Essex to be either careless, or discontented, and that
he did not act with the same Vigor as formerly; apprehending him perhaps, too
much inclined to Peace (for he had dared to write to the Parliament some time
since, to incline them to it) or, over-affectionate to the Nobility, which they
grew weary of; were casting about, though they did not seem to suspect his
Fidelity, how they might with least Noise (for he was still very considerable
for his Interest) be rid of him. Cromwell, in his Narrative of the raising of
the Siege of Dennington, had aspersed Essex's Forces, with some oblique
Reflections; which so transported him, that he was resolved to vindicate his
Honor with the Ruin of the Informer. And, for the more Security, he closed
with the Scots Commissioners, as knowing them highly incensed against them,
because of the profuse Liberty of Speech he had used in their Concerns. Having
therefore convened a private Meeting of choice Friends, both he and the
Chancellor of Scotland, used all their Arguments and Elocution, to prove him an
Incendiary betwixt the Two Nations; which they had further proceeded in, if
they had not been dissuaded, by the contrary Opinions of Maynard and Whitlocke,
whom he had called thither, and advised with in this grand Affair. But, the
Grandees at Westminster did not desist; resolving, not only to remove him, but
with him all the Presbyterians in Power. Yet, first to sweeten him, and lest he
might oppose their Design; they vote him Ten Thousand Pounds per annum out of
Delinquents Estates, as a Testimony of their Gratitude for his eminent Services
for the Commonwealth; for, the Independants growing rampant, designed to get
the Command of the Armies into their own Hands. The Houses therefore voted,
(pretending nothing of their own private Interest, but all for the Public,)
That no Member of either House should during that War, The self-denying
Ordinance.
enjoy or execute any Office or Command Military or Civil, which had been
granted or conferred on them by either House, or by Authority derived from them.

The Lords, though often pressed by the Commons to pass this Ordinance, could
not be induced to do it, not obscurely foreseeing their Design against the
Nobility, and most eminent Presbyterians; nay, some looked upon this Change in
the Militia, as the Grave of Monarchy and their Peerage. And yet, after some
Time, they so far concurred with the Commons, that they assented to the List of
Officers for the new Modelling the Army; insomuch, that they were thanked by
the Commons, and assured of their Affection and Support.

Cromwell only was exempted from this General Order, being permitted by a
particular Act, to continue in the Camp. The Command of the Army, was conferred
upon Sir Thomas Fairfax, a Person thought obnoxious to the Artifices of every
prevailing Faction, and therefore approved of by the Suffrages of both Parties.
He was daring, and no Self-seeker. Constancy was attributed to his Natural
Temper, being Melancholy, which was notwithstanding thought ductile where
Religion was in Question; and therefore Cromwell, that famous Impostor in
Godliness, was given him for a supervising Lieutenant. The Forces, as if new
raised, were new mustered and modelled; the Presbyterians being by various Arts
dismissed of their Employments, and the most zealous of the Independent
Sectaries put into their Places. And here we may also observe, that the Clause
for conserving the King's Person, which was inserted in Essex's Commission, was
by Vote of the Lower House, left out of that which was given to Fairfax; and
not absurdly, it seeming superfluous to except him, against whom you point a
Hundred Thousand Darts.

It was now Winter, and the Armies on both sides were in their Winter Quarters,
whilst the Houses were busy in modelling theirs, especially in their Choice of
Officers. In the mean Time, lest the Sword should be too sparing of Bloodshed,
the Ax likewise was to be glutted with the Effusion of it.

Sir Alexander Carew, as also the Two Hothams, repenting, Hull, Plymouth.
though too late, of the Crimes they had committed by their Rebellion against
the best of Princes, would have delivered the Fortresses they had so unjustly
detained, to the true Owner again, as an Expiation of their Offenses; but,
being intercepted, they were Tried by a Court-Marshal for High Treason, and by
Sentence thereof, they were all, as equally Guilty, beheaded; but, fell
unlamented, by Reason of their Inconstancy. Of the Hothams, I have made some
mention already. And, of Carew, I will add this not unworthy to be noted, which
happened at the Trial of the Earl of Strafford. Sir Bevil Greenville (a Person
never to be mentioned but with Honor) at the passing the Bill of Attainder,
said to Sir Alexander, sitting then next him, and both serving for Cornwall;
Sir, pray let it not be said, That any Member of our County, should have a Hand
in this Ominous Affair, and therefore pray vote against this Bill. But, the
other instantly replied; If I were sure, to be the next Man that should suffer
upon the same Scaffold, and with the same Axe; I would give my Consent to the
passing of it. And, we have seen, how truly and how circumstantially exact, he
foretold his own Fate.

Archbishop Laud, murdered, January 10.
William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, followed next, more truly lamented of
all good Men. They had abolished the Book of Common Prayer, and the Liturgy, as
Preludes to his Fate and Function. But, not daring to hazard his Trial by a
Common-Jury, (for no Law could condemn him) nor by the Peers, as equally
dubious; he then was voted Guilty in the Commons House, the Lords by an
inauspicious Compliance sitting with them. The Scots had formerly declared him
an Incendiary, and a public Enemy, upon which Account he had been thus long
kept in Prison: And now they demand his Life, as a grateful Retribution for
their Assistance; which was also sacrificed to their Ambition, and Fears. Thus
the Covenant betwixt both Nations, was to be cemented with Episcopal Blood.

This Great Pillar of our Church, as he had been eminent in his Life for
Virtue, was no less remarkable at his Death for his Piety. He preached his own
Funeral Sermon upon the Scaffold, and that with a Countenance no less serene
than his Mind, which he was going to offer up to his Creator, and far from that
seeming Weakness (as he then Prophesied) which appeared in him, when the
Illustrious Strafford, going that same way, called to him for his Benediction.
Generous Spirits, being no less affected for their Friends Sufferings, and
sometimes more, than their own. And, thus fell this Good Man and Good Bishop,
by the nefarious Ambition of Pretended-Reformed Christians.

We must acknowledge, that the Bishops fell by the Envy of the Presbyterians,
who stirred up the People against them, as too seemingly imperious. Not that
they would have their Power abrogated; for, That they pretended to themselves,
being resolved to assert that of Archbishops in their National, and that of
Bishops in their Provincial Synods, whilst every Individual Presbyter, should
exercise more than Prelatick Jurisdiction in his own Classis.

The public Severity requiring more Blood, the Lord Macquire and Macmahon, Two
Irish Noblemen, Chief Contrivers in the Bloody Conspiracy in Ireland,
deservedly suffered the Gallows, though not proportionable to their abominable
Contrivance. And yet these, especially Macquire, had been tampered with, to
accuse the King, as an Abettor in this nefarious Rebellion; which he yet
generously enough disowned upon his Death.

Fortune as yet, or rather Providence, had not decided the Quarrel. The War was
unhappily prolonged; and there appeared some Hopes of composing our Troubles by
Treaty; and particularly, in that of Vxbridge. The Treaty of Uxbridge.
The King, as is already mentioned, after his routing of Waller at
Copredy-bridge, and defeating of Essex at Lestithiel, had sent Messages to the
Parliament with offers of Peace, which he now again renews from Oxford; no less
graciously than affectionately inviting them to comply with him, in restoring
these harassed Kingdoms to their former Tranquillity. But, it proved fruitless,
and all the King's Concessions, how indulgent soever, could effect nothing.
For, the Demands of the Faction were so high, and their Propositions so
unreasonable, that the King could not assent to them; without ruining his
Conscience as a Christian, and his Majesty as a Prince. For, these modest Men
did require The Extirpation, of Hierarchy, by the Abolition of Episcopacy and
the Liturgy; and, the Introduction of Presbyters, and the Directory in their
stead. They would divest the King, of all his Power, both Military and Civil:
And did press, That the Nobles, and such as had been true to their Duty, should
be delivered over to their Justice; that is, to Death, to Imprisonment and
Exile: Which appeared so Inhumane and Tyrannical, that it is abhorring to Sense
and Reason; whilst these nefarious Conspirators do not think, that the King
has done enough in pardoning his Enemies, unless he also betray his Friends.
By this it appeared, how inclinable they were to Peace. As also, by their
sudden breaking of the Treaty, contrary to the King and his Commissioners
Desires, they did demonstrate, that they were resolved to permit the Decision
of the Cause to the Sword, and to perpetuate themselves thereby, in their
Usurped Tyranny.

Shrewsbury surprised.
About this Time, Major General Mitton surprised Shrewsbury, betrayed to him;
being of very great Detriment to the King. Scarborough and Weymouth were also
taken; which happening presently after the Treaty, the Houses ordered a Day of
public Thanksgiving for these great Victories, as being Evidences from Heaven
of their Sincerity.

Sir Thomas Middleton had formerly beaten Colonel Marrow from the Siege of
Oswestry. Nor was he less fortunate at Montgomery. He had surprised the Castle
by Intelligence, which by reason of the Consequence of its Situation, being an
Entry into North Wales was again Besieged by the Lord Byron, General of those
Countries. But Middleton, with the Assistance of Brereton, Meldrum, and Sir
William Fairfax, with their conjoined Forces, relieved the Place; and, after a
sharp Fight, The Fight at Montgomery.
routed the Cavaliers. Fortune seemed at first to favor the juster Side, by
forcing away the Enemies Horse; but changing, the Rebels carried the Day. The
slain of the Royallists, were at least Three Hundred, and no fewer wounded;
though the Enemy scarce lost a Hundred, except Fairfax and Symons.

And now Essex (a no less Victory to the Independents) as also the Earls of
Denbigh, Manchester and Warwick, and the rest of the Chief Officers, lay down
their Arms, resting Inglorious, and only not neglected; especially Essex, who
denied to give Peace to the Kingdom, Essex discarded.
though invited to it by the King himself, when it was in his Power. And now,
retiring from Business, he languished away the Residue of his Days, in
Discontent and an irksome Retreat.

BOOK III.
The Continuation of the Irish Rebellion. The Lords of the. Pale, side with the
Rebels. Their Model of Government. The Cruelty of the English in Ireland.
Ormond makes first a Cessation, then a Peace with the Irish. Delivers Dublin to
the English. The King vindicated from any Correspondence with the Irish Rebels.
Fairfax marches Westward; recalled, besieges Oxford. The King relieves Chester.
Takes Leicester. The Fatal Battle of Naesby described. The King's Cabinet
taken, and published. Fairfax relieves Taunton. The Fight at Langport. He takes
Bridgwater, Sherburne and Bristol. The King's Travels and Labors. The Scots
besiege Hereford. They quit it. The Fight at Rowton-Heath. Digby and Langdale
defeated in the North. Barclay-Castle, the Devizes, and Tiverton taken.
Cromwell takes Winchester and Basing-House by Assault. The Fight at Torrington.
The Prince passes into France. The Lord Hopton disbands his Army. Distractions
at Newark. The King returns to Oxford. The Lord Ashley defeated.

Continuation of the Rebellion in Ireland.
IT is now time to return to the Irish History, we have hitherto discontinued,
with design not to interrupt the English. And, shall now take the same Liberty
to represent this, to the Rendition of Dublin to the English, in one continued
Relation.

The King had committed the Government of Ireland to the Earl of Leicester, a
Favorite of the Faction, upon a Supposition, that that Kingdom would be the
better provided for. But, he observing the backwardness of the Parliament,
however pressed by frequent Addresses from the Council there, and by reiterated
Messages from his Majesty nearer, had no mind, though invited to it, and
entrusted with it, to stir or engage himself in so hazardous an Enterprise. He
therefore, lest he might seem wholly to neglect his Province, commissioned the
Earl of Ormond, a Person made up of Honor and Loyalty, to be his Lieutenant
General in that Kingdom; which was likewise approved of by his Sacred Majesty,
the best Judge of Men and Abilities; and, who afterward Honored his Merit
with the Chief Government of the whole: Which he performed with so much
Courage, Constancy, and Prudence, as will raise him a Trophy of Honor in the
Annals of Time. Upon his Arrival at Dublin, with a Troop of a Hundred Horse
well armed, having been summoned thither by the Lords-Justices, he revived by
his Presence the desponding Courage of the City. He also immediately proposed
in Council, the raising of a small Army, which might in the Infancy of the
Rebellion have suppressed, or else stopped its Progress; but, they being either
not able, or not willing, (and the Reader may believe both, as will too visibly
appear hereafter) the Business was laid aside.

The Conspirators, especially in Vlster, where they were most predominant,
having with the Extremity of Rage and Cruelty, drowned, slain, spoiled,
stripped and ejected infinite Numbers of the poor Protestants, made Sir Phelim
O Neal their General. He was of the House of Tyrone, but bred up in
Lincoln's End, and a Protestant till of late, though indeed of no famed Conduct
or Courage. However, he took Dundalk, which was surrendered to him, and besieged
Tredah by Sea and Land. Tichburne the Governor, doubtful of the Event, had
demanded and obtained the Grant of Succors from Dublin. Six Hundred Foot were
sent to him under the Command of Major Roper, with a Convoy of Fifty Horse for
their Security. But, they were surprised in a Mist by the Irish, and defeated,
scarce one Hundred of the Foot escaping to Tredah with the Major, though the
Horse with Weems their Commander, brake through, and returned back to Dublin.
It is not conceivable, what Courage this Success (then great) infused into the
wavering Irish. Those who were content to look on before, became hereupon
Actors in this Tragedy. Nay, The Lords of the Pale, join with the Rebels.
the Lords of the Pale, who had hitherto stood upon their Guard, now upon the
uncontrouled Progress of the Rebels, and the no Appearance of any considerable
Forces from England (the Breach there betwixt the King and Parliament daily
wid'ning) to oppose them; they also, contrary to the sacred Vows of Duty and
Allegiance, forfeited both, by joining with their Countrymen. Nay, all the
Provinces in the Kingdom broke out into a detestable Rebellion, being
instigated thereunto by their Priests and Confessors, with the Appearance, nay,
Assurance of Liberty, and Heaven. Besides, they had understood, that their
Country was to be enslaved, and their Estates to be divided amongst the English
Adventurers; to each, proportionable to the Money raised by them for the Use of
the War. Nay further, that they not only designed to suppress the Rebellion,
but the very Religion of the Rebels. They therefore now declare, That they
fight for their Altars, for their Subsistence, and for their Lives; seeing
their Countrymen were denied Quarter in England. So that, their taking up Arms
was no Rebellion, their extreme Peril unavoidably obliging them to it. These
and the like Arguments, obliged all to run to their Natural Defense, so that
there was no Corner exempt from this dismal Infection. And yet it was not so
universal, but that some of the principal of the Nobility, continued, to their
great Honor, unshaken in their Fidelity to the King; nor so bloody, but that
some Marks of Humanity, appeared in the very Actors in this Tragedy, who
sheltered, clothed, fed, and delivered very many from the Barbarities of their
Associates. Which ought not to be silenced, without Injustice, and Ingratitude.

The Rebels settle a Form of Government.
And now the Rebels finding their Strength and Numbers considerable, institute a
Form of a Commonwealth; and choosing amongst themselves a Council of the most
eminent Persons of the Party, gave it the Title of The Supreme Council of the
Confederate Catholics of Ireland; and framing an Oath of Association, by which
all were bound to obey them, assumed the Form of a Regular Government. This
Senate consisted of Five and Twenty, Six out of each Province; the Twenty Fifth
being Castle-Haven, newly escaped from Dublin, where he had continued a
Prisoner a great while. They also made them a Great Seal; coined and raised
Money; erected several Courts of Judicature; appointed several Officers of
State; and amongst other Points of Regality, constituted Four Generals of the
Four Provinces; Preston, for Lemster; Barry, Munster; Owen Roe O Neal, Vlster;
Burk, Their Four Generals.
Conaught. They had cleared most of the Inland Countries of the English, and
did really bear all before them, until those few English sent over, joining
with the Protestants at Dublin, put a stop to their Carier. In the mean Time,
they put out their Remonstrance, where amongst other things, they declare, That
they had taken up Arms for Defense of the Roman-Catholick-Religion, their own
Rights and Privileges, and the King's Prerogative, etc. exactly copied
afterward by the Rebel-Parliament in England.

The Irish had hitherto lived in Amity with the Scots, apprehending the
Neighborhood of Scotland, and lest they should buckle with Two Enemies at
once; but finding their Power grow, they also fell upon their Quarters, using
them with no less infamous Barbarities than they had done the English. But, the
Siege of Tredah went but slowly on; for, though they practice all the Arts of
Force, and Intelligence, in the assaulting of it, They raise the Siege of
Tredah,
yet upon the Arrival of Sir Simon Harcourt with a strong Regiment out of
England, despairing of carrying it, they quitted it, notwithout considerable
Loss. For, the Governor falling in his Rear with most of his Garrison, did
such Execution upon them, that he pursued them to Dundalk; which he also took
by Assault, forcing O Neal to pass the River for his Security. For all this,
the Enemies by the general Defection of the Nation, grew so numerous, that they
threatened Dublin; and, filling the Villages and Country round, extremely
obstructed their Markets and Commerce by their Cavalcades. There were no less
than Twenty Thousand reckoned in this Province of Lemster, but they wanted
Skill and Military Conduct; so that they waged War with Numbers, not
Understanding. Whilst the English who were but few, and had received no great
Assistance out of England, did not only oppose, but dared to provoke them,
beating, routing, killing and destroying them in well-nigh all the Encounters
they had with them; for, being well armed, well led, and well disciplined, they
easily vanquished so effeminate and so unknowing and Enemy. The Cruelty of the
English in Ireland.
But, as the British were more brave, so they were no less cruel than the
Irish, revenging the Barbarousness of their Adversaries with equal Inhumanity.
For, they destroyed many Thousands of them, ruining with Fire and Sword, and
pillaging all they met with; reducing a well planted, most fertile Country,
into a Solitary Desert; whereby they did not only destroy the Natives, but
created to themselves irreparable Mischief and Desolation, by ruining that
which they should have subsisted with. Hence grew those Wants upon them which
they had occasioned, and were now forced to combat a stronger Enemy than they
had yet encountered, as Hunger, want of Pay, Clothes, and all other Nutriments
of War. Which they had in vain expected from the Parliament, its self now
Rebellious, and so far from assisting them, Their Necessities.
that they themselves seized upon the Money designed for Ireland, taking a
Hundred Thousand Pounds of it at once, and employing those Regiments raised for
that Service under the Lord Wharton, to fight their own King, as they did at
Edgehill, in that unnatural Rebellion. Seeing this, they earnestly petitioned
his Majesty for their Discharge, or to be transferred to any other Warfare,
where they might contend with any Enemy but Hunger.

Ormond makes a Cessation with the Irish.
The King being thus daily solicited by the pressing Miseries of his Subjects,
and seeing no other way to relieve or deliver them; commanded the Earl of
Ormond to make a Cessation with the Irish for a Year (which he did) and to send
Three Thousand of the Protestant Army into England, (leaving the Garrison well
provided) to assist him to oppose the Rebellious Scots, who then invaded him.
This Cessation was variously censured, according to the Interest or Inclination
of Parties. Such who disapproved it, cried out against the Transportation of
the Soldiery, pretending, It would expose the Protestants that remained, and be
of too much Advantage to the Rebels. But others, more discerning and equal,
were of Opinion, That it is always better to save a Citizen, than destroy an
Enemy. It was the prime Interest of a Prince to preserve himself. Ireland was
not so formidable, but when England was quiet, it might be reclaimed by fair
Means, or by foul. There was more Danger from the Puritans, who threatened Ruin
to Religion and Monarchy.

The Parliamentarians, and Scots-Irish refused to be included in this Truce,
being supported with Money and Supplies out of England; which was denied the
Royallists, by reason of their unshaken Fidelity to their King, which neither
the Threats nor Allurements of the now English Rebels, could blemish or
overcome. Ormond (now Marquess, and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland) improved this
Cessation with much Prudence and Industry, by a continued Treaty, into a Peace:
which being proclaimed at Dublin and Kilkenny, Then a. Peace
he followed thither with Fourteen Hundred Men, where he was received by the
Supreme Council with due Respect and State, who also surrendered the Government
which they had thus long managed, into his Hands. But this Calm did not last
long, most of the Chief Towns and Great Officers, as Preston, and Owen Roe O
Neal, with others, dissenting. The Archbishop of Firm, the Popes Nuntio, not
only protested against this Peace, but, adding the Thunder of Excommunication,
renewed the War with more violence than ever. Ormond ran no small Hazard of
being intercepted in his Retreat to Dublin, where he was given for lost; and
therefore received with very extraordinary Joy by the People.

Britains and the Irish, ever since the Cessation, with various Fortune. But,
now thinking that a fair Opportunity did present it self, by the Absence of the
English Army, for the Conquest of the whole Kingdom, they join all their Forces
together; and, raised with some late Successes (for Owen Roe O Neal had
defeated Monroe and his Scots in Vlster, slain above Five Hundred of his Men,
taken Five Fieldpieces, all his Baggage and Five Thousand Arms) they besiege
Dublin by Land, The Nuntio dissents and besieges Dublin.
which was also blocked up by the Parliament-Ships, now equally Rebels, which
lay before the Haven. The Lord Lieutenant unable to resist so many Enemies, and
destitute of all hopes of Relief, Ormond unable to preserve it, delivers it to
the English.
acquainted his Majesty with the present State of Affairs; who seeing it
impossible to defend the Place, commanded him to deliver it rather into the
Hands of the Parliamentarians, than the Irish. An irrefragable Testimony,
against the black Calumnies of the English Rebels, who did not cease to accuse
his Majesty of Intelligence with the Irish. But, it will not seem very strange
to Posterity, that the Miscreants of the Faction should endeavor to
assassinate the Fame of this glorious Sufferer, when they had already usurped
his Authority; and, that all the steps they made, tended to the martyrizing of
his Person. It Is true, their Brethren of Ireland pretended, That they were
owned and authorized by his Majesty; and, to amuse and engage the silly Crowd,
showed them a fictitious Commission, with a Great Seal affixed to it, belonging
to a Patent of the Lord Caulefield, which Sir Phelim O Neal took, together with
the said Lord, in the Castle of Charlemont. Which he afterward confessed at
his Trial; and, being urged further by the Judges to declare, Why he did so
deceive the People? He repsied, That no Man could blame him to use all Means
whatsoever, to promote that Cause he had so far engaged in. Although this Sir
Phelim, had been the principal and bloodiest of all the Rebels, yet before
Sentence, he was offered his Liberty and his Estate, if he would prove, he had
had such a Commission from the King. But, he generously answered, He could not;
and, That he would not further burden his Conscience by unjust calumniating
the King. The King vindicated from any Correspondence with the Rebels.
Being upon the Gallows, and ready to be turned off, one Peake, and another
came posting to the Place, and crying aloud, Stop, pierced the Throng; and,
having whispered a while, Sir Phelim answered aloud, in the hearing of several
Hundreds of Spectators, I thank the Lieutenant General for his intended Mercy;
but, I declare, good People, before God, and his Holy Angels, and all of you
that hear me, that I never had any Commission from the King, for what I have
done, in levying or prosecuting of this War. Nor was it only with him, but with
several other Prisoners, that they most impiously endeavored, by Promises of
Life, Liberty, and Estates, and no less abominable Artifices, to sooth them to
Confessions, that might entitle the King to this nefarious Rebellion.

(...).
And 'twas thus the Enemy did with exquisite Malice (to use the King's own
Expressions in his Divine Meditations) mix the Gall and Vinegar of Falsity and
Contempt, with the Cup of his Affliction: charging him not only with Untruths,
but such as wherein he had the greatest Share of Loss, and Dishonor, by what
was committed. Whereas, in all Policy, Reason, and Religion, having least cause
to give the least Consent, and most grounds of utter Detestation, he might be
represented by them to the World, the more inhumane and barbarous.

Dublin surrendered to the Parliament.
The Treaty being concluded with the Committee of Parliament, the City was
surrendered into their Hands. Ormond stipulating amongst other Things, a Liberty
of going to the King, to give him an Account of the Progress of that War. He
found his Majesty in Hampton Court, in the Hands of the Army; but, seeing how
Affairs were carried, he withdrew himself into France, where he continued,
until the Confederate Irish, terrified with the Preparations made in England to
destroy them, by their humble Addresses to the Queen and Prince of Wales,
obtained his Return.

But, it is now time to return into England, where, upon Essex his being laid
aside, the Command of the Army was, as we have already related, given to Sir
Thomas Fairfax; who, with great Industry and Toil, modeled and formed the
diverse Forces that were dispersed under several Chieftains, into one entire
Body. This being effected, he marched from Windsor, his head Quarters, in the
Beginning of May, by Orders of the Committee of both Kingdoms, to the Relief of
Taunton, Fairfax marches to the Relief of Taunton.
which had been long besieged, and reduced to great Extremity. In the mean
Time, Cromwell had been sent from Windsor with a strong Party, to disturb the
King's Preparations about Oxford. He defeated two Thousand Horse at
Islip-Bridge, killing several, and taking Four Hundred Horses, as also Two
Hundred Prisoners, with the Queen's Standard. Some Runnaways, had taken
Sanctuary in Blechingdon House; where being followed, and the Place summoned,
the unfortunate Governor, to gratify the Fears of his Lady, tamely surrendered
it; which cost him his Life, by being shot to Death by the Sentence of a
Court-Marshal. Sir Willam Vaughan, sent with some Foot to Radcot-Bridge, was
likewise with Two Hundred of his Party, intercepted by him. Fierce with these
Successes, and strengthened with Six Hundred Foot from Abington, he assaulted
Faringdon; but not without Loss, being bravely received by Sir George Lisle,
the Governor. At the same Time, General Goring, being sent for by the King to
Oxford, fell upon Five Hundred of Cromwell's Men, under the Command of Whaley
near Faringdon; where Bethel, who led the Van, was taken, and the rest routed,
with the Loss of Three Colors. But Goring having Intelligence of Fairfax's
march Westward, returned with all imaginable Haste to oppose his Attempts upon
Taunton.

In the mean time, the King taking the Opportunity of Fairfax's Absence, sent
for his Horse, under the Command of his Nephews, Rupert and Maurice; and
marching himself with his Cannon out of Oxford, joined them, notwithstanding
Cromwell and Browne's Endeavor, who were commanded to observe him, to the
contrary. His Forces being united (for Gerrard having vanquished Langhorne in
South Wales, was also come up,) he grew so formidable (the Rebels Army being
absent) that he was greatly apprehended, especially in the associated Counties,
and neighboring Countries. Fairfax was recalled upon these Apprehensions: And,
though advanced as far as Blainford, he there received Counter-Orders,
commanding his Return; which he obeyed, sending Col. Welden, with betwixt Six
and Seven Thousand Men, to the succouring of Taunton; whilst he himself,
strengthened with the Addition of Cromwell, Brown and some other Chiefs of the
Party, marches to Oxford and lays Siege to it. Besieges Oxford.
The Royallists at Taunton upon the Approach of Welden, supposing the whole
Army to be there, removed from the Town; but, perceiving their mistake, Goring,
Hopton, and Greenville joining their Forces, fight and beat Welden, and besiege
the Town more closely than before.

The King relieves Chester.
The King having united his Forces, moved with quick Marches toward Chester,
one of the Loyallest, and Chief Cities of his Party, then besieged by Sir
William Brereton, who drew off upon Report of his Majesty's Advance. The King
thereupon wheeling about, flies to Liecester, and by Summons commands the Town
to be surrendered to him. The Place lying in a fertile Country, was also well
stored with Ammunition and Provision. The Committee of the Shire was then
there, and consulting with the Townsmen about the Summons, told the Messenger,
they would return an Answer next Morning: But, that being refused, and but one
Hour's Space granted for Consultation, by a Drum sent on purpose; whilst they
delayed, the Cannon began to play, which together with the small Shot, they
continued to do without Intermission, that Evening and the following Night. The
next Morning, the Town was assaulted in many Places at once, Leicester taken.
and after a stout Defense forced. The Garrison embodied again upon the
Marketplace, and continued the Fight with great Resolution; till being
oppressed with Numbers, they were defeated with a great Slaughter. The Plunder
of the Place followed, which was great; the Governor Colonel Gray.
and the Committee, with several other Officers and Gentlemen, being made
Prisoners.

The King's Affairs much heightened with this Victory, were judged by most Men,
not inferior to the Enemies. And he himself thought no less, when he writ to
the Queen, in these Terms, I may without being too sanguine affirm, That since
this Rebellion, my Affairs were never in so hopeful a Way. The Men at
Westminster, terrified with the Greatness of the Danger, and in no less
Disquiet by reason of the Diffidence, and Dissensions amongst themselves, which
every Success on the King's Side would improve, dispatched sudden Commands to
Fairfax, who had thus long trifled at the Siege of Oxford, That be should
forthwith follow the King, and having overtaken him, fight him if possible, and
so decide the controversy by Battle. This City, seated in the middle of the
Kingdom, was a great Eyesore to the Faction. Besides, it extremely incommoded
London; and, being the Royal-Seat of the King, and head of the contrary Party,
it seemed great to attempt it. Nor were they without hopes, seeing the
Cavaliers were so remote, and dispersed. But, the King sollicitous for Oxford,
as also for Pomfret Castle, which had been long besieged, designed to relieve
both; and, being nearest the City, sent a strong Party of Horse, with a great
Number of Sheep and Cattle, to its Relief, and encamped with the rest of his
Army upon Borrow-hill. The Convoy having succored Oxford, the Expedition of
Pomfret, by Langdale's Persuasion, was resolved upon. There were they who
advised, that the King should march Westward, and join with Goring, who had a
very great Army, and then with united Forces go directly for London; supposed
an easy purchase, as being more than sufficiently distracted with Factions and
the Terror of their Approach. Whilst they were thus consulting, News was
brought that Fairfax having quitted Oxford, was with his Army at Gilsburg but
Five Miles off, and that he had sent Ireton with a good Body of Horse, to
observe the Royallists: who that Night falling upon the Rear of the Army,
quartered at Naesby, did not only disturb it, but carrying Terror with him,
forced the King out of his Quarters, and to make haste to Harborow, where the
Van of his Army was lodged. Upon this, the King immediately called a Council of
War; where, neglecting the Opinion of those who dissuaded an Engagement, and
prudently advised a Conjunction with Goring, they resolved to fight, and
because Fairfax followed them so close, to turn upon him, and offer him Battle.

The Battle of Naesby 1645 Jun. 14.
And now the fatal Day, the Eighteenth of the Kalends of July did appear, by so
much the more dismal, because it ushered in under the Veil of Liberty, the most
insupportable of Tyrannies. All Men's Eyes and Attentions were taken up with
the Expectation of the Event of this decisive Day; and, Vows had been sent up
to Heaven, at Oxford and London, for the Success of it; since the Fate of the
Kingdom, seemed to depend upon it. Monarchy and despised Majesty were to be
vindicated on one Side, together with Religion; whilst the other contended for
Anarchy and Usurpation, and a Liberty of doing Evil. It was told the King, but
falsely, that the Rebels were retreating, designing to shelter themselves in the
associated Counties. Whereupon, Orders were suddenly given to march; and, least
they might get away, some of the heaviest Cannon were left behind, that they
might not retard their haste, in preventing the escape of these pretended
Fugitives. But, they found the Enemy drawn up, upon the Advantages they had
chosen, in a plowed Field near Naesby, and ready to fight. Though the Sight was
surprising, being unexpected; yet the Royallists embattelling likewise their
Army, advanced toward then. Both sides were full of Courage, and desirous of
doing well, proposing nothing less than to overcome. The Cavaliers Word was,
God and Queen Mary; the other Side, God with us. The King took to himself the
Care of his Main Battle. The Princes, Rupert and Maurice, commanded the Right
Wing of the Horse, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale the Left. The Earl of Lindsey,
and the Lord Ashley, led the Battalions of Foot toward the Right; and, the
Lord Bard and Sir George Lisle, those to the Left. In the Rear of the Foot,
stood Col. Howard's Regiment of Horse as a Reserve, the Whole being closed up
with the King's Guards and Prince Rupert's Regiment of Foot. Nor was the
Enemies Order or Numbers disproportionable. Sir Thomas Fairfax himself, with
Skippon his Major General, commanded the Foot. Cromwell, now Lieutenant General
of the Horse, and Col. Ross^ter newly arrived, led the Right Wing; and
Commissary General Ireton the Left, the Reserves being conducted by the
Colonels, Raynsborough, Hammond and Pride. With these Forces, and a more than
Civil Rage, the Armies encountered, both equally animated, and of equal Desires
and Hopes, the Contest being for an Empire. Rupert charged with his accustomed
Valor, and routed the Three outmost Squadrons of Ireton's Wing; but, suffering
himself to be hurried away with the too great desire of overcoming, pursued
them to the very Town. Ireton seeing the Prince past, falls with the Remainder
of his Horse upon the King's next Brigade of Foot; where, being ill received,
he was hurt with a Pike in the Thigh, and a Halbard in his Face, and his Horse
being killed under him, he was taken Prisoner; though presently released by the
Victory of his Party. But, Affairs went otherwise in the other Wing; for, Col.
Whaley, after a rude Encounter on both Sides, forced Langdale with Two of his
Squadrons, upon Prince Rupert's Men in the Rear; where, whilst he was rallying
again, he was quite dispersed by Cromwell, who followed. The Main Battle on
both sides, rushing upon each other with great and equal Fury, fought with all
the Incitements of Hope and Desire, -- Pede pes, densusque viro vir: mutually
exposing their Arms, their Persons, their Wounds. They slay and are slain,
force and are forced. But, the Victory, in all Probability, had been the
King's, the contrary Divisions being forced up to their Reserves, if Cromwell
had not with his Troops, fierce with success, joining their Main Battle, and
charging the Royallists, destitute for want of their Horse, broke and routed
them. And yet, there was one brave Battalion of Foot (as that at Marston-Moor)
though charged often on all Sides by Cromwell, which could not yet be pierced;
till Fairfax, charging them with his Horse, and Guards in Front and Rear at
once, at length defeated them; worthy of better Fortune, who maintained the
Ground they stood on alive, and covered it as if they still would keep
Possession of it, when dead.

The Princes were scarce returned from the Pursuit (having lost much time in
their vain Attempt upon the Carriages, which were guarded with Firelocks) and
at length come, though too late, when they were forced, with the King (who had
performed all the Parts of a Great Captain, and now abandoned by his Fortune,
not his Virtue) to leave the Field, and an Entire Victory to the Rebels.
Fairfax did not think it safe, to follow the Royallists without his Foot, lest
he might expose the Advantage he had got, to new Dangers. He therefore staid
till they were come up, being not above a quarter of a Mile behind; and then
opening his Horse to the Right and Left, received them up betwixt the Interval,
and so marched as at the Beginning, in Battle-Army against the Enemy. The King,
notwithstanding he had lost all his Foot and his Cannon, would have charged the
Rebels Horse with his own, which he had embodied, before their Foot were come
up; but, being over-perswaded by the desponding Courages of them about him, and
the Infantry approaching, the Greatness of that Resolve vanished, and he was
obliged to secure himself by a timely Retreat toward Leicester, whilst
Langdale hastened with his toward Newark. The Rebels Loss, in those slain and
wounded, were esteemed near a Thousand; amongst whom, Ireton and Skippon were
signalized by their Hurts, the Marks of their Disloyalty.

There were taken of the Royallists near Five Thousand, and Six Hundred
supposed to be slain. The Baggage, Cannon, Eight Thousand Arms, and the vast
Spoils of the Field, fell into the Enemies Hands. Six Colonels, a Hundred and
Four Inferior Officers, and Two Hundred Colors were taken by them at present,
and afterward, the Supreme Power, as a Dependence upon their Victory: for, The
Royallists being entirely broken, lost at the same time, all possibility of
renewing the War. The King's Cabinet taken, and published with malicious
Annotations.
The Rebels took, amongst other Spoils of the Field (for, the opprobrious
Actions of their Triumph must be also told) the King's Cabinet, with his
Letters which he had writ to the Queen, and other particular Friends. These
they caused to be printed, with most malicious Annotations. It was a common
thing for these impure Barbarians, to calumniate the King, and to worry his
Reputation, who preferred his Honor before his Scepters, with Pasquils and
infamous Reflections. But, these Epistles effected the contrary, as being writ
with Ingenuity, with Candor and a Majestic Style. Besides, the pretended
Parliament was justly blamed, for divulging the Secrets betwixt Husband and
Wife. against the Laws of Modesty, and Humanity; and, that by a Brutality, that
Infidels would blush at.

The Casualties of humane Affairs, are so various, and changeable, that they no
less surprise us, than move our Admiration. And here we have a lively
Representation of their Incertainties. The Royallists, disappointed in their
vast Hopes, are now necessitated to endeavor their own Security, not attempt
upon others. The Field at Naesby being lost, they fled to Liecester; where
depositing their sick and hurt Men, the King went to Ashby-de-la-Zouch that
Evening: And, hearing of the Enemies Advance, left it about Midnight, and
hasted to Liechfield, and thence into Wales to Hereford, a Place of more Safety
for the present; where, by the Assistance of the Neighboring Counties, he
might raise Foot, which he mainly wanted, and which were in some Measure
furnished to him by draining of the Garrisons in his Obedience, and the
Accession of a Thousand Foot and some Horse, sent him by Gerard from the Siege
of Pembrook. Langdale fled, as is said, to Newark, and 'twas wondered he
escaped Gell, then marching with Two Thousand Horse from Nottingham to
Leicester.

Fairfax in Pursuit of his Victory, followed the Royallists close, and laying
Siege to Leicester, takes it without any considerable Opposition. Here it was
sometime disputed, Whether they should follow the King, to hinder and obstruct
his Levies; or, hasten to the Relief of Taunton, reduced well-nigh to the last
Extremity. Both pressed; and therefore, in order to either, he marched with his
Army through Warwickshire toward the Severn, in Expectation of Orders from his
Superiors; but, upon receiving some Letters intercepted from Goring to the
King, the latter was preferred, especially the Scots being advanced as far as
Nottingham, in order to their March toward Worcester, and Wales, to disturb
the King's Recruits.

A cunning Fellow, upon raising of the Siege before Oxford, stole into the Town
some time before, and told the Secretary, Sir Edward Nicholas, somewhat of the
King's Progress, as also of the designed Removal of the Camp and Siege; which
gained him so much Credit, that he was employed, though with seeming
Reluctance, into the West. At Bath, he met with the Prince (our since glorious
Monarch) who richly rewarding him, sent him further to Goring, lying before
Taunton; Fairfax marches to the Relief of Taunton.
who also speedily returned him to the King, with Assurance, that in Three
Weeks he should take Taunton, and his Majesty be Master of the West; humbly
advising him, by no means to engage till he had joined him with his Army. But,
this suborned Villain, being an Agent of Watson's, the Scout-Master General,
brought these Letters to Fairfax; which, if the King had received, it is more
than probable, that his Majesty had declined fighting when he did. Fairfax
quickened with this Advice, and lest Goring might still join his Forces with the
King's, whose Horse were almost entire, and so renew the War; receiving also
Orders from the pretended Parliament, and the Committee of both Kingdoms, to
hasten his March into the West with all Expedition, he moved accordingly. He
took High Worth in his Way; and, dispersing the Club-Men who pretended to be
Neuters, and only up in their own Defense; advancing with all Diligence, the
Siege seemed to be raised by the Fame of his coming. Goring was not ignorant of
Fairfax's Motion, and therefore, removes from the Siege with a tumultuous
Retreat, supposing that the besieged transported with the Joy of their
Deliverance, would sally out upon him; which they did, with much Confidence.
But, the Royallists turning upon them, beat them back with considerable Loss,
and shut them up closer than before. But, this last Restraint was of no long
Duration; for, Fairfax approaching indeed, the Besiegers drew off in good
earnest, and marched toward Langport, with design to join the Horse they
expected from the King. They at first encamped at Sutton, having broke the
Bridges of that River, guarding the Avenues and Fords of it, that the Enemy
might not pass to them. But, the Rebels having forced the Passage at Evil, and
repaired the Bridge, they got over with all their Forces. And thus Taunton, now
again upon the point of being forced, was delivered; having been bravely
defended in both Sieges by Colonel Blake the Governor, who will also signalize
himself hereafter at Sea, for Courage, worthy to be transmitted to Posterity,
if he had not sullied it, by employing it against his own Prince.

Colonel Massey was sent with Four Thousand Horse, and some Regiments of Foot,
to disturb General Goring's Rear; which he did, being also well received.
Fairfax followed with the Rest of his Army; and, drawing up upon a Hill near
Langport, saw the Enemies Horse in Battalia, upon another opposite to him,
being marched out of Town to defend a Passage which hindered Massey to join with
the Fairfaxians. The Rebels made a sound Charge upon the said Avenues, and
after a brave Resistance, forced the Royallists out of the Hedges, and their
Horse charging vigorously into the Lane, Langport Fight.
were as vigorously repelled, until being seconded with Reserves of Horse and
Foot, their Cannon also having done much Damage amongst our Cavalry, they
forced the Passage; the Royallists in their Retreat setting the Town on Fire.
In this Fight and Rout (for the Enemy pursued within Two Miles of Bridgewater)
there were not slain above Four Hundred on both Sides, but near two Thousand of
the Royallists taken; a Thousand Horses, Twenty Foot Colors, One and Thirty
Cornets, Two Guns, and all the Baggage. Lieutenant General Porter, and Fifty
other Officers, were numbered amongst the Prisoners. The loss on the Rebels
Side, was very inconsiderable, only Two Captains, one Lieutenant and Fifty
private Soldiers; Bethel and Cook, with some others of the forwardest, being
wounded. Fairfax did not pursue the Run-aways, being unwilling to leave
Bridgewater behind him. It was therefore resolved, in a Council of War, to
attack; and to loose no time, to attempt it by Assault. The Town seated on the
Banks of Severne, and divided into Two by a Branch of it, was very strong. The
Moat, though deep, was but narrow, not exceeding Thirty Foot in Breadth, which
was filled with the Flood every Tide. The Circuit of the Place was not large,
being defended by Eighteen Hundred Soldiers, Forty Guns mounted upon the Walls,
with great Stores of other Military Provisions. But, the Rebels fierce with
their former Victories, and slighting all this, cast Lots for the Posts they
were to attempt. But, first they summon the Citizens to a Surrender, with
Threats of all the Extremities of War in case of Refusal. Colonel Edmond
Windham, the Governor, no less brave than Loyal, returning the Messenger with
Scorn, prepared for Defense. Which so irritated the Enemy, that planting their
Cannon, they also ran floating Bridges into the Graft, which was not difficult,
by reason of its narrowness; and, storming the Walls, with great Violence,
notwithstanding their utmost Resistance, mounted them, and beating the besieged
from their Bullwarks seize their Cannon, and turn them upon the other Town;
whilst the rest forcing the Gate, and cutting down the Drawbridge, opened a
Passage for their Horse to enter at. And thus this part of the Town (it being,
as is said, divided by a Chanel) was taken, as also Five Hundred of the
Defendants in it. Nor did this terrisie the Governor, who refusing another
Invitation to surrender, consumed with Fire from Grenades, and glowing
Bullets, that Portion of the. Town which the Enemy had possessed. Fairfax having
provided all things for another Assault, sent a Trumpet to the Governor; and,
that he might add the Fame of Clemency, to that of his Success, he signified to
him, That seeing he was resolved to maintain the Fortress, he would
notwithstanding (making War against Men only, and being loath to involve the
Innocent with the Guilty) permit the Women and Children, Liberty to go where
they pleased. Upon publishing hereof, the Governor's Lady, and some other of
that Sex, accepting this unexpected Gallantry, went out: Who were no sooner
departed, but the Enemy thundered upon the Town with their Mortar-pieces,
Cannon, Fireballs and incessant Showers of small Shot, that the Buildings were
all in a Flame. The Citizens and Soldiers astonished with this unusual
Tempest, sent Mr. Elliot, who had formerly carried the Great Seal from London
to York, by the Governor's Consent to Fairfax, with Conditions of Peace. But,
he rejecting all mention of Treaties with the Governor and Garrison, fiercely
replied, That since they had destroyed so sine a Town by their Obstinacy, they
should immediately surrender themselves to the pleasure of the Parliament, upon
Quarter for Life only. Which was done; Bridgwater taken. July 23.
the Soldiers remaining Prisoners of War, but the Townsmen permitted their
former. Immunities. The City of Bath terrified with the Fate of Bridgewater,
tamely surrendered it self to the Colonels Rich and Okey; but, Sherburne was
defended more nobly. Sir Lewis Dives, a Man of Courage and Honor, was
Governor of the Castle. Who rejecting Fairfax's Summons, and Offer of fair
Quarter, replied, That he would sooner lose his Life, than his Fame, especially
in such a Cause. And, he bravely defended himself and the Place, until it was
ruined by Approaches, by Mines, and by a Breach made in the Wall, capable of
Ten Men abreast, with the Rubbage whereof the Moat was filled and levelled; so,
that after much Resistance, it was taken by Assault. Sherburne taken.
Many brave Men fell into the Enemies Hands, at least Four Hundred. Amongst
whom, were Colonel Thornhill, Sir Jo. Wallot, and others. Nor did they slay Sir
Lewis Dives, nor Mr. Strangeways; who being Members of Parliament, were
reserved for more exemplary Punishment.

Sherburne being taken, they were at a stand what to undertake next. Some
advised, their March Westward, to hinder Goring's recruiting of his Army, which
was broken at Langport, which he might easily do by new Levies in the Provinces
of Devonshire and Cornwall, being countenanced by the Prince of Wales, and by
the Addition of Greenville, Barkley, and the rest of the King's Generals. They
also demonstrated, how the Plague was in Bristol, which might endanger the
whole. Army, if they moved that way, by the Infection. But, others persuaded
the taking of Bristol, lest Prince Rupert, who was Governor with Five Thousand
brave Soldiers, should draw the wavering Club-Men to his Party; and, having
the Severne open, invite, and obtain Auxiliaries from Ireland and Wales, and
consequently form a formidable Army anew in the very Bowels of the Kingdom;
which would not only render him terrible to the Parliament, but troublesome to
them also, if he should exclude their Forces, whilst they were in the remote
Counties of the West, from all Commerce with London by Land, and disturb their
Rear whilst they had Goring in the Van. They further remonstrated, of what
Moment that City was to the Royallists, as being their chief Port, and great in
shipping and Wealth. Bristol being preferred for these Reasons, Ireton was sent
with Two Thousand Horse to hinder the Excursions of the Garrison, and to oppose
the firing of the Neighboring Villages and Buildings. And yet, Bedminster, and
Clifton, and some other houses nearest, were burnt. The whole Army being
advanced, all the Avenues were stopped up, Bristol besieged.
and the City entirely closed by the taking of Potsheard. Point, and the
obstructing of the Severne by Seven of their Men of War. Nor did the Rebels fix
their Quarters and Stations about this great Town, without vigorous
Interruption, being obstructed in their Approaches by the continual Sallies of
the besieged, though with mutual Slaughter. But, the Multitude prevailed; for,
the Club-Men, of whom the Rebels doubted before, now Rebels themselves, joined
with the other Rebels; so that the Defendants being shut up within their Works,
they were also summoned to a Surrender by a Trumpeter. The Prince demanded
Permission, to send to the King to know his Pleasure; which was denied, under
pretense of Delay. The Trumpet sent again, was notwithstanding his Orders to
return that Evening, not dispatched till next Morning, and then returned with a
Draught of Conditions from the Prince, above the supposed State of a vanquished
Enemy. Fairfax perusing them, and finding some things doubtful in them, and
others not to be granted but by the Parliament it self; he proposed, that
Commissioners on both sides, should meet with power to conclude, sending with
all a Scheme of what was in his Power to grant. But, the Messenger being
delayed, and bringing but a dilatory Answer, he was commanded in Anger suddenly
to return, and tell the Prince, That unless he would immediately accept of what
had been offered, all that had been hitherto done, should pass for nothing. The
Trumpet returning again later than ordered, carried with him an Answer not
unlike the former. The Prince desired to procrastinate the matter in hopes of
Relief, which he seemed to expect from the Conjunction of Goring's Forces with
the Oxford-Horse. For, he had writ from Collumpton, that he would be ready in
Twenty Days to succor the Besieged. Fairfax had also intercepted some of those
Letters, which made him prepare for a General Assault, which he designed with
his utmost Vigor and Industry. But, these were Dreams; and, all Attempts for
renewing the War, after the Defeat at Naesby, and Goring's Loss of his Foot at
Langport, but imaginary. The Royallists would notwithstanding attempt every
Extremity, for the Defense of their dear Master and King; in whose Safety, the
Church, the Laws and Liberties of all good Men, (lest they should be enslaved
to the worst of Tyrannies) were included.

Bristol assaulted. Dec. 10.
All things being ready for the Assault, the Sign being given early in the
Morning, by firing Heaps of Faggots and Straw, and the Discharge of Four great
Guns; they fell on upon all sides. Montague and Pikering, assaulted
Lawford-Gate with their Regiments, and entered it; and, being followed by
Desborough, with the General's Regiment of Horse, routed the Defendants, and
siezed upon. Two and Twenty of their Cannon. Sir Hard. Waller with Two
Regiments of Foot, fell upon the Line, betwixt the said Port of Lawford and the
River From, and mastered it. Raynsborough and Hamond had the like Success by
Prior's-Fort; which, after a brave Defense, ( Price the Governor being slain)
was forced, and all the Defendants cut in Pieces. The Lines and Hedges being
levelled by Pioneers, the Horse entered, and charging the King's Cavalry,
occasioned a Bloody Encounter; where, Colonel Tailor a Royallist, and Major
Bethel of the Enemies side, were sorely wounded. But, the Garrison Horse being
overpowered, were obliged to secure themselves by retreating betwixt the Great
Fort and that of Coulston. The Enemies Success, was not the same on the other
side of the Town; for, the Wall being higher, the Defense was easier, Welden,
who attacked it with Four Regiments, being beaten off. The Royallists set the
lost part of the City on Fire; which they also extinguished (a new Treaty being
set on foot) at the Desire of Fairfax. and surrendered.
And, thus Bristol was surrend'red; upon harsher Conditions, than the Enemy had
formerly presented: For, the Foot were allowed their Swords only; but, upon the
Prince his Desire, and Engagement of Restitution, they had a Thousand Arms lent
them for their Defense, against the Insults of the Club-Men. The Enemy lost
about Two. Thousand Men, and a few Officers in this Enterprise. Nor did the
taking of this Noble City, and the Recovery of the Cannon, which the King had
taken from Essex at Lestithiel, which were laid here, cost them any more. Which
will seem less strange, when we consider, that the King's Party was every where
broken. But their Virtue was invincible, and they themselves above their
Misfortunes, which they will yet abundantly testify. Bristol being thus taken,
Fairfax fearing the Contagion, retires to Bath, a better Air, and sends his
Soldiers, after so many Toils, for some Days, to fresh Quarters. In the mean
time, whilst the Rebels are indulging upon his Ruins, it will be requisite to
relate the Actions and Labors which the King underwent in person.

After the Fatal Battle of Naesby, this magnanimous, however unfortunate
Prince, The King's Travels and Labors.
retired (as is said) to Hereford. To add to his Calamities, as the Miserable
are usually neglected, so he is now also insulted on by the degenerate Scots
Ecclesiastics. Who, in a Letter, most impudently admonish him, That
acknowledging his great Sins, he should seriously, and suddenly repent. How
could he think, that God would bear with his fighting, against his faithful and
pious Subjects! his authorizing their Murder and Slaughter by the Irish
Rebels; and his permitting of the Exercise of the Mass and other abominable
Idolatry? He had wearied the Patience of his Subjects, which if he persisted
in, they denounce, would be his inevitable Ruin. They advise him, Not to
neglect the Demands of his faithful Subjects, and that he should at length
repent, and suffer the Son of God to reign over him and his. Kingdoms, in the
sincere Worship and Discipline of his Church, etc. These barbarous Reproaches
from a less barbarous Generation, however false, might have been in some sort
born; but, to have Clodius accusat Maechos.
Rebels pretend to Loyalty, Schismatics to Piety, and Superstitious
Disciplinarians to rail against Idol Worship, where there was none, is only
proper to such, who usurping the Title of God's Vicegerents, would reign and
domineer over the Kings of the Earth. But, his Majesty, not to be moved with
these Impertinencies, no more than the scurrillous divulging of his Cabinet,
being Proof against the Malice of Calumny, as well as Fortune, after some time
left Hereford, and with Three Thousand Horse hastens by Liechfield to Bewdly:
Where falling upon some Troops of Scots Horse, he beats and routs them. From
thence, by a swift March, he enters Derbyshire, and beat Gell at Sudbury, and
Ashburnham. He thence came to Welbeck, and ravaging the associated Counties,
surprising the Guard at the Gate of Huntington, enters the City, and imposing a
reasonable Ransom upon it, did the Inhabitants no further Harm. He passed by
Cambridge, which he looked upon with a benign Eye, it being the Seat of the
Muses and Learning. But, he fined St. Ives Five Hundred Pounds. And finally,
passing through Ouburne and Doncaster, returned to Oxford. It is not to be
wondered, that he obliged some Towns in his March to redeem themselves, with no
great Pecuniary Mulcts, seeing they had always been exempted from any
quartering of Armies, and had perpetually contributed to the Maintenance of the
Rebellion. The King had continued his Cavalcade through these Counties with so
much Celerity, that he baffled the Sedulity of his Followers. And, though he
had been pursued by Ten Thousand Horse, the ( Scottish Cavalry being joined
with the English) and that with the utmost Obstinacy, yet they could not
prevent him.

The Scots, however fattened with their Rest and Quarters, would not yet leave
them, without the Allurements of Prayers, and Money. Being then paid, they were
persuaded to move Southwards; and, The Scots besiege Hereford.
having taken Canon-frome, a small Garrison of the King's, they marched
directly for Hereford, and laid a formal Siege to the place. The Convention at
Westminster, had sent General Leven a Jewel, valued at Five Hundred Pounds, as
their Acknowledgment for his late Success, and an Incitement to greater Things.
This did not a little quicken him; and, now the City is approached, mined,
battered, and assaulted by his no less craving Soldiers. But, being bravely
received and beaten off with great Loss, they attempted the Surrender, which
they had not been able to compass by their Action and Threats, by the offer of
very fair Conditions. The Parliament had also joined in these Demands; and, the
Inhabitants of the Country round, forced by Fear, added also their desires to
the rest. But, in vain; for, Scudmore the Governor, rejecting these
Invitations with Contempt, told them, He would deliver the City to none but to
the King that had entrusted him with it, or to his Majesty's Commands. And thus
the Scots, but raise is
after a sharp, though no long Siege of Five Weeks, seeing there was no good to
be done, raised their Camp, and marched Northwards, occasioned perhaps by their
Apprehension of the King's Motion from Oxford; or, rather, affrighted with the
stupendous Victories of Montross in their own Country, Rosseter being
commanded thither with Six Thoufand Horse.

The King having again left Oxford (for, his private Affairs there, no less
than his public abroad, grew by the Distractions and Divisions in his own
Court daily worse) marched to Ludlow, with design to relieve Chester, long
laboring under the Pressures of a close Siege. The Parliament, hearing of the
Kings Motion, ordered the Colonels, Points and Rosseter, to observe him: with
orders, that in case he moved toward Hereford, they should act by consent with
Leven; but, if he should go toward Bristol, they should then move by
Communication of Counsels with General Fairfax, their Forces being joined, Four
Thousand all Horse, follow the King close. And, the unhappy City of London, to
promote this Design of King-Catching, as they called it; or, rather, The
Common Council of London order their Members, to find each a Horse to persuethe
King.
their own Slavery, made a Decree in Common Council, that every Member of it,
should have a Horse with Accoutrements, ready to join with the rest in pursuit
of the King. His Majesty in the mean time, hastens toward Chester, and being
come to Routon-Heath within Two Miles of it, Rosseter falls with great
Resolution upon the Royallists, who received them with no less Courage. The
Fight was very hot, wherein the Rebels were not only disordered, but had been
quite defeated, and an entire Victory obtained, but that Colonel Jones coming
in that instant with near a Thousand Men from the Siege of Chester, turned the
Day, by confirming their own Party, and restoring to them the Success they
despaired of before. The Fight at Rowton-heath.
The King being overpowered with the Accession of these new-Commers, lest he
should be surrounded by them, charged through them, and not without much
Slaughter on both sides, recovered Chester. The untimely Death of the Lord
Bernard, no less eminent for Courage and Loyalty, than Illustrious for the
Nobleness of his Extraction, aggravated the King's Loss, he being the Third
Brother of the Duke of Lenox, slain in his Majesty's Quarrel in this unnatural
War.

The King did not stay long in Chester, the Enemy growing upon him after their
Victory, but retired into Wales, still loyal to his Interest; he being a Prince
however unfortunate, insuperable in Afflictions, and Superior to all
Calamities. Nor did he at all despond, however harassed, trusting that the same
God who from small beginnings had raised him once to an Equality with his
Enemies in Power, might yet of his Goodness restore him in his good time. He
then by his indefatigable Industry, and the Accession of Prince Maurice his
Troops with some other scattered Remains, had got a considerable Body of Horse
together; which he divided, and delivering Fifteen Hundred of them to Digby and
Langdale, Digby and Langdale defeated.
sent them with Commands, to endeavor to conduct them to Montross; which if
these great Men had been able to have compassed, might have changed the whole
Face of Affairs. He had already acted to a Prodigy, as will be hereafter
declared; but, they could not reach the Borders, and Confines of both Kingdoms.
For though they had broke Colonel Wren's Regiment of Horse, and taken Eight
Hundred Foot at Sherburne, and Mylford, they were afterward surprised by
Copely and Lilburne, who being fresh, fell upon their wearied Troops, and
defeated them. Carnaby and Hutton, Two Knights, with some others were slain;
and, Four Colonels, together with many Inferior Officers, and Four Hundred
Horse, fell into the Enemies Hands. The Lord Digby's Coach was also made a
Prize, wherein amongst other Spoils, several of the King's Letters, too
carelessly guarded, were found. And these, as those formerly taken at Naesby,
were printed with the same Malice and Impudence. Nor is it to be wondered, that
as they began the War with Tumults, Scandals, and all Kinds of Barbarity; so
they should end it, with the same Arts, and the same Brutality. Digby was again
routed by the Scots upon Carlile-Sands, and scarce saved himself by
withdrawing with very few Attendants into the Isle of Man, and from thence
into Ireland. So that this whole Party, together with its Design, was destroyed
and vanished.

But to return to Fairfax into the West, where the main Stress of the War was
(for, what happened in other Provinces, were rather Velitations, and Encounters
of Parties, than formed Designs of Battles) after the taking of Bristol, the
Enemy consulted what to undertake next. Many were of Opinion, they should march
to the Relief of Plymouth, laboring under the Evils of a very long, and irksom
Siege. But that Town having the Sea open, and the Parliamentarians abounding in
shipping, having the Navy at their Disposal, it was thought more expedient, to
dislodge the Royallists out of those Garrisons, which impeded the Commerce
betwixt London and the Western Counties; and, so open a Passage for Travelers,
to and fro, at Pleasure. In order to this, Barclay-Castle, as nearest, was
first attempted. This Fortress lying betwixt Gloucester and Bristol, did not
only disturb the Commerce of both those Cities, but extremely incommoded the
Country on every side, with Excursions. Fairfax had formerly sent some Horse to
hinder their Cavalcades; and now Colonel Raynsborough is ordered with Three
Regiments of Foot, to besiege and reduce them. Which he also did, having forced
their Outworks, Barclay-Castle taken by Raynsborough.
and particularly the Steeple and Church which overlooked the Castle. For, Sir
Charles Lucas, however brave, being unequal to the Enemy in Power, was forced
to surrender; which he did, considering the State of Affairs, upon no
contemptible Conditions. In the mean Time, Cromwell took the Devizes; The
Devizes by Cromwell.
without any great Opposition; as also Laicock, with the same Facility, the
Soldiers being permitted to march away with their Arms. And now Fairfax
commands him, with Three Regiments of Horse, and Four of Foot, to reduce
Winchester, and Basing-House, the Seat of the Marquis of Winchester, whilst he
himself marches with the Rest of his Army Westward. His Soldiers were
mustered, and paid, and new clothed. Being come to Chard, he was advertised,
that the Royallists had a design to break through his Army, and join with the
King. Which seemed neither incredible, nor unreasonable; for, that being
effected, the Enemy would be obliged either to divide his Forces, which might
expose both Parties, or follow with his whole Army, and so leave the Two
fertile Provinces of Devonshire and Cornmall entirely in the Prince's Hands. He
therefore lay in the Field all Night, and forced the advancing Royallists to
retreat over the Isca. Goring had fallen into the Enemies Quarters near Chard,
with Success, having slain some, and taken about Sixty. But, Tiverton by
Fairfax.
Fairfax closely pursuing them, took Tiverton, as also the Castle and Church,
by storm, occasioned by a casual Shot which broke the Chain of the Drawbridge,
by which Accident the Passage was immediately seized, Sir Gilbert Gerard; the
Governor, and the whole Garrison being made Prisoners.

The Winter being far advanced, and the Robels wearied with so many Toils,
thought it neither fit nor safe to attempt the Royallists further, or besiege
Exeter, well fortified, and strengthened, with a Garrison of Five Thousand Men.
They therefore resolve to block up the City at a Distance; and raising some
Redoubts, and Skonses, upon the River Clyssa, within Command of each other,
though Three Miles from the City, put Guards into them, whereby they might,
with no great Force, extremely disturb the Communication betwixt the Town and
Country. They might have done the same on the other side of the Isca, and so at
once have shut up the Garrison from all Commerce with the adjacent
Neighborhood; which they also afterward did.

Cromwell having possessed himself of the City of Winchester, without
Opposition, Cromwell takes Winchester,
battered the Castle with Six Cannon, and made a Breach in the Walls. Which
being observed by the Lord Ogle the Governor, who thinking every Defense in
this declining State of Affairs superfluous, beat a Parley. And, being admitted
to treat, having compounded for the Security of his Garrison, he surrendered
this Fortress, however furnished with all kinds of Military Provisions for a
long Siege. But, the Marquis fell by a nobler, however more unhappy Destiny;
for, Cromwell having battered his Works, assaulted them with Four Battalions,
and passing the Moat, and Ramparts, brake down the Gates; and so, however
bravely opposed, forced his Passage into the House, and became Master of it.
and Basing House.
The Marquis, Sir Robert Peak, with others of Quality, with immense Spoils,
were the Reward of the victorious. There were a hundred slain, a Girl of a
masculine Courage being found amongst the stripped. And thus this Fortress of
Loyalty, having baffled very many Attempts of the Rebels, for its Reduction
hitherto, fell now by the uncontrouled Fortune of Cromwell. And, being first
pillaged, was afterward burnt to the Ground, out of spite, rather than any
advantage to the Conquerours. Langford fearing the like Fate, prevented it by a
timely Surrender. And now, the Passages being cleared betwixt London, and the
more distant Provinces of the West, Cromwell rejoins his Forces to Fairfax's
Army.

The Prince sends to Fairfax about Peace.
During these Traverses, the Prince of Wales had sent to Fairfax, his Desires
for a safe Conduct for the Lords Hopton, and Culpeper, to go to the King, with
design to endeavor to compose the Differences betwixt his Majesty and the Two
Houses. But, Fairfax returned Answer, That it not being of his Province to
treat of Peace, he had sent his Highness's Letters to the Parliament, from whom
an Answer was to be expected. Goring having sent the Colonels Scroop and
Philips, had attempted the same before, proposing, That by the united Force of
both Armies, they should compel both King and Parliament to an Accommodation.
The like Conjunction of Forces had formerly been motioned to Essex, which was
then rejected by him, as now by his Successor.

All hopes of Peace being vanished, the Prince sollicitous for Exeter, draws
his Army, consisting of about Seven Thousand, to Okehampton. His Highness had
been informed, that the Rebels Forces were very much diminished by Death and
Diseases, which gave him room to hope for some favorable Occasion to attempt
upon them. But, being suddenly after assured, that they were daily furnished
with new Levies, Fairfax surprises Three of Wentworth's Regiments at Bovey.
and fresh Supplies (which was true,) he changed his mind, and withdrew his
Forces to a greater Distance. But, the Enemy advancing, surprised Three of
Wentworth's Regiments at Bovey. The Troopers (except Fifty, and a Major, who
were taken) escaped by Favor of the Night, but they left near Four Hundred
Horses behind them.

Fairfax was careful to advertise Plymouth of his Advance, and the Royallists
Retreat, which was also relieved by the drawing off of the Besiegers. This
Place had been very long blocked up by Land; and having been often bravely
attempted, by Sir Richard Greenville, did defend it self with no less Bravery.
For, the Sea always open, and the Rebels Masters of it, they could not be
forced. Dartmouth was the next Trophy of the Conquerours, Dartmouth taken.
which they took by Assault, without the Loss of scarce one single Man, though
the Town was strengthened with a Hundred pieces of Ordnance. Nor was the
Slaughter greater on the Defendants side, Sir Hugh Pollard the Governor, the
Earl of Newport, Seymour, Denham, and about Eight Hundred, being taken
Prisoners..... Carey, and his Officers, upon the Delivery of a Fort which he
guarded, was permitted his Liberty, and the Soldiers had also leave to retire
every Man to his own Home. The Cornish-men, who they were many, had each Two
Shillings allowed for their Journey; not absurdly bestowed, to tempt the rest
of their Countrymen, who were now the only considerable part of the King's
Forces.

The Rebels marched thence to Totnes, and afterward returned to the Siege of
Exeter. Sir Hardres Waller had commanded there; and, now it is resolved, to
attempt the forcing of the Place, it having hitherto been but blocked up with
Forts and Redoubts. They therefore commanded Ladders to be brought out of the
Country, for an Assault; until upon fresh intelligence of the Prince's
Preparations and Design to relieve the Besieged, they again leaving Waller with
Three Regiments of Foot, and one of Horse, to continue the Blockade, moved with
the Rest of the Army to meet the Royallists. The Lord Hopton commanded the
King's Forces. For, the Lord Goring being gone for France, and having entrusted
his own Troops to the Lord Wentworth's Conduct; the Government of the whole was
devolved upon this excellent Personage: Who now had, with Three Thousand Horse
and Four Thousand Foot, possessed himself of Torrington, with a Resolution to
defend the Town, and to hazard there the Extremity of War. Fairfax being
advertised of all this by his Spies, quickens his March: and, to give the
Royallists no time to fortify themselves, made all imaginable haste. Hopton
had lined the neighboring Avenues with Musketeers, which he again quitted
upon the Enemies Advance, who also possessed the said Places: Where they fixed
their Station, by reason of the Darkness, until a Noise in the Town, creating
an Opinion that the Royallists were dislodging, obliged them to send a Party to
see what was the matter. These Discoverers being received with a Volley of
Shot, were seconded by a Reserve, and they again by a Third and Fourth Party;
so that Supplies being successively sent from both sides, both Armies were at
length engaged. The Passage into the Town was barricado'd up, The Fight at
Torrington.
where the Fight was very sharp, at push of Pike, and Butt-Ends of Muskets;
but that being gained, the Encounters in the Street were no less brave. The
Royallists had Twice repelled the Enemy, and being as often beat back
themselves, were forced at length to quit their Ground, to the more numerous
Assailants. Hopton in Person, very conspicuous, and well mounted, brought up
the Rear of his Horse; but, was not able to save his Foot, whereof scarce Six
Hundred escaped. The Horse, by Benefit of the Night, and Knowledge of the Ways,
did well-nigh all save themselves by Flight. Four Hundred as well Commons as
Gentlemen were taken; of which, near Two Hundred were blown up with the Church.
Hopton had left Fourscore Barrels of Powder in it, which being fired by
Accident, or by one Watts, as it was said, hired thereto for Thirty Pieces of
Gold, I will not determine. But however it happened, very many of the Rebels
perished with it; the Town was miserably shaken, and Terror and Destruction
were scattered every where by the Dreadfulness of the Noise, and the Vibration
of the Ruins of the Temple. The Enemy following the Chase, forced the
Cavaliers over the River Tamar; and, advancing forwards, beat Colonel Basset
out of Launceston, which they also possessed.

The Prince sails to the Isles of Scylly.
The Prince of Wales admonished by the frequent Misfortunes of his Party, and
seeing, after this last Defeat, no possibility of renewing the War, took
shipping at Truro. And, that he might withdraw himself, from these barbarous
and bloody Enemies to his Life, and Fame; and being attended on by the Lord
Capel, Lord Culpeper, and Sir Edward Hyde, since Lord Chancellor of England,
sailed to the Isles of Scylly, and thence into France; reserving himself, by
the Care of Providence, for the signal Restitution of his enslaved Kingdoms, to
their former Glory. Fairfax did not omit to improve this Opportunity of the
Prince's Retreat, by inviting Hopton, by honorable Conditions, to disband his
Forces, as being abandoned and left to himself. The Greatness of the thing,
kept him in suspense for some Time. It grieved him to the Soul, to see his
King, and dearest Lord, deprived of so many brave Men, and such a gallant Body
of Horse, and that by his own Act. But, to conserve them, seemed morally
impossible; for, there was no Help to be expected from Abroad, and he himself
shut up within the compass of Six Miles, in the Streights of Cornwall,
surrounded by the Sea, and a victorious, hostile Army. Nor, did he know whither
to go, in case he had broke through; the Ways being obstructed with Trees, cut
down and laid cross them on purpose; the Passages every where kept with strong
Guards; and what was more dismal, the King's Affairs were under such sad
Circumstances, and so desperate, that we were deprived of the very Solace of
Hope. In this Extremity, it was determined, to lay by our now useless Arms, and
submit to the Necessity of our Fate. A Treaty was therefore entered upon, by
Commissioners from both sides, The Lord Hopton disbands bis Army.
who met at Tressilian-Bridge; and, after a great Contestation, concluded a
Dissolution of the Royal-Army. The Officers, each according to his Quality,
were permitted the Enjoyment of their Arms, Horses and Equipage. But, the
common Troopers, were obliged to deliver theirs, receiving every one Twenty
Shillings in Lieu of them. All had their Bag, Baggage, and Liberties secured to
them, and Permission to return to their Homes, or to pass into Foreign
Countries at pleasure. The Army being disbanded, and the Garrisons thereby
excluded from all Hopes of Relief, did likewise fall. Exeter the Chief City of
the West, surrendered upon honorable Terms. Barnstable followed, as also the
remaining Garrisons, upon Demand. And now Fairfax having subdued the West,
marched with his victorious Army toward Oxford. Whilst he is on his way, it
may not be from the Purpose, to relate what happened in other Parts of the
Kingdom. Which I hitherto designingly omitted, not willing to interupt the
Progress of this Western Expedition. Being content, to deliver the greater
Actions in their Order, rather than to distract them, with a regard to the
Things themselves, more than the Times they were acted in, though that also
will appear in the Margent.

After the Defeat of Digby and Langdale, which we have mentioned, the King had
continued for some time at Newark, until wearied with the Dissentions of his
Party, he was necessitated to depart. The Lord Gerrard, Sir Richard Willis,
Distractions amongst the Royallists at Newark.
and others had deserted his Majesty; and, the Princes, Rupert and Maurice
having capitulated with Points, for Passes to go beyond Sea, which was assented
to by the pretended Parliament, were upon the point of abandoning him. The
Dispute was about Digby, who being accused by these Dissenters with more Fervor
than Duty, considering the Times, found an Advocate of his Innocence in the
King, and Bellasis the Governor. Hereupon, his Majesty with Six Hundred Horse
came to Oxford, where being entertained with heavy Countenances, and a
lugubrious Account of Affairs, he replied with undaunted Constancy; That Three
Years ago, he had been in yet a lower Condition than at present. The same God,
who from such despicable Beginnings had rendered him great and formidable, did
live and reign still, to whose Goodness he also recommended the Care of his
present abject Estate. But however confident he seemed to be, he was, as is
usual in great Calamities, too much neglected by many. And, though he daily
performed, whatever could be expected from a brave and prudent Prince, yet
nothing succeeded, by reason of the perpetual Distraction of his Nobles, his
Officers and Counselors, agitated by the Infelicities of the present
Condition of Affairs; or rather, actuated by the secret Dispensations of
Providence. Nor was he long permitted to reside there, Ashley beat at Stow.
the Lord Ashley having been defeated and taken at Stow. He had drawn a Body of
near Two Thousand out of several Garrisons, evacuated for that Purpose; which
were the last Field-Forces that appeared for the King. So, that the Remains
being forced to save themselves in their Fortifications, were, since there was
no Success to be expected from Abroad, easily divested of them also.

BOOK IV.
The King leaves Oxford, and goes to the Scots Army. Hereford is surprised, and
Chester surrendered. Oxford besieged, and taken. The other Royal Garrisons
follow. Massey's Forces disbanded. Contests with the Scots. Their barbarous
Usage of the King. They sell him. He is imprisoned in Holmbey-House. The
History of the Scots Rebellion, and valorous Actions of Montross. Independency
triumphant. The Army mutinies, and seize upon the King at Holmbey. They court
him, but deal treacherously with him. He flies to the Isle of Wight.

FAirfax had sent Ireton with a Body of Horse, to hinder the Excursions of the
Oxonians, and to invest the City with his Troops, whilst he himself followed
with the main Army, in order to a formal Siege. This obliged the King to think
of a Retreat. He had attempted all ways of Peace, and invited those barbarous
Tyrants at Westminster to it, though neglected, by near Twenty Messages. They
refused a Pass for the Duke of Lenox with Propositions, though the King had (in
vain) conjured their Assent; they being then, as they said themselves, upon
others, to be sent to his Majesty. They also flatly refuse the Scots
Commissioners, who pressed for a Treaty, pretending to great interruption in
their Affairs, by the delays and difficulties, the joint Councils of both
Kingdoms produced. And therefore vote, That the King's Answer shall be desired
to their Propositions without Treaty. And being indeed weary of the Scots, they
also voted, That they do intend to carry on the War of Ireland with the Forces
of England; and, that the Scots Forces should be called away.

The Parliament design to gratify their Grandees.
In their Debate about the Propositions to be sent the King, they think it time
to gratify their Grandees; and, in order to it, Vote, That Sir Thomas Fairfax
be made a Baron, with Five Thousand Pound per Annum settled upon him; and, that
his Father be made an Earl; Cromwell a Baron, and two Thousand five Hundred
Pound per Annum; Northumberland, Essex, Warwick, Pembroke, Dukes; Salisbury,
Manchester, Marquesses; Roberts, Say, Willouby of Taram, Wharton, Howard,
Earls; Sir William Waller a Baron; Hazelrigg, Stapelton, Barons, each Two
Thousand Pound per An. Vane, a Baron; Brown, fifteen hundred Pounds per An. and
Skippon a Thousand Pound. Thus they were dividing the spoil, whilst the good
King offered, provided they would suffer his Friends to live securely at home,
whatever the most nefarious of Criminals could desire, to wit, An Act of
Oblivion for what is past; the Fruition of all they had acquired; Accession to
Offices and Dignities. And, because they might have no color or pretense for
Jealousies and Suspicions, he would immediately disband all his Forces; and,
would not only return to his Parliament, but also ratify whatever they should
judge necessary, for restoring his afflicted Kingdoms to their former
Tranquillity. But, all this was absolutely refused by these modest Men, who at
length laying the Veil of Hypocrisy aside, did not blush to declare to the
whole World, That there was nothing less in their thoughts, than what they had
so often solemnly declared, promised, protested, vowed, and sworn to perform;
which was, To rescue the King out of the hands of Evil Counselors, and to
bring him back to his Parliament. Nay, now they take care by Proclamation, that
he shall not come; and command their Militia-Officers, in case he attempted it,
to secure his Person, and detain all his followers Prisoners. The King
perceiving himself in such unusual streights, this potent Monarch of three
Kingdoms, and sometimes Supreme Arbitrator of Peace, and War, knows not now
where to lay his Head.

Heu! faciles dare summa Deos, eademque tueri Difficiles! He therefore,
reassumes his Thoughts of a Retreat. Being rejected by the Parliament, The King
leaves Oxford, and goes to the Scots Army.
he had a design to throw himself into the Arms of the Army; but, being refused
by these also, he puts himself into disguise. And, accompanied only with two
Attendants, Ashburnham of his Bedchamber, and Hudson a Divine, he left Oxford,
and conveyed himself to the Scots Army, then at the Siege of Newark Monsieur
Montrueil, the French Resident, then in the Scotch Camp, had stipulated for
security, and equitable conditions for his Majesty, who upon that confidence,
and the assurance he had entertained of his Countrymen's Loyalty (as he wrote
to the Marquess of Ormond Lord Lieutenant of Ireland) he cast himself into
their Protection. May 1646.
Some thought, he was gone into Wales, still true, however oppressed, to his
Interests: Others, that he was withdrawn into Scotland, to the renowned
Montross; and not a few were of opinion, that he was concealed in the City:
Which, the Parliament so far believed, that they declared by beat of Drum, and
sound of Trumpet, That what Person soever shall harbor or conceal, or know of
the harboring or concealing of the King's Person, and shall not reveal it
immediately to the Speakers of both Houses, shall be proceeded against as a
Traitor to the Commonwealth, forfeit his Estate, and die without Mercy. A while
after, contrary to the opinion of all Men, he was rumoured to be in the
Scottish Camp; which was also signified to the Grandees at Westminster, by the
Commander in chief of the Scots Army. The pretended Parliament, as soon as they
were informed of the King's Departure, and were assured of his being in the
Scotch Army, desire and require of the Scotch Commissioners at London, and of
the Scots General in the Camp, That they would deliver his Majesty into their
Hands, to be secured in Windsor-Castle, until the Parliament should otherwise
dispose of him. Moreover, they barbarously Vote, That the King, by going to the
Scots Army, He goes with the Army to Newcastle.
did prolong the War against the Parliament, and foment the Discord betwixt the
Two Nations. But, the Scots not ignorant of the value of their purchase, gave
no Ear to their Dear Brethren; but, breaking up with their Army (a Rumor being
spread that Cromwell was advancing toward them with all his Horse) marched in
haste to Newcastle with the King, affirming, That as his Majesty came to their
Camp of his own Accord, so he followed it with the same Liberty, the Army
neither persuading, nor opposing him. And, this was a place garrisoned with
their own Soldiery, and near the Confines of their own Country.

The Royallists being, as is related, shut up in their Fortresses, and
languishing with the despair of Relief; some of them taking occasion from their
adverse Fortune, surrendered upon demand: Whilst others, defended themselves
till they were forced, as Col. Stanhop at Shelford; or famished out, as the
Heroic Countess of Darby at Lathome-House, which she had kept two Years,
against all the Insults of the Rebels. But, the Fate of Hereford was more
dismal; which, having baffled and beat the Scots from her Walls, was not able
to prevent the surprizal of a less considerable Enemy. The Colonels Morgan and
Birch, with Two Thousand Men drawn out of Gloucester and other neighboring
Garrisons, by the favor of an obscure Night, and a quick March, accomplished
the Enterprise. For, having sent Six choice Soldiers, with a Lieutenant, who
pretended to be a Constable, all in Country-Habits, Hereford miserably
surprised.
early to the Gate; the said fictitious Constable, calling to the Guard, told
them, That he was come thither with his Men, according to the Governor's
Command, to break the Ice in the Moat, expecting only till the Bridge was let
down. Being admitted with their Rural Instruments, which they carried for show,
they immediately making use of the Arms they had under their Clothes, in an
instant seized the Guard, killing some few, and secured the Gate, letting in a
Hundred and Fifty more, who were in Ambuscade near Hand. The rest of the Party
not far off following, and intent upon the Occasion, seized upon the Port and
City, and in it upon the Governor, and a great many Persons of Quality, with
immense Riches and Plunder.

The Misfortune of Hereford, Feb. 3. 1645/6.
was followed by the Surrender of Chester, a Place of no less Consequence. This
City had been long besieged; for, the Rebels, under the Conduct of Jones and
Louthian, had surprised the Suburbs the preceding September. And, Sir William
Brereton, joining them with greater Forces, Chester, makes a brave defense.
attempted the Town by Assault, having made a considerable Breach. But, they
were beat off with much Loss, Venables being slain in the Action. This Success
added so much Courage, and Confidence to the besieged, that they did not
despair of being able to defend themselves, and disturb the Enemy. In the mean
time, the King sollicitous for the Relief of this important Place, had
attempted it, but unsuccessfully; for, being defeated, as is already mentioned,
at Rowton-Heath, his Majesty not willing to be shut up in a besieged Place,
retreated into Wales. The Lord Byron, a Person of great Honor, and Loyalty,
was Governor of this considerable Garrison, who no whit dismayed after the
late Misfortune, however pressed by the Enemy, omitted no Duty of a brave
Commander. Points, after the King's Departure, fierce with his Victory, did not
doubt to carry the City by Force, not being able to gain it by Threats. For,
beating the Walls with their Cannon from Three several Batteries at once, they
made Three considerable Breaches; which however repaired by the laudable
Bravery of our Women, were valiantly assaulted by them, especially that next
the River, though repelled with great Loss. Sir William Byron, the Governor's
Brother, had got Four Hundred Horse with Provisions, which he attempted to
relieve the Place with; but, he was beaten, and himself made a Prisoner near
Holt. Neither was Sir William Vaughan more fortunate, although followed by Two
Thousand Horse; for, he was forced by Colonel Mitton, with additional Troops
from the Siege, near Denbigh, after several sharp Encounters, to a Retreat. The
Enemy returning victorious, lay a more close Siege to the City; for, they now
also encamped on the Welsh Side, which had hitherto been kept open. So, that
the Place being shut up all round, the besieged in time spent all their fresh
Provisions; and, not long after, their Patience. Whereupon they, especially the
Citizens, began to be very uneasy, although their Mutterings, did not surpass
the Modesty of Words; for, as they had several times bravely sustained the
Insults of the Enemy, so they did not suffer themselves to be overcome with
ordinary Necessities. The Garrison consisted most of Welsh, the Officers being
of the same Nation, resolved to suffer all Extremities for their King, rather
than the imperious Government of the Rebels. Nor were the Citizens less signal
in their Valor and Constancy, until their whole stock of Provisions was spent.
Horseflesh and other Viands less consistent with Nature, were now accounted
Delicacies; but, those likewise failing, they were necessitated to desire a
Remedy for so many Evils, in a Surrender; which seemed yet worse than the
Disease it self, at least to the brave. They therefore besiege the Governor,
and humbly entreat him, since there was no visible Hopes of Relief, that he
would be pleased to treat with the Enemy for their Preservation. Brereton
demanded the same, at the same Time by a Trumpeter: demonstrating, the King's
Forces to have been beaten out of the Field every where, and their Remains shut
up in Garrisons; so that, there was no kind of Relief to be expected. He would
notwithstanding, and did, offer very reasonable Conditions, provided they did
not refuse them, whilst they might have them; which he the more easily
consented to, because he much desired to preserve that Place, he was himself,
upon its Rendition, to Command. And, Byron did not seem altogether averse to
the Supplications of the Citizens, or the Invitation of this Civil Enemy; yet,
he delayed the matter, upon a Report, that Colonel Vaughan having joined the
Lord Ashley and some Recruits of Welsh and Irish, designed again the Succor of
the Place. But, being uncertain of these Preparations, and shut up from all
Commerce from Abroad; he sent the Author of this Relation, to see what was to
be expected from that Conjunction of the Royallists; resolving to attend his
Return. He, having broke through the Enemies Quarters, with Five and Twenty
Horse, found all these Reports to be false; which, having signified by Fires
from the highest Tower of Flint-Castle, as was agreed upon, designed himself to
return by Water into the City again; which he might possibly have done, by
Favor of the quick Tides, if he had not been hindered by great Sholes of Ice,
which filled the River; so that with much ado he recovered Flint again. He also
notified this Misfortune by Fires to the besieged; which being perceived,
considering every Delay now superfluous, is surrendered upon honorable
Conditions.
the City was delivered up upon honorable Terms. The Garrison was led by the
Governor into Wales, where it was dismissed; but, he shut himself in
Caernarven, where being again besieged, he was again forced to surrender upon
Conditions, and to retire from that War, wherein he had behaved himself with no
less Valor, than Misfortune.

Fairfax being before this time advanced with his Army within sight of Oxford,
lay down before it; and, having observed the Situation of it, made a large
Quarter capable of receiving Three Thousand Men upon Hadington-Hill. Which he
also fortified very well; and, drawing a Line from thence round, he
strengthened it with other Forts, appointing the Colonels, Raynsborough,
Lambert, and Herbert to command them. Whereby the City was entirely shut up.
Oxford besieged by Fairfax.
The Enemy had seriously considered in a Council of War, how they might best
render themselves Masters of this important Place, and at length agreed
unanimously, that it being well fortified, it was safer to famish, than force
it. They judged, that the only way to carry it, was to leave it to its own
Necessities, and Dissentions. They knew, the City was fortified after the
modern Fashion, the Bastion and Flanks mutually defending each other. They saw,
that the Rivers Isis and Charwell, did with their Inundations cover Three Parts
of the Town; and that the Fourth, which pointed to the North, was approachable
but on that side, though otherwise fortified with Two Lines, and strongly
defended by the Colleges; appearing like so many Castles. To all this, the
Garrison consisted of Five Thousand Veterane Soldiers, and the Flower of the
King's Infantry; provided with all Kind of Stores for many Months, and
commanded by Sir Thomas Glenham; Famous for his defending of York, and Carlisle;
the latter of which he had kept above Ten Months against the main Forces of
Scotland, suffering well-nigh a Saguntine Famine in its Defense. Nor did then
quit it, but upon equitable Terms, for the Security of his Garrison. At York
also, he had extorted good Conditions from their victorious Armies. These
things being considered, Fairfax invites him also to treat, with very large
Offers, which he seemed to hearken to; requiring First, permission to acquaint
his Majesty, and to know his Pleasure therein. This being denied, Commissioners
were some time after appointed to treat on both sides. But, they could not
agree; for, the Terms the Royallists demanded, were so high, that Fairfax
transferred them to the Parliament, by which they were rejected as incongruous;
and new Orders sent to the General, to reduce the City with all his Power and
Skill. But, the Treaty was after some time reassumed, though no Cessation
intervened, neither did any Military Action happen, worthy the recital; and,
after some Disputes, agreed upon, being comprehended in Six and Twenty
Articles. Faringdon was likewise surrendered upon the same Terms; for, Sir
George Lisle, the Governor of that Fortress, being then in Oxford, Oxford
surrendered, Jan. 24th 1645/6.
was comprehended in the Oxford-Pacification. The chief of the Articles were;
That Oxford, with the Castle, Forts, Works, Arms, Cannon, and all Provisions of
War, should be delivered to Sir Thomas Fairfax 's Possession, on the 24th of
January.

The Duke of York, received, and treated, according to his Dignity; should be
permitted to go to London with his Family, and continue there with the King's
Children, until his Majesty should otherwise dispose of him. The Princes Rupert
and Maurice, with their Train, not exceeding Seventy Persons, should in Six
Months depart out of the Kingdom. The Seals and Sword of State, should be
locked up in a Chest, and secured in the public Library. The Governor,
Colonels, and all other Officers and Soldiers, should be permitted to march
with their Horses, Arms, Standards, flying Colors, Muskets and Pistols
laden, Match burning at both ends, etc. (the usual Solace of the vanquished)
Fifteen Miles which way they pleased, where the private Soldiers should lay
down their Arms, and then, at their choice, either return to their Homes, or
dispose of themselves into Foreign Service. The Nobles, Peers, Gentlemen, and
all others of what Quality soever, should not be obliged to compound for above
Two Years Revenues of their Estates. The Chancellor; Masters, Professors,
Students, etc. of the University, should enjoy their Possessions, Customs,
Institutions, Privileges, and Government, without Disturbance. The Citizens
should also enjoy all their Immunities and Freedoms, nor be burdened with a
Garrison, or enquartering of Soldiers, but upon great Necessity. The Kings
Houshold-Servants, shall, together with all his Household Stuff, be conveyed to
Hampton Court, where they shall continue until his Majesty shall otherwise
dispose of them. To conclude, Immunity for what was passed, was granted to
every Individual; and that no Man should be questioned, for any thing done
during the War, or the present Siege. And thus, this Seat of Loyalty and
Learning, where the King had kept his Court during the Troubles, fell with the
Fate of the Kingdom; whose Example and Fortune, the remaining Royal Garrisons
did readily follow: the which, to gratify the Reader, we will also mention,
though not without Reluctance.

Wood stock. Banbury*
Raynsborough had stormed Woodstock not without great Loss, which Place
notwithstanding was afterward surrendered to him. Banbury stooped to the same
Fate, however bravely defended for a long time by Sir William Compton, and
signalized with several Slaughters of the Rebels. Radcot was delivered by.....
Palmer; and, Bostol-House by another Compton. But, nothing was more sensible,
than the Loss of Newark, which had been defended by the Lord Bellasis, with
Conduct and Valor, against the united Forces of the English and Scots, until
delivered up to Points upon the King's Order, now in the Scots Army. Worcester
and Wallingford, Ragland, etc.
Worcester held out till the Surrender of Oxford, and then veiled. Wallingford
submitted with the same Facility, but better Conditions. Ragland, was kept,
during the whole War, by the Marquess of Worcester (a Man of great Parts and
one who had greatly obliged the King) who, however Bedridden, had an active Soul,
which made him maintain the Place, till there was not a Garrison left to go to,
upon the Rendition. Nor did he yet part with it, till Fairfax himself came to
receive it. The Lord Charles Somerset, his second Son, Commanded under him, who
had also signalized himself in many Rencounters during the War, but all
failing, was forced to surrender, the Marquess Sacrificing his own Liberty to
the freedom of his Soldiers. Pendennis, involved in the same fate, was forced
to submit to the same necessity, being delivered up by Colonel Arundel. There
remained yet some few Castles in North Wales, which had the honor to hold out
longest in this Scene of Blood. Conway was taken by force by Colonel Mitton,
and the Archbishop of York, who sacrificed the honor of his Robe and Loyalty
to his Ambition and Revenge. Ludlow was delivered, as also Litchfield, to
Brereton upon Chester-Articles. The Isles of Scylly ran the same fortune. The
Dutch had much desired the Possession of them, for the convenience of
Navigation, and offered great Sums for them. But Sir Jo. Greenville, the worthy
Governor, now Earl of Bath, prudently chose, rather to deliver them to the
English Rebels; being not ignorant, that if annexed to England, they might one
day return to their obedience, and duty to their Natural Prince again. Some
time after, Holt-Castle, and those of Harlegh and Denbigh (in which last place,
as also Denbigh and Harlegh, the two last Scenes of this War, were delivered up.
the Author of these Commentaries, besides many other Gentlemen, was besieged)
after long and tedious expectation of some good from the North (though contrary
to the Proverb) closed the last Act of our unnatural Tragedy. Omne malum ab
Aquilone.


The Royallists being wholly subdued, it pleased the Parliament, the
Independent Faction in the House being paramount, to order Fairfax their
General, Massey's Forces disbanded.
to go and disband Massey's Forces, being Five and Twenty Hundred, all Horse.
The pretext was very plausible, the easing of the public charge of the
Treasury; and, 'twas therefore perhaps, that they allowed them but six weeks
Pay, whereas they had many Months due to them. This considerable Service being
done, Fairfax came to London, where he was received by the Militia of the City
in Arms; by the Speakers of both Houses, with Congratulatory Speeches and
Thanks; and, by the Court of Aldermen and Common Council, with great
Assentation and Flattery.

The King prosecuted by the Scots at Newcastle.
The King at Newcastle, being no less prosecuted and afflicted by the Scots, to
whom he had betaken himself for Sanctuary, than by the Parliament, which he had
escaped, was yet constant to himself. And, to use his own words in his Divine
Soliloquies, Not to be compelled by any hardship, to renounce his Honor, or
depart from his Judgment: Not that he would peremptorily deny, what was fit to
be granted; but lest he might yield to that, which both Reason and Religion
commanded to deny. As soon as he was come to Newcastle, Leven commanded by
Proclamation, That no Papists or Delinquents (that is, any who was Loyal or
Faithful to the King) should be permitted to approach him. And it was moreover
cautioned, That no Soldiers, or Officers, should contract any commerce of
Friendship, or Civility, with Malignants (that is, such as were addicted to his
Majesty.)

But, the Independent Grandees did fret and fume, that the King was detained by
the Seots, their Mercenaries, and Hirelings, as they termed them, as being
nourished by their Pay. Affirming further, Contests betwixt the Independents
and Scots,
That the Kingdom of Scotland had no right, or joint Interest in disposing of
the Person of the King, in the Kingdom of England. Hence they come to Threats,
and Vote, That they have no more Occasion for their Assistance, the Kingdom
being no longer able to bear them. Yea, they took care to publish to the World
by Declaration, their Rapines, Extortions, Cruelties and Errors. The Scots, on
the other side, pretending the Laws of Nature, of Nations, and Hospitality,
affirm, That it is in no Kind permitted them, to deliver up the King, and
especially their own King, to any whosoever against his Will, His Majesty
having refuged himself under their Power; of his own Accord. But, lest they
might altogether displease their Dear Brethren, they force the King to send
Orders to his Governors, to deliver such Places as they had yet in their
Power, to the Parliament; to the Marquess of Ormond, not to conclude any Treaty
with the Irish; and, to Montross, to disband all his Forces in Scotland. These
things being extorted from the King, they also would wrest his Assent, to the
Parliament's Imperious Propositions, which they sent to Newcastle to him, viz.
That he should ratify the Solemn League and Covenant; abolish Episcopacy;
deliver the Power of the Sword into the Hands of his Enemies; and exclude the
Peers made by him, with several others of his chief Friends, from Pardon, etc.
They had themselves, not as yet corrupted with English Gold, condemned many of
these Propositions, which they advance now with Menaces; lest both Kingdoms
should agree, he refusing, to settle Peace and Religion without him, to his,
and his Posterity's irrecoverable Loss. Nor did they thus terrify this
magnanimous Prince, who chose rather to expose his Crowns and Scepters, than
his Honor and his Religion; and to see himself and Posterity, divested of the
Imperial Dignity of Kings, Montross disbands by the King's Command.
by the violence of others, than his own Act, by a tame Subscription to the
unjust demands of his Enemies.

The Scots had deputed Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Crawford, and others, to the
King (although their Parliament had Voted, That he should not come into Scotland,
declaring it to be contrary to their agreement with the English, and the
Treaty,) to persuade, exhort, warn, and urge his Assent to the Covenant: And
that he would be pleased also, to approve and enact the English Propositions.
These were followed by Delegates from their Synod, denouncing, in case he were
refractary, The Scots barbarous usage of the King.
the Wrath of God against him, and the hate of his Subjects. Some of these were
appointed to remove his Scruples, and clear his doubts, whereof one being
admitted to Preach before him, after several bitter Invectives in the Pulpit,
his Sermon being finished, he commanded the fifty second Psalm to be sung, Why
do thou Tyrant boast? etc. But the King perceiving his malicious Reflection,
unexpectedly stood up, and ordered the fifty sixth Psalm, Have Mercy Lord on me
I pray, to be sung. Which the People, neglecting the Parson, unanimously did.
Nor were the Fortunes of David and Charles much unlike (the one being detained
by the Philistines at Gath, and the other by the Scots at Newcastle) when this
Psalm was composed by the Royal Prophet, and sung by the Royal Sufferer.

But now the main Controversy amongst the Rebels, was, about the disposal of
the King's Person: Until the Scots moved by Contumelies, and the Sarcasms of
the Cromwellists, and, perceiving the Parliament, although they had conquered
England, did not disband, were more inclined to agree with them; and perhaps
softened by the Parliament's offers, after some previous formal disceptations,
to heighten the Price of their Treachery, they at length resolved to deliver
him up: And, he was delivered to the English Rebels, by his native unnatural
Subjects of Scotland, to whom he had fled for Security, with all the
circumstances of Irreligion, of Impiety, of Perjury, of Treason, and of
detestable Avarice; being sold for Two hundred Thousand Pounds. They sell him.
Which they having received, and evacuated their Garrisons in England, they
returned with this Reward of their Iniquity, into their own Country. But, with
a Curse also; for, it is observable, That after that time, they did never
thrive, nor nothing they undertook prosper.

There had indeed been some attempts made for the King's escape. But, they were
all prevented by the vigilance of his cruel Keepers; Leven assuring the
Parliament, That he would, according to their desire, take care that his
Majesty depart not away. And he was as good as his word; for, his Majesty
having changed his Keepers, being, as he had truly said, Bought and Sold, and
now in the hands of his bloodiest Enemies, He is imprisoned in Holmby, and
cruelly used.
was carried to Holmby-House, not far from Naesby, where he had so
unfortunately fought, that he might be perpetually tormented with the sight of
that odious Companion. Nor was he less perplexed within doors, not being
permitted to enjoy a freedom in his Solitude. His Friends, and his Chaplains
(which a common Civility would not refuse to the most Criminal) being inhumanly
kept from him, whilst some of their own unknowing Factious Levites, are
obtruded upon him. These mistaken Creatures, had neither Modesty to cohabit,
nor Learning to dispute with this Royal Divine; who being equally capable of
the Mitre, as well as Scepter; of the Sacerdotal, as well as Kingly Office, was
truly inimitable in both. How good a Divine he was, appears by his
Controversies with the Marquess of Worcester, a Person no less Eminent for
Learning, than Nobility, of the Roman Catholic Religion; and with the
Parliament Ministers; especially by his Writings to Henderson, a Scots
Presbyterian, and Champion of the Party, who being vanquished by the strength
of his Arguments, testified his Conviction by his Repentance; and died for
Grief, as is credibly reported (that he had offended so good and so pious a
Prince, not as the Enemy affirm, because he could not persuade his Majesty to
sign the Propositions,) a reconciled Son to the Church of England.

Whilst the King is afflicted in his noisome Prison at Holmby, it will not be
from the purpose to relate what things were performed by the Royallists in
Scotland, and briefly to insert them in our Commentaries. Which will be the
less difficult, seeing they are for the most part extracted out of the History
of Montross, writ in fine Latin by the most Reverend Bishop of Edenburg, Doctor
Wishart.

The Scots, the cause of all our Evils, deserve to be treated with a more
severe style, The History of Montross.
but that we find also even in this Nation, several Persons of Honor and known
Virtue, who signalized themselves by the Eminency of their Loyalty, and
Endeavors for the King's Preservation. Amongst these, Montross deservedly
challenged the first rank, who performed such stupendous feats of Arms, with
such slender means, having neither Soldiers nor Pay to begin with, that we may
equally wonder that he undertook, as that he effected them. He had formerly
been of the Covenanters Party in Scotland, and was the first that led his Men
over Tweed, in the first Scotch Invasion. But, when he perceived that his
Countrymen designed not only the King's Ruin, but that of Monarchy too, he
resolved to quit them. He also wrote to the King, to testify his Obedience.
But, his Letters were stole out of His Majesty's Pockets, by some of his
Bedchamber, and Copies of them conveyed to the Confederates; as also, notice
of the King's Letters to Montross, which were intercepted, stitched up in a
Saddle, as had been notified. This being perceived, he resolved in Person to
wait upon the King at Oxford. Which he did, and discovered to His Majesty, the
Counsels, and Designs of the Confederates; but, in vain, the Faction of the
Hamiltons being too prevalent at Court; which continued, until the Scots did
actually enter England. The King then perceiving himself abused, sent Hamilton
Prisoner to Pendennis-Castle, and, at the same time sent Montross into
Scotland, as chief Governor of the same.

The King indeed, had ordered the Marquess of Newcastle, to furnish him with
some Forces for the Expedition. And, Prince Rupert, after the fatal Battle of
Marston-Moor, had promised him a Body of Horse; but all came to nothing,
insomuch, that he entered Scotland with only two Companions, himself disguised
in the habit and garb of a Groom, and by swift Journeys, came to the Banks of
the River Tai; where he lay close for some days, in the house of Patrick
Grimes, his Kinsman, a Person of great worth and Loyalty. Here he understood,
how all the King's Friends had been suppressed, by the tyranny of the Rebels.
The Marquess of Huntley, had indeed raised a considerable Army; but he quitted
those Arms he had rashly taken up, upon the first noise of the Enemies
Trumpets, saving himself by Flight. Montross troubled with the misfortune of
the Gurdons, began to cast about, how and by what means he might draw this
brave and Loyal People to his Party, that they might again try the fortune of
War under another General. In the mean time, there was a rumor spread amongst
the Shepherds, who watched their Flocks in the Mountains, though very
uncertain, of several Irish, who being wafted over, Some Irish Land in Scotland.
kept themselves in the Northern Highlands. Montross fancied this possible, and
that they were of those Auxiliaries, which the Earl of Antrim had promised a
few Months before. Which he also found to be true, as well by Alexander
Macdonnel's Letters who commanded them, as by others from several of his
Friends in the Mountains. Having received these by accident, he answered them,
as if he had been at Carlisle, encouraging them highly with assurances, that
they should neither want Assistance, nor a General. Ordering them at the same
time to descend with all speed into Athol. Which they did, with Joy, upon the
immediate Receipt of these Commands, sooner than could imaginably be expected.
Montross, who was scarce twenty Miles off with his Cousin Patrick, habited like
a Mountaineer, and on foot, surprizingly met them, which also happened very
opportunely, they being in great danger of being destroyed. For, the Marquess
of Argile followed them close with a great Army, whilst the Low-landers
attended them in the Plains; where, if they descended, they could not escape,
being trod to pieces under their Horses Feet. The Ships which had brought them
over, to take away all hopes of a Retreat, were burnt by Argile. Nor would the
Atholians or others, who favored the King, run any hazard with them, they
being strangers, had no known Authority, nor could produce any Person of
ancient Nobility, (which the High-landers chiefly reverence) to head them. To
this, their number was small, not exceeding eleven Hundred, whereas ten
Thousand were promised. Montross heads them. the Atholians come in to him with
800 Men.
But Montross his Presence, who was received by them as if dropped from Heaven,
seemed to compensate all these defects, and in two days the Atholians, to the
number of eight Hundred, and armed, presented themselves with great Alacrity to
Montross. Being thus accompanied, he the same day marched through the Fields of
Athol toward Ierna, with design to open a passage for his Friends and
Supplies, (if any such should be stirred up with the fame of his undertaking,)
before it should be shut up by the Enemy, surprised perhaps with the novelty of
the thing, before they could rejoin their divided Forces. Having passed the
Tai, the greatest River in Scotland, he was strengthened by the accession of
five hundred Men, as also the Lord Kilpont, and Sir Jo. Drummond with 500 Men.
under the Command of the Lord Kilpont, and Sir John Drummond. They, as well as
others, had been summoned by the Confederates, to oppose the Irish as common
Enemies; but, as soon as they heard that Montross did command, they both,
without any hesitation, (for both, though privately favored the King's Cause,)
joined Forces with him. Heightened with these supplies, he beat the Enemy
consisting of six thousand Foot, and seven hundred horse, commanded by the Lord
of Elchon, and the Earl of Tullibardin, at Tippermoor. Montross had no Horse at
all. He therefore to prevent (by reason of the inequality of their numbers)
being surrounded, extended his Front as much as possible, so that his Files
being but three deep, the first Rank was commanded to kneel, The Battle of
Tippermoor.
the second to stoop, and the third, where the properest Men were, to shoot
standing, and all to fire at once, and then to fall in with the Butt-ends of
their Muskets, and their drawn Swords. All which was valiantly performed; but
they wanting Powder, and not being well Armed, they fought with such Weapons as
chance furnished them with; throwing Stones with such activity and animosity at
the Enemy, that they forced them first to give Ground, then to run away. The
slain were reckoned at two Thousand, and more taken. Perth was surrendered to
Montross the same day; where having rested three more, he was informed, that
Argile was marching toward him with a strong Army. He therefore re-passing the
Tai, encamped at Cupr in Angus, lying then, as well-nigh always, in the open
Field. Passing thence by Taodan, he marched to Esk, where he met with the old
Earls of Arley, with his Sons, and a brave train of Friends and Attendants.
Here he had intelligence, that the Lord Burgley was at Aberdene, of Aberdene.
with design to draw the Northern Parts by Money or Force, to join with him.
Which Montross understanding, having passed the River Dee, he found the Enemy
drawn up in Battle Array near the City. Burgley had two thousand Foot, and five
hundred Horse, which he placed in the Wings; and having chosen his Ground, and
planted his Cannon at the head of his Army, expected the onset. Montross had
but fifteen hundred Foot; for, the Lord of Kilpont's Men were gone home, to
convoy the Body of their Lord, who had been murdered by one of his own
Servants; and, very many of the Atholians were also returned laden with
Plunder after the Victory of Perth, and not yet come up to the Army. He also
placed his Horse, which were but four and forty, in the Wings: Adding some of
his Foot to them, who for their Agility and Strength, were equal to Horses;
enjoining them to have a care, lest the Enemies Troops surrounded them. Which
they also valiantly performed; for the Charge being given, the Enemy was
defeated, slaughtered, routed. The Horse escaped for the most part; but, the
Foot having no place to retreat to, but the City, fled thither. But being
closely pursued by the Conquerours, entering Pellmell with them, the Streets
were strowed with their slain Bodies. Two days being allowed the Soldiers to
refresh in, Montross was informed, that Argile was advancing with far greater
Forces than formerly; being also accompanied, with the Earl of Lothan with
Fifteen Hundred Horse. He therefore left Aberdeen and marched to Kintor, from
whence he determined to lead his Forces to the Mountains and Places of most
difficult access. In order to this, he buried his Cannon in the Earth, and
disburthened himself of his heaviest Baggage. But, the Enemy pressing on all
sides, he marched to Badenoth, that he might be out of the danger of their
Cavalry, those Quarters being scarce passable for Horse. The Enemy having left
pursuing him, he was surprised by a fit of Sickness, which extremely harassed
him for some days; but, being recovered, he marched again into Angus, hoping
either to force Argile, tired with tedious Marches, into Winter Quarters, or to
leave him far behind him. Having traversed Angus, and passed over the Grampian
Mountain, he came to Strath-bogy, to invite the Gordons with his Presence to a
Conjunction of Arms with him. But, in vain, being opposed by the Marquess of
Huntley; who, though he did not hate the King, envied the glories of Montross
too much to contribute to their greatness. He went thence to the Castle of
Favia, which he took; but being sharply attacked there by Argile and Lothan,
had much to do to resist their Power; which he yet did, by his own Virtue, and
the rare Valor of his Men. Many days being thus spent at Favia, Argile got
nothing with so great an Army, but Infamy from his Friends, and Contempt from
his Enemy. Montross baffles Argile, who flies to Perth.
Sometime after, Montross understanding Argile to be at Deucalidon without his
Horse, resolved to attempt him; which coming to his knowledge, Montross being
as yet sixteen Miles off, he commanded his Men to shift for themselves, whilst
he secured himself by his flight to Perth.

Montross being of opinion, that an Enemy could be no where so advantageously
assaulted as in his own Country, flew with incredible speed and industry into
Argile; where having forced the Marquess to save himself again in a Boat, he
destroyed and filled the Province with Blood, Slaughter, Rapine, and Fire. Nor
were the other Neighboring Countries, as Lorn, and the rest that acknowledged
the Dominion of Argile, better used. The Royallists having quitted these
Quarters, they at length met with Argile at Innerlock; but, charged him with
such Fury, that they broke their Ranks; and, pursuing with a great shout,
defeated them with a great slaughter, killing above Fifteen Hundred upon the
place. Whilst Argile himself, placed in a Boat, and put off from Shore, saw the
ruin of his Men at a distance, and without any share of the danger. After
this, the Citizens of Elgin, surrendered their Town of their own accord; at
which time, the Lord Gourdon, The noble Lord Gourdon joins with Montross; and
eldest Son to the Marquess of Huntley, a Person above all Commendation; for
the eminency of his Virtues, left his Uncle Argile, and came over to the King's
Party, with a very choice Squadron of Friends and Dependants. Montross
heightened with this accession, forced Hurrey, Commander of the Rebels Horse,
refusing to fight upon his Invitation, to a Retreat; and offered Bailey (sent
for purposely out of England, to whom Hurrey was also joined by a Trumpeter)
the liberty of Battle. But he replied, That when he was disposed to Engage, it
should be by his own, not another choice. The Royallists marched forward to
Deucalidon, and designing to pass the Tai, were upon the point of being ruined,
by a very mischievous accident, which they could not forsee. Lodowick Gordon,
who had born Arms at Aberdeen on the Rebels side, had by the mediation of his
Noble Brother, his Brother Lodowick deserts the army, which greatly distresses
Montross.
been reconciled to the King's Party. But now, whether upon real, or pretended
Letters from his Father, having privately seduced most of the Gordons to a
defection, carried them away, exposing thereby his Brother and Montross to very
imminent danger. And truly, it may be a question, whether of these excellent
Persons most hated this Perfidy. Montross highly troubled with this defection,
thought how to secure the rest, and immediately sent the weakest of them away
with all his Baggage, with Command to meet him at Brechin. This done, he with
an Hundred and Fifty Horse, which was all he had, and Six Hundred nimble
Footmen, marched with incredible Speed to Taodun, which he assaulted, took, and
plundered. He himself stood upon a Hill which overlooked the Town, when sudden
news was brought him, that Bailey and Hurrey were with Three Thousand Foot,
Montross's noble retreat from Taodun.
and Eight Hundred Horse within a Mile of the Place. By that time he had got
his Men out of the City, which was not done without extreme difficulty, being
scarce to be withdrawn from their Plundering, the Enemy was come up within
Musket Shot of him. His Retreat was admirable, wherein he showed himself no
less a worthy Commander, than he had done in his former Victories. Some advised
the General to reserve himself for better times, and secure himself by flight
with his Horse; and, others under these desperate Circumstances, were of
opinion, they should not perish unrevenged. But he complying with neither,
instantly sent Four Hundred Foot before, and commanding the other Two Hundred
to follow, he himself closed the Rear with his Horse. The Enemy discovering
their number, and seeing them so few, divided their Forces, and followed after
them very eagerly, not only coming up with them in their Rear and Flank, but
endeavoring to obstruct their passage to the Mountains. The Rebels forlorn of
Horse, pressed hard upon Montross's Rear, but his Foot facing about, fired upon
them, and having slain the three foremost, rendered the rest more cautious, and
the pursuit less hot. The darkness of the Night, put an end to these
Skirmishes. By this they were come near Aberbroth, where Montross, considering
that the Enemy might have intercepted the direct way to the Hills with his
numerous Horse, commanded his Men to turn to the South-westward, and march with
all imaginable speed; by which artifice and incredible toil, he deluded his
Pursuers, slipping by them in the night; and wheeling suddenly Northwards, he
passed the Esk not far from the Castle of Careston. And having after some light
Skirmishes, and a continued March of threescore Miles, without Sleep, without
Meat, or any other refreshment, gained the foot of the Mountains, the Enemy at
length left them, retiring from their fruitless pursuit.

Being thus beyond their hopes come into a place of security, Montross sent the
Lord Gourdon, as well to recall those Troops his Brother had debauched, as also
to augment them by new Levies; which he also performed with great industry,
joining the General in Mar, with a Thousand Foot, and Two Hundred Horse. Being
thus enforced, the Royallists defeated Hurrey with Three Thousand Foot, and
Five Hundred Horse at Alderna, The Fight at Alderna and Alford, where the Lord
Gourdon was slain.
he himself hardly escaping with the Horse. Nor was Bailey, the most knowing of
the Enemies Captains, more fortunate at Alford; where having left his Foot, he
also fled with his Horse, which the most untimely fall of the noble Lord
Gourdon contributed to; a loss irreparable to the King and his Party, and which
cast such a damp upon the Victory, that the Soldiers overcome with Sorrow, wore
the countenance of a baffled not conquering Army. But Montross, after this,
strengthened with a numerous recruit of High-landers, and by the accession of
the Earl of Aboyne (who succeeded his Brother Gourdon) and Arley, who were come
up to him with Three Hundred Horse, resolved to penetrate into the inmost parts
of the Kingdom, as well to disturb the Enemies Levies in Fife, as to dissipate
the Convention of the States at Perth.

Being come into Fife, the richest and most popular Province of the Kingdom, he
resolved to pass the Forth. Which he also did, four Miles above Sterling; and
marching forward, encamped at Kilsythe. The Rebels, fierce with their
multitudes, thought that Montross's late Marches, and his hasty passing of the
Forth, were the effects of his Fear, not Counsel. So that they resolve to
attack him in that place he had chosen; their chief care being, to cut off all
Retreats, especially to the Mountains. Montross's Army, consisted of Four
Thousand Five Hundred Foot, and Five Hundred Horse; the Rebels, of Six Thousand
Foot and Eight Hundred Horse. But, their fortune the same; for, the Royallists
animated by the rare Valor of the old Earl of Arley, who being sixty years of
age, did with his single Troop defeat Three of the Enemy's, and dis-engaged a
Battalion of Montross's Foot, The Battle of Kilsythe.
too rashly advanced; which gave such universal Courage to the whole Army, that
raising a great Shout, they all ran upon the Enemy, beat down such as resisted,
and ruined all, scarce One Hundred of the Foot escaping. The Arms, Baggage, and
Spoils of the Field, were the present reward of the Victors, who lost only six
Men, whereas, near Six Thousand of the Enemy fell that day.

Upon this, the Confederate Lords fled out of the Kingdom, and such who
favored the King, did no more scruple to discover themselves. This Victory
having produced a new face of things over the whole Kingdom, reconciled the
Cities and Provinces thereof to their duty to the King. Which he had also
maintained, if the Horse which His Majesty had sent with the Lord Digby and Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, had, as he hoped, come up to him. But, these being
dispersed, as is said, in England, he found other Forces than those he expected
thence: For, the Confederates upon the fame of his Achievements, had sent
David Lesley with Six Thousand Horse; who, by their intelligence with the Earls
of Trequair and Rosburg, whom the King had unhappily trusted, surprised and
defeated him at Selkirk, The Royallists surprised at Selkirk. Montross leaves
Scotland.
Yet did not so far oppress him, but that he afterward became formidable
again. But the King being in the Scots Army, he was by his Majesty's Command
forced to dismiss his Soldiers, leaving his Country to the disposal of the
Confederates.

It is now high time to return to Holmbey, and take a view of His Majesty's
Diversions in that wretched Solitude. Amongst other things, seeing he heard
nothing from the Parliament, he composed an Answer to the Propositions formerly
sent to him. Wherein, besides many unexpected Concessions, he promised, To
comply with the rest, provided he were suffered to come to London. But having
no Secretary, or Clerk to transcribe what he had writ, he desired one from the
Commissioners attending him; otherwise, he would himself scrible it over, as
well as he could. This was rejected as soon as sent, although he had assented
to most, and desired a Personal Treaty for the rest; they being deaf to his
demands; and whilst he was thus earnest for Peace, Vote him averse to it;
affirming moreover, how falsely! The King's miserable restraint at Holmbey.
That he had never offered them any thing worthy their Acceptance, or accepted
of any thing they had presented to him. In this extremity, he turns to God, and
withdrawing himself, writ those Divine Soliloquies which compose his Book,
spending that leisure time with Heaven, which was not permitted him to employ
with any he delighted in here below. This Book, as it surpasses all other
except the Bible, in Piety, Prudence and Eloquence of Style, so it contains a
true and genuine discovery of the state of affairs; and consequently, fit to be
read of all good Men, and, such who would be satisfied in the reality of our
Transactions. In the mean time, the Pretended Parliament force away the
miserable from the unfortunate. For, seeing the King's unhappiness and
restraint, had not so far divested Men of that Veneration they owed him, but
that many sick of that Disease called the King's Evil, came to him to be healed;
the Novellists, more out of envy than grounded in reason, endeavored, though to
no purpose, by Declarations, to divert the People from this pretended
Superstition, as they called it. Although all the Kings of England, have ever
since the time of Edward the Confessor, who received this Prerogative from
Heaven, made use of it with success.

The Rebels being now Masters of the King and Kingdom, having supplanted the
true Heir, were upon dividing the Inheritance. Nay, had gratified several of
their Grandees with splendid Donatives, when dissenting amongst themselves,
they by their own Discords, opened a passage to their deserved ruin. The
difference and emulation which did arise betwixt the very Conquerors, The
Presbyterians and Independents jarr.
who though they had ended the War, were yet far from Peace, troubled all; those
Twins of Presbytery and Independency, which the same Womb lately enclosed,
striving for Predominancy, which was, as also the Blessing, extorted by the
Younger Brother.

The Presbyterians, to comply with their Scots Brethren, had abolished the
Liturgy, and to keep Episcopacy from reviving, had confiscated all its
Revenues. But, the Severity of this rigid Discipline, was not equally pleasing
to all, especially to those who pretended New Light. These blaming all
Tyranical Impositions in Holy Things, hold forth a Christian Liberty, which
permits every one Independent from another to serve God after his own manner.

This Doctrine was very pleasing to the Common People, especially the
Soldiery, seeing it indulged them with Licentiousness; which, not only the
Vulgar, but their Officers did likewise embrace. So that the Fold of Presbytery
being thrown down, the strayed Sheep were gathered under other Shepherds,
forming thereby the several Sects of Quakers, Anabaptists, Millenaries, and the
rest. And, these were they, who under pretense of the Self-denying Ordinance,
removed Essex and his Chief Officers from the Command of the Army, imposing
Fairfax, who though a Presbyterian, was flexile, in his Room. To this Man,
being of a melancholy and affected Godliness, Cromwell, by a particular
Dispensation, was adjoined; who, by a feigned Sanctimony, should lead him at
Pleasure. The Colonels and Captains, were likewise all Schismatics, or such
who were not averse to them. These also caused Massey and Cook to be
disbanded; as also Poyntz's Forces, for Mutinies which they themselves, by
detaining their Pay, had occasioned. These and such like Feats, being not
perceived, or neglected by the Presbyterians, who were far more numerous in the
House, had passed: But the Faction increasing and growing potent, by the
Accession of other Sectaries, they at length resolved to observe them more
narrowly. The Enemy now most formidable was the Army, fierce and high with
their Victories. These they fear, and therefore desire to dissolve them; which
they not daring to attempt at once, they bethink themselves how to diminish
their Power and Pride. And a very plausible Occasion presented it self,
supplies being to be sent into Ireland. Eleven Thousand were instantly voted
for that Service; and, another Decree passed, for easing of the Commonwealth,
The Presbyterians endeavor to disband the Army.
that most of the Army should be disbanded; the standing-Forces to consist of
Five Thousand Horse, a Thousand Curiassiers, and Six Thousand Foot, under the
Command of Fairfax; though that last Clause, did not pass without much
disputing, which was wondered at by many. These Votes however violent, were
carried by Cromwell's Skill and Arts, who ceased not to assure them of the
Soldiers Obedience and Submission. Not, that he desired the Army dissolved,
the thing in the World he apprehended most; but, that by that means the
Presbyterians, as Chief Authors of those odious Decrees, might be rendered more
hateful to the Soldiers. Which happened accordingly; for, the News was no
sooner come to the Camp, but they began to mutiny, especially being made
believe, they were to be cashiered without their Arrears. They therefore take a
Resolution not to stir, and to try every Extremity rather than go into Ireland,
so far distant, to be destroyed with Sickness and Hunger; or indeed, to return
to their Trades again. In this heat, they fly yet higher, and choose Agitators,
The Army mutinies.
Two private Soldiers out of every Regiment of Foot, and Two out of every
Troop of Horse, who were authorized by their Comrades, to consider and
determine, what was to be done for the public Utility of them all. By these a
Declaration was emitted, in the Name of the whole Army, that the Soldiery
would neither be disbanded, nor go into Ireland, until they had received all
their Pay due to so many Victories; until the People had their Liberties, and
just Powers restored to them; and until Peace was secured to the Kingdom and
Indemnity to the Soldiers. This Declaration, with a Petition, was presented to
the Lower House by the Colonels Hammond, Rich, and Ireton, which extremely
offended the Presbyterians, whom they will dare to offend yet higher: For, this
impetuous Faction, being sure of the Army, resolve to get the King likewise
into their Power; especially being informed, That the Parliament had, unless
prevented, the same design. This quickened them; for, laying all delay aside,
his Majesty was seized upon at Holmbey, where his Captivity was, Surprizethe
King at Holmbey.
by one Joyce a Cornet, sometimes a Godly Tailor, and now a Tumultuous
Agitator, with a Party of a Thousand Horse, and carried away against his Will
(as he sent the Parliament Word, by the Earl of Dumferling) to the Camp; his
Character rendering him very considerable to the Party he was with, however a
Prisoner. The Surprisal of the King being known at Westminster, the Members
there, hurried betwixt the Passions of Rage and Terror, were ready to despond;
until raised by Cromwell, who seeming to detest the Insolences of the
Soldiers no less than his Colleagues, added, That if they thought fit to let
him go to the Army, he promised with much Asseveration, that he would not only
reduce the Regiments to their Duty, but would oblige the Soldiers to lay down
their Arms at the Door of the Parliament House. The Fathers revived with these
flourishes, greatly extol their Author. And there were amongst them, who
proclaiming the Actions which he had gloriously performed for the Parliament,
judged him worthy a Statue of Gold, if he should compose the seditious
Disturbances of the Army. By this Artifice, he got leave to go (though others
were of another Opinion, and not obscurely advised his Seizure) whilst he
smiles at their Credulity. He immediately taking Horse, flew with no ordinary
Speed to the Camp, where he not only approved what the Soldiers had done, but
cheerfully subscribed their Declarations, Petitions, and Remonstrances. And, to
show of what Consequence he esteemed steemed the King's Arrivalat the Army, he
did not blush to bragg, That he now had the Parliament in his Pocket.

The King was not uncivilly received by Fairfax, but was entertained by
Cromwell with all the Testimonies of Duty and Loyalty; We is seemingly civilly
received in the Camp.
who pathetically expressing his Sorrow for his Misfortunes, did not cease to
profess, That the Army, doubtful of his Safety, had rescued him out of the
Captivity of the Parliament; and that he would never lay down Arms, until his
Majesty was restored to his Scepters, and his Friends to more equal Conditions.
And indeed all, as well Officers as Soldiers, did seem to deplore the Injustice
and Extremity of his Fate; and particularly, that he had been excluded from the
Conversation of his Friends, and as it were buried alive in his own Palace, by
the Severity of his Adversaries. The King not displeased with this Change,
desired to go to his own House at New Market, which after some time was
permitted; Fairfax, and especially Cromwell, in the interim affirming, That his
Majesty could be no where safer, or more eminently honored, than in the Army.
And to improve their Promises, his Chaplains, and the usual Forms of Divine
Service (a thing which he had greatly desired, and the only Artifice to beget a
Confidence in him, of their Reality) were permitted him at pleasure. His
Friends and Servants were likewise admitted to his Presence, and Attendance; so
that the Royallists were dazzl'd with the Luster of these Concessions. Nay
more, he was indulged the Liberty of writing to the Queen; and, her Majesty's
Messages, were in no wise interrupted. His Children had free Access to their
Royal Father, and moreover the sick of the King's Evil, were without Difficulty
suffered as formerly, to be touched by him. But, all this was precarious, being
the Contrivance of those impious Impostors, the Father and Son in-law, Cromwell
and Ireton, not out of any Favor to the King, but that by his Accession, they
being paramount, might more securely triumph over the Presbyterians.

Upon the King's Arrival in the Camp, Fairfax not a little surprised,
acquainted the Parliament with it, professing, That it happened without his, or
his Officers Knowledge. And truly, it is not incredible, but that this servile
General might be ignorant of the Authors of so great an Attempt: it being also
told him by the Council of War, that seeing the thing was done, it was
advisedly and opportunely enough performed; and, that this was the Opinion of
the Army. He therefore had done enough in giving them at Westminster notice of
it. But the more piercing and quick-sighted, found, that it was contrived by
Cromwell and his Son-in-Law, and executed by the Agitators by their
Instigation; no less insolent in their Licentiousness, by confidence of
Impunity, than the other Two Impostors, were famous for their Dissimulation and
Sagacity.

The Pretended Parliament alarmed at the Surprisal of the King, The Parliament
is alarmed with the Surprisal of the King.
and the Rumor of the Armies approach, stopped them at present at St. Albans
with Entreaties and Money. In the mean time, they advise with the City; and,
joining Forces with them, prepare for Defense. But the Citizens Preparetions
were tumultuous, and full of Confusion and Distraction, as is usual in
unexpected Occurrences. And now the Dissentions betwixt these Parties, growing
to a Height, they attacked each other with the same Method and Arts, wherewith
they formerly had tormented the King. Petitions were suborned on both sides,
from the Provinces and City, and nothing more frequent than tumultuous Resorts
at the Parliament-Doors. And, it is observable, that none did so much apprehend,
or more condemn these Seditious Concourses, than those who formerly had
fomented and stirred up the like against the King. The Houses were no less
agitated with Seditions than the City, especially upon publishing a new
Declaration from the Army. The Army's Declaration.
The Sum of it was, That the Parliament should be dissolved upon a set-day,
another being called to succeed it: That they should give an account to the
Kingdom, of the vast Treasures they had received: and, That they should suspend
from sitting in the House, Eleven Members they named, viz. Hollis, Stapleton,
Lewis, Clotworthy, Waller, Massey, Glyn, Maynard, Long, Harley, Nicholas, being
the chief Champions of Presbytery, and now accused of High Treason, etc. The
Houses silent to the rest, answered only to the Point of Suspension, affirming,
That it was not lawful to exclude any from the House, without first showing
cause. Forgetful of what they themselves had formerly done in the case of
Strafford, and Canterbury; which was also seasonably retorted upon them now, by
the Soldiers. Having thus affrighted the Parliament, they thought good to
terrify the City also, by demanding, That the Militia thereof; might be put
into other Hands. This so enraged the Londoners, that running tumultuously to
Westminster, they forced the House, by keeping the Speaker in his Chair, To
confirm their former Grant of the Militia; and to invite the King by Votes to
London. They also made new Levies, and giving Massey, Waller and others the
Chief Commands amongst them, made suddenly a considerable force by the Addition
of their Reformado's. Whilst they are thus busy, the Two Speakers, with about
Fifty Members, fly to the Camp; and, crying out, That the Houses were under a
Force, sat daily and voted with the Chief Officers of the Army, in a sham form
of Parliament.

The Soldiery glad of the Occasion, march toward London, under pretext of
reconducting these Tribunes, the fugitive Members, back, and removing all force
from the Parliament. The City, the Parent and Nurse of that nefarious Rebellion
against the King, now distracted with their own terrors and apprehensions,
neglecting a generous defense, delivered themselves up to the disposal of the
menacing Army. And, surrendering their Tower and Forts into Fairfax's Hands,
they were forced to give new assurances of Fidelity to their new Masters. The
chief Citizens, and Members of the contrary Faction, were imprisoned, and
banished; the Militia was put into trusty hands, of their own Party; and all
the Works raised with so much heat and violence against their King, are now, to
prevent new Rebellions against their Mercenaries, demolished by them. Nor did
this empty obsequiousness suffice. A Months stipend was paid to these
Janisaries for their good Service, and a Donative of Fifty Thousand Pounds
bestowed upon their Deliverers. Fairfax, lest the Senate might seem ingrate,
was constituted Generalissimo of all their Forces, more to his Honor, than
intrinsic Power, he still acting but as Cromwell's Substitute; for, whilst he
seemed satisfied with the Title and Shadow, the Independents did in effect
possess the Substance and Advantage.

The Army having triumphed over the City, by their pompous marching through it;
and, over the Parliament, by modelling it according to their Interest; harsher
Propositions than the former were sent to the King; whereunto the chief
Officers had likewise given their Suffrages in the House; but take care in the
Camp, that his Majesty should not consent to them; promising, that they would
obtain, or give him better themselves: declaiming much against the Presbyterian
arrogance and severity. And they indeed did produce easier, and more equitable
Terms; with which artifice, the King being circumvented, seemed to prefer them
before the other, to the great satisfaction of the Heads of the Army; as if
now, the Camp were more valuable in the King's Esteem, than the Parliament. And
yet these Catifs did not cease to imbitter these Members against him, as if
despised by him. Nay, themselves forgetting their former Civilities, Risum
tene^^is!
grew more morose; and now they delay, and pretending a reverence for the
Parliament, reason and dispute things; interpreting their own Promises in a
contrary Sense.

In the mean time the Parliament Vote, That the King should be convoyed to
Richmond, under the Guard of Colonel Rosseter; which was also consented to by
Fairfax, until the Army required, That the King should come no nearer London,
than the Houses would suffer their Camp to be. Cromwell, who had obtained his
End, having the Parliament in his Pocket, began now to neglect the King, whom
he had seemingly adored and courted, with the charming Promises of his
Restitution. He did not wait upon him as usual, and nauseating his
Conversation, wished him gone. He had formerly deliberated with his Cabal how
to destroy him, and had once designed to have him murdered in the Scotch Camp,
to satisfy his Revenge, and at once to throw the odium of the Fact upon them
he equally hated. But, it now seems sufficient to terrify him with apparent
dangers: Designs upon the King's Life.
reserving his final ruin, till they gained more Authority, by rendering him
more odious to the People, as averse from Peace. Which having obtained, his
fall would seem less pitied, being also perpetrated by a Parliamentary Judicial
Act, as most plausible. Nor was the King ignorant, of these rebellious
Scelerates designed Villainies, having been not obscurely informed of
Cromwell's perfidious dealings with him, by some, whom the Eminence of his
Virtues, had gained amongst these black Conspirators. Neither were his Friends
wanting, in their wishes and endeavors for his safety. Amongst whom, we with
gratitude applaud the offers of the Scots Commissioners; for the Earls of
Lauderdale and Lannerick, meeting his Majesty, as he was Hunting near Nonsuch,
and but slenderly guarded; they having at that time Fifty Horse of their Train
with them, told his Majesty, That they were come thither on design to deliver
him out of his Captivity. And therefore, humbly desired, That he would be
pleased not to omit this opportunity to save himself, out of their too visible
perfidious Hands, But, His Majesty answered, That he had passed his Royal Word
not to leave the Army without acquainting the Chief Officers, and therefore
would not violate his Promise, to save his Life. Some time after, he told the
said Commissioners, That he was now discharged from his Word, and after many
Propositions about his retreat, he seemed much pleased with that of Barwick, as
then ungarrisoned, and in the Confines of both Kingdoms. But that was also
waved, by reason of the violent motion of the Agitators, a rumor being also at
the same time spread at Court, that they had conspired against his Life; which
was not only conveyed to him by his Friends, as believing it, but also by
Colonel Whaley his Guardian, who told him, That moved with duty and affection,
he could not forbear to beseech his Majesty, to save himself by a timely
Retreat; affirming, That this also was the Sense of the Chief Officers of the
Army, who were very imwilling to be Spectators, of what they could not at
present help. His Majesty withdraws from Hampton Court.
With these Artifices, this best of Princes being circumvented, privately
withdrew himself from Hampton Court, which by the removing of the Sentinels was
not difficult.

Having passed the River in a Boat, he found Ashburnham, Leg, and Barclay on
the other side with Horses. He had designed to go to London, where he also had
a Lodging provided for him; but, upon a Consideration, that the Citizens, being
obnoxious to the Soldiery, were not to be trusted, and that Ashburnham
persuaded the contrary; leaving the City, they after much Toil, and the Errors
incident to traveling, in a dark and tempestuous Night, came to the Seaside
near Southhampton. Where, not finding a Ship, as they expected, to transport
them to Jersey, the King asked, Whither they purposed to carry him? Ashburnham
replied, To the Isle of Wight; for, he had great confidence in Colonel Hammond,
the Governor, Brother to Doctor Hammond, the King's Chaplain. The King
replied, That he would not enter into the Island, unless he first had assurance
from the Governor both of his Liberty and Security from danger. Ashburnham
therefore and Barclay, were sent to propose these Conditions. To whom Hammond,
(dear to Cromwell, and sent as is supposed to command the Island for that
purpose) answered, That he would provide for the King's Security from danger,
but could not dispose of his Liberty, but with the Army and Parliaments
Knowledge. Our Delegates having advanced beyond a Retreat, were necessitated
through fear to accept of the Condition, and so brought Hammond with them to
the Countess of Southhampton's House near Tichfield, where the King privately
lay. He was no sooner come, and His Majesty acquainted with the Terms, but
clapping his Hand upon his Heart, he said, too Prophetically alas! I am now
undone. Whereupon his Attendants bursting out into Tears, and Expressions of
Violence, would instantly have killed Hammond. But, His Majesty absolutely
forbad it, who would not purchase his own Safety, at the clandestine
Destruction of a most bitter Enemy. And, so he delivered himself into his
Custody, and those Toils which the nefarious Cunning of his Adversaries, had
long since laid for him.

BOOK V.
The King in the Isle of Wight. His Message for Peace. The four Dethroning
Bills. The Votes of Non-address. Cap. Burleigh attempts the King's Delivery;
Rolfe his Life. The King appeals to the People. They rise in several Parts of
the Kingdom. Are suppressed. Pembroke taken. The Scots defeated, and Hamilton a
Prisoner. Colchester surrendered. The Treaty in the Isle of Wight broken by the
Army. They seize upon the King. Garble the Parliament. The perjured Remains of
the Commons, assume the Supreme Power. Constitute a pretended Court of High
Justice. Arraign, Condemn and Murder their King. His End and Elogy.

THE King, upon his Departure from Hampton Court, had left upon his Table
amongst other things, a Letter to the Parliament. The Contents thereof were,
That Liberty being desired by all Men, and no less necessary for King's than
others; and that he had long suffered the irkesomness of a Prison, under hopes
of Peace: He now finding the contrary, and the inconstancy of the Army, had
withdrawn himself. And yet wherever he should be, he would use all his Power
for the procuring of it, and hinder further effusion of Blood. Finally, if it
should be permitted him to be heard with Honor, Liberty and Freedom, he would
quickly break through this Cloud of Retirement, and demonstrate himself truly
to be the Father of his Country. Being arrived in the Island, The King's
Message for Peace,
he again earnestly presses the Parliament, for what he had so often desired,
Peace; and having sent them Concessions beyond their Hopes and Desires, he yet
invites them to a Treaty, though with the same Success. And yet, lest these
pious Patriots might seem too averse from that they had pretended to, the Peace
of the Nation, they send the old Propositions to him, but accompanied with four
preliminary Articles. Which, how unjust soever, they require him to assent to
before any further Proceeding. They demand,

The 4 dethroning Bills.
1. The Absolute Power of the Militia. 2. That the Parliament be not Adjourned,
Prorogued, etc. but by their disposal. 3. All Oaths, Declarations,
Proclamations against the Parliament should be revoked and annulled. 4. All
Honors and Titles, conferred by the King, since carrying away the Great Seal,
should be annihilated and suppressed.
By the granting of these, the King would not only divest himself, and that by
his own Suffrage, of all Right to Govern, but take upon him the Guilt of all
the Bloodshed in the late War. Moreover, they desire, contrary to Order and
Reason, the concession of those Things which were to be treated of, before the
Treaty should begin. The Scots-Commissioners also opposed these Demands by
Public Protestation, before the Parliament at London, and in presence of the
King in the Isle of Wight; as being repugnant to Religion, the Honor of the
Crown, and the Treaties betwixt both Nations. Which when the King had
inculcated to them, they were so far from being moved thereat, that these Sons
of Violence, railed not only against the King, but even Monarchy it self One of
them proposed, Wroth.
To have him closely kept in some inland Garrison, until he could be brought to
judgment. In the mean time, they should themselves (he being entirely excluded)
govern. It was equal to him, what kind of Government they settled, provided they
admitted, neither Kings, Ireton.
nor Devils. Another urged, That his rejecting of the Propositions, was no
other than the denial of his Protection, and that the People upon that account,
did owe him no Subjection, being these were reciprocal. But Cromwell, who was
the Bell-weather of the Faction, admonish't the Parliament, To rule by their
own proper Power and Fortitude; and not suffer the People longer to expect
their Safety from a Man, whose Heart God had hardened; or, subject, those who
had served them so faithfully, to the Fury of an implacable Enemy; lest they
should force them (clapping his hand upon his sword) to endeavor their
security by some other means. The servile Senate being admonished by these
Arguments, Vote, Votes of Non-address.
That no further Address should be made to the King, and that no further
Demands should be sent to him, or any received for him. To these barbarous
Votes, they add their no less barbarous Commands to the Governor of the Isle
of Wight, for the King's closer Detention in Caresborough Castle; which he did,
by a stricter Confinement in redoubling his Guards, and by turning away his
Servants, saying, That he was actuated by ill Counsels, to the destruction of
the Kingdom. The King a close Prisoner.
And yet at the same time, he tampered with his Majesty, by courting Ashburrham
and Berkely, who were still retained with him, as also the Earl of Southampton,
who was at large, to make new Proposals, whereby to gain his Majesty's nearer
owning of the Army; that, whilst they amused the People with appearances, they
might the more securely destroy him. But, seeing this did not take, their late
monstrous Votes, were followed by as monstrous a Declaration, to mask, in as
much as in them lay, their unjust Proceedings. It was stuffed with their old
exploded Calumnies, and so often repeated pretended Misgovernments, to abuse
the Peoples credulity, though in vain, however owned by the impious Army, who
did dare to profess, That they would live and dye with the Parliament, in
maintaining of those dethroning Votes.

But this did not hinder a worthy, however fruitless attempt, of Captain
Burleigh; Captain Burleigh attempts his release.
who beat a Drum at New port in the Isle of Wight, with Design to raise a
Force, for the delivery of his injured Sovereign; but, being suppressed by
Hammond, he was Murdered by Wild and Mildmay, for levying War against the
King. And yet, these Reverend Judges! acquitted Rolfe, who had been employed,
upon apprehension of the following Rising, to Poison the King, or otherwise to
remove him, out of the way, as conducing to their Affairs; which was proved, as
well in part, by his own confession, as the discovery of Osburne, some time his
Confident. This wilful Intention of Parricide, was found Ignoramus. Nor indeed,
had this Villain been tried at all, had it not been to satisfy the Clamors of
the People, who began, as will suddenly appear, to be sensible as well of the
Perfidy of the Usurpers, as of the miserable Condition of their King.

His Majesty seeing himself secluded from the Society of reasonable Men, and
considering the untractableness of the Pretended Parliament, appeals to the
People; and, Publishing his most Elegant Apology, not only clears himself from
the imputed Crimes laid to his Charge, but retorts all those wickednesses they
were so justly and visibly guilty of, upon their own heads. He further
represents, His Majesty's Apology.
his wretched and disconsolate Condition, improved by the continuance and
rigidness of an irksome Imprisonment. He demonstrates, with what earnestness he
endeavored the composing of all things in a desirable Peace, and gives just
and unanswerable Reasons, why he could not yield his Assent to the Four
Dethroning Bills. And Appeal to the People.
He therefore appeals to the whole World why, or how, he had deserved to be
thus used? Especially by those who were his Subjects, being he had Sacrificed
all for the Peace of his Kingdoms; but, what was much more dear to him than
Life, his Honor and Conscience. He further mentioned, his compliance with the
Army and their Interests; as also, of what importance that was to them, and
their often repeated Professions and Engagements for his just Rights and
Restitution. He finally inferred, If it was Peace they would have, He showed
them the way to it, to which he would contribute his utmost. Was it Plenty and
Happiness? They were the inseparable Effects of Peace. Was it security? He that
did wish, that all Men would forgive and forget like him, had offered the
Militia for his time. Was it Liberty of Conscience? He who wanted it, was most
ready to give it. Was it the right Administration of Justice? Offices of Trust
were committed to the Choice of the Two Houses. Finally, was it the Arrears of
the Army? Upon a settlement they would certainly be paid with much Ease, which
otherwise would be scarce Possible. But, all this was to no purpose; so that
the People, awaked out of that stupid Lethargy they had been lulled in, by
these Pretenders of Reformation, perceived at length, that the Tyrants. at
Westminster, had designed wholly to exclude the King, and Usurp the Government
themselves. Which being evident by their late pernicious Votes, and that
nothing but Slavery and Oppression was to be expected from these new Masters,
they resolved to vindicate their Sovereign, and their Liberty, by the way of
Arms. But, They rise in several Parts of the Kingdom.
first they would try the way of Petitioning. The Men of Essex began; being
followed by them of Surrey in greater Numbers, requiring, That the Treaty with
the King, might be renewed, and the Army paid off, and disbanded. But, their
reception was very rude; being beaten, and plundered, and slain, by their
Guards. Insomuch, that the Kentish-men having likewise framed a Petition for
Peace, upon the like usage, by a Party of Horse, and being threatened, to have
two harged out of each Parish that were Promoters of it, and the rest
sequestered; they threw away their Paper, and betook them to their Arms.

The first appearance of an Insurrection, broke out in the City of London,
being accidental, not upon the King's Account. The Parliament had piously voted
down Holy Days, abrogating all the Festivals of the Church, having appointed
one Day in every Month, in lieu of them, for Publik Recreations. The
Apprentices, as usually, had met in some Numbers in Moor-Fields on the 9th. of
April, to play and divert themselves. But, this being Sunday, moved the Zeal of
some precize Schismatical Officers of the Trained-Bands, who with their Guards
would force them away, but were themselves routed by the Boys, with Stones and
Clubs; who also took their Colors from them, and in a Childish Bravery,
marching into the Streets, frighted Warner the then Mayor into his House; and,
taking away a Drake from his Door, Planted it at Lud-Gate nearest the Foe, the
Army, then about White Hall. But, Fairfax on the Morrow following, entering
with some Regiments of Horse and Foot at Alders-Gate, easily dispersed them,
though then numerous, no Person of Quality undertaking their Conduct.

The Fame of this tumultuous Insurrection, or rather Riot, was quickly noised
throughout the Kingdom, which although strangled in its Infancy, seemed to
animate the oppressed populace to follow the Example; whereby they might redeem
themselves, and Liberties from their impending slavery. The Welsh were the
first that took up Arms under the Conduct of Major General Laughorn, The Welsh
in Arms.
and the Colonels Poyer and Powell, all Three formerly stiff Assertors of the
Parliaments Jurisdiction. But now, being to be disbanded by Orders of the
Council of War of the Army, they refuse to obey. And, the better to secure
themselves, declare for the King, acting by Commission and Powers from the then
Prince of Wales. Laughorn grew suddenly by the accession of Major General
Stradling, and others of the King's Party to a considerable Army, esteemed
Eight Thousand strong, which rendered him Master of the Town and Castles of
Pembroke and Tenby. Sir Nicholas Kemish, at the same time surprised Chepstow
Castle; and, Sir John Owen, another eminent Cavalier in North wales, defeated
and took the High Sheriff of Caernarvan. So that all Wales, seemed at once to
shake off that cruel Yoke they labored under.

Nor were the preparatives for a War of the Kentish-men, less considerable.
For, As also the Kentishmen.
Rendezvouzing near Rochester, they chose the Earl of Norwich, then upon the
place, to be their General. Very many Apprentices, and reformed Officers and
Soldiers flocked from London daily to them. Insomuch, that the Juncto
terrified with the apprehension of what might happen, restored to the City
their Militia, which they feared otherwise might be extorted from them, hoping
by this Confidence to render them more addicted to their interest. Which also
happened, not upon sentiments of generosity, but to manifest their aversness to
oppressed Monarchy, even then when it was in their Power to restore it; Skippon
being also readmitted to the Command of their Forces, the Communication with
Kent was interrupted, by placing Guards upon the Passages of the River.

But, the Clouds that threatened the fiercest storm, gathered in the North,
where Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Sir Charles Lucas, and others having surprised
the strong Town of Berwick, Berwick and Carlisle surprised.
and Sir Phillip Musgrave and Sir Thomas Glenham that of Carlisle, and raised
considerable Forces to join with the Scots now ready to enter England, seemed
no less able than willing to effect what they pretended, the King's
Restitution. Though it be true, that the Scots-Declaration, had so many
untoward Restrictions in it, that nothing but the Frank Loyalty of the
Royallists could join with them.

Upon the first noise of the Scots arming, many English repaired into Scotland,
which obliged them at Westminster, by their Deputies, to require the delivery
of the chief of them as Incendiaries. They named particularly Wogan, who
carried a Troop thither, with Sir Thomas Glenham and others. But the Scots
refused it, seeing it was not stipulated in the Treaties betwixt both Nations;
They not judging those to be Incendiaries between the Two Kingdoms, but only
between the King and England.

These Revolts and Preparations for a new War, did strangely disquiet the
pretended Parliament, who thereupon reviving their Votes of 1642. declare, That
it appears, that the King seduced by wicked Counsel (though then a close
Prisoner) intends to make War against the Parliament.

Cromwell being dispatched against the Welsh with great Forces, the Kentish
Expedition was not thought unworthy Fairfax's Conduct. He therefore marches
with Six Thousand Foot and Two Thousand Horse against the Cavaliers, who being
fatally divided, whilst they Fight singly by Parties, they are all overcome.
Fifteen Hundred stout Men were sent to Maidstone, Fairfax defeats the
Kentish-men.
to oppose their Enemies Passage there; who fought with so much Valor, that
after they had been beaten from the Avenues and Hedges, they kept that Town,
firing from the Houses and Leads, about the space of Six Hours, with great
slaughter of the Enemy. So that it is believed, if the Earl of Norwich had come
up with the rest of the Army to their Assistance, the Rebels might have been
defeated that Day. But, he dividing his Forces, sent half of them to Dover, and
himself marched with the rest to Black Heath; and being denied a Passage
through the City, which had been promised him, he Ferries and Swims his small
Army over to the Isle of Dogs. From thence, he moved to Mild-end-Green. But,
seeing none come out of London to his relief, as he expected; he himself with
only Five Hundred, the rest being upon the obstinacy of the Citizens slipped from
him, joined with the Essexians at Bow under the Command of Sir Charles Lucas.
They all stayed here some time, to favor any Loyal Attempt that might be made
at London; until warned by the approach of Fairfax, who having dispatched Rich
and Barkstead with their Regiments, to reduce those Castles which the Kentish
had taken toward the Downs, had passed the Thames at Graves-End, they were
also forced to dislodge. And, marching further into the Country, seized store
of Arms and Ammunition, in the Earl of Warwick's House at Lees; and, having
surprised the Parliament-Committee at Chelmsford, went thence to Colchester,
where the brave Lord Capell joined them, with some Horse: And, all of them
received the Van of Fairfax's Army with such Gallantry at the Towns-end, that
they forced them to retire to their main Body, with considerable Loss. They had
designed to march further, if they had not been so closely pursued by the
Enemy, with Hopes of strong Assistance from the Inhabitants of Norfolk and
Suffolk. But, these failing, and indeed joining with the Rebels, contrary to
their solemn Promises, the Royallists were besieged in this Town, no way
tenable, but by the rare Fortitude of the Defendants.

Cromwell the Welsh.
Nor was Cromwell less successful in Wales. Laughorn having been beaten at St.
Fagons, by Col. Horton, with scarce half his Number, Fifteen Hundred of his Men
being killed, and near Three Thousand taken Prisoners. Cromwell besieged the
Fugitives in Pembroke, having first taken Tenby Castle, and forced that of
Chepstow by Col. Eure, who slew the Governor in cold Blood. The Rumor of the
Scots Invasion greatly increasing, animated. Cromwell to employ all his skill
and force for the Reduction of this important Post. The Garrison within was
strong, and the Place well fortified, which he resolved however to attempt by
Storm. And, falling on with great Courage, was as bravely received, and at
length beaten off with great slaughter of his Men. After this, not thinking it
advisable to expose his dismayed Soldiers to new hazards, he resolves to gain
that by famine, which he could not effect by force. Which being perceived by
the Garrison, they chose rather to surrender upon Terms, than lanquish in the
Toyls of a long Siege, tho they saw a Prospect of a General Rising in the
Kingdom, and the certainty of the Scots Invasion. But, Cromwell knowing how
precious time was, offering the Soldiery and Inferior Officers very good
Conditions, he had this strong Place, with the Three chief Leaders, Laughorn,
Poyer and Powell, delivered into his hands by these faithless Miscreants.

Nor was Sir John Owen more fortunate in North Wales, being defeated and taken
Prisoner by Colonel Mitton. So that, the whole Country being reduced to the
Parliaments Obedience again, Cromwell was at liberty to march against the Scots
with all his Power.

The Earl of Holland defeated.
The Earl of Holland, the Duke of Buckingham, with the L. Francis his Brother,
the Earl of Peterborough, and some others of Quality appeared near Kingston,
with Five Hundred Horse and some Foot, but were instantly suppressed, tho not
without some bloody Shirmishes; in one of which, the Young and Generous Lord
Francis refusing Quarter, was barbarously slain by an unknown Hand. Holland was
taken in his flight at St. Neots by Col. Scroop, where Dalbier, sometime a
Favorite of Essex's, and a great Parliamentarian, was killed in his Quarters.

But, the Scots seem now to demand our Attention, being advanced with a very
numerous and well accoutred Army, far into the Kingdom. And here may be
observed the Vicissitudes of the Times, as well as of Affairs. For, the Scots,
whom the Parliament had formerly with great Endeavors and Charges, allured to
their Assistance; and whom, the War being done, they had likewise twice
dismissed with vast Rewards as Friends: These same Scots, the Faction being
changed, become Enemies, and invading England again, join Forces with the
Royallists their now reconciled Friends, against their sometimes dear Brethren
of the Parliament. Duke Hamilton, upon the surrender of Pendennis Castle, where
he had been detained Prisoner by the King's Command, being set at liberty, was
now General of this great Army, consisting of Fifteen Thousand fighting Men, to
whom Langdale and Musgrave brought Three Thousand English; which forces, if God
had not determined otherwise, might have effected what they designed. As soon
as the King was informed, that Hamilton commanded the Scots Army, he too
prophetically foretold the Fatal Issue of the Expedition, as fancying him
unfortunate or inconstant. But, Cromwell being come out of Wales, with a
victorious and disciplined Army, and joining with Lambert, who had hitherto
attended the Enemies Motion, fell upon the main Body of the Scots within Two
Miles of Preston in Lancashire, and routed them by Skirmishes, Cromwell defeats
the Scots at Preston.
and beating up of Quarters, without the Formality of a Battle. Langdale and
his English fought bravely, but being neglected, and no ways succored, were
oppressed by the adverse Multitudes. The Scots presumed perhaps upon their own
Power, and thinking to conquer by themselves, and consequently reap the whole
Advantage of the Victory, as also the entire Honor of restoring the King (if
they had any such design) abandoned them that fought so well, and by this
foolish precaution or presumption, contributed to their own ruin. Besides, the
Scots Forces, either by Ignorance, or Malice, or Discord (for, Hamilton, and
Calander, who was Lieutenant General of the Army, did not agree well) were so
untowardly marshalled, that they could not all be brought to fight or assist
each other, by reason of the over great distance of their Wings, whereby they
were all defeated. Bailey, after sharp encounters with those who pursued him,
having recovered Warrington-Bridge, delivered up himself and Four Thousand Foot
to the Conqueror, upon Quarter. Major General Midleton, was intercepted with
Four Hundred Horse, and Hamilton himself General of the Expedition with Three
Thousand Horse, was taken without a Blow at Vttoxeter, by the Lord Gray and
Colonel Wait. Very few returning by the way they came, met with Monroe, who
followed Hamilton with a Supply of Six Thousand more; but, hearing of the
Defeat, returned with the other Fugitives back into Scotland. Cromwell
following in the Rear of these, came to Edinburgh, where joining Forces and
Councils with Argile, by whom he had been invited; they not only obliged the
contrary Faction to lay down Arms, but having summoned another Parliament,
condemned the late Expedition as unjust.

Scotland being pacified, Cromwell secure on that side, having also concerted
with Argile concerning the Ruin of the King, and Extirpation of Monarchy it
self; they also advised and agreed on the Form and Method of the future
Regicide. And so, after sumptuous Treats, and many high Expressions of
Gratitude, and Acknowledgments for his meritorious Services, Cromwell returned
into England.

All this while, Colchester held out with incredible Courage and Constancy,
upon hopes of Relief from the Scots; and, not only content to defend
themselves, did extremely annoy the Enemy, by their frequent Sallies and
Camisadoes. They had consumed their Horses, Dogs, Cats, and what else was no
less abhorring to Nature; but, their hopes, with the defeat of Hamilton, being
likewise spent, they were forced to surrender. Which they did, upon no other
Terms, than Quarter for life to the Soldiery, and Mercy to the Officers. But,
Colchester surrendered.
how cruel the Mercies of these Scelerates were, instantly appears; for, they
had no sooner possessed the Town, but Three most Noble Persons, Men of Eminent
Valor and Loyalty, the Lord Capell, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle (to
whom was added Sir Bernard Gascoyn, but exempted upon the account of being a
Stranger) were sentenced to be shot to death by the Court-Marshal, tho the War
was done. Sir George and Sir Charles, were immediately murdered, by Soldiers
appointed for the Slaughter. The Stone they fell upon being sprinkled with
their Blood, could not be cleansed of it, but continues still a Monument of
this horrid Impiety, with this Inscription engraved, Hic jacent Car. Lucas and
Geor. Lisle, a Fairfaxio mactati. Capell was reserved for the Scaffold, who
afterward suffered with no less Constancy and Greatness of Mind, than his
illustrious Colleagues now did, as we shall see in the Sequel of this History.

Nor was it on Land only that the Sword did rage, the Sea also had its Scenes
of Blood and Horror; for, a great part of the Navy, detesting the Tyranny of
their Old Masters, deserted them, and revolted to the Prince of Wales. The
Revolt of the Fleet.
Batten, one of their prime Leaders, having been dismissed by them, returned to
his Duty, and joined his Highness with some more Ships. The Seamen had exposed
Rainsborough their Admiral, and a Turbulent Leveller, by putting him on shore
(who was afterward slain in his Quarters by a Party from Pomfret) and now
embracing the King's Party with universal Consent, seemed resolved to expiate
their former Rebellion by a Return of Duty, and to merit their Pardon by the
Eminency of their Services. Prince Charles, with the Duke of York his Brother,
who lately escaped from St. James's in Woman's Clothes; Prince Rupert, the Earl
of Brandford, the Lords Hopton, Willmot, Willoughby, Culpeper, and others of
Name and Quality, sailed from Holland with this brave Fleet, consisting of
Twenty Ships of War, and came into Yarmouth-Road, with design to attempt every
thing that was possible for the Relief of Colchester. But, finding the distance
from that City too great, and the Shore and Passages possessed by the numerous
Enemy, his Highness sailed to the Mouth of the Thames, carrying Terror and
Force with him to awe the City of London. But, his stay there was not long, the
Castles of Deal, Walmer and Sandwich requiring his Assistance; which he
attempted, by landing Five Hundred Men; who, though they fought with extreme
Gallantry, were yet forced back with great loss to their Ships again. The
Castles, after this Defeat, were immediately surrendered. By this time, the
Earl of Warwick, lately made Admiral again, had equipt another Fleet in the
River; and, having joined that of Portsmouth, resolved to fight the Prince;
which he yet delays for the present, not only terrified with the Revolt of
others, but in some doubt of the Fidelity of his own Men. The Prince perceiving
this, courted the Earl with magnificent Offers, to the Return of his Duty. But
he perfidiously constant, persisted in his Rebellion; and, in recompense of his
Services, shall see himself disgracefully outed of all Trust, and his only
Brother, the Earl of Holland, beheaded for his late Return to his Obedience.

Some were of Opinion, that the Royallists omitted an opportunity of fighting,
the Sea men being high in Heart, and seemingly very Loyal, and the Enemy
supposed to waver; tho the Event afterward proved the contrary. In the mean
time, the Prince seeing his Landforces every where defeated, and the adverse
Fleet growing daily stronger, returned into Holland, giving the Command of the
Fleet to Prince Rupert. But, many of the Ships, out of an innate levity of
their Sailors, leaving the Prince, returned to their old slavery under Warwick,
whilst the rest continuing in their Duty, stuck close to their New Admiral,
whose Actions and Adventures shall be hereafter related.

Some other Fortresses, besides those already mentioned, declared for the King,
as, N. B.
Tinmouth-Castle, seized upon by Major Lilburn; Scarborough, by the Return of
Sir Matthew Boynton the Governor to his Allegiance; and, Pomfret, possessed
upon the same score by Major Morris. Tinmouth indeed was retaken by Assault,
the Governor losing his Life with the Place. Boynton got Terms not unworthy
the Defense he had made; and Morris, and being lost, bravely exposed himself
to save his Garrison. Who, tho he broke through the Camp, which was the Conditions
he had articled for, yet was afterward taken and murdered under color of
Justice in cold Blood.

The Visitation of Oxford.
But, before we proceed further in these Occurrences, it may not be impertinent
to take a Review of some Transactions in the entrance of this Black Year, 1648.
seeing, they seem to tend to those monstrous Catastrophes it ended in. The
first thing our pious Reformers undertook, was visiting the University of
Oxford. They had long since garbell'd Cambridge to their Interest, and, will
now, as much as in them lies, extinguish this other Luminary, by removing its
Candlesticks, and ejecting all the Members thereof, that were any ways notable
for Learning, Loyalty, Piety, or Obedience to the Church or State, as
established by Law. The Earl of Pembrook being made Chancellor, together with
several Delegates of the Factious Clergy, and some of the Laiety (as good
Divines as himself) were appointed for this Service. Which was performed, with
all the Rigor of an Inquisition, none being spared, from the Reverend Heads of
Colleges, to the hopeful Striplings of Sixteen.

And yet, the entrance of this Year, had thus much extraordinary in it, in that
it contributed to the Deliverance of the Duke of York, out of the Hands of
those worst of Rebels, The Duke of York escapes into Holland.
being conveyed away in a Virgin-disguise, and carried into Holland by Col.
Bamfeild; who afterward, aspersed the Honor of this Service, by undutiful
Intelligences.

But, to return whence we digressed, the Army with Cromwell being absent, and
in Scotland; several Petitions from the Country, the Captains, Masters and
Sailers, as also from the City of London, were presented to the Men at
Westminister, requiring, with more than ordinary earnestness, a personal Treaty
with the King. This did so far, work upon the Presbyterian Faction in the
House, very jealous and apprehensive of the Power of the Independants, that
they resolved for their own preservation, to make a Peace with the King. And,
The Treaty in the Isle of Wight.
in order thereunto, forthwith recalled their Votes of Non-Address, and sent
Commissioners with Propositions, not much unlike the former, with Power to make
Peace, allowing Forty Days for the time of treating. They indeed permitted his
Majesty the attendance of several Lords of his Council and Bedchamber, many of
his Servants, some of his Chaplains, some Lawyers and others: But, they refused
the Assistance of any but himself in treating. Nor was it truly necessary; for,
it presently appeared, that as he was a Prince of prodigious Parts; so he
seemed more than humanly inspired, who could singly manage so weighty an
Affair, against Fifteen Commissioners, Persons prejudiced, and of great
Subtilty; and with that success, that he made Converts of some of his bitterest
Enemies; and, however unwilling, forced their very Reason. But, they having no
liberty to recede, or any way to remit of the Rigor of their Propositions, His
Majesty out of his affection to Peace, granted many things above their Desires,
being content to divest himself of most of his Regalities for his time, and
trust those insatiable Men with the exercise thereof; as appears by his
Concessions. And, now the Hopes of Peace, and a Happy Accommodation, seemed at
^and; which had also been effected, if the Parliament had not wretchedly lost
too much time in frivolous disputations of no weight. Whereby it appeared, as
formerly at Vxbridge, that they never designed, that this Treaty should take
any effect, nor that they would be satisfied with Part, who had already
devoured the Whole in their thoughts. The Army, who seemed to acquiesce in the
Pleasure of their Superiors, whilst engaged in War, did dare now, the
Royallists being every where suppressed, changing their Principles with their
Success, plainly to dissent; And, to declare openly to the whole World, That
nothing would satisfy, but the Destruction of the King, and the Subversion of
Monarchy.

In order hereunto, a fierce Petition was presented from the City against the
Treaty, which was also seconded from Oxfordshire, New Castle, York. etc. and,
in particular, Ireton's Regiment insisted upon the same, demanding, That the
same fault, may have the same punishment in the Person of King, or Lord, as in
the Person of the meanest Commoner. A Prelude to the designed Regicide.

They had formerly designed the Murder of the King, by the Ministry of that
Villain Rolfe, as is already mentioned; but now, fierce with their Victories,
they will themselves destroy him. To this purpose they emit a Remonstrance, The
Armies Remonstrance.
execrable as it is Authors, Cromwell and Ireton; which was presented to the
Commons House by Col. Eure, and Seven other Scelerates like himself. In this
they furiously declaim against the Restitution of the King, or any Accommodation
with him, requiring, That he, as the Capital Enemy, should be brought to
judgment; That the Prince and Duke of York, should be summoned in by a day;
That the Parliament should constitute a Government for the future; and, fixing
a Period to their own Session, should take care for Annual or Biennial
Parliaments; and the like stuff, which they offered in their own Names, and as
the Agreement of the People. They were grown now to that insolence, that their
modest General writ to the Committee of the Army for Money, or he should be
forced to receive (that is, take it) out of the Collectors and the Receivers
hands, where he could find it, if speedy course be not taken to supply him.
Which, however high it appeared or unbeseeming in the General, was connived at.
And, now again the Army declare, That they can see in the Majority of those
trusted with the Affairs of the Kingdom, nothing less than a treacherous or
corrupt Neglect of, and Apostasy from, the public Trust reposed in them, and
therefore they appeal from them to God, and the People. In order to this, the
Army marches toward the City, and in contempt of the Parliament's Order, who
commanded their stay, advance, sending a Declaration before them, wherein, They
accuse the Members of Folly, of Infidelity, and Inconstancy; threatening, They
would come to Westminster, where they would further act as God should inspire
them.

And thus the Parliament, after successes above their desires, are agitated and
tormented, with the Mutinies of their own Army. They had indeed declared the
seditious, and mutinying Soldiers Enemies; but now by a desponding Compliance,
they Vote them their Pay, and the Officers their Arrears; and also, that the
Declaration against the Army, be rased out of the Journal of the House. They
further, as also the Citizens of London, and the Counties, began to make all
their ^pplications to the General, especially Cromwell and the Army. The
Parliament seemed now ^eglected, whilst the Army triumph, and all Men are
afraid of doing any thing that may ^isplease them.

The King hurried to Hurst Castle.
During these traverses, and the Treaty at Newport not yet finished, the King by
command from Fairfax, was by Col. Eure hurried to Hurst-Castle, a place
Infamous for Cold, and the Insalubrity of the Air. At parting from the Isle,
the Parliament-Commissioners coming to take their leave of him, he gave them
his Answer unsealed, and having acquainted them with the Condition of the
Times, he told them, He had parted with All how dear soever to him, except
wherein his Conscience was dissatisfied. And finally added, That he had reason
to believe, that this would be the last time of their enterview. But that
blessed be God, he had made his Peace with him; and should without fear
undergo, what he should be pleased to suffer Men to do unto him. As for them,
they could not but know, that in his fall and ruin, they saw their own, and
that also near to them. He prayed God, to send them better friends than he had
found. He was fully informed, of the whole Plot and Carriage against him and
his. But that nothing so much afflicted him, as the sense and feeling he had of
the Sufferings of his Subjects, and the Miseries that hung over his Three
Kingdoms; drawn upon them by those, who upon pretenses of good, violently
pursue their own Interests and Ends.

Fairfax, by so much the more wicked, in that he witlesly acted for others,
brought the Army (equally Rebels to the Parliament now, as they had been to the
King before) to London; and, in Contempt of the Treaty, impudently took up his
Quarters at White Hall. And yet the pretended Parliament, that had hitherto
rejected, as well the King's Concessions, as his Demands, in contemplation of
the Armies Insolence, The Parliament Vote his Concessions satisfactory.
voted His Majesty's Answer, to the Propositions of both Houses, to be
Satisfactory. But, this was too late; for, the^e double Rebels were so
furiously enraged thereat, that they immediately demanded by writing from the
Parliament, That the late accused Members, and such other who favored the
Scots, the King, or the Personal Treaty, should be excluded the Houses: Nor
were they pleased to stay for an Answer, but besetting the Senate, they seize
upon One and Forty of them, whom they imprison; and seclude a Hundred and Sixty
more; leaving none to sit, but such who were mancipated to Cromwell, and the
Faction. The Common Council was purged with the same Ingredients from the Army,
the vacancies being supplied with Plebeian fanatics, whereof any Forty should
be a Quorum and Superior to the Mayor. These petitioning with the same fury
against the King, as the Agitators had done, involved the City in the Guilt of
the Regicide, as well as the Rebellion.

The Government being thus changed from one Tyranny to another, the Supreme
Power, which the Presbyterians had so long hunted for, was surprised by the
Independants. Who to show their Authority, dissannul whatever the Presbyterians
had voted concerning the Treaty, or their secluded Colleagues. And some time
after, diverse of the Lords, how degenerate! did so far compliment Fairfax upon
his Proceedings, that they let him know, They would wave their Titles and
Privileges, in case they should be judged burthen-some to the Commonwealth,
or the Peoples Liberties.

Things being thus disposed, and the Obstacles that might hinder their
premeditated Parricide, removed; the King, the designed Sacrifice to their
hellish Ambition, hurried from one Prison to another, was brought to Windsor,
where the usual Ceremonies of the Knee, and other Marks of Honor were laid
aside. Col. Harrison, a Butcher's Son, had the Impudence to sit with his
Majesty in the Coach with his Hat on, leading this most innocent and pious
Prince, like a Lamb to the Slaughter. There were yet some amongst these
Barbarians, Who could not judge the King obnoxious to Law, and seeing they had
vanquished him by Arms, they did not at all esteem him considerable or to be
feared. But, the furious Novellists pronounce with much bitterness, That they
will have him forthwith removed. Nor durst they, who had other Sentiments,
mutter against them, for fear of being expelled. Yet, these States had a mind
to delegate this worst of Employments, as being unheard of, and beyond all
Precedents, to be perpetrated by these worst of Men, the Soldiery. This being
perceived, the Chief Officers however unnaturally desperate, yet decline it;
thinking it might suffice, if they remitted the performance of so villainous an
Act, to those who sat by their Favor and Permission. The Commons therefore of
the Lower House, being scarce the eight Part of the whole, whereof many also
were Commanders in the Army (so that n^thing remained of a Parliament but the
Name) arrogating the Supreme Power to themselves, that they might seem to avoid
the Infamy of Perjury, absolved themselves by an Ordinance from the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, The Commons assume the Supreme Power.
which they had so often taken to the King; thinking perhaps, to evade what
they had done separately, by this conjunct Abjuration. This done they Vote,
That it is Treason, by the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, in the King of
England, to levy War against the Parliament: And send up the same to the Peers
by the Lord Gray of Grooby, who rejected it with Indignation, as inconsistent
with Reason, and the Laws of the Land. This enraged the Commons, who slighting
the Assent and Power of the Lords, unanimously decree, That, 1. The People
under God, are the Original of all just Power. 2. That the Commons of England
in Parliament Assembled, have the Supreme Power of the Nation. 3. That whatever
is enacted or declared for Law by the House of Commons in Parliament, has the
force of Law.


Constitute a High Court of Justice.
This Foundation being laid, they constitute a High Court of Justice, without
any consideration of the Lords, or those Thousands who desired to preserve the
King from the Destruction he was threatened with, and the Nation from the Guilt
of his most Innocent Blood. The Scots, by their Commissioners, protested highly
against this pretended Trial. The Dutch deprecated it, as of most pernicious
consequence to the Reformed Religion. Some of the Chief Nobility, as the Duke
of Richmond, the Marquess of Hartford, and the Earls of Southampton and Linsey,
endeavored his Conservation by Prayers, and Proffers; Offering themselves, as
being the Chief Ministers of his Will, as Hostages for him; and (by a generous
Example of magnanimity) in case the Kings pretended Crimes could not be
expiated without Blood, presented their own to be shed in lieu of his. Prince
Charles, piously endeavored by all manner of ways, to deliver his Father from
the impending danger: For, besides the Dutch Embasladors which his Highness had
procured to be sent over, to mediate for him; he and the Prince of Orange
enquired after, and sent for such Officers, or others in that Country, who were
of Kindred or related to Cromwell, Ireton, or any other of the Conspirators;
and sent them into England, with full Power to offer, present, promise and
yield, to every thing; mingling Thr^ats with their Entreaties, that might
divert them from their designed Parricide, or at least retard it. The Queen was
no less active on her side, to save her Royal Consort, Endeavors to preserve
the King.
who also writ to Lenthall the Speaker, in terms capable to mollify every
thing, except these Hyrconian Monsters, which Letters were also delivered by
the French Ambassador, but laid by without being opened. Nor could there any
thing in those days be expected from France, laboring then with the same
Frenzy of Rebellion. Amongst others, the Presbyterian Preachers, who had
betrayed the King into these Streights, pierced with the Infamy of their
Treasons, and perhaps apprehending their own turns in case the Independants
should persist, very earnestly besought, and conjured them by monitory Letters,
Petitions and Remonstrances, as also admonished and exhorted them out of their
Pulpits, to desist from their designed enterpize, Lest they should defile the
English Nation with so horrid a Guilt, as that of Regicide. For, that execrable
fact could not be] perpetrated, without violating the Obligation of so many
Oaths as they had taken, without breaking the Public Faith exhibited by so
many Protestations and Declarations, without transgressing the Law of Nature
and Nations; and finally, without prostituting the Dictates of the Scripture
and our Religion. But, all this was to no purpose; as also, the Princes sending
of them White Paper to write their own Conditions. For, nothing seemed enough
to them, who had swallowed all the Hopes of Empire, and were ready to ascend
into the Throne. They therefore name One Hundred and Fifty of the most Petulant
of the Faction, and the most adverse to Monarchy, to judge the King. Some of
the Nobility, whom they had pitched upon, as also the Judges, however raised to
that Dignity by them, for daring to declare, That it was not lawful to bring
the King of England to Trial, were expunged out of that black Catalogue; others
being introduced in their places.

A suborned Prophetess produced, to encourage their Villainy.
But, to encourage the doubtings of the less Persuaded, and entitle their
Actions to Providence, these divine Jugglers, produced an Impostor, a Virgin
they called her, out of Hertfordshire, who told the Officers of the Army, That
she had a Message from Heaven to them; and, being admitted, affirmed, That God
did approve of their Designs. Which did exceedingly encourage the most
wavering. The Contemptibleness of the Judges, did in some sort aggravate their
Crimes, many Petty-foggers, Brewers, Carr-men, Goldsmiths, Cobblers, and other
Mechanics being of the Number; who thirsting after the King's Revenues, as
well as his Blood, were forward to perpetrate any mischief, how tremendous
soever. At this Tribunal, the King was impleaded, baited and condemned,
unheard, unconvict, as Guilty of those Crimes of Treason, Tyranny and Murder,
which those incarnate Devils, his Judges had committed. I had purposed to omit
the Particulars of this Black Tragedy, as being exactly described already by
better Pens: But, lest these Commentaries might prove imperfect, it was thought
requisite to present the Curious, if this empty Narrative can render any such,
with an Abridgment of the same: Quamquam animus meminisse horret, luctuque
refugit. The pretended Court of High Justice, having spent some days in
settling the Method and Formalities of their Proceedings, rejected the Opinions
of such, who would have the King first deposed, and then put to Death, as
dangerous by its delay, and savouring of Popery. But, those who gaped after the
Government, the Democratick, would have the King tried as King, that by the
Effusion of his Blood, as such, they might extinguish Majesty and destroy
Monarchy it self. For, several of them confessed, That Charles his only Crime
was, his being King; and, that the Eminency of his Virtues, together with his
Right of Succession, rendered him incapable of being a Private Man. They
therefore, having first by their Sergeant at Arms, with sound of Trumpets,
cited such profligate Witnesses as they could get, the stress of whose
Depositions was, That they had seen the King in Arms at several Battles and
Encounters: Having also the same Day, voted the making of a New Great Seal,
because of the incongruity of using the King's against himself; those
Sanguinary Judges met in Weminster-Hall, at the End whereof, they caused a
Theater to be erected, on which they acted the ensuing Tragedy of Horror and
Blood. John Bradshaw, the Shame of the Long Robe, and only known by this horrid
Fact, the impudent President of this execrable Court, commanded the King to be
brought before them, where he was accused of all the Bloodshed in the late
Wars; The King is arraigned.
with the injurious Terms, of Tyrant, Traitor and Murderer; and required, to
give his Answer to the Charge.

The King with an inimitable presence of Mind, and a Fortitude truly Royal,
slighting what he had heard, instead of an Answer, demands of these Novel
Judges, By what Authority he was brought thither? Adding, he knew very well,
that there were many unlawful Authorities, as those of Thieves and Robbers. He
bid them remember, he was their King, and would know by what lawful Authority
he was seated there, and he would answer? In the mean time, he would not betray
his Trust, derived to him from God, by old and lawful Descent. The President
replied, That he was brought thither by Authority of the People of England, by
whom he was elected King. His Majesty denied this, affirming, the Kingdom of
England never to have been Elective, but Hereditary, for near a Thousand Years.
He stood more for the Liberties of his People, than any there; and therefore,
desired to know by what lawful Authority he was brought thither? and he would
answer; otherwise, not. But the President often interrupting the King, and
chattering the same Tune of the Peoples Authority, His Majesty said, That no
body did more esteem a House of Commons rightly constituted, than himself. He
saw no House of Lords, that might with the King constitute a Parliament. Was
this the bringing of the King to his Parliament? Is this the bringing an End to
the Treaty, in the Public Faith of the World? Let him see a Legal Anthority,
warranted by the Word of God, the Scriptures, or Constitutions of the Kingdom,
and he would instantly answer. But, the President urging, that unless he would
answer, the Court would consider how to proceed. His Majesty replied, That
unless they would satisfy God and the Country, concerning the Premises, he
would not betray his Trust, and the Peoples Liberty. For, he did avow, That it
was as great a Sin to withstand lawful Authority, as it was to submit to a
Tyrannical, or any other ways unlawful Authority. He was not afraid of their
Bill. And this was the Sum of the first Days Convention.

Two Days after, the King, the Best of Princes, was again brought before these
Worst of Rebels, his Judges; Where the President, upon the Solicitor's Motion,
requires his Positive Answer again, or else the Charge may be taken pro
Confesso. He added, That this Court was fully satisfied with their Authority,
which he also ought to acquiesce in, and therefore they yet again required, his
particular Answer, by confessing or denying it. If the later, Witnesses were at
hand in behalf of the Nation, to make good the Charge against him. To this the
King said, If it were his own particular Case, he would have satisfied himself
with the Protestation he had made against the Legality of the Court, and by
demonstrating, that the King of England, cannot be tried by any Superior
Jurisdiction upon Earth. But it not being his Case alone, but the Freedom and
Property of the People, he must stand for their Liberties. For, if an
illegitimate Power, might make and break the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom at
Pleasure, no Man could be secure of his Life or Goods. He did expect Reasons to
know by what Law, what Authority they did proceed against him; but, hearing
none, he would produce his, with as much brevity as he could. But, he was
interrupted here, the President telling him, They must suffer no arguing,
concerning the Authority of the Court, nor hear any Reasoning against it. The
Votes of the Commons in Parliament, were the Reason of the Kingdom, not to be
questioned by any; to which also, he, and his Predecessors, were always
obnoxions and responsible. This being denied by the King; he further denied,
That the Commons of England were ever a Court of Judicature. Which vexed the
President to that Degree, that he told him, That he was not to be permitted to
go on in that Speech and those Discourses; and, if he would not Answer, he
should be recorded as contumacious. Hereupon, the King desired, That his
Reasons at least might be heard; but was answered, That his Reasons were not to
be heard against the highest Jurisdiction. Whereunto, the King returned, That
they should show that Jurisdiction, that would not hear Reason. To which the
President replied, That they showed it him there; and, that the next time, he
should know more of their Pleasure, perhaps their final Determination.
Commanding withal, That they should take the Prisoner away: Who bid them
remember, That the King was not suffered to give his Reasons, for the Liberty,
and Freedom of the People.

The next Day, the King being brought now the Third time, before this nefarious
Tribunal, continued with the same Constancy as at first, to deny the Authority
of the same. And being insulted upon by the President, was required at length
to submit, and that with Threats, That although he would not understand it, he
should find, that he was before a Court of Justice, which knew no respect of
Persons. But the King replied, As for the Charge, he did not value it a Rush;
it was the Liberty of the People he stood for, and therefore he neither would,
nor could, being a King, acknowledge a new and unheard of Court, against their
Privileges, and the Fundamental Laws of the Land. The Prefident hereupon
subjoyned, That the King had now denied the Authority of the Court Three times,
contemning the Dignity thereof. Adding, That his Actions, Writ in bloody
Characters throughout the Kingdom, did sufficiently demonstrate, how far he had
preserved the Privileges of the People.

The King had designed to deliver his Reasons in writing against the
Jurisdiction of the Court. But, it was not permitted, the President, saying, He
would admit nothing against the Parliament, from which there was no appeal. And
so, the King was remitted, and the Court Adjourned.

Three Days after, the King was again brought before this Impious Court, where
He desired the President (clothed now in Scarlet, suitable to the Bloody
Design of the Day) to be heard a Word, hoping to give no occasion of
interruption. But, the President refused him, saying, The Court must be first
heard. And thereupon told the Auditors, how the Prisoner had been several times
convented, and brought before the Court, to make Answer to a Charge of Treason,
and other Crimes. Which he not only refused to do, but took upon him, to offer
Reasonings and Debates against the Authority of the Court, and the Highest
Court that constituted them to try and judge him; which being considered, as
also his Contumacy, and the Probability of the Fact, they had resolved to
pronounce Sentence against him. But, the Prisoner desiring to be first heard,
the Court was content to hear him, provided he said nothing against the
Authority thereof.

The King then said, Since they would hear nothing of Debate, concerning what
he thought most material for the Peace of the Kingdom, he would wave it; only
tell them, That all Things had been taken from him this many a Day, but what he
valued dearer than his Life, his Conscience and his Honor. And, if he had
respect to his Life more than the Peace of the Kingdoms, and the Liberty of the
Subject, certainly he would have made a Particular Defense for himself, whereby
he might have at least delayed an ugly Sentence, which he believed would pass
upon him. And therefore, if his Zeal to his Country, had not overborn the Care
that he had of his own Preservation, he should have gone another Way to Work.
He conceived, That a hasty Sentence once passed, might be sooner repented of,
than recalled. And, the same desire that he had for the Peace of the Kingdom
and the Liberty of the Subject, more than his own particular, did make him now
at last desire, that having something to to say that concerns both, he might be
heard in the Painted-Chamber before the Lords and Commons. This delay could not
be prejudical to them, whatsoever he said. If Reason, it would be worth the
Hearing; if otherwise, those who heard him might judge. He therefore conjured
them, as they loved what they pretended, the Liberty of the Subject, and Peace
of the Kingdom, that they would grant him a Hearing before Sentence past. If
not, he did protest, that so fair shows of Liberty and Peace, were but mere
shows, and not otherwise; and, that they would not hear their King.

This being heard, however the President had said, That it was but a new Delay,
and a farther declining the Jurisdiction of the Court; yet there were some
amongst the Judges, who would reason the Business in Private. And, lest they
might seem to dissent amongst themselves, they withdrew into the Court of
Wards. Where after some sharp Contests, They Vote, That what the King had
tendered, tended to delay. Several of the Judges were of a contrary Opinion,
desiring to know what the King would say to them. But, it was voted by the
major part, in the Negative; whereupon, some of them exagitated with the
Terrors of their Consciences, went away in discontent. The rest being returned
into the Court, the President, in a very long nauseous Speech, ripping up all
the Misfortunes and Errors committed in the Government, imputed them to the
King. He further affirmed, That Kings were inferior to the People, and to the
Laws; producing Examples of some Kings of England deposed from the Government
(which happened by Parliaments no less impious than this) and more particularly
in Scotland, where of 109 Kings, near half were removed by untimely Ends. This
tedious and hated Speech being ended, and the Charge read, the Sentence
followed in these Terms,

He is condemned.
That Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and Public Enemy, shall
be put to Death, by severing his Head from his Body. It may not be from the
purpose, to mention some particular Passages that intervened extraordinarily,
at the various Sessions of this Court. The King behaved himself with that
Firmness of Mind, Wisdom and Majesty, that he did nothing that was not truly
Royal, cluding their Epithites of Tyrant and Traitor with Smiles. Casualties
that happened, during his Trial.
Some time after, the Head of his Cane falling off, he was himself forced to
take it up, not one amongst so many Barbarians, offering at so small a
Civility; and perceiving the Bystanders seemed to look upon it as sinistrous,
he said, That was nothing. The Second Day, the King offered his Reasons in
Writing against the Jurisdiction of the Court, but was not permitted. The Third
Day of Meeting, the General's Wife (whilst he impiously commanded the equal
impious Army) ventured to disturb the Court, when they were baiting the King,
calling out, That was a Lie. Adding, That the Tenth part of the People (she
might have said the Hundredth) were not of that Opinion; but, that it was done
by the Artifice of that Traitor Cromwell. She also blamed the Subjects
Irreverence to their King. Insomuch, that the Soldiery had much to do to
silence her (though Axtel called her Whore) and others moved upon that
occasion. I cannot tell, Whether this may not in some sort Parallel that of
Pilates Wife. But, what I was seriously told by one that was present, of
Bradshaw's Wife, comes nearer. She, the Morning of the Day that the King was
Sentenced, rushing into her Husbands Chamber, fell upon her Knees at his Feet,
and dissolved into Tears and Sighs, besought her Husband, That he would have
nothing to do with His Majesty, nor Sentence this Earthly King, for fear of the
dreadful Sentence of the King of Heaven. You have no Child (said he) and why
should you do so monstrous an Act to Favor others? But, Bradshaw bidding her
get about her business, added, I confess he has done me no Harm, nor will I do
him any, but what the Law commands.

The Sentence being pronounced, his bloody Murderers, Seventy Two of them
being present, stood up, thereby expressing their Assent. The King delivered to
the Soldiers who abuse and mock him.
After which, His Majesty was hurried away by his Guards; the Soldiers,
instigated by Axtel and Peter's, crying, as he went along, Execution, Execution,
as the Jews had done formerly to their Savior, Crucify him, Crucify him. To
these, the King no less immovable in Adversity, than Prosperity, replied, Alas
poor Souls! for a piece of Money, they would do so by their own Commanders.
Which also happened upon the Restoration of Charles II. when some of these
Miscreants, cried out for Justice against the King's Judges, with no less
Violence and Clamor. There were amongst these Wretches, some who puffed
Tobacco, the Smell whereof was odious to him, in his Face, and threw Pieces of
Pipes, as he walked along, at his Feet, And, lest he might not be like his
Savior in his Sufferings, he was mocked, and had his Reverend Countenance
defiled with Spittle; which he wiped off, with no other Reproaches, than, That
Christ had suffered more for his sake. He spent the Rest of his Time in
preparing himself for his Last Hour, however disturbed with the Questions,
Cavils, Scoffings and Petulancy of the Enthusiastic Soldiers. All which, he
either repressed by Arguments, or eluded by neglecting them. Nor did he say any
thing, however provoked by Arrogancies, unusual to Princes, or unworthy his
former Magnanimity.

Dr. Juxton, the Reverend Bishop of London, was at length admitted to wait upon
the King; to whom, by reason of his Holiness of Life, and the Consolation he
brought him, he was exceedingly welcome. But, coming later than he was
expected, the King said to him, That you are not come sooner, is, I know, none
of your Fault; and now, seeing these Rogues will shed my Blood, you and I must
consider how I may best part with it. The Faction had offered some of their own
Fanatic Levites, whom the King had rejected, as miserable Comforters. He would
not pray with them, who had always prayed against him; but, they might pray for
him if they pleased. Having then the Benefit of his own Chaplain, he prepared
himself for Death so well, that he overcame the Terrors of it before it
appeared. Amongst these Preludes of Death, some of the Prime Officers of the
Army came to the King, offering him certain Propositions, with Promise of Life,
and some Shadow of Royalty, if he would sign them. Of these, one was, That the
Army consisting of Forty Thousand Men, should be perpetuated under the Present
General and Officers; and, that the Council of War, should be impow'red to
supply Vacancies from time to time, He rejects the Soldiers impious
Propositions, though to save his Life.
as occasion should happen, and settle Taxes for the Pay of the Army, to be
levied by the Soldiers, etc. But, the King having read some of these Tyrannous
Proposals, threw them away with much Indignation, saying, That he would rather
become a Sacrifice for his People, than thus betray their Laws, Liberties,
Lives and Estates; with the Church, the Common wealth, and Honor of the Crown,
to so intolerable a Bondage of an Armed Faction. Preferring, with his usual
Greatness of Mind, a Glorious Cross, before an ignominious Life. Nor did he
only prefer the Public Good, before his own Particular; but, would not expose
private Friends to inevitable Danger, to save himself. Which abundantly
appeared at his being at Bagshot, where, when the Lord Newburg and his Noble
Lady had demonstrated to His Majesty, Means whereby he might elude his bloody
Keepers, who led him to the Slaughter; His Children come to him. His
instructions to them.
he waved their Proposals, saying, If I should escape, they would cut you to
Pieces.

It was some Solace to the King in his Streights, that his Children were
permitted to see him. The Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of Gloucester, very
Young, were only left in the Power of the Faction; the Duke of York having, as
is already mentioned, escaped their Bloody Hands. To these Princes, of rare
Endowments and Hopes, the King gave in Charge, That they should consider
Charles, not as their Brother, but as their King; That they should forgive
their Enemies; Love one another, and all of them be Obedient to their Mother.
He told them also, what Hooker 's Eccl. Pol. Bish. Andr. Sermons Laud against
Fisher.
Books they should read to confirm them in their Religion; and, giving them his
Blessing, dismissed them in a Deluge of Tears. The Prince Elector and the Duke
of Richmond, had also obtained Permission to visit the King, though His Majesty
now intent only upon his Meditations, would not admit them, how dear soever to
him.

And now, the Fatal Day, the 30th. of January being come, the King being
guarded from St. James's through the Park on Foot, he spoke to the Soldiers to
go faster, saving, That he now went before them to strive for a Heavenly Crown,
with less solicitude, The King prepares for his End.
than he had often encouraged his Soldiers to Fight for an Earthly Diadem.
Being come to White Hall, he spent most of his time there in his Devotions.
And, having received the Blessed Communion, he was much raised, by the reading
of the History of the Passion of our Savior, described by the Evangelist St.
Matthew; and, more particularly, when he knew it was not done upon Design, but
prescribed by the Rubric for the Service of the Day. Being brought through the
Banqueting House to the Stage, covered with Black; the Block, the Axe, and the
masqued Executioners presented themselves to his Sight. Which did not so much
dismay his Heart, fortified with Innocence and Piety, but, that his Care for
the Living seemed no less, than his Solicitude for Dying. He therefore, lest he
might seem to submit to the Guilt as well as the Punishment, in Vindication of
his Innocence, demonstrated;

That it was not He, but the Two-Houses that began the War. He acknowledges God
's Justice, in punishing one Unjust Sentence with another. He not only
forgiveth his most bitter Enemies, but prays also, that God will Pardon them.
Being solicitous for Peace, he warns them not to seek it by Conquest; but, to
give God, the King and People their due: God, by settling the Church; the King,
according to Law; and, the People, by such a Government, whereby their Lives
and Goods might be most their own. Finally he told them, He dyed the Peoples
Martyr, and a Christian, according to the Profession of the Church of England.

After some short Prayers, he submitted his Head to the Axe; an unheard of, and
surprising Example of Human Fragility. It is wonderful, with how much Constancy
and Christian Fortitude, He his Murdered.
he laid down his Head, used to wear Crowns; and, with what Meekness, who by
all Laws Divine and Human, was exempt from the Penalties of any. Perhaps
insulting, in that he was to change this Earthly Crown (however splendid, yet
heavy) for that of Immortal Glory. As he seemed to intimate, in that prophetic
Anagram, composed by himself, the Day preceding his Martyrdom.

CAROLUS REX.

Cras ero Lux.

And truly, as there was never any Parricide, except that of our Savior, so
detestable as this; so, never any Man was equally lamented, as this best of
Princes. No Sex, nor Age, nor Order of Men was found, that did not mourn this
universal Loss. Children, how little soever, sensible of the Public, dissolved
in Tears, could hardly be appeased. Those who were more advanced in Years,
could scarce bear their Sorrow: Whilst the Weaker, not able to support their
Grief, as Thunderstruck, sunk under it. And, Breeding-Women, labored with
Untimely Births; and, like her, who, when the Glory was departed from Israel,
would admit of no Consolation. And truly, not only his own Subjects, but the
Universality of Mankind (for, Quae Regio in Terris, nostri non plaena Doloris?)
did lament the undeserved Fate of this Prince. Nay, the outrageous Faction it
self, did blush to approve the Infamy of so flagitious an Act. The Factions
disapproving the Infamy of the Regicide, impute it to each other.
The Presbyterians, to shift the Envy of it from themselves, threw it upon the
Independants, condemning upon the Stage, what they had designed in the
Tyring-room. But, whether out of true Sentiments of Repentance, or, that they
could act no further, let them look to that; being equally Regicides in their
Intentions, though not in the Execution. The Independants said, That they only
put to Death, a Private Man, and an Enemy. The King had been long since killed
by the Presbyterians, as being despoiled of his Prerogative, whereby he
excelled others; of the Militia, wherewith he protected his Subjests; and, of
his Freedom of Vote, whereby he made Laws. They also remembered, How he had been
divested and robbed of his Liberty, as a Commoner; of the Society of his Wife,
as a Husband; of the Conversation of his Children, as a Parent; of the
Attendance of his Servants, as a Master: Yea, of every Thing that might render
his Life comfortable. So, that there was nothing left for the Independants to
do, but to put an end to the Calamities, wherewith this Man of Sorrow, had been
so cruelly overwhelmed and afflicted by the Presbyterians. But, who ever were
the Authors of this Impiety, we grieve at what they did; which, seeing it
cannot be undone, we may wish, that the Memory of it may perish, with them who
designed and perpetrated so Hellish a Mischief.

Nor had the Scelerates of the Faction, yet satisfied their Cruelty. They were
inhumanly barbarous to his Dead Corpse. Their Inhumanities after his Death.
His Hair and his Blood were sold by Parcels. Their Hands and Sticks were
tinged with his Blood: And, the Block now chipt, as also the Sand sprinkled
with his Sacred Gore, were exposed to sale. Which were greedily bought, but,
for different Ends; by some, as Trophies of their slain Enemy, and by others,
as precious Relics of their beloved Prince. It is certain, that Cromwell, to
satisfy his greedy Eyes, had caused the Coffin to be opened in White Hall; and,
did with his Fingers search the-Wound, as if he had still doubted of the
effecting of his Hellish Cruelty. Nor did it suffice, to have raged against him
living, and dead; they will also, for as much as in them lies, kill his very
Fame. Which they endeavored to do, by the enslaved Pen of a needy Pedagogue,
one Milton. Salmasius indeed had writ a Defense for the King; but, he being a
Presbyterian, as the other an Independent, both very good Latin (if we believe
the Learned Hobbs) and hardly to be judged which is better; and, both very ill
Reasoning, and hardly to be judged which is worst.

And thus both Houses, as they had often sworn with hands lift up to Heaven,
did make him a Great and Glorious King, by changing his Fading Crown, which
they had interwoven with Thorns, into an Immortal and Incorruptible one. They
made him great indeed; great in Suffering, in Patience, His Character.
and great in his Martyrdom. Thus fell Charles the Great and Just, Monarch of
sometimes Three flourishing Kingdoms. A great Example, if any, of both
Fortunes. The Best of Kings, The Meekest of Men. His Countenance was Comely and
Majestic. He was Constant, Valiant, Pious, Eloquent; of infinite Reason and
Reading. His Integrity was entire, and no Guile found in his Mouth. His public
and private Virtues were eminent. He had been born for the Good of Mankind, if
he had not fallen amongst Monsters, not Men. The best of Princes, the best of
Men; the best Parent, the best Husband, the best Master. Famous for Patience,
for Piety, for Chastity, for Justice; and of an unshaken Fidelity toward God
and Man. His Greatness only rend'red him Guilty; being, by the Suffrages of his
most bitter Enemies, worthy of Empire, if he had not reigned.

The Royal Corpse being embalmed, and exposed for some Days to public View at
St. James's, was afterward delivered to Mr. Herbert, And Funeral.
one of his Servants, to be translated to Windsor. He had earnestly solicited,
to have had it deposited in Henry VII's Chapel, near to the Monument of King
James. But, they refused it, lest the Place, as they said, might be profaned
by the Superstitious Concourse of the People. He was therefore carried ^o
Windsor, by the Direction of the Duke of Lenox, the Marquess of Hartford, and
the Earls of Southampton and Linsey, who had got leave ^^om the Faction for the
decent Enterrment of their ^ear Lord, provided the Funeral-Charges did not
^xceed Five Hundred Pounds. These Sacred Re^^ques being then born by the
Officers of the Garri^on, attended on by the Four Lords, were laid (...) Henry
VIII's Vault. It is observable, that ^^ough the Air was serene when they set
out, before they reached the Chappel-Door, the ^^erse of Black Velvet which
covered them, was all White with Snow; which seemed to fall, to testify their
Candor and Innocence.

But, it troubled the Assistants, that the Fanatic Governor would not permit
them the Use of the Common Prayer, the Bishop of London attending there to do
this Last Office to his Dearest Master. So, that he was interred with the Sighs
and Tears of his Servants.

And thus, Lam. C. 4. V. 20.
the Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken in their Pits;
of whom we said, Under his Shadow, we shall live among the Heathen.

COMMENTARIES ON THE REBELLION OF England, Scotland and Ireland.
PART II.
BOOK I.
The Regicides prohibit the proclaiming of the Prince of Wales. They abolish
the House of Lords, and the Government by Kings. Choose a Council of State.
Displace and Fine the Lord Mayor for refusing to publish the Act for abolishing
of Monarchy. Declare they will-maintain the Fundamental Laws. Erect a High
Court of Justice. Hamilton, Holland and Capell, condemned by it and murdered.
Several Acts of State. The Scots proclaim Charles II. Some Actions of the
Levellers. The King leaves Holland, and goes by Brussels into France. The Duke
of Gloucester, banished. Continuance of the History of Ireland. The King at
Jersey. Prince Rupert Sails from Kinsale to Portugal. Loses his Brother Prince
Maurice, by a Hurrycane. The King at Breda, Treats and Concludes with the
Scots. Montrosse's unfortunate End. Fairfax routed, and Cromwell General. His
Actions in Scotland. The Scots barbarous Usage of the King. They are defeated
at Dunbar. The King crowned at Schone. He enters England. The Battle of
Worcester. The King's miraculous Escape.

CHarles the Martyr being removed by a Parricide black as its Authors, as is
declared in our former Commentaries, the Regicides endeavor with the same Fury
to supplant his Son, Heir of his Diadems and Virtues; in order to which, they
immediately after his Fathers Death, The Regicides prohibit the proclaiming of
the Prince of Wales.
made an Act, prohibiting the proclaiming of the Prince of Wales without
consent of Parliament, and that under pain of High Treason. This Decree being
dispatched by swift Messengers into all Counties, the High Sheriffs had
likewise Orders sent them, to see the same published with all Expedition; which
was likewise done. Their next care was, to disable the Secluded Members from
being admitted to sit for the future; which was performed, by voting them quite
out of the House, as desiring no more sharers in their Oligarchy. The House of
Lords came next under consideration. These had sent a Message to the Commons,
for a Committee to settle the Kingdom; which, upon no great Debate, was refused
Admittance, They abolish the House of Lords.
and a Vote passed, that the House of Peers in Parliament, is useless and
dangerous, and ought to be abolished; and consequently was laid aside: being
the less pittyed, because they had so unnaturally abandoned their Sovereign.
Only they had this Comfort left, that they might sit in the Lower House (if
they had the luck to be elected) which some did, as Pembrooke, Salisbury,
Escreek. This is in no wise mentioned, to reflect upon those honored Peers who
attended the King in all his Fortunes; those we honor for their eminent
Courage and Loyalty; but, upon that hated Juncto, that continued their Session
even to this Moment. And yet they will not separate without a Protestation
against these Tyrannical Proceedings of the Commoners, affirming, And
Monarchical Government.
their Treason and Insolences exceeded those of the Malignants, that is, the
Loyal Party. And now, the Kingly Government was likewise abolished, under
pretense, that it was chargeable, useless and dangerous. And that Monarchy
which had continued from the Beginning of Times, changed into a detestable and
many-headed Tyranny, under the Chymerical Title of a Free State.

This being done, the Pseudo-Parliament (for they still abused the reverend
Title of Parliament, by assurning it, as most grateful to the People) to ease
themselves of part of the Government, choose a Council of State, upon which
they transfer the Execution Part of the same. Choose a Council of State.
These were Forty in Number, chief Officers of the Army, and other principal
Sticklers of the party, sufficiently infamous in their own Persons, tho they
had not chosen that execrable Parricide Bradshaw for their President; whom they
also gratify with the Donation of 2000 l. per Annum.

The City seemed all this while uneasy; which put our Usurpers, upon
diminishing their Greatness; which they did. Reynoldson, the Lord Mayor, had
refused to publish their Act for abolishing Monarchy, which enraged them to
that Height, that they cast him into the Tower, fine him 2000 l. and also put
him from his Employment, electing Alderman Andrews, Displace and fine the Lord
Mayor, for refusing to proclaim the Act for abolishing Kingly Government.
one of the Regicides, in his place. They further empower any Ten of the Common
Council (which was modelled to their Design, by new choice of young, needy,
enthusiastic Fellows, in stead of the grave and wealthy Citizens whom they had
elected) to convent this City-Senate where they pleased, tho the Lord Mayor
should not consent to it.

But as they had displeased some, they would content others, especially the
Populace; which they did, by rescinding the old Laws against Heresy and Schism;
which opening a vast Door to Libertinism, procured them very many Proselytes.
Abrogate Laws against Schism and Here^y.
This Religious Indulgence in opinions strangely distracted the Commonwealth;
insomuch, that they burst out into infinite Errors and Schisms, being mainly
animated by the Hystrionick preaching of their Itinerant Teachers,
industriously displaying the Doctrine of the Democraticks, and holding forth a
Liberty in Holy Things. But, upon more serious consideration, lest these
Concessions of Liberty might terminate in Confusion, it was thought fit, at
least seemingly, to countenance Presbytery, as most popular; but, with a strict
inhibition: For, these busy Ministers, were curbed by an Act, wherein according
to the method of the Low Countries, they were forbid, under severe Penalties,
to meddle with any Affairs of State. They moreover endeavor, Allow of
Presbytery.
to draw these Dissenters to their Fold, promising generally to all their
Preachers, Settlements out of the Kings Revenue. Nay further, they tell these,
that differing from the King in Civil Interest, puts them at a greater Distance
from him, than any Contests about Religion could do. They add, that the
Presbyterians first raised War against him, subdued him and delivered him to
the Independants to be put to Death. That his Successor therefore would
consider them, as equally noxious and criminal; and therefore insinuate that
they ought in Prudence for their own preservation, to join with them in their
common Defense.

Declare they will maintain he Fundamental Laws.
However, they will flatter the People, by declaring, that they were fully
resolved to maintain the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, as to the preservation
of the Lives, Liberties and Properties of the Subject, saving those
Alterations, concerning the King and House of Lords already made. And yet at
this very time, they levied Taxes, by Soldiers, permitting them free Quarters:
and, contrary to all Laws, erect a pretended High Court of Justice, with the
same bloody President, But erect a High Court of Justice.
who being gorged with Royal Blood, would not stick at any other Sacrifice how
Sanguineous soever. And now, as they had subverted Monarchy, the most excellent
Form of Government, by murdering their Prince, so they will lay the Foundation
of their new Republic, in the Blood of his Nobles.

Hamilton, Holland, and Capel condemned and murdered by i^.
Duke Hamilton, by the Title of Earl of Cambridge; was the first that ascended
this Fatal Tribunal, of whom it was doubted, whether his Ambition or Infidelity
were greater. The Earl of Holland, the most ungrateful of Men, followed him;
yet, both deserving our Sentiments of Pity in this, that when they would have
been good they could not. Both had pleaded Quarter, but in vain, tho Hamilton
had offered vast Sums for his Ransom; and Holland urged, the many S^^vices he
had formerly done for the Parliament. The generous Lord Capell, was the third
in this Scene of Blood, involved in the same Fate with the other; but lamented
with more real Sorrow, because of his eminent Loyalty and Virtues. He had not
been wanting in his defense with those unmerciful Judges (who had already
resolved his Death) chiefly insisting upon the Quarter given at Colchester; but
to no purpose, Fairfax then in Court no less impiously than unsouldierly,
interpreting, that the said Quarter, regarded only the Military not the Civil
Power. His Colleagues had argued much in extenuation of the Crimes objected
against them. But he being brought to the Scaffold, behaving himself with a
most Christian Bravery, looking upon the People with Assurance, told them
amongst other Things, That he was brought thither, for obeying the Fifth
Commandment, written by Gods immediate Finger, which commands Obedience to the
Magistrate; and paying his Duty to his King, the most pious, most virtuous, and
most sufficient of Princes. As for the present King, having been his
Councellor, he affirmed, That he never saw greater Hope of Virtue in any young
Person than in him; great Judgment, great Understanding, great Apprehension,
much Honor in his Nature, and a very perfect Englishman in his Inclination.
By which just Character, he raised and renewed the Desires of the People after
so deserving a Prince. As for himself, in Imitation of our blessed Martyr's
Ingenuity about the Death of the Illustrious Strafford; he confessed, That he
had given his Vote to that Bill that took away h^s Life, which he greatly
bewailed: And, at length, having earnestly prayed for the King, the People and
his Murderers, he was indisputably added to the Number of the Blessed.

Norwich and Owen reprieved.
The Earl of Norwich and Sir John Owen both signal for their Loyalty and eminent
Endeavors in the late War, were likewise condemned to the Block; but both
reprieved by the glutted Votes of the House, tho they will make other Examples
in other parts of the Kingdom. Beaumont a Minister, was hanged at Pomfret,
Others in other parts put to Death.
being Chaplain to that Garrison. Major Monday, was shot to Death at Lancaster.
Morris dyed with no less Bravery, than he had lived Nine Months in the Defense
of Pomfret. Poyer, one of the Three revolted Grandees in Wales, was likewise
shot to Death; his Comrades, Laughorne and Powell, escaping by Lot, which was
indulged to all, by reason of their former great Services the to
Rebel-Parliament. There were also some others, slaughtered upon the same
account; Unhappy Monuments of unfortunate Loyalty, and the Regicides Cruelty.
Tho several considerable Persons, eluding the Sagacity of their Keepers,
escaped; as, Col. Massey, Sir Lewis Dives, Mr. Holden, the Lord Capell (tho
unfortunately betrayed into their Hands again) the Lord Loughberow, and others.

Nor was it only against the persons of Men that these Tyrants raged; they also
seized the King and the Churches Patrimony, Revenues, Palaces, etc. and force
such of the Cavaliers as they did not confiscate, to a ruinous Ransom of their
Estates. And now, to render the Peoples Obedience to the Usurpation more easy,
they absolve them from all Oaths made to their Sovereign and his Posterity, but
will enchange them with a more rigid one; obtruding an Instrument upon them,
whereby, they engage themselves to be true to the Commonwealth of England,
Several Acts of State.
without King or House of Lords. And now, having declared themselves a Free
State, make it Treason in any, who by Word or Writing should dare to oppose
them as such, or should contrive the death of the General, the Lieutenant
General, or kill any Member of their Parliament. They also put a Period to
their Monthly Fast, God having indulged them what they fasted for, the Death of
the King, and Possession of his Inheritance.

They had already made a new Great Seal, with this Inscription; In the first
year of Freedom by God's Blessing restored, 1648. They also took down the
King's Statue from the West End of St. Paul's; and that other in the Old
Exchange, putting this Inscription under the Niche in Letters of Gold, tho with
no less Falseness than Impudence: Exit Tyrannus, Regum ultimus, 1648. But they
could persuade but half of their Judges, tho all made such by them, to comply
with their Change; however, they easily supplied the Vacancies. And now they
proceed to another Act of State, which was, coining of Moneys, marked with the
Arms of England and Ireland, on one Side, and on the Reverse, with the House of
Commons; to demonstrate thereby their Sovereignty, wherever their Traffic
might extend.

The Scots in the mean Time (in whose power it had once been to restore the
late King to his Royal Throne) exagitated with the Guilt of having sold him,
found the Infamy of it aggravated by his calamitous Murder. They therefore, to
vindicate themselves from so black a Crime, as they had declared their Dissent
against His Majesty's Trial, so they protested highly against his Death: and,
acknowledging the Succession of his Son Charles II. proclaim him King with
great Pomp and Solemnity; The Scots proclaim K. Charles II.
which being done, they dispatched Commissioners to acquaint his Majesty with
it, who was then at the Hague, attended by a noble Train of Peers and
Gentlemen, who followed his Fortunc.

It will be now Time to return to the Army. The Faction had quite suppressed the
Fast, and Perverseness of the Presbyterians. And with the same ease, oppressed
the Levelling Sect of those, The Story of the Levellers.
who pretended to a Community, and Equality of all Things. The Soldiery
actuated with the Leven of the Agitators, did not only dream, but consult of
dividing the Possessions of the Kingdom amongst the Godly, that is, themselves.
Cromwell had brought them to his Lure with these kind of Baits before the
King's Murder, with the Hopes whereof, they were grown numerous in the Army:
But seeing no Effects of these fine Promises, began to be troublesome and
tumultuous; in so much, that Lockier, one of their Ringleaders, was shot to
Death; though sumptuously butyed by the Rabble of his Party. This Execution,
rather madded than appeased them; and, being too feeble a Remedy for so growing
an Evil, it was thought fit to separate them; which was attempted, by voting
Eleven Regiments of these Mutineers for Ireland. But this enraged them to that
Height, that perceiving that instead of enjoying those Happinesses they had
been deluded with, they were exposed to new Hazards, and the Dangers of a
starving War; they absolutely declare, they will not go for Ireland, till the
Peoples Liberties, for which the Army first engaged, were secured. These also
require, that the so often promised Representative might be chosen. They
inveigh against the High-Court of Justice, and Council of State, as tyrannous,
not without blaming the Injustice and Illegality of the Regicide. They add,
That the People had only changed, not shaken off their Yoke; and, that the
Rump's little Finger, was heavier than the King's Loins, etc. And because
Discourses were fruitless, they fly to Arms. Scroope's Regiment of Horse,
quartering at Salisbury, having cashiered all their Officers, march with their
Colors to join with those of Harrison, Ireton, Skippon and others (confederated
by the briguing of the Agitators) which they had also done, if they had not
been prevented by the extraordinary Diligence of Cromwell and Fairfax, who
posting Forty Miles in one Day, overtook them at Abington. But, being doubtful
of the Event, they offer a Treaty, wherein satisfaction might be mutually
given; and till that were effected, that neither Party might come within Ten
Miles of each other. Things being upon these Terms, the Levellers march to
Burford, where resting secure, upon the Engagement of those Twins of Perfidy
and Ambition, They are suppressed.
the General and Lieutenant General, they had their Quarters surprised, and
beaten up about Midnight by Reynolds, where Four Hundred of them were made
Prisoners, and Nine Hundred of their Horses taken. The Democraticks or
Levellers being thus defeated, our brave Hero's march to Oxford, where both of
them, Fairfax and Cromwell, were made Doctors of Law, who had themselves
trampled upon all Laws both Divine and Human. After this, having visited
Portsmouth, they return to London in Triumph, where after a Thanksgiving for
their late Successes, they were together with their Servile Senate, invited,
treated, and regaled by the more Servile City; who again, not to seem
ungrateful, or rather to entangle them in their Interest, bestowed New-Park,
with all the Deer in it, upon the Citizens.

The Regicides being now secure at home, at least in Appearance, began to look
after Foreign Correspondence and Amities. Amongst which, the Friendship of the
United Netherlands seemed preferable, by reason of their Neighborhood, of
their Resemblance in Government, and the Genius of the Nation. Dorislawes and
Ascham, in their Embassies.
Doctor Dorislawes, a Civilian, as also a German by Birth, was sent thither
with Instructions, not only to propose a strict Friendship, but also a
Coalition of both People: But he was prevented in it, being assassinated in his
Lodging by one Whitford a Scot; who with Ten or Twelve more, having perpetrated
the Fact, withdrew without any Pursuit, though they were afterward colourably
summoned in by the States. The reason of this Remissness, was his presuming to
appear, as it were in the King's presence, having contributed so eminently to
the Ruin of his Father. And thus God permitted one Injustice, to be retaliated
with another. Nor had Ascham (another of their Envoy's at Madrid) better Fate,
being killed in his Inn, upon his Arrival, by one Sparks an Englishman; who
though he took Sanctuary, was pulled thence by the Spaniard, apprehending the
rising Greatness of the new Commonwealth; for, the Regicides had declared,
though they much esteemed the Amity of so great a King, yet they ought, and did
require the punishment of so Nefarious a Parricide (as they called it) adding,
that unless Justice were immediately satisfied, they did not see how the
Friendship betwixt both Nations could be sincere and durable.

The King acknowledged at the Hague.
The King had continued hitherto at the Hague, acknowledged and reverenced by
all; and though the States, that they might not altogether seem to displease
their Sister Commonwealth, of whom they began to be jealous, had dispensed
with the Ceremony of Public Congratulation, yet the Swede and Danish
Ambassadors had saluted His Majesty with the usual Testimonies of Condolence
and Congratulation. He was also King in Possession, Scotland having proclaimed
him, and Ireland being upon the point of being reduced; so that, his Affairs
calling him away, he left the Hague, and being attended by the Princess Royal,
his Sister, and the Prince of Orange, his Brother-in-law (to whose generous
Friendship he owed all Things) through Rotterdam, Dort and Breda, Treated
magnificently by the Archduke.
being received at these Places with the noise of their Cannon and Bells, and
all other marks of Honor, he came to Antwerpe, the principal City of the
Spanish Netherlands, where he was magnificently entertained and presented with
a rich Chariot, and Eight brave Horses, sent him by Archduke Leopold,
Governor of the Low Countries. His Majesty was also Royally treated by him at
Brussels; from whence after some Stay, being conveyed on his way to France by
the Duke of Lorrain, Goes into France.
and feasted and honored every where with the same Grandeur, as if the King of
Spain had been there; he came to Compeigne, where the French King, accompanied
with a great Train of his Nobility, received him with all the Testimonies of
Affection and Honor, and brought him thence in State to his Mother, the Queen
of Great Britain, then at St. Germians.

Whilst the King was in France, the Duke of Gloucester, his Brother, and the
Lady Elizabeth, his Sister, both Princes of divine Endowments and Hopes, were
removed from the Earl of Northumberland's Guardianship, to Carisbrook Castle,
(infamous for having been the Prison of their Martyred Father) to the custody
of that impure Villain Anthony Mildmay; The Lady Elizabeth dies, and the D. of
Gloucester is banished.
where the Princess (afflicted with the daily Sight of that odious Mansion, and
consumed with Grief, and the Maladies it occasioned) breathed her last, being
denied by those barbarous Parricides, the Assistance of such Physicians as she
had desired. Her Brother the Duke, was presently after banished out of England
by the Regicides; the only agreeable Thing they did, in rescuing him out of
their Bloody Hands by their own Act.

The Kingdom being thus subdued, and the Army reduced to Obedience; the
Mock-Parliament or Rump (for, Continuation of the History of Ireland.
it grew famous, by that Title of Infamy) thought Ireland now worthy their
consideration. They therefore Vote Eleven Regiments to be sent thither, under
the conduct of Cromwell, with the Title of Lord Governor, whereof he was very
fond, which he could not forbear testifying for all his Dissimulation. The Fame
of these Preparations immediately flew over, which obliged the Irish Rebels,
however dissenting amongst themselves, to think of uniting for their Public
Safety, and, although the Nuntio opposed this Confederation with all his Power,
excommunicating the Authors of it, whilst they declared him and his Party
Traitors, resolving to force him by Arms; which they did, The Popes Nuntio
expelled.
driving him into Galloway for his security, where they pressed him so hard, that
notwithstanding the Thunder of his Excommunication, he was necessitated for his
personal safety, to abandon his Principality and the Kingdom.

The Irish-Grandees thus at Liberty, invite and obtain the Marquess of Ormond
(as is mentioned in our former Commentaries) with an Assurance of an entire
Obedience to his Majesty's Lieutenant. He being arrived, the Confederates grew
formidable by the Accession of the Lord Inchequin, President of Munster, and
the Scots in the Province of Vlster. Both these had served the Parliament with
much Vigor, until the King and Monarchy had been destroyed in England; but
abhorring the sordid Tyranny of the Regicides, they deserted that Party they
had so unjustly followed, and return to their Duty and Allegiance to their
Sovereign.

Owen-Roe-Oneal refused to be included in the Confederacy, upon pretense that
sufficient Provisions had not been made for the Security of their Religion;
but, in reality, because the Confederate Delegates, had foolishly denied the no
extravagant Conditions, which his Quality seemed to require, and he had
demanded. The Difference was about the Command of Four Thousand Men, which they
were willing to grant, and Six Thousand which he insisted upon, which they
afterward tho too late (after his conjunction with Monk and Coot, and his
relieving of Londonderry) were glad to assent to.

During these Traverses, the Marquess of Ormond entered upon the Government,
The Marquis of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
but with too precarious and Authority: for, he was forced to grant every thing
the Irish insisted upon; and consent, that Inchequin should have Munster entire
to himself, for the subsistence of his Army; which was indeed the Ruin of the
Old Irish Regiments of that Province. The Peace being thus made up, and these
several Interests, however ill cemented, seeming to acquiesce in the main,
their Obedience to the King; and Army was raised by the extraordinary Labor
and Prudence of the Lord Lieutenant, and being reinforced with the considerable
Troops of the Lords, Inchequin, Clanrickard and Castel-Haven, they marched
toward Dublin. Inchequin was by the Impatience of the English and Scots
Forces, declared Lieutenant General of the Army. Raises an Army.
Clanrickard and Castel-Haven seem disgusted with this Preference, tho both
acquiesced, preferring their Loyalty before the satisfaction their Merits might
deservedly challenge. Col. Jones, Governor of Dublin, advanced with his Forces
as far as the Naas to obstruct the March of the Army; but being unequal in
Numbers, retreated into the City again. Ormond had omitted no Caresses, to draw
this brave Rebel to his Party and Duty again; but in vain, he obstinately
persevering in an Infidelity which he had engaged in, for Spite, because a
Lieutenant Colonel had been preferred over his Head. Which may serve for a
President, not to prejudice deserving Men in their just pretenses; tho no
Excuse can serve to vail those abominable Sins of Perfidy and Rebellion.

Ormond encamped his Army at Finglas, being content at present to shut the
Garrison within their Walls, and keep them from foraging, until the several
parts of his Army were come up to him. Inchequin now Lieutenant General, was
sent with a strong Party to reduce the neighboring Fortresses, possessed by the
Enemies Garrisons; which he did, defeating also a Batalion of Oneal's Men
commanded by Farell, marching to the Relief of the Nuncio. He also routed the
younger Coot with the Dublin-Horse, and had Dundalk delivered to him by the
Garrison, who also entered into the Kings Pay, Inchequins Successes.
notwithstanding the endeavor of Colonel Monk their Governor to the contrary,
and their promises to stick close to him. Trim, the Newry and Tredagh it self,
ran the same Fortune; so that all being cleared on that side, Inchequin
returned triumphant, and increased in numbers by so many Victories, to the Camp
again; where it was forthwith resolved, by Advice of the Peers and the Council
of War, to invest and press the City with all their power.

Dublin, the Seat of the Kingdom and the War, called by Ptolomy, Eblana, and by
the Irish, Balaeleigh, because founded upon Piles and Hurdles, is seated at the
Mouth of the Liffny, which would render the Haven very commodious, but that it
is obstructed by Heaps of Sand, often thrown up by Reciprocation of the Sea.
This City was first fortified with Works and a Garrison by the King, and after
by the Parliament, being now very defensible by its Numbers and Fortifications.
But, the Lord Lieutenant relying upon his great Army, consisting of at least
Twenty Thousand, and the Defection of the Soldiers in Dublin, whereof most had
formerly served under his Command, and daily came over to him, Ormond besieges
Dublin.
resolved upon a vigorous and close besieging of the Place; in Order to which,
leaving the Lord Dillon with a strong Party at Castel-knock, he transferred his
Camp to the South side of the City; and, that he might wholly shut up the
Enemy, and particularly their Horses and Cattle from grazing, he commanded a
Fort to be built at Baggot-rath, giving the Charge of this considerable Trust
to Patrick-Purcell, Major General of the Army. Some Regiments from England were
in the mean time Landed at Dublin, under the Conduct of Reynolds and Venables,
to the Number of Three Thousand Horse and Foot; whereupon, a Rumor was spread,
that Cromwell himself designed for Munster, as not yet confirmed in their
Defection from their late Masters. This Report obliged Inchequin, to desire the
Lord Lieutenant's permission to go thither, affirming, all his Troops would
revolt, unless prevented by his speedy Repair to them; which Ormond, not being
in a condition to refuse, was forced to assent to. He parted then with Eleven
Hundred Horse, dividing thus the Army, whereas the whole did scarce suffice for
the Enterprise in Hand.

Jones the Governor of Dublin, perceiving the Progress of the Work at
Baggot-rath, and considering that if it were finished, it would entirely shut
him up from all Commerce by Sea as well as Land, Aug. 22. 1648.
resolved to obstruct it by a vigorous Sally; which he did; for, the Garrison
rushing out upon the Pioneers, easily dispersed them, and with the same
Facility dispersed the Watch that guarded them, and possessing the Place,
routed the amazed Irish; and, their Courage increasing with their Success, they
pursued them to the Avenues of their Camp, where falling upon the Guards there,
who seemed rather to look on, than prepare for Defense, they put them likewise
to Flight. The remaining Garrison in the Town, The Siege is raised.
seeing the success of their Friends, together with the Inhabitants, flew all
to their Assistance, and with very little Pains, obtained a very great Victory.
For, the Army being upon the sudden surprised, with a more than Panick Fear,
the Soldiers forgetful of their Defense, threw down their Arms and ran away.
In this Confusion, there were about Three Thousand slain, amongst whom Sir
William Vaughan was one, who had also fought well: The Prisoners were no fewer.
Colonel Butler, the Lord Lieutenant's Brother, and a Hundred Officers, being
of the Number. The Cannon, the Camp, and the immense Spoils of it, sell to the
present sharing of the Conquerors; and, presently after, the whole Kingdom, the
Forces of it being irrecoverably lost by this Blow. Ormond who had spent the
Night on Horseback in rounding and viewing the several Posts of the Army, being
but newly laid to rest, was raised, by the coming of the Lord Taffe, General of
the Ordnance, but too late, the Camp being distracted with Fear, and its
Consequence, Confusion. He therefore, in this General Consternation, having in
vain opposed himself to this resistless Torrent, until abandoned by them that
followed him, hastened to the Lord Dillon's Camp; but those Irish had fled upon
the Noise, having scarce seen the Enemy.

About this Time Londonderry was likewise relieved by Owen Roe-Oneal,
Londonderry relieved.
the most bloody of the Irish Rebels; who leaguing with Coot and Monk, as above
mentioned, forced the Scots from that Siege.

But, as if these Misfortunes had been but light ones, they were followed by a
grievous Plague, brought to Gallowav by a Spanish Vessel; which raged with that
Fury, that it swept away many Thousands in that City, and the Neighboring
Country. To heighten these Calamities, Cromwell, the worst of Plagues, who
ruined not only Persons, but whole Cities and Provinces, Landed at Dublin with
an Army of Fifteen Thousand, Horse and Foot. They were not very forward till
they heard the Siege was raised, and the Royallists overcome; and, in
probability, if Dublin had been taken, would never have attempted the
Re-Conquest of Ireland. But now they fly to share in the Spoils of a regained
Kingdom, Cromwell Lands in Ireland with an Army.
and Cromwell will triumph for another's Victory. Having refreshed and mustered
his Army, he marched with it to Tredah. This Town was well fortifyed, and a
Garrison in it of Two Thousand Five Hundred Foot and Three Hundred Horse, the
Flower of the Royal Army, under the command of Sir Arthur Aston, a brave and
experienced Soldier. The Lord Lieutenant had foreseen, that this Place, by
reason of its Neighborhood and Situation, would be first attempted; it not
being advisable in the Enemy, to leave so considerable a Fortress behind him.
And, he hoped he might have time to recruit his shattered Army, and repair the
Loss of his late Overthrow, which he endeavored with all his Might, whilst
Cromwell was employed in the difficulties of the Siege. But, this impatient
Conqueror, omitting the common Forms of approaching and turnings, fell to
battering, and made two accessible Breaches in the Walls, which were Twice
bravely assaulted, and Twice no less valiantly defended, the Enemy being as
often repelled; until reinforced by Cromwell's presence and conduct, renewing
the Storm, having slain Colonel Wall in the Breach, they at length entered. A
tumultuous offer of Quarter being made, and accepted sooner than it ought to
have been, was the Ruin of the Defendants, and, by their incautious Facility,
of the whole Garrison: For, the Town being thus taken, they were all put to the
Sword; though they did not fall unrevenged, for they fought in every Street,
the Marketplace, and from the Houses and Towers whither they had retreated.
Ashton the Governor, withdrew into the Castle, where the Enemy entering
Pell-Mell with his Men, slew him. Others who fled into a Tower, imploring the
Enemies Clemency, Takes Tredah.
were forced to yield to a Decimation, about Thirty of the Remainder of them,
being condemned to the Plantations in the Western Islands. There fell besides
the Governor, several brave Men, amongst whom Sir Edmond Varney; the
Colonels, Warren, Flemming, and Brinn; Lieutenant Colonel Finglass, Major
Tempest, and many other Gentlemen and Officers. The Garrison being slain, the
City was spoiled and pillaged; and, though it had repelled the Fury of the
Irish Catholic-Rebels for three whole Years, it did not suffice to resist the
Force of the English Fanatic Rebels, the space of one Week.

I would not condemn the promiscuous slaughter of the Citizens and Soldiers,
of Cruelty, because it might be intended for Example and Terror to others, if
the like Barbarity had not been committed elsewhere. The Garrison of Trim and
Dundalke, apprehending the Fate of Tredah, quit them; which the Enemy having
taken possession of, Cromwell marches with his Army to Wexfora'; and, having
routed a Party of Inchequi^^ to his way, had the Castle betrayed to him (...)
Strafford that commanded it. The Town was otherwise strong by Situation, and a
good Garrison; but being thus surprised, was assaulted, and entered, all being
put to the Sword with the same Cruelty as at Tredah. Wexford being taken, he
hasts to Rosse, Wexford and Rosse.
a Port capable of very great Vessels, seated upon the Banks of the Barrow.
After some great shot, this Place was delivered undefended, and in sight of the
King's Army, by Luke Taffe, who was permitted to pass with his Garrison,
consisting of Fifteen Hundred Men, to Kilkenny, besides Six Hundred English,
who deserted and took Pay with their Countrymen. Cromwell, after so easy a
Victory, passes the River upon a Bridge of Boats, with design to force Ormond
to Fight, or oblige him to separate his Army. The English, in the mean time,
besieged Duncannon, which was relieved by an Artifice of Castel-haven's. He
sent over in Boats, (the Tract being at least Three Miles) by favor of the
Night, Fourscore Horses, with their Saddles and Accoutrements, but without
Riders. These were mounted by English, most Reformado-Officers; who, Duncannon
relieved.
under the Conduct of Colonel Woogan, the Governor, sallied out with so much
Suddeness and Vigor, that the Enemy, knowing they had no Horse before, and
feeling them now, fancied that the Royallists from without, had broken into
their Camp; with the Apprehension whereof, leaving some Cannon behind, they
tumultuously ran away.

The King's Army was by this very numerous and strong, being increased by the
Forces of Inchequin, Ardes, and Oneal; who being rejected by the Fanatics, had
also complied. But, they omitted a fair Opportunity in not attempting it, that
is, to wage Battle, their Soldiers being cheerful and willing, and the Enemy
on the other side, weary and faint with so many Toils and Sicknesses. But,
these Forces, how great soever, mouldered away through the Dissensions of their
Chief-taines; for want of Pay, and conveniences; by the Aversion of the great
Cities and Towns, which refused to contribute to the Public; and by the daily
deserting of the British, allured by the Temptation of Cremwel's Money and his
promises of Preferment. By these means, Reynolds took Carrick, in part betrayed
to him; which the Royallists attempted to recover in vain. Cromwell who had
lain sometime Sick at Rosse, being restored to his Health, formed a Design upon
Waterford, which he notwithstanding deferred, when he perceived the Constancy
and Resolution of the Citizens to defend themselves. And now, not willing to
tempt Fortune any further, The Chief Towns of Munster revolt to the Regicides.
having taken Passage Fort, a very strong Place, he resolved to put his
Soldiers into Winter Quarters: which he also did, very opportunely, by the
traitorous Surrender of Cork, Youg-hall, and the other Fortresses of Munster
into his Hands.

Ormond pressed also with want of Necessaries to subsist, with having attempted
Passage and Waxeford (this by Inchequin, and that by Tarell) in vain, was also
necessitated to send his Army into Winter Quarters, but too separate and far
distant from each other. The Vlster Men, except Sixteen Hundred, sent to
Clonmell, returned home, to choose another General in Oneal's place lately
dead, as was agreed. Others were distributed into other Places; Tasse to
Conaught, Inchequin to the County of Clare, The Confed^rates d^^ersed into
Quart^rs.
and Dillon into Methe. It is scare credible, with what Industry and Prudence,
Ormond endeavored to allay the wild Animosities and Dissensions of the
Confederates, though to little purpose, which occasioned the daily Defection of
the Soldiers. And now, the Irish as well as British, allured by the Regicides
Successes and Invitations, as also deterred with the Plague that raged amongst
them, together with want of Pay and Necessaries, ran by Troops to Cromwell's
Camp. Hereupon, Ormond seriously considering the untoward State of Affairs,
having appointed Castle haven Governor of Lemster, he himself removed to the
County of Clare, to raise new Forces, to oppose, for as much as in him lay, the
Enemies Progress.

But Cromwell being abundantly furnished with Recruits and Provisions out of
England, the Winter drawing to an End, takes the Field; and having possessed
himself of some Neighboring Garrisons, forced Goram, betrayed by the Sedition
of the Soldiers, causing Hammond the Governor, with some of his chief
Officers, to be shot to Death in Cold Blood. This done, he marched with his
victorious Troops to Kilkenny. Kilkenny besieged and surrendered.
This City, the Nursery of the late Rebellion, and the Residence of the Supreme
Council, was by the Diligence of Castle-haven, well provided with Defendants
and Provisions. Nor were they wanting in a generous Defense, having repelled
the Enemies Assaults with Slaughter of them. But all Hopes of relief vanishing,
Collonel-Butler, the Governor, at length surrendered it upon reasonable
Conditions. Clonmell ran the same Fortune, though Hugh Oneal, who commanded
there, having beaten off the reiterated Assaults of the Enemy, and slain above
Two Thousand of their Men, was necessitated through want of Powder to quit the
place; which he did with so much Secrecy, that the Enemy ignorant of it, gave
very good Conditions to the Towns men next Morning. The Bishop of Rosse with
Four Thousand Foot and Three Hundred Horse attempted to, The Bishop of Rosse
taken and hanged.
relieve it; but unhappily, being routed and taken by the Lord Broghill, who
without any Respect or Reverence to his Character, caused him to be hanged up.

The Bishop of Cloger runs the same fate.
Emir Mac Mahon, Bishop of Cloger, who succeeded Oneal in the Command of the
Vlster Army, ran the same Fate: for, being overcome by Coot and Venables (who
had joined him with Two Regiments of Foot and one of Horse of Cromwell's Army)
he was also hanged. Coot with the same Facility overran Vlster, routing both
Scots and Irish that opposed them; and rendering himself Master of their
Garrisons on all sides.

Cromwell returns into England.
It is now Time to sail back into England, where Cromwell is likewise hastening,
leaving his Son-in Law Ireton in Ireland, to finish what he had so prosperously
carried on, and put an End to the Relics of that War, whilst he himself is
destined to new Empires, and new Triumphs. Nor was there indeed any thing of
moment done by the Mock-Parl^ament, without his Consent, or in his Absence,
save, that the Regalia and the Revenues of the Church were exposed to Sail, and
a nefaricus Tribunal of Mock-Justice erected, as well to terrify as enslave
the People.

During these Traverses, the Scots apprehending the Changes of the
Presbyterians in England, were glad to look back toward their own King, whom
they had so cruelly offended. They knew it would be no difficult Business, to
raise an Army by the Influence of his Name and Title. Nor were they mistaken;
tho taking Advantage of his Necessities, they would impose upon him; The Scots
send Windram to the King?
and therefore demand, amongst other Things, That he should take the Covenant;
ratify the Decrees of the late Parliament; revoke his Commission to Montrosse;
drive Papists from his Court and Presence; renounce his Negative Voice in
Parliament; and name a place in the United Provinces, where they might further
treat of all Things. These Propositions, were sent by Windram of Liberton, to
his Majesty who was then at Jersey, whither he was retired out of France, upon
the little Prospect of Relief from that Court: as also to be nearer England,
where the Levellers were stirring; and near Ireland, now wholly, except Dublin
and Londonderry, at his Devotion. The Confederates had earnestly desired his
Presence amongst them; and it is not doubted, if he had gone thither, but that
he would have been absolute Master of the Kingdom. Others were of another
Opinion, urging, that if he miscarried in Ireland, he would also loose the
Hopes he had conceived of the Protestants in England and Scotland. As if a
Sovereign Prince, were not permitted to make use of his own Subjects, of what
Religion soever they were, for his Service and Defense; especially, they being
willing to assist him, and he satisfied in their Loyalty.

But, when the News of the Overthrow at Dublin came, the Scots demands were
taken into Consideration. Some of the Council, seemed to reject all kind of
Commerce with that People, affirming, That as they had sold and betrayed the
Father, so when their Fear and Covetousness prompted them, they would serve the
Son, and therefore there was no Faith to be given to such Perfidious Men. But
others more moderate in their Councils, advised the King, by no means to omit
the Opportunity which so fairly offered it self, but immediately to close with
the Scots: for, that Kingdom being recovered, his Attempts upon the other would
be less difficult. The Queen Mother was also of this Opinion, He is returned
with a satisfactory Answer.
and so was Montrosse; who offered now, to go into Banishment, as Strafford
formerly to Death, voluntarily, rather than interrupt so Hopeful a Peace. The
King at length persuaded (tho not without Repugnancy) dispatched Windram back
into Scotland with no unpleasing Answer, and Assurance, that he would do every
thing for the Good of his People; appointing moreover Breda, a Town in Brabant,
for the Place of Treaty; commanding and desiring the Committee of Estates, to
send Commissioners thither, to meet him on the 5th of March following.

Windram being sent into Scotland, the King left the Island, as well upon
Account of the Regicides Preparations to invade it, as of his being at Breda.
by the Time appointed for the Treaty. Whilst the King is in his way, it may be
proper to say somewhat of the Royal Fleet, under the Command of Prince Rupert.
The Rebels being too strong for him, he was necessitated to shelter himself in
the Haven of Kinsale, where he had long been shut up by them. And now Cromwell
approaching the City with his victorious Army to besiege it by Land, he was
forced to adventure to Sea, and did break through the Enemies Fleet with the
Loss of Three of his Ships; and, directing his Course for Lisbone, he entered
the River Tagus with full Sail, where he found not only a friendly Reception,
but Protection also from that Prince. The Rigicides irritated with this
Civility, declare War against the Author of it; and sending Blake with a Fleet,
blockt up the Mouth of the River, extremely interrupting the Traffic of
Portugal, by seizing their Ships in their Return home. He lay long there; but
not being able to oblige that King by Entreaties or Force to abandon the Prince
he at length, his Provisions being spent, was constrained to go seek for more.
The Prince, taking the Opportunity of his Removal, put to Sea, and sailing
toward Malaga, took and burnt several English Vessels; but, Blake pursuing
him, mastered and seized the Roe-buck, a good Man of War, and forced Five more
upon the Rocks and Shore. The Prince escaped this Misfortune, tho reserved for
a greater; for, being forced into the Western Islands, Prince Maurice lost in a
Hurricane.
after many Hazards and Adventures, Prince Maurice being separated from his
Brother in that Tempestuous Ocean, perished in a Hurricane. The immature Fate
of this Royal Youth, was justly lamented by the Good and Brave; for, being no
less eminent for Fortitude, Gentleness, Greatness of Mind, and all other
Virtues, than Illustrious for his Birth; he was snatched away, leaving his Fame
to his Posterity, and to us his Contemporaries, the Desire of him.

The King being come to Breda, met the Scots-Commissioners, who attended his
Majesty some Miles out of Town. The first Congress was fair, but the
Disceptations and Arguings in the Treaty, long and sharp. The main Disputes
were, about the Covenant, the Directory and the Catechism. And, tho the said
Covenant, did naturally regard the People, not the Sovereign; yet, the
Commissioners, instigated by the English Presbyters, did so obstinately adhere
to them, The Treaty at Breda.
that they refused to grant the King that Liberty in Holy Things, which they
challenged to themselves. But, to sweeten him, they promise, if he would
consent to their Demands, that they would not only restore him to the Scottish
Throne, but assist him in the Recovery of the rest of his Dominions, and to
bring to condign punishment the execrable Murderers of his Royal Father. His
Majesty readily consented to the Civil Part of their Proposals, remitting all
Things to the Determinations of Parliament, but stuck at the other; until
overcome by the Persuasions of the Prince of Orange, and the greatest part of
his Council, as also by the Desperateness of his Affairs, ruined both by Sea
and Land; he, tho very unwillingly, at length yielded. And now the Treaty was
upon Conclusion, when the unfortunate Defeat and Death of Montrosse, had like
to have quite broke it off.

Those who were averse to any Agreement with the Scots, took Occasion hence to
dissuade his Majesty, from having any Commerce with them; daily inculcating to
him, That this perfidious Nation, had no other thoughts but of his Ruin,
because they had in the very time of Treaty, so inhumanly murdered his
Lieutenant. But, no Man did more affectionately bewail the immature and cruel
End of this excellent Personage, than the King himself; who did not cease to
expostulate the Injury done him in it, by so barbarous an Act of Hostility,
even then whilst they pretended to Peace. But Time, and the Necessity of his
Affairs, did somewhat allay his Resentments; so, that the Treaty being at
length happily concluded, Concluded.
he and the Commissioners embarking at Scheveling, with Young Trompe, sailed
toward Scotland.

Whilst His Majesty is upon the Ocean, it will not be impertinent to be more
particular in the sad History of the Illustrious Montrosse. Our former
Commentaries, have noted those Actions of Glory he had performed in Scotland,
with the Luster whereof he appeated so eminent in the Courts of Foreign
Princes, that his Exile seemed rather a Progress than Banishment, until the
Commands of the King obliged him again to arm and invade. his Ungrateful
Country. The last Scene of Montrosse's Actions.
This was done by his Majesty, with Design, that by the known Valor of the
General, he might force his untractable Countrymen to more Equal Terms. But,
the Event proved unsuccessful. Scotland was then full of Armed Men, and their
Forces entire; whereas, he had scarce. Seven Hundred Soldiers with him when he
landed. Nay, the Inhabitants either wearied with the War, or terrified with the
noise of Foreigners, came but slowly in to him, notwithstanding his known
Valor and Conduct; but, forsaking their Dwellings, fled with their Fears about
them, and filled the Country with the Apprehension of this Pretended Invasion.
Hereupon, Lesley was sent with the Army to suppress this new Enemy, who was
also defeated by Straugham, sent before with a Party of Three Hundred Horse,
and being betrayed by the Lord of Aston, one he had entrusted with his Safety,
was taken, and murdered, with all the dire Circumstances of Enraged Malice,
and his Quarters sent to the Four principal Cities of the Kingdom, to be fixed
over their Chief Gates. It is strange, with what Firmness of Soul, and unshaken
Constancy, he heard this dreadful Sentence, saying only, That he took it for
greater Honor, to have his Head fixed upon the Prison Gate in such a Cause,
than to have his Picture in the King's Bedchamber. And, lest his Loyalty
should be forgotten, they had highly honored him, in designing lasting
Monuments to Four of the Chiefest Cities, to bear up his Memorial to all
Posterity; wishing, he had had flesh enough to have sent a piece to every City
in Christendom, to Witness his Loyalty to his King and Country. Being ready to
mount the Scaffold, they put a Rope over his shoulders, with his Declaration
and History fastened to it; which he wore with the same Calmness as formerly,
affirming, That he embraced that, with no less Alacrity, than he had done the
Garter, when he was admitted of that most Honorable Order, by his present
Majesty. He further asked these Barbarians, Whether they had any more Dishonor
to put upon him. And thus ended this renowned Marquess, not unjustly paralelled
to the great Captains of Antiquity, if he had not fallen in the Untimely
Prosecution of a most Just Cause.

The King having escaped the Dangers at Sea, and eluded the Snares laid for him
by the English, landed (having been convoyed by Three Men of War, lent him by
the Prince of Orange) at Spey in the North of Scotland; where being received by
a Noble Train of Attendants, and welcomed by the grateful Acclamations of the
People as he passed, he came to Edinburgh. His reception there from the
Parliament, and Committees of the Kirk, was honorable, and with all the
Appearance of Affection and Loyalty; July 15, 1650.
the People congratulating his happy arrival, with continual, and perhaps more
sincere Shouts of Joy. And, now the Second Time, he was proclaimed King of
Scotland, England and Ireland; tho his Coronation was deferred as yet, by
reason of the pressing Difficulties of the War.

The English Parricides were not ignorant of these Triumphs and Preparations of
their Neighbors, and were also informed of their promises to restore the King.
They had Intelligence of what was transacted in Scotland, by their Friends
there; and of what was done at Court, by their Spies and Hirelings about the
King. They therefore, to prevent a War at their own Doors, resolve to transfer
it to the Enemy, as well to prevent their Invasion of England, as to remove
into another Country the Calamities that attend Camps and Armies. But, Fairfax
could not be persuaded to bear Arms against the Scots, their Brethren, and
sworn Confederates; his Aversion to it being much fortified by his Wife, and
the Presbyterian Teachers. Nor was the Mock Parliament much concerned at his
Refusal; for, thinking they had done enough, in having sent a Committee to
persuade him, they conferred the Generalate upon Cromwell, lately called out of
Ireland to this Purpose.

Cromwell having at Length obtained what he had so long coveted, the Command of
the Forces of the Commonwealth, high with this Accession of Honor, prepares
vigorously for War; and hastening to the Army, he mustered it near Berwick,
Sixteen Thousand strong, brave Men, and well accoutred, flesht with so many
Victories, and confident of Success. He, thus accompanied, enters Scotland,
having sent his Declaration before him, July 22.1650.
amongst other Things, denouncing War against them, because they had proclaimed
Charles Stuart King, who was their Public Enemy, and had promised to support
him against the Commonwealth of England.

Being come to Dunbar without seeing an Enemy, the Inhabitants being all fled,
tho he had invited and courted their staying at Home, he refreshed his Army
there with Rest and Provisions, brought by shipping out of England. From thence
he marched to Musselbourg, with Design to attempt the Scots, who lay encamped
not far off. But, being opposed by the Rains, the adverse Tempests, and the
Toyls of his Men, who lay in the open Field; he was forced to return to his
Camp again. The Enemy pursued him close, charging and continually disturbing
his Rear, until they were repressed by Lambert and Whaley, who hastened thither
with fresh Supplies. The following Night, Montgomery and Straugham, with
Fifteen Troops of Horse, fell upon the English with so much Violence, that
having forced their Guards, and beaten a Regiment of Horse that seconded them,
they brought Terror into the rest of the Army. But, these recollecting
themselves, the Scots were charged by Parties that hastened to the Danger from
all Sides; and, being waylaid by Okey in their Return, they bravely broke
through, and returned after much Damage given and received, to their own Camp.
The King was then accidentally in the Army, by whose conduct (for seeing the
danger of the Men, he had hastened to their Assistance) their Retreat was
secured. The Chief of the Army, and the turbulent Delegates of the Kirk, were
much vexed at it, urging the Kings Departure. Nor would they suffer this
magnanimous Prince, to stay in the Camp, pretending the danger of his Person;
but more truly, lest, as it appeared in that Encounter, he should gain too much
upon the Soldiers Favors, and thereby render himself Master of that Army,
which had been raised by the auspicious Influence of his Name.

There were Three prevalent Factions in Scotland at that Time. The First and
Greatest, was that of the Parliament and Kirk, which would indeed have a King,
but precarious, and one who should govern as they directed. Another Faction,
was of the most rigid Presbyterians. These dreaming of I know not what
Theocracy or Government by the Church, equally abhorred both King and
Commonwealth as profane. But this, upon the Defeat of Straugham and Kerr by
Cromwell, quickly vanished. The Third was, that of the Royalists, but unarmed,
and excluded from Public Employments; to which the King was forced to retire,
in Expectation of better Times.

The English, in the mean time, raised with some small Successes, as the taking
of Collington, and Red-House by storm, endeavored to draw the Scots to Battle.
They approached their Camp; seemed carelessly to wander under their Trenches;
and with the contumely of Words, daily dared them to fight; but in vain, for
the Scots were fixed not to adventure the Hazard of a Battle, but to overcome
the Enemy without Danger, with Hunger, Cold, Sicknesses, and the Rigor of the
Climate. Cromwell seeing then he could not force the Scots, by reason of the
Situation of their Camp, nor oblige them to fight out of it; his Provisions
being likewise spent, he determined to bring his Army back to Dunbar; which he
also did, tho not without much Difficulty by reason of the close pursuit of the
Scots. From thence he resolved to return with what haste he could, with his
sick and weary Forces, by Sea or Land, for England; for, he despaired of any
Hopes of Success in this inauspicious Expedition.

Dunbar is a Sea Town, seated betwixt Edinburgh and Berwick, surrounded on the
Land side with Mountains and Precipices; which are likewise so steep, that
there is but one passage at Copperspeith, scarce large enough for Ten Men
a-brest, which was also possessed by the Enemy, who now insultingly bragged
(which they might also have performed, if God had not infatuated their
Understandings,) That they had the Army of the Schismatics in a Pound.

And thus this so famous a Leader, had brought his Army, by ill Conduct, into
such Streights; that all his Glory got by so many Victories, had vanished in
Infamy, if Fortune and the Follies of his Enemies, had not contributed to his
Relief. For, it would have proved a business of extreme Difficulty, to have
shipped his Men, they pressing so near upon him: nor would it have been less
dangerous to return by Land, all the Passages and Avenues being guarded by an
Enemy so numerous, and much more healthful, as being in the Clime they first
breathed in. They were Twice as many as the English, and hovered like a Cloud
upon the Hills about them. But, their Impatience to overcome, lost them the
Victory; for, wheeling to the Right, they, in Confidence of their Strength,
descended into the Plain, as if they designed to deprive them of all Hopes of
Retreating. Cromwell perceiving this, as if he had cooped himself up, but with
Design to break out with more Luster, sent Lambert with Six Regiments of Horse
and Three of Foot, to charge them. He was bravely received at first; but
afterward, by the Fatal Valor of Despair, routed the adverse Cavalry. The
Foot seeing their Horse broke without any resistance, ran also away, in vain
seeking that Safety in their Legs, which they had had in their Hands. And thus,
a very great Victory was gained by the English in a Moment, wherein Three
Thousand were slain, and near Ten Thousand taken; Two Hundred Colors, Fifteen
Thousand Arms, and the whole spoil of the Camp, with the Loss of scarce Three
Hundred English.

Nor did this signal Victory, which made them Masters of the South side of the
Frith, cost them any more: For, it being known at Edinburgh, by the Arrival of
Lesley who fled with the Horse, the Nobility and Soldiery quitted that City,
as also Leeth, a commodious Station for shipping, and posted away to Sterling,
leaving all except the Castle of Edinburgh, to the Disposal of the Conquerors.

This Battle seemed indifferent to the King, who could lose none but Enemies,
whoever vanquished. The Presbyterians were no less averse to him, than the
Independants; and the Scots, if they had overcome, would have used him no
better, than they did his August Father at New Castle: They had extorted
Conditions from him, equal to those their English Brethren had forced from his
Martyred Predecessor in the Isle of Wight. Nor did those Concessions suffice;
somewhat was still superadded and obtruded upon him. And, as if that were not
enough, he himself, as also his Friends, were excluded from sharing in the
Government. He had no command in the Commonwealth, although all its Forces were
raised in his Name. And, even now, their Army being lost, they did not cease,
unseasonably to torment this excellent Prince with their Impertinencies. They
impose new Conditions upon him; pretend to reform his Family; and endeavor to
extort a Declaration from him, against himself, and such who were faithful to
him. Provoked with these insufferable Indignities, and with the Impatience of
bearing with their reiterated Follies, he withdrew himself privately our of
their Guardianship; and, taking Horse, under pretense of taking the Air in his
Shoes and Steekings, he rode toward the Provinces of the North, where the
Atholians and the Guordons expected him in Arms. It is incredible, how
unworthily he had been used since his first Arrival in Scotland. It may not be
impertinent, to mention some of those barbarous Passages. In his way from Spey
to Edinburgh, some of the Towns did not only congratulate his happy Arrival
with their Acclamations, but with their Presents also. Aberdene bestowed
Fifteen Hundred Pounds upon him; which the Commissioners took so ill, that to
prevent the Liberality of the other Towns, they commanded, That such who had
Money to lavish away, should bring it into the Treasury. Cautioning hereby,
that the People should not demonstrate their Affection to their Prince, or the
Prince be sensible of the good Will of his Subjects toward himself. Yet more;
when the English Parricides had reproached them with their Agreement with their
King, they declared, They would not own his Cause, until he acknowledged and
repented his own Sins, the Transgressions of his Father, and the Idolatry of
his Mother. By all which, it is evident, That his Majesty was now in the same
Danger, his Royal Father had formerly been, in the Hands of the Presbyterians.

But, the Parliament seriously considering the King's Recess, and perceiving
their own inevitable Ruin at Hand, if they persisted in their Obstinacy and
Follies, they sent Montgomery with a choice Party of Horse after his Majesty,
humbly to desire his Return. Which he also effected, upon promise of better
Conditions for the future; which were also performed, the Grandees being much
mollified by their late Overthrow. And, now the King was admitted, as
concerned, in the Public Transactions; tho the Ministers mainly opposed it,
not yet sensible of the imminent Destruction, which threatened the continuance
of their Dissensions and Feuds.

The King now at the Helm, Orders were given out for new Levies; his Friends
were admitted to Public Employments; and he was crowned, with as much Pomp and
Magnificence, as the Troubles would permit, at Scone. And now, the Minds of the
most Seditious being in some sort appeased, the King's Standard was set up at
Aberdeen; and, all who were fit to bear Arms, were invited to take them up
against their invading Enemies.

Whilst the King is busied in raising Forces, Cromwell was no less intent in
Prosecution of his Victory. Edinburgh and Leith, opened their Gates to him. And
the Castle annexed to the City (Inexpugnable in it self by reason of its
Situation) after no long siege was surrend'red to him. He took also all the
Fortresses, by himself or Liuetenants, on this side the Frith; so that the King
solicitous for Sterling, encamped under the Walls of it. He removed thence to
Torwood; where being well entrenched, he slighted the Provocations and Attempts
of the Enemy, resolving to hazard nothing, before his new Levies, which were
raising for him in the Northern Counties, were come up to him.

Whilst the Two Armies were thus in fight of each other, a Presbyterian Plot
was discovered, which was detected by I know not what Letters found in a Ship
at Air. The Design was formed by their Parsons in London; who expecting a
choice Body of Horse from Scotland, under the Command of Massey, pretended to
raise some considerable Disturbances in Absence of the Army. But, the Secret
being laid open, Love and Gibbons, for Terror to others, were by Cromwell's
Recommendation both heheaded.

Cromwell, when he saw he could neither provoke nor compel the King to fight,
impatient of Delay, he commanded Col. Overton to attempt a Passage into Fife;
which he did, with Fourteen Hundred Foot, and Four Troops of Horse. And after
some light Skirmishes, landing at North-Ferry, he immediately cast up some
Works for his Defense, where he also contained himself until more Succors came.
Which quickly happened; for, Lambert flying to his Aid with Two Regiments of
Horse, and as many of Foot, they fought and defeated Brown, who was sent
thither by the King with near Four Thousand Men. Him they slew, and killed and
took well nigh all the Royallists. Whilst this was in Action, Cromwell braved
it before the King's Trenches, and seemed to design to assault them; but,
hearing of Lambert's Success, he marched back with his Army; and, passing the
Forth, joined the rest of his Victorious Forces; and, marching with speed to
St. Johnstone, after having drained the Mote and planted his Cannon, he had the
Place delivered to him without any further Resistance.

The King, who had long since designed to march into England, is now
necessitated to do it, and to transfer the War into England, which he was not
in a Condition to support in Scotland. Hearing therefore of the Siege of St.
Johnstone, whilst the Rebels were busied there, he removes his Camp with swift
Marches toward England; permitting all such, who were dissatisfied with the
present State of Affairs, to depart at pleasure. Many, especially of the
Faction of Arguile and the Kirk, leaving him, he led the Rest, now entirely at
his Command, along with him. Cromwell being informed of the King's Departure,
sent his Horse after him; and having left Monk behind him, with Six Thousand
Men, to finish the Relics of the War in Scotland, follows with the Strength
of his Army, whilst the rest of his Forces which guarded the Borders, endeavor
to hinder the King's Advance. The Rump terrified with the Rumor of this
Invasion, condemned Cromwell of Temerity and Precipitation; but, raised with
his Letters, prepare for Defense. And, lest the Provinces wearied with their
Tyranny, should look back toward their Lawful Prince, they fill them with
their numerous Troops, forcing the Trained Bands of the Counties, to join with
them against the Invading Scots.

The King's Army not exceeding 12000 Effective Men, had entered England; July.
1. 1651.
and being advanced into Lancashire, notwithstanding Lambert and Harrisons
Interruption with their numerous Cavalry, joining with the Earl of Darby out of
the Isle of Man, forced their Passage at Warrington-Bridge; and continuing
their March through the thick Squadrons of the Enemy, and the Opposition of
frequent Encounters, came at Length to Worcester, a City affectionate to His
Majesty's Service. The King left the Earl of Derby behind him in Lancashire, to
raise new Forces. But, this excellent Personage, however great in Reputation in
that Country, had scarce got Fifteen Hundred Men together, when he was attacked
by Colonel Lilbourne with far greater Numbers; and, being unequel to those
Veteranes, after a sharp Fight, he was defeated by them. And, however he
escaped their present Fury by Flight; he was afterward taken in the Battle of
Worcester, and being brought to Chester, was there, notwithstanding the Quarter
given him, beheaded by the Regicides; finishing his Course with no less
Gallantry, than he had lived with Glory.

The King upon his Entry into England, was ploclaimed by a Herald at Arms, King
of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND; which was also done in all the chief
Towns as he passed along, and was now repeated at Worcester with greater Pomp
and Splendor. He had by Letters and Messages in his March, invited several of
the Rebel-Commanders and Governors to the return of their Duty, but in vain.
He had also desired the same of the Mayor and Common Council of London, but
with the same success. There were, however, several Noble Persons who came in
to him, as, the Lord Talbot, Packington, Howard, Broughton, and others, with
about Two Thousand private Soldiers. The rest kept back, either surprised with
the sudden Advance of the King, and consequently unprovided; or terrified with
the Cruelty of the Rump, and so durst not appear; or averse to the Scots, now
unseasonably mindful of the former Injuries received from them, and would not
come.

The King had been advised, and it was his own Opinion, to march from
Warrington directly to London, which in probability ought to have been done, if
the Army had not been so much wearied with their former Toils and Labors.
They therefore came to Worcester, a Place convenient enough; where having
recovered, and repaired their Strength, they might either expect or promote the
War. Hither Cromwell came Six Days after, with the conjoined Forces of the
Party, amounting to near Sixty Thousand Soldiers and Trained-Bands, and having
beaten Massey from Vpton-Bridge, approached the Town. The Rebels having passed
the Rivers Severne and Tame, upon Bridges and Boats, advance toward the Walls,
however very bravely opposed by the Scots, out of the Hedges and Ditches in
their way. But, the Royallists being out-numbered, were forced to retreat
toward the City. The Rebels having repulsed and wounded Montgomery at Powick,
Cromwell advancing, drew up near..... Wood. The King with Forbes's Foot, a
small Body of Horse, (for Lesley with Two Thousand more stood a loof of, and
did not approach) and some English Volunteers, charged the Van of the Enemy
with so much intrepid Bravery, that he not only repelled them, but took their
Cannon; which yet he could not keep by reason of their numerous Reserves, and
Supplies incessantly relieving each other: Insomuch, that the King having
performed all the Parts of a Great Commander, by rallying his broken Troops,
and embodying his scattered Foot, and encouraging them by his Example and
Presence in their renewed Encounters, being overpow'red by the adverse Legions,
Duke Hamilton who kept close to him, being also wounded (of which Hurt he
shortly died) he was forced to retreat toward the City, which he entered on
Foot at Sudbury-Gate, being then obstructed by a laden Wagon overthrown in the
Passage. Nor did he long stay there, but mounting another Horse, when he saw
all was lost, and that the Enemy entered on all sides, he at length, slipping
away in the Crowd, escaped out of the City. The Royal-Fort, defended by Col.
Drummund with Fifteen Hundred Men, was taken by Assault, where all were put to
the Sword. The slaughter in the City, was not less barbarous; the Citizens and
Soldiers being promiscuously slain, all being filled wi^h Rapine and Murder.
There fell as well without, as within the Walls, where the Slaughter was
greatest, Three Thousand Five Hundred, and the Prisoners were above Six
Thousand, most of the English escaping by the Benefit of their Tongue. Duke
Hamilton, having his Thigh broken, died there; and, amongst the Prisoners of
most Note, were the Earls of Derby, Cleveland, Lauderdale, Rothes, Carnworth,
Kelley; as also Packington, Greves, Fanshaw the King's Secretary, and many
other Noble Persons, taken in their Flight. It is a Wonder, that the King
escaped the Diligence of his Pursuers; but, the Means by which he escaped,
doubles the Miracle. Five Poor Brethren, by Name Pendrills, with Francis Yates
married to their Sister, and Three Females their Companions, who concealed,
conducted, and nourisht him; justly merited the Glory, not only of saving a
Citizen (as they had done before in the Person of the Earl of Derby, whom they
had formerly secured) but of preserving their Prince. No Threats of
Punishments, or Death, nor the offer of a Thousand Pounds to those who
discovered him, would prevail with these, however needy Plebeians, whose
Loyalty surmounted both their Hopes and their Fears.

The King having spent several Days in this miserable Solitude, passed through
many Hands of both Sexes and Religions; Men and Women of the Middle and Lowest
Sort. And, by many Accidents, and Spottings of Fortune, wandering as it were in
a Cloud for the space of Two Months, he at length going on Board a small
Collier, and not unknown to the Master, at Bright-hemston in Sussex, was
conveyed, together with the Lord Wilmott, his Achates and Companion in Dangers,
into France; reserved by Divine Providence, for the Glories that attended his
Restitution. At Rohan he discovered himself to some English Merchants, where he
changed his Apparel, and went the next Day to Paris; where his Fame arriving
before him, he was met in the way by the Queen his Mother, and the Duke of
Orleance, with a great Train of Nobility. Thus convoyed, he was brought to
Court; where he was received with the Applause of all Men, and the particular
Congratulations of the French King, and all the Peers of that Kingdom.

BOOK II.
Cromwell enters London Triumphantly. Continuation of the Irish Affairs. Ormond
leaves Ireland, and Clanrickard, his Deputy there. Ireton dies of the Plague.
Monk takes Sterling, Dundee; and Subjugates Scotland. The Isles of Scilly,
Barbados, Garnsey, Jersey, and that of Man, surrendered to the Regicides.
Their Greatness. They are courted by the Neighboring Kings and States. They
send a solemn Embassy into Holland. Cromwell cabals. Turns out the
Mock-Parliament. Chooses another. Is chosen Protector. The Wars with the United
Provinces. The various Sea Fights betwixt the Two States. Cromwell makes a
Peace with them, and a League with France. The Expedition of San Domingo and
Jamaica. Blake's success at Tunis and Santa Cruz. Dunkirk taken. The Death of
Oliver Cromwell. His Character.

THE Scotch Army being defeated at Worcester, and Lesley, Midleton and the
other Chief Officers, who fled with the Horse, taken; Cromwell having sent his
Prisoners before him, entered London; the Westminster and City Senates and
Grandees, receiving him with all imaginable Honor and Flatteries. And now the
Commonwealth having overcome all their Enemies, exceedingly gloried in their
Acquisitions. Ireland was also subdued, the remaining Natives being transported
into Connaught. But, of these Tumults it will be expedient to treat more
particularly.

Ireton having been left by his Father-in-law to command in Ireland, as we have
already mentioned, he began with the Siege of Waterford. Which Preston, who
commanded there, seemed resolved to defend; until, finding himself shut up with
Approaches, and Trenches, and attacked with the adverse Cannon; but, above all,
seeing no hopes of Relief, he surrendered this strong City, upon Articles of
Indemnity for the Inhabitants, and Liberty for the Garrison to march away with
their Colors and Arms. Carlaw and Duncannon, ran the same Fate at the same
Time, Young Preston marching away with the Soldiers of those Fortresses. All
this while, the Confederates continue in their unhappy Dissensions, the
Catholics and Reformed teazing each other with their wild and unseasonable
Controversies. No due respect or obedience were paid to the Lord Lieutenant.
And now, the Clergy endeavored to distract the Protestants amongst themselves,
animated particularly against Ormond; whom they labor with Calumnies to
separate from Inchequin, and him again by the same Arts from his Excellency.
The furious Heat of some of the Bishops grew to that height, that impatient of
the Government of the Protestants, they pronounced it abrogated;
excommunicating all such, who dared to disobey their Dictates. Ormond having
tried all ways to allay these fatal Differences, and persuade them to unite for
their Common Defense, to no purpose; perceiving their Obstinacy, he resolved to
quit them, lest he might be involved in their Ruin. To these Indignities, they
of Limerick besieged on one side by Ireton, refused him Entrance on the other,
though he came with Forces to their Assistance, under pretense, That they
themselves sufficed for their own Defense. And yet, lest the King's Affairs,
might suffer by their Folly and his Absence, he gave the Earl of Castel-haven
the Command of the Forces; and, by the Suffrages of all, constituted the Earl
of Clanrickard, Deputy of the Kingdom.

Clanrickard having undertaken the Government, more to delay the Rebels
Conquest, than out of any Appearance of Success, in hopes it might advantage
the King upon his march out of Scotland, makes new Levies; recruits the
Veteranes; provides Warlike Instruments; and, being powerfully assisted by the
Ecclesiastics, endeavors to repair the lapsed condition of their Party: Not,
that he thereby fancied the Recovery of the Kingdom; but, to give the King Time
to try the Fortune of a Day with Cromwell, as His Majesty had himself
inculcated to him by his Letters. Nor were the Forces he raised contemptible,
amounting to Five Thousand; but, by the continual Aversness of Fortune, they
effected nothing of moment. They indeed took some small Garrisons of Ireton's,
he being gone to his Winter Quarters; but, being assaulted by Colonel Axtel in
the Isle of Milech, and their Trenches forced, they were broken, Five Hundred
at least of them being slain and drowned. The Residue attempting no further,
secured themselves in Connaught, interposing the River S..... and the Curluvian
Mountains, betwixt them and this Fortunate Enemy; guarding the Passages and
Avenues of that Province, the only thing they were now capable of. Nor could
they long secure themselves there; for, the Spring advancing, Ireton took the
Field; and, having sent for Coot out of Vlster to meet him, he (Coot) under
Pretense of besieging Slego, thereby diverted the Enemies Forces, passing the
Colluvian. Mountains, whilst the other got over the Shannon at Killalo, by the
Treachery or Cowardice of Colonel Fenel, appointed to guard it. Having joined
Forces, they took Athole; and separating again, Ireton besieges Limerick, and
Coot, Galloway. Limerick, however strong, weakened with their own Dissensions,
did not resist so long as it might have done, being well garrisoned and well
victuall'd; but delivered it self, the Garrison marching away without their
Arms, leaving Four and Twenty of the Principal in it to Mercy. Of these, the
Bishop of Firne, and several others active in the first Part of the Rebellion,
were hanged. Nor was this Victory less fatal to the Conqueror, who did not
long survive it, being extinguished by the Plague. This Monster, having been
bred up in the Law, whereof he had some smatterings, had been largely imbibed
from his Youth, in the Frantic Ravings of the Ecclesiastics. Which Cromwell
observing, as also his Ingenuity, took him into his Fellowship, and Family; and
matching him to his Daughter, made him his Son-in-law. He was active, vigilant,
and steadfast; nor improper for Council or Execution in War; and consequently, a
chief Champion and Contriver in the exerable Regicide.

Ireton being dead, the chief Command of the Army, was at present devolved upon
Ludlowe, a Man bold and daring, to whom Three more Colleagues were afterward
associated. In the mean time, Galloway was surrendered, Clanrickard having
articled for Permission to depart. Neither was any more warring there save
against some, Mountainers and Tories, the Garrisons every where opening their
Gates; and, the Soldiery yet in Arms, having conditioned their Transportation,
passed most of them into the Spanish Service in Flanders; a Militia, not much
more Fortunate than their own. Ireland being subdued, all veiled to the
Conquerors. General Monk, after Cromwell's Departure, besieges Sterling, which
however filled with Arms, Cannon, Provisions in Abundance, and the Records, and
Monuments of their Kings, was tamely surrendered to him Dundee, by the Valor
of Lunisdane the Governor, held out; but, being overpowered, it was taken by
Assault, and the whole Garrison put to the Sword. The slaughter was cruel, and
the Town no less unmercifully pillaged by the covetous Soldiers; which struck
such a Terror in others, that Aberdene, and the rest of the Scotch Garrisons,
that they might not be involved in so ruinous a Fate, prevented it by a timely
Rendition.

Sir Phillip Musgrave had attempted to raise new Forces in Galloway, so did
also a Convention of some of the Nobility at Ellit: but, being surprised, the
Earls of Leven and Crawford, Ogelby, Musgrave, and others, were taken
Prisoners. The Scots made yet one Attempt more under Midleton, Huntley,
Glencarne, and other Highlanders; but, they also were suppressed by the Valor
and Vigilance of Col. Morgan. There was no Enemy more that appeared; and, to
take all hopes of embodying from them for the future, Four strong Cittadels
were built in Four principal Parts of the Country, viz. Leith, Air, Innerness,
and St. Johnstons. And now, Scotland being sufficiently subjugated, was
subjected to the Laws of England, and incorporated into one Commonwealth with
that Kingdom.

During these Traverses, Sir John Greenvil had detained some Merchant Ships
belonging to the Dutch at Scylly; which so irritated the States, that they sent
Tromp with Twelve Men of War to reclaim them, or require satisfaction for the
Damage. He had also Instructions, to treat with the Governor for the
Surrendry of that Place into their Hands; but, the Secret was not carried so
close, but that these Transactions were known to the English, who thereupon
sent Blake with a Fleet to hinder the Alienation of so Important a Place, by
reason of its exceeding Commodiousness for Navigation. Greenvil being thus
assaulted on both sides, chose rather to deliver the Isles to his Countrymen,
than Strangers; presuming, that being annexed to the Kingdom of England, they
might by that means be one Day, together with it, restored to the Crown again.
He therefore, upon very honorable Conditions, surrenders that Post he could
not preserve longer, having the King's Permission for it; and will in the close
of this History, grow eminently illustrious, for his Services in the
Restoration of his Sacred Majesty.

About that Time, the Island of Barbados, the Richest of our Western
Plantations, was surrendered to Sir George Ayscue. He had for some Months
hovered with a Fleet about those Coasts, until the Inhabitants, destracted with
their Intestine Dissensions, obliged the Lord Willoughby, the Governor, to
deliver it up; which he did, upon very good Terms for himself, and the
Islanders: being also followed by the Subjection of the rest of our Occidental
Colonies.

The Rebels had long since been Masters of Garnsey, except the Castle, situate
in the Sea, and defended for several Years (being relieved by shipping from
France, and the Neighboring Isles) by Roger Burges, the Governor; which at
length, all being lost, he likewise quitted, stipulating some Months Pay for
his Garrison, and Permission to depart.

Col. Haynes, a Principal Tribune amongst the Rebels, with Two Regiments of
Foot, and Four Troops of Horse, having slain..... a brave Man, at his landing,
the rest upon the fall of their Leader running away, left him the Possession of
Jersey. There were Two Castles in it, almost impregnable, but, that nothing is
so, where fear is predominant. Mont Orgueil made no Resistance. And, Castle
Elizabeth, surrounded with Rocks and the Ocean, and consequently inaccessible,
tho it held out some considerable Time, followed the Fate of the Island; Sir
George Cartaret, the Governor, having obtained Conditions for himself to pass
into France, and Impunity for the Islanders that returned to their Houses.

Finally, the Isle of Man, hitherto kept by the Noble Countess of Derby, who
had so bravely defended Lathome House against the Insults of the Rebels, closed
this Fatal Roll; by so much the more illustrious, as being the last, who fell
in Defense of her King and Country.

After so many Victorious and uninterrupted Successes, the Commonwealth grew
eminently high, enjoying Peace, and the quiet Fruition of their Usurped
Tyranny. The Regicides were not only feared at Home, but formidable to their
Neighbors. And yet, one thing seemed still necessary to establish their
Government, which was, to reconcile the King's Party to them. But, this being
not only difficult, but impossible, with such who preferred their Loyalty and
Honor before all things, and particularly, so sordid a Compliance; the Enemy,
upon consideration of it, had several bloody Consults about their Extirpation
and Massacre. The business was long debated in a Council of War; and, carried
in the Negative, as too Cruel, but by Two Voices. And now, what they cannot
effect by Severity, they will endeavor to compass by fair Means. An Amnesty,
or Act of Oblivion, tho with many intricate Exceptions, is published, which
gave hopes to such who lived quietly and peaceably, of being in time admitted
to Public Employments in the Commonwealth. Nor was it absurd in them, to
pretend to a continuance of their Usurpation, by allaying the Heats and Hate of
all Parties. But, this precaution proved fruitless; for, an unexpected
Adversary of their own hatching, starting up amongst themselves, did as
suddenly suppress them.

In the mean Time, the New Commonwealth, as they were great at Home, so they
were formidable Abroad; being acknowledged by all, courted by some, and looked
upon as very considerable, by such who affected them least; The Spaniard,
French, Portugal, Suedes, United Provinces, and others, saluted this Rising
State with Embassies; being also resaluted in form, especially by the Dutch, by
reason of their Parallel Beginnings, and manner of Government. St. John's and
Strickland were deputed with great Pomp, not only to offer them Peace, but to
invite them to a Coalition or Incorporating of the Two Nations in One. But,
these Ambassadors not having been received with such Warmness as they expected
by the States, but also used with all manner of Indignities by the Royollists,
and such who favored the King, they returned home without effecting what they
came for, fraught with rage and scorn against their Rival-Sister; Which
afterward broke out into a most cruel and lasting War, as we shall see
hereafter.

Cromwell, after the Victory at Worcester, as if endued with another Spirit,
seemed to arrogate the Supreme Power to himself, which appeared by his offering
to knight Lambert and Fleetwood in the Field of Battle; which he had also done,
if he had not been dissuaded by some of his Confidents. The War being now
ended, and he at leisure, he reassumed his Thoughts, which he had always
indulged, of his future Greatness. He had, for as much as in him lay, rendered
the Parliament odious to the People, as the Authors of Bloodshed in Time of
Peace, and the only Authors of all their Grievances: And, as he had incited the
Agitators to Murder the King, he now again stirs them up with the Charms of
Promises, to persecute this hated Juncto. They therefore, accuse the Members of
it, with Covetousness, Tyranny, and a Design of perpetuating themselves in
their Empire. They tell, how they had arrogated to themselves, their Friends
and Dependants, all the Honors, Commands, and Lucrative Employments of the
Kingdom. They therefore, whose Arms were not Mercenary, but taken up in Defense
of their Common Liberty, and who would not lay them down till they had obtained
the ends they strove for, did (how ever threatened) require, That the Parliament
should at length put a Period to their Session, and let another more equal
Representative be chosen in their Place. The Commanders hoped perhaps to be
elected in their Rooms. And, some undoubtedly had a regard to Liberty, that the
People might not still be subjected to the same Masters. The Senators were not
a little perplexed with these Novelties; the Army especially mutinying to that
Height, that some of the Common Soldiers, did impudently dare to draw their
Swords upon their Lords with Threats and Insultings. Nay, the Citizens of
London, sometimes their best Friends, who had so often promised and protested
to live and dye with them, actuated with the same Spirit of Sedition, do now
question their Integrity, blame their Conduct, and disown their Proceedings.

Things being at this pass, Cromwell having convened the Chief Officers of the
Army, and several of the pretended Members of the Juncto, in the Speaker's
House, declaimed highly against the present State of Affairs; demonstrating,
that there was no Good to be hoped or expected from a Parliament so
constituted, as being corrupt, and designing to perpetuate it self. He added
somewhat of a mixed and well tempered Monarchy, which how ever magnified by the
Lawyers who were present, as most consonant to the Laws and Genius of the
Nation, was highly opposed by the Officers, who were more than Monarchs in
their Commands and Governments. Some had proposed, to elect the Duke of
Gloucester, the King's Youngest Brother, as least obnoxious to the Wiles of the
Enemy, by reason of his tender Years; but, this also displeased, and nothing
was fixed upon. In the mean time, several Petitions out of the Counties, were
presented to Cromwell; in which, after an Enumeration of his Glorious Actions,
they earnestly desire, That God having given him the Power of the Sword, they
might be eased of their Grievances, by his and his Armies mediation. Moved with
these Supplications, and his own Ambition, he ceased not to press the Members
singly and collectively, to put an End to their odious Domination, and permit
the Election of a new Representative of Men, singular for their Integrity and
Holiness of Life, to whom the Government might be transferred. But, these
Conscript Fathers, bewitched with the Sweets of Empire, turned every Stone to
prevent their casheering; and, being vehemently urged to it, promised that they
would name a day for the ending of this Session. But, Cromwell raving with the
Thoughts of Supremacy, and looking upon every Delay as pernicious, rushing into
the House of Commons, having taxed all with their Crimes, pointing at several
with his Finger, accused some of Adultery, some of Drunkenness, others of
Gluttony, and not a few of Robbing the Common wealth; And, his Officers, upon
his stamping with his Foot, which was the Signal, crowding in to him, he turned
out this Hated Juncto; putting a Period to that detestable Convention, which
had thus long abused the Sacred Name of Parliament.

And, here we ought to adore the unsearchable Judgments of God, seeing them,
who violated the Majesty of their own Lord, become Slaves, by as just
Retribution, to their own Servants. It Is scarce credible, with what universal
Applause this Dissolution was effected: not, that better Times (unless the King
were restored) durst be hoped for; but, that People were willing to try every
Change, rather than longer to bear the Yoke of this odious Domination. And,
thus this perfidious Servant, subverted his equally perfidious Superiors; and
constituting a Council of State, which should govern at his beck, requires by
Proclamation, the Subjects Obedience and Submission, under great Penalties, to
their Dictates.

Many eminent Men, have acquired Dominion over their Fellows by Fortitude and
Virtue; and, some by flagitious and detestable Crimes; but, very few by
cheating; and perhaps, scarce another besides Cromwell, who ever invaded, and
obtained the Supreme Power, by Tears, and Sighs, and Lies, and Pretenses of
Religion. And yet, it was with these Arts, that this Ambitious Trooper, and
False Prophet, having deceived the Army he commanded, being Fanatics, and
gained the Independants by Benefits, durst attempt what ever Power and Ambition
could suggest.

The Mock-Parliament being turned out, the Civil Employments in the Kingdom,
were by Proclamation confirmed in their Hands that enjoyed them: whilst the
Soldiery by Sea and Land, as also the Armies in Scotland and Ireland, did not
only approve of this Change by their suffrages, but by their congratulatory
Addresses too, protesting their Obedience to their Generalissimo and his Orders
in all Things. But Cromwell, lest he might seem to arrogate the Supreme Power
to himself, and thereby offend the Dissenting Brethren; and, the better to
delude the Democraticks with the jugglings of Appearances, convened another
Assembly by advice of his Officers, to the number of one Hundred and Four and
Twenty. To these, being Godly Men, and chosen by himself out of the Provinces,
he devolved the Supreme Power; who, being Sectaries and Enthusiasticks, met at
Westminster; and, usurping the Name of a Parliament, as most plausible, began
to manage the Affairs of the Kingdom. But, they performed nothing of
consequence, save, that they endeavored to take away Tithes, and alienate the
Revenues of the Church, as Antichristian. They attempted also, to abrogate our
Laws, as Badges of the Norman Conquest, imposed to enslave us; to suppress our
Universities and Public Schools, as savouring of Paganism; and, to annihilate
Titles and Nobility, as contrary to the Law of Nature and Christianity. All
which, they had also effected, if they had not been stopped in their Carreer by a
sudden Dissolution. Cromwell had many Privado's amongst this mad Rabble; who,
seeing they could do no good with them by tempering their Obstinacy; and,
considering that they acted by a precarious Authority and the Will of another,
the Speaker being likewise of their Cabal; they took their time when many of
the other were absent, declaring, that since no good was to be expected from
the Commonwealth so constituted, it seemed consonant to reason, that the
Parliament should be dissolved. Which, by the Speaker's leaving the Chair, was
done; who marching in the Head of the rest of the Party to White Hall, they
surrendered to Cromwell the Authority they had received from him; opening
thereby a Passage, to that Supremacy he so eagerly thirsted after.

Council of War, and Consent of the Army ( Lambert contributing mainly to it,
for he also hoped to have his Turn in the Government, after the Death of his
General) chosen Protector, he was no less vigilant in conserving his Dignity,
than he had been industrious in acquiring it. But, first it was thought fit he
should be installed in this New Dignity; which was done in great state at
Westminster Hall, Dec. 18.
where he took an Oath according to the Tenor of an Instrument then presented
to him, To govern the Nations according to the Laws. Statutes and Customs: to
seek their Peace; and cause Justice and Law to be equally administered. The
Heads of the said Instrument were, That the Protector should call a Parliament
every Three Years, which should sit Five Months; That their Bills, unless he
consented to them in Twenty Days, should pass without him; That his Council
should not exceed One and Twenty, nor be under Thirteen; who immediately upon
his Death, should choose another Protector; but, that no Protector after him
should be General of the Army. That he should have power to make Peace or War,
and with his Council make Laws in the intervals of Parliament, that should be
binding to the Subjects, etc.

His Council for the present, seemingly appointed by the Chief Officers, but
allowed by himself, were Fourteen in Number; Harrison, and some others being
disgusted with the Change, being lest out, tho they had hitherto strenuously,
but blindly contributed to it. But, the City not content to have testified
their Joy by their Bells and Bonfires, invited this New Dictator to a
magnificent Feast at Grocers Hall, where he Knighted Viner the Mayor; but, in
his Return, was saluted with a Brick-bat which light upon his Coach, nothing
else save a profound Silence accompanying this splendid Cavalcade.

But Cromwell not taken with Appearances, in Order to his Settlement sends his
Son Henry to Command in Ireland, and General Monk into Scotland; securing
thereby the Three Kingdoms in his Power. At home, he discountenances Bradshaw
the Regicide, with Scot, Vane, and other Enemies to Monarchy, and erected a
High Court of Justice to terrify the Royallists, by which Colonel Gerrard, and
Mr. Vowell were inhumanly butchered. And truly, there was no Appearance of
stirring at Home, all being quiet, and the Patties quite wearied out, besides
the dread of so powerful an Army hovering over them. Abroad he had been courted
by an Embassy out of France, and Whitlock in Sweden concludes a Treaty with
that Crown. But, what he most earnestly seemed to desire, was, the Friendship
of the Dutch, as necessary for his Establishment. But, before we determine that
Difference, it will be proper, to give some Account of the War betwixt the Two
Nations, which had been so ruinous to both, especially the Hollanders; having
according to my usual Method, not thought fit to disjoyn the Relations of
things of Importance, tho distant in Time.

The People of England, had about Two Years past commenced a War against the
United Provinces; which was, by so much the more fierce, as being betwixt Two
Rival Commonwealths, both equally jealous of each others Greatness; besides,
that both did endeavor to render themselves Masters of the Traffic of the
Ocean. The Causes divulged in Manifesto's and Declarations on both sides, were
various, the English insisting chiefly upon Dorislaus his Murder, and the
unrevenged Contumelies thrown upon their Ambassadors St. John and Strickland at
the Hague. The first Blow was, a Civil Edict, prohibiting all Men of what
Nation soever, to bring any Commodities or Merchandise into England, but such
as was of the Growth of the Country from whence they brought them. This, as it
was very advantageous to the English, so it was ruinous to the Dutch, whom it
also chiefly aimed at, as abounding in Shipping, and producing nothing of their
own Growth but Butter and Cheese; who, however potent at Sea (the Scots being
now vanquished) sent Four Ambassadors into England to endeavor to mitigate the
Rigor of this Act, and conclude the Treaty which had been begun at the Hague;
but, to little purpose: For, the English being heightened with so many
Victories, propose new Conditions to the Dutch, arrogating to themselves,
reasonably enough, the Herring-Fishing, and the Honor of the Flag. They also,
revive the Slaughtering of their Countrymen at Amboyna, and pretend a free
Passage for Navigation through the Scheld to Antwerp. The Ambassadors disdaining
the Pride and Haughtiness of the English, bragged also with no less Arrogance
of their Hundred and Fifty Men of War, which they had in Readiness. Whilst they
were thus cavilling, they were both surprised with the Rumor of an Engagement
betwixt Blake and Tromp, their Two Admirals. The manner thus; Tromp with a
Fleet of Forty Ships of War, met Blake with only Fifteen, to whom Bourn came
with Eight more out of the Downs, tho not till after they were engaged. The
English, to vindicate the Honor of the Flag, warned the adverse Admiral by a
Shot to strike, which was repeated Thrice: But Tromp confident in his Numbers
and Strength, answered him at first with Contempt, by discharging a Gun on the
contrary side; and then putting out the Bloody Flag, gave him his whole Tire of
Ordnance. Blake replied in kind, which engaged both Fleets, both fighting with
great Valor until the Night parted them. The Dutch lost Two of their Ships,
one being taken, as also the Captains of both; whilst the other abandoned by
the English, was left to the Mercy of the Waves. The English were much
endamaged in their Rigging and Sails, their Loss in Men being but
inconsiderable; not above Forty slain and wounded.

The Ambassadors being informed of the Success of this Fight, and finding they
had got nothing by it, seemed to deprecate the Offense, as an accidental
Encounter, and in no wise committed with the Knowledge, or by any Command of
the States General. But their Excuses were not received; so that they broke out
into an open War on both sides, which was carried on with equal Violence and
Emulation.

Blake sailing Northward, fell in with the Dutch Herring-Fleet, which he
dispersed in a Moment, taking all their Convoy, which consisted of Twelve Men
of War. Tromp came shortly after into that Sea, with Design to meet their East
India Merchant Ships; which having sent Home, he resolved to adventure another
Battle with Blake. But, being diverted by a violent Storm, he could not recover
his own Coasts without Difficulty. Several Encounters happened bewixt these
potent Parties upon other Occasions, with various Successes. Sir George Ayscue
defeated a Fleet of Merchants in the Channel, taking and sinking several of
them. And, some time after, meeting another Crew of them, convoyed by Sixty Men
of War, fought them. The Combat lasted from Four in the Afternoon, till the
Night separated them, with equal Valor and Loss. The Dutch continued their Way
undisturbed, the English retreating to Plymouth, to repair the Damage received
in the Fight, which seemed to imply the Advantage of the Enemy. In the mean
Time, several Trading-Ships, as well of the French as Dutch, were daily made
Prize of. And, Blake took the whole French Fleet, designed for the Relief of
Dunkirk, whereof he brought Seven to Dover; which obliged the Dunkirkers, to
surrender their Town into the Hands of the Archduke, who besieged them.

The States, for the better Government of their Fleets, had appointed some of
their Members to embark with them, as well to advise with their Councils as to
supervise the Actions of their Chiefs. And now De Wit is at Sea with Sixty
Ships of Force; but, he did not think fit, to wait Blake's sailing toward him
out of the Downs; who notwithstanding, did dare to disturb his Rear with his
nimblest Sailors. But, Tromp having got together a great Fleet, consisting of
Fourscore brave appointed Ships, resolved to attempt Blake in the very Downs;
who, however not exceeding half the other in Numbers, stayed for him. The Fight
was great, and the Victory bravely contested for, until the Night parted them.
But, the English being overpowered, having lost Two Ships, retreated with the
rest to Dover, and thence into the River of Thames. Nor was the Victory
bloodless on the Enemies side, having many of their Ships torn and disabled.
Tromp fierce with his Advantage, wandered now at pleasure uncontrouled, and
vainly bearing a Beesom at his Main Top, bragged he would sweep the Sea of the
English.

The Parliament having prepared a very great Fleet of Eighty Ships of War,
constituted a Triumvirate of Admirals, Blake being still one, Dean and Monk the
other. These being ready sooner than the Dutch expected, attended Tromp with a
great Fleet of Merchants, returning from the Ports of France and Spain. Nor had
they waited long, when they discovered this numerous Enemy be* betwixt them and
Portland. Blake sails directly toward them. And Tromp no less forward,
prepares to receive him. The Fight was cruel and bloody, the Success also being
various in the diverse Parts of it, until the Night parted them. On the Morrow,
they engage again. Tromp having sent his laden Vessels before, closed their
Rear with his Ships of War, and fights retreating. The Third day the Battle
being renewed, the Dutch after a stout Conflict, got away by Favor of the
Darkness, having lost Eleven of their Men of War, and Thirty of the Merchant
Ships. The English lost the Sampson (but saved her Men) as also the Captains,
Mildmay and Ball, commanding the Triumph and Vanguard; and, Blake himself was
wounded in his Thigh. The slaughter on both sides, especially the Enemies, was
very great. Tromp gained great Honor, and that deservedly, for saving his
Fleet; justly attributing the Cause of his Retreat, to his Care for his
Merchants, which he convoyed.

The Hollanders, admonished by their Losses, write to the Rump for a
Reconciliation; but, seeing the other Provinces had not concurred, their
Letters were rejected. But, what the Dutch lost in the Channel, seemed to be
compensated by their Victory in the Tyrrehenian Sea off of Leghorn, where Van
Galen defeated Appelton, taking and sinking Fire Men of War. He had formerly
taken the Phoenix at Porta Longona, which was afterward recovered by Cox,
sometime her Lieunant; who in the Night, under the Notion of Fishermen, clapped
her on Board with a Hundred Men in Three Boats, forcing Young Tromp who
commanded her, to save himself out of the Cabin Window, and brought her to
Naples.

The Danes favoring the Dutch, had detained an English Fleet in the Sound,
laden with Masts, Pitch, Tar, Hemp and other Naval Provisions, which the
English mainly wanted. Nor would they release them, although pressed to it by
Captain Ball, with a great Fleet of War.

Cromwell, as is mentioned, had dislodged the Rump, assuming to himself the
Supreme Authority over these Nations. And now the Dutch proposing to themselves
much Advantage by this Change, and, as they supposed, unsettled state of
Affairs, prepare a great Fleet, consisting of Fourscore brave Ships of Force.
Wherewith Tromp sailing out of the Texel, made Northwards to meet their French
Merchant Fleet, coming round Ireland and Great Britain, for fear of the
English; who obstructed the Passage through the Channel. These being sent Home
in safety, Tromp sailed to Dover, which Town he battered with his whole Fleet a
whole Day. The English in the mean Time, under the Command of Monk and Dean,
sailing along the Coasts of Scotland, Denmark, and the Belgic Strands, carried
no less Terror with them. June 2.
The Coasts having been thus alarmed on both Sides, both Fleets came in Sight
of each other, and engaged. The Fight, as usual, was brave and bloody. Dean was
slain by a Cannon Bullet from the first Broadside; but, the Dutch, in Revenge,
were so ill treated, that the Night coming on, they retired toward Dunkirk,
securing themselves from the Enemies greatest Ships betwixt those known Sands.
The next Morning, the English augmented by the Accession of Blake with Eighteen
Ships, renewed the Fight, and, after a sharp Encounter, force the Dutch to
fly, notwithstanding Tromp (who put himself at the foremost of them) his
Endeavors to the contrary. The Belgians lost at least Fifteen of their Ships,
sunk and taken; the Damage the English suffered, being very inconsiderable.
The Conquerours raised with their Success, besieged the Havens and Ports of
Holland and Zealand, to their very great Detriment; for, the Ships homeward
bound, ignorant of what had happened, fell into the Hands of the Besiegers;
and, those within, durst not venture out.

The Dutch finding the Inequality of the Party, send Ambassadors into England
to treat of Peace; where, whilst they are disputing about the Conditions, the
Fleets again meet not far from the Texel. This Naval Battle, seemed to exceed
all the other in Fierceness and Slaughter; though, nothing memorable happened,
that, or the following Day, by reason of the Tempestuousness of the Weather. On
the Third Day, July 31.
being the 31st. of July, the Fleets from the Texel and Zealand being joined,
Tromp and De Wit made up to the English; who bearing off at Sea, by reason of
the Sholes and a Leeshore, quickly tackt upon them; and, receiving their Attack
with equal Fortitude and Fierceness, at length repelled them. The Fight dured
from Six in the Morning till Noon. Nor did the Party seem unequal, until Tromp
was slain, being shot in the Breast with a Musket Bullet. And, thus fell this
great Man, to be mentioned with Honor for the Glory of his Achievements, and
his skill in Naval Affairs. He finished his Course, with no less Reputation
than he had continued it; seeing, he died in Defense of his Country, and, that
the War which he had begun, expired with him. The Admiral being dead, the
Valor of his Men vanished with him; who, unequal to the English in
Perseverance, fled before them with much Disorder and Loss, toward the Texel.
Nor were they much pressed in their Retreat; for, Monk, however successful,
bought his Victory dear, being necessitated to return into England, to repair
his Breaches and Losses. He had Six of his Captains slain, and as many wounded,
and Two of his Ships lost. Pen and Lawson did particularly signalize
themselves. What the Enemy suffered, was not known; save, that Five of their
Captains were made Prisoners, and scarce Ninty of One Hundred and Twenty Ships
they had fought with, escaped into the Texel. A day of Thanksgiving, was
appointed in England for this Victory; the Chief Officers, and Captains of the
Fleet, being honored with Gold-Chains and Medals, as Marks of their Valor and
good Service.

Opdam, a Person of Honor, and of the Nobility which is conspicuous in
Holland, succeeded Tromp in the Command of the Fleet. And, now both Republics
weary of the War, seemed desirous of Peace, which was also concluded betwixt
them upon Conditions honorable enough for the English, if the Protector, too
solicitous for the future, had not too much apprehended the Young Prince of
Orange, then in his Nurses Arms. The Danes were included in the Treaty, the
Price of the detained Ships being paid by the States. Peace was likewise
concluded with the King of Portugal, as also with the Sweeds, by splendid
Embassies from both Sides. A more strickt League was also made with the French,
and all upon his own Terms: For, he forced the Dutch, and Portuguese, to pay
the Charges of the War. Nor would he conclude with the French, without
inserting an Article (their King being then under Age) That France should upon
Demand, assist him with Ten Thousand Men, to establish his Authority, against
the King, against the People, and against the Defections of his own Army, which
he had reason to apprehend. Nay, they valued the Friendship and Favor of this
Usurper at that Rate, that they forced King Charles by an unheard of President,
upon his Demand to leave that Kingdom; banishing him out of his very Exile,
against the Law of Nations, which allows Sanctuary to the distressed, and
against the Rights of Blood and Hospitality.

Cromwell being offended with Spain, or perhaps in Consequence of the League
with France, Proclaims War against that Nation; from whom, having in vain
attempted Hispaniola, he extorted the Island of Jamaica in the West Indies;
and, Dunkirk, a famous Seaport nearer Home, by the Assistance of the French.
But, these deserve a more particular Narrative.

He had equipped Two considerable Fleets, with great Cost and Application; one
whereof he sent with Blake into the Mediterranean; and, the other under the
Command of Pen and Venables, fraughted with Land-Souldiers, set Sail about the
same Time. The Design was kept secret, which did not a little amuse the
Neighbour-Princes, and particularly the Spaniards, who sent the Marquess of
Leda, Governor of Dunkirk, into England, to penetrate into the Reasons and
Designs of these great Preparations. But, conjecturing by the Ambiguity of the
Answers he received, that it might concern his Countrymen, he immediately
returned.

The Fleet arrived happily at the Barbado's, one of our Principal Indian
Colonies. Where, as also out of the Neighboring Isles, the Landforces they
brought out of England, consisting but of Three Thousand, were made up to at
least Ten Thousand; Servants and others, being invited to take up Arms, upon
Assurance of their Liberty, and Hopes of Plunder. But, though the Army were
great, the Provisions made for it were not so; the Generals perhaps thinking,
that they did but need, to Come and Conquer. With these Forces and vast
expectations, they sailed toward Hispaniola. Being come within the Sight of
San Domingo, the Spaniards terrified with the Danger, abandoned their City, and
fled into Woods, leaving all to the Discretion of the Assailants. But, the
English, by the vain Precaution of their Governors, fearing I know not what
imaginary Ambuscades, omitted and lost the Opportunity; for, leaving the Port,
Venables landed Ten Leagues from the Town with Seven Thousand Men. The
Soldiers were brisk and fierce, promising themselves Gold and Wealth, even to
Satiety. But, their Joy did not last long; for, it was proclaimed under pain of
Death, that none should plunder Gold, Silver, Jewels, or any other precious
Movables, or kill any tame Cattle. The Soldiers damped with this unseasonable
Order, destitute now of the Solace of Hope it self, moved but dully; and,
marching through thick Woods, scorching Sands, excessive Heat of the Sun, and
its concomitant, unsufferable Thirst, they at length came to the assigned
Rendezvous. Colonel Buller met them there, with Three Regiments from the
Fleet, where they were somewhat refreshed; for, there was a River of
Freshwater, which discharges it self into the Sea. The Forces being joined,
Venables marches with his Army toward the City, having sent Captain Cox, who
was also their Guide, with Five Hundred Men before as a Forlorn. And, they
proved so. In the mean Time, the Spaniards taking Courage from their Enemies
loitering, and perceiving the Difficulties they labored under, betake
themselves to their Defense; and, falling briskly upon them in the Intricacies
of their Passage with a handful of Men, they kill Cox, and rout his Party, who
rushing upon the next Regiment put it to Flight. Upon advance of the Army, the
Spaniards retired into a Fort they had in the Wood. Venables, after this brush,
returned back to the River, with a Resolution, to reassume his Design: And,
having mounted Two Guns, provided Scaling-ladders, Mortars, Granado's and
Fireballs, he marches the second Time toward the City. But, being betrayed by
the Errors of his Guides, who undertook to lead him a more commodious Way for
the avoiding of the Fort, he is brought into the same place where they had
already fought so unluckily. The Spaniards, but Seventy in Number, sallying
hastily out of their Ambushes, fell with such Violence upon the Van Guard, that
the Forlorn being beaten into the next following Battalion, that also turned
upon their own Army, and filling all with Terror, they all ran away. The Enemy
pursued with a great slaughter; nor did they retire, till they were wearied
with killing, and carried away Seven Colors in sign of Victory. Colonel
Haynes having with great Courage endeavored to make Head against them, being
abandoned, was slain by them, and with him Six Hundred more, besides several
wounded. These Miscarriages, were followed by the Negligence of the Commanders,
with want of Provisions; so, that several of the Soldiers straying in the
Woods in Quest of Victuals, were snapt up by the Enemy. Their Wants growing
daily upon them, they eat all their Horses, which they had brought in a fine
Troop with them from the Barbados; and, these not sufficing, they at length
resolved to leave this unlucky Shore: Which they did, sailing with their
baffled Army to Jamaica; where, the News of their Defeat not being yet arrived,
they easily landed, the Spaniards there articling for Liberty to depart, which
they easily consented to. This Island is very pleasant, Sixty Leagues in
Length, and Thirty in Breadth. But, they met here with an Enemy more severe
than the Spaniards, which was the Plague; which, in a little Time, reduced
their Army to sewer than Two Thousand. Those who survived, being recruited with
Provisions and Men from England, the Island being also cleared of Spaniards, is
now become a famous Colony of the English.

But, Admiral Blake's Successes were greater, though they did not make more Noise
in the World. The Algerines, upon Sight of the Fleet so far superior to theirs,
making a Peace with him, consented to the Restitution of the British Slaves,
and a Liberty of Commerce. But, they of Tunis, trusting to their own Strength,
answered Blake's Summons fiercely; showing him, by way of ostentation, their
Castles in the Guletta, and their Fleet in that impregnable Receptacle of
Porta-ferino. Blake resolving always on the brave, filling his long Boats with
his boldest Adventurers, sent them into the Haven to burn their Ships. Which
they also effected, consuming Nine of them with Fire, with the inconsiderable
Loss of Five and Twenty Men. All this while, the Ships of the Fleet thundered
terribly with their Cannon upon their Castles and Batteries, dismounting for
the most part their Guns, and forcing the Defendants to abandon their Works.
The Infidels thus chastised, became more submiss, being glad to accept of that
Pacification, they had lately so insolently refused.

Cromwell being secure Abroad, had at Home defeated all the Endeavors of the
Royallists, as also of the Presbyterians and Democraticks, for the recovering
of their Liberty. All these Attempts were stifled in their Infancy, or betrayed
in their Growth, before they came to any Ripeness; effecting nothing, but the
Ruin of such who were concerned in them, and the securing of him in his
Tyranny, whose Destruction was so passionately desired. This cruel Protector,
had afflicted the Royallists with all manner of Torments in their Persons. And
now, having constituted Major Generals, after the Manner of the Turkish
Bashaws, in all the Kingdom; decimated, and confiscated their Goods; and raging
against their Persons with Incarcerations, Banishments, and Death it self,
exposed them to all the Miseries their inexorable Malice could invent. But,
seeing that all would not do, and that they were Proof against the utmost
severity; he changed his Battery, and will now try to gain them by Civilities,
and a more gentle Usage. But, that taking no effect with Men immovable in
their Loyalty, and whom nothing could oblige to abandon that Cause, they had so
religiously maintained; he thought of other ways to be rid of these Men, so
averse to his Tyranny. Upon this account, he permits Foreign Ministers in
League with him, to make Levies of them for their Wars, the Prisons having
often times been emptied for that purpose. The Colonies, in the West Indies,
consumed many of them by Slavery, and others allured into the unfortunate
expedition of San Domingo, perished in it. His Domestic Enemies being thus
removed or oppressed, the Usurper became also formidable to Strangers. And, now
it seemed seasonable for him to think of transmitting his Tyranny to his
Posterity. As he had usurped the Power of a King, so he ambition'd the Title,
which a Parliament he had convened for his Purpose, endeavored to invest him
with. But, he was opposed by the Chiefs of the Army, who expected, and hoped
after his Fate, to have their Turns in the Supremacy. However, he managed his
Design so well, that he was created Sovereign Protector, with Power to name his
Successor; which was, in effect, what he desired, in rendering his Tyranny
Hereditary.

The Spaniards, to repay one War with another, seized and confiscated all the
English Merchants Goods and Shipping in his Dominions, and by a Public Edict,
declared War against the Nation. But, Cromwell acting more Effectually, sent
Blake and Montague with a Fleet to shut up the Haven of Cadiz, where the Rich
Ships from the Indies usually arrived. Stayner, with his Squadron of Seven
Frigates, 1656. Sep. 1.
fell upon Eight of them, in the Absence of their Admiral; whereof, he took
Two, burnt One (with the Marquess of Badaiox, the Viceroy of Peru and his Lady
in it) sunk Another, forced Two on Shore, and the other Two escaped into Port.
This was a great Victory, wherein they took above Two Millions of Pieces of
Eight. But, that which Blake won at Teneriffe the Year following, surpassed all
other in Nobleness of Action, and Resolution of the Undertakers. The West India
Fleet, consisting of Sixteen Rich Ships, 1657. Apr. 20.
having Intelligence that the English were cruising upon the Atlantic Ocean,
put into the Haven of Santa Cruz; where, by the Advantage of their strong
Castle at the Entry, and Seven Forts round the Bay, they thought themselves
secure. But, Blake perceiving their Order, sending Stayner, a brave Commander,
with some nimble Frigates before, followed himself with the rest of his Fleet.
And, plying the Castle and Forts, with his great Ships, beat the Spaniards from
their Guns; and, after a sharp Fight, took the Fleet, abandoned by the Seamen
who ran on Shore; but, not being able to carry it away with them, they set in
on fire, consuming both it and the immense Riches it was fraughted with. A
Thanksgiving-Day being appointed in England for this so eminent a Victory,
Blake was honored by the Parliament with a Present of Five Hundred Pounds.
But, this so famous Admiral, did not long survive so many Victories, expiring
at his Entrance into Plymouth Road, by the Malignity of the Dropsy and Scurvy.
Thus ended this brave and fortunate Warrior, worthily to be celebrated, if he
had not so audaciously resisted his own Prince.

Nor was it at Sea only that Cromwell plagued the Spaniard; for, he sent Six
Thousand Men, under the Command of Colonel Reynolds into Flanders, who much
facilitated the Successes of the French. Montmedy and St. Venant, were taken by
their Asstance; and, some time after, Mardike, which was delivered to the
English, and by them so strongly fortified, that it firmly withstood the
Assaults of the British Regiments in the Service of Spain Hereupon, Dunkirk
was Besieged by the Confederates. But, Don Juan of Austria, Governor of those
Low Countries, Solicitous for the conserving of so considerable a Seaport, and
to prevent the Excursions of the French into Flanders on that side, having
drawn his Army together, and strengthened it with Veterane Soldiers taken out
of their Garrisons; and being joined by the Duke of York, with four Batalions
of English, and Irish, then under his Command; he marched to the Relief of the
Besieged, and suddenly possessing the Height of the Sand-Hills opposite to
Turin's Camp, pitched his there. Marshal Turin having left Guards to Defend
Forts and Posts against the Sallies of the Besieged, drew the rest of his Army
out of his Trenches. The English were in the Van; who, notwithstanding the
Showers of shot powered upon them, ascended the Hill, and after a sharp
encounter at push of Pike, and Butt-end of Musket, forced the Enemy from their
Ground. This being done, the French Horse charged the opposite Cavalry, which
being long sustained by the Valor and Virtue of the Duke of York, and his
Brother Gloucester, was at last, the English advancing upon them, obliged to
leave the Field. There were above a Thousand slain, and more then Two Thousand
taken Prisoners. The Cannon and Spoil of the Field, were the present Reward of
the Victors; and, some time after, Dunkirk it self: Which, by the Death of the
Governor, the Marquess of Led, was surtendered upon Conditions, and put into
the Possession of the English by Contract.

Cromwell however heightened by this Victory, did not long survive it; being
oppressed with a Melancholy, which he had contracted upon the Death of his
beloved Daughter Cleypoole; Which accompanied with a Fever, and Faintings,
snatched him hence (deprecating his immature Destiny in vain) to that Tribunal,
where he was to give an Account of his Rebellions, Sacrilege, Perjury,
Parricide, and Tyranny. He died indeed, like other Men, in his Bed; but, not
without some extraordinary Commotions of Spirit. Nay, the whole Frame of Nature
suffered violent Concussions, by a dreadful Tempest at the Exit of this
Impostor; which threatened, by Tumult, and Noises, loud as his Sins, to reduce
the World into its pristine Chaos again. We cannot with Justice, deny this
great Artist in Dissimulation and Imposture, Courage and Vastness of Mind;
since he raised himself up from a Private Condition, and a simple Gentleman, to
the Supreme Height of Empire; not altogether unworthy the Degree he attained
to, if he had not acquired it by ill Means.

BOOK III.
Richard succeeds his Father in the Protectorate. He is deposed by the Army.
The Rump restored. Lambert defeats Sir George Booth. Montague returns with the
Fleet out of Denmark. Lambert turns out the Rump. Monk dissents, and declares
for the Rump. Lambert marches against him. Being deluded by Treaties, he is
deserted by his Army. The Committee of Safety routed, and the Rump yet again
restored. Monk marches to London. Readmits the Secluded Members. The Parliament
dissolved by its own Act. An Abstract of the King's Actions and Motions abroad.
He is proclaimed by the Parliament. Returns into England. His glorious
Reception. The End of our Troubles.

OLiver having during his Sickness been vainly confident of his Recovery, which
he also had been deluded into an Assurance of, by his Chaplains and Flatterers;
had neglected the Nominating of a Successor, as he was authorized to do by the
Petition and Advice. 'Twas thought, he balanced in his Choice betwixt his Son
and Son-in-law Fleetwood; which his Council finding, and perceiving his Spirits
and Senses to fail, demanded of him, If he did not appoint his Son Richard to
Succeed him? To which he answering, as is supposed, in the Affirmative;
Richard, as soon as he expired, was saluted and proclaimed Protector in his
Fathers Room. But very unlike him in Fortitude, and the Arts of Government; as
will appear, by his being disturbed from the quiet Possession of Three
Kingdoms, by those he neither had Wit nor Courage to suppress or oppose. He was
in the mean time, as well as his Father, acknowledged and saluted, by the Army,
the City, the Provinces and Foreign Ministers and Ambassadors. The Beginning of
his Reign was serene, and his first Care, the Funeral of his Father. Which was
performed with a more than Royal Magnificence, there having been Sixty Thousand
Pounds expended in it; this Treasure, as it had been extorted by Tyranny, being
consumed in Luxury. His Corpse, however wrapped up in a Sixfold Cerecloth, a Lead,
and a Wooden Coffin, fermenting in this restraint, burst out of it; and,
filling all with a most noisome Odor, was privately deposited in Henry Vll 's
Chapel, amongst the Ashes of King's; but, by the just Judgment of God, to be
transferred and buried under the Gallows, as we have since seen.

The Officers of the Army, after all their Addresses to Richard, grew weary of
him, as soon as they had well owned him; and, unmindful now of their Duty and
Promises to him, by the Insinuations of Lambert, formerly cashiered by his
Father, and the Concurrence of the Democraticks, having also drawn Fleetwood
his Brother-in-law, and Desbourough who had married his Aunt, into the Cabal,
consult how to abolish the Protectorate, and restore themselves to their former
Freedom. Nor was Richard ignorant of their Designs, but wanted Resolution to
suppress them; and, indeed, courage to countenance the Undertakings of others,
who offered their Service for the scizure or killing of these Mutineers. He had
called a Parliament, by whose Authority, he supposed these Heats might be
allayed; and, they endeavored it. But, this Puny Prince, affrighted with the
Threats and Noises of the adverse Party, was persuaded to dissolve that
Convention, however addicted to him. Hereupon, he is likewise laid aside. The
Rump, composed of those Antimonarchists which his Father had formerly ejected,
being introduced and seated in the Government again. His Brother Henry,
Viceroy of Ireland, quitted also that Kingdom, and the Army there, by command
of this restored Senate, with the like Pusillanimity. Whereby it appears, how
sordidly these Fellows degenerated from their Father in Audaciousness, though
they resembled him well enough in Wickedness. Monk, who commanded in Scotland,
did likewise submit; but, kept his Employment, thinking he had done enough, in
congratulating their Restoration by Addresses and Messages.

The odious Oligarchy being restored, under the Title of a Commonwealth; and,
acknowledged by the Army, and their Partisans in the Provinces, drive more
furiously than before, endeavoring to remove all Obstacles and Impediments to
their designed Tyranny. In order to this, they exact a spontaneous Abdication
of the Protectorate, from Richard; which he tamely granted, promising further,
To behave himself peaceably under the Government, from which he expected
Protection. And thus this Mushrom-Prince, the untimely Birth of a short Relgn,
turned out of White Hall, vanished; and, will be no more heard of, but with
Obloquy and Infamy. And yet, if he had had either Honor or Honesty in him, he
might have had one Game more to play, no less probable, than glorious, which
was, the restoring of the King; several Overtures having been made to him, by
the Royal Party, to that Purpose. The which, with his Interest in the Army, and
Two Houses, before their Dissolution, might have been effected without a
Miracle.

The Rump was no sooner seated, but they began to divide the Inheritance
amongst themselves; and, whatever the Cromwellian storm of Hail had left, these
rapacious Locusts did consume and devour. But, the Universality of the Nation,
trembled at these Preludes of Tyranny and Slavery; and, being resolved to
suffer any thing, rather than the known Domination of the Regicides, took up
Arms in diverse Counties. Nor were the Parriciaes ignorant of these Designs.
They therefore to prevent them, fill the Prisons with the most suspected, and
command all those who had served the King, to leave the City, and not to return
without Permission. The swift Motion of their Horse, hindered the Risings in
Kent and Surrey, and some other Counties. And yet, they got together in
Cheshire, under the Command of Sir George Booth, to a considerable Body, being
assisted by Sir Thomas Middleton, Randal Egerton Major General, and Colonel
Worden, with others, Asserters of Liberty, and a Free Parliament. Having
possessed themselves of Chester, Manchester, and Warrington, they became
formidable. The growing Power of these Royallists (for such they were esteemed)
extremely terrified the Rebels at Westminster; and therefore, Lambert was
ordered with Seven Regiments of Foot, and Two of Horse, to march with all speed
against these new Adversaries, and suppress them. Which he also did, with no
great Difficulty; their raw unexperienced Militia, not being able to stand the
shock of an Army, flusht with so many Successes. So that, attacking them at
Norwich-Bridge, where Morgan, a brave Youth, was slain, they forced it, routing
and defeating the whole Party. Chester, and the other Fortresses, were all
retaken; and Booth himself being fled, was afterward discovered in Woman's
Cloths at Newport, and was cast into the Tower.

The Men at Westminster swollen with this Victory, having thereby reduced the
Kingdom to their Obedience, resolve to call the Authors of this Late War, to a
very severe Account, thirsting no less after their Estates and Possessions,
than their Blood. In the mean time, Montague, who had been sent in Richard's
Protectorate into Denmark, with a great Fleet, invited by the King unto whom he
was reconciled, and commanded by him, sailed toward England with his Naval
Power, to help to free his Native Country from Oppression and Slavery. But,
hearing by the Way, of the Defeat of the Royallists, the Secret was not
discovered, tho he returned with the Fleet; and was commanded by the Rump, who
suspected his Faith, to his House, till they should be at leisure to take an
Account of his Voyage, and Actions.

The Enemy being subdued, these Blood-Canibals judging of the Justice of their
Cause by the Success, and thinking nothing bad, but what was improsperous,
looked upon themselves as owned by Heaven. But yet, their joy was but
short-lived; for, whilst they go on securely, they were yet again by the Just
Judgment of God, disturbed by their own Servants. Lambert after his Victory
aiming at greater Things, began not only to neglect his Equals, but to despise
his Superiors also. But, the Army was first to be gained, which he endeavored
to do, by the usual Charms of Ambition; attributing to them, the Glories of
their Achievements, and the Honor of the late Success. He also distributed
amongst them, the Thousand Pounds, which these nefarious Senators had bestowed
on him: affirming, that Presents of that kind, were no less due to them by
whose Fortitude Great Actions were performed, than to him by whose Conduct they
were effected. With these Arts, he rendered the Soldiers not only favorable,
but subservient to his Designs. Whilst he is thus employed, he received Letters
from the Senate (who began to suspect him of ambitious Intreagues) but very
obligingly writ, to invite him to Town; which he instantly obeyed, being secure
in the Soldiers affection, and that he might give no Shadow of Distrust by his
Delay. A Petition from the rest of the Commanders to the Parliament, followed
the General, wherein they required, That Fleetwood and Lambert should have the
Chief Command and Generalship of the Army. The Parliament who had conferred
that Province upon their Speaker, who had also hitherto commissioned these very
Officers, startled at so unusual a Demand, and fancying if they yielded they
were undone, Vote, That to have any more General-Officers in the Army, than are
already settled by the Parliament, was unnecessary, burthensom and dangerous to
the Commonwealth. But, the Soldiers persisting in their arrogant Demands,
this Vote was followed by another, declaring, That it should be Treason for any
Person or Persons, to levy Money without the consent of Parliament. By this
means, these States thought, and reasonably enough, to render the Soldiers for
the future, more obedient to them from whom they were to expect their Stipend
and Rewards. This done, they (animated perhaps more with Choler than Counsel)
casheer Lambert, as Chief of the Conspiracy, and Eight more of the boldest
Tribunes of his Party; transferring the Chief Command of the Army, upon Seven
of their own Tribe, viz. Fleetwood, Monk, Hazelrig, Ludlow, Walton, Morley and
Overton. But, the disbanded Officers disdaining to be thus used, armed with
Revenge and Ambition, flew with their Regiments to Westminister, filling the
Avenues of the Court with their Soldiers, resolving to hinder the sitting of
the Members. The Parliament, on the other side, loath to dislodge, solicited the
rest of the Army to their Assistance, and had them. Being drawn up on both
sides, they yet past no further than Threats, being pacified by the Care and
Authority of the Council of State. But, Lambert gained his desired end, in
hindering the Speaker to go to the House, and sending him Home without his
Pretorian Troop which had attended him thither, and more like a Captive, than a
General, or an Imperial Speaker.

The Independent Faction being thus divided, the Civil Part of it was forced to
truckle to the Military; and now in Contempt of the Authority of their Senate,
Fleetwood, no great Soldier but a valiant Holder-forth, by Suffrage of the
Council of Officers, was made General, and Lambert Lieutenant General; to whose
Artifice, the other was obnoxious. They also, erected a Council of State or
Committee of Safety, consisting of Three and Twenty Commissioners, most
Officers; to whom, the Supreme Care of the Laws and Government were at present
committed, with Instructions, to introduce a new Form of a Commonwealth. The
State being thus settled, Lambert endeavors by a Declaration, to calm the
Minds of Men, distracted with so many Novelties, with the Show and Assurance or
their Liberties, both Sacred and Civil; and sending some of his Colbet, Barrow.
Confidents into Scotland and Ireland, attempts all ways to draw those Armies
to his Party. But, without Success; for, Ireland being addicted to the Rump,
continued faithful to them. And Monk, did dare openly to dissent from the new
Modellers. Part also of the Fleet, under their Vice Admiral Lawson, did sharply
demand the Restitution of the Parliament; and, Portsmouth, a strong Sea Town,
revolted from our Novelists.

The Committee of Safety being in these Streights, provide with their utmost
Care, Remedies for so many Evils. Lambert is sent with a great Army, consisting
of Twelve Thousand Men, against Monk; and Forces were likewise sent to reduce
Portsmouth, the Fleet being invited by Messages and Promises, to return to
their Obedience. But, these precautions proved every where fruitless; for, the
Fleet blocking up the Mouth of the Thames, persisted in their Obstinacy. The
Parlamentarians at Portsmouth, were grown formidable, by the Accession of those
that besieged them, who had revolted to them; and, Ireland following the
Example of the other Dissenters, declared for the Parliament. But, the greatest
Danger that threatened them, appeared in the North; for, Monk in his Letters to
Fleetwood, did dare to disapprove the Actions of the Army, requiring the
immediate Restitution of the Parliament. And, mustering his Army, having turned
out such of his Officers as favored the contrary Party, he marched Southwards
and seizes the strong Town of Berwick.

The Committee of Safety startled with Monk's Proceedings, send Ambassadors to
him to treat of Peace and a mutual Correspondence betwixt them, giving out at
the same time Commissions and Orders for new Levies; being resolved, if the
Treaty did not succeed, to vindicate their Power by Arms.

Lambert, as is said, was marched toward the Confines of the Kingdom with his
Army, the Committee omitting no Industry, whereby they might divert this
growing storm in the North. Monk also, revolving the Danger and Greatness of
his Enterprise, will do nothing rashly. He apprehended the English Army as
brave and numerous, and therefore resolves, to protract and delay Time. His
Friends also out of England, had assured him, that the New Government there was
odious to the Nation, which would also, for want of Money and Council, if he
delayed a little, fall by its own Weight. Moved with these Reasons, and the
Backwardness of his own Preparations, he seems less averse to Peace than
formerly; and, sending Three Delegates to the Committee of Safety, magnifies
his Desires of an Accommodation. These Ambassadors, met Lambert at York; and,
satisfying him abundantly of the peaceable Inclinations of the Scottish Army,
wrought so with him, that he prohibited the further Advance of his Forces.

Monk having thus lulled his Adversaries, summons a Convention of the Scots
Nobility; from whom, not obscurely informed or presuming of his Intentions, he
obtained Contributions for his Army for a Year beforehand, allowing them in
return, Liberty to arm themselves for their Defense. In the mean time, a
Pacification was agreed upon at London, betwixt Commissioners of both sides;
where, amongst other things, the Name and Family, and Royal Title of the
Stuarts, was wholly excluded; a Tyrannous Stratarchy, or Club-law being
introduced under the Vail of a Free State. Monk having received the Articles
agreed upon, recalls his Commissioners. And, casting Wilks, the principal of
them, into Prison for exceeding his Orders, refuses to ratify the Treaty; and,
declaring the Pacification null, breaks out into Open War.

The City of London during these Traverses, although they had disapproved the
Interruption of the Rump, did openly refuse to join with the Army; daring, by
Petitions and Tumults, to manifest their Desires for a Free Parliament. And
truly, such were the Sentiments of the whole Nation, which enraged the
Soldiery to that height, that a great part of the Army was sent into the City
to keep them in their Obedience, denouncing Death and Ruin to the obstinate.
Nor did they thus attain the Ends of their Desires, opposed by the contrary
Strivings of the People, who would be satisfied with nothing, but the
Restitution of This, or the Convocation of a New Parliament. Which they at
length assented to, but with most servile Restrictions.

There was nothing of moment, happened this while upon the Borders. Monk was
resolved to delay and gain time; which he also did, by avoiding Battle, and
amusing his Adversaries with another Treaty at New Castle. But, Fleetwood, head
of the Chymerical Republic, unequal for so great a Weight, as ignorant of his
own Strength; a Man neither constant to himself nor bravely perfidious, thinks
of laying down his Burden. Which he was the more inclined to, as believing, if
Lambert returned with Victory, his Reign would be but very short. To this, his
Endeavors to reduce the Fleet had proved but vain, and that the Soldiers sent
against the Rebels at Portsmouth, had revolted to them. To all this, he wanted
Money for the Army he commanded, the Soldiers being ready to Mutiny for want
of Pay, and would infallibly rage with all the Extravagancies of Sedition and
Tumult. Pressed with so many Evils, and dreading greater, this miserable
Holder-Forth, wretchedly submits his Grandeur to the Rump, which he had so
lately routed; and, Dec. 26.
with sordid Assentation, permits his old Masters to return to their Assembly
as before.

The Rump being thus restored, their first Business was, to remove Lambert, by
whom they had been disturbed, from his Command. Which was not difficult to
effect; for, the Irish Brigades left him, and Desborough's Regiment of Horse,
by the Example of Fleetwood's Soldiers, had abandoned him, which the rest of
his Army likewise did, upon receiving the Parliaments Pleasure and Orders for
that purpose. So that, this General who so lately hoped for Triumphs, by a
strange Vicissitude of things, was forced to search for a Retreat to hide
himself, not unworthy the Fate that attended him, since he suffered himself to
be deprived of so great an Army, without the Circumstance of a Blow. Moreover,
as most ample Conditions had been formerly presented to Oliver, and his Son
Richard, upon returning to their Duty; so, no less Honors and Dignities, with
the same Arguments, had been offered by the Lord Hatton in the King's Name to
Lambert; and, not without Threats (which proved Prophecies) That if he refused
this Opportunity, the King's Restitution would be worught, and that suddenly
without him, and against his Will. He should therefore make use of the
Occasion, to render himself and Posterity great to after Ages. But, this Advice
was in vain, he, as the rest, being blinded with Ambition and the Frantic
Desire of Rule.

Monk being glad that the Enemy was dispersed without a Blow, enters England
with his little Army of Five Thousand Men; tho the Parliament had assigned him
but Five Hundred, sending the rest back with Morgan into Scotland. All the
several Parties and Factions, had an eye upon his Motions. The Rump presumed by
his Means, to tame the Contumacious City; and, the Citizens hoped that he would
compel the Rump to admit of the Secluded Members again, or fill the Vacancies
with new Elections. They had sent their Sword Bearer to Complement him upon his
coming into England, and he was likewise congratulated by all the Provinces he
past through, as also by Deputations from the most remote Counties. The desires of
all good Men were, for a Free Parliament, as the only remedy against the
impending Evils, and, the true means to reduce the Commonwealth to its pristine
Forms of Government, and most holy Laws again. Monk, tho he was of the same
Opinion, did not as yet think it convenient to discover himself so far. Lest
therefore, he might displease those, for whose sake he had armed, his Returns
to those many Addresses to him were general and civil, intimating, that he
would acquaint the House with their Petitions, and recommend them; but, exhorts
them for the present, that they keep themselves quiet and within the Bounds of
Modesty, permitting the Disposal of Affairs to the Judgment and Prudence of the
Parliament. And, thus he moves forwards with slow Marches, forming the
Garrisons and Forces in his Way to his own Humor. The Rump troubled that he
was come with more Forces than they had designed, he pretending to secure them
from all violence by them, solicitous of the many Petitions and Addresses to
the General, and convinced of the Hate of all Men toward themselves, not
knowing where to fix, send Two of their Members Scot and Robinson, cunning Men
to him, under pretense of congratulating his Arrival in England, but in effect
to pry into his Actions, and to see what was to be expected from him. Monk
received these Gentlemen with the greatest. Observance imaginable, very careful
least he might betray himself by any Inadvertency to these crafty Discoverers.

Being come to St. Albans, he was again saluted by a Splendid Embassy from the
City, which he received and dismissed with great Civility covering his
Purposes, with a profound Dissimulation. On the Second of February, he entered
the City with his Army, and took his Lodging at White Hall, against the Opinion
of all Men. The Third Day being attended upon by Scot and Robinson into the
House, he refused the Chair appointed for him. But, leaning upon it, after he
had received the Speaker's Thanks and Complements for his great Service in
restoring the Parliament by his Council and Arms, he replied in these Terms.
First, having modestly declined so great praises; since he had done nothing but
what his Duty obliged him to, He humbly offered to them, That they would be
pleased to satisfy the People's Expectations, by a Vindication of their Laws
and Liberties, God having restored them, not so much to study their own as the
Public Welfare. He then desired them, To remove the Jealousies some Men
conceived, of their Design of perpetuating themselves in the Government; and,
that mindful of future Parliaments, they would fix a Period to this. Moreover,
he advised them, Not to burden the Subjects with New Oaths. And finally, That
they should take heed to the Royallists and Fanatics; and commending Scotland,
and a Free State to their Care, he finished. There were they in the Assembly,
who fancied, he spoke more like a Dictator than an Orator, and yet he left
them, laden with Thanks and Congratulations, to take his place appointed him
in the Council of State. Here, he prudently declined the Oath of Abjuration
presented to him; not as absolutely refusing it, but as desiring time to
consider of it. For, the Rump compelled all in Office, to a Renunciation of the
Right and Title of the King. By which means, they insured them in their
Society, and ensnared them in the same Bond of Rebellion with themselves.

The Londoners deceived in their Expectations, began to Mutiny. They will
acknowledge no Authority, but that of a Free Parliament, and make a Decree in
their Common Council, that for the future, they will pay no Taxes nor Imposts
whatever, to any but by order of such a Convention, full and entirely their own
Masters. The Rump, mad with Anger, command Monk to march into the City with his
Army, and order him to beat down the Gates and Portcullises, break their Posts
and take away their Chains out of the Streets. Several also of the Prime
Citizens, Assertors of Liberty, were put in the Tower, Sectaries and Fanatics,
being introduced into their Vacancies. The People were amazed at these Actions
of Monk, from whom they had hoped better things. Whilst he, revolving the
Odiousness of what he had done; however necessitated to it, by the pressing
Commands of the Juncto, and lest he should imprudently spoil what he had so
well begun; and, not ignorant that these Tasks had been imposed upon him, as
well to try his Obedience as to break the Friendship and Intelligence which was
betwixt him and the City, resolved to attempt greater Matters. To all this, he
apprehended a Diminution of his Power with the Soldiers, which was likewise
effected that very Day; the Command of the Army being given to a Septemvirate
of their own Confidents, he being but one of the Number. This highly displeased
him; nor could he endure Co-Equals in Power, which the Rump forgetful that it
was Lambert's Case, had obtruded upon him. And, who indeed can endure Sharers
in that Power, he is solely Master of? Monk impatient of so sordid an
Indignity, complains to his Officers of this Mutilation of his Authority; who,
upon consideration of the Matter of Fact, did unanimously declare, That the
Parliament forgetful of them by whose Merit they did reign, had designed and
resolved to casheer them, and, by continuing their Session, to perpetuate their
Tyranny over the most Noble English Nation. Upon these Grounds the Army marches
into London, resolving to join Hands with the Citizens, now Assertors of the
Public Liberty, and declare, together with them, for a Free Parliament, as the
only Remedy for so many Evils. Being thus united, the Soldiers pathetically
testified their Resentments, and Sorrow for the Injuries and forced Violence
done to that Noble City, which was put upon them against their Wills. This
happy Conjunction, filled the Town and whole Kingdom with so universal a Joy,
that the People demonstrated their Satisfaction by their Acclamations, Feb. 9.
ringing of their Bells and infinite Bonfires, besides the roasting of all
manner of Rumps, in Contempt of the present Juncto; resounding in these
Transports and glad Ecstasies, the Name and Fame of the General.

The Mock-Parliament troubled at this unexpected Change, and forseeing their
infallible Ruin, if Monk persisted, omitted no Arts, no Allurements, Wiles,
Flatteries, Threats, Treasons, or any other means whereby they might reclaim
Monk or destroy him. It is affirmed, that the Sectaries, who could suffer any
Lord, but their own, whom they had so cruelly offended; offered him the
Protectorate, upon condition he would not change Party. Which he Prudently, as
well as Loyally, refused, considering, that tho the Employment was magnificent,
yet it was very hazardous, the stream of the Peoples Inclinations flowing
toward their old Government. It was reported, that Monsieur Bourdeaux, the
Ambassador of France, offered the same, but, with the same success, though he
had also offered the Assistance of France for securing of the Dignity.

Monk had given the juncto, who had usurped the Power over their Colleagues
(they themselves being scarce an eight part of the whole) a Day, by which they
were to fill their Vacancies with new Elections. Which being omitted by the
Fanatics, the Secluded Members having given him satisfaction in several
Conferences, why they ought to be readmitted, were, however mainly opposed by
the Rumpers and chief of their Conspiracy, freely permitted to return to their
Duty again. The House being increased by double the Number, and at liberty to
act, began where they had ended in 1648. Voting the Concessions of Charles the
Martyr in the Isle of Wight to be satisfactory, and declare, That what ever had
been done by their Usurping Colleagues since, was null, and of no effect. But,
these Gentlemen being Presbyterians, and consequently tenacious of their old
Principles, condemned indeed what was done by the Independants, but recalled
none of their own Unjust Decrees, nor voted any thing at present in favor of
the King. On the contrary, they declare, That Charles I. did first raise up
Arms against the Parliament. They impose again, the Solemn League and Covenant,
the Root of all our Evils; and Vote, That none who had born Arms against the
Parliament, should be admitted in the next Elections. But withal, they make
Monk Captain General of all their Forces; vote the Gates, Portcullises, Posts,
Chains, etc. of the City, to be set up again at the Public Charge; release
Booth and others out of Prison; put the Militia of the Kingdom into good Hands;
and having fixed a day for their Dissolution, as they had been obliged by Monk,
they appointed a Free Parliament to convene in April next. These things being
done to the Satisfaction of all Men, they further constitute a Council of
State, who should govern during the Interregnum. And, recommending the
Soldiery to Monk's Care and Prudence, they dissolve themselves by their own
Act and Decree (putting an end to that Long and Bloody Parliament, which could
not be determined but by their own Consent) after they had exercised their
Tyranny upon their Fellow Subjects (besides the Horrid Murder of their
Sovereign) the Space of Nineteen Years; except Oliver's Quingquennium,
Richard's short Empire, and Lambert's Ten Weeks domineering.

And thus ended that unhappy Parliament, which gave Life and Being to those
viperous Factions of Presbytery and Independency; by whose violence and
impetuous ambition of ruling, they did not only destroy the Hierarchy of the
Church, but Monarchy out of the Commonwealth, involving themselves in the Ruin
of that Parent that begot them.

It Is scarce credible, with what excess of joy the People, wearied with the
continuance of that Black Parliament, and freed from the fear of its
Refurrection, entertained the News of its Dissolution. The Fanatics only, and
the Dependants of the Hated Juncto, who left nothing unattempted for the
perpetuating the Session of the Regicides, were averse to it. To effect which,
they solicited Petitions out of the City against their Dissolution; they
tempted the Tribunes and Chief Officers, with the usual Charms of Largesses to
their Party; they caused fictitious Lists of the Militia to be printed. And,
when all would not prevail, some of them, as St. John's and others, were for
imposing Conditions upon the King (for they no more doubted of his Restitution)
that might restrain him from acting beyond their pleasure. But His Majesty's
Rights and Prerogatives, were inviolablely restored to him, by the Prudence and
noble Endeavors of Monk. This enraged the Regicides to that height, that they
began now to condemn their own Precipitation and Folly, accusing themselves of
Madness, in that, that they did persecute Lambert so rashly, and unseasonably
to their own Destruction. They now call to mind, how ridiculously they had
rejected the King's Gracious Letters presented them by Nevil (who had
accidentally received them) wherein they were assured of Indignity for all
their monstrous Crimes and Treasons, if they yet at length would return to
their Duty. They therefore, like Men in Despair, agitated by the Flagitiousness
of their Guilt, resolved to vindicate their Crimes by attempting greater, and
to try the Matter once more by the Sword. Nor was it long, before an occasion
presented it self. Lambert, who had been imprisoned in the Tower, because he
had refused to give bail for his good Behavior, had escaped thence and
appeared armed about Northampton. Some Sectaries, and several disbanded
Soldiers repaired to him; all the Fanatics of the Army being upon the Wing,
till stayed with the News of his Defeat. This Sedition was extinguished in its
Birth. And Lambert being taken by Ingolsby without a Blow, h^s Party was easily
dispersed, whilst he was returned into a more safe Custody in the Tower.

During this Interval of Parliaments, the Council of State administered Affairs
with much Prudence and Courage; and, putting out a Proclomation against all
Disturbers of the Peace, easily restrained the Seditious Minds of the most
dissenting. Monk also, purging his Army, by the Casheering of Fanatics; and,
living more familiarly with his Officers than usual, reconciled the most fierce
amongst them, to an Acquiescence in the Resolves of the future Parliament. The
Disturbers of our Peace, being thus suppressed or quieted, the Loyal Party, as
if endued with new Spirits, put on more cheerful Countenances, and shaking off
their Fears with their Shackles, appeared more eminently conspicuous. But,
being traduced by their Adversaries, as thirsting after Revenge and Blood, they
abundantly demonstrated by their Declaration, their own Innocence, and the
Enemies Malice, restifying, That they would leave Vengeance to God, and Justice
to the Disposal of Parliament.

And now the City of London did also publish a Declaration, whereby they
endeavored to clear themselves from the Guilt of the Regicide and Usurpation;
as being actuated and oppressed, by the Counsels of Despair and Violence. Nor
will we deny, but that they contributed by the like Tumults to the Restitution,
as they had formerly fomented the War

We have hitherto made but little mention of the Particular Actions of our
King; for, we would not intermingle the History of the Best of Princes, with
that of the most Scelerate of Subjects. We shall therefore, deliver the Series
of his Actions by themselves, wherein notwithstanding will appear, as Extremes
do best shine by Contraries, not only the Eminency of his Virtues, but the
Errors, Impieties, Rebellions, Treasons, Slaughters, Sacriledges, Pride, Rapine
and Infamy of his Enemies. For, what Mischief did they not commit, and were
guilty of?

After the King's miraculous Escape from Worcester, through a thousand Hazards,
he at length got safe into France; being received at Paris, as if sent from
Heaven. A pregnant Example, of the Care of Providence for the Persons of Kings.
That Monarchy was actuated then, with well-nigh the same Spirit of Division,
which had so lately distracted England, the Parisians inveighing against the
Errors of the Government and Evil Counselors, pointing particularly at Mazarin
with the same Rage and Passion, as the Londoners did against Strafford. The
Princes were grieved, that a Stranger should be First Minister of State, and
would have him therefore removed. In order to which, they raised an Army,
obtaining Assistance from Spain (that Nation being very officious in helping
their Neighbors upon such like Accounts.) Nor did they find King Lewis
unprovided, but resolved to oppose them with all his Power. King Charles
persuaded Lewis and the Princes, by his own example, to peace; but, could not
prevail, tho he carried himself with that Equality, that both sides were
Jealous of his Conduct. For, the Princes refused to lay down Arms, unless the
Cardinal were removed. And, the King, with the Queen-Regent, his Mother, would
not have Laws prescribed to them by their Subjects. The Princes, had called the
Duke of Lorrain to their Aid; who also entered France, with an Army; but
returned, upon the Interposition of King Charles, who had discoursed with him
about his undertaking the Protection of Ireland. This enraged the Princes
against Charles, who blamed him much; and the Parisians did dare to calumniate
and affront him to that Height, that he was forced to retire to St. Germains.
Where he also, for the most part continued, until a League being made betwixt
Cromwell, and that Crown (which he had opposed in vain) he was compelled again
to go into Exile, out of his very Banishment.

The Duke of York had thus long served in the Armies of France, with such
Bravery and Fortitude, particularly in the Battle of Estampes, that he
attracted the Eyes of all Men upon him. And, his behavior in General, in Court
and Camp, were so signal, that the Duke of Longville would have bestowed his
Daughter upon him, the greatest Fortune in France. And Marshal Turene being
very Sick, recommended him to his King, as the fittest Person in that Great
Monarchy, to command his Armies. But, he would not stay in France after the
King his Brother, though he was offered to be Liuetenant-General of their
Forces in Italy; but, leaving that inhospitable Land, accepted the Invitation
of Don John, the Governor of the Spanish Low Countries, where he largely
asserted the Glories of his former Actions.

The King in his passage to Germany, was received at Liege with all imaginable
Honor; and, going thence to the Spaw, met his Sister, the Princoss of Orange
there. Very many Persons of Quality, as is usual at the Season, but in unusal
Numbers upon this Occasion, were come thither out of the Neighboring Nations,
as well to see this Royal Congress, as to take the Waters. And all of them paid
His Majesty as much Reverence, and Honor, as if he had been their own Natural
Prince; or, would have vyed with us, who had the Happiness then to attend him,
in Duty and Obedience, and Veneration for him. He was afterward received at
Colen by the Magistrates there, which the same Testimonies of good will and
Esteem: Where he resolved to fix his Court for some Time, as a place
delectable, and convenient, for his Designs. A while after, he accompanied his
Sister in her Return to Holland, as far as Dusseldorp, where he was
magnificently received by the Duke of Newburgh, and treated during his Stay
with Hunting and other Royal Divertisements. Being returned to Cologn, he found
his Brother the Duke of Gloucester there, lately arrived from France. The King
had been informed, now he had been thrust out of England by the Regicides,
which they had done to save the Expense of his Maintenance, and to Shipwreck
his Religion. Besides, it was supposed, that Cromwell had designed his Removal,
for that some in his Council had moved his Assumption to the Crown, as no ways
obnoxious or prejudiced by reason of his Youth, as is already mentioned. It Is
scarce imaginable, with what Constancy he defended his Religion, however very
young. In so much, that armed with Instructions from the Lord Hatton, and
Doctor Cousens, he eluded the Assaults of Abbot Montague and the Marquess of
Plessis, the one employed by the Queen-Regent of France, and the other by the
Queen of England. Neither the charming Pleasures of the French Court, nor the
Purple Dignities of the Church of Rome, nor yet the extreme Severities of the
Queen his Mother, who did not only refuse him his ordinary Sustenance, but
denied him the Solace of her Benediction, were of strength to shake his Faith.
Which they yet would endeavor to force, by shutting him up in the Jesuits
College; if the King his Brother, displeased with these Novelties, had not
sent the Marquess of Ormond to his Rescue, and to bring him to Cologn to him;
which he did, though not without Difficulty. But, nothing was impossible for
this Great Man.

After this, the King went to Franckfort, famous for its Marts. And, in his
Progress, saluted the Queen Christina of Sweden at Koningsteyn. Where, after a
Reception worthy Two such great Princes, and some private Discourses, the Duke
of Gloucester, and his Royal Sister did the same. The Marquess of Ormond, Earl
of Norwich, Lord Newburgh, and others of His Majesty's Train, being also
admitted, paid that great Princess the Respects due to her Highness. The Queen
continued her Journey to Insprug, where, after a splendid Reception from the
Archduke, she made Public Profession of the Roman Religion.

The King leaving Franckfort, with the universal Acclamations of the People,
and thundering of their Cannon, went to Ments, whither he had been invited by
that Elector, where his Reception was truly Royal. And, after three Days Treat,
parting with the same Magnificence, returned to Cologn. Nor did his Majesty
spend the Time idly, whilst the Regicides triumphed in England. He had already
sent Embassies, to all the Princes of Europe, to desire their Assistance
against his Rebels. But, with little success, though the Cause were Common. The
French flourishing in Promises, made a League with the Regicides. The
Spaniards, though they seemed to grieve at the Murder of the King, were yet
the first that acknowledged and owned this rising Commonwealth. The Grand
Seignior, corrupted with English Gold, delivered Sir Henry Hyde, the King's
Ambassador at that Court, against the Law of Nations, into the Hands of the
Parricides; who Murdered him, by cutting off his Head before the Exchange.
Swedeland was then in an unsettled Condition. Portugal unable, being attacked
both by the Spaniard, and Dutch in the Indies. Poland was worried with her own
Domestic Distractions. Denmark was exhausted, with the Treasure formerly lent
to Charles I. Others indeed, restified their goodwills, by their Contributions;
as, the Great Duke of Muscovy, the Count of Oldenburg, the Electors of Mentz
and Brandenburg, and some other Princes of Germany, by the Earl of Rochester's
negoriating at Ratisbone. But, what could this import, to make a new and great
War? Whereas, it scarce sufficed, to defray the Charges of the Embassies.

The King then seeing no Hopes of his Restoration from abroad, wisely sought a
Remedy where the Wound was received, from the Benevolence and Loyalty of his
Subjects, which the Eminence of his Virtues could not in Justice refuse him.
Neither was he any way wanting to himself, but most intent upon all Occasions;
leaving nothing unattempted, whereby he might raise his sinking Affairs.

He kept constant Correspondence with his Friends in England. Caused great
Disturbances to the Rebels on every side, and exposing himself to the Danger,
did more than once incite the People to arm against the Usurpers. He now kept
his Court at Bruges in Flanders, nearer hand, having been invited by the
Spaniards, repenting their too early Compliments to the Regicides, and supplied
with 9000 l. per annum; which Money was punctually repaid upon His Majesty's
Restitution. The Duke, in the mean Time, having recalled all the Kings Subjects
in the French Service, joining them with those in the Spanish Low Countries,
composed a considerable Body; which he commanded, with no less Honor than he
had done in France, although they were well nigh destroyed by the fatal Valor
of the English Rebels at Mardike and the Battle of Dunkirk. The Duke more
illustrious by Misfortunes, did not only for some time resist, but retard the
Progress of the Victors; until oppressed by multitudes, as is already said, he
was necessitated to comply with the Fate of the vanquished. Cromwell dying soon
after, however a way seemed thereby to be opened to the Kings Restoration, his
Majesty received the News of it with remarkable Constancy and Calmness of Mind,
in no ways insulting, though he saw his most Mortal Enemy extinguished in the
Person of this Usurper. Cardinal Mazarin, however averse to King Charles, did
at the same time congratulate the Queen his Mother, upon the Hopes of her Sons
Restoration, since he was, by the Death of that Tyrant, delivered from his
most implacable and successful Enemy.

The sudden Change in England, followed by the Deposing of Richard, and the
Resurrection of the Rump, and the other Innovations already mentioned, which
followed; as they augmented the Hopes of the King at Home, so they varied the
Counsels of Princes abroad: Which his Majesty applied, in as much as was
possible, to his own Use, by Negotiations and Embassies. But there being now a
Treaty in Agitation betwixt France and Spain, he would himself be present at
it. For, if a Peace were concluded, which was more than probable, betwixt these
great Princes, it was but reasonable to suppose, that they might spare some of
their numerous Forces to assist an injured King, their Ally by Blood, and
Common Interest. And yet, the King would rather reduce his Rebel-Subjects to
Obedience, by the Appearance of his Power, than by the Use of his Forces. In
the mean time, accompanied with the Duke of York his Brother, and the Marquess
of Ormond, he hasted Incognito through France, having saluted the Queen his
Mother at Paris, in his way to St. John De Luz, where the Great Ministers of
the Two Crowns were then in Treaty. Don Louis de Haro, upon Notice of the Kings
Approach, went to met and receive him. Which he did (alighting from his Horse,
and Embracing and kissing his Knees) with as much Honor and Splendor, as if
he had been his Master the King of Spain. The next Day, his Majesty was visited
by Cardinal Mazarin, the other great Plenipotentiary, who was courtly, though
reserved. And yet, the King behaved himself with so much charming Prudence to
both these Ministers, and gained so much upon them, that he not only defeated
the Designs of Lockhart, the Regicides Ambassador then there, but having
obtained an Assurance of being assisted by the Forces of the Two Crowns for his
Restitution, he was dismissed with the same Honors he had been received. At
Paris in his Return, he was splendidly treated by the Duke of Orleance, as King
of England; and acknowledged such by all Men, none now doubting, of his sudden
Restoration. From thence, he came to Brussels, entering into that City
publicly, and with a Pomp worthy his Grandeur, where he also was magnificently
caressed, and where he designed to continue until the Dissolution of the
Parliament.

Whilst these things were in Agitation, the Distractions and Risings in England
were various; the Impatience of the Royal Party to restore their Prince,
precipitating them, as usually, into great Inconveniences. And yet, they got
to a Head in Cheshire, under Sir George Booth, as is already mentioned; and,
the King himself was in private about St. Malos, attending some favorable
Occasion to transport him into England. These Risings, especially Booth's, were
looked upon as formidable, it being supposed, that Monk was intermingled with
them. But, they being suppressed every where, the King returned again to
Brussels, in expectation of the event of the Pacification concluded betwixt the
Two Crowns. He had not continued long there, when being informed of the
Differences betwixt the Army and Rump, his Hopes being raised thereby, he took
also a Resolution not to be wanting in himself. He had tried the ways of War,
and had also attempted the perfidious Fidelity of his Enemies, but with no
Success. He will therefore, put himself upon other Counsels: And seeing Monk
commanded the Rebels in Scotland, in Chief, he will enquire into the Secret of
his Intentions and Mind. The King had found him a sharp Enemy, but Noble; free
from Calumnies and Revilings, nor any way distained with the inexpiable Guilt
of the Regicide. In the former Wars, he had served King Charles I. but being
taken, and perhaps neglected, he preferred Liberty before Confinement, and the
Management of Arms to the clinking of Shackles. It was therefore thought
expedient, to attempt him under these Circumstances, and endeavor to reclaim
him with the Charms and Honor of being the Deliverer of his Country and King,
the Church, and State. Sir John Greenvill, eminent for his Loyalty, and of kin
to Monk, was employed to manage this important Secret. Who in order to it,
having gained Mr. Nicolas Monk, a Minister, the General's Brother, on whom, as
Patron, he had bestowed a very considerable Benefice, he sent him into
Scotland, with Commission, in the King's Name, to offer him any Conditions he
should please to Demand. But, Monk wisely suspicious, under pretense of the
uncertain Vicissitudes of Affairs, answered ambiguously, neither openly
declaring his sentiments nor wholly concealing them. He also, having exacted an
Oath of secrecy from his Brother, sent him back with his Daughter, which was
the Pretext for his coming into Scotland; as also, a Message to the Members
outed by Lambert, to assure them of his Fidelity to the Parliament. These
Gentlemen, raised with these Hopes, presumed all things upon that Account, and
was a plausible Vail for him in the modelling and forming his Army, according
to his Designs. But Greenvill being not well satisfied with the Parson's
Declaration, acquainted the King with it. Who, notwithstanding the Abstruseness
of it, drew no ill Augury thence, commanding Greenvil to attend the General
when he came to London, and make all imaginable Enquiry, of what Intentions he
was toward His Majesty's Restitution. And, this he happily performed, being
admitted by the Assistance of Mr. Morris, a great Confident of Monk's, and
afterward Secretary of State to the King. The Enterview was in Morris his
Chamber; where, no Body but themselves being present, Greenvill delivered Monk
the King's Letters. To which, after Twice reading of them, he answered, That he
would not only comply with the King's Desires, but also restore him without
Conditions, or any the least Diminution of his Royal Authority. Neither would
he think of any Terms for himself, humbly submitting that to the King's
Pleasure when he returned. Greenvill ecstasi'd with the Joy of his Success,
desired Letters to the King, to testify so great a Secret; but he replied,
That he would commit nothing to Writing, nor send any Body to the King besides
himself, whom he had found so faithful and secret. He hoped, His Majesty would
Pardon what was past, professing, That he always had a Veneration for the King,
and now upon this first Occasion would testify his Obedience to him, with the
Hazard of his Life and Fortune. Greenvill overjoyed with this happy Conclusion,
hastened to acquaint the King with it at Brussels, who was infinitely pleased
with Monk's generous Actings; especially, having received Letters out of
England from some Friends there, desiring him to accept of the Isle of Wights
Conditions, they being the best they could at present procure him. But,
Greenvill was, by Advice of Sir Edward Hyde (then made Chancellor) and the
Marquess of Ormond, presently returned into England, with a Commission for
Monk, as General of all the Forces in the Three Kingdoms; and, a Letter all
writ with the King's own Hand, full of gracious Expressions and Acknowledgments
for so great a Benefit. Greenvill had also other Letters, which we shall
mention in their Place. And, lest he might himself return empty, after he had
been so signally meritorious, the King honored him with a Warrant for an
Earldom and 3000 l. a Year.

Whilst these things were in Agitation, the English observing that the Treaty
betwixt France and Spain upon the Borders, would end in a Peace, showed
themselves likewise not averse to it; especially considering, the vast Commerce
they always had with the Spanish Countries. Hence followed, a spontaneous
Cessation from Arms. But, the King would not expect the Event of it, for fear
of being imposed upon here as he had been in France; and therefore, removed his
Court to Breda, belonging to his Sister the Princess of Orange. The sudden
Change in England, occasioned Changes of Councils. And, now it was supposed
that the King should take shipping from Calais, or some Part in Flanders,
having been earnestly invited thereto from both France and Spain: But, to
content both he accepted of neither, but continued at Breda, cluding thereby
the Arts of both Princes, the French Designs, as well as those of the Spanish,
longing for the return of Jamaica and Dunkirk to their Obedience. The King then
being secure at Breda, was saluted there by Deputies from the States General,
where he was also magnificently treated by the Public.

The Parliament being now met, consisting of Two Houses, free, and full in
their Numbers, their first Care was to give Public Thanks to God for rescuing
their Country from Usurpation and Tyranny; and, the next, to thank the General,
who by his Courage and Conduct had contributed so mainly to it. They then Vote,
Declare, and Decree, That the Government of England is Monarchical, consisting
in a King and Two Houses of Parliament. After this, King Charles I. his
Statues, thrown down by the Sectaries, were set up again; and, the New Arms of
the Common wealth, with extreme Contumelies, t^rn and defaced, those of the
King being put in their Places. A ^^w Days after, the King himself the Members
of B^th Houses assisting, and an I^f^nity of People, was with the usual
Ceremonies, but unusual Transports of Joy, proclaimed at Westminster, in
London, and afterward in the whole Kingdom, King of Great Britain and Ireland;
In these following Terms:

Although it can no ways be doubted, but that his Majesty's Right and Title to
these Crowns and Kingdoms, is and was every way complete by the Death of his
most Royal Father of glorious Memory, without the Ceremony or Solemnity of a
Proclamation: Yet, since Proclamations in such Cases, have been always used, to
the End that all good Subjects might upon this occasion testify their Duty and
Respect. And, since the armed Violence and other Calamities of many Years last
past* have hitherto deprived us of any Opportunity, wherein we might express
our Loyalty and Allegiance to his Majesty: We therefore, the Lords and Commons
now assembled in Parliament together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common
Council of the City of London, and other Freemen of this Kingdom now present,
do, according to our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully, and unanimously
acknowledge and Proclaim, That immediately upon the Decease of our late
Sovereign, King Charles I. the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and all
the Kingdoms, Dominions and Rights belonging to the same, did by inherent
Birthright, and lawful, undoubted Succession, descend and come to his most
Excellent Majesty, King Charles II. as being Lineally, Justly and Lawfully,
next Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm. And, that by the Goodness and
Providence of Almighty God, He is of England, Scotland and Ireland, the most
Potent, Mighty and Undoubted King, and thereunto we most humbly and faithfully
do submit, and oblige our selves our Heirs and Posterities for ever.

At the Ceremony of this Proclamation, the Public Joy expressed by Shoutings,
Acclamations of God bless the King, Bells and Bonfires, were no less
extraordinary than infinite, the People being at length redeemed out of so long
and so wretched a Captivity, by the miraculous Restoration of their Beloved
Prince.

Our most August Monarch, had hitherto, as is already mentioned, wandered in
Foreign Courts, and as usual in the Disgraces of Fortune, too much neglected;
especially, where Reason of State seemed more prevalent, than all the Ties of
Blood or Hospitality. He was at Brussels, the Metropolis of the Spanish
Netherlands, when he first heard of this Change in England; from whence he
removed to Breda, a more secure place under the Circumstances of the present
Times. And, now he hastens Greenvill away again, with Letters to the Two Houses
of Parliament, to the City, to Monk, and to Montague, joint General at Sea. In
these Writings, He Pardons all Men and all Crimes, committed against his Royal
Father or himself; except such as the Parliament should except against;
promising further; The Soldiers their Arrears though they bore Arms against him;
and, That he would from that time receive them into his own Trust and Service,
upon the same Terms they did now enjoy, etc. This Declaration being received
and read in Parliament, with inexpressible Satisfaction and Joy, was voted
infinitely Satisfactory, and a splendid Embassy ordered to the forthwith sent
to the King, with their humble Thanks for his Gracious Declaration and Letters;
and, to invite and press His Majesty's return, to his Parliament and People.
Six Lords and Twelve Commoners, with Twenty Principal Citizens, with a noble
Train of Attendants, were sent upon this happy Occasion. Who, the Wind
favoring them, after a quick Passage, found His Majesty at the Hague in
Holland, where he had been treated and defrayed by the States of that Province,
with all imaginable Demonstrations of Honor and Friendship. The Ambassadors
being admitted to the King's Presence and graciously heard, had their Desires
crowned with a wisht-for Answer. So, that nothing now impeded His Majesty's
Return to his Dominions, but the Wind, which in favor to the kind Dutch, kept
him some little time longer there. In the interim, the Duke of York visited the
Fleet, lying at Anchor before Scheveling, under the Command of General
Montague, formerly (as is mentioned) reconciled to His Majesty. After a
magnificent Reception, his Royal Highness taking the Oaths of Allegiance from
the Seamen, and having changed the Names of several of the Prime Ships,
restored this first Pledge of Empire to our Monarch.

The King having taken his Leave of the States General, and of the States of
Holland in their Assemblies (the Honor of which visit they acknowledged in a
most Elegant Speech, with all the Expressions of Gratitude and Satisfaction) he
embarked in a Boat, prepared for him by the States, whose Flag had this
memorable Inscription, Quo Fas et Fata vocarunt. The Ways, the Downs, the Sand
Hills and Shores, were crowded with an innumerable Multitude of all Sorts of
People, ecchoing his Departure with Vows for his good Success. By the way, upon
the Approach of a Brigandine from the Fleet, he entered into it. And, going
aboard the Royal Charles, formerly the Naesby, with his Two Royal Brothers, the
Dukes of York and Gloucester, he was receieved there by Montague with all
submissive Veneration, who again treated him with a Gracious Testimonial of his
Affection. The Season was very clear, and the Sea so calm, that his Majesty
mounting upon the Poop did dai^n to turn his Eyes to the Shore which he had so
lately left; and, seeing the infinite Crowds of Spectators there, he was
pleased to say, That he thought his own Subjects could scarce have more
Tenderness for him than those People, on whose Affections he saw he reigned no
less, than he was going to reign on the Wills of the English.

After this having kissed his Nephew Prince of Orange.
and the Queen his Aunt Queen of Bohemia.
, and bid them farewell, he had much a^o to be separated from his Sister.
Princess Royal.
This matchless Princess, who had born and slighted so many Vicissitudes of
Evil; and who had frequently solaced the Calamities of her Brothers by her
charming Discourses, can scarce now, without shaking her Constancy, endure the
Absence of a few Days; being what she had desired with so much Impatience, and
what was so glorious to both of them.

The Anchors being at length weighed, he left this friendly Shore, with the
thundering of the Cannon on both sides, and sailed toward England, now truly
his own. On the 25th of May, he came into Dover Road; where, upon his landing,
he was received by Monk with Joy and Observance. This best of Servants, had
thrown himself upon his Knees, to adore this best of Masters. But, the King not
forgetful of what he owed him, took him up, embraced him and kissed him. Other
Noble Men and Persons of Quality there present, were likewise admitted to the
Honor of his Majesty's Hand. Which done, the King, with his Two Royal
Brothers, the General and the Duke of Buckingham, took Coach, amongst the
charming Congratulations and Shouts of a pleased People, and went that Night to
Canterbury. The next Day, Monk was installed Knight of the Garter, the Ensigns
of that Honor, being put upon him by the Two Royal Brothers. He went hence
toward London, accompanied with the whole Nobility of the Nation, and a
numberless Multitude of the Commons, flocking together to see their Restorer.
He viewed the Ships at Chatham by the Way, and the Army drawn up upon
Black Heath. On the 29th of May, it being his Majesty's Birthday, he entered
London in Triumph, he himself the greatest and goodliest part of it. Where he
was received by the Universality of the People, sensible of the End of their
Miseries, and the smothering of a most cursed Rebellion, with joy not to be
expressed, scarcely conceived.

PART III.
BOOK I.
The REBELLION breaks into new Flames. Some Millenaries secured. Venner's
Insurrection, and End. The Presbyterians stickle for new Elections. Several
Seditious Tumults detected and punished. The Plague consumes the People. The
Conflagration of the City. Tumults in Scotland. Oates's Plot. The Parliament
insist upon removing the Duke from the King's Presence and Councils. It is
dissolved. Another Parliament called. The Duke retires from Court. A new
Council chosen. The Parliament refuse the King Money, and insist upon the Bill
of Exclusion. It is also dissolved, another being Summoned. A new Rebellion in
Scotland. The Archbishop of St. Andrew's inhumanly butchered. The Rebels are
defeated at Bothwel-Bridge. The King sick. He recovers. The Duke returns to
Court. Monmouth Cabals, and is outed of his Employments. The Lord Strafford
beheaded. The Parliament dissolved, and succeeded by another at Oxford, which
is likewise dismissed. College is hanged and Shaftsbury tried. The strange
Increase of the Eanaticks. Their Insolence and Power in the City. They form a
Conspiracy. The Council of Six. The Plot to Murder the King and Duke. The
Providential Fire at New Market. Keeling discovers the Conspiracy. Russel and
Sidney are executed. Monmouth absconds, but upon his Submission is pardoned. He
again transgresses, and is banished. The King dies of an Apoplexy. The Duke
succeeds.

KING Charles II. being restored to the Greatness and Glories due to his Birth
and Virtues, was not yet Crowned, when the Faction hardened in Wickedness, did
dare to disturb his, and the Public Quiet of the Nation. The Acts of Grace and
Oblivion Decreed in Favor of these worst of Rebels, could not hinder them to
conspire against the King; by whose immense Bounty, they enjoyed not only
Impunity for their Crimes, but Rewards in the undisturbed Possession of their
Rapines and unjust Acquisitions. But, no Indulgence of the Prince, could
acquire him the Good Will of this perverse Generation. Some therefore, whose
Clandestine Councils were penetrated into, were secured; as, Overton, sometimes
a Major General in the Rebles Army, Day, Courtney and others, Millenaries, or,
Fifth Monarchy Men. Nor did the Detention of these, hinder the Rest of the
Party to attempt their designed Insurrection, which they did with such
impetuous Madness, that it exceeds all Belief, and may justly lay an Imputation
upon the Credit of History in the Relation of it. For, how is it possible to
imagine, that a handful of Men, not exceeding Fifty in Number, should
undertake, and that in Cold Blood, and by Daylight, to assault so great a City
as London, with Confidence of Success? By this unheard of Enterprise, it is
visible how far the outrageous Liberty of the Enthusiasticks, may oblige them
to dare.

On the Sixth of January, 1660.
having armed themselves in their Conventicle, with Weapons they had conveyed
thither (for the King had indulged to all Opinions, a Liberty of serving God
their own Way) they came about Twy-light to St. Paul's Churchyard. Where,
drawing up their small Army, they placed Sentinels in all the Avenues that led
to it. One of these, killed a Man that passed by, for that being asked, Who he
was for? he had answered, for God and King Charles. This Noise raising the
Neighboring Trained Bands, they were repelled by the Rebels, who marched
thence through Bishops-Gate; and, wheeling about, entered again by Cripple Gate.
And finally, forcing their Passage by affrighting the Guard at Aldersgate, they
declared, They took up Arms for King Jesus. Continuing their March thence, they
shot a Constable dead in Beech-Lane, who would have opposed them, and retreated
thence into Cane-Wood. Where they absconded for some time, with Design to raise
greater Tumults in the City; which they might probably have done, if they had
not been prevented by a Party of Horse and Foot sent to disperse them. Nor were
they thus appeased. For, having published an abominable Libel against the Royal
Family, they returned to London with more wild Confidence than before. The King
was then at Portsmouth, whither he had accompanied the Queen his Mother, and
the Princess Henrietta his Sister, in their Way to France. These Wretches,
would not omit so fair an Opportunity as seemed to present it self by his
Absence; but, take Arms again, under the Conduct of one Venner, a Wine-Cooper.
This Fellow, by his Preaching had strangely incensed the furious Zeal of these
Madmen, pronouncing to them with Confidence, That no Weapon framed against
them should prosper, nor a Hair of their Heads perish. They should look upon
the Example of Gideon. It was the same thing to God, whether he saved by a few,
or a great Multitude. These Discourses, together with the Impunity of their
first Attempt, precipitated these desperate Enthusiasticks, to the Disturbance
of the Public Peace and their own Destruction.

Their first Appearance, was in Thread-Needle-street, behind the Exchange,
where they beat back a Party sent from the Guard there. But, upon the Advance
of more Forces, they retreated to Bishops Gate street; where, after a smart
Encounter, Two of each side being slain, slipping here and there away, they
disappeared. A while after, like the Flashing of Clouds, they were seen again
at College-Hill; from whence crossing Cheap Side, they passed into Wood-street.
Here, after a Cruel Fight, wherein they showed Skill, as well as Valor, having
ruffled some Train'd-Bands, and repelled the Horse Guards that came to assist
them, they were not overcome, until Venner being knocked down, and sorely
wounded, and Tuffney and Cragg, Two of their fiercest as well Preachers as
Combatants, were slain. These being killed, the rest fled; and, being for the
most part taken, Eleven of them were drawn, hanged and quartered, some others,
tho convicted, being reprieved by the King's Clemency. There sell of the
Royallists Two and Twenty, and as many of the Rebels. Those who were executed,
expired with Execrations in their Mouths, against the King and the Government;
and, Blasphemy against God, daring to say, That if they were deceived or
misled, God had deceived them. Thus, no less wickedly, than foolishly charging
God with their Fancies and Delusions.

Parliament, which he had honored with the Title of the Healing Parliament,
had summoned another. It Is remarkable, with what Industry the Presbyterians
stickled in the Elections to choose Members of their own Faction. Tho to no
purpose; for, the People now freed from the Impostures of the Godly, using
their own Liberty in giving their Voices, and not forgetful of the Tyranny of
the Disciplinarians, did openly reject them; which mainly contributed, to the
Settlement of the Peace and Religion of the Kingdom. So that this Parliament,
by their endeavors to restore the Commonwealth to its ancient Splendour, so far
irritated those Wasps of Independency and Presbytery, that they did dare to buz
after a New Change. The Champions of the late Anarchy, were the principal in
this Conspiracy. But, being detected before they broke out, the Barebone,
Moyer, Salmon, etc.
chief of them being apprehended, the design vanished without doing any great
harm, except to the Contrivers of it.

Novellists were again suspected to hatch new Designs; which gained Credit so
far, that the City Train'd-Bands kept extraordinary Guards all the following
Summer. But, the Plot being discovered, by the Confession of one of the Actors
in it, was also expiated by the Execution of Philips, Tongue, Gibs and Stubs,
for High Treason. They had conceived a new Form of Government, their most
secret Councils being actuated by a Juncto of Six. Ludlow the Regicide, was
designed to be their General, having devoted the King, the Duke, and the
present Government to Destruction, and, to surrogate a new Domination of
Enthusiasticks in their Place. Nor were the Fanatics deterred with these
Severities, against so many Criminals. The Poison diffused, and the Factions
uniting closer amongst themselves, contrive how to lay the Foundation of a New
War. Their Consciences were so exagitated with their former Guilt, that their
Fear of Punishment, obliged them to move in Contempt of the King's Mercy, as
well as his Justice. The executed Regicides, were represented to the People as
Martyrs, and their last Speeches upon the Gallows, were obtruded as the Oracles
of expiring Saints. The Pulpits thundered Curses and Terrors, and the Streets
crowded with Libels. One amongst the rest, that magnified the Example of Ehud,
who killed the King of Moab by Surprise, was timely suppressed as it was peeping
Abroad.

Scene further off. They designed to intercept the Castle of Dublin, together
with the Lord Lieutenant, the Duke of Ormond, in the Desguise of Laborers;
whilst others were appointed, to seize the Tower of London and White Hall; and,
others again to surprise the Passages of the Severne, Trent and Tine, by
possessing themselves of Nottingham, Gloucester and New Castle. All the Rabble
of Sectaries, were engaged in this Conspiracy; some of Cromwell's Old
Soldiers, as also the Assertors of the Long Parliament, how dissenting soever
amongst themselves, yet agreeing like Herod and Pilate, to ruin the Government,
and crucify the Lord's Anointed. But, this, as the rest of their Conspiracies,
vanished in Smoke; Fifteen of them, confronted and convicted of this Black
Treason, being executed, some at Leeds in York shire, some at York; who dyed
not only in their Impenitency, but with strange contempt of Death it self.
London, the Old Forge of Rebellion, had also its Pseudo-Martyrs, a Printer
being hanged for publishing Seditious Pasquils, and others Pillory'd for the
same Crimes, Preludes to the designed Attempts of these bold Enthusiasticks.
Rebellion, by the intercepting of Carlisle. In order to which, some of them met
at Kirby-Stevens; but being fewer in Number than were expected, they again
dispersed themselves; Three only being taken, who having been also engaged in
the former Conspiracy, were executed as Travtors at Appelby. Their Names were
Waller, Weatherhead and Petty, fit to be inserted in the Martyrology of these
Perjured Saints.

In the following Years, these Domestic Evils broke out with new Violence,
taking rise from our Distractions, occasioned by the War with the Dutch, and
the Plague raging amongst us; to which it may be presumed, the Negligence of
our Inferior Magistrates did so much contribute. The Sword, the Pestilence,
and Fire (which well-nigh consumed the City) as if they mocked at the public
Calamities, were made use of to enrage the very Madness of the People;
exagitating their Consternations, with fictitious Stories and Prophesies; and
not obscurely pointing at our Chief Magistrates and Governors, as the Authors
and Causes of all these Calamities. This subtle and contagious Spirit of
Rebellion creeping into the Minds of Men, did at length infect with its Poison
the very Parliament it self, which will too evidently appear by the Sequel. In
the mean time, Eight of the late Vsurper's Veteranes, were hanged at Tyburn,
for contriving to murder the King and subvert the Commonwealth. One
Alexander, furnished these Wretches with Money and Advice, for the carrying on
of their Wickedness; but, they deferred the executing of their Designs, till
the Third of December following; for, having erected a Scheme, they fancied
that would be a Fortunate Day, a Planet averse to Monarchy being then
predominant.

Conflagration in London. Where, however Thirteen Thousand Houses were consumed
with the Fire, the Sacrifice could not expiate their former Rebellion, and
their not opposing the Murder of their Sovereign; which, some of them had
encouraged, all permitted.

The Tumults in Scotland, were carried on with the same Licentiousness and
Contempt of Authority. Sir James Turner, for his more severe Prosecution of the
Laws against Dissenters, as was pretended, was barbarously used by them, to the
endangering of his Life. For, being violently taken out of his Bed at
Dunfreese, he was by the wild Rabble, dragged naked into the Marketplace,
hardly escaping their Fury by the Persuasion of some of the more moderate
amongst them. Nor were they contemptible for Numbers, being by the Accession of
the Multitude increased to Sixteen Hundred, so that they durst march in a Body
toward Edinburgh. But, being at Glencarne, and fought by the Royallists, they
were broke and routed. Five Hundred of them were slain upon the place, and One
Hundred taken; whereof, some of them being affixt to the Gallows for the Terror
of others, the rest were pardoned by the King's Clemency.

Odium of conspiring being thrown upon the Papists. All Things were quiet at
Home. Our Wars being hushed up by the Treaty of Breda. The Plague did devour our
People no more, its Poison being extinct. And, the City lately of Wood, was now
by the King's Munificence rebuilt of Brick and Stone: When one Titus Oats, who
had had his Education and Orders in the Reformea Church of England, being
afterward reconciled to that of Rome, passed over first into Flanders, and
thence into Spain: Where, under pretense of Religion and his Zeal for it, he
gained so much Favor with the Priests and Jesuits, that he had Opportunities,
as he pretended, to penetrate into their most secret Councils. This new
Proselyte, changing Parties again, returned into England; where he informs the
King, of a Design of the Papists against his Life, against the Reformed
Religion, and the present Government. And, naming several Lords, as, Bellasis,
Powis, Peter's, Arundel, Castelmain, Stafford, and other Men of Quality, as
prime Conspirators in this Treason, gained so much Credit with the Parliament,
that the accused were all imprisoned, the Papists commanded to remove Ten Miles
from the City, and all of them to be cashiered out of all Employments both
Military and Civil. The mysterious Death of Godfrey, inflamed the Parliaments
Credulity to Vote, That there was a Plot, execrable and Hellish, as they termed
it. Insomuch as the King, at their instant Desires, past a Bill to disable all
Popish Peers or other Members so affected, to fit in either Houses of
Parliament. Offering further, to comply with any Expedient they should propose,
for the Security of the Protestant Religion, so as they tended not to impeach
the Right of Succession. Coleman, Ireland, Pickering, Groves, Fenwick,
Whitebread, Langhorn, Staley, Green, Berry and Hill, condemned by the Testimony
of Oats and others of his Associates, solemnly attested their Innocence at
their Death. Nor did so great Effusion of Blood, suffice to remove the
Jealousies they had of the Papists: so that the Houses of Parliament, to whom
the King had granted all things for the security of Religion, not contented
with these Concessions, proceeded so far, as to press the King to remove the
Duke of York from his Presence and Councils. To this, they added the
Imprisonment of his Secretary Williamson, without his Knowledge. Which did so
far irritate his Majesty, that he dissolved this Parliament, after it had
continued Seventeen Years.

Fanaticism, which had lurked for some Time under a Protestant Mask, and
infused its Contagion into the Parliament, began now under Pretense of
Godliness to appear more openly. The King having dissolved the Parliament, as
is said, had summoned another, from which he hoped for more good than he had
hitherto experimented. And, lest the Presence of his Brother might prove any
Obstacle, he commanded him to retire until the Heat of the Faction did a little
cool. Which he obeyed without Repugnancy, that he might in no wise occasion any
the least Dissension betwixt the King his Brother and the Parliament. But the
King's Indulgence, and the Duke's Observance, were equally valued. Nor could
all his Concessions, with those Limitations, not meddle with the Succession or
his Prerogatives, satisfy their Contumacy. Privy Council, as being ill looked
upon by the Parliament, surrogating others in their rooms not so obnoxious to
the Faction, making the Earl of Shaftsbury President. But, all this was to no
purpose; for, the Parliament omitting those Things which they were to have
treated of, and postponing the King's Demands of Subsidies, they again attacked
the Duke of York, absent then in Flanders, the Commons voting his Exclusion
from the Succession. But, the King seeing the contumacious Animosity of the
Party, and not obscurely perceiving, that he himself was aimed at through the
Duke's Sides, July 10. October. 17.
dissolving this present Parliament, commanded another to convene in October
following.

Whilst these things are in Agitation in England, the Tumults in Scotland flew
higher. Dr. Sharp, the Archbishop of St. Andrews, was most inhumanly murdered
in his Coach, by a Party of the barbarous Covenanters. Which done, the
Rebellion they designed, was, by the Concourse of those Multitudes that flockt
together, suddenly formed into a considerable Army, consisting of Sixteen
Hundred Horse, and above Four Thousand Foot. Nor were the Royallists less
active, the King having sent the Duke of Monmouth thither as General; who
joying with the Scots Nobility, they raised such a Force, that fighting the
Rebels at Bothwel-Bridge, chey defeated them. The Slaughter was not great; for;
the Enemies Horse not being pressed or pursued, by the Connivance if not Command
of Monmouth (for he himself had other Designs, as it afterward appeared)
retreated in a Body at least Twelve Miles from the Place they had fought in;
and, separating there, dispersed themselves, some of the Foot being slain. A
few of the Prisoners were punished for their improsperous Treason.

After this, the King fell sick of a Fever at Windsor, which was so violent,
that the Physicians despaired of his Recovery Upon News whereof, the Duke
hastened from Brussels to Court. But, it seemed otherwise good to the Almighty;
who was pleased to prolong his Life, until he could leave the Kingdom, agitated
at present with so many Distractions, settled and composed to his Successor.
Being restored to his Health, the Joy of it was celebrated by the Universality,
at least the Good Part of the Nation; the City also sending their Lord Mayor
and Aldermen, with a great Train with Thirty Coaches; and a Troop of a Hundred
Horse, for their Convoy to Windsor, to congratulate his Hapyy Recovery.

But Monmouth, however illegitimate, blinded with Ambition, and not content
with those great Honors and Places he enjoyed, aspired to the Crown it self;
inviting and alluring with the Baits of Employments and Rewards, some of the
most interested, to his Party. But, this caballing, was discovered to the King
by the Earl of Oxford; who, abhorring the Treason, preferred his Loyalty before
all the Offers of Ambition and Greatness. The King being justly incensed
against the Ingratitude and Vanity of the Pretender, divested him of all those
Dignities and Offices which he enjoyed, and banished him the Kingdom. Moreover,
to prevent the Chymerical Delusions which the Report of his being married, or
contracted to the said Duke's Mother might occasion, his Majesty by repeated
Declarations publicly emitted, as also by Writings under his own Hand,
declared, Upon the Faith of a Christian, and the Word of a King, that he never
Married; nor gave any Contract to any Woman whatsoever but to Queen Katharine
his Wife. This the King did, with so much Solemnity, to prevent the Peoples
being abused by these false and malicious Reports; and, lest the Factious might
thereby mislead them, to disturb the Public Peace, or violate the Rights of
Succession: Whereby also, the vain Pretenses of Monmouth, and the ridiculous
Machinations of the Seditious, might be disappointed.

The Parliament, 1679. 1680.
which the King had summoned to meet in October, being delayed by several
Motogatives, did not come together before the October following. Nor were their
Councils now less violent, punishing some of their own Members by expelling
them the House, and persecuting several of the Judges, and others faithful to
the King. Nor did this suffice. For, they not only voted, but past a Bill which
they called, An Act to aisable the Duke of York from inheriting the Imperial
Crown of England and Ireland, and all the Territories thereunto belonging. But,
it went no further; for, being carried up to the Peers by the Lord Russel,
after a second reading it was thrown out of the House.

After this, Dec. 17.
the Lord Viscount Stafford was brought to his Trial, being prosecuted by the
Commons upon the Testimonies of Oats, Turberville and Dugdale; and, condemned
by the Suffrages of the Peers, was beheaded. Not were the Commoners thus
satisfied. They press the Bill of Exclusion anew; and, demand Permission for
the Protestants, to associate themselves for security of the Protestant
Religion. They declare all other Remedies in sufficient and obnoxious to
Dangers. And, that therefore they could give the King no Supply, without Danger
to his Person, Hazard to the Protestant Religion, and Unfaithfulness to those
by whom they were trusted. Nay, they required, That the Lords Hallifax,
Worcester, Clarendon, Rochester and Feversham, should be removed from all
Offices of Honor and Profit, and from his Councils and Presence for ever. And,
with the same Breath, with unheard of as well Fury as Arrogance, Vote, That
whosoever shall lend, or cause to be lent by way of Advance, any Money upon
the. Branches of the King's Revenue, arising by Custom, Excise, or
Hearth-Money, should be adjudged to hinder the sitting of Parliaments, and
should be responsible for the same. And, when they perceived, that the King
wearied with such monstrous Insolence, designed to Prorogue their Session, they
had (...) vote and denounce, That whosoever advised the King to prorogue that
Parliament, to any other purpose, than in order to the passing the Bill of
Exclusion, should be looked upon as a Betrayer of the King, the Protestant
Religion and the Kingdom of England, a Promoter of the French Interest, and a
Pensioner of France.

But, Mar. 24.
the Parliament being however Prorogued, and then Dissolved by Proclamation;
the King intimated his pleasure to call another, which should convene in March
following at Oxford, as a place less Subject to Faction and Tumults. Which so
stung the Common Council of London, and such Peers as were emancipated to the
Party, that they endeavored by Petitions to divert his Majesty from thoughts
of so remote a Design, upon imaginary reason of Danger, and Unfitness; praying,
it might therefore sit at Westminster. But, to no purpose. So that the
Parliament met at Oxford, composed for the most part of the same Delegates. The
major Part of the Deputies, as also the Fanatic Lords, depending upon their
numerous Attendants and Friends which they were accompanied with, drove on
futiously; and neglecting the King's Admonitions (who had declared, That as he
had resolved never to use Arbitrary Government himself, so he was resolved
never to suffer it in others) rage with more Fierceness against the Duke, and
press the Bill of Exclusion with so much Violence, that the King putting a stop
to their career, immediately dissolved them. And, it was time, seeing they
designed, not only to retrench his Prerogative, but also to seize his Person.
Upon that Account, Rouse, Hains, White, College and the Earl of Shaftsbury,
were committed to Prison. Of those, College and Shaftsbury were brought to
their Trials. But, in vain, being acquitted by their Juries, against the
Testimonies and Evidences of irreproachable Witnesses. Which was no Wonder, the
very Co^rts of Justice being enslaved to the Faction, and acted by their
Prescripts. So that the King, who himself was religious in the equal
Distribution of Justice to all Men, could not obtain Justice for himself. But
College being brought before another Tribunal, less subjected to the Authority
of the Faction, received such Punishment as his Treason deserved. He had no
less offended at Oxford, than at London, and was tried and executed there. The
Fellow was of the Lees of the Rabble, a Joyner by Trade; vain, restless,
inquisitive, and perpetually busy in Affairs that least concerned him. But,
Shaftsbury's Fortune was better, who eluding the Public Justice, by a Jury
addicted to himself and the Faction, and retorting the Danger upon his
Accusers, triumphed, whilst they hardly escaped the Fury of the Rabble. And
'twas no wonder; for, this destructive Faction was so prevalent in the City,
that it had infatuated the People and the Companies of Tradesmen, with a
reverent Opinion of their Sanctity; And, spreading wider, the Contagion had
diffused it self into most of the Provinces of the Kingdom. And now, all such
whose Crimes had rendered them Guilty, or Indigence bold; such whose Zeal made
furious, or Ambition lofty, joined themselves to them. The same Pretenses of
Liberty, Property and Religion; and the same Methods wherewith the Reign of
Charles the Martyr had been involved in Blood and Confusion, were now again
made use of, mostly by the same Men; cunning, restless and implacable, to
seduce weak and irresolute Persons, as also to disturb that Peace, which we
hitherto enjoyed to the Envy of all Europe.

By such Instruments, the mildest of Governments was branded with the Name of
Tyranny; The Church of England is traduced, and the faithfullest Ministers and
Servants to the King and Crown, calumniated with Male Administration. In the
mean Time, Schism and Sedition are every where promoted; Jealousies and vain
Terrors are suggested; proditorious Discourses and infamous Libels are
scattered about; and things abhorring from Christianity, are daily exercised,
under the genuine Veil of Protestantism. Finally, the old Opinions and
Doctrines of the Democraticks, so ruinous to Monarchy, are now again
countenanced and asserted with the same Fierceness and Confidence, as they had
been in the late Rebellion.

With these pickeerings of Rebellion, they gradually proceeded to Action.
Parties are distinguished. Names and Signs of Separation are distributed.
Unlawful Conventicles, in despite of the Laws are patronised. Tumultuous
Banquets, and factious Clubs are every where set up. Clandestine and seditious
Assemblies are frequented. Unusual Quantities of Arms, are bought up by private
Men. Insolent Progresses are made through the Country, to the End they might
show how numerous they were, spread their Terror about as they moved, discover
their Party, and demonstrate their readiness upon all Occasions.

Nor were these Caballings unknown to the King, who when he saw his Clemency so
highly abused, by those whom he had pardoned yet greater Offenses, resolved to
chastise them, and oppose the severity of Law to their Extravagancies. In the
Two preceding Years, Two Favorers of the Faction being Lord Mayors by Turn,
had promoted turbulent Fellows to the Magistracy, and chief Employments in the
City. Of these, the Two Sheriffs were chief, who directed the choice of Jury's
at pleasure, which gave the licentious Liberty to offend: For, what durst they
not attempt, who were certain of Impunity?

But, the King resolved at length to stem this growing Evil. Which he did, by
restoring the Free Election of the Sheriffs according to the ancient Custom,
and taking the Forfeiture of the City-Charter, adjudged so by Law, into his own
Hands. These means, however proper for the Commonwealth, had like to have
destroyed both. For, when so many Criminals and Wicked-doers saw the
Magistrates, especially the Sheriffs changed. and honest Men put into their
Places; and, considering that there was no Evasion from the Law, under pretense
of it, they resolve upon a high Attempt, and worthy their Hellish Conspiracy;
which was, to subvert the King and Kingdom, and involve them in the same Ruin.

Shaftsbury being conscious of his Guilt, and not ignorant of the Injustice of
the Sentence by which he escaped, terrified with the unexpected Change, and
seeing himself obnoxious to that Justice which he had frustrated and eluded;
moved with the greater Precipitation, he terrifies his Associates with the
Greatness of the Danger, encourages some to rise, others to Parricide,
resolving to hazard all rather than tamely betray himself into the Hands of his
Enemies. He therefore exhorts his Companions, To vindicate their Liberty,
Property, Religion, [the old Cant still] against Popery, Tyranny, Superstition,
Idolatry, Oppression, Murder, and the other growing Evils of Servitude. With
these kind of Orations, they incense the furious. So that, what they could not
effect by Fraud and pretended Sanctity, they resolve to compass by the way of
Arms. To this End, they advise about raising of Forces. But Shaftsbury thinking
they moved not swiftly enough in it, impatient of every Delay, and fearing (for
every Noise alarmed him) of being intercepted, as he had already withdrawn
himself from his own Dwelling, exagitated with his own Guilt, he fled the
Kingdom, and retreated into Holland. Where, this most torbulent of Men being
neglected, found that Repose in Death, which the impetuous Desire of Ruling had
deprived him of here.

The Conspirators however troubled at the loss of so eminent a Patron, and not
ignorant that they were advanced beyond a Retreat, constitute a Supreme Council
of Six, to manage their Affairs. Besides this, they had another more Inferior
Court, who consulted how to remove the King and the Duke by Assassination or
otherwise, and to solicit the Revolt of the Commonalty in Order to a War;
which they resolve to carry on, against the King and the Commonwealth. The
Scots, under the Conduct of Arguile, were invited to join, and act in this
nefarious Rebellion: Who had also their Commissioners at London, who together
with the English Conspirators, should move by consent. And, it was concerted
amongst them, that they should break out into open Hostility in both Kingdoms
at the same Time.

They resolve to secure London, the Head of their Design, by the same Methods
it had been circumvented in the former Rebellion. They further, divide the City
into Twenty Parts, which they distributed under the Conduct of so many
Commanders. Some were to seize the Tower, and the principal Posts in the City;
others White Hall, and particularly the Guards which were to be surprised and
cut off. They had a Hundred of Cromwell's Officers at hand, ready to head the
People upon their Insurrection, being abundantly provided with Money and Arms
by voluntary Contributions from the Chiefs of their Party. The Country was no
less addicted to them, especially those Parts which Monmouth, who was returned
from his Banishment without Permission, had visited in his Progresses.

Whilst they thus prepare for War, the Design to Murder the King and Duke,
kept pace with them. Hone, another Godly Joyner, proposed to have them shot
from Bow steeple as they passed, with Cross-Bows. Rumbald the Maltster, would
have the Playhouse blown up with Gunpowder when they were present, declaring
further, That he he had laid a Design Ten Years ago to have slain them, as they
returned from New Market, if they had not by accident taken another way,
whereby they escaped the Danger. Some designed to attempt them as they walked
in St. James's- Park, which they frequently did with no great Train. Some
fancied it easy to sink them in the River, when they took the Air by Water in
their Barge, by shocking them with a greater Vessel. There were again others,
who would have them pistol'd in the Playhouse, whilst intent upon the Comedy,
or killed as they came thence along Bedford-wall. Other places betwixt Windsor
and Hampton Court, about Winchester and Red-Lyon Fields, if they should come
there, were judged proper enough for this black Parricide. But these all, as
subject to too much Hazard and Danger, were laid aside upon mature
Deliberation, of the more convenient Situation of the Rye, a House belonging to
the aforesaid Rumbald seated, in the Way to New Market, Eighteen Miles from
London, in the County of Hartford. This Place being Moated about, and the
Passage near it narrow and strongly fenced and walled, was judged the most
proper of any for the Purpose; Rumbald himself, the Designer of this
Wickedness, offering in Person to undertake it with Forty more Associates, and
at once to destroy both the Royal Brothers. Which he had probably effected, if
God, the Protector of Kings, had not wrought a Miracle in their Favor.

The Conspirators full of Hopes and Assurance, seemed in nowise to question the
Success of their so well laid Enterprise, when the Divine Providence
disappointed in a moment all their Contrivances and Plots, by a Fire
undoubtedly sent from Heaven, which burnt a great part of New Market. The
Conflagration was so terrible, that the Flames of it approaching the King's
Palace, forced him thence, to another part of the Town further off. Where, by
reason of the Commodiousness of his Lodgings, he proposed to pass some days
more in Hunting, and the other usual Diversions of the Place. But, he had no
sooner resolved it, but the Wind, conducted by some Invisible Agent, suddenly
changing, fills his new Lodgings in a moment with Smoke and Cynders. Which
obliged the King, seeing no other convenience for his Reception, to declare,
That he would immediately return to White hall; which he also did, before he
was expected, or that the Conspirators Preparations were in a Readiness

The Noise of so unexpected an Accident, was diversely received by the
Parricides. Some believed, That so unusual Burnings, could not happen without
the Direction of Providence. Walcot professed, that he thence conjectured, That
God did not approve of their Design. Whilst Ferguson, without any the least
Horror of so hellish an Undertaking, did dare to affirm, That he plainly saw,
that God had reserved the King for his own Judgment. And yet one of these
Conspirators, Keeling by Name, a Schismatic, greatly addicted to the Faction,
and numbered amongst the Forty Murderers, perceiving the Averseness of Heaven,
and agitated with the Terrors and Storms of a Guilty Conscience, after many
Combats in his Soul, resolved at length to disburthen himself, by discovering
this Tartareous Secret to the King. At first, the Monstrousness of so horrid a
Design, discountenanced the Credit of the Relator, until verified by
demonstrative Arguments, which gave Opportunity to the Conspirators to withdraw
themselves. Yet, some of them were taken, as Howard, Essex, Russel, Rumsey,
Sidney, Walcot, Hone, Rowse, and the Lord G. but, he escaped out of the hands
of the Messenger. The Lord Russel and Colonel Sydney were both beheaded.
Walcot, Rowse and Hone were executed at Tyburn; and, others in other places,
suffered the punishments due to such execrable Treasons. The Earl of Essex, the
unfortunate Son of a good Father, by his own hands prevented the Kings
Clemency, who could not show the utmost of his Severity, against a Son of my
Lord Capels.

Of those who fled, some obtained the Kings Pardon by their ingenious
Confessions, as Barber, Blaney, Bourn, How, Howard, Rumsey, etc. Nor is it
unworthy of Notice, that scarce any of those who were executed, did dye,
without confessing enough to demonstrate their Crime, though not their
Repentance.

Amongst the Fugitives, the most considerable were Armstrong, Ayloff, Burton,
the Two Goodenoughs Brothers, Gray, Holloway, Norton, Nizbet, Row, the Two
Rombalds Brothers, Smyth, Wade, Tyley and Ferguson, the Shame of his Coat and
Calling, a Canting Teacher, and more cruelly wicked than all those he had
endeavored to mislead. Sir Thomas Armstrong and Holloway, being intercepted,
the First at Leyden in Holland, the other at Mevis, one of our Western
Plantations, and brought into England, were both executed according to the
Merit of their Crimes.

The Parricide designed thus in England, against His Majesty and the Duke,
being discovered and prevented, the Conspiracy in Scotland fell also, as
depending on it. James Stuart, Monroe, Melvin, Cockran, Bayley, Castares,
Spence, Alex. Gordon, Nezbet, etc. were the Chief of the Party, acting in all
Things by Agreement with Argile. This perverse Son of a wicked Father, had
Demanded 30000 l. of the English to buy Arms, engaging himself to make a
powerful Diversion in his own Country. Which he also effected, as we shall see
hereafter, having procured Supplies by other means.

The Duke of Monmouth youthfully rash, inconstant, ambitious, and hurried on
with the Pretense of vindicating Liberty and Religion, agitated now with the
Guilt of his Crimes, had also withdrawn himself. But, being proscribed, and
finding but little safety in a Retreat, though it his best course to implore
that Clemency which he had so cruelly offended. Which he did by his Letters,
seemingly full of Ingenuity, wherein he acknowledges his Crimes of
Unfaithfulness against the King, and of Ingratitude to the Duke; bewailing what
he had done, and humbly supplicating Pardon for what was past. With
Imprecations of Vengeance upon himself, if he offended any more, or violated
the Promises he then made of his future Fidelity. The King, the mildest of
Princes, moved with his Submissions, answered him under his own Hand in these
Terms, That if the Duke of Monmouth would render himself capable of his Mercy,
it was necessary he should surrender himself into the Hands of Secretary
Jenkins, and should tell His Majesty all that he knew, submitting himself as to
the rest entirely to his Pleasure. This peremptory Declaration of the King's
Will, extorted other Letters from Monmouth, wherein, he pathetical^y aggravates
his Sorrow and Tortures of Mind for his failings against his Majesty;
Confessing, that being fatally circumvented by the Enchantments of others, he
was drawn into their Design, and precipitated into those Evils, the
Consequences whereof he had not suspected. He declares, that his Crimes
appeared to him with so terrible an Aspect, that he would rather dye than be
tormented with their stings; he therefore implores the King's Grace and Pardon,
which he did not desire, but by the Mediation of his Royal Highness. He further
professes, That he says this seriously and sincerely, not only submitting
himself for this Time to the King's Pleasure, but for his whole Life.
Concluding, That he should be the unhappiest of Men, until he were raised with
a grateful and mild Answer.

The King after this, 1683. Nov. 25.
not questioning the sincerity of Monmouth's Conversion, admitted him to his
presence: Where throwing himself at his Majesty's Feet, he plainly and fully
acknowledged himself conscious of all the Conspiracy, except the Parricide;
discovering many things to the King, which they had hitherto been ignorant of.
Monmouth being, by the Intervention of the Duke, restored to his Majesty's
Favor as formerly, obtained also the Favor not to be produced as a Witness
against any Body (which Grace had been formerly refused to the Duke of Orleance
in France) and that undoubtedly was the reason, that his old Associates and
Friends impudently gave out, that he had discovered nothing of the Conspiracy,
but contrarily, had vindicated the Innocence of those that had so injuriously
suffered. The King moved with so great Arrogance, and perceiving that Monmouth
did continue his Society with those who seduced his unwary Youth, after some
Admonitions, he commanded him to publish in Writing, what he had declared to
himself and to the Duke his Brother. Nor did he refuse it, writing to the King
in these Terms. That he was informed, that it had been reported of him, as if
he had designed to extenuate the late Conspiracy, and traduce the Testimonies
against them that suffered. His Majesty and the Duke knew, how ingeniously he
confessed all Things, and that he was not conscious of the least Evil against
his Majesty's Life. It grieved him however, that he had so greatly countenanced
the said Conspiracy. He would publish this for his Vindication, beseeching his
Majesty not to look back, but that he would please to forget those Injuries
which he had forgiven. It should be his Care for the future, to sin no more, or
suffer himself to be misled from his Duty. Yea, he would spend his whole Life,
to deserve that Pardon, which he had granted to his most Dutiful Monmouth.

But, these Flourishes were no less fickle, than short-lived. For, the unhappy
Youth, being bewitched by the Artifices of wicked Men, and his own Ambition,
broke that Faith which he had so solemnly promised to preserve inviolable. For,
being foolishly persuaded, That the Declaration he had so lately made, was a
Diminution to his Honor, and might rise up in Judgment against him hereafter,
he redemanded it from his Majesty: Who, tender of his Good, endeavored to
divert him from so preposterous an Attempt; but, being more obstinately
pressed, he in great Anger restored it him, banishing him at the same time from
his Court and Presence.

The King did not long survive this: for, being intercepted by a violent
Apoplectic Fit, he changed his Terrestrial Crowns, for one of Glory; being so
universally lamented by the Good, and leaving so great a Desire of him behind
him, that our Loss was in a Manner inconsolable. He was succeeded by James Duke
of York, who was immediately proclaimed King. But he was scarce settled in his
Throne, when the Hydra of Rebellion, lift up her Head again out of the Lake of
Schism and Faction.

BOOK II.
The Rebellion breaks out in Scotland under Argile, in England under Monmouth.
Both are vanquished, taken and executed. The Final Ruin and End of the
Rebellion.

ARchibald Campbel, Earl of Argile, and Son to the late Marquess of that Name
(who had been beheaded for his Treasons and Rebellion) treading in his Fathers
steps, out went him in adding Ingratitude to his Infidelity. For, being
restored in Blood, by the King's Clemency; as also, to the Dignities and
Honors of his Family, except the Title of Marquess, he forfeited all again, by
his Caballing, and Endeavors to disturb the Public Peace. Which being
discovered, and he forced to Ba^ishment by his own Fears, he now joining with
Monmouth (both Heads of Factions, the one in Scotland, the other in England,
both exiled for conspiring the Destruction of the Government, and both upon
that Account looked upon as the Idols of their Parties) he now again, together
with the other, contracting their Fury into a last Push, being at that time
both in Holland, resolve with United Councils and the whole Force of their
Factions, to attempt the Disturbance, if not the Ruin of the yet unsettled, as
they fancied, Government of the King. To this End, they make great Provision of
Arms and Ammunition, being assisted and furnished very nobly, as they said, by
several good Protestants (most Dutch I suppose) And having hired several Ships
for their Transport, they with their Friends and some few Soldiers, sailed,
Argile toward Scotland, and Monmouth toward England.

The Scot was first ready, May 2.
and setting Sail from the Vlye in Three Ships, notwithstanding an Arrest which
the States had sent for the searching of them, he touched at Orkney; where,
having sent his Secretary and Chyrurgeon on shore, to try the Temper of the
Inhabitants (who seized upon hem) he Sailed thence for the West of Scotland,
and landed at Dunstafnage in Lorne (a ruinous Castle, May 13.
sometime belonging to himself) and put a Garrison therein. His first Care was,
to put forth a Manifesto in his own Name; and, some of his Party had emitted a
very large Declaration of Six Sheets of Paper, to invite their Countrymen, and
all other well affected Protestants, to join with them; with the old Cant, To
engage with them for the maintenance of Religion in its Purity, and the due
Administration of the Laws of their Native Country, in Opposition to Arbitrary
Government, Tyranny, Popery and Prelacy, against a Persecuting Tyrant, and an
Apostate Party; for, so they call the King, and his Loyal Subjects. Their
Colors were Blew, and their Motto, Pro Deo and Patria.

But these Rebellious Declarations, and pretended Protestants, found other
Entertainment in England, being not only marked by the Infamy of Treason, but a
Vote passed in the House of Commons, That they will stand by and assist his
Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes, against the pretended Earl of Argile,
and his Adherents, and all Rebels and Traitors and all other whatsoever, that
shall assist him or any of them, etc. Nor was the Parliament of Scotland, less
vigorous in their Voting and Acting against the Rebels; who however increased
by the Accession of Malignants and Schismatics, could not amount to the Number
of a just Army. Nor did they effect any thing, proportionable to the Noise they
made; for, being unequal to the Royallists, they were forced to sculk from one
Island to another to avoid them. Which they easily did by help of their
Shipping and Boats, until the Arrival of some Vessels of War sent by his
Majesty, as the Falcon, and Mermaid, and some other Frigates, which shortly
after happened. Argile having Intelligence of the approach of his Majesty's
Ships, quitted the Island of Boot, and went over to Cowal, one of the Divisions
of Argile-shire, bringing his Vessels and Boats into Loch-fine toward
Inverary; where they were also blockt up by the King's Ships, lying in the
Mouth of the said Loch. In the mean time, Argile having brought his Ships under
the Castle of Ellengregg, gave out, he would fight the Marquess of Athol, who
lay about Inverary, though his Design was to avoid it; his Men not finding the
People to come in in such Numbers as were promised, daily deserting him. Nor
could his Ships, detained by contrary Winds, get into Loch-fine, but were so
discouraged upon the Advancement of the King's-Fisher and Faulcon to the
entrance of Lochrowan where they lay, that they began to fortify the said
Castle of Ellengregg, and a Rock that lies near to it in a little Island, for
securing their Ships. This being done, Argile having put his Cannon, Arms and
Ammunition into the Castle, leaving One Hundred and Fifty Men for the Defense
of it and his Ships, marched away toward the Head of Loch fine; and, returning
thence, after an untoward Reception by the Marquess of Athol's Men, passed
Loch-long, marching toward Lenox in Dunbartonshire. The same Day, his
Majesty's Ships came up to the Castle with a Resolution to batter it, and to
destroy their Ships; but, upon the firing of the first Gun, Two Men came off in
a Boat with a White Flag, and told them, They might save their Labor, for
there were none to oppose them, all the Rebels being fled. Whereupon, they sent
a Boat on Shore, and finding it to be so, took Possession of the Castle, Ships
and Boats, with Five Thousand Arms, Five Hundred Barrels of Powder, with Ball
and other Stores in Proportion; besides the Cannon, some whereof were mounted,
and others sunk, but recoverable. The Rebels had a Design to blow up the
Powder, but it was prevented. Whilst this was a doing, the Argilians marched by
the Head of Gaviloch, toward the Fords of the River Levin, betwixt Loch-Lomand
and the Town of Dunbarton.

The Earl of Dunbarton, General of his Majesty's Forces in Scotland, was then
with the Army at Glascow, where having notice that the Rebels had passed the
River Levin above Dunbarton, Jun. 17*
he marched very early in the Morning after them, they taking their Way toward
Sterling, and overtook them in the Parish of Killerne. The Horse and Dragoons,
kept up the Rebels till the Foot arrived: But, they were posted in so strong a
Ground, that it being late in the Evening it was not thought fit then to attack
them. So the King's Army stood in Battle-Array all night, as well to prevent
Surprisals, as to be ready so soon as Daylight appeared, to fall upon them.
But, the Rebels with great silence marched off in the Night, undiscerned by the
Royallists, toward the River Clyde, which they swam with their Horses, wafting
their Foot in Boats, and so go^ without any considerable Opposition into
Reufrew. The King's Army missing the Rebels in the Morning, marched with all
Diligence to Glascow, and thence Dunbarton with his Horse and Dragoons hasted
after them, leaving the Foot to follow with what speed they could make. At
Reufrew, Sir John Cockram undertook to provide Guides to carry his Friends safe
into Galloway, but they mistaking the way, carried them into a Bog, where
having lost their Horses and Baggage, the Foot dispersed into small Parties;
whereupon Dunbarton, likewise divided the King's Forces to pursue them. Argile
seeing all lost, returned toward Clyde, and was fallen upon by two of
Greenock's Servants, but would not yield, firing at them when they called to
him. He received a Wound in the Head; upon which, not trusting his Horse, he
alighted and ran into the Water. The Noise brought out a Countryman, who ran
into the Water after him, where he was almost up to the Neck. He presented his
Pistol to the Countryman, but it missed Fire; whereupon, the Countryman gave
him a Wound in the Head, which stunned him, so that he fell, and in falling
cried out, Unfortunate Argile. Before he recovered, they took him and carried
him to their Commander, from whence he was brought to Glascow, and thence to
Edinburgh; entering the City with his Hands bound behind him, bare-headed, with
the Hangman going before him. A sad, tho deserved Spectacle of unfortunate
Disloyalty.

The Rest of the Rebels being totally defeated, Rumbald the Malister, who
fought desperately, was taken, and Colonel Ayloff, who after he was a Prisoner,
ripped up his own Belly with a Penknife, but recovered to be hanged in England,
as the other had been in Scotland, his Wounds not permitting his Transport into
his own Country. June 30.
Argile closed the Scene of this Rebellion, being beheaded; which could not yet
expiate for so much Blood and Confusion, which he had occasioned by his
Ambition and desire of Revenge. Nor was Monmouth more successful in England,
whose Enterprises being carried on with more Noise and Hopes, may require a
more particular Relation.

The Duke of Monmouth having hired a Ship at Amsterdam of Two and Thirty Guns,
with a Hundred and Fifty Men in it of several Nations, and paid for it in
Person; was by the States General, at the Solicitation of the King's Envoy with
them, ordered to be arrested, which notwithstanding got to Sea, and in it the
Duke of Monmouth; and, not long after, Two small Vessels more, upon Account of
the Rebels. With this Fleet, 1685. June 11.
he sailed Westward, and landed at Lime in Dorsetshire about Seven a Clock in
the Evening. He was accompanied with the Lord G. a Person daring and desparate,
and about Two Hundred more well appointed, all appearing as Officers, and each
with a Carabine and Two Pistols by his side. With this Equipage, did this bold
Rebel dare to attempt the Crown of England. Having possessed himself of the
Town, he likewise took Possession of an Old neglected Fort, in which were Seven
Guns. And setting up his Standard, which was Blew, he invited all Men to his
Assistance for the Protestant Religion, against the Duke of York. Nor were
there wanting such, who, abused by his Pretenses, came in to him; his
Emissaries being dispatched into the Neighboring Towns and Villages, to incite
the People to an open Rebellion against his Majesty. Their Numbers being in few
Days increased, they sent a Party of Horse and Foot to Bridge. Port; where they
surpriz^d some Gentlemen, whom they inhumanly murdered, as Mr. Strangewayes,
Coaker and others. But, the rest getting to their Arms, escaped to a Party, who
maintained a Post not far off; whither the Rebels still pursuing them, were
beaten off with the Loss of Seven of their Men, and several Arms and Prisoners,
which they left behind them.

The King, upon Notice of this Invasion, caused Monmouth, and all his
Accomplices, and Companions to be proclaimed Traitors, and a Reward of Five
Thousand Pounds to any who should bring the said Monmouth in alive or dead.
Monmouth on the other side, dispersed a Declaration, fraught with Treason and
Imposture against the King, under the Title of Duke of York. Which, upon
consideration of the infamous Calumnies it contained, was condemned by the Two
Houses of Parliament, to be publicly burnt by the Hands of the Hang man; which
was done accordingly.

The Duke of Albemarle, the Day of Monmouth's landing, had mustered the Militia
of Devonshire, whereof he was Lord Lieutenant; and, keeping them in a Body, he
much impeded the Resort of Novellists and Fanatics to the Enemy. And yet it
was not safe for him to fight them, being scarce secure of his own Men. For,
the changing Rabble, attentive upon Novelties, seemed to prefer great
Incertainties, before their present Enjoyments. The Duke of Beaufort, on the
other side, secured Bristol with his Presence and Forces, whilst the King's
Troops hasten to meet from all Parts. The Lord Churchil with his Dragoons came
first, and disturbed the Rebels with various Skirmishings, and was followed by
the Earl of Feversham with greater Force, who also was appointed General for
the Expedition. The Duke of Grafton marched to the Rendezvous with Eighteen
Hundred of the Guards, whereof he was Colonel. And, Eighteen Field-Peices, with
all their Accoutrements, we^e sent to the Camp under the Convoy of some old
Companies of Dunbarton's Regiment. To these, new Levies were suddenly made, of
Eight Regiments of Foot, and several Troops of Horse. Also the Six Regiments of
Britains, which were in the Service of the United Provinces, were recalled;
Three whereof being Scots, were sent against Argile, but he being defeated,
they returned into England.

On the other side, Monmouth having left Lime, marched to Taunton, an old and
obstinate Receptacle of Fanaticism; where his numbers increasing, tho no one of
Quality came in to him, he usurpt the Title of King. But, the Reign of this
Ephemerous Prince, was neither propitious nor long. What he could not effect,
under pretense of the Protestant Religion ( for, those who are truly
Protestants, of the Church of England, do detest nothing more than Rebellion)
he resolved to attempt by assuming the Title of Prince; but, no less impiously
than foolishly. For, the Chief of his Party hated Monarchy, since they could
not all be Kings; and, seemed mainly to contend for a Commonwealth. What
Argile, oppressed by his adverse Fortune, did pathetically express in this
Case, deserves to be mentioned here. His Expressions against those of Amsterdam
first were, That they having made a Collection among Four Hundred of them to
set him out, had failed in carrying on the Undertaking. But, against Monmouth,
As one who had broke Faith both with God, and Man: With Man, when taking him by
the Hand at parting, he promised to be in England as soon as he in Scotland;
and, with God, in that he had upon the Sacrament declared at Amsterdam, that he
would never pretend to the Crown. Nor, must we omit a Saying of Rumbold's at
his Execution, being moved when he heard that Monmouth had taken upon him to be
King (for, it seems, they were all for a Commonwealth) We have, said he, a
better than he, that is called so already.

Monmouth left Taunton again, accompanied with a Multitude of sorry Fellows,
scarce half armed; for, they had left most of their Equipage of War at Lime,
where the King's Ships seized upon a Pink and a Dogger, with Forty Barrels of
Powder, with Back, Head and Breast-pieces for near Five Thousand Men; and, Lime
it self was secured, by a Garrison sent thither from the Duke of Albemarle, of
Three Companies. The Rebels changing their Quarters often, and in perpetual
Motion, seemed desirous to pass into Gloucestershire; but, were repelled at
Canisham-Bridge between Bristol and Bath, with the Loss of Two Troops of their
Horse. They hereupon returned back by Bath where the King's Forces were, and
marched toward Philips-Norton, being followed in their Rear by the Royallists.
For that purpose, a Detachment of Five Hundred Foot, with some Dragoons and
Horse-Granadiers, commanded by the Duke of Grafton, whilst the Rest of the
Forces followed with the Cannon, were sent in Pursuit of them. Being advanced
near the Town, he fell into an Ambush, the Lane being lined on both sides with
Foot and Horse behind the Hedges, who made very great Fire upon our Men.
Grafton went as far as the Gate of the Town, with as much Courage and
Resolution, as can be expressed; but, the Enemy continuing their fire, he
retired; and, passing through the Rebels Horse, with no less Bravery than good
Fortune, got safely off. Eight of his Men were killed in the Adventure, and
about Thirty wounded. The Rest of the Army being come up, the Earl of Feversham
drew it up in good Order, upon a little Hill within Distance, answering the
Rebels Cannon with the Noise of his own, tho with no great Effect on either
side. He had designed to have fought the Enemy there, but was impeded by the
Excessive Rains which fell at that time. So that toward the Evening the
Royallists marched to Bradford, and the Enemy to From. But, the Rebels
doubling, and changing Quarters often to avoid their Pursuers, came to Wells,
where they profaned the Cathedral with unusual Barbarity; plundered, ravished
and robbed the Citizens, upon pretense of wanting Pay. From hence they marched
to Bridgewater; and, the Earl of Feversham, from Somerton to Weston, where he
encamped, Three Miles distant from the Rebels. The Horse and Dragoons lay in
the Town, and the Foot in the Field, covered toward the Campaign with a
Parapet and Trench, formerly made by the Countrymen against Inundations; and,
their Rear was secured, by the said Village behind them. Toward Evening it was
told my Lord Feversham, that the Rebels were stirring, in Order to march.
Whereupon, he sent frequent Scouts out to learn News of them. But, Monmouth
eluding the said Scouts, enters unobserved, and with great Silence, into the
Plain before the Royallists Trench. Where drawing up his Army, which consisted
of Six Thousand Foot, and having entrusted the Lord G. with the Horse, which
amounted to Twelve Hundred, he marched in Battle-Array against the Adversary.
The alarm being taken, the Royallists consisting only of the Guards and part of
Dunbarton's Regiment, were quickly ready to receive them. The Fight began with
great shouts, and brisk firing. The aforesaid Dike being in the Nature of a
Parapet, was of great use to the Royallists, which occasioned the Enemies shot,
as being aimed higher, to five for the most part over their Heads; whilst they,
as being more exposed in the open Field, were more directly armed at and
woundded. The L. G. hastening with his Horse to the Assistance of the Foot,
loosing his way in the Night, fell unexpectedly upon a Party of the Royallists.
Which he endeavored to avoid, by wheeling from them. But turned upon his own
Men, who thinking he ran away, did effectually do so themselves; and, filling
all with Fear and Confusion, the whole Horse were broke and routed, and that
without a Blow; every one shifting for himself, and searching his Safety in his
Flight instead of fighting. The Foot stood bravely to it, until attacked by our
Horse, at length come up, in Flank and Rear; as also, our great Guns beginning
to play upon them, they seeing themselves abandoned by their Cavalry, were also
broke, routed and slaughtered. The slain on the Rebels side, amounted to near
Two Thousand, besides many taken. Colonel Holmes, Major Perrot, Crookhorn and
other unknown Names, were made Prisoners. There were also taken, Three
Fieldpieces, and Six and Twenty Colors. Of the King's side Three Hundred were
slain, and many wounded. And, undoubtedly the loss would have been greater, but
for the forementioned Breast-work, the Rebels so far out-numbering them.

Immediately after this Victory, Feversham marched with Five Hundred Men to
Bridgewater, the Rebels next Station. Which he possessed himself of without
Resistance, they dispersing and flying upon his Advance. And, here he left
Colonel Kirk, to compose the Disorders of the Town.

Monmouth and Gray seeing all lost, escaped out of the Battle; and changing
their Vestments, sought where best to conceal themselves. But, the Lord G. was
taken in the disguise of a Shepherd, one other only being in company with him;
and, being brought to the L. Lumley, he was discovered at first sight, being
also known by a Servant of the said Lord's, who had formerly been his Groom. So
that, putting off his Disguise, he professed, That since his landing in
England, he had never had one good Nights Rest, or eat one Meal in quiet. Nor
is it a wonder, being perpetually agitated with the perturbations and cares
which accompany unfortunate Ambition.

Two Days after, Monmouth himself fell into the Hands of his Pursuers. The
Immensness of the Rewards, raised the Country in the search; so that, the Ways
and Woods were filled with their Numbers. Some went out by break of Day, and
taking a Dog with them, as Men usually do in Hunting Beasts of Prey, the Dog
made the first Discovery of one hid in a Ditch, who proving to be a Foreigner
(which appeared by his broken Language) and threatningly required to tell where
Monmouth was, pointed at his Covert; whither they immediately went, and there
seized this unhappiest of Men, in great Distraction, pale, trembling and full
of Disorder. He was brought thence to the Lord Lumley's; and, from Ringwood
sent a Letter to the King, Protesting the Remorse in him, for the Wrong he had
done His Majesty in several things, and now in taking up Arms against him. He
complained of his Misfortune, in meeting some Horrid People, that led him away
to believe, That it was a shame and a sin before God, not to do it. But, he
would not trouble his Majesty at present, with many things he could say for
himself, that he was sure would move his Compassion. The chief end of this
Letter, being only to beg, That he might have the Happiness, to speak to his
Majesty, having that to say to him, that he hoped might give him a long and
Happy Reign. He concluded, That he really thought himself the most in the Wrong
that ever any Man was, and had from the Bottom of his Heart, an Abhorrence for
those that put him upon it, and for the Action it self. Hoping, that God
Almighty would strike his Majesty's Heart with Mercy and Compassion for him, as
he had done his with the Abhorrence of what he had done. Finally, he hoped to
live, to show how Zealous he should ever be for his Majesty's Service. And,
could he say but one word in this Letter, he would be convinced of it; but it
was of that Consequence, that he durst not do it, and therefore he begged once
more, that he might speak with him. For, then he would be convinced, he should
ever be his Majesty's most humble and dutiful, Monmouth.

Being brought to the Tower, he did not long survive his Misfortunes. July. 14.
1685.
For, being Attainted of High Treason by An Act of Parliament, he was beheaded,
on a Scaffold for that purpose, erected on Tower Hill.

He had delivered this following Paper, before he mounted the last Stage of his
Life, referring himself to it in all the Discourses he held upon the Scaffold.
Which I thought fit to subjoyn.

I Declare, that the Title of King was forced upon me; and, that it was very
much contrary to my Opinion when I was Proclaimed. For the Satisfaction of the
World, I do declare, that the late King told me, he was never Married to my
Mother. Having said this, I hope that the King who is now, will not let my
Children suffer on this Account.

And, to this I put my Hand, this 15th day of July, 1685. Monmouth.

His Actions, sufficiently declare his Character. And, his Body, being inhumed
by Order in the Chapel of the Tower, put an End to his Chimerical
Principality, and this REBELLION.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Thomas Newborough at the Golden-Ball in St. Paul's-
Churchyard.
SEveral Chyrurgical Treatises, by R. Wiseman, Sergeant Surgeon to his Majesty,
Fol. New.

Travels of Monsieur Thevenot into the Levant. (viz.) Into Turkey, Persia and
the East Indies, Fol.

A New and Easy Method to the Art of Dialling. Containing all Horizontals, all
upright, Reflecting Dyals, and Dyals without Centres, Nocturnal, and upright
Declining Dyals, without knowing the Declination of the Plane. 2. The most
natural and easy way of describing the Currelines of the Sun's Declination on
any Plane: By Thomas Strode Esquire Quarto.

A New History of China; containing a Description of the Politic Government,
Towns, Manners and Customs of the People* etc. Octavo.

Geographia Vniversalis, the Present State of the World; giving an account of
the several Religions, Customs and Riches of each People, the Strength and
Government of each Policy and State: The curious and most remarkable things in
every Region, etc. By the Sieur Duval Geographer to his Majesty, Octavo.

The Muses Farewell to Slavery. Or, a Collection of Poems, Satyrs and Songs: By
the Eminent Wits of the Nation; the Second Edition, Octavo.

Books Printed for and Sold by Luke Meredith, at the Angel in Amen-Corner.
Books written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick.
THE Christian's Sacrifice: A Treatise, showing the Necessity, End, and Manner
of receiving the Holy Communion; together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year; and the principal Festivals in memory of our
blessed Savior: In Four Parts. The Third Edition corrected.

The devout Christian instructed how to pray and give thanks to God: Or, a Book
of Devotions for Families, and particular Persons, in most of the concerns of
human life. The Second Edition, in Twelves.

An Advice to a Friend. The Fourth Edition, in Twelves.

A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist, in Octavo, Two
parts.

Jesus and the Resurrection justified by Witnesses in Heaven and in Earth, in
Two Parts, in Octavo, new.

The Glorious Epiphany, with the devout Christian's Love to it, in Octavo, new.

The Book of Job Paraphrased, in Octavo, new.

The whole Book of Psalms Paraphrased, in Octavo, Two Volumes.

The Proverbs of Solomon Paraphrased, with Arguments to each Chapter, which
supply the place of Commenting.

A Paraphrase upon the Books of Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon, with
Arguments to each Chapter, and Annotations thereupon, in 8.

The Truth of Christian Religion, in Six Books; written in Latin by Hugo
Grotius, and now Translated into English, with the Addition of a Seventh Book
against the present Roman Church in Octavo.

Search the Scriptures; A Treatise, showing that all Christians ought to read
the Holy Books; with directions to them therein: In Three Parts.

A Treatise of Repentance and of Fasting, especially of the Lent Fast: In Three
Parts.

A Discourse concerning Prayer, especially of frequenting the Daily public
Prayers: In Two Parts.

A Book for Beginners; or a Help to Young Communicants, that they may be fitted
for the Holy Communion, and receive it with profit.

Books written by Jer. Tailor, D. D. and late Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.
DVctor Dubitantium, or, the Rule of Conscience, in Five Books in Folio.

The Great Exemplar; or, the Life and Death of the Holy Jesus, in Folio, with
Figures suitable to every Story, engraved in Copper: whereunto is added, the
Lives and Martyrdoms of the Apostles: by W. Cave, D. D.

(...), or a Collection of Polemical Discourses addressed against the Enemies
of the Church of England, both Papists and Fanatics, in large Fol. the Third
Edition.

The Rules and Exercises of holy Living, and holy Dying: the Eleventh Edition,
newly Printed, in Octavo.

A Collection of Sermons, Fol.

The Golden Grove; a Choice Manual, containing what is to believed, practiced
and desired, or prayed for: the Prayers being fitted to the several days of the
Week; also Festival Hymns according to the manner of the Ancient Church.

Books written by the Reverend J. Goodman. D.D.
THE Penitent pardoned; or, a Discourse of the Nature of Sin, and the Efficacy
of Repentance, under the Parable of the Prodigal Son.

A Winter Evening Conference between Neighbors; in Three Parts.

The Old Religion demonstrated in its Principles, and described in the Life and
Practice thereof.

A Serious and Compassionate Enquiry into the Causes of the present Neglect and
Contempt of the Protestant Religion and Church of England: with several
seasonable Considerations offered to all English Protestants, tending to
persuade them to a Compliance with, and Conformity to the Religion and
Government of this Church, as it is Established by the Laws of the Kingdom.

A Centry of Select Psalms, and Portions of the Psalms of David, especially
those of Praise; turned into Meter, and fitted to the usual Tunes in Parish
Churches; for the use of the Charter House, London: by J. Patrick, Preacher
there, in Octavo, new.

The Sinner impleaded in his own Court: wherein are represented the great
Discouragements from Sinning, which the Sinner receives from Sin it self. To
which is added the signal Diagnostick, whereby we are to judge of our own
Affections; and as well of our present as future State, By Tho. Pierce, D. D.
Dean of Sarum, and Domestic Chaplain to King Charles the Second: the Fourth
Edition, in Quarto.

Go in peace; containing some brief Directions for young Ministers in their
Visitations of the Sick. Useful for the People, in their state both of Health
and Sickness. In Twelves, new.

The Practical Christian; in Four Parts: Or, a Book of Devotions and
Meditations. Also with Meditations and Psalms upon the Four last things; 1.
Death. 2. Judgment. 3. Hell. 4. Heaven: By R. Sherlock, D. D. Rector of
Winwick, Octavo.

The Life and Death of King Charles the First: By R. Perenchief, D. D. Octavo.

Bishop Cozen's Devotions, in Twelves.

Les Provinciales, The Mystery of Jesuitism, discovered in certain Letters,
written upon occasion of the present Differences at Sorbonne, between the
Jansenists and Molinists, displaying the pernicious Maxims of the late
Casuists, with Additionals, in Octavo.

Bishop Taylor's Opuscula: The measures of Friendship, with five Letters to
Persons changed and tempted to a change in their Religion. To which is now
added his moral Demonstration, proving that the Religion of Jesus Christ is
from God. Price bound 1 s. Twelves.

The Countess of Morton's daily Exercise; or a Book of Prayers and Rules how to
spend the time in the Service and Pleasure of Almighty God, the Thirteenth
Edition, 24.

THE END.

