

Britains Glory: OR, THE HISTORY Of the LIFE and DEATH of K. ARTHUR, And the
Adventures of the KNIGHTS of the Round Table.

GIVING A Relation of their Heroic Exploits and Victories in many Lands, but
especially in the Holy Land against the Turks and Sarazens: The Combats with
Giants, and Monsters, and fearful wild Beasts: Encounters with Pirates at Sea:
His building Palaces: Love to Ladies, and the many deliverances wrought by
him: With other wonderful Achievements: Pleasant and delightful; altogether
worthy the perusal of the ingenious Reader.



Printed by H. B. for J. Wright, J. Clark, W. Thackeray, and T. Passinger.
1684. Entered according to Order.

JOHN SHURLY

TO THE READER:
COURTEOUS READER,
DVring the Revolutions of this Kingdom, such have been the Valourous Exploits
of the Princes, and other Renowned Warriors, Natives not only in this our Land
and neighboring Countries, but throughout the known World, that all Nations
have stood amazed, and trembled at their Prowess. And amongst others, well may
the famous ARTHUR that Renowned British King take place, though (to lessen the
Credit of his great Exploits) some envious Aliens have endeavored to prove
there was never such a man; but since it is evident by Chronologers of the most
Antiquity and Integrity, that he was the Son of Vter Pendragon of the Ancient
British Royal Blood.

I shall not use more Arguments to manifest it to the World, but proceed to the
Matter of History, as I find it laid down for the Instruction of future Ages:
And remain,

Reader, Yours to serve you, I. S.

BRITTAIN'S GLORY: OR, The HISTORY of the Life and Death of King Arthur, and
the Adventures of the Knights of the ROUND TABLE.
CHAP. I.
Of the Parentage of King Arthur; and how he came to the Crown after his
Fathers death.
THE Saxons, after the departure of the Romans, having (under the title of
friendship) seized upon many strong places in this Kingdom, the native
Britains, after having tried their fortunes in many dreadful Battles, were
obliged to retire into Wales and Cornwall; ^et retaining many places of
considerable strength; and from thence by frequent excursions greatly anoyed
the Enemy; not forgetting their ancient Ualour, and the former Glory of this
Isle, amongst which was King Vter Pendragon, lineally descended from the
British Kings, who in the Year Anno 500. began to Reign over the Britains
that possessed the Mountainous Country with great success, giving the Saxons
many defeats, and gaining greatly upon them; till at last falling in love with
a fair Lady named Igrayin, wife to Alfridus Duke of Cornwall, he so doted on
her Beauty, that not finding her to be won by persuasion to yield her chastity
to his disposal, he plotted with Merlyn a famous Necromancer of that age, to
bring his designs about by policy. This Necromancer undertaking the matter, the
better to ease his Princes laboring thoughts, with Spells, and by Magic
Enchantment so wrought, that either deluding the Ladies sight, or transforming
the King into the shape of her Lord, she received him as such, and suffered him
in the absence of Alfridus to enjoy her a whole night, on whom he got our
famous Arthur: For her Lord being in War against the West Saxons, was slain
e're his return; of which the King hearing, though greatly grieved at the loss
of so renowned a Subject, yet as much rejoiced that fate gave him opportunity
to procure the love of the fair Duchess in an honorable way, which he
prosecuting after the days of mourning were over, so dealt with her by fair
words and rich presents, that being now at liberty, she was contended to be his
Wife, and was married to him by the Bishop of Carlisle with great pomp and
splendor; all the Lords and Nobles subject to his Scepter; together with their
Ladies adorning their Nuptials, and assisting at the Ceremony: And so great was
the joy, that easting, Turnament, and all manner of disports to recreate the
senses, were held for twenty days: Yet the Queen was troubled to find the
fruits of her womb increase so fast, as fearing to be suspected of Adultry, for
well she knew she had been deceived, when she computed the time of Alfridus
death with the time she supposed him in her embraces: but the King, to put her
out of doubt, and to prevent melancholy thoughts, in loving wise unrevealed
the whole mystery; yet it was agreed between them, that it should be kept
secret, and that the Child should as soon as born, be conveyed to a trusty
Guardian to prevent obloquie.

The Queen, about six months after the Ceremony of the Wedding was over, being
brought to bed of a Son, the Child named Arthur as it was before resolved, was
conveyed by trusty hands to a Lady of good repute, named Marilda, Wife to Sir
Ector, one of the Kings Knights, who brought him up in such learning as was
meet for his Years: When as his Father worn out with the continual toiles of
War, and much distempered through the many wounds he had received, died,
leaving him sole-Heir of his Dominions; who thereupon was proclaimed by most of
the Nobility, and Crowned King, though some taking the advantage of his green
years, rebelled, and raised diverse Commotions; but he growing up, and getting
the Reins of Government into his hands, did many great Exploits, as will in the
series of this History appear.

CHAP. II.
The Description of King Arthur's usual Accuterments, his Vision, and the
Interpretation thereof: And how he constituted the Knights of the Round Table.
KIng Arthur by this time being grown up, became exceeding tall and strong,
insomuch that he seemed more than man, and in many Iusts and Tournaments so well
behaved himself, that none could stand before him: A Horse he had which he
called Beaucephalus, after the name of the Great Alexander's Horse; and he in
all Exploits proved the best in the world: His Sword was of a large size, viz.
five foot in length; and in breadth eight inches; cutting with two fearful
edges, on which hung death and destruction: His Lance was eight cubits, and
the head thereof formed of Massy Steel, weighing six pound: His Armor was of
the highest prooff, shining with Gems and burnished Gold: And the better to
inure him to War and great Exploits, he frequently rode thus accutered; and
often in places of greatest danger, glorying in nothing more than his strength
and manly prowess, delighting in nor fancying none but such as were truly
valiant, and feared not Death in any of his dreadful shapes, but to such he was
lavish to Excess; retaining no other for his Counselor, but Merlyn the famous
Necromancer, from whom, as from an Oracle, he received the certainty of future
events, and at his request recreated him with strange and wonderful sights, the
Representation of Magic; and amongst the rest, upon a great Plain before the
Kings Palace at Cardigan, he raised a stately Tower, and round it a pleasant
Garden adorned with Fruits and fragrant Flowers, Fish Ponds, Fountains,
pleasant Bowers, and Umbrages, into which he led the King and all his Nobility,
feasting them after a sumptuous manner, as they imagined; but he had no sooner
re-conveyed them thence, but looking back, they saw all vanish in Thunder,
Lightning, and a prodigious Earthquake, to their great amazement; yet knowing
before it was but delusion, they rested somewhat more satisfied, yet could not
but think of what had passed.

The day being spent in viewing this Piece of Recreation, and the King
ruminateing many things in his mind, at last laying him down upon his Couch, he
fell into a slumber, and then dreamed that he was carried into a spacious Hall,
in which stood a Table of great circumference, out of the middle of which grew
an Oak and a Laurel, with Crows, Scepters, Swords, and Ensigns hanging on them,
and that they were guarded by many valiant Knights, high in prowess, and
terrible to the whole World, which made him desirous to become their Associate;
nor did he sooner demand it, but they joyfully received him, and placeing him
in a Chair of Ivory and Gold, made him their Chief, and gave him a Banner with
a Lion rampant portruyed thereon, and this Motto written, viz. EVER VICTORIOUS:
upon which, the sound of Trumpets, noise of Drums, clattering of Arms, shouts,
and cries, saluted his Ears: And he supposed he beheld Armies in rout and
slaughter scattered through the whole World, and that the Conquorers laid the
Trophies at his feet, and with an universal shout saluted him Great Monarch of
the Western World. At what time awakeing, he found it but a Dream, yet
revolving in his mind the strangeness of the fancy, the next morning he related
to his Nobles, who assured him of happy presages, and advised him to make
inquiry into the interpretation thereof; whereupon sending for his Necromantick
Counselor, he related it to him, who promised within a day to give him the
signification of his Dream, which he did as follows. viz. That by the Table
was signified his Kingdom; by the Knights the Pillars and Strength thereof; by
Oak and Laurel, strength, victory, and durance; the Crowns, Scepters, Swords,
and Ensigns, the spoils of the Nation he should be possessed of; and the
Schene of War, the representations of the many dreadful Battles he should
fight, wherein he should ever remain victorious; and the making him Chief,
giving him the Standard, and placeing him in a Chair of Ivory and Gold, denoted
him deep in his Subjects love; and that no Treason should prosper against him.
This interpretation highly pleased the King and raised his towering imaginations
to such a pitch that he resolved to spread the terror of his Arms throughout
the world; wherefore he made great preparation for all manner of Warlike
provision, but above all of hardy and courageous Knights, inviteing them from
all parts to his Court, and for their better encouragement, caused a spacious
Hall. 300 Foot in length, and Twenty in breadth, to be built, with Glass
Turrets on the top, ceiled with Fretwork and Gold, wainscoted with Cedar, and
paved with Marble, in the midst of which he placed a Round Table, at which 400
Knights might sit, and caused it daily to be furnished with great store of
choice p^ovision, for the entertainment of such men of UUar as would resort
thither, and shortly after constituted the Order of the Round Table, allowing a
Yearly Pension of 100 Mark to such as were truly valiant and would inrole
themselves to attend his service when occasion required, making himself the
Head or Sovereign of the Order, so that by this means the valiant men of the
neighboring Nations tendered their service to him, and were admitted into the
noble Order, but not before they had been proved in some great Exploit.

CHAP. III.
How King Arthur warred with the Kings of Mercia, and the East Angles, who
invaded his Dominions, slew a monstrous Giant, and put their Armies to the
rout. etc.
THe King being established in his Throne, and having thus far proceeded,
caused a place to be made for justing, where once every week his Knights
exercised in Martial Order and justed with each other, and to him that did
best, the King would frequently send one rich present or other, himself being
still a Spectator of those Exercises, and at all great Feasts present amongst
them at Dinner, having a Chair like a Throne placed on that part of the Table
that was toward the upper end of the Hall, but no Music suffered, except the
Martial sounds of Drums, Trumpets, and Clarions, in which most of all our
Heroic Prince delighted. And now being furnished with mighty men, that might
compare to David's worthies (if not exceed them) in dreadful Feats of Arms; he
passionately desired to have an honorable occasion to try his and their
valors, which was not long wanting: For the Mercian King of the Saxons, and
the King of the East Angles presuming upon their strength broke into Cornwall,
part of King Arthurs Dominions, and committed diverse outrages, burning
plundering, ravishing, and slaughtering in such a dreadful manner, that the
people (with such substance as they could convey) fled every where before them;
the News of which rouzed our Lyon-like Prince, who taking with him his Guard of
400 Knights, and 8000 common Soldiers, the flower of his Dominions by swift
Marches passed on to give UUar the meeting, whose approach the Enemy (being
treble the number) little regarded, not doubting to give him the overthrow,
trusting greatly to the force of one Cingeterox a monstrous Giant, nine cubits
high, six in circumference, and armed with a huge Battel-Axe and Coat of Mael;
but the undaunted Prince, whom fear could not dismay, having animated his
Soldiers and set them in Battel-Array, attended by his Knights, broke through
the Ramparts, killing such as guarded the Camp, and setting upon the Infidels,
for so at that time they were, and cutting through the thickest of them made
such slaughter that all the way he passed was strewed with dead bodies; yet on
he pressed through ^anes of death, his Heroic Champions following, as animated
by the Martial deeds of their Renowned Leader; nor did they less annoy the
Enemy, who by this time, taking the Alarm in all parts, came running to oppose
them, and began to make some slaughter of his men, especially where the Giant
fought, which the King perceiving by the cry that arose, caused his Stander
with the great Lion to advance that way, beating down all before him till he
came to the place where he found Cingeterox and Ethwaldus the Mercian King
bathing their Axes in the blood of his men, of which they had slain 300, when
as King Arthur with a loud voice cried, Turn this way Infidels, spare the weak,
and bend your force against the strong: upon which the Giant stairing on him,
with a dreadful voice replied, Who art thou that comes to seek thy Death? I am
a Soldier, said the King, and one that am come to fetch thy Head by way of
reprizal for the mischiefs thou have done in my Country. But you must get it
first, said the Giant. That shall not be long, said the King; and thereupon
charged on the Monster so furiously with his Sword, that e're he could wield
his Battel-Axe with a full stroke on his Helm, which made the fire spring from
thence, he made him stagger three huge Paces and bend with his knee to the
ground: then the Giant (enraged) made at him and struck the King, so that the
blow dazzled him, and made his eyes swim, but soon recovering; he that had never
been so used before, resolved revenge, and thereupon (after a full stroke)
wheeling his dreadful Sword about, he struck the Monster on the Helm with such
force, that cutting it through the Sword entered six inches, whereupon with a
terrible groan he fell to the Earth, at what time the King stood on him and
divided his Head from his Trunk, the which he delivered to his Esquire that bore
his bow and quiver: Nor were the Knights of the Order idle, for Sir Lancelot
had by this time grievously wounded the Mercian King, and taken him Prisoner;
and Sir Tristriam slain 7 Captains, besides 36 common Soldiers; so that the
King of the East Angles seeing all go to wrack, and his men were disordered,
caused the Retreat to be sounded, whereupon his Captains endeavored to bring
off their men, but they being in great consternation, and the Britains
pressing on them, (fearful of death) fled in all parts, and left all the booty
they had gotten to the Conquerors, who fiercely pursuing the flying Foe, made
terrible slaughter, insomuch (...) such as could not fly into Castles and
places of strength, fell by the Sword, to the number of 20000.

This overthrow being noised abroad, brought a great fear upon all the Saxon
Princes, so that the Mercians wholly submitted and sent a great ransom for
their King, who upon his swearing to become Tributary and Uassal to King Arthur
was set at liberty. Nor were there any of their petty Kings that then possessed
this Island, which they had divided into a Heptiarthey, but sent their
Ambassadors with great Presents to entreat a Peace, the which, upon their
acknowledging him their supreme Prince, and paying each 200 Mark, a brace of
Geldings, a Faulcon, and a Greyhound yearly, was accorded to. And thus
flourished this Renowned King in the beginning of his Reign, but more dreadful
and re-doubted were his future deeds, as by the sequel will appear.

CHAP. IV.
How King Arthur passed into Danemark, conquored the Kingdom of Norway,
overthrew Burnamissa the Danish King.
THe King having in a manner brought England to his subjection, resolved not to
suffer the current of his Victory to be damed up with ease, took counsel with
Merlyn and the most valiant of his Knights, what Enterprise was next to be
undertaken, who advised him, That it was most for his Honor to revenge the
injuries he had received by the Danes, who roaming about those Seas, had not
only taken diverse of his Ships, but (landing) had surprised some small Towns
upon the Seacoast, and burnt them, carrying the Inhabitants into miserable
Captivity, and by cruel tortures obliged them to offer Sacrifice to their
Idols, that Kingdom being then unconverted. This motion pleased the King, whose
restless spirit and desire of Glory made him impatient of ease; whereupon he
caused a great Navy of Ships to be rigged in Milford Haven, and in all other
Ports, and gave Order for the building Men of War and Gallys, so that in six
months space he had a fleet of small and great Uessels that consisted of 300
sail, on which early in the Spring he imbarqued with 28000. choice Soldiers,
and all manner warlike of provision; having by this time inroled twenty new
Knights, to supply the places of such as fell by the Sword, or dyed of diverse
diseases; and so with a fresh gale weigshing Anchor, and with a fair wind
arriving in the Baltique Ocean, entered the Straits, now guarded by the two
famous Castles of Coronsburg and Elzeburg, the later standing on the Coast of
Norway, and there brought such a fear on either shore, that the Inhabitants in
all parts fled with what they could most conveniently carry, leaving the rest
for a prey to the Britains, who under the conduct of their victorious King,
enriched themselves with a great booty: when incamping before Nidrosia in
Norway, summoned the City to yield, but there being a strong Garrison therein,
they returned answer, That they kept the City for Burnamissa King of Danemark,
and would in no wise yield it without his Order: whereupon the King commanded
the assault to be made by 12000 men, under the leading of 44 Knights of the
Order of the Round Table, who having their scaleing Engine in a readiness, on
Easter-Eve marched to the wall, and with a shower of Arrows and Wildfire drove
the defendants thence; when as Sir Ector, bearing the Royal Standard, mounted,
and making great slaughter of such as opposed, cutting off Arms, Legs, and
Helmed Heads, placed it on the chief Bulwark, which the rest seeing, on all
sides strove to imitate him, so that within less than six hours the City was
won, which the conquered perceiving, retired to the Marketplace, and throwing
down their Arms begged mercy, which the King generously granted, yet gave the
spoil of the City to his Soldiers, not reserving any part to himself, which
so hightened them, that (leaving a Garrison there) passed on to Bergen, which
upon the first simmons surrendered; and by its Example all the remaining Cities
and walled Towns did the like, so that the Kingdom of Norway was entirely at
King Arthur's devotion: whereupon finding no more to conquer, he having
received a supply of 5000 men to make up the number he brought, by reason he
was forced to leave the like number in Garrison, imbarqued, and passing the
Straits landed upon the Danish shore, filling all with terror and amazement,
when as that King having gathered a huge Army, advanced to give him Battle,
which did not a little rejoice King Arthur, who greatly desired to try his
strength in War: when joining, on the great Plain before Copen Hagen a dreadful
Fight began, but Uictory (who never declined our Heroic Prince) soon declared
for the Britains, so that the Danish King finding the Battle swerve, and that
he could not stay his men longer from open flight, to cover their shame,
sounded the Retreat; whereupon they retiring in great confusion, K. Arthur and
his Knights followed so furiously, that all the Plain was strewed with the
bodies of the slain; and so hotly they pressed on, that ever three parts of the
Army entered the City, the Gates were shut up, and a third part shut out, for
fear the Britains should enter pell-mell with them, who were by the furious
Soldier slain in the sight of their friends, though the compassionate King bid
spare the sword.

CHAP. V.
How King Arthur besieged Copen-Hagen; and how at the entreaty of Geneura the
Sister of the Danish King, he hearkened to an Accord.
THe Danes thus overthrown, the King encamped before the City, resolving to
carry it by forte, and the next day prepared for the assault, resolving to
march in the head of his Knights to win immortal fame by his planting his
Standard upon the Wall with his own hands, or to lose his Life; nor could the
persuasion of his Nobles make him decline it: but as he approached the Wall,
the Gates opened, whereupon he supposed the foe intended to sally, but instead
of armed men, there issued out a Troop of beautiful Ladies and in the front of
them the beauteous Geneura Sister to Burnamissa the Danish King, whereat King
Arthur much wondered, and commanding his men to stand in Battalia, with twelve
Knights went to meet them, when as the Ladies approaching him, the fair and
beauteous Princess fell at his feet, and bedewing the ground with tears,
besought him to have compassion on her distressed Country* the King being moved
at this unusual sight, in loving wise raised her in his Arms and had her be of
good comfort, but the sorrowful Lady, whom tears made more lovely, refused all
comfort unless he would grant her request, to which the King (overcome by
compassion) consented, after a short pause if what she demanded might consist
with his Honor; whereupon opening a Casket that one of her Ladies held, she
first presented him with Jewels of great value set in Gold, and then entreated
that an interview might be had between him and her Brother; to which the King
readily consented, as already feeling Loves pointed shafts pierce his
high-prooffed Armor, and presenting the fair Princess with a Crown of Gold set
with Pearls and Diamons, which he had taken in the Mercian War; as likewise her
Lady with Jewels of great price; he dismissed them, and caused a Royal Tent to
be pitched about a Furlong from the Uaunt-guard of his Army.

CHAP. VI.
How King Arthur had an Interview with Burnamissa the Danish King; and how a
Peace was concluded between them upon the whole matter, being left to the
Princes Award.
HOstilitys ceasing, the Danish King with twenty of his chief Nobility came to
King Arthur's Tent, and there in humble wise would have prostrated themselves,
but the King would not permit it; but making them sit down according to their
degree, entered into a discourse with them, relating at large the justness of
his taking up Arms and demanding Restitution for the wrongs his Subjects had
received, and for the mischiefs his Country had sustained; to which Burnamissa
replied, That whatever had happened in that nature, had been without his
knowledge; but however knowing him to be a Prince of great Clemency, he would
be well content to submit to what ever he should think fit: The King overcome
by meekness of the Dane, finding a relenting in his breast, as generously
offered to refer the whole matter to the beauteous Princess, and bound himself
tostand to what Award she should make, which was joyfully accepted by
Burnamissa, who expected before, that no less than his Kingdom of Norway would
make satisfaction to the offended British Monarch: whereupon the Princess was
sent for, who came, attended by diverse Ladies of Honor, in most sumptuous
attire, glittering in Gold and Gems, which were out-vied by her incomparable
beauty; when making her approach, King Arthur arose from his Chair of State and
saluted her; as likewise his Knights did her Ladies: Then Burnamissa made her
acquainted with the pleasure of King Arthur, but she in modesty refused to be
Arbitress in so weighty a matter, till the King pressed it, and desired her to
do him so great an Honor; whereupon after some consideration she awarded, That
her Brother should defray the whole Charge of the War* and restore all such
ships as were found to appertain to any of King Arthur's Subjects, and that the
Offenders being taken, should be delivered to the King to dispose of as he
thought fit, and then the King to depart the Land, and withdraw his Garrisons.
These Articles were highly approved on either part, and the Princess her wisdom
admired: whereupon Commandment was given to proclaim them with heat of Drum and
sound of Trumpet, and that from thenceforth all Hostility should cease.

CHAP. VII.
Of the great Joy conceived by the Danes; and how King Arthur falling in love
with Genura the fair Princess, married her.
PEace being thus happily accorded, the Danes rung their Bells and made
Bon-fires in every City, all the Nobility feasting their poor Neighbors and
Tenants throughout the Kingdom; when as the Danish King causing a Royal
Pavillion to be reared without the City; prepared a sumptuous Feast, to which
he in humble wise invited the King and his Nobles, and so great was the
entertainment, that the like had not before been known in that Kingdom.

But what pleased King Arthur more than all, was the sight of the fair
Princess, with whom by this time he was most passionately in love: Nor did the
Fever of his desire less afflict her, though she durst not raise her hopes so
high; till at last the King (not long able to resist the Magic of her eyes)
took the opportunity of breaking his mind to her, who humbly told him with a
demure countenance, That she could not conceive her self worthy the thoughts of
so great a Monarch, but if it pleased him to condescend so low, as to raise her
to such dignity, she had no argument against his pleasure, if her Brother would
consent. This pleasing answer overjoyed the King, insomuch that sending for the
Danish King, he desired to beg one favor of him; Nay, replied Burnamissa, your
Majesty may command even what you please, since to your clemency I owe so much.
Then said King Arthur, It Is this fair Pledge of lasting peace that I with low
submission do request. If my Sister be contented, said the King, I am overjoyed
at what I hear, and have long desired to be allied unto so great a Prince, yet
must not compel a free mind. You need not, (said the Princess, blushing like a
Rosey Bloom that opens in June or July to the Morning-Sun) for I have already
parted with that heart that needs would go, upon condition you consented. I do
consent most willingly, replied the King; and thereupon taking King Arthur in
his right hand, and the Princess in his left, he joined their hands, and at the
request of the former, Segbert the British Arth-Bishop married them, according
to the Cannons of the British Church, pronouncing many dreadful curses on
whoever should attempt to untye the sacred Band. This known in the Camp and
City, redoubled the joy, so that all night long whole loads of pines blazed,
insomuch that the fires created a new day as soon as Sol was set; and so
sumptuous was the Feast, which lasted many days, that Rome in all her Glory
could not exceed it; the Martial feats (to win glory, and the love of the
Ladies) were so many that I have not place here to relate them.

CHAP. VIII.
How returning home King Arthur found his Country invaded by Magor King of
Ireland, and how he vanquished him with slaughter.
THe King having been absent from his own Dominions for the space of six
months, began to cast his eye homeward; when having remitted Burnamissa the
charges he was at, and only gave order his Subjects loss should be repaired, he
with his fair Queen, whom the King loaded with rich presents, took leave of the
Danish Court, and imbarquing with the whole Army, and diverse of the Danish
Nobility, who from their King had order to attend the Queen; having a fair
gale, on the ninth of October landed where they first imbarqued, and were
received with universal joy; whereupon the King coming to a Castle of his, near
Cardniff, feasted the Danish Nobility in a most splendid manner. But whilst he
remained there, he had notice, That Magor King of Ireland, who by his
Ambassadors had courted the fair Genura, and been refused, was (to revenge it
on his arrival) landed with a great Power in South Wales; whereupon the King
comforting his Queen, who was greatly grieved that through her cause such
sudden troubles should arise, passed on with his victorious Army, and gave him
Battle near Merionoth, and utterly discomfited him, so that flying with his
broken Army, and being every where assailed by the Country Pesants, who had
laid the way for him, he scarcely escaped to his Ships with five Thousand out
of thirty Thousand; so that King Arthur (speedy as Caesar in his victories)
returned to his fair Queen with the Trophies of his conquored Enemies long
before he was expected to have fought the Battle; when sending four Thousand
men under the leading of Sir Lancelot and diverse other good Knights, they
landed on the Isle of Angle-Sea, and drove thence the French that had for some
time past, during the troubles of this Kingdom, settled themselves there.

CHAP. IX.
How the King having recovered the Isle of Angle-Sea from the French, sailed
with a great Power into France, to revenge the injury done to his Subjects, and
overthrowing their Army, made them dearly purchase Peace.
THe Kings victories daily increasing, the terror of his name spread wide, and
made the most re-doubted Monarch tremble, yet durst France (then powerful at
Sea) invade our Coast, and with fire and sword spoiled many Sea-Towns, carrying
away great booty, as also the people, the men they made row in their Gally, and
the women to satiate their prodigious Lust: When as the cries of his suffering
subjects reaching his ear, where he was delighting himself with his Queen, he
resolved once more to forsake the Camp of Venus, and her soft delights, to
court Fame and Glory in the Camp of Mars; whereupon having sent to Lotharius
for Restitution, and receiving rather scorns than a satisfactory answer from
that imperious King, he made great preparations for the War, and had at that
time twelve Sail of Ships sent to his aid by his Brother of Danemark; when
being in a readiness with an Army of 34000, he coasted the Country; and putting
into the Bay of Marselies, with his shot of Arrows that flew like Hail, drove
the defendants from the shore, on which himself with his own Standard first
leaped, and stood like an enraged Lion, though a thousand shafts flew round his
Head, and many rebounded from his glittering shield; but long it was not e're
the valiant Knights of the Order (imitating their Sovereign) thrust their ships
on Land, and putting their Soldiers in Battel-aray, charged furiously upon the
foremost Battailian of the Enemy, lead by the Duke De Vallois, so that being
over-set, they retreated in great disorder, and finding no place to be
received, broke the Ranks of their friends; when as the Duke De Nevers advanced
with the right wing of Horse to their succor, but was so gau^ed with the shot
of Arrows, that the Horses mischiefed more the Riders than did the Britains.

In this confusion the King drawing out 6000 of his choice men, charged upon
the disordered Enemy with such courage that he pierced their main Battle,
making lanes of death wherever he came, cutting off Arms, Heads, and Legs,
insomuch that the Danish General Gironeus imitating him, the French Soldiers
(routed in all parts) left their Commanders and fled, insomuch that the
slaughter of the Nobility was great, a fate ever incident to that Kingdom; nor
would they trust to the weak wall of Marselies, but flying to Lions and Paris,
left that part of the Country naked, to be possessed of the Britains.

The terror of this overthrow alaruming the French Court, and finding that
brought home to 'em which they had used to others abroad, the people with Tears
besought their King to appease the Conquorer in time, and thereby prevent worse
desolation, who considering his tottering Kingdom was at stake, sent four of
his prime Lords to beg a weeks Cessation or Truce, to which King Arthur (whose
aim was more at Glory and Renown than Advantage) accorded; during which time,
the King having raised a Million of crowns, sent them in diverse Wagons, with
other rich Presents, to purchase his Peace, and the departure of his new-come
Guest, yet prevailed they not e're he had made his acknowledgment for the
indignity put upon the Kings Ambassadors, and deliver the Town and Port of
Marselies, to be possessed as a pledge of future Peace by the Britains for the
space of 20 years to come, and upon pain of forfeiting it for ever, no
Hostilitys to be used by Land, nor depradations by Sea. These Articles
accorded, the King hastened to his own Country with the greatest part of his
Army, leaving only 2000 Soldiers in Marselies; and having amply rewarded the
Danes, dismissed them.

CHAP. X.
How Queen Geneura was delivered of a Son; and of the Presents and Vows made by
the Saxon Kings: As also a full description of the Knights of the Round Table.
UPon King Arthur's return he found to his unspeakable joy his fair Queen
delivered of a lovely boy, who, by the advice of Merlyn, he named Constantius,
whose Uictories and great Exploits that Prophet foretold, which after his
Fathers death, he succeeding him in his Throne, exactly came to pass: And now
the joy being great throughout the British Dominions, all the Saxon Kings came
to King Arthur's Court, then removed to the then flourishing City of Hereford
and made their Homage, complementing him highly on his Marriage, and the birth
of his Son, presenting the Queen and Royal Infant with great Presents, as
Jewels, Gold, and fragrant Spice of Arabia, promising for them and their Heirs
to be obedient to the British Scepter, though before and after the Death of
King Arthur they brake their vows, though to their great disadvantage: For the
young Prince (almost as successful in War as his Father) grasped the Kingdoms
of the Mercians and East Angles with so hard a hand, that during his Life, they
could not wrest them from him, but to our purpose. King Arthur being the chief
Favorite of Fortune, and the eldest Son of Fame, began to enlarge the splendour
of his Court, and increase the number of the Knights of the Round Table, in
whom consisted his chief strength, for scarce was there any one of them, but
durst encounter ten ordinary men hand to hand; and as he increased them, so he
enlarged their pensions, which drew the most valiant of all Nations to serve
him, though none were admitted before they were tried: The habit the ordinary
wore, when without their Armor, was a Uest lined with Sables, and on the back
of it a red Cross, and on their Thighs Cushes of highest prooff; their
Stockings were in the manner of Buskins, and their Shoes of Camels skin, the
Hair appearing outward; on their Heads they wore Caps made of Seal-skins lined
with Silk and Cotton; and about their neck Silk of diverse colors; each of them
in UUar carrying a double Faulchion, a Battel-Axe, a Bow and Quiver, and a
Lance being severally allowed a Esquire or Armor-bearer, who attended them in all
Battles.

CHAP. XI.
How King Arthur, upon the Relation of a Hermit, what miseries the Christians
suffered in the Holy Land, sailed thither with a great Fleet; and how at his
first arrival he took Joppa.
ABout this time King Arthur finding nothing worthy of his Sword at home, and
altogether impatient of ease, studied how he might employ it abroad, and whilst
he was musing thereon, an Hermit in poor array came to the Court, and filled it
at once with pity and desire of revenge upon the dismal Relation he made,
which was, That the Turks and Sarazens had fallen upon Judea and Palastine with
an Army of 100000 men, and made such slaughter of the Christians in those
parts, that such as escaped were forced to fly into Rocks and Caves of the
Earth, and there were either starved to death, or became a prey to wild Beasts:
And that they had taken the Holy City of Jerusalem, after thirty days Siege,
and put almost all the Christians they found therein to the sword, polluting
the Temple and Holy Sepulcher with their Heathenish Worship: As also, that they
impailed the Patriarch alive for refusing to worship Mahomet.

This story coming to the Kings ear, he could not refrain from shedding tears;
when sending for the Hermit, in the presence of his Nobles, he most strictly
examined him to all particulars, and finding he delivered nothing but what (as
he said) himself had been an eyewitness to; the King turning to his Lords,
said, Hear you this, my Lords, shall we suffer the Enemies of our Lord and
Savior thus to triumph over the professors of his Name? to which they with one
voice replied, That it was intolerable, and that they were ready to venture
their Lives and Fortunes in that Holy War, and in his service: whereat the King
highly commending their resolutions, vowed by the Passion of his blessed Lord,
whom those Infidels defied and blasphemed, he would not take pleasure in any
thing till he had faced those barbarous Nations, and tried his Fortune to free
the Holy City from its pollution; and thereupon he sent to all the neighboring
Princes for aid, resolving to set sail early in the Spring, it being now the
middle of August: He likewise laid double Taxes upon his own Subjects, and
demanded double Tribute of the Saxon Princes, who did not so willingly pay it
at that time as was expected, by reason most of them were unconverted, and
therefore secretly rejoiced at the prosperity of their brother Infidels: But
however the King raised a great Mass of money, and caused his Navy to be
augmented; so that from France, Danemark, and other Ports of Spain, having
received fifty ships of War, most of them Manned with Volunteers of those
Nations, he with 200 sail, on board of which he had 50000 men, in the
beginning of April waighed Anchor, and having a fair wind, coasting France and
Spain, he joined likewise diverse other ships, who were ready to attend him, for
the noise of this War had overspread all Christendom; when passing through the
Straits into the Mediteranian Sea, he brought such a fear upon the Sea-towns,
that the Infidels inhabiting them fled with their substance to the Mountains,
into which the Christians entering, found yet some booty; but (desirous to pass
on to Jerusalem) the King sailed to the Isle of Cyprus, then governed by one
Emanuel a Christian, where having refreshed his Army, he again imbarqued, and
sailing through that tract of Seas, arrived at Joppa, a famous Seaport, and
the in let of Palastine, which he found strongly fortified, as likewise
Salmanezer King of the Turks encamped with a Host of 100000 Turks, Jews, and
Sarazens about six miles from thence; yet landing his men, he resolved to
besiege the City, and by taking it, secure the Port; whereupon causing his
Enginers to make diverse batterings after the Roman fashion, which under the
favor of the night (notwithstanding the besieged hurled down wildfire and
stones in great abundance) they set to the Walls on the North side, and by
force of Cords battered with such fury, that they rent the Uamures in diverse
places, making the City tremble, which so alarmed the Infidels, that they
sallyed 10000 strong upon the quarter guarded by the Earl of Merionoth, but
coming to handy-strokes, were forced to retire 5000 less than they came, and
the next morning, by King Arthurs express command, a furious assault was given
on all parts, when as the Britains with their shot of Arrows beating the
besieged from their defenses, mounted and planted the Kings Standard upon the
wall, entering and killing the Infidels in great number, so that all the
streets ran blood, till such time as the King (upon their throwing down their
Arms, and on their knees begging mercy) bid spare the sword; when having
expelled them the Town, he placed a Garrison of diverse Nations therein, and so
marched to join Battle with Salmanezer.

CHAP. XII.
The overthrow of Salmanezar, and taking of Jerusalem, with what else happened
remarkable on that occasion.
THe Infidels being greatly troubled at the loss of Joppa, desired their
General to lead them to battle e're the Christians advanced any further, to
which after many delays he consented, and on the fifteenth of July early in the
morning advanced, in hopes to surprise the Christians, but finding them in
battel-aray, he began to repent his rashness; but finding no means now to
retire, unless with loss and disgrace, he divided his Army into three parts,
the first (containing 40000 men,) he lead himself; the second (containing
36000,) he committed to his Brother Albamazer, a Giant of great stature, fierce
and cruel; and the third (containing 24000,) to Gouzeles, Governor of
Jerusalem: Nor did King Arthur delay to Marshal his Battle in the best manner,
leading the first Battalian, consisting of 20000 choice Soldiers, and an
hundred Knights of the Order for the guard of his person; the second battle
(consisting of 10000,) he committed to Battanius Duke of Cornwall; the third
battle (consisting of 10000,) he committed to Sir Lancelot du Lake; the fourth
(consisting of the like number) was lead by Frovonius a noble Dane: When as
both Armies (marching in this posture) came face to face, leaving a little
space between, a monstrous Pagan stepping forth, demanded (e're the Charge was
sounded) a man to fight him hand to hand, and that the combat should be for no
less than the City of Jerusalem, or the departure of the Christians, if King
Arthur durst agree to it: whereupon the King having sent to the Turk to know if
he would stand to what his proud Champion proposed, and finding him inclinable
thereto, he thought no sword more fit than his own to chastise the daring; when
(contrary to the mind of his Nobles) disguising himself in the Armor of one of
his Knights, he stepped forth, and without much ceremony, charged him with such
fury, that at one full blow he broke* his Helm, and made him stagger six paces
back, yet recovering his station, he the more enraged resolved to obliter the
disgrace that he had sustained, in the sight of his Prince and his whole Army,
came on with double fury, foaming and storming for shame and anger to be so
foiled, he smote the King with such force, that he loosed his Helm and made
his eyes swim dazie; but he nothing daunted thereat, as the Giant was about to
redouble his stroke, struck him so full on the right arm that his Battel-Axe
fell to the Ground, when pursuing his stroke, he struck him as he bended to
recover it on the neck, so that the sword entering caused a deep wound, out of
which issued great quantity of blood, so that the King finding that through
loss thereof he must needs faint, kept him off, as not thinking it safe to
hazard too eagerly his person when the Conquest was already made; nor did his
expectation fail; for the Giant finding his strength decay, like a Lamp, which
at going out gives the greatest blaze, taking his Axe in both hands, smote upon
the King with great fury, and with a full stroke upon the shoulder crushed his
Armor, and much bruised him; at what time the King with undaunted courage gave
him another wound on the left arm between the joints of his Harness, and
pursuing it with a thrust, pierced his Coat of Mael and high-prooffed Cushies,
so that the sword entering a foot into his bowels, he with a dismal groan fell
to the Earth: whereupon the Pagans, contrary to the promise of their King,
sounded the Charge, refusing to stand to what had been sworn, the which so
enraged the Christian Soldiers, that re-doubling their fury upon the signal
given, the charged so furiously upon the Infidels, that the Battle wherein
Abumazer fought was by King Arthur and his Squadron overborn, and pierced even
to the middle, where Sir Gawen a Knight of the Order having killed ehe
Standard Bearer, took the Standard even in the Infidel-King's sight, which made
him advance with all his strength to recover it; but finding great resistance,
after he had fought, and by words strove to animate his men, laboring in vain
to stay their flight, he turned furiously upon his second Battle that was
advancing; being hotly pursued by the Christians, and finding no place to
retreat, he put them into great disorder; when as Sir Lancelot fetching a
compass about, charged them in the Flank on the right, and so gauled them with
shots of Arrows, that after many were slain and wounded, and nothing but the
cries of the vanquished, and the shouts of the vanquishers, to be heard, the
rest of King Arthur's Battles advanting, and charging them in the left, they
(after making what resistance they were able, and the loss of 40000 of their
best Soldiers, their King being sore wounded and carried out of the battle)
fell into disorder, and in great confusion fled, every one as he could shifting
for himself, so that the Execution following with great fury, scarce 20000
escaped the sword.

The Uictory thus happily gained, the Christians found such store of Treasure
in the Camp, that it was wonderful, the which the King sharing amongst his
Soldiers, according as every one had deserved, and well refreshed his Army,
sending the wounded of his part to Joppa, and buried the slain; he with Banners
spread, marched toward Jerusalem, bringing a great fear on all the Citys in
his way, most of which surrendered upon the first Summons; so that coming before
the Holy City, whither the greatest part of the scattered Army was retired, he
having summoned the Infidels to yield and save their lives, but receiving no
answer, he battered it with his Rams, War-Woolfes, and other fearful Engines,
till a great part of the wall on the South side fell, upon which a furious
assault was given, insomuch, that the Infidels having drawn their greatest
strength to defend the breach, a great slaughter was made; yet the Christians
resolving to carry the City, which then was but small, and very ravenous,
pressed on with such violence, that the fearful Enemy being overborn, were
every where slain; and the Christians entering, placed King Arthur's Standard
upon the Bulwarks, which so dismayed the Infidels, that such as could, fled by
the Posterns, and over the Brook Cedron, others hid themselves in Caves till
the fury of the Soldiers were over, and such as could not do either, fell for
the most part by the Sword.

This famous City, being the first time thus taken by the Christians, a great
number of miserable men and women were released out of Dungeons, who had for a
long time been fed with Bread of Affliction, half starved, and miserably used
by the Infidels, for publicly owning the Name of the Lord, who, not far from
thence, purchased them with his precious blood to their unspeakable joy.

CHAP. XIII.
How upon notice that the Saxons invaded his Country, he returned; and of his
strange Adventures.
THe King having thus performed his vow, repaired the Walls, built a strong
Castle, and placed 7000 Soldiers therein, besides the Christians of Syria and
Judea, that daily flocked thither in great number; he received notice, That the
Saxon petty Kings in his absence had cast off their Allegiance, and being
united, invaded his Country, insomuch, that his Queen, Son, and those that he
had left in charge with the Kingdom, being overthrown in a pitched battle, were
fled to the fastnesses of Snow down Mountains. Which News greatly perplexed the
King; so that having made his Offering at the Holy Sepulcher, and constituted
Religious Men to keep it, he with three parts of the Army he brought, returned
to his ships, the other part being either slain in the battle, perished by
sickness, or left in the Garrison; yet e're he could imbarque, 27000 Turks,
Sarazens, and Egyptians, lying in ambush in a Wood for that purpose, fell upon
the Rear of his Army, and cut off three or four hundred Britains and Danes
e're the King with the Gross of his battle could draw up to their relief; yet
fatal was it to the Infidels; for being unexpectedly Enclosed by the
Christians, who fetched a compass behind diverse little Hills, they were almost
all of them cut off.

This second overthrow given, the King quietly imbarqued his Soldiers, and
sailing by diverse Islands, destroyed the Garrisons possessed by the Infidels:
When one day going on shore on the Promentory of Carthage, with a few of his
Knights, he was set upon by four hundred Moors, who sallyed out of Tunis; but
such was his and his Knights invincible Courage, that they drawing their
swords, slaughtered the Barbarians in such a manner, that they fled with great
cries, taking them to be more than mortal; whereupon the King causing 8000 men
instantly to come on shore, besieged the City, and with Wildfire burnt it
about the Barbarians Ears, putting many of them to the sword: And then marching
up farther into the Country, there came against them sixteen huge Lions, bred
in the Muritanian Forest, with whom the King and twenty of his Knights
encountering, killed twelve, and put the other four to flight.

CHAP. XIV.
How upon King Arthur's return, the Saxon Kings laid down their Arms and sent
great Presents, together with their Sons for Hostages.
KIng Arthur, impatient of stay, least whilst he conquered abroad his Country
should suffer with great spoil, put again to Sea, and sailing homeward, met
with a Fleet of Pirates, who taking his ships for Merchants, set upon the
foremost Squadron with loud shouts, casting great quantity of stones and
wildfire amongst them, but coming to graple, they soon found their mistake,
and then in vain endeavoring to fly, were miserably slaughtered, insomuch,
that out of thirty but five escaped: In these ships many miserable Christian
Captives, both men and women, were found, of which the King taking compassion,
sent them into their respective Country, allowing them all things necessary for
their maintenance during the space of a year, and so passed on toward his own
Country.

The Kings approach being known to the Saxon Princes (w^o not long before had
news that he was dead in the Holy Land, and thereby were animated to take up
Arms) so discouraged them, that withdrawing their Forces* every one retired
into his own Province, to study how to appease the victorious Monarch, whom
they had justly incensed by their perfideous treachery; and as soon as they had
notice the King was landed and preparing his Forces to War against them, they
sent their respective Deputies with rich Presents, to excuse their rash and
unadvised actions, promising never for the future to transgress in the like
nature; yet the King being highly incensed, would at no cheaper a rate pass
over their perfideous dealings, than at a personal acknowledgment, and the sum
of 2000 Marks each; As also be the better assured of them for the future, that
each of them should send his son as an Hostage; and that those that had no
sons, to send their nearest Kinsmen; and over and above, to make reparation for
such damages as could be by any of the Kings Subjects proved to be sustained by
their unlawful Arms. This being performed, a Peace ensued; and the King
dismissed his Auxiliarys with great Rewards.

CHAP. XV.
How King Arthur built many Religious Houses, and gave great Cargases to the
Poor: How he swore his Nobles and Knights to his son Constantius, and then dyed.
KIng Arthur now having leisure to repose in Peace, and think on his many
wonderful deliverances, resolved to apply his mind to deeds of Piety; and
thereupon caused many Monastrys and Religious Houses to be built, giving yearly
maintenance to diverse poor people, but especially to such as had lived in
splendor, and were fallen to decay: And daily he visited the sick, giving them
Christian comfort: And using his utmost endeavor to cherish Learning and Arts,
to which end at his proper charge he built likewise many Schools and Colleges,
giving himself wholly up to the study of the seven Liberal Sciences; and so
well profited he therein, that he became the greatest Master therein of his
Age: But most of all, he fixed his thoughts upon his later end, and with
Solomon was frequently heard to say, All Worldly things were but Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit; and that on Earth no real nor substantial joys were to be
found: When in the 60 year of his Age, and 49 year of his Reign, falling sick,
and by the opinions of his Physicians not likely to recover, he sent for all
his Nobles and the Knights of the Order, and he caused them to swear Fealty to
his Son, comforting them in the best wise; and thereupon finding himself decay,
after diverse pious Expressions, and Prayers, exhorting his Nobles to be
careful of securing his son in his Throne, and having great respect to his
Queen, he gave up the Ghost, to the great grief of his Subjects, but more of
his fair Queen who took it so grievously, that soon after falling into a
Fever, she dyed, and was buried with him in a Monastery, built by him at
Monmouth; whose Tomb (richly adorned) continued visible till the Dissolution of
the Fabric in the time of Henry the Eight.

And thus (kind Reader) I Have revived the fame
Of Him who well deserves a glorious Name;
Hoping that time henceforth shall not destroy
What here I build to Arthur's Memory.
FINIS.

