THE MANIFESTO, Of near 150 Knights, and Eminent Merchants and Citizens of
LONDON, Against the Jews now in England; Being a Brief Account of the JEWS
Case, (which is now become National) in Relation to the CUSTOMS, etc.
Humbly Presented to the KING and PARLIAMENT, by Samuel Hayne, Gent. Sometime
Surveyor for the Customs, and for the Act of Navigation, in the Counties of
Devon and Cornwall.
Charles II. and King James II. 1. H. 7.2. 11 H. 7.14 22. H. 8.8, etc.
Non obstante the Statutes were Void at the Demise of the first, and the
Abdication of the last; and that the said Duty is given a new by Act of
Parliament to His present Majesty; and that His Majesty has neither confirmed
those non obstante Clauses, nor granted any new Patents of Denization with such
Clauses: Yet the Jews presumed to enter their Goods and Merchandises since His
Majesty's Reign in their own Names, paying only English Duty, 12. Car. 2.1. W.
and M.
and for Non-payment of the said Alien Duty, the Goods so entered, or the value
thereof, are entered. Hide Stat. in the Magent.

Which being taken in one of, Mr. Thomas Penington, one of His Majesty's
Officers at the Custom-House London, (with the privity of Mr. Samuel Hayne,)
acquainted one of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury with the whole
matter, who did represent it to the King; and His Majesty being satisfied, Mr.
Penington was ordered to bring on his Informations; and His Majesty declared,
That he would not abate the Jews Three pence of what was legally due to
himself, which is a Moity.

Soon after Mr. Penington enters his Informations in the Exchequer, Qui tam,
58000 l.
etc. against some Jews in about 58000 l. -- And before he could bring on his
first Trial, the Jews got an Order of Council for Mr. Attorney Genesis to enter up
Noli Prosequies against those Informations brought by Mr. Penington, and
against all others that should be brought against the Jews on the like Account.

However Mr. Hayne observing the Jews to be guilty of more Forfeitures on the
same account, brought new Informations against them for about 30000 l.. Non
obstante the said Order. 30000 l.


The Jews Petition, whereon this Order of Council is grounded, is for the
greatest part filled with Illegal and False Allegations, which might have been
replied to and detected. And to that purpose Mr. Pennington lodged a short
Petition in Council, praying, That both parties might be heard. But when that
Case came on (which was Nine Council Days attended) he could not get his
Petition read though often urged. So the Order was past without admitting any
debate, of the Matter; as appears in Numb 3.

It is humbly supposed, That these Illegal Actions do naturally fall under the
Consideration of the Parliament; (the Case being National, 100000 l.
and of above 100000 l. concern to the Crown.) For, it is the Parliament gives
the Customs (and on non-payment thereof, the Moiety of the Forfeitures) to His
Majesty, for the Supply of the Navy, etc. And these Noli prosequies, have all
of them a Salvo Jure in the Conclusion. So that if the King be deceived in his
Grant, they are revocable, and by Authority, may be set aside, and the King
restored to His Moiety.

A Copy of the Order of Council of Noli Prosequies.
At the Court at White Hall, the 20 th. of February, 1689. By the King's most
Excellent Majesty, and the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
UPON reading this Day at the Board, the Humble Petition of Antonio Gomezsera,
Phineas Gomezsera, Andrew Lopez, Antonio de Costa, J^shuah Bueno, Menasses
Mendez, Antonio Corea, and several others, making in all Twenty Merchants of
London; setting forth, (1) That the most of them being made Free D^nizens, are
by Virtue thereof discharged from paying any more Customs, then his Majesty's
Natural born Subjects. (2.) And that, upon questioning the Validity of their
Patents in the Date Reign, it was by the then Lord Treasurer, with Advice of
the then Attorney General, upon a solemn hearing of Council on both Sides
determined in Favor of the Petitioners; who were then told by the
Commissioners of the Customs, That they might freely enjoy the Benefit intended
them by their Letters Patents. (3.) And afterward, when Informations of
Devenerunt were brought against them, for all the Goods they had Imported since
the Death of King Charles the Second for Non-payment of Aliens Duties; the
same, upon Application to His Majesty in Council, were stopped by Noli
prosequies, and the Letters Patents thereby again confirmed: (4) That now there
are Suits commenced against them by one Thomas Penington, who has lately
Arrested all the Petitioners in His Majesty's Name, for vast Sums of Money,
being the Value of all the Goods they have Imported and Exported since the
Eleventh of December 1688. and brought Informations of Devenerunt against them
in the Court of Exchecquer, which greatly impairs their Credits, and puts a
stop to their Trading. (5.) That such of the Petitioners as are not Denizens,
have paid Aliens Duties for all the Goods they Imported, and the rest have not
taken the Benefit of their patents, any farther than what concerns their own
proper Goods, paying still, as Aliens, for what belonged to Foreigners, and was
consigned to them by their Friends Abroad, inasmuch that for above one half of
what they are Arrested for they have paid the full Duty as Aliens. (6.) And as
for Aliens Duty Outward, the same having been taken off by Act of parliament
in King Charles's Reign, and by proclamation in the Late Reign, as greatly
prejudicial to the Exportation of the Woolen Manufactures, it was never
demanded. The Commissioners of the Customs taking it for granted, That it was
never intended by the next Grant of the Customs to his Majesty; till of late
the said Commissioners have been directed and have ordered the Merchants to
deposite the said Duties Outward, till His Majesty shall be pleased to declare
his farther pleasure. (7.) And the Petitioners therefore praying to be relieved
against the said Informations, by a Noli Prosequi, His Majesty taking the whole
Matter into Consideration, was Graciously Pleased this Day in Council, to
Order, That Sir George Treby, His Majesty's Attorney General, do cause Noli
Prosequies to be forthwith Entered upon the said Informations, or any others
that shall be brought against the Petitioners upon the like Account, it being
His Majesty's Pleasure, that they enjoy the full Benefit of their Respective
Letters Patents.


John Nicholus.

Remarks on the Order of Council foregoing for Noli Prosequies; which (with
other things) would have been argued, if a hearing had been admitted.
(1.) THE very first Allegation is false, for by the Statutes, Aliens made
Denizens, must pay the same Duty they did before they were made Denizens,
notwithstanding any Patents then granted, or afterward to be granted to the
contrary. (2.) However, King Charles the II. granted diverse Jews Patents of
Denization, with Clauses of Exemption from Payment of the Alien Duty non
obstante the S^atutes. But that Duty, with the Customs, were given to the said
King only for his Life, and that the Validity of their Patents were called in
Question, is also False, for, 'twas only those non obstante Clauses were
questioned. And my Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Rochester, never determined in
their Favor, but declared his Opinion to the Contrary. But as for the
Commissioners of the Customs, (over whom Sir Nicholas Butler had the Ascendant,
and was to the Jews a particular Friend,) might, for ought I know, say as they
Allege. (3.) The non obstante Clauses being Void by King Charles his Demise,
and, by Act of Parliament, that Duty given a new to King James; and those Jews
omitting to pay the same, Informations (after taking the Opinions of Sir John
Holt, Sir Henry Pollexfen, Sir Crezwell Levi^tz, Mr. Fi^ch, Sir William
Williams, and other Council Learned) were brought against them, and the Trial
ready, but stopped by Noli Prosequies gotten behind the Backs of the Informants,
by the interest of Sir Nicholas Butler, as Sir Thomas Powis, then
Attorney General, told them; but their non obstante Clauses are not thereby
confirmed. (4.) King James granted to those, and other Jews, the like non
obstante Clauses, which, by Council-Learned, Mr. Penington was advised were
Void by his Abdication. And the said Duties being given a new to Their Present
Majesty's, he did bring Informations of Devenerunt, as is set forth, and if it
impairs their Credits, they have brought it on themselves by their non-payment
of the Duty. (5.) Their Allegations of paying Aliens Duty, etc. is but a Sham;
for Mr. Penington cannot recover, but for such Goods as have not paid it.
Charles his Reign, was Repealed by the Acts 1 Jac. 2. and 1 VV. M. and there
was never a Proclamation to that purpose in King James his Reign, only an Order
of Council during Heasure; against which, all the Merchants in England (except
very few) Petitioned, but could not be redressed till His Present Majesty in
Council the 1^th. of Octob^r, 1693. Ordered its Receipt, a Copy of which
Petition and Order, and the Merchants Address of Thanks therefore follow. (7.)
And now the Jews (correspondent to their former Art in King James his time)
have procured this Order of Council without any hearing ^ad of the Matter,
which is humbly conceived would never have been granted, if his Majesty, (by
whose Appro^^^ion the Suits were beg^n,) had heard the Matter debated.


Considering,

First, That His Majesty's Moity of the Prosecution amounts to above 40000 l.
on Forfeitures past. 40000 l.
That the Duty thereby cut off for the future, is at least 10000 l. per Ann.
10000 l. per An.
That His Majesty's Necessary Occasions must be provided for; and if this be
remitted to the Jews, it must be supplied by the People of England.

Secondly, That the Balance of Trade is thereby broken, and those Jews, by
Virtue of their Illegal Clauses, let loose to overrun and Ruin the Trade of
the English Merchants, both at Home and Abroad.

Thirdly, That these Noli Prosequies prove a Snare to the Just, whether Officer
or other Legal Prosecutor; for, instead of Reaping the Benefit of their Legal
Prosecutions, they are by Noli Prosequies caught in a Trap and ruined.

Fourthly, That this Order of Council bears date since the last Session of
Parliament, and the Act of Rights, 1. W. M.
etc. provides against all Non Obstantes, of, or to any Statute whatsoever:
And, though these are only Noli Prosequies, yet they are to support and confirm
pernicious Non Obstantes granted by King Charles and King James: Also the said
Act declares the dispencing Power Illegal, and that no Forfeitures shall be
disposed of till after Conviction.

Fifthly, That most English Merchants have Estates, in Land, as well as Stocks
in Trade. and pay Taxes for it, whereas the Jews Riches are past finding out:
And, it must needs grieve the English to pay the New Taxes, when the Jews are
Illegally exempted from payment of an Ancient Duty.

A Copy of Mr. Penington's Petition which he could not get Read.
To the King's Most Excellent Majesty in Council.
Shows,
Devenerunt qui tam, etc. against some Jews, who had defrauded Your Majesty in
Your Customs, and illegally incroached on the Trade of this Kingdom, in hopes
that by a Legal Conviction of their Frauds, they may be obliged, for the
future, to pay Your Majesty's Customs according to Law, which will advance the
Revenue at least Ten Thousand Pounds per Annum, and the true Interest of the
Nation.

That Your Petitioner was lately informed, That the said Jews petitioned Your
Majesty in Council for a Noli prosequi on the said Actions, to which Year
Petitioner made an Answer, and petitioned Your Majesty, That both might be Read
before any Determination were made in the Matter; notwithstanding which, the
said Jews now give out, That Your Majesty will grant the said Noli prosequi
without it.

Your Petitioner therefore most Humbly prays Your Sacred Majesty, (considering
that this is a National Case,) That You would please to hear both Parties,
either with or without Council, and that then Your Majesty would please to give
such Directions therein, as to Your Majesty in Your great Wisdom shall seem
meet.

And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc.


