LETTERS Written by Mrs. MANLEY. To which is Added A LETTER from a supposed NUN
in Portugal, to a GENTLEMAN in France, in Imitation of the NUN's Five LETTERS
in Print, by Colonel Pack.

LONDON, Printed for R. B. and Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1696.

TO THE Incomparably Excellent Mrs. DELARIVIER MANLEY.
MADAM,
FOnd of the Vanity of having your Ladyship's Friendship, I cannot rest easy
with the vast Blessing, unless the World know me favored by a Person so
extraordinary: And whilst the Town is big to see what a Genius so proportionate
can produce, whilst Sir Thomas Skipwith and Mr. Betterton are eagerly
contending, who shall first bring you upon the Stage, and which shall be most
applauded, your Tragic or Comic Strain, I could not refuse the Vanity (my
Soul whispered to me) of stealing you from the expecting Rivals, and
dexterously throw you first into the World, as one that honored me with your
Friendship before you thought of theirs. Doubtless, you will speak me a
vainglorious Rascal, and unworthy of that Esteem I betray. Perhaps you may
most justly object, These Letters which I expose, were not proper for the
Public; the Droppings of your Pen, fatigued with Thought and Travel. But let
them who are of that Opinion imagine what Ease and Leisure could produce, when
they find themselves (as they necessarily must) so well entertained by these.

That Honor, Esteem and Friendship I had for Sir Roger Manley, (who has left a
kind of Immortality behind him, in his Books, his Memory, and his extraordinary
Daughter:) That old and true Kindness, which grew up with you, and made me with
Veneration and Wonder heedfully observe what others neglected as Childish, I
confess, has most warmly opposed your Design of Writing Plays; and more, that
of Making them Public. I would have had a happy Nature, such as yours, taken
up with more Sublime and Elevated Thoughts; and Time better spent, than in such
Trifles. But since I could but combat (not overcome) your Desires, my
Friendship engages me to serve what I cannot approve; and I have thought this
one Way, by giving the Town a true Taste of your Thoughts and Sense; I say, a
true Taste; for here you cannot but be supposed to speak for your self.

Should I follow the Business of all Dedications, which is Encomium, mine must
be as boundless as the Theme: I should tell the World, how separate you are
from all the Weakness of your Sex; what a Nobleness and Generosity of Temper is
yours; how distant from the Shadow of Interest, or mean Design: How have I
heard you (compassionately) regretting the Miseries of others, and never your
own, but when they prevented your exalted Charity to them!

And now let us descant a little upon the Injustice of Fortune, that has not
(with Nature) made you her choicest Favorite. Why did she not place you in a
Station as exalted as your Merit? Why thrown your Chance in the Country, who
might have adorned a Court, and taught a Nation? Herein all cannot but commend
you, suiting your Inclinations to her Caprice; and by withdrawing from the
Possibility of tempting others, put it beyond your own of being tempted.

Now, Madam, it is time to ask your Pardon for venturing to make any thing of
yours public, without your Leave: 'Twas what I knew I should never procure,
and therefore have presumed upon that Sweetness of Temper, which never shows
you vindictive against an Enemy; most obliging to your Friends, and happily
calm to your self. Years of Friendship, and Veneration, can plead mine no
Design of exposing you; nor can my Life be easy, when it has lost the Relish
of being esteemed

Your Foremost Admirer, and Most Devoted, Humble And Obedient Servant. J. H.

LETTER I.
Egham, June 24. 1694.
I Am got (as they tell me) sixteen Miles from you and London; but I cannot help
fancying it is so many Degrees. Though Midsummer to all besides, in my Breast
there is nothing but frozen Imaginations. The Resolutions I have taken of
quitting London (which is as much as to say, the World) for ever, starts back,
and asks my gayer Part if 't has well weighed the Sense of Ever? Nor does your
Letter, which I received this Morning, (taking Coach) less influence me, than
when I first formed the Design. You should have used but half these Arguments,
and they had undoubtedly prevailed: It Is of the latest now to ask me why I
leave the crowded Market, and retire to starve alone in Solitude? Whereas you
quote the Poet, All your Beauty no more Light will have
Than a Sun-Dial in a Grave.
I am too much afraid Sloth and Sadness are going to be my Eternal Companions;
and you know my Soul's unfitted for such Guests, till upon the Road to
Execution: I fancied Dying to the World; Horace, Cowley, all those Illustrious
Lovers of Solitude, debauched my Opinion, against my Reason: I took Coach with
Mr. Granvill's Words in my Mouth, Place me, ye Gods, in some obscure Retreat:
Oh! keep me innocent: Make others Great:
In quiet Shades, content with Rural Sports,
Give me a Life, remote from guilty Court:
Where free from Hopes and Feans, at humble Ease,
Unheard of, I may live and die in Peace.
Yet you see how great a Change two Hours has produced: All my Constancy is not
Proof against the Thoughts, I am going to have no Lover but my self for ever.
The green inviting Grass (upon which I promised to pass many pleasing solitary
Hours) seems not at all entertaining: The Trees, with all their blooming,
spreading Beauties, appear the worst sort of Canopy; because, where I am going,
they can offer their Shade to none but solitary me. But it is not reasonable my
Dullness should extend to you, who have every thing in your Nature just and
pleasing. You asked, and I eagerly engaged (because you desired) to give an
Account of my self and Travels, every Stage. I have not forgot (when I told
you) 'Twas too often, how you answered, Not for a Mind so fruitful as mine in
Variety of Inconstant Thoughts. You find at present, they run all upon
melancholy Apprehensions, which have so wholly possessed me, I have not had
time to observe my wretched Fellow-Travellers, only a pert Sir in the Company,
that will make himself be taken notice of by his Dullness. They most
unmercifully set us to Dinner at Ten-a-Clock, upon a great Leg of Mutton. It Is
the Custom of these Dining Stages, to prepare one Day Beef, and another our
present Fare; it is ready against the Coach comes: And though you should have a
perfect Antipathy, there is no Remedy but Fasting: The Coachman begs your
Pardon; head not stay dressing a Dinner for the King, (God bless him) should he
travel in his Coach. I have left the Limb of the Sheep to the Mercy of my
Companions, (whose Stomachs are thus early prepared for any Digestion) to tell
you, with what unfeigned Respect I shall be ever

Your True Faithful Servant, Dela. MANLEY.

LETTER II.
I am got safe to Hartley-Row, and in a little better Humor than when I writ
my last. Our Landlord is a perfect Beaux, and most exquisitely performs the
Honors of his House. I am in pain for his Assiduity: I cannot fetch a Step, no
not to the Window, from the Table, etc. but he is Squiring me; and so dressed,
and so conceited, that nothing but Serving a loose Apprenticeship, could have
set him up a Master in the Trade of Foppery. He was a Goldsmith's Apprentice,
where he studied more his Pleasure, than Profit. This House fell to him, and he
wisely resolved to keep it himself, with the Help of his Sister, who is a neat,
houswifely, obliging sort of Woman. I suppose it is, by much, the best
Entertainment this Road affords. They have a tolerable Cook; and I was glad to
find something I could eat at Three-a-Clock, for we came in here at Two, and I
can give you a little better Account of my Fellow-Travellers. The Sir I spoke
of is a Baronet's Son, as he has carefully given me to understand: I take it
for granted, he likes me; and would have me do the same by him. As he came in
he put off his Traveling Suit, for a Coat and Vest, designed to dazzle the
Curate and all his Congregation. The Way I took to mortify his Foppery, was,
not to speak a Word of the Change; which made him extreme uneasy: At length,
out of all Patience, he desired my Opinion, If his Tailor had used him well?
What the Brocade was worth a Yard? How many Ounces of Silver-Fringe? And
recommended to my Curiosity the exquisite Workmanship of the Loops; and then
gave me the Sum Total of his Cost. I answered him, That Finery was lost upon
me; I neither was, nor pretended to be a Judge. He pertly answered, He
perceived by my Sullenness, that I had a great deal of Wit; though I understood
he had but little by his Remark. -- Well, all this did not do: He would fain
have had me inquired into his Family, Intrigues, and Fortune; which when he
perceived I had no Curiosity for, 'Faith, Madam, said he, I beg your Ladyship's
Opinion, if I am not the most unfortunate Man breathing: I Will tell you a most
mortifying Adventure -- Nay, you must hear me -- I vow, this Indifferency does
not look natural to you; your eyes promise us much more Fire. I Will shut 'em,
thought I, for ever, rather than such a Fop shall find any thing to like them
for -- What! no Answer, Madam, said he; I perceive your Attention by your
Silence. Gad, I love a Person of your Breeding, that know themselves better
than to interrupt a good Story. Perhaps Madam is not well with her Journey,
answered Mrs. Mayoress of Tatness -- Alas! I wonder Riding in the Coach should
not have got you a better Stomach -- Poor Gentlewoman, she has scarce eat any
thing. I Will recompense that by a Feast of the Mind, answered my Fop. How say
you, Madam? Shall I begin the Regalio? -- I had as good consent, quoth I: With
or without my Leave, I see you are resolved upon it. Well then, Madam, said he,
since you are disposed to be delighted, I Will about it instantly.

'It happened at Oxford three Months ago, (where I often came, my Father's
Estate being not far distant) I saw a Lady, and fell in Love with her; ^y Gad,
Madam, downright in Love with her. She was a Person Gentilely bred, had seen
the Beaux Monde, made the Tour of all the Places of Gallantry, shined in the
Drawing Room, languish'd in the Boxes, adorned the Park; in a Word, was all a
Man of my Circumstances could desire in one he was resolved to make an Oblation
of his Heart to. But as her Honor was my Care, and not Marrying my Design, I
searched for a dexterous Pretense to visit, and be happy. I took Mr. Sly with
me, a Gentleman of the Town, who had a Wife: To give you the Character of my
Friend, He was naturally amorous, had a handsome Person, and Strains of natural
Wit beyond whatever I saw in the most Acquired; and your Ladyship must allow me
to be a Judge of Wit, by so dexterously finding out yours, Maugre your
Silence.' I bowed for this extraordinary Compliment; and thought I could not
more agreeably return it, than by continuing my Silence; and, as the Poet has
it, left him to his dear Mistake. 'Mr. Sly, continued he, was to propose a
Marriage between me and my Lady Conquest, to the old People, her Relations,
whom she was just come to live with: But as soon as he saw her, if I was her
first Oxford-Victim, he was certainly the second; and, as I found, presently
took with her. She had a very fine Hand, which Mr. Sly, according to the
Country-Liberty, kissed; and then, with Cleveland, said, So soft, it is Air; but
once removed,
Tender, as 'twere a Jelly Glov'd.
She gave him a Look, which seemed to say, she wondered in that Place at such a
Piece of Gallantry; and then pursuing with her Wit the Victory of her Eyes,
charmed my Friend to that Degree, that he told me, he must enjoy her, or die.
Gad, Madam, was not this a very odd Turn? I carried him to speak for me; and he
comes to make me the Confident of his Designs? We agreed, though as Friends
should, to keep our mutual Confidence secret from her, and to endeavor each of
us to make himself happy, and faithfully to relate the Progress of our Amors.
But because the Country is much given to Tatling, the Pretensions of Marriage
went on. Lady Conquest was Airy and Coquet; loved Company and Gallantry, if
they could be purchased with Safety: But she knew so well how to manage every
body, that none durst speak to her, more than she had a mind to hear. I was one
of the awed Fools. Gad! Would you believe, Madam, that Love could make so great
an Ass of a Man of my Understanding? And yet 'twas not altogether that neither,
my Pride was concerned; I was resolved not to serve for her Diversion, till I
was sure she was consenting to be mine; but could no more keep out of her
Company, than I could hang my self. I desired her to walk: She consented, with
a Crony she picked up, upon Condition I would engage Mr. Sly of the Party. I
was jealous, but to no purpose; either my Rival's Company, or not my
Mistress's. Sly pretended Fear of his Wife, that he durst not appear in public
with any other Woman; for she already began to have Apprehensions of my Lady
Conquest, whose Way of Living was remote to those of Country-Gentlewomen's; and
therefore he was resolved to think no more of her, though infinitely pleasing to
him; for his Fortune depended, in a great measure, upon his Wife's Mother. I
came back with this doleful News to Lady Conquest. Go tell him, answered she,
He who has pretended to love me, should fear nothing more than not being
beloved; and that I command him to meet us at the appointed place. I ran, like
a Fool, to do her Message, which I believed Raillery, because she ought to have
been more cautious of a Married Man's Love, if serious. Sly wanted but
Entreaty: He consented, and we met, but not to my Comfort; though the Expense was
mine, he had the Profit: She was not easy unless he sat nigh her; she talked
to him, star'd at him, did every thing to show she was pleased; whilst I, by a
Notion of Pride, would pretend nothing, for fear I should not have all: For,
Gad, Madam, I don't love being balked thus. Several times we met, but all as
little to the purpose. Undoubtedly, she saw I loved her, but would not see,
because I was of Use in her Affair with Sly. The whole Town talked of our
approaching Wedding, and I began to be Fool enough to resolve on it through
Sly's Persuasion, who continually extolled her Honor and Virtue, and tickled
my Pride with the News of her Love; but that she wanted a Declaration from me,
before I could expect a Confession from her. I told him, I would think on it;
and so we parted. -- That Night (as Chance would have it) I passed along by the
House where she lived, and I found the Gate open: I know not what Devil of
Curiosity carried me in; and when in, to go to her Chamber: I did both unseen,
and concealed my self behind the Bed, which I saw fitted for Night. I resolved
to wait till she should be in Bed, and then to take Advantage of her Woman's
Absence, (who lay in the Antichamber) and there to declare my Love, and offer
her Marriage. Long I had not waited, (Though, Gad, Madam, I was very impatient,
and thought every Minute Seven,) when the charming Fair came from her
Dressing Room, with nothing on but her Nightgown and Slippers, which were soon
thrown off, and the Goddess appeared more beauteous than the naked Queen of
Love. The happy Bed soon received her; and she cried, Haste, and bring my Lover
to me. At these Words her Woman went into the Antichamber, and returned softly
with Sly; who flew to her Arms, sighed, kissed, and died there. -- Imagine my
Surprise! 'Twas so great, I could not in a long time show my self, to interrupt
'em: At length, seeing him undress for Bed, Gad, Madam, my Patience was quite
expired; Traitor, said I in showing my self, Is it thus thou preservest thy
feigned Duty to thy Wife? I laid my Hand upon my Sword, and he did the like on
his; and we had certainly drawn, had not the Amorous Fair thrown her self out
of Bed between us, and conjured us on her Knees to make no noise; else she was
lost for ever. I raised her naked Beauties, and carried them whence they came,
but complained at my hard Fortune, which had made me the Instrument of my own
Ruin. She saw I was extremely touched at it; and after her Shame and Surprise
was a little over, You have no Reason, Sir, said she, to complain of me: I
could have no Engagements with a Man who never pretended to love me. Though you
have given me the Glory of refusing you as a Husband (in the Eyes of the Town)
it could not but nettle me, to know there was nothing serious on your side, but
done like a Gentleman, to secure my Reputation amongst Illbred Fools, who know
not the Charms of Conversation, and will not permit it (without Censure) to those
that do. But, Gad, Madam, answered I, your Ladyship is not so dull, but to know
I loved you: All my Assiduities, Uneasiness, Sighs and Oaglings must have
informed you. Our Sex dares hardly believe yours, she replied, when you take
pains to speak: And sure 'twere an unpardonable Vanity to draw such
Consequences without it. Those Circumstances you pretend, I have found common
to all Gentlemen: Therefore must I conclude the whole World is in Love with me;
and deny my self to those who tell me they are my Servants, for the vain
Imagination that another is silently so? Gad, Madam, answered I, I cannot
possibly forgive the Preference of a dull, silly, sober Married Man, to an
Airy, Well-dress'd, Young, Amorous one. I Will be gone to London by Break of day,
for fear I should not conceal my Resentments, and so injure your Ladyship
irreparably: For, Gad, Madam, I must repeat again, you were to blame to slight
all the Pains I took to breed you for nobler Game.' This last, I confess, broke
my Splenetick Silence, and I could not hold laughing heartily; which amply paid
my Squire for the Pains he had taken in his Relation. He concluded it with
telling me his Journey to London, and short Stay there, only to accouter, his
Design of visiting a Lady-Sister, married into Devonshire: And closed with
Lauds to his good Fortune, that had thrown him into a Coach with a Lady of my
Charms and Sense to whom he had sacrificed the Relics of Lady Conquest the
first Minute that he saw me. I answered him, That I found Experience had made
him resolve against losing a second Mistress for want of speaking. -- He had
Manners sufficient (or rather Conscience) to think he had given me enough of
his: Beaux-self for one Day, and withdrew.

I could not forbear, late as it was, sending you an Account: If you laugh in
your Turn, I am paid for my Pains, as well as the Squire. It Is now past Eleven,
and they will call us by Two: Good Night; I am going to try if I can drown in
Sleep that which most sensibly affects me, the cruel Separation we have so
lately suffered.

Hartley-Row, Jun. 22. 1694.
LETTER III.
DOn't you think I am more constant than your Friendship could hope, or mine
pretend to? I think it a great Proof of it, amidst the Fatigues of a
West-Country Journey, to give you thus duly an Account of my insignificant
self, and Travels. We parted from Hartley-Row at Three this Morning, through a
Crowd of Beggars, who watch your Coach for Alms; and will never leave it
unblessed. Hence my Beaux took Occasion of Simile; Bid me to observe how
wakeful those Wretches were for small Charities; That he would do the like, in
hopes of greater; And that my Divine Idea had so filled his Sight, he could not
resolve to let Sleep intrude, for fear of shutting me out. I perceived he took
pains to be thought uneasy, and I have more good Manners than to disappoint
him. Mrs. Moyoress, now she is acquainted, has all the low, disagreeble
Familiarity of People of her Rank. She entertained us all the Morning with a
sorry Love-business about her Second Husband; Stuff so impertinent, I remember
nothing of it. Beaux continues his Assiduities: I think none was ever so
plagued with dying Eyes; his are continually in that posture, and my Opposites,
that I am forced to take a good deal of pains to avoid 'em. The two other
Fellow-Travellers were never so promoted before, and are much troubled their
Journey is to last no longer, and wish the four Days four Months. I hope every
Jolt will squash their Guts, and give 'em enough on it: But they are Proof
against any such Disasters, and hugely delighted with what they are pleased to
call Riding in State. After this ridiculous Account, you need not doubt but I
am thoroughly mortified. -- The Trouts are just brought upon the Table, which
are the only good thing here; they look inviting, and will not stay for Cooling
Complements. I hope Time will show it none, to say,

I am unalterably yours.
SUTTON, Jun. 23. 1694.
LETTER IV.
I Cannot give my self any Reason why these Coach-men are such unreasonable
Rogues: They make us rise at Two in the Morning, to bring us into our Inn at
the same Hour in the Afternoon. After we were reposed a little, Beaux shined
again, as yesterday, and waited upon me to Evening-Prayers. I need say nothing
to you of Salisbury-Cathedral: If in a Foreign Country, as the Lady in her
Letters of Spain, I could entertain you with a noble Description; but you have
either seen, or may see it; and so I Will spare my Architecture. There are
abundance of pretty, innocent-look'd Women, genteel enough; but I have lost my
Heart to a handsome Churchman. I never thought before that Dress was tolerable;
but so wore, it seems a mighty Ornament. He was placed behind me; but I turned
my Devotion, and kneeled to him, imagining him no less than (as in Antique
Days) some High Priest of the Sun. The Canon gave me Cause to think he had
dined too well, and was obliged to his Snuff, more than Religion, for keeping
him awake. -- Well, Devotion done, I was forced to break up mine, and leave him
without a Knowledge of his Conquest. As we were walking to our Inn, I asked
Beaux what we should do to pass the next day without being very weary of each
other, for Sunday does not permit Traveling. He, you may be sure, did not fail
to tell me, He could never be weary of me, though (himself) expiring by my Sight
and Cruelty. I waved his Complement, and told him my Design of engaging the
People in the Exeter Coach (if they seemed worth it) to live with us for the
time. When we returned, we were told it was not yet come in, occasioned by the
breaking of the Axle-tree five Miles off; but that a Fellow was gone to mend
it, and they were expected every Moment. My Chamber-Window answered the Court;
I rose to it at the Noise of the Coach, and presently saw alight a tall,
blustering, big-bon'd, raw Thing, like an overgrown Schoolboy, but conceited
above any thing. He had an Appurtenance, called a Wife, whom he suffered to get
out as well as she could; as long as he had layn with her, he did not think her
worth the Civility of his Hand. She seemed a Giant of a Woman, but very fine,
with a right Citt Air. He bluster'd presently for the best Lodging, which he
saw taken up by her that held the fine Fan before her Face: You may guess this
was your humble Servant. The Chamberlain told him, 'Twas their Custom, First
come, first served; but that there were very good Chambers besides. The rest of
the Company were two Things that looked pert and awkard; Trades-men's Daughters
I judged 'em. But methoughts, casting my Eyes upon a Gentlewoman and her
Servant, that came out last, I found something pleased me; whether it were
because she really deserved it, or that the Stuff she was with set her off. I
had a Basin of fine Heart-Cherries before me, just come from the Garden: I
caused 'em to be brought after me, into the Gallery, and designed 'em as a Bait
to the Woman whom I was to begin the Acquaintance with; for Beaux designed to
set up to get a Fortune in Devonshire, and was unwilling to show any
Irregularity; -- and I thought my self above their Reflections. The first that
appeared was the Wife, with a Rising Belly: This seemed a good Hint; I offered
'em to her, not knowing but she might long. The Sight, I suppose, did not
displease her, for she readily accepted, and eat very greedily. The Gentile
looked Lady had much to do to be persuaded. As for the other two, they were
gone to choose a Lodging. We presently grew acquainted, taking Travelers
Liberty and Supped together. But, shall I tell you? The Wife grew jealous of me.
It seems, her Temper was such. And her Husband (no small Man in his Country,
though himself just set up in Merchandising at London; his Father one of the
Canons at Exeter;) thought he might carry all Hearts before him, as well as the
Country-Lasses. They were come from visiting their Friends, and returning to
their House in London. Mrs. Stanhope, for that was the Lady's Name that I
liked, told me, I was not to count upon the Conquest, for he had given her
Douceurs all the Way, and made her extreme uneasy, because his Wife appeared
to be such. We grew into an Intimacy, and left the Company. My Beaux was to me
faithless and inconstant. One of the awkard little Things I told you of, and
who had a tolerable Face, was a Goldsmith's Daughter of Exeter, and acquainted
with his Lady-Sister; that began their Acquaintance. She seemed free and fond:
He took the Hint, and applied himself to her; which I was very glad of. Mrs.
Stanhope went with me to my Chamber; and after much Discourse, offered
Friendship, and mutual Knowledge of each other; she gave me this Account of her
last Adventures.

'I came now from Falmouth, (said she) where I have been since the Beginning of
the Spring, to visit a Brother and his Wife that lives there. 'Till within
these Six Weeks I saw nothing that pleased me: At lost, 'twas a Captain of a
Man of War had the Chance; my Brother brought him to his House: And for my
Excuse, I must tell you, he is a very pretty, genteel young Gentleman, of a
good Family and Education, and in prospect of coming to very good Fortune. They
talked of the Town and Country-Beauties: At last, a young Creature was named,
whom I had not seen; but the Captain set her before every thing he had. I was
concerned at his Opinion, and asked him his of the Duchess of Grafton? He gave
her her due Praise; but yet, in his Esteem, this exceeded. I could not but
think him extremely in the wrong; and was angry when I heard him wish himself a
Man of mighty Fortune, to deserve her. He sailed that Night; and after Ten Days
Cruise, came in again. His first Visit was to me. I asked him if he had seen
his Mistress. He said, he had none. I remembered him of what he had spoke. He
answered, That I had taught him better. He continued his Applications, visited
me Three Times a Day: And because I was still jealous of his Words, I had him
watched, and an Account brought of all his Visits. The young Lady's Uncle made
a Ball; but because my Brother and him were not well together, there was no
Hopes of my being invited; which my Lover very well knew, and therefore said,
he would not be there, having received Orders to Sail. He took his Leave with
transporting Sorrow; and had the Glory to find mine was real. However, I would
not lose the Ball, because I desired to see my reputed Rival. I forgot to tell
you, he had never seen her but once, when he praised her to that Degree; and
dexterously told me a second Sight had undeceived him. I dressed my self like a
Farmer's Wife, with a Basket on my Arm; and, by the help of one of the
Servants, was placed like a Country-Gazer, at a Corner of the Room. I needed
not to be told my Rival; a Thousand dazzling Charms distinguished her; and,
though I looked with jealous Eyes, must acknowledge, I never saw any Beauty
more perfect. All my Hopes lay in a certain Softness, which did not promise
much Wit. In a little time, my Traitor (whom I imagined in the wide Ocean) came
to the Ball, danced with his Mistress, and was as Assiduous as she deserved. I
was so well pleased at the Discovery, I stayed not for any more, for fear I
should not 'scape my self. About Midnight he came (for a Minute) to see me; and
told me, he was just come Ashore, the Ship under Sail; yet without another
Sight, 'twas impossible for him to depart. I confounded him with telling him
what had so lately passed at the Ball: Yet he drew himself out of the
Embarrass, and said every thing, to make me think he loved me; and we were
seriously treating upon the Affairs of Matrimony. I told him, he must get my
Father's Consent, who lived at London, where I was going. He begged me to defer
my Journey till he came in; which I too readily promised; and so we parted. I
knew my Fortune fairer than my Rival's, and began to be persuaded I had the
better of her. For, What else could draw him to address me? When I saw him
return, 'twas with mutual Joy: But he was ordered that same Night to sail to
Plymouth, and did not expect to be back in a Week; therefore we agreed upon my
Journey. He swore an inviolable Love; and would have contracted himself, if I
durst without my Father's Consent: He intended to write to his Friends above,
to ask it. And thus we once more parted, but not till he had severely exclaimed
against any Designs upon my Rival, before a whole Crew of Town-Gossips, that I
was sure would tell her. You may conclude, we agreed upon Writing. I took my
Journey, and stayed at an Aunt's House in Exeter Ten Days; where I heard, that
within Four of my Departure, my Lover returned; and in Three more was publicly
married to my Rival. I writ to thank him for ridding me of a Knavish Husband,
wished him Joy, took Coach, and resolved against too easily believing any Man
again.'

The Post has just brought me a Letter from you: I find you curse me with the
Continuation of Egham-Uneasiness, till I return to (the World in) London.
Methinks it is unreasonable to impose the continued Slavery of Writing: I assure
you, I shall take Truce with it till at my Journey's End, unless something
happen worth our Notice. General Talmash's Body was brought in here this
Evening: His Secretary I am acquainted with, and have sent to desire the Favor
of his Company to Morrow to Dinner; and if any thing in his Relation be
Entertaining, you shall not fail of it from

Your Sincere Faithful Servant.
Saturday Night, from Salisbury.
LETTER V.
THE Account of so great a Man's Death as Mr. Talmash (in the middle of all his
Enterprises, when Fortune seemed to promise him much greener Laurels than he
had yet gathered) has so added to my Melancholy, that I will not describe his
Misfortune to you, for fear it be contagious; but rather suffer you to expect
the public Account; for I am one of those that esteem you more, than to make
you uneasy; as I think none can be otherwise, that hears the Particulars of
his Loss. Something there was, extreme touching. --

After this doleful Subject, methinks my Beaux may justly complain I have so
long a time neglected his most singular self. We parted this Morning from our
Sunday-Acquaintance. Fop told me (when I gently reproached him for
Inconstancy,) Gad, Madam, it is but to make my self the newer to your Ladyship
to Morrow. I rather thought 'twas to keep me such to him. He has given me a
Relation of his Success with the Damsel. She treated him (in her Chamber) with
Rosa Solis, and what he calls Sucket. The rest he would willingly have
acquainted me with, but I recommended Discretion in Ladies Affairs; and he,
almost bursting, is yet forced to be silent. How long he will keep such, I do
not know, for he has often offered at breaking his most painful Penance. We
have passed Dorchester and Blandford to Day, but nothing I found in either
worth your notice. The Toils of the Body influence the Mind: I suppose, by my
Dullness, you find I speak woeful Truths. We are lodged at Bridgport, and very
ill; but it is but for a Night. Here Is just come into the Inn an Acquaintance of
Beaux's, who promises yielding Matter for to Morrow's Letter. This was infected
in the Beginning by General Talmash; and the most uneasy Journey as dully
concludes it.

Your ever Constant and Obliged Servant.
Bridgport, Jun. 25. 1694.
LETTER VI.
BEaux is now grown so insipid, that I shall say very little of him for the
future; and I have Reason to believe my self such to him; for these two last
Evenings, contrary to Custom, he has not Re-dress'd: The Fatigue, which he
seems more sensible of than any of us, has tarnish'd the Luster of his Eyes;
and, instead of any further Oagling, drowns all his Amorous Pretensions in as
profound Sleep as the uneasy Jolting of the Coach will permit. This is what I
can never be so happy to gain. But to tell you something of our last Night's
Entertainment: Whilst Supper was getting ready, the Gentleman I told you of, at
Beaux's Entreaty, gave us an Account of what Affairs were carrying him to
London: The short of it is this.

'Your Ladyship, said he, may soon perceive by my Accent that I am a Foreigner.
I had the Glory of following the Prince of Orange, (now our Auspicious King) in
his Expedition into England. We landed in the West, with all those Particulars,
which are needless to repeat. During our Stay at Exeter, I rendered my constant
Devotion at the Cathedral; and in coming thence one Evening, an old Woman (with
a Look as mean as a Beggar) presented me a Letter; which, when I had opened, I
found from an Unknown, who styled himself my Friend, and gave me this Advice,
That a Lady of good Country-Quality and Fortune, (and who was then in Exeter)
was going to be disposed of by her Mother, to a Man she no way affected: But
that she had been heard to say, If the handsome Switzer were in his place, she
should obey without Reluctance. And concluded the Letter with giving me Advice,
like a good Friend, to improve my growing Fortune: For so considerable an one
as Twelve Thousand Pounds was not every Day thrown into a Soldier's Lap. I had
forgot to tell your Ladyship the Letter was writ in French, and Directions of
the Lady's Name and Lodgings. My Heart gave me a secret Presage that the Matter
would not be lucky to me, which I followed, and therefore took no notice of the
Letter. Three Days after, the same Old Woman brought me another much more
pressing: Upon which, I gave my self blindly up to my Destiny. I visited, and
found the Lady, though not a Beauty, yet Genteel and Taking. 'Twas easy to guess
by my Reception, that the Letters came from her. I Will omit the Discourse we
had, and only rest upon Matter of Fact. She obliged me to leave my Command, and
go with her to her Estate. Her Mother looked upon me with an evil Eye; but my
Mistress was transportingly kind, and much concerned that none of the Ministers
round durst marry us, for fear of the Old Lady. Whereupon, we concluded I
should pretend to take my Leave, as designing for London; but instead of that,
go directly into Cornwall, where she had a considerable Estate, and would meet
me. The Matter happened as we had agreed; but for fear her Mother should pursue
us, she consented to take me for her Husband before the Parson could be got to
make us such. That happy Night I had all the Reason in the World to believe my
self agreeable to her; and all was confirmed in the Morning, by the Priest.
Thus caressed, and blessed, we returned to her House. The Old Lady (who had no
Command of her Daughter's Fortune, and saw the Business beyond Remedy) was with
the first to make her Court to me, and wish me Joy. Three happy Months I had
all the Satisfaction that innocent Marriage and excessive Love in a Bride could
give me. Then I began to consider a little my Affairs, and proposed to my Wife
my being Naturalized, that I might look after hers. She swounded at the Name;
and when she recovered, she snatched a Bayonet of mine, and wounded her self
under the Left Breast, but not much. I cannot express my Surprise: We hushed the
Matter, for fear of her Mother; and I employed some of my Soldierly Skill to
cure it, which had the Effect. I inquired into the Reason of this Extravagancy.
She told me, The Discovery of Interest in me, when she had believed Love was
the only Motive to our Marriage. Some Days passed and as often as I offered at
it, she received such mighty Disgust, that I resolved to get it done without
her Notice; for she took me not as a Husband, but a Lover. It Is true, I was
received as a Guest, but not a Master; and my Circumstance (having left my
Command) required that. I got her Leave for my Journey: She showed such
extravagant Passion at our Separation, that I swore a speedy Return; and
resolved to leave my Naturalization depending, look after my other Affairs, and
return within a Fortnight to her: But before that time I had a dangerous Fit of
Sickness in London. I writ often to her, and gave her an Account, that the Act
was Passed, and I could now happily call my self an English Husband. She only
answered, She knew how to interpret it; but she was out in her Cunning, if I
should find an English Wife at my Service, who knew not the true Value and Use
of one. This Letter damped me; but trusting to the Greatness of that Power Love
had given me in her Heart, I did not question but my Presence would make all
things easy. I took Post, my Impatience would not stay the Coach, though the
Remains of my Fever seemed to expect it. I gave my self no Rest during the
whole Journey. I sent to give her notice of my Arrival: But what was my
Surprise, to find all shut at home! I called under her Window, where I
perceived Light: 'Twas a heavy Night of Rain: I knocked at the Gates, and
stormed, but all to no purpose; I was glad to take up my Lodging in the Porch.
At Six in the Morning an Under-Servant appeared: I asked for her Lady. She told
me, She was gone none knew whither, and had conveyed away her Plate, etc. So
that, if I pleased, an empty House was at my Service. I calmly bore all this,
imagining it but a Trial; sought her round the Country, but in vain; she often
shifted Places and went disguised. Not long after she commenced a Process
against me, and by a Pretense, (which will for ever make her notorious)
rendered me to the Court as Incapable. I was still so tender of her Fame, as to
suffer the Aspertion. Common Law separated us: She got the better, by my
refusing to vindicate my self, and I Fifteen Hundred Pounds of her Fortune, and
the Charges of the Court. It Is since last August that this has happened. I have
vainly tried to remove her implacable Aversion, or to learn the Cause of it:
But I see my Endeavors are all fruitless; and I am now going to leave England,
I think for ever.'

I complemented him upon his Misfortunes, and really, in my Opinion, he could
not be deserving of them. Gad, Madam, speaks Beaux, See what unconstant Things
you Ladies are! I happened to be at this Gentleman's House when he was first
married, and never saw any thing so fond of him as his Wife. Gad, I don't
believe, whatever Woman I make happy, though her Esteem be equal to my Merit, she
can possibly be fonder.

I am now got safely, weary, into Exeter; and, I thank God, rid of the
Impertinency of my Fellow-Travellers, Beaux excepted, who will see me safe
home, though distant from his. The Cathedral here is very fine; the Bishop's Seat
in it surpasses Salisbury, though short in every thing else. Forgive me for
leaving you thus abruptly, since it is more pleasingly to entertain my self with
a Letter of yours just brought to me.

I am Most Constantly and Sincerely yours.
EXETER, Jun. 26. 1694.
LETTER VII.
IF I have omitted answering your Three last, it proceeded from nothing but the
Desire of doing something new; and you know it is extremely so in^e, not eagerly
to show you all Testimonies of Friendship. -- My Solitude is much more pleasing
than I fancied it: As yet I am not weary of that happy Indifferency, which
leaves me nothing either to hope or fear. Thus empty, and thus Idle do I live;
Nor Loved, nor Loving, can nor take, nor give.


I have most Foppish Letters from Beaux, who parted with a World of seeming
Regret; and yet I hear he is endeavoring at a Mistress. I suppose I may bid
his Impertinence Farewell for ever: I think I bad you hope (in one of mine) to
hear no more of him; I know not how I am fallen upon the nauseous Repetition.
Themistocles refused Simonides, when he would have taught him the Art of
Memory; pertinently saying, He had more need of Forgetfulness than Memory. I
remember what I would not, but I cannot forget what I would. My Study has
fallen upon Religion; I am searching into all sorts: You shall not fail to hear
what that Chance-Medley produces. I can now with cold Indifferency shake Hands
with all Things beyond this Solitude. How long the extraordinary Humor may
last, I cannot inform you at present. I repeat with Stoical Pride, Keep me, ye
Bounteous Gods, my Caves and Woods
In Peace: Let Tares and Acorns be my Food.


POSTSCRIPT.
I Forgot to leave Orders with the Jew about the Chocolate: Pray, take care
that it be sent me, and excuse this Trouble.


Yours.
July 10. 1694.
There happened a long Intercouse between these Letters; but Business unfit for
the Public keeps 'em at present concealed.

LETTER VIII.
I Am sorry I cannot make good my Promise to so indearing a Friend as your self.
Looking over my Papers, I find but one of Colonel Pack's Letters in Imitation
of the Portugal-Nuns: I certainly had Three, which he sent to me for my
Opinion; but Two are lost, which I very much regret; and the more, because I
know not where he is, to repair it. I would hear how you approve his Style. I
think Imitation the hardest Part of Writing: It confines a Freeborn Genius,
which naturally loves Untrod Wilds; at least, if I may guess at another by my
own. And now I am speaking of that, let me tell you, all those Romantic Ideas
of Retirements, which viewed at a distance, gives a ravishing Prospect, now I
am Wedded, Bedded too, prove the worst sort of Matrimony; but it is only to such
a particular Friend as your self, that I dare complain; to the remoter Sort I
assume a Stoical Appetite and Air: -- Tell them, the World, with all its gaudy
Pleasures, are but rich Delusions, which at once corrupts our Senses, and our
Fame: That the little Spot of Earth I have chose to fix my Face in, has more
solid Entertainments, more real Innate Delights, than the Glories of
Kensington: Then sigh, and seem to pity the more Elevated Part of the World,
that can bury themselves in Noise and Crowd. -- But, let me tell you, there is
no real Satisfaction without Conversation. I have had so much of the Dead since
I settled here, and (as I may say) nothing of the Living, for I find none
deserves the Name, that I wish for the Conjuring Art; and would rather converse
with the Ghosts of the Departed, than always with their Books, or with my self.
-- But I forget I detain you from better Company; I mean, the Enclosed. Write
to me still, but nothing of News; I mean to hear none, till I see London again;
and when that will be, I have not the Pleasure so much as to imagine: 'Twill be
new (to lie forgotten, and forgetting, and, as it were, be born with
Understanding) to all the Vanities and Virtues (if any) of that Hydra.

I am, SIR, With great Esteem, Your Most, etc.
March 15. 1695.
A Second Letter from a supposed Nun in Portugal, to a Gentleman in France, in
Imitation of the Five Letters in Print, by Colonel Pack.
O My fled Heart, and he that so unjustly keeps it from me! Was not your
barbarous Resolution sufficient, that I should never possess yours; but you
must add the Use of all your best Art to keep me from my own? In what Disorder
do I speak and write, for want of a poor tender Heart? That Is gone a Pilgrimage
to Love, and (the unkind Heavens not hearing its Prayer) has, through
Distraction, lost its Way, and never will return again. Fire sets on Fire: Why
then does not my Flame make you burn? It Is a false Maxim: Extremity of Cold
scorches you. Had I at first put on a Behavior more cool and remote to your
pretended Affection, and treated you with Unkindness, how many (...) and Vows
would you have of-offer'd at Love's Altar? With what Ardency would you have
continued your Protestations? Who would have thought that a Fire (at first) so
well kindled as yours, should need Fanning with an infectious Blast, to
preserve its Heat? Or that the wholesome Sun should put it out? But that, Alas!
was my Misfortune: My Burning was the greater, and drew yours away. -- How can
I then with any Confidence blame you for what I my self was truly and
principally the Occasion of? You too easily perceived how earnestly I was wont
to watch your Eyes, that they looked not on others; as if mine took it unkindly
they were not gazed on altogether. How perverse are our Fates! Why else was it
not contrived that you might be as happy in me, as 'twas possible for me to be
in you? Say what you will, you was to blame. What Care you took to assault my
Affections, was sufficiently discoverable in the constant Ardour and Formality
of your Approaches; contriving to appear at all Times as Engaging as possible.
Your Conquest was not so great: You could not well have met with a Heart less
fortified for a Defense: Ye Gods! that I should yield upon your very first
Summons; and so dishonourably, that I was not allowed Flying Colors! Nay,
what is yet more; That I should bear so mean, low, and contemptible a Spirit, as
to take infinitely more Delight in my own Vassalage and Captivity, than in the
most flourishing Tranquillity! What do I thus rave upon? What would I have? If
I am happy in my Condition, why do I not rest, and retain my Senses, like
others of my Sex? But that still (and, I fear, ever) I have the same sad Tune
to sing: 'My Conqueror (whom I adored for being so) is gone; and my Cloister is
now as much a Prison to me, as 'twas Heaven, and Liberty, and all things, when
I had him there. 'Twas an unworthy Thing to steal my better Part, my Soul,
away; and not think this little Frame, its old Companion, worth taking with
you. But what you had got, you thought, was of light Carriage, needed little
Stowage, paid no Freight, and (I dare stake my Life) was the All ever you
intended to have of me: And to be so served, is (it seems) the All I am ever
likely to expect from you How grossly did I flatter my self, and abuse you,
whenever I imagined you would be kind and true to me! You that are so cruel,
that could you reduce any other Woman into my ill Circumstances, if there was a
Third in the World, you would certainly leave the former, and there feign fresh
Adorations. If there was not, yet purely to gratify your Inhumanity to her,
even I, now slighted and neglected, should then have your Company; for you
could not brook being put by a Pleasure of that kind, though it cost you the
Trouble of going to one who loved you more than the World.' --

How very odd (and as though you were writing to some public Place of
Intelligence) was that Discourse of yours, in your last Letter, concerning the
great Lightning and Thunder which you say happened in your Parts! Also you
desire to know what Weather we have had here. Is this fit to stuff in a
Love-Letter? Truly, it might have thundered, lightened and rained, or it might
have been very pleasant, delightful Weather, for ought I know; for I am not
capable of making any Remarks of that kind: But this I can inform you, being
too sure of the Truth of it, that it has been very stormy Weather in my Eyes
ever since your Departure; and until you return (the only Sun, whose Influence
can disperse these Clouds) I fear 'twill ever be tempestuous. This Account (it
may be) pleases you more than if I had sent you Word the ill weather had
reached our Country, demolished our Monastery, set me at Liberty, and I was in
pursuit of you. Then, then how I would glut my Revenge by the Incursions of my
Love! For it should haunt you in all Places and Countries. And since it wore so
much the Visage of an Evil Spirit in your Conceit here, as to make you quit the
Place, I would try whether Change of Air would alter its Complexion and
Features, so as to force you into a better Opinion of it, and be thoroughly
revenged on you that Way: For, to love, I find, is the Unhappiness you would
avoid, above all other Things: But your Appetite and Taste is as much depraved,
as my Project is vain and impracticable: I find the Sour of France gratifies
your Palate above the Sweets of Portugal; and a French Lady (with her distant
Regards to your Address, and (at last) counterfeit artificial Acceptance shall
engage you much more than the Loyalty, Integrity, Truth and Freedom of my
unlimited Passion. Will not the World swear we are both mad: You for preferring
a Counterfeit, (because it glisters) before the true Metal it self, which is
known to every Child, by its Weight: I for my Fidelity to so much Ingratitude.
But let the World blame us as it pleases, I am resolved to be as true to you,
as you to your unnatural Inconstancy. -- To what a Degree of Bliss should I be
advanced, if I could find you complaining of the Remisness of my Love, and
admiring how intense was your own: And I should be but too happy, if that Fault
was not found on your side, as (Alas!) to all the World too visibly it is* And
the same Conceptions you make of an Immensity will but just serve you to fathom
my Zeal, which (although cherished and pruned after the most careful manner) is
productive of nothing but the most bitter, sour and unpleasant Fruits
imaginable. -- Your unkind Dealings and Actions to me are the Fruits of my
extraordinary Passion. What Soul could imagine such dissonant Notes should
spring up, to interrupt the Harmony of my Affection? In what had you been the
worse, if my extreme Kindness you had retaliated with but a little of yours;
and although more than a little be my due, yet with the least Grain I could have
wrought my own Contentment: But you are so unjust to deny all, and leave me to
the harassing of a miserable Despair; one Hour's Torment of which I would not
wish you should endure, Ages to come, to be set free my self; and yet no
otherwise fond of my Condition, but as it is a Gift of yours, and which (for
any thing less than your Love) I will never part with. Barbarous, Barbarous! to
deny me that, which you take more pains to throw away upon another, than I can
do to obtain it. You shall not use me thus; indeed, you must not: It Is I say
it, but you regard not that, so insensible you are of my Condition; which, though
never so unfortunate as to my own particular, yet is aggravated with Cares for
your Welfare, who are the sole Cause of my Unhappiness. How you will relish
this Letter I know not, I fear you will think there are too many Invectives
against your Tyranny; in which I will agree with you my self, and ask your
Forgiveness: But, alas! they are as gentle as I could possibly persuade my Pen
to drop; for, since you take so much pleasure in a hard Heart, I would not for
the World any ways cross you, by making you less obdurate; so tenderly I value
your Satisfaction, and so little (for your sake) my own. But, Oh! the infinite
Pleasures you would find in Love, if you thought them worth the looking after!
Love (as it is, or is not mutual) is the truest Epitome of the Supernatural
States: If mutual the Joys are lasting, and never cloy; if not, the Torments
are intolerable, yet must be endured. Oh, that any thing I could say might
dissolve you to a Sense of my miserable Life; or, indeed, rather your own! And
yet, if it could, in the least, enter into my Thoughts that you are altogether
at Repose, I assure you, I would never interrupt you; no Noise of my
Afflictions should ever be your Disturbance: But I am very much mistaken if you
are altogether without Remorse for the Sufferings you have brought upon me. I
remember, you once was flexible, and of a compassionate Nature, and your
Behavior very like a Gentleman; whatever has mis-guided you to the Abuse of my
Favors, which (if I have Knowledge of my Heart) were (at first) much more for
your sake, than my own, you were the Aggressor, and not I; and whatever
Kindness I showed you, was more to make me happy, than your self; that by
Charity to a Serpent, I at last was stung. It Is said, that venomous Creatures
have a Balsamic Quality in themselves, to cure the Wounds they make: But you
(more unnatural than all the rest) have none; at least, most cruelly withold
it from me. O Heaven! That I had but Power to contain my felf! That I had but
Temper to be a little calm! But it is a Condition I have long since abandoned,
and (till I see you again) will never reassume. In the Rage I am in, I could
think you as many unkindnesses, as, by and by, the Fury of Love would find a
Task to unravel; for if one Half Hour I blame you, in the next I call it
Injustice. So careful I am that no ill Thought of you appear deserving, that
were you worse than you are, my Pleasure would consist in being flattered that
you are better than I think you: Nay, Sometimes I persuade my self that you are
a Man of the greatest Justice in the World; and that it is not even in your
Nature (wilfully) to do an unequal Thing. But it is most certain, I am doomed to
a fruitless Love, without the least Possibility of a Deliverance. Indeed,
formerly I had a faint Prospect (as I thought) of being in some measure
restored; but I looked through false Glasses, that presented me with a wrong
Object; and since that, I have done the great Work of learning to be well
satisfied with my intolerable Condition. Did my Love run parallel with what is
commonly found in the World, it would not be so desperate. -- Happy they, who
(in a Pett, or upon some small Disgust) can recede from their Passions, and set
up for new ones elsewhere; and whatever they pretend, Self-is the greatest
Thing. This is the Way of Amouring most in Fashion: This is that Imposture that
prevails upon so many tender Hearts: And in Cases of Denial, very artificially
can usurp Languishing Eyes, want no expressive passionate Insinuations,
counterfeit Melancholy and Distraction; and all to serve some base by-End. If
this had been the Quality of my Love, the Vengeance you assign me had then been
merited. I verily believe, if it had had but the least Tincture of Treachery, I
should have won your Heart, should have made you jealous: And that Temper would
have been very inconsistent with your Resolutions to make a thorough Conquest:
Nothing less than which (to a Man of Prowess like you) could have been a real
Pleasure. Yes, yes; it is very plain, If my Passion had been forged, and bore a
false Accent, it would certainly much better have agreed with yours, as being
much nearer related; but the fatal Consequence (of a true Fervency, returned
with fair Assurances, and foul Actions) none knows, but the wretched, solitary
I. Upon the whole, I think verily I love you because you make me miserable. If
that be true, go on, be signalized to the World for your Unkindness, that the
more I may be so, for my unaccountable Affection. That I love you, Heaven
knows; you know, else I should see you here again cringing out the feigned
Allegations of your Sincerity, though much more distant than we are. Oh, that we
were to begin again! What Course would I then take! I fear, even fool my self,
as I have done; for, since I know no greater Pleasure than the Love of you, I
should too willingly run the Risk of any Disadvantage that could happen by it.
I die a Thousand Deaths every Hour, and still revive, to die them over again:
Adieu. What could not I endure for your sake! I have at this Moment so lively
an Idea of you, that I almost fancy you here in Person. Methinks, how very kind
you are! How affectionately you condole me for the Torments I have suffered in
your Absence; and how thankful I am to you for them! How you press my Hand, and
swear you will never part with me! And, Ah, Monsieur! How I believe you, for
being hitherto so faithful! -- Once more, Adieu. I think I never writ to you in
my Life, but their Length made 'em stayed for. The Post (at my Request) has
waited a great while, and I am now sent to; I wonder, else, when I should give
off. You may judge a little of my Condition, when you see even hurrying
Post-haste it self can admit of a Delay, to please me. The Actions of all
People that see me, are designedly kind, and of a Desire to divert me. One
takes me by the Hand, begging of me to be cheerful, and leave my unprofitable
Thinking; showing me good Reason for it: But, Alas! I find Reason and Love two
very separate Things, not at all influencing each other. To Day a Sister
brought me Variety of the best Fruits; of which, nothing but a piece of a
Pomgranate could I be persuasuaded to eat. It Is possible, I might thank her,
but am not sure I had so much Manners: Every Body excuses my Ill Breeding, but
much wonder at my Alteration. The Rigor and Severity of our Religion can
dispense with many great Faults in me, that it will not allow in others. What
shall I do? Well, I have only one thing more (besides a Thousand) to say to
you; which is, That if you can have regard for any one Sentence in this Letter,
it may be too this last, I implore you to let me see you in Portugal before I
die. Adieu, Adieu.

FINIS.

