THE CONSIDERATIONS WHICH OBLIGED PETER MANBY DEAN Of LONDON-DERY, TO EMBRACE
THE Roman Catholic RELIGION.

Humbly Dedicated to His GRACE the Lord Primate of IRELAND.

PSALM XLII. Judica me Deus, and discern causam meam de Gente non sancta.
Emitte lucem tuam and veritatem tuam. Ipsa me deduxerunt and adduxerunt in
Montem Sanctum tuum, and in Tabernacula tua. Dublin Castle the 11th. of March
1686/7.
This following Discourse is Allowed to be Printed.

Tho. Sheridan Secr.



LONDON, Reprinted for NATH. THOMPSON at the Entrance into the Old Spring
Garden near Charing Cross. 1687.

TO THE READER.
When a Protestant rehearses this Article of his Creed, I believe one Holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church, I would fain understand what Church he
means? Whether the Church of England alone as established by Law, or the Church
of England in Communion with other Churches? If the former, then his meaning
is, I believe one Holy Protestant Church as settled in England by Act of
Parliament. If the latter, I desire to know, with what other Church under the
Heavens does the Church of England Communicate in Sacraments and Liturgy?
Whether with Lutherans, Calvinists, Waldenses or Greek Church? If with none of
all these, why does he pretend to believe One Holy Catholic Church? This
Church Established by Law being Catholic, neither as to Time, nor Place;
because not Visible any where for many Ages before Edward VI.

Good Reader, if we believe our selves Catholics, let us not fancy to our
selves a Church divided from all the rest of the World. And therefore I crave
leave to ask St. Paul 's Question, What? came the Word of God out from you (the
established Church) or came it unto you alone? 1 Cor. 14.36. Has the Divine
Goodness left all the World in Darkness except our Island? And Us too, for so
many Ages until Henry VIII. took a fancy to Ann Bolen? Is the Catholic Church
dwindled away to the Church of England? Perhaps you will Answer me, that by One
Holy Catholic Church, you understand all the variety of Protestants; as
Church of England-men; Presbyterians, Lutherans, Independants, Anabaptists,
Fifth-Monarchy-men, Quakers, etc. But all these wanting that first and
Essential Mark of the Catholic Church called Unity, cannot be That one Holy
Society intended by our Creed. And moreover, this makes Protestancy so wandering
and uncertain a thing, that I for my part do not well understand it. Can you
say that Lutherans and the Church of England-men are the same in all Material
points, the Lutherans holding a Corporal Presence in the Sacrament, and the
Church of England denying it? Or that Calvinists and good Protestants are the
same in all necessary matters, the former having no Orders of Priests and
Bishops, consequently no true Sacraments, nor Power of Binding, and Absolving
Sinners; Besides, the Catholic Church can never fail: But as for those Sects
of Protestants, Who ever saw, or heard of them for many Ages before Henry VIII.

Well, but you will insist upon it that God has his People amongst all sorts
of Protestants; which Answer I have sometimes heard out of the Mouths of
Protestants. And it calls to my mind those excellent words of the late King's
second Paper, viz. The Protestants are not of the Church of England as it is the
true Church from whence there can be no Appeal, but because the Discipline of
that Church is conformable at that present to their Fancies, which as soon as
it shall contradict, or vary from, they are ready to embrace or join with the
next Congregation of People, whose Discipline or Worship agrees with their own
Opinion at that time, etc. And further, it brings into my remembrance these
words of a certain Person, once of my Acquaintance; he was a Presbyterian, and
gave his Son leave to go for New England to seek his Fortune. Why, said a
Friend of his, they are all Independants there, and your Son will be in danger
of losing his Principles: I care not what he be, replied the other, so he be
not a Papist.

In a word ( dear Reader) it concerns thee to understand aright that Article of
thy Creed, I believe one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church; Because the
only way to be at rest in this World, and happy in the World to come, is to
find out that Church upon whose Authority thou may rely. Noah 's Dove found
no rest for the sole of her Foot, until she returned into the Ark. No more will Thou, but shall be tossed too and fro upon the unstable Waters of Schism, until
thou return into the Ark of one Holy Catholic Church. I pray recollect what
St. Paul admonishes concerning Schism. I beseech you Brethren by the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
Schisms among you, 1 Cor. 1.15. But that ye glorify God with one Mind, and one
Mouth: That is, that ye serve God, not only saying the same things, but the
same Words, especially about your Sacraments and Liturgy. For by one Spirit We
( meaning all Christians,) are Baptized into one Body. Therefore he exhorts
them to take heed of such Teachers as have no Mission or Authority for what
they say, but only good Words and fair Speeches to deceive the hearts of the
simple.

In the following Discourse, I hope the Reader shall find it briefly, and yet
fully made out to him, that the first Reformers had no Mission for what they
did; nor any pretense to justify their Separation and breach of Unity, but
only the Scripture as interpreted by themselves, not only without, but against
the Authority of the present Catholic Church: Out of which a man may have all
things, except Salvation, said St. Augustine. And further he shall find me
pressing for an Answer to such Questions as these, viz.

What Priesthood or Holy Orders had the first Reformers, but what they received
from the Hands of Roman Catholic Bishops?

Whether a Presbyterian Minister, having received Orders from a Protestant
Bishop, can by virtue of such Orders pronounce the Church of England a corrupt
Church?

Whether Cranmer and his Associates could condemn the Church of Rome by
pretense of the Mission they received from her Bishops.

Whether an Act of Parliament in France, Spain, or Germany, be not as good an
Authority for Popery there, as in England for Protestancy? And in case there,
be no Judge to determine, who have the true sense of Scripture, Roman
Catholics or Protestants. Whether the Catholic sense be not as good as the
Protestants?

Finally, I entreat the Protestant Reader to peruse Dr. Heylin 's History of
the Reformation, a Book that speaks bitterly enough against Popery; yet as to
matter of Fact, so Honestly written, that, notwithstanding all Dr. Burnet 's
industry to diminish its credit, it has opened the Eyes of many good
Protestants. See Dr. Burnet 's character of it in his Preface to his first
Volume, where he censures it not for telling untruths in matter of History, but
rather for speaking too much truth. He doubts not but Dr. Heylin was a sincere
Protestant, but violently carried away by some particular conceits, ( these are
Burnet 's words,) and is not to be excused that he never vouched any Authority
for what he writ, (...) This is the worst he could say, and it is an untruth
that Heylin writ u^^^ uncertain grounds, as Dr. Burnet would insinuate. For
thus Heylin himself will satisfy the Reader in the Preface to his History,
viz. As for my performance in this work; in the first place I am to tell thee,
tha^ toward the raising of this Fabric, I have not borrowed my Materials only
out of vulgar Authors, but searched into the Registers of the Convocation,
consulted all such Acts of Parliament as concerned (...) purpose, advised with
many Foreign Writers of great Name and Credit, exemplified some Records and
Charters of no common Quality, many rare Pieces in the Famous Cottonian
Library, and not (...) few Debates and Orders of the Council Table: And next I
am to l^^ thee know, that in the whole carriage of this Work, I have assumed
unto my self the freedom of a just Historian, delivering nothing for ^ Truth
without good Authority; but so delivering the Truth as t^ witness for me, that
I am neither byas'd by Love, or Hatred. If I seem sharp at any time, as
sometimes I may, it is but in such case only, and on such occasions in which
there is no good to be done b^^ lenitives, etc. I have transcribed this
passage, least the Reader should be imposed on by Burnet 's Character of the
Ingenious Heylin, who^^ History he would disparage to advance the Reputation of
his own. And pray the Reader to observe, that Dr. Burnet does not instance one
passage of any moment in all Heylin 's Works, wherein that he dares say he is
false which certainly he would have done, had he found any such. But he
delivers many things in such a manner and so strangely, that on^ would think (
says Burnet) he had been secretly set on by those (...) the Church of Rome,
though I doubt not but he was a sincere Protestant, etc. But what sort of
People they were who set on Dr. Burnet^ write his History is very well known. I
will instance some passages out (...) Heylin, which I suppose did not please
Dr. Burnet, viz. All that wa^ done in order to a Reformation under Henry VIII.
seemed to be accidental only, and by the by; rather designed on private ends
that out of any settled purpose to Reform the Church, and therefore intermitted
and re-assum'd again as those ends had variance. But no^ the work was carried
on with a constant hand, (under Edward VI. the Prelates of the Church
cooperating with the King and his Council, etc. And scarce had they brought it
to this pass when King Edward died, whose death I cannot reckon for an
Infelicity to the Church of England, (says the Doctor.) For being ill
Principl'd i^ himself, and easily inclined to embrace such Councils as were
offered to him, it is not to be thought but that the rest of the Bishoprics
(before sufficiently impoverished,) must have followed the Fate of Durham, and
the poor Church left as destitute of Lands and Ornaments, as when she came into
the World in her natural nakedness. Nor was it like to happen otherwise in the
following Reign, ( to wit, of the Lady Jane Gray) if it had lasted longer then
nine days wonder. For Dudly Duke of Northumberland, who then ruled the roast,
and had before dissolved, and in hope devoured the Wealthy Bishopric of
Durham, might easily have possessed himself of the Bishoprics of York and
Carlisle, etc. Dudly's Son was Married to the said Lady Jane, Proclaimed Queen,
to maintain whose Interest and Title, the poor remainder of the Churches
Patrimony was in all probability (says Heylin) to have had been shared amongst
those of that Party to make 'em sure; but the Wisdom of this great Achitophel
(Dudley) being turned to foolishness, he fell into the hands of the public
Hangman, etc. Reader, Behold the spirit of Reformation which governed those
times. They are Heylin 's own words.

But what is all this (you will say) to Cranmer, and other Clergymen, whose
intentions of Reformation were sincere and honest? As for Cranmer, then, you
may judge of his spirit by what I shall remark to you out of Doctor Burnet 's
Records. Only observe the Duke of Somerset 's History in short, ( thus out of
Heylin^) Being condemned to die by his own Brethren of the Reformation, he was
so defective in his judgment, as not to crave the benefit of his Clergy which
might have saved his life: Whether it were some secret judgment on him from
above, that he who had destroyed so many Churches, invaded the Estate of many
Cathedrals, deprived many learned men of their means and livelihood (for being
Papists) should want the benefit of his Clergy in his greatest extremity, etc.
Observe the remarkable Fates of those grand Reformers. Now as for Cranmer 's
spirit, take notice of it from his own words recorded by Dr. Burnet; which the
Reader may consult, to save me the labor of transcribing, one or two Passages
I cannot omit: Cranmer, with the rest of the English Bishops, being desired to
return their Answers severally to this Question; Whether in the New Testament
be required any Consecration of a Bishop or Priest? Cranmer Answers thus under
his hand, viz. In the New Iestament, he that is appointed to be a Priest or
Bishop, needs no Consecration by the Scripture, for Election thereunto is
sufficient. In which assertion all the rest of the Bishops, except one, were
against him.

And being consulted about another Question, Whether Bishops and Priests only
may Excommunicate by Gods Law? To which he returns this Answer under his Hand,
viz. A Bishop or Priest, by the Scripture, is neither commanded nor forbidden
to Excommunicate, but where the Laws of any Country give them Authority to
Excommunicate, there they ought to use the same in such Crimes as the Laws have
such Authority in. And where the Laws of the Country forbid them, there they
have no Authority at all. And they that be no Priests may also Excommunicate,
if the Law allow thereunto. Here he had the spirit of Hobbs of Malmsbury.

And about another Question, whether by Authority of Christ's words, Quorum
remiseritis peccata, remittuntur illis, Christians are bound to confess their
secret sins to a Priest? He answered in the Negative against all the rest of
the Bishops, except one. Let the Reader consult Burnet, and compare him with
Heylin; in both which it will appear, that the Grand Reformers, Somerset,
Dudley, etc. Made their Breakfast only of Abbey Lands, intending to Dine upon
the Bishops Lands. Burnet strains all his wit to palliate their Doings, and
paint them out to Advantage. Heylin represents them honestly for the most part,
and in their own colors; and in my poor opinion, writes more Truth, and
better. English: He was full of a Generous Indignation to see so much Stripping
and Plundering of God's House under pretense of Resorming it.

Tu abominaris Idola and Sacrilegium facis. Romans 1. 22.
FAREWELL.
May it please your Grace,
I Humbly beg leave to send Your Grace this short Account of my Reconcilement
to the Roman Catholic Church. God be praised it was not any consideration of
Temporal Interest that inclined me to it, as all that have known me these
several years past can witness. But having often reflected on the uncertainty
and variety of the Protestant Spirit, and perused the Books of Catholics
without prejudice, especially the Mass it self, I found my self deceived by the
Reports which I had entertained of Catholic Religion.

THere are three Points chiefly wherein I could never satisfy my self, since I
began to Study the Controversy between both Churches. One is the Authority or
Mission of the first Reformers. The second is the want of Confession in the
Church of England. The Third is the Answer given by Protestants to that
Question in His late Majesty's Papers, Where is that one Holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church which we do profess to believe in the two Creeds.

As to the first, I have seen Dr. Bramhall's and Mr. Mason's Vindications of
the Church of England; but could never find any satisfactory Answer to this
Question, Who Authorized the first Reformers to Preach their Protestant
Doctrine, and Administer their Protestant Sacraments? Their Priestly or
Episcopal Character, whether valid or no, I meddle not with to prevent
Disputes: Although I think it no easy matter to find out who Ordained the first
Protestant Bishops; there being none to do it except Roman Catholic Prelates,
who never use to Consecrate any Protestants. This Testimony I lately met with
in the Records annexed to Dr. Burnet's second Volume of his History of the
Resormation.

In the Month of March anno 1553. Queen Mary sent this, amongst other Articles,
to the Bishop of London, viz. Touching such persons as were heretofore (meaning
the days of Edward the VI.) promoted to any Orders after the new sort and
fashion of Orders, considering they were not ordered in very deed; the Bishop
of the Diocese finding otherwise, sufficiency, and ability in those men, may
supply that thing which wanted in them before, and then according to his
discretion admit them to Minister, etc. This Royal Testimony, with the Honest
Protestant Reader, will not be despisable. I shall not insist upon it, but only
observe at present, that Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Latimer Bishop
of Worcester, at the time of their Confecration were professed Roman Catholics
in all points, except. perhaps the Pope's Supremacy; But afterward turning
Protestants, and pronouncing the Church of Rome Idolatrous, I would fain know
by whose Authority.

The truth is, they were first Ordained Catholic Bishops according to the
Roman Pontifical, and afterward made themselves Protestant Bishops. But I
understand not how a Man can forsake the Church of England, and Preach
Presbyterian Doctrine by virtue. of his Protestant Orders; nor how any man can
justify his Protestant Doctrine by Authority of his Popish Mission.

This was Cranmer and Latimer's case, who at the time of their. Consecration
(which was in the days of Henry the VIII.) professed Seven Sacraments; whether
they believed so many, is a Question: Afterward, anno 1536. retrenched them to
Three, that is to say. Baptism, Penance, and the Lord's Supper: Then to Two,
anno 1548 By whose Authority or Mission, I cannot tell. So that Protestancy
seem to me to have been born into the World not like Honestly begotte Children,
whose Parents are known, but rather like a By-blow whose Father is doubtful. I
have known some Pre byrerians; when questioned about their Mission, pretend
they did receive it from the Church of England Prelates; But being further
interrogated, Did that Church Authorize you to Preach against her Sacraments or
Liturgy? There was no Answer to be had. I know it will be said that the
Protestant Religion is Authorized by Act of Parliament, and so is not
Presbytery. A Parliamentary Mission then our first Reformers had, and no other
that I can find. But whether the Parliament, being a Civil Authority, has Power
to send Missioners to Preach the Gospel, and Administer Sacraments, I do not
well understand. If they have I suppose every Member of Parliament may Preach,
and Administer Sacraments if he pleases; because no man can give that Authority
unto others which he has not himself. And if English Parliaments may Preach,
and Administer Sacraments, I doubt not but the French, Spanish, Scotch, and
Irish may do the same; and then what Unity of Spirit, or agreement in Faith
Christians are like to have, I could never understand.

To this, two Answers are wont to be given, which I will not conceal from the
Reader. One is, that Cranmer and his Associates were sent and ordered by the
Roman Pontifical to instruct the people according to the Scriptures. This is
the Answer of Dr. Burnet. The Church (says he) was overrun with Errors and
Corruptions; this Cranmer saw, and was obliged to undeceive the people! Very
good. But I entreat the Reader to inspect the Records aforesaid, published by
the Doctor himself, and annexed to the first and second Volume of his History:
where he shall find Cranmer, and one or two Bishops more pretending Errors and
Corruptions, and driving on a Reformation against the Major Vote of the English
Bishops. He shall find the same Cranmer at the time of his Consecration, owning
and professing those very Doctrines which afterward he called Errors and
Corruptions; so that still I must ask the old Question, by whose Authority did
he condemn that Church from whom he received his Mission and Holy Orders? I
desire to know whether an honest Man can Preach against the Liturgy,
Sacraments, or Constitution of any Church, by virtue of any Commission he
received from it? And whether such Preacher be not liable to the Censures of
that Church? Did ever any Church Authorize her Priests or Bishops to go and
Preach the Gospel according to their own private Sense and Conscience, in
contradiction to her declared Doctrine and Worship; Does the Church of England
give any such Power at this day? No, by no means. Read the Form appointed by
her for the Ordination of a Priest, where the Bishop is to interrogate the
Party thus, viz. Do you think in your heart, that you be truly called according
to the Order of this Church of England, to the Order and Ministry of
Priesthood? The Answer is, I think so. Will you then (says the Protestant
Bishop) give your diligence always to Minister the Doctrine and Sacraments as
this Church and Realm has received the same according to the Commandments of
God? The Answer is, I will do so by the help of God.

So that, as no honest Man can turn Presbyterian or Independent. Preacher, by
virture of his Protestant Mission; so neither can he Preach Protestant
Doctrine, by pretense of a Commission he received from the Church of Rome. If
any body should ask me, what if the. Church be manifestly corrupted with
Superstition and Idolatry? In this case, why may not able Men Preach without
any Mission? I must beg leave to ask him again, what if the Church finds those
Men of Abilities manifestly intoxicated with mistakes of Holy Scripture? With a
Spirit of perverseness, and a desire of change? Or perhaps an evil Eye at the
Lands of the Church? What is to be done in this case? Let the Scripture (he
will say) determine the business: But the Scripture admits of various
Interpretations: and I would fain know what Rebel or Heretic shall ever be
convicted, that must be tried by a Law whereof himself must be the Interpreter.

Well, but Cranmer, though he had no Mission to Reform, was perhaps a Holy Man:
as for his Sanctity, the Reader may be pleased to see him subscribing to a
Letter in Foxes Acts and Monuments for Excluding his Lawful Sovereign the
Princess Mary, from Succession to the Crown: And afterward Recanting the
Protestant Religion, and relapsing into it again, when he saw no hopes of a
Reprieve. The truth is, when I reflect that Cromwell and He were the chief
Engineers of the Reformation, first to Divorce Henry VIII. from his most
Virtuous and Innocent Wife Queen Katherine, then to Marry him to Anne Bolen,
and afterward to dissolve that Marriage: Then to destroy Religious Houses, and
hang up the poor Abbots; disband four or five Sacraments; set the People a
madding after new Lights: I cannot but look upon those two Politicians as the
Ringleaders of all that Confusion and Mischief, which has since broke out upon
the Stage of Great Britain.

So much for the former Answer, that Cranmer and his Associates were sent, and
ordained by the Roman Pontifical to teach the People according to the
Scriptures, which they did according to their own Sense of the Scriptures.

If it be said that he Preached no new Doctrine, nor Administered any new
Sacraments, but only the Primitive Doctrine and Sacraments of Jesus Christ,
according to the Sense of the Ancient Fathers, which is the second Answer: I
pray the Reader to remember, that this was the very Answer of Luther, Socinus,
Zuinglius, Calvin, and other Reformers. I am not disputing what Doctrine he
Preached, but who sent him to Preach his Protestant Doctrine, and Adminster his
Protestant Sacraments? It Is not his Doctrine, but Mission I am now enquiring
after. How shall they Preach except they be sent? says St. Paul. It Is not a
pretense of true Doctrine, without External and Lawful Mission, that makes a
Man a Preacher of the Gospel. The necessity of Mission appears from God's own
word, Jerem. 23. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not
spoken to them, yet they Prophesied, verse. 21. Therefore they shall not profit
this People at all, says the Lord, verse 32.

There are but two sorts of Mission in Holy Scripture, the one Ordinary, the
other Extraordinary: The former is the License and Approbation of the Church in
being: The latter is the immediate Voice and Inspiration of God himself, ever
attested by Miracles, Prediction of future and public Events, etc. Now, as for
the first Preachers of Reformation, some body must send them by an Ordinary or
Extraordinary Commission, or they must run on their own heads. Fur and latro
est (says St. Cyprian) qui a nemine Missus nisi a seipso: That is to say, he
enters not by the Door as honest Men do, but seeks Windows, Corners, or By-ways
of his own; as if the Divine Providence were wanting (when necessity requires)
to send Preachers into the Church, or to furnish them with sufficient
Credentials, so as to leave us without excuse. Did not the Hand of God strike
Vzzah with sudden death, for presuming to put forth his hand, un-commanded, to
support the Ark from falling, 2 Samuel 6. And King Vzzah with a Leaprosy to the
day of his death, for Offering Incense which appertained to the Priests alone?
Are not these things Recorded for our instruction?

The not considering this matter, has brought a World of confusion upon these
Kingdoms; and till the people can be brought to understand it, we are never
like to see an end of our Religious Distractions. For why may not I (may a
Presbyterian Minister say) having the same Authority of Scripture as Cranmer
pretended to, Preach against the Superstition of Common Prayer, as well as He
against the Idolatry of the Mass.

The second point wherein I was disatisfy'd, was the want of Confession to a
Priest. I found Protestant Sermons had some Authority with the people, but not
much for lack of this Curb upon their Vices, Catholics commit sin, it is true:
but call themselves to an account for it, by Confession and Submission to their
Ghostly Fathers. Protestants sin likewise, without calling themselves to any
such reckoning; because they can make a shift without it.

I have diverse times discoursed with Protestant Ministers, and some Protestant
Bishops about this matter. I was sorry to find no Harmony in their Opinions.
Some said it was a thing allowed by the Church of England, as very expedient in
some cases, but no matter of necessity. Others thought it but a Pick-Lock of
secrets, and a matter of ill consequence. But when I urged that the Church of
England seems to require it in her Offices for the Communion and Visitation of
the Sick; the reply was, she does it with this Proviso, If a man be troubled
with any doubts or scruples; Which reply did but add more to my
dissatisfaction: For thought I, is Confession nothing else but to be resolved
in our scruples and doubts? I have sometimes wished her Exhortation before the
Communion, otherwise worded, then saying, If there be any of you which cannot
quiet his own Conscience, let him come to Me, or some other Learned Minister of
Gods Word, and open his grief, etc. Which words seem to allow as much, as that
sinners may satisfy their own Consciences well enough without troubling
themselves for the Absolution of a Priest, although a Priest may be had.

In short, I confess my dullness understands neither the Piety nor Policy of
leaving off the practice of a thing so approved and frequented by all the
Christian World, except the people of our Islands, and some few others that
call themselves Reformed. And that only for some Abuses which possibly may
attend it. By this means the Church of England appears to me to have lost that
Interest in the Consciences of the People, which both the Roman and Greek
Priests are happy in at this day.

And what if some Catholics are never the better for it? What are many
Protestants the better for all the Sermons they hear, and Sacraments they
receive? If we confess our sins, God is faithful, and just to forgive us our
sins, says St. John. Faithful and just to what? Even to his own promise which
he has thrice repeated in the Gospel, Whosoevers sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them. But another promise, that he will do it without the
Ministry of his Priests, we read not of in the New Testament. I pray the Reader
to consider whether private Sinners in the Church of England do not offend God
at a much cheaper rate then in the Church of Rome; since in the Church of Rome
they are bound to some Penance: But in the Church of England they may Confess
to their Ministers, and do Penance if they will; or if they will not, they may
let it alone. If they cannot satisfy their own Consciences (says the
Common Prayer) let them come to me, or some other Discreet and Learned
Minister, and open their Grief, etc. That Christians may receive the Communion
of Christ's Body and Blood without a previous Confession and Absolution by a
Priest, was never heard of in the Catholic Church until the days of Henry the
VIII.

The third difficulty was the Answer given by Protestants to that Question in
the late Kings Papers, Where is that one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church
which we do profess to believe in the two Creeds? Was there any such Society as
one Holy Catholic Church extant upon the face of the Earth when Cranmer began
his Reformation? And what Provinces of the Earth did this Church inhabit? This
is a plain Question, and desires no Answer but of the ubi or place where to
find it, This Society, if it be not an Idea Platonica, must appear somewhere:
And when That is known, the next doubt is, Did Cranmer believe himself a Member
of it? and if so, I would fain know who gave him Authority to Reform this one
Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church; To set up Altar against Altar, etc. If
there were no such Church extant upon the face of the Earth, as there must be
none, in case she were lapsed into Idolatry, what became of our Saviors
Prediction, that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against his Church? I am
told that Dr. S -- eet has answered these Questions, by saying, that the Church
of Rome are Idolaiers, and yet a true Church at the same time: Which Answer I
confess I do not understand. For what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols, (says St. Paul) and what concord has Christ with Belial? For ye are
the Temple of the living God, what communion has light with darkness? 2 Cor.
6.16. What? Idolaters, and yet a true Church? it is as much as to say, they are
in the way to Heaven and Hell at the same time. But such Answers must the given
when there are no better. I confess I never read this Answer in him, I only
have it by Hearsay. Surely, to teach and practice Idolatry, destroys the very
Being of a Christian Church. And it the Church of Rome be no Christian Church,
there is an end of the Episcopal Succession of the Church of England, and
consequently of the Church it self.

To conclude, that which obliged me most of all to the Church of Rome, was the
perusal of her Books of Devotion; such as Saint Francis Sales Bishop of Geneva,
his Introduction to a Devout Life. Neirembergius of the difference betwixt
Temporal and Eternal. Lewis Gratensis of the Love of God. Kempis of the
following of Christ, etc. Especially the Mass it self; which I read without
prejudice, and compared the Spirit of Piety, which I found there, with the
Spirit of Reformation.

Instead of Idolatry, I found the most Elevated and Judicious Prayers to the
Holy Trinity; concluding in the Name or our Savior Jesus Christ; besides the
daily Sacrifice offered up to Almighty God, according to his own appointment,
Do this in remembrance of me. All this I observed, and then said within my
self, God forgive the wickedness of those people who quarrel at this, and
persecute it with so blind and furious an aversion. So did the Jews Crucify our
Savior.

What fault can any ingenious Protestant find with This, or any other Prayer of
the Mass? Suscipe sancte Pater, omnipotentes aeterne Deus hanc immaculatam
hostiam quam ego indignus famulus tuus offero tibi Deo meo vivo and vero, etc.
Accept, O Holy Father Almighty and Eternal God, this unspotted Sacrifice which
I thy unworthy Servant offer unto thee, my living and true God, for my
innumerable sins, offenses and negligences, and for all here present, as also
for all Faithful Christians both living and dead, that it may avail both Me and
Them unto everlasting life, Amen. If this be the Mass, who but a perverse
ill-natured Phanatick can except against it?

As for the Confiteor said at the beginning of Mass, the Reader shall find
Protestants objecting nothing against it, but what Presbyterians do against
that Canticle in the Common Prayer Book, called, Benedicte omnia opera. O
Ananias, Azarias and Misael, Praise ye the Lord, is a^ rank Popery with the
Presbyterians, as any thing in the Mass, or Litanies of our Lady. For what is
that (say they) but to invocate dead men, who don't hear us. Thus they will
interpret it in their own Sense, and not in the Sense of the Church of England.

In a word, I found the Church of England beholding to the Mass for the best
Flowers in her Communion Service. And since some Protestants will believe
nothing but their Senses, let them read it as I have done, and believe their
own eyes. The objection of its being said in the Latin Tongue, allows every man
to hear it that understands Latin. And as for unlearned Catholics, if the
Truth were known, they understand as much or more of it than Illiterate
Protestants do of the Common Prayer. What does the Protestant Multitude
understand of the Predictions of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Zechariah,
read in their Churches by appointment of the Common Prayer? How many
Expositions of the Mass are extant in Print by the commandment of the Church?
So that no man can be ignorant of it that desires to be informed. How much more
Universal and Vulgar is the Latin than the English Tongue? Had not the Jewish
Church, (being then the only true Church in the World) almost all her
Scriptures and public Service for fourteen Generations, that is to say, from
the Captivity of Babylon unto Christ in the old Hebrew? A Language not then
understood by the common People. Did our Savior or his Apostles ever reprehend
the Jews for this? or for not Translating their Scriptures into the vulgar
Language? If the Service of God must be said in the Maternal Language of every
Nation, where shall an Englishman in France or Spain, that understands not the
Language, go to serve God upon the Lord's Day? This would destroy all community
of Sacraments and Liturgy between the Members of the Catholic Church; which
being one Body or Society of men, cannot be like the builders of Babel, who
would not understand one another Language. Now I beseech you Brethren, (says
St. Paul,) by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no Schisms among you, that ye may with one mind and
one mouth Glori^y God, 1 Cor. 1.10. Romans 15.6.

In fine, let the Reader compare that Devotion which Catholics pay to the
Sacrifice of the Mass, with that which most Protestants show to the
Common Prayer, and then see how much better we are by Reforming the Mass into
English. As for St. Paul's 14th. Chapter of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, I humbly think it not well understood by Protestants. If any man
be ignorant, says he, let him be ignorant, Wherefore Brethren, covet no
Prophecy, and forbid not to speak with tongues, ver. 39. God is not the Author
of Confusion, but of Peace, ver. 33.

Upon the whole matter, I desire to be informed whether the Protestant Church
had any other foundation (setting aside an Act of Parliament,) than every man's
own Reason, or which is the same thing, the Scripture interpreted by every
man's Reason. There are but two Bases whereupon to settle our selves, the
Scripture, and Fathers expounded by my own Reason, or the Scriptures and
Fathers expounded by the voice of the present Visible Church. This later is
Popish, and cannot support a Reformed Fabric.

I have sometimes wondered at this Assertion of Calvin, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 1.
(so incoherent with his own Principles of Reformation,) Extra Ecclesiae gremium
nulla speranda salus nec remissio peccatorum, quia non est alius in vitam
ingressus; Which I think may be thus rendered into English: He that will enter
into Life, let him mortify the pride of his own Reason, and humbly cast
himself at the feet of the Catholic Church. If this be the meaning of his
words, as it must be in case he believed any such thing as one Holy Catholic
Church; how he will justify his Reformation at the day of Judgment, I cannot
imagine.

In this Paper therefore I presume not to assert my own Reason (which I confess
to be as weak as any body else can think it,) but the Authority of the Church
against the A^rogance of the first Reformers. This difference I understand
betwixt the spirit of Catholics and of Heretics; the former make use of
their Reason with Submission, the later with Contradiction and Petulancy
against the Church, and against the express words of Christ; He that hears
you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me.

Cranmer had no Mission from Heaven, nor yet from the present Visible Church to
authorize his doings; but made himself Judge, Witness, and Accuser. So did
Luther, so did Calvin, Socinus, Knipperdoling, etc. How they will Answer it at
the last day, I cannot understand.

A word or two more before I make an end. I know diverse Loyal Persons of the
Church of England, who are Protestants by the Tyranny of Prejudice or Interest,
but Catholics by Inclination: Of them I beg leave to ask a few Questions.
What Priesthood or Holy Orders have Protestants, but what they Confess to have
received from Roman Catholic Bishops? Who gave them Authority to pronounce
themselves Sound Members, and the Church of Rome a Corrupt Arm of the
Catholic Church? Did not the Presbyterians, anno 1641. pretend the very same
warrant of Scripture for Reforming the Church of England? And the Independants
for supplanting the Presbyterians, anno 1647. The Presbyterians (said Hugh
Peter's) are no other then Gibeonites, who may help to hew Stones, and square
Timber for a more Glorious Reformation.

Now as for Roman Catholics, do they ever say Mass to any other Object, but
the Living God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? Read the Catechism of the Council
of Trent, and see whether they attribute any thing to Angels or Saints, but as
the Ministers and Favorites of the Living God, receiving from him whatever
understanding they may have of our Affairs upon earth. The Angels must know our
Affairs, because They are ministering Spirits, sent forth for the good of those
who shall be Heirs of Salvation; And because they rejoice at the Conversion of
Sinners: And have glorified Saints no Communication or Intelligence with the
Angels? As for the Images of Christ's humane Nature, see the 25th. Session of
the Council of Trent, and enquire whether Roman Catholics pay any more
respects to Them, than Protestants do to the Elements of Bread and Wine, which
(say they) are but a Figure or Image of Christ's Body and Blood. Omnis
Superstitio in imaginum usu sacro tollatur, says that Council; Let all
Superstition be taken away in the use of Images; and then gives it in charge to
all Bishops to look to it. The Church of England Protestants are every jot as
offensive to us (say the Presbyterians) kneeling before the Elements of Bread
and Wine, as the Pupists kneeling before the Images of Christ. I humbly
recommend to Protestants the perusal of a late Book, Entitled, Pax Vobis: And
of another, styled, Considerations upon the Council of Trent, by R. H.

I say no more, only give thanks to Almighty God with all my heart, that I am
escaped out of the unstable waters of Schism into the Ark of Christ's Church.
And I beseech him to inspire me with that Spirit of Devotion which I observed
in the Mass, and other Books of Catholics. As for the ill practices of some,
and the ill Opinions of other Roman Catholics, which Protestants are wont to
charge upon the whole Church, I pass it over as no Argument at all: All
Protestants are no more Saints, than all Papists. In the Council of Trent an
unprejudiced Reader shall find nothing but what is Judicious and Pious. And let
him view Popery not as Protestants, but as Papists represent it, who should
best know their own Religion.

In the Church of Rome he shall find variety of Religious Orders, but no
Schism, nor discord about their Sacraments or Liturgy. In vest Ecclesiae
varietas est, scissura non est. No confusion of Sects, nor disobedience to
Superiors; but all things performed in excellent order, and God Almighty
served, as he is the Creator and Emperor of the World, with Reverence and
distance.

O quam dilecta sunt Tabernacula tua Domine virtutum! concupiscit and deficit
Anima mea in Atria Domini. Beati qui habitant in domo tua, in Saecula
Saeculorum laudabunt te. Amen. Psalm. 84.
P: S:
IF any Protestant Reader, instead of a material Answer to this Discourse,
shall think fit to revile the Author, it is but what I expect, and what I intend
to take no notice of. But I entreat him to read the following Quaeries without
his Spectacles of Prejudice and Interest.

Dubia quaedam super Reformatione Anglicana.
ECclesia Anglicana vel est tota Ecclesia Catholica vel membrum illius, si
membrum duntaxat, ostende mihi sub sole Ecclesiam vel coetum cujus Sacramenta
amplectitur, nisi sit a reliquo corpore absc^ssum?

Number recipit Sacramenta Lutheranorum vel Calvinistarum?

Vnde Missas est Cranmerus primus ille Reformator Ecclesiae Anglicana? quis
misit illum ad praedicandum Evangelium suum Reformatum? utrum licitum ei vel
honestum fuerit rebella^e adversus Ecclesiam Romanam virtute Missionis ab ea
acceptae.

An liceat Episcopo vel Ministro ab Ecclesia Anglicana fugitivo praedicare
contra eam obtentu Ministerii ab ea co^^a^i?

Vtrum defectus Missionis sit error in fundamentis? ratio dubitandi est, quia
furtum and latrocinium est non ingredi per Ostium in Ovile.

Vtrum Cranmerus intravit per Ostium Parliamentarium vel forsan per Portam
Scripturarum? at haec est cantilena omnium Sectariorum Scripturas sibi
vendicantium. Quaero igitur nonne varius and multiplex est Scripturarum sensus?
unde necesse est assignari Judicem aliquem qui verum sensum a falso dijudicet,
nisi mavis altercari in aeternum.

Ad haec Postulata saepius quaesivi responsum sed nullum hactenus inveni. Si
dixeris (quod a multis obtendi solet) Cranmerum cum suis sodalibus Ordines
Sacros accepisse a Christo and Apostolis per manus Episcopo um Pontificiorum,
sequitur Episcopos Pontificios suos etiam Ordines a Christo and Apostolis
accepisse. Sunt ergo very pastores ac proinde Audiendi. Hoc respouso videntur
mihi jugulare causam suam Protestants. At, inquies, Episcopi Pontificii
ordines suos non Doctrinam acceperunt a Christo and Apostolis; egregie. Cupio
ergo doceri qua uthoritate insurrexerunt Primi Reformatores adversus Doctrinam
Ecclesiae Romanae? aut hic nodus solvendus est, aut simul agis and Judicem and
testem and Accusatorem.

Sed plerumque responderi solet, cuilibet Genti competere jus reformandi
seipsam: esto. Ergo pari jure Resormata fuit gens Scotica ad Calvinismum,
Saxonica ad Lutheranismum, etc. deinde jalsum est quod sacta erat mutatio
Religi^nis in Anglia ex vo^o Genti and cleri Anglicani, sed ex Vertigine
pauco^^m res novas quaerentium sub pueritia Edwardi Sexti. Lege illo^um
temporum Annals, ubi palam est Episcopos sere omnes ( Cranmero and paucis
aliis exceptis) a novo Evangelio abhorruisse

Caeterum dato hoc and non concesso, nempe Reformatam fuisse Religionem ex
mente potioris partis Cle^i Anglicani; nescio an licuit Ecclesiae Anglicanae,
cum esset Membrun. Ecclesiae Catholicae, semet abscindere a Reliquo corpo e. Si
dixeris hoc sactum fuisse non vitio Ecclesiae Anglicanae sed Romanae
corruptelas suas Orbi obirudentis, respondeo breviter, quod se Judice omnis
haereticus absolvitur. Praeterea animadvertat Lector hoc ipsum solere objici ab
omnibus Presbyterianis defectionem suam ab Ecclesia Angicana excusantibus,
uimirum so reliquisse non nisi errores and corruptelas Anglicanae Religionis.

An per Vniversum Orbem depravatus fuit verus Dei cultus ante ortum Cranmerum?
si non, dic mihi ubinam gentium exti erit? An apud Waldenses? a^ n^scio unde
Missus est Petro Waldo Alercator Lugdunensis? nec scio an ^j^s Sacramenta
placeant Ecclesiae Anglicanae.

Vt um ho^ie extra Regnum Angliae and Hiberniae nullus extet purus and
Apostolicus Dei cultus.

Vtrum liceat populo Anglicano comminisci sibi Ecclesiam a toto Orb divisam?
quae Authoritate damnat Sacramenta and Ritus Ecclesiae Romanae?

Vtrum Cranmerus fuit primus Archiepiscopus Ecclesiae Anglicanae? Ratio
dubitandi est, quia Archiepiscopi Cantuarienses per novem antecedentia saecula
fuerunt omnes Pontificii. Si primus fuit, ergo desuit ei successio Episcopalis,
quia primus suae Sectae nuli successit. An fuerit leguimus P^stor cui deearant
Successio Missio and Miracula?

Vtrum sit ve^a Ecclesia quae non h^bet legitimos Pastores? Vel an possint esse
vera Sacramenta apud Pastores non veros? Si non, ergo praestat communicare sub
una specie cumCatholicis quam sub nulla cum Reformatis.

Vtrum 39 Articuli Ecclesiae Anglicanae sint Articuli si ei vel non? Sinon;
ergo nemo tenetur fidem habere iliis sub periculo salutis. Si sic, ergo
Ecclesia Anglicana novos excogitavit sidei Articulos praeter duodecim illos a
Ch^isto and Apostolis institutos.

Vtrum Religio Reformata sit divisibilis in semper divisibiles?

An in re Eucharistica Argumentum a sensibus ductum sit fallibile? Ratio
dubitandi est quia Serpens primos fefellit Parents suadendo illis ut suis
crederent oculis, scilicet comederent de ligno scientiae quia erat pulchrum
oculis. Quod si ab oculis suis deceptum fuit genus humanum, quaeso unde pus
fidei meruerunt caeteri sensus?

Vtrum Ecclesia Anglicana mutabilis sit ad nutum Parliamenti?

Vtrum Spiritus Calvini negantis ac Lutheri affirmantis Corporalem Christum
praesentiam in Eucharistia sint idem? Si diversi, ergo uterque a Deo esse non
potest.

Nonne impudentissimus fuit. Johannes Calvinus usurpato sibi munere reformandi
Orbem cum Juvenis esset vigenti sex annorum idque absque omni praetextu
Mi^aculorum, quod ne ipse Christus susceperat ante annum trigesimum?

An ex utero Reformationis essluxerint Caedes, rapinae, direptiones templorum,
tumultus, Schismata and bella civilia quae emerserunt Anno 1641.

Vtrum Africa feracior sit Monstrorum quam Britannia Fanaticorum, ubi nulli non
licet intelligere Scripturas pro suo judicio discretionis?

Vtrum Elisabethae ex Anna Bolena suscepta, vivente adhuc Regina Katherina,
legitimos habuit natales?

Vtrum laudanda sit sapientia Henrici VIII. qui expulso uno Papa Romano
suscitavit infinitos Papas ex suis subditis;

Qua Autoritate uxorem suam Katherinam repudiavit Henricus? Sut, vel aliena? Si
sua quidni possint and alii Reges pro libitu suas dimittere uxores? Quod si
Maria filia ejus ex Katherina fuit legitima Regni haeres, ergo Elizabetha non
fuit; quia Henrico non licuit habere duas uxores simul.

Si nefas sit mutare Religionem Parliamentaria Autoritate stabilitam, und^
licuit Elizabethae religionem evertere Catholicam Regni legibus stabilitam? 14
Episcopos Catholicos e sedibus suis expulit Elizabetha ob recusatum juramentum
Primatus. At quomodo poterant jurare eam esse caput Ecclesiae, quando non
poterant jurare eam esse caput Regni?

Nonne Liturgiam suam suffuratus est Cranmerus ex Missali, Rituali and
Breviario Romano?

Nonne Juramento Primatus tenentur Protestants obtemperare Regi ut supremo
Gubernatori tam in omnibus spiritualibus sive Ecclesiasticis rebus aut causis
quam in temporalibus, etc. quid sibi volunt hac verba tam in omnibus
spiritualibus quam temporalibus rebus aut causis, nisi ut Protestants debeant
Regi praestare omnimodam obedientiam tam Religiosam quam civilem? Nonne ergo
secundum hoc juramentum oportet eos esse Catholicos cum Rege Catholico,
Calvinanos cum Calvinano. Arianos cum Ariano? Dico secundum hoc juramentum,
quiae Regia Majestas est unicus supremus Gubernator tam in omnibus
spiritualibus quam temporalibus rebus. Haec verba agnoscunt in Rege primatum
tam spiritualem quam civilem. At unde constabit ejus Jurisdictio spiritualis
absque protestate clavium?

Dices, obsequendum est Rege quantum licet per leges Dei and Regni; esto. Ergo
Rex non est supremum sub Christo caput sed Scriptura and Statuta Regni. At si
quod lis surrexerit inter Regem and subditos de ve^o sensu Scripturae, Quis
erit Judex? Spiritus privatu an non? hinc, ni fallor, origo and fomes bellorum
civilium.

Cur Reformationem tam avide amplexi sunt tot nobiles sub Elizabetha? Ob
conscientiam an ob lucrum praediorum Ecclesias^icorum?

Cur plebs Anglicana novitatis avida odit Papismum? forsan quia Papismus non
est novitas.

Ecclesia Anglicana vel est fallibilis vel infallibilis, si fallibilis sit (uti
fatentur omnes) ergo non est ^undata super Petram, quia potest falli and
fallere.

Vtrum sapienter ^ecit Cardinalis Wolsae^s evertendo Monasteria ut fundaret
Collegia? ratio dubitandi est quia lignum scientia non fuit lignum vitae.

Nonn^ in Ecclesia Anglicana desideratur versio Bibliorum multo emendatior and
correctior? quia quam plurimis in locis Vi^iantur textus in favorem carnis and
gra^iam Schismatis; exempli caus^, Gal. 5.17. Dan. 4.24. Vbi Propheta
alloquitur Regem Nebuchadonosor sic, quamobrem, Rex, consilium meum placeat
tibi, and peccata tua eleemosynis redime, and iniquitates tuas misericordiis
Pauperum. Quem textum ita reddunt Biblia Anglicana satis vitiose. Wherefore O
King, break off thy Sins by Righteousness, and thy Iniquities by showing Mercy
to the Poor. Cum verti oportuit, redeem thy Sins by Alms-deeds, and thine
Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor. Praeterea mal^ reddantur haec verba
Sancti Pauli ad Corinthios, 1. Cor. 7.9. Quod si non se continent, nubant; But
if they cannot contain, let them Marry? Vbi haec vox (cannot) excogitabatur in
favorem carnis.

Rursus verba Christi corrumpuntur, Mat. 19.11. propter indulgentiam carnis
sic, non omnes capiunt verbum istud sed quibus datum est. All Men [cannot]
receive this saying, but such to whom it is given. Deinde verba Jobi c. 7.1.
and alii textus non pauci praesertim, Exodus 20.4. in odium imaginis Christi.
Non facies tibi sculptile. Quae vox sculptile a 70 been vertitur Idolum, quia
Deus non prohibuit imagines sed Idota.

FINIS.

