HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ETMON DROIT

royal blazon or coat of arms

THE Clerks Guide, Leading into THREE PARTS.

VIZ. I. Of Indentures, Leases, etc. II. Letters of Attorney, Warrants of
Attorney, Mortgages, Licenses, Charter-Parties, etc. III. Bills, Answers,
Replications, Rejoynders in Chancery, etc.


Under which are comprehended The most Usual Forms of Clerkship.

To which is added, A FOURTH PART OF Fines, Recoveries, Statutes,
Recognisances, Judgments, etc. Distresses and Replevins.

Illustrated with CASES, and the STATUTES Relating to the same.

By Tho. Manley of the Middle Temple, London, Esquire

London, Printed by John Streater, Henry Twyford, and E. Flesher, Assigns of
Richard Atkins and Edward Atkins, Esquires, M.DC.LXXII.

Cum Gratia and Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HOW various the Pretenders to Clerkship have been in their Resolves, we have
too many Experiences in Print, especially when in the late Times of Usurpation
a general Liberty was admitted, which indeed we may call Cacoethes scribendi,
an inveterated humor of writing, rather tending to involve the Clerk in a maze,
than to lead his Client in a safe and well-beaten Path. It is not the design of
this Premonition to beg the Question; Others have offered what fitted their
capacities: This Tract shall show nothing more than is fit and reduced into
such a method as an Easy English Clerk shall be capable of. It Is true, some
may say, Facile est inventis addere, but that is not the sole design of this:
For here is much obliterated that is useless; something polished that was
unnecessary, and much added that is profitable; yet it dares not assume the
title of Infallible.

The former Three Parts which are herein offered with many Advantages shall
speak for themselves, whereto there is now added a Fourth, which in this kind
you have not met with; If the design meet the humor of those it is intended
for, is fulfilling the purpose: However, whether it do or no, (for there is no
doubt but the best intent may be quarrelled) yet the Usefulness of the Work
upon Perusal, will satisfy all men concerned, whether they be well dealt with
in the Settlements they propose to themselves from Persons they shall entrust
or employ, when at a cursory view they may find not only what they would, but
what they ought to have done.

Sept. 3. 1672. T. M.

Part 1.
An Indenture of an Annuity.
THis Indenture made the twentieth day of, etc. in the, etc. between I. S. of
Skipton, in the County of York Esquire of the one part, and C. P. of London Esquire of
the other part, witnesses, that the said I. S. for and in consideration of the
sum of, etc. to him before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, well
and truly contented and paid, whereof and wherewith, he the said I. S. does
acknowledge and confess himself to be fully satisfied, and thereof, and of
every part and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit and discharge the said C. P.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, for ever by these
presents: Has given, granted and confirmed, and by these presents does give,
Grant.
grant, and confirm for him and his Heirs, unto the said C. P, his Executors
and Assigns. One Annuity of yearly Rentcharge of Two hundred pounds of lawful
Money of England, to be issuing and going out of all those the Manors and
Lordships of Stanton, etc. with all and singular their rights members and
appurtenances, in the said County of York, and out of all and singular the
Messuages, Cottages, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards,
Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Moors,
Marshes, Rents, Reversions, Services, Profits, Commodities, Emoluments and
Hereditaments whatsoever, with the Appurtenances to the several Manors, or any
of them belonging, or heretofore had, used, reputed, occupied or enjoyed, as
part or parcel of them, or any of them: And also out of all other the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments of the said I. S. within the said County of York,
To have and to hold, perceive, receive, and take the said Annuity, or yearly
Rentcharge of, etc. unto the said C. P. his Executor; and Assigns, from the day
of the date of these presents, for and during the full term and time of forty
years now next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, if the said C. P.
and R. P. Esquire Nephew to the said C. P, or either of them shall so long live; To
be paid at four most usual Feasts, or Terms, in the year; that is to say, the
Feast of, etc. by even and equal portions, at or in the Church Porch of the
Parish Church of, etc. And the said I. S. for himself, A Covenant to pay (...)
l. for every day after default in payment of the Rents, and to Reenter.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, does
Covenant, Promise and Grant, to and with the said C. P, his Heirs and Assigns,
that if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. to be behind and unpaid,
in part, or in all, over or after any of the said Feast-days, in which the said
ought to be paid, being lawfully demanded, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents. That then he the said I. S. his Heirs and Assigns,
shall and will not only forfeit and lose unto the said C. P. his Executors or
Assigns, nomine poenae, the sum of forty shillings of lawful money of England,
for every day the said yearly Rent shall happen to be behind and unpaid, in
part, or in all, over, or after any of the said Feast-days; wherein the same
ought to be paid, as before is mentioned: But also that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said C. P. his Executors and Assigns, and to and for
every of them, from time to time, from and after every of the said Feast-days,
wherein the said yearly Rent, or any part thereof, should or ought to be paid,
as before is mentioned; into all and singular the said Manors, and into every
of them, and into all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, to the said
Manors, or any of them belonging, and into all other the premises, with all
and singular their appurtenances, and into every or any part or parcel thereof,
at his, or their, or any of their free wills or pleasures, to enter and
distrain, as well for the said yearly Rents, as for the said sum or sums of
Money, which shall or may happen to become forfeited or lost, for or in the
name of a pain, as is aforesaid, and for the a^^erages of them, and either of
them, if any shall happen to be; and the Distress and Distresses then and there
found, to lead, drive, take and carry away, and the same to detain and keep,
until the said C. P, his Executors or Assigns, shall be fully satisfied,
contented and paid. Covenant that he is seized in Fee, and has power to charge
the Premises with this Annuity.
And the said I.S. for himself, his Executors, etc. does covenant and grant to
and with the said C. P, his Executors, etc. that he the said I. S. at the time
of the ensealing and delivery of these present Indentures, is solely,
rightfully and absolutely seized in his Demeasn, as of Fee-simple, to his own
proper use and behoof, without any manner of condition, or limitation of any
Use or Uses, to alter, change or determine the same, of and in the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all other the Premises
above named, with their Appurtenances, and of every part and parcel thereof:
And that he now has full Power and lawful Authority to charge all and singular
the same Premises, with the Appurtenances, and every part thereof, to and with
the said Annuity, or yearly Rent, etc. in manner and form above declared; And
also that the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and all other the
Premises, now are, and so from time to time, and at all times for and during
the said term of forty years (if the said R. and C, or either of them, shall so
long live) shall and may remain, and continue liable, sufficient and avert to
and for Distress, and Distresses of the said A, and of his Executors or
Assigns, as the case in that behalf shall require, for and concerning the said
yearly Rent, and other the Premises, and every part thereof: And the said I. S.
for himself, etc. that he the said I. S, his Executors and Assigns, shall and
will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, for and during the space of
five years next ensuing the date hereof, at the reasonable request of the said
C. P, his Executors and Assigns, or any of them, at his or their, or any of
their proper costs and charges in Law, do, make, knowledge and suffer, or cause
and procure to be done, made, knowledged and suffered, all and every such
further reasonable and lawful act and acts, thing and things, device and
devices in the Law whatsoever, for the further, more better and perfect
assurance, surety, and sure-making of the said Annuity, or yearly Rentcharge
of, etc. to the said C. P, his Executors and Assigns, for and during the said
term of forty years, if the said C. and R. do so long live, according to the
true intent and meaning of these presents, as by the said C. P, his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or by any of them, or by any of their Council
learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised, or required. In
witness whereof, the Parties aforesaid to these present Indentures, have not
only interchangeably set their, etc. but also the said I. S. has given and
delivered unto the said C. P. ten shillings current English money, in the name
of seisin of the aforesaid Annuity, or yearly Rentcharge of, etc. before
mentioned. Dated the day and year above written.

An Indenture of Lease, with extraordinary Covenant.
THis Indenture made, etc. between C. B. of, etc. of the one part, and I. S. of
Stretton in the County of, etc. witnesses, That the said C. B. for and in
consideration of, etc. has demised, granted, set, and to farm-let, and by
these presents does, etc. unto the said I. S. all that his Message or
Tenement, set, lying, and being in, etc. aforesaid, together with all Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Yards, Orchards, Crofts, Lands, Meadows Pastures,
Feedings, Commons, Profits and Commodities whatsoever, to the said Message or
Tenement of right in any wise belonging, lying within the Town or Fields of
Stretton aforesaid: All which Message or Tenement, with all other the
Premises, are now in the Occupation of the said I. S. (except and always
reserved) out of this present Lease, all manner of Trees growing or being in or
upon the said Premises, or any part thereof; to have and to hold the said
Message or Tenement, with all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Yards,
Orchards, Crofts, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Commons, Profits and Commodities,
with their Appurtenances, as is aforesaid (except before excepted) unto the
said I. S, his Executors, etc. from the day of the date of these presents, unto
the full end and term of 21 years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended; yielding and paying therefore yearly, during the said term,
unto the said C. B. and the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten; and for
default of such Issue, to the right Heirs inheritable to the Premises, the
yearly Rent of, etc. at two of the usual Feasts in the year; that is to say, at
the Annunciation of our Lady, and St. Michael the Archangel, by even and equal
portions, and doing service to the Court of the said C. B. his Heirs, and
others aforesaid, at his or their Manor of S. aforesaid, as often as it shall
be kept there, at or upon reasonable summons or warning, as other Tenants of
the said Manor do, or should do: And at the decease of the said I. S. and such
his Assigns, as hereafter by him shall be nominated or appointed, dying Tenants
of the Premises, to pay his or their best Beast unto the said C. B, and to such
as the remainder or reversion of the said Manor should come unto, in the name
of a Heriot: And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. to be behind,
or unpaid, in part, or in all, by the space of, etc. next after any of the said
Feasts at which it ought to be paid (if it be lawfully demanded) that then and
from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful unto and for the said C. B. his
Heirs, etc. and all and every other the person or persons above named, to whom
the Right thereof shall appertain as aforesaid, into the said Message or
Tenement, and all other the Premises, with the Appurtenances, wholly to
re-enter, and the same to have again, retain and re-possess, as in his or their
former estate, this Indenture, or any thing therein contained to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding. And also it is covenanted and agreed, that it
shall and may be lawful unto the said I. S. and his Assigns, to lop the Trees
growing upon any parcel of the Premises heretofore lopped, at all times
convenient, For Reparation.
for the necessary fencing of the Hedges: And the said I. S. does Covenant and
Grant, for him, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents to
and with the said C. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them. That he the said I. S. and his Assigns, shall and will make and
do, or cause to be made or done, at his or their own proper costs and charges,
all and all manner of reparations in and upon the Premises, before by these
presents granted and letten, from time to time, when and as often as need shall
require, during the said term of, etc. and so well and sufficiently repaired,
shall in the end of the said term, or other sooner determination of this
present Lease, yield up and leave the same. And further, shall from time to
time, To do suit belonging to the Mills of the said Manor.
during the said term, do his or their suit for or belonging to the Mill or
Mills of the said C. B. within the said Manor of S. aforesaid, and all such
Corn and other Grain whatsoever, as the said I. S. aforesaid does or may
accustomarily use to grind, or cause to be ground, to be at the same Mill or
Mills ground. And it is further covenanted and agreed between the said Parties,
that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. B. and his Heirs, or any
to whom the Right thereof shall appertain as aforesaid, if it be their
pleasure, at any time hereafter during the said term, to make an exchange of
parcel or parcels of the Lands or Meadows, or any part or parcel of the
premises belonging to the said Message or Tenement, and to take and have the
same at his or their will and pleasure, giving and allowing unto the said I. S.
and his Assigns, as much Land in quantity and goodness for the same, in such
place within the Fields of S. aforesaid, as by the judgment and discretion of
sour of the Tenants of the said C. B. and his Heirs, or any to whom the Right
thereof shall appertain as aforesaid, then dwelling in S. aforesaid, shall be
adjudged, nominated and appointed: And the said I. S. covenanteth and grants,
etc. that he the said I. S. or his Assigns, shall and will yearly during the
said term, at seasonable times, due and convenient in the year, plant or set in
or upon the premises six handsome young Trees or Saplings of Oak, Elm or Ash,
and them so planted and set, shall from time to time yearly cherish, preserve,
sustain and suffer to grow and increase, to the most profit, use and behoof of
the said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. Provided always, and it is
fully conditioned and agreed between the said Parties, that the said I. S.
shall not at any time hereafter Demise, Grant, Let, Set, Assign, or by any
other way, or means, put away or depart with the said Leases, Term of years,
Message or Tenement, and other the premises, with the appurtenances, or any
part or parcel thereof, or do, procure, or suffer to be done, any act, deed, or
thing whatsoever, whereby the same, or any part or parcel thereof, shall or may
at any time hereafter, Revert, Descend, or come unto any person or persons
whatsoever, other than unto his Wife and Child, at any time during the said
term, without the consent of the said C. B. or his Hei^s, and other the persons
aforesaid, first had and obtained in Writing under his or their Hands or Seals,
upon pain of forfeiting of this Indenture of Lease, any thing herein contained
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And the said C. B. convenanteth for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, etc. to warrant and defend the said Message or Tenement, and
all other the premises above letten, unto the said I. S. and such his Assigns
as are above expressed against all and every person or persons pretending any
Title to the same, from, by or under him the said C. B. his Heirs or Assigns,
during the said Term, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents. In witness whereof the Parties first above named unto these present
Indentures interchangeably have set their Hands and Seals, the day and year
first above written, Annoque Dom. 1636.

A Deed of Gift made to One to save him harmless from all Bonds.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, II. P. of,
etc. send greeting in our Lord God everlasting: Know ye, That I the said I. P.
as well for the indemnity, discharge and saving harmless of R. B. of, etc. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, off and from all manner
of Bonds and Writings Obligatory whatsoever wherein the said R. B. is and
stands bound for me the said I. P. in any sum or sums of money to any person
or persons whatsoever; as also for diverse other good Causes and Considerations
me hereunto especially moving, have given, granted, Grant.
bargained, sold and confirmed, and by these presents do give, grant, bargain,
sell and confirm unto the said R. B. all and singular my Leases, Goods and
Chartels whatsoever, as well real as personal, of what kind, nature, quality or
condition soever the same are or be, and in what place or places soever the
same shall or may be found, as well in my own custody and possession, as in the
hands, custody and possession of any other person or persons whatsoever; To
have and to hold all and singular the said Leases, Goods and Chattels, and all
other the premises, with the appurtenances, to the said R. B. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and
behoof for ever: And I the said J. P. and my Heirs, all and singular the said
Goods and Chattels, and other the premises, unto the said R. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper use as aforesaid, shall
and will warrant and for ever defend, by these presents. Provided always, That
if the said I. P. my Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of us, do or
shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, clearly acquit and
discharge, or otherwise sufficiently save and keep harmless the said R. B. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all his and their Goods, Chattels,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and every of them, off and from all and
singular Bonds and Writings Obligatory whatsoever, wherein, or whereby the said
R. B. at the request and for the debt of me the said I. P. is and stands
bound to any person or persons whatsoever, in any sum or sums of money, and off
and from all manner of Actions, Suits, Charges, Troubles, Expenses and Demands
whatsoever, which shall or may in any wise hereafter happen, come, grow, or be,
to or against the said R. B. his Executors or Administrators, or any of them,
for or by reason, or means of the same Obligations or Writings obligatory, or
any of them, or any thing in them, or any of them mentioned or contained, that
then this present Deed or Grant, and every thing herein contained, shall be
utterly void and of none effect, any thing herein before specified to the
contrary thereof in any wise not withstanding. In witness whereof, etc.

A Lease of a House and certain Lands made in consideration of a certain sum of
money, the Fee-simple being in the Leasor.
THis Indenture made, etc. between M. C. of, etc. Gentleman, and A. C. his wife
on the one part, and T. E. of, etc. Esquire on the other part, witnesses, That the
said M. C. and A. his wife, for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. of
lawful money of England to them in hand paid before the ensealing and delivery
of these presents by the said F. E. whereof and wherewith they the said M. C.
and A. acknowledge themselves to be fully satisfied, contented and paid, and
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do clearly acquit and discharge
the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents,
have Demised, Granted, Set, and to Farm-let, and by these presents do Demise,
etc. unto the said T. E. his, etc. All that their Mansion House, with the
Rights, Members and Appurtenances thereof, situate, lying, and being in
Arlescot, in the Parish of N. in the County of W. and all that Close of Pasture
commonly called or known by the name of the great Close, containing by
estimation forty Acres, be it more or less; and also all that Close of Pasture
commonly called or known by the name of the middle Pasture, containing by
estimation forty Acres be it more or less, and all that Close of Pasture, etc.
All and singular which said Closes, and other the Premises, are, or late were
in the Tenure or Occupation of the said M. or his Assignee or Assignees, and
are situate, lying and being in A. aforesaid in the said C. of N. and also all
other Messuages, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Dove-houses,
Orchards, Gardens, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods, Under-woods,
Commons, Wasteground, Moors, Marshes, Rents, Reversions, Services, Profits,
Commodities and Hereditaments whatsoever of them the said M. C. or A. C. or
either of them, situate, lying and being in A. aforesaid, or in either of
them, in the said County of N. To have and to hold the said Mansion House,
Closes of Meadow, Pasture and Arable, and all and singular other the premises,
with their and every of their appurtenances before by these presents demised,
and every part and parcel thereof unto the said T. E. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast Day of, etc. last past, before the
date hereof, unto the full end and term of, etc. from thence next ensuing, and
fully to be complete and ended, yielding and paying therefore yearly during the
said term unto the said M. C. and A. his Wife, their Heirs and Assigns, one
Pepper-corn at the Feast of, etc. if the same be lawfully demanded; And the
said M. for himself, and for the said A. his Wife, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, does Covenant, Promise and Grant
to and with the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to
and with every of them by these presents, in manner and form following. That is
to say, That he the said M. C. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of
these presents, stands and is lawfully seized in his Demeasn, as of Fee, of
and in the said Mansion House, and several Closes, and of and in all other the
premises, before by these presents demised, or mentioned to be demised, with
their and every of their appurtenances, without any manner of condition or
limitation of use or uses, to alter, change or determine the same: That they
the said M. C. and A. or one of them, now have or has full power and authority
to Demise and Grant the said Mansionhouse, and other the premises, with their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said T. E. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form aforesaid, and also
that the said Mansion House, Closes, and other the premises before by these
presents demised, or meant, mentioned or intended to be demised, and every part
and parcel thereof, now are, and by and during the said term of, etc. by these
presents granted, shall be, remain and continue unto the said T. E. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns of the clear yearly value of, etc. at the
least over and above all charges and reprizes; and further that the said T. E.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, under the Rents, Covenants, Grants
and Agreements in these presents contained, shall and may at all times
hereafter, and from time to time during the term hereafter granted and demised,
or meant, mentioned or intended to be granted or demised; quietly and peaceably
have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Mansion House, Closes, and
all other the premises, and every part and parcel of them, with their and every
of their appurtenances: And the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, shall or may
receive, perceive and take to his and their own proper use and behoof, clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged off, and from, all manner of former and
other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Joyntures, Dowers,
Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple Recognizances, Intrusions, Judgments,
Executions, Rent-charges, Rent-seck, Arrerages of Rents, Debts and Duties to
the Kingdom. And off and from all other Charges, Titles, Troubles and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, done or suffered, by the said M.
C. and A. or either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, or by
any other person or persons whatsoever: And moreover the said M. C. for
himself, and for the said A. his Wife, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and for every of them, does Covenant, Promise and Grant to and
with the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with
every of them by these presents, that be the said M. C. and A. his wife, their
Heirs and Assigns, shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time
during the term and space of five years next ensuing the date hereof, upon all
and every reasonable request and requests to him or them, or any of them to be
had or made by the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any
of them, and at the costs and charges in the Law of him the said T. E. his
Executors or Assigns, or some of them, do make, acknowledge, execute and
suffer, or cause to be done, made, knowledged, executed and suffered, all and
every such further lawful act and acts, thing and things, device and devices in
the Law whatsoever, for the better confirmation of these presents. And for the
better and further assurance, surety, sure-making and conveying of ^he said
Mansion House, Closes, and other the premises, and every or any of them, with
their and every of their appurtenances, for and during the said term of, etc.
years, hereby granted, or mentioned to be granted unto the said T. E. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, according to the true intent and meaning
of these presents, as by the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised, etc. In witness, etc.

In Assignment of the same Lease and Premiss to a third person in trust, upon
condition that if the money be paid, the Assignment to be void.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between T. E. of, etc. on the one part, and T.
C. of, etc. on the other part, witnesses, That whereas M. C. of, etc.
Gentleman, and A. C. then Wife of the said M. by their Indenture of Lease,
being dated the, etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did demise,
grant, and to Farm let unto the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, all that his Mansion House, with the Rights, Members and Appurtenances
thereof situate, lying and being in Arlescot, in the Parish of N. in the
County of N. and all that Close of Pasture, commonly called or known by the
name of the great Close, containing by estimation forty Acres, be it more or
less; and also all that Close of pasture, commonly called or known by the name
of the middle pasture, containing by estimation forty Acres, be it more or
less; and all that Close of Meadow, etc. all and singular which said Closes,
and other the premises, then or late were in the Tenure or Occupation of the
said M. his Assignee or Assignees, and are situate, lying and being in
Arlescot aforesaid, in the said County of N. and also all other Messuages,
Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Dove-houses, Orchards, Gardens, Tenements,
Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods, Under-woods, Commons, Waste-ground, Moors,
Marshes, Rents, Reversions, Services, Profits, Commodities and Hereditaments
whatsoever of them the said M. C. and A. C. or either of them, situate, lying
and being in A. aforesaid, and N. or either of them, in the said County of N.
to Have and to Hold the said Mansion House, Closes of Meadow, Pasture and
Arable, and all and singular other premises, with their and every of their
appurtenances, by the said Indenture of Lease demised, or mentioned to be
demised, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said T. E. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. then last past, before the
Date of the same Indenture of Lease, unto the full end and term of, etc. from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yielding and paying
therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said M. C. and A. his wife,
and to the Heirs and Assigns of the said M. one pepper-corn only at the Feast
of, etc. if the same shall be lawfully demanded, as in and by the same
Indenture of Lease amongst diverse other Covenants, Grants, Articles and
Agreements therein contained, more fully and at large it does and may appear.
Now this Indenture further witnesses, the said T. E. for and under the Proviso
or Condition hereafter in these presents mentioned and expressed, has granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully,
clearly and absolutely grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said
T. C. his Heirs and Assigns, all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Property,
Possession, Term of years, Claim and Demand whatsoever, which he the said T. E.
now has, may, might, should, or in any wise ought to have or claim, of, in or
to the said Mansion House, Closes of Land, and other the premises, with the
appurtenances, by the said Indenture of Lease demised, and in and to every or
any part or parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said recited Indenture
of Lease; Provided always, That if the said T. C. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, shall not well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid unto the said T. E. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
the sum of, etc. at or on, etc. without fraud, etc. That then this present
Indenture, and all and every Covenant, Grant, Article and Agreement therein
contained, shall be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect; any thing
herein before specified to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In
witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Judgment, with a Letter of Attorney therein asserted.
TO all Christian People, to whom this present Writing shall come, we I. H.
Clerk, Parson of, etc. and O. B. of, etc. Son and Executor of I. B. late of,
and. Gentleman, deceased, send greeting; Whereas there is a Judgment of 400 l.
depending in the Court commonly called the Kings Bench at Westminster, against
E. S. of F. Esquire and R. S. of F. aforesaid, Gentleman, at the suit of me the
said I. H. and of the said I. B. deceased, as by the Record thereof remaining
in the said Court of Kings Bench, more at large may appear, upon which
Judgment, there has been Execution lately prosecuted and taken forth. Now know
ye, That we the said I. H. and O. B. for diverse just Causes and valuable
Considerations us hereunto especially moving, Have granted, transferred,
assigned, and set over; and by these presents do clearly and absolutely grant,
transfer, assign and set over unto Anthony H. of Lincolns Inn, in the County of
Middlesex, Gentleman, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as well the
said Judgment of 400 l. aforesaid, as also all the Benefit, Commodity, Sum and
Sums of Money, profit and advantages whatsoever, that now is, or hereafter
shall be obtained or gotten, by reason or means of the same Judgment, or of any
Execution or Extent thereof, or thereupon to be had, sued, executed or
obtained, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest and Demand whatsoever,
which we the said I. H. and O. B. or either of us have or ought to have or
claim, of, in and to the said Judgment of 400 l. or any sum of Money, Lands,
Tenements, or other things, which by virtue thereof, or of any Execution,
Process, or proceedings thereupon used, shall be recovered, obtained or gotten;
and further, we the said I. H. and O. B. do by these presents make, ordain,
constitute, authorize and appoint the said A. H. to be our true and lawful
Attorney for us, and in our names, or the names of either of us, to sue and
prosecute the Execution upon the said Judgment, and upon satisfaction given, or
any other end, Composition or Agreement made concerning the premises, to (...)
knowledge satisfaction, or to make and do any other Release and Discharge for
the same, and all and every other act or acts, thing or things whatsoever, as
shall be requisite and needful to be done, in and about the premises, we
covenant, promise and grant, allow, ratify, establish and confirm by these
presents; And we the said I. S. and O. B. for us, and either of us, our
Executors and Administrators, do covenant, promise and grant to and with the
said A. H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, in
manner and form following; That is to say, that neither the said I. B. in his
lifetime, nor we the said I. H. and O. B. nor any of us have heretofore made,
done or committed any Release or other Discharge of the said Judgment, or of
any Extent or Execution which has been thereupon sued or executed; nor we the
said I. H. and O. B. or either of us, our Executors or Administrators, at any
time hereafter shall or will make, commit or do any Release, or other act or
thing whatsoever, whereby the said Judgment, or any Extent or Execution which
has been thereupon sued or executed, or which shall be thereupon sued or
executed at any time hereafter by the said A. H. or his Assigns, shall be in
any manner of wise, hurt, hindered disabled, debarred or extinguished, without
the consent of the said A. H. his Executors or Assigns, thereunto first had and
obtained in writing under his or their Hands and Seals. And further, that we
said I. H. and O. B. our Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of us
shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time upon request made,
and at the cost and charges of the said A. H. and his Assigns, maintain,
justify, allow and confirm all such lawful Actions, Suits, Process, Extents,
Executions and Proceedings whatsoever, as have been, or hereafter shall be
brought, sued forth or prosecuted against the said E. S. and R. S. or either of
them, their Executors or Administrators, or their, or any of their Lands,
Tenements or Goods upon, or by reason of the said Judgment of Four hundred
pounds above mentioned; And that the said A. H. his Executors and
Administrators, shall and may peaceably and quietly have and hold, receive and
enjoy, to his and their own proper uses and behoofs, all such benefit, sum and
sums of money, Lands, Tenements, and other things, as by virtue of the said
Judgment, or any Extents, Execution, Process or Proceedings thereupon brought
or to be brought, sued or prosecuted, shall be recovered, obtained or gotten,
without the let, suit, trouble, eviction or disturbance of us the said I. H.
and O. B. or either of us, our executors o^ administrators, and without any
account or other thing to us, or any of us to be therefore made or given. In
witness, etc.

An Assignment of a House and Lands, from one who had the same in Mortgage, and
was forfeited to him.
THis Indenture made, etc. between W. B. of, etc. on the one part, and G. H.
of, etc. on the other part, witnesses: That whereas B. C. of, etc. by his
Indenture bearing date, etc. (and so go forward with the recitals.) And whereas
in the said recited Indenture of Assignment, there is a proviso or condition
contained for redemption of the premises, upon payment of one hundred pounds
of, etc. on the sixth day of, etc. which then should be, and since has been in
the year of our Lord God, etc. at or in the, etc. as in and by the said Proviso
or Condition, whereunto relation being had, more fully and at large it does and
may appear, which said sum of 100 l. etc. or any part thereof, was not paid or
tendered to be paid, to or for the said W. B. at the day or place in the Proviso
of Redemption limited for the payment thereof, and yet remains unpaid, by
reason and means whereof the said Message and other the premises, and the
whole estate, lease, right, title and interest of the said B. C. in and to the
same became forfeited unto the said W. B. and he thereby was, and now is, and
shall be lawfully interessed and possessed in the same premises, and every part
thereof during all the residue and term of years, which then were, and yet are
to come, and unexpired of the term granted to the said B. C. in and by the said
Indenture of Demise abovementioned. Now this Indenture further witnesses,
That the said W. B. for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him in hand
paid by the said G. H. at and before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, whereof and wherewith, etc. Has given, granted, bargained, sold, and
assigned over, and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely give,
grant, etc. unto the said G. H. his executors, administrators and assigns, as
well the said Message, Tenement, Yards, Gardens, Orchards and Closes to the
same adjoining and belonging; Together also with all and every the arable
Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Profits, Commodities and Hereditaments
whatsoever to the said Message belonging, or in any wise appertaining. And all
other the premises, with appurtenances whatsoever, in and by the said Indenture
of Demise granted to the said W. B. as aforesaid. As also all the Estate,
Right, Title, Interest, Property, Possession, term of years, claim and demand
whatsoever which he the said W. B. his executors, administrators or assigns now
have, has, may, might, should or in any wise ought to have or claim, of, in or
to the said Message, and other the premises, with the appurtenances, and every
or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said
Indenture of Mortgage or Assignment above recited, or either of them, or any
thing in them, or any of them mentioned o^ contained, or by any other ways or
means whatsoever: together with the same Indenture of Demise and Mortgage
aforesaid, and all and every other Writings and Minuments concerning the same;
To have and to hold the said Message, Yards, Gardens, Orchards, Lands,
Meadows, Pastures. Feedings, Indenture of Demise and Mortgage, Writings and
Minuments, Estate, Right, Title, Interest and term of Years, and all and
singular other the premises, with the appurtenances, before by these presents
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and every part and parcel thereof, unto
the said G. H. his executors, administrators and assigns, to his and their own
proper uses and behoofs, in as large, ample, and beneficial manner and form to
all intents, constructions and purposes as he the said W. B. now has, may,
might, should, or in any wise ought to have and enjoy the same, by force and
virtue of the said Indenture of Lease or Demise, or the said Indenture of
Mortgage aforesaid, or either of them, or any thing in them, or any of them
mentioned or expressed, or otherwise howsoever (a Covenant for discharge of
Encumbrances) in witness whereof, etc.

A Mortgage of a Lease for indemnity of certain Sureties bound in a^
Obligation made to another in trust, for their use.
THis Indenture made the, etc. Between H. H. of, etc. Gentleman, on the one
part, and R. N. of, etc. I. N. and R. D. of, etc. Gentleman, on the other part,
witnesses, That whereas, etc. as in and by the said Indenture of Lease amongst
other things more fully and at large appears. And whereas the said I.N. and
R. D. at the request and for the debt of the said H. H. together with him, in
and by one Obligation with Condition endorsed, bearing Date with these
presents, are and stand jointly and severally bounden unto R. S. of, etc. in
the sum of, etc. for the true payment of, etc. on the, etc. at or in the, etc.
as in and by the said recited Obligation and Condition thereof more at large it
does and may appear. Now this Indenture further witnesses, That the said H. H.
for the Indemnity and Discharge of R. and D. their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, of, and from the said recited Obligation,
and all sum and sums of Money therein mentioned and contained, and from all
Actions, Consideration.
Suits and Demands concerning the same: Has given, granted, bargained, sold,
assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully, clearly, and
absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said R. M.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as well the said Message or
Tenement, and all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances, and
every part thereof by the said Indenture of Lease demised, and every part and
parcel thereof; as also all the estate, right, title, interest, property, term
of years, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said H. H. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, now have, has, may, might, should, or in any wise
ought to have or claim of, in and to the said Message or Tenement, and other
the premises, with the appurtenances, and every or any part or parcel thereof,
by force and virtue of the said recited Indenture of Lease, or any thing
therein contained, or by any other ways or means whatsoever: together with the
said recited Indenture of Lease: To have and to hold the said Message or
Tenement, Indenture of Lease, Habend.
estate, right, title, interest, term of years, and all and singular other the
premises, with the appurtenances before by these presents bargained or sold, or
meant, mentioned or intended to be hereby given, granted, sold, assigned and
set over, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said R. M. his Executors
and Assigns, from the ensealing and delivery of these presents forwards, for,
during, and until the full accomplishment of all the residue of the said term
of, etc. now to come and unexpired, granted by the said Indenture of Lease in
as large, ample and beneficial manner and form, to all intents, constructions
and purposes, as he the said H. H. now has, may, might, should, or in any wise
ought to have and enjoy the same by force and virtue of the said recited
Indenture of Lease, or any thing therein contained, or otherwise howsoever.
Nevertheless upon special trust and confidence, that he the said R. M. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them shall stand and be
interessed and possessed of and in the said Message or Tenement, and all other
the before bargained premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and
parcel thereof, to the only proper uses and behoofs of the said I. N. and R.
D. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever. And the said H. H. for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said R. M. his
Executors, etc. and to and with every of them by these presents, in manner and
form following: That is to say, That the said recited Indenture of Lease at the
time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is a good, perfect, sure,
and indefazible Lease in the Law of and for the said Message or Tenement, and
premises thereby demised, and so shall stand, remain, and continue unto the
said R. M. his Executors and Assigns, to the uses before mentioned, for and
during the Term of Years thereby granted and unexpired; And that he the said H.
H. now has full power, good right, true title, and lawful authority to give,
grant, And that he hash power to demise.
bargain, sell, and set over the same premises, and every part thereof unto the
said R. M. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to the use aforesaid, in
manner and form above mentioned, according to the true intent and meaning of
these presents (A Covenant or quiet enjoying, and from Encumbrances) Provided
always, Proviso.
That if the said H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of
them, do truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said R. S. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the said sum, of, etc. on the, etc. at the place
aforesaid, for and in full and clear discharge of the said recited Obligation
and Condition above mentioned, that then this Indenture to be void and of none
effect: this Indenture, or any thing therein contained to the contrary thereof
in any wise notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

A Bill of Sale.
KNow all Men by these presents, That I. W. H. of, etc. for and in
consideration of the sum of, etc. of lawful money of England to me in hand paid
by I. S. of, etc. Goldsmith, at and before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, wherewith I confess my self to be fully satisfied, contented and
paid, have bargained and sold, and by these presents, do fully, clearly, and
absolutely bargain and sell unto the said I. S. in plain and open Market within
the City of London, one Chain of Gold with round links unsothered, weighing
twenty ounces of Gold weight; and one Gold ring enameled, set with a small
table Diamond; To have and to Gold the said Chain of Gold and Ring, to the said
I. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper
uses and behoofs for ever. And I the said W. H. my Executors and
Administrators, and every of us, the said Chain and Ring unto the said I. S.
his Executors and Administrators, against all people shall and will warrant,
acquit and for ever defend by th^se presents. Provided always, That if I the
said W. H. my Heirs, Executors, Administrators, etc. or any of us do well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said I. S. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of, etc. on the, etc. at or in the,
etc. without fraud or coven: that then this present Bill, and the bargain and
sale of the said Chain and Ring, shall be utterly void and of none effect, or
else to stand and abide in force and virtue.

A Release of Lands Mortgaged.
THis Indenture made the, etc. Between A. N. of, etc. Esquire on the one part, and
Sir M. H. of, etc. Knight, on the other part, witnesses, That whereas the said
A. N. by his Indenture b^aring date the, etc. for and in consideration of the
sum of, etc. by I. H. of, etc. well and truly to be paid in manner and form as
in and by a Proviso contained in the said Indenture is mentioned, limited and
declared, did bargain and sell unto the said I. H. and to his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, all that his Grange or Farm of, etc. with the appurtenances in the
Parish of A. in the County of S. being parcel of the possessions of the late
dissolved Monastery of W. in the said County of, etc. and all other his
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods,
Under-woods, Leets, Courts, Liberties, Franchises and Hereditaments whatsoever,
with all and singular their appurtenances, situate, etc. all and singular
which said premises, the said ^. N. late bought and purchased to him and his
Heirs of the said I H. Together with all and singular Messuages, Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Dove-houses, Orchards, Gardens, Lands,
Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, etc. and Hereditaments whatsoever to the said
Grange or Farm of, etc. and other the premises before mentioned, or any part
thereof belonging or in any wise appertaining, or accepted, reputed, taken or
known as part, parcel, or member thereof, or heretofore used, occupied,
demised, letten, possessed or enjoyed, as part or parcel thereof. To have and
to hold all and singular the said premises to the said I. H. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, in which said Indenture there is a Proviso contained, That if
the said I. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them should fail in the payment of the sum of, etc. unto the said A. N. his
Executors or Administrators at the day and place in the said Indenture
specified, that then the said Conveyance should be void, as in and by the said
Indenture more at large it does and may appear. And whereas the said I. H. has
conveyed and assured all and singular the said premises unto the said Sir M. H.
and his Heirs, before the ensealing and delivery of these presents: Now this
Indenture witnesses, That the said A. N. for and in consideration of the sum
of, etc. to him the said A. N. in hand well and truly satisfied and paid by the
said I. H. before the ensealing and delivery of these presents; And also in
consideration of the full discharge and release of the Condition and Proviso
aforesaid, and at the special instance and request of the said I. H. has
remised, released, and quit-claimed, and by these presents does for himself and
his Heirs, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto the said Sir M. H. and
to his Heirs for ever, the Condition and Proviso above mentioned, and also all
the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Claim, Reversion, Condition and Demand
whatsoever, which he said A. N. now has, or by any manner of ways or means
hereafter shall or may have of, in, or to the said premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, and also of, in and unto all and singular the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments which the said A. N. has at any time purchased to him and
his Heirs, of him the said I. H. To have and to hold the said Grange or Farm,
and all and singular the premises, with the appurtenances unto the said Sir M.
H. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper use and behoof and the said Sir
M.H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, absolutely without any condition or
limitation whatsoever: and the said A. N. for himself, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and and Assigns, does covenant, promise and grant, to and with
the said Sir M.H. his heirs and assigns, by these presents in manner and form
following (viz.) That he the said Sir M. H. his heirs and assigns, shall and
may from time to time, and at all times for ever hereafter, peaceably and
quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Grange or Farm, and
all and singular the premises, with the appurtenances conveyed and released, or
meant, mentioned or intended to be conveyed or released by these presents,
without the let, suit, trouble, disturbance or eviction of the said A. N. his
Heirs or Assigns, and without the lawful let, suit, trouble, disturbance or
eviction of any other person or persons lawfully claiming any estate, right,
title or interest, in, out of, or into the premises, or any part thereof, from,
by, or under the said A. N. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his, their, or any of
their means, act, consent, assent, privity, agreement or procurement, other
than of the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns, claiming from the said A.N. by
virtue of the assurance aforesaid: and also that all and singular the premises,
and every part and parcel thereof, shall and may from time to time, and at all
times for ever hereafter continue and remain unto the said Sir M. H. his heirs
and assigns, free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and
discharged of, and from all and all manner of former and others gifts, grants,
bargains, sales, etc. had, made, done or committed by the said A. N. his heirs
or assigns, or by his, their, or any of their means, act, assent, consent,
privity, agreement or procurement (except before excepted). And the said A. N.
does further for himself, his Executors, etc. That he the said A. N. his heirs
and assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at all times before the
Feast of, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, at the proper costs and charges in
the Law of the said Sir M. H. Do and execute, or cause to be done and executed,
all and every such further act and acts, thing and things, device and devices
in the Law, as shall be reasonably devised, advised, or required by the said
Sir M. H. his heirs or assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Law,
for the better assuring and sure-making of all and singular the premises, with
the appurtenances unto the said Sir M. H. his heirs and assigns, according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents; Be it by fine or fines,
feoffment or feoffments, deed or deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, recovery or
recoveries, with double or single Voucher or Vouchers release, confirmation,
warranty, or by any other ways or means whatsoever: In witness whereof, etc.

A Deed of Revocation of certain uses.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, R. R. of L.
Esquire sends greeting, etc. Whereas the said R. R. in and by two several
Indentures or Deeds indented, bearing date the, etc. whereof the one is made
between the said R. R. and G. W. of, etc. of the one part, and I. H. of, etc.
Gentleman, of the other part, and the other of them is made between the said R.
R. of the one part, and the said G. W. and J. H. of the other part, whereupon a
Fine was afterward in due form of Law acknowledged by the said R. R. and A.
his wife, did assure and entail unto the said R. R. and to the heirs of his
body lawfully begotten, with certain remainders over, and amongst other things,
all those Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances
in N. in the C. of, etc. containing by estimation, etc. and lately purchased by
the said R. R. of one, etc. and then in the tenure of, etc. or of his assigns,
and in and by the said several Indentures, did likewise assure and entail unto
the said R. R. and to the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, with certain
remainders, over and amongst other things, all that the Manor of Lingate, with
the royalties, rights, members and appurtenances thereof whatsoever in N. and
A. in the County of, etc. and all Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to the
same Manor, then or late appertaining, or as part, parcel, or member thereof,
then before had, known or reputed, with the appurtenances in N. and A.
aforesaid, or either of them, containing by estimation, etc. then lately
purchased by the said R. R. as in and by the said several Indentures or Deeds
indented (amongst other things therein contained more at large it does and may
appear) in which said several Indentures, there is contained a Proviso in these
words following, that is to say, Provided always, That if the said R. R.
during his natural life, shall by his Deed or Deeds of revocation under his
hand and seal testified by two witnesses, or more, revoke, annihilate, and make
void, or declare that he does revoke, annihilate, and make void all or any the
Uses and Estates in and by these presents limited and raised, of, or upon all
or any of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever in the said Fine to be contained, and in these presents mentioned,
that then from and after the ensealing of such Deed or Deeds of revocation,
such of the said Uses as shall be declared to be revoked shall cease and be
utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect, and that then the said Fine of
such parcel or parcels to be revoked, shall be to the only use of the said R.
R. and his Heirs for ever, any thing before in these presents contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding; as in and by the said Proviso, in
the said several Indentures mentioned and contained, more plainly may appear.
Now know ye, that the said R.R. as well in consideration that the uses and
estates of and in the said Manor, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the
aforesaid Indentures of entail specified may touching the said uses and estates
remain and be rovoked and continue to the said R. R. his heirs and assigns, to
be disposed of at his or their pleasures, and also for diverse other good and
just Causes and Considerations him hereunto especially moving, and by virtue of
the Proviso contained in the said several Indentures above recited or
mentioned, or other wise, has revoked, annihilated and made void, and by this
present deed of Revocation, does revoke, annihilate and make void the several
uses and estates in and by the said Indentures, or either of them raised or
limited of or upon all the said Manor of Lingate, with the Royalties, Rights,
members and appurtenances thereof whatsoever in N. and A. aforesaid, or either
of them in the said County of, etc. and of all the said Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments to the said Manor of Lingate now, or of late appertaining or
belonging, or as part, parcel, or member thereof, heretofore had, known or
reputed, with the appurtenances in N. and A. aforesaid, or either of them,
containing by estimation, etc. late purchased by the said R. R. of, etc. And
further, the said R. R. for the consideration aforesaid, and by virtue of the
said Proviso contained in the said several Indentures, and otherwise, has
revoked, annihilated, and made void, and by this present Deed of Revocation,
does revoke, annihilate, and make void the several uses and estates in and by
the said Indentures, or either of them, raised and limited of or upon one Close
of Land and Pasture, called K. Close, containing by estimation, etc. and of, or
upon one other Close of Land and Pasture, with the appurtenances, containing by
estimation, etc. in N. aforesaid, and of or upon two acres of arable Land, by
estimation, etc. in N. aforesaid, now in the occupation of, etc. or of his
Assigns. In witness, etc.

A Grant of the Reversion of certain Lands.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R. W. of, etc. of the one part, and C. D.
of, etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said R. W. for and in
consideration of the sum of, etc. has granted, bargained and sold, and by
these presents does fully, clearly and absoluted grant, bargain and sell unto
the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that his Right, Title, Use,
Interest, Reversion and Remainder of and in all and singular, etc. now, or late
in the Tenure or Occupation of, etc. which said Message and other the
premises, with the appurtenances, he the said R. W. has, should or ought to
have by and after the deceas^ of A. W. Mother of the said R. Which said
Message or Tenement, Barn, Orchard, etc. with the appurtenances; R. W.
deceased, late Father of the said R. W. party to these presents, By his last
Will and Testament devised, willed and bequeathed unto the said A. W. for and
during the natural life of the said A. W. and the immediate reversion or
remainder thereof to the said R. W. and his Heirs for ever: Together with all
the Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Escripts, Writings and Minuments, which he the
said R. W. or any other to his use, or by his consent or delivery, have or
has, touching or concerning the said Message or Tenement, and other the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof: All and singular which said Deeds,
Evidences, Charters, etc. the said R. W. has already delivered at and before
the ensealing and delivery of these presents: To have and to hold the said
reversion and remainder, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, etc. of
the said R. of, in, and to the said Message or Tenement, and other the
premises, with the appurtenances, before by these presents granted, bargained
and sold, or meant, mentioned, or intended to be hereby granted, bargained and
sold, and every part thereof, immediately from and after the decease of the
said A. W. the Mother unto the said C.D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the
only proper use of the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And the said
R. W. for himself, his heirs, etc. That he the said R. W. at the day of the
date of these presents, is lawfully and solely seized of and in the reversion
and remainder of the said Message or Tenement, and of other the premises with
the appurtenances, immediately from and after the decease of the said A. W. of
a true and perfect estate of inheritance, in the Law in Fee to his own use,
without any manner of Condition, Mortgage or Redemption: And further, that the
said reversion or remainder of the said Message or Tenement, and of other the
premises, with the appurtenances, from, by, and after the decease of the said
A. W. the Mother, and at the day of the date hereof, are and be, and so at all
times from henceforth, shall be and continue, free, clear, and clearly
acquitted, exonerated, and discharge, and freely save harmless by the said R.W.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, of and from all and every former and
other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Statutes-Merchant and of the
Staple, Recognizances, Joyntures, Dowers, Wills, Entails, Intrusions,
Rents-charge, Rents-seck, Arrerages of Rents, and of and from all other
Charges, Titles, Troubles, Encumbrances and Demands whatsoever, had, made,
committed, suffered or done by, etc. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Recognizance, with very good Covenants therein inserted.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. P. of, etc. Gentleman, on the one part,
and C. D. and R. D. of, etc. on the other part; witnesses, That whereas W. P.
of, etc. Son and Heir apparent, etc. by one Recognizance acknowledged in His
Majesty's High Court of Chancery, bearing date, etc. has acknowledged himself
to owe and stand indebted unto the said T. P. in the sum of, etc. payable to
the said T. or to his certain Attorney, his Executors or Administrators, in
manner and form as by the said Recognizance, together with a certain Condition
there-under written in the said Court of Chancery enrolled, and remaining on
Record, more at large it does and may appear. Now the said T. P. for diverse
considerations him thereunto moving, has granted, bargained, assigned, and set
over, and by these presents does, etc. unto the said C. D. and R. D. the said
Recognizance, and all and every sum and sums of money therein contained, and
all the profits, benefits, advantages and commodities, which shall or may in
any wise hereafter grow, be had, made, gotten, arise, accrue, or come to the
said T. P. his Executors or Assigns upon, or by reason of the said
Recognizance, or any thing therein contained. And also the said T. P. does by
these presents authorize and appoint, constitute, ordain, and make the said C.
and R. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, his
Attorney and Atturneys irrevocable, of and for the said T. P. his Executors and
Administrators, and in his and their name or names, to sue and prosecute all
and every such lawful action, execution and process, actions, executions and
processes, as shall or may be commenced, sued or tried, in, upon, or concerning
the said Recognizance, or any sum or sums of Money, Debts, Duties or Demands
whatsoever in the same contained, comprised or specified, or by reason thereof
to be had or obtained: And other Attorney or Attorneys, for or under them, or
any of them, or in their, or any of their behalfs to substitute, make and
ordain, and the same disallow, change or remove, when and as often as they the
said C. and R. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them shall
think good. And the same sum and sums of money, profits, commodities and
demands, and every of them, or any other thing in satisfaction thereof, to
receive, have, take and enjoy to the only proper use and behoof of the said C.
and R. their Executors and Assigns, or any of them; And therefore, or for the
same to make any composition, agreement or discharge whatsoever, which they the
said C. and R. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of them
shall think good: And also the said T. P. for himself, etc. That he the said T.
P. his Executors. Administrators and Assigns, shall and will quietly permit and
suffer the said C. and R. their executors, administrators and assigns, and
every of them, at their, or some of their own proper costs and charges, to
prosecute, sue, implead and attempt, at any time or times, and from time to
time hereafter, all and every such lawful and reasonable action, execution,
suit, process and demand whatsoever, in the name or names of the said T. P. his
executors, administrators or assigns, as he the said T. P. his executors,
administrators or assigns, or any of them may, might, should or ought to have
done, upon or by force or means of the said Recognizance, or touching or
concerning any sum or sums of money, duty or demand whatsoever concerning the
same; or any thing therein contained, comprised or specified, or any thing
thereupon to be had or obtained: And that he the said T. P. his executors,
administrators and assigns, shall and will at every time and times hereafter,
and from time to time, at and upon the reasonable request, and at the cost and
charges of the said C. and R. or one of them, their or one of their executors,
administrators or assigns, avow, justify and maintain all the said actions,
suits, processes and demands; and that neither he the said T. P. nor his
executors, administrators or assigns, shall at any time hereafter revoke,
discontinue, discharge, release, or otherwise wittingly or willingly hinder or
delay any such action, execution, suit, process or demand whatsoever, as shall
be so attempted, pursued or had, as is aforesaid, or any of them, without the
consent of the said C. D. and R. D. or any of them, first had and obtained; And
also that neither he the said T.P. at any time heretofore has received the sum
of, etc. nor has released, extinguished, determined, or in any wise discharged
the said recognizance, or has at any time done or committed, or shall
hereafter without the special consent of the said C. and R. their executors,
administrators or assigns, and some of them, first had and obtained in writing
willingly do or commit any act or thing, whereby or by reason whereof any such
action, execution, suit, process or demand whatsoever, as shall be so
attempted, pursued or had by the said C. and R. their executors, administrators
or assigns, or any of them, in the name or names of the said T. P. his heirs,
executors or administrat. upon, concerning, or by reason of the said Recogniz.
or any thing or demand thereof to be had, shall or may be discharged, released
or barred. And also that they the said C.D. and R.D their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall or may at all times
hereafter have, receive, and take to their own proper use and behoof, the whole
execution, benefit and commodity, and all and every sum or sums of money, and
other thing or things whatsoever; as at any time hereafter shall fortune to be
recovered, had and obtained by reason of the said Recognizance, or any such
action, suit, extent and execution, as shall or may be commenced, had, pursued
or obtained as is aforesaid, without any let, charge, hindrance or interruption
of the said T. P. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any other person
or persons whatsoever, by his or their assent, consent, title, means or
procurement, and without any account heretofore to them, or any of them to be
yielded or made; and also the said T. P. for himself, etc, That he the said T.
P. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them; at all time
and times hereafter, upon, or within convenient time, after every reasonable
request and warning to him or them to be made or given, and at the cost and
charges of the said C. D. and R. D. their Executors, Administrators or Assigus,
or some of them, shall do, knowledge and suffer, or cause to be done, etc. all
and every such lawful warrant and warrants of Attorney, and other lawful and
reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device and devices, and by the said
C. and R. or one of them, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some
of them, their, or some of their Council learned in the Law, shall be
reasonably devised or required, either for the clear acquitting, cancelling or
discharging of the said Recognizance, or for the better obtaining, having,
holding or assuring (to them the said C. and R. their Executors and
Administrators, or to such person or persons as they, or the survivor of them,
or the Executors or Administrators, or the survivor of them, shall name or
appoint) the said Recognizances, or any sum or sums of Money therein mentioned,
and of all, every or any sum or sums of Money, Goods, Chattels, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and other thing and things whatsoever, which he the
said T. P. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, now are, or any of
them is or at any time hereafter shall be entitled unto, by force, or
concerning the said Recognizance, or any execution, matter or thing thereupon
to be had, sued or made at the Election or Choice of the said C. D. and R. D.
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, and shall not
release or discharge the said Recognizance, or any Execution, matter or thing
thereupon to be had, or any part thereof. In witness, etc.

A general Release.
KNow all men by these presents, That I A. G. of, etc. Gentleman, have remised,
released, and for ever-quit-claimed, and by these presents do for me, my
Executors, and Administrators, and every of us clearly and absolutely remise,
release, and for ever quit-claim unto G. H. etc. his Executors and Assigns, all
and all manner of Actions, Suits, Quarrels, Debts, Duties, Bonds, Bills,
Writings Obligatory, Reckonings, Accounts and Demands whatsoever, which against
the said G. H. ever I have had, may have, or which I, my Executors or
Administrators, or any of us at any time hereafter shall or may have, for or by
reason or means of any matter, cause or thing whatsoever, from the beginning of
the World, until the day of the date of these presents.

Witness my Hand and Seal, etc.
A Release from One that has lost the Counterpart of his Lease.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, H. E. of,
etc. sends greeting: Whereas I. T. of, etc. in and by one Indenture of Lease,
bearing date the, etc. for the consideration therein expressed, did demise,
grant, betake, and to farm-let unto me the said H. B. my Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, (reciting the Grant,) In which said Indenture of
Lease there are diverse covenants, grants, articles and agreements, on the part
and behalf of the said T. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to be
observed, performed and kept, as by the same Indenture of Lease, among diverse
other thing and things therein contained, more at large appears. Now know ye,
That I the said H. B. for diverse good Causes and, etc. have by these presents
remised, released, and always of and for me, my Executors and Administrators,
for evermore quit-claimed unto the said T. S. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, all and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles, Provisoes,
Conditions, Clauses, Sentences and Agreements whatsoever, in the said Indenture
of Lease, mentioned or contained, which on the part and behalf of the said T.
S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, are or ought to be observed,
performed and kept, and also of and from all, and all manner of actions, suits,
quarrels, benefits, commodities and advantages that shall or may happen to
arise or grow, by reason or means of them, or by the breach, or not performing
of all and every the said Covenants, Grants, Articles, Clauses and Agreements,
or any of them; and also I the said H. B. have remised, released, surrendered,
assigned and set over, and by these presents do remise, release, surrender,
assign and set over, from me, my Executors, Administrators and Assigns, unto
the said T. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all the Estate,
Right, Title, Interest, Term of years, Property, Claim and Demand whatsoever,
which I the said H. B. now have, or that I, my Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of us ought to have, or claim of, in and to all and singular
the premises, to me the said J. B. in and by the said Indenture of Lease
demised as aforesaid, and of, in, and to every or any part or parcel thereof.
In witness, etc.

A Release of Fines and Forfeitures due to the King, and to the Informer, upon
the Statute of Recognisancy.
TO all people to whom this present Writing shall come, I A. S. of, etc. send
greeting; Whereas I the said A. S. in or about the first day of, etc. did
exhibit and prefer into the Kings Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, one Bill of Information, touching, and upon the Statute of
Recusancy, against F. M. of, etc. for the supposed Christening of a Child of
the said F. contrary to the said Statute and Laws of this Realm, as by the same
Information depending and remaining in the same Court of Common Pleas more at
large appears. Now know ye, That I the said A. S. for and in consideration of
a certain sum of lawful, etc. to me in hand paid by the said F. M. before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, have remised, released, and
quit-claimed and by virtue of one Indenture to me made and granted, from the
Right Honorable R. Lord Ewre, and F. Lord Morley, for the prosecution, ending
and compounding for, of all matters concerning the said Statute, do remise,
release, and for ever quit-claim unto the said F. M. his Executors and
Administrators, all and all manner of actions, and causes of actions, suits and
troubles, now, or at any time heretofore by my means or procurement prosecuted,
and depending in his Majesty's said Court of Common Pleas, or elsewhere,
against the said F. M. touching the Statute before mentioned, and all Fines,
Forfeitures, Penalties, sum and sums of money, and demands due and payable, of
which of right ought to be due and payable either to our Sovereign Lord the
Kings Majesty that now is, his Heirs or Successors, by reason or means of the
breach, or nonperformance of the said Stature, or to me the said A. S. my
Executors or Administrators, by virtue of the Indenture aforesaid, or of any
Information in that behalf exhibited, or otherwise howsoever. And I the said A.
S. for me, my Executors and Administrators, by these presents do covenant and
grant, to and with the said F. M. his Executors and Administrators, That I the
said A. S. my Executors and Administrators, and every of us shall and will at
all times hereafter for ever, well and sufficiently maintain, uphold, make good
and defend this present Release to the said F. M. his Executors and Assigns,
and every of them, against all persons that shall or may at any time hereafter
deny, oppose or contradict the same, and also save harmless the said F. M. his
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, from all actions, suits,
charges and troubles that may or shall arise, be prosecuted or brought against
the said party, by any other person or persons whatsoever concerning the
premises. In witness, etc.

A Resignation or Release from one used in trust of all the benefit he might
Claim, by virtue of any Covenant in the Indenture.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I J.B. of,
etc. send greeting: Whereas by one Indenture bearing date the, etc. made
between R. O. of, etc. on the one party, and the said J. B. and J. H. of, etc.
on the other party, he the said R. O. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, did covenant and grant, to and with me the
said I. B. and the said I. H. our Executors and Assigns; That he the said R. O.
should and would within the space of, etc. next ensuing the date of the same
Indenture, convey and assure, or cause to be conveyed or assured to the said R.
O. and E.H. Daughter to R.H. of, etc. with whom the said R. O. was then to be
espoused, and to the heirs of their bodies lawfully begotten, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, of the full and clear yearly value of 1000 l. at the least;
as by the said Indenture and Covenants therein contained, amongst diverse other
things more at large appears; And for performance thereof, according to the
said Covenants, the said R. O. by his Obligation dated, etc. became bound with
Sureties to us the said I. B. and I. H. in the sum of, etc. as by the same Bond
may also appear, in which said Indenture and Bond, the name of me the said I.
B. was only used in trust, for the Benefit and Behoof of the said E. H. Now
therefore know ye, That I the said I. B. in discharge of the trust in me
reposed, and at the request of the said E. H. have remised, released,
surrendered, resigned, and set over, and by these presents, for me, my Executors
and Administrators, do freely and absolutely remise, release, surrender,
resign, and set over unto the said E. H. her Executors and Assigns, all the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Use, Trust, Benefit, Privilege and Demand
whatsoever, which I the said I. B. have, or may have, or claim of, in, or to
any sum of Money, or other matter or thing whatsoever; in the said Indenture,
Covenant and Bond, contained, mentioned and expressed, or in any of them: So as
neither I the said I. B. my executors or administrators, or any of us, at any
time hereafter shall or will ask, claim, challenge or demand any interest, use,
benefit, trust, privilege, or other thing, in any manne^ whatsoever, by reason
or means of the said Indenture, or any Covenant therein specified, or in, or to
the said Bond, or any sum of Money therein mentioned, but thereof and
therefrom, and from all actions, suits and demands which I, my executors or
assigns, may have concerning the same, shall be utterly secluded, and for ever
debarred by these presents. In witness, etc.

An Indenture for justifying of Actions upon setting over of a Statute.
THis Indenture made the, etc. Between R. W. of, etc. on the one part, and T.
C. of, etc. on the other part, witnesses, That whereas I. H. of, etc. in and
by one Statute of 800 l. now appertaining to the said R. W. as Executor of the
last Will and Testament of the said, etc. Now the said R. W. for diverse good
Considerations him especially moving, has given, granted, assigned and set
over; and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely, give, grant,
assign and set over unto the said T. C. his executors, administrators and
assigns, as well the said Statute-Staple aforesaid, as also all the Debts of,
etc. in the same Statute mentioned or contained, to the only proper use and
behoof of the said T. C. his executors, administrators and assigns for ever.
And further the said R. W. covenanteth, etc. That he the said R. W. his Heirs
and Executors, and the administrators that hereafter shall happen to be of the
Goods, Chattels and Credits of him the said R. W. and every of them, at all
times, and from time to time hereafter (upon request) shall maintain, justify
and allow all and every such action and actions, Writs, Suits, Bills, Plaints,
Executions and Demands whatsoever, as the said T. C. his executors or
administrators, shall commence, pursue or make in the name or names of the said
R. W. his executors or administrators, that hereafter shall be of the Goods,
Chattels, Credits and Debts of the said R. W. or in the name or names of any of
them; and that it shall be lawful to and for the said T. C. his executors,
administrators and assigns, and every of them, to take, receive, have, hold and
enjoy for ever, to the only use of the said T. C. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, all and every such sum and sums of Money, costs and
damages, satisfactions, commodities, profits and advantages whatsoever, which
shall be gotten, recovered, obtained or had by reason of any the actions,
writs, bills, plaints, executions and demands aforesaid: or by reason or means
of any of them, without any impediment, denial or contradiction of the said R.
W. his heirs, executors, administrators of assigns, that hereafter shall be of
the Goods, Chattels or Credits of the said R. W. or any of them. In witness,
etc.

An Indenture between the Scavenger and the Raker, for cleansing the Streets.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between R C. S. P. and T. R. Citizens of London,
Scavengers of and for the Parish of, etc. on the one part, and E. D. etc. on
the other party, Witnesses, That the said E. D. in consideration of the sum
of, etc. to him to be paid in such form as hereafter in these presents is
expressed, covenanted, promised and granted for himself, etc. in manner and
form following, (that is to say) That he the said E. D. his executors,
administrators or assigns, shall and will (at his and their own proper costs
and charges) cleanse and make clean, or cause to be cleansed and made clean in
the said Parish of, etc. all the Streets, Lanes, Alleys, and other places
whatsoever within the said Parish of, etc. as the same have been heretofore
used and accustomed to be cleansed and made clean, by any Carter or Raker in
that behalf appointed, from the Monday next after the Feast of the Epiphany of
our Lord God, commonly called Twelfth-day, next ensuing the date hereof, until
the Monday next after the Epiphany of our Lord God; which shall be in the year
of, etc. three times in every week weekly, during the said term, to wit, on
every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday: And also at all other such times and
days as the Lord Mayor of the said City of London for the time being, the
Aldermen of the Wards, His Majesty's Privy Council, or the Common Council of
the said City of London, or any of them, shall appoint or command the same; and
from thence shall carry away and convey all such Channel dirt, filth,
Sea-coal-ashes, sweepings of Houses and Streets, Lanes, Alleys, and other
places, of and within the said Parish of, etc. unto some convenient Pastall for
the same to be provided by the said E. D. his executors, administrators or
assigns, at his or their proper costs and charges (All Rubbish and Rushes as
shall happen to be laid out of the Parish Church, etc. during the said term
only excepted.) And further, that he the said E. D. his executors,
administrators or assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at all times,
during the said term, clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge, and save and
keep harmless the said, etc. and every of them respectively, and their
Successors in the said Office of Scavenger, during the said term of, etc. of
and from all and all manner of Costs, Charges, Imprisonments, Expenses and
Damages whatsoever, by them or any of them to be had or sustained, or otherwise
put unto, during the said term, for or by reason of any negligence or default
of the said E. D. his, etc. in the premises, or any part thereof. And they the
said, etc. do Covenant for payment of the Money at days agreed on, etc. In
witness, etc.

A Condition to pay a sum of Money at two several Payments.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such. That if the above bounden I. C. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed R. M. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, at, or in the now dwelling house of the said R. M.
situate, etc. the full sum of 8l. and 12s. of lawful, etc. in manner and form
following, (that is to say) on the last day of May next ensuing, 4 l. thereof;
and on the, etc. next, etc. the other 4 l. 12 s. thereof, being the full
remainder of the said sum, etc. without fraud or coven, That then this present
Obligation to be void and of none effect: But if default shall happen to be
made in either of the payments aforesaid, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, that then, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive one single Debt.
KNow all men by these presents, That I. E. C. of, etc. Gentleman, have
assigned, ordained and made, and in my stead and place by these presents put
and constituted my trusty and well beloved Friend F. L. of, etc. to be my true
and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my name, and to my use, to ask, sue for,
levy, require, recover and receive of I. W. of, etc. Esquire all and every such
Debts and sums of Money, which are now due unto me by any manner of ways or
means whatsoever: Giving and granting unto my said Attorney my whole power,
strength and authority in and about the premises, and upon the receipt of any
such debts or sums of money aforesaid, acquittances or other discharges, for me
and in my name to make, seal and deliver, and all and every such act and acts,
thing and things, device and devices whatsoever in the Law, for the recovery of
all or any such debts or sums of money, as aforesaid, for me, and in my name to
do, execute and perform, as fully, largely and amply in every respect, to all
intents, constructions and purposes, as I my self might or could do, if I were
there in mine own person present: ratifying, allowing and holding firm and
stable, all and whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be
done in or about the execution of the premises, by virtue of these presents. In
witness, etc.

A Condition to make an Apprentice free of London, at the end of his
Apprenticeship.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas J. H. the Son of, etc. is to be the
Apprentice of the above-bound T. R. for the term of seven years, as by the
Indenture in that behalf to be made shall appear; If therefore the said T. R.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at the end of the said term of seven
years (if the said J. H. shall be his Apprentice, and shall dwell with, and
serve him as an Apprentice) do, or shall make, or cause to be made the said J.
H. a Freeman of the City of London, and of the Company of Cordwayners of the
said City, at the proper costs and charges of the said T. R. That then, etc.

A short Letter of Attorney to receive Money due upon a Bond^
KNow all men by these presents, That I T. A. of, etc. have assigned, ordained
and made, and in my stead and place by these presents, put and constituted my
trusty and well-beloved Friend I. B. of, etc. my true and lawful Attorney, for
me, in my stead and name, and to my use and behoof, to ask, recover, and
receive of W. S. of, etc. O. T. of, etc. and I. M. of, etc. the sum of, etc.
due unto me for the non-payment of the sum of, etc. of like money, on the 20th.
day of, etc. last past, before the date of these presents; As by one Obligation
with Condition there-under written, bearing date, etc. in the year, etc. more
plainly appears: Giving, and by these presents granting unto my said
Attorney, my full power and lawful authority in the premises, to do, say,
perform, conclude and finish for me, and in my name as aforesaid, all and every
such act and acts, thing and things, device and devices in the Law whatsoever,
for the recovery of all the Debts aforesaid, as fully, largely and amply in
every respect, as I my self might or could do, if I were personally present:
and upon the receipt thereof, acquittances or other discharges, for me, and in
my name, to make, seal and deliver: Ratifying, allowing and holding firm and
stable, all and whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be
done, in, or about the execution of the premises, by virtue of these presents.
In witness whereof, etc.

A Form of an Award.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, T. M. of,
etc. sends greeting, etc. Whereas diverse Controversies and Debares heretofore
have been had, moved, and yet are depending between H. D. of, etc. of the one
party, and O. L. etc. of the other party, for the appeasing and determining
whereof, the said Parties have submitted themselves, and are become bound each
of them to the other, by their several Obligations, dated, etc. in the sum of,
etc. with Conditions upon the same Obligations endorsed, for the performance of
all and every the Award, Arbitrament, Determination and Judgment of me the said
T. M. Umpire indifferently elected and chosen, as well on the part and behalf
of the said H. D. as on the part, etc. To Award, Arbitrate, Determine, and
Judge of and concerning all and all manner of Actions, Suits, Judgments,
Executions, Accounts, Reckonings, Trespasses, Strifes, Variance, Quarrels,
Controversies and Demands whatsoever, had, made, moved, stirred or depending
between the said H. D. of the one part, and the said O. L. on the other part,
from the beginning of the world, until the day of the date of these presents.
So always as the said Award, etc. of me the said Umpire, for and concerning
the premises, be made and put into writing indented under my Hand and Seal, on,
or before the, etc. as by the said several Obligations, and their several
Conditions, more plainly appears. Now know ye, That I the said T. M. Umpire,
as aforesaid, taking upon me the charge of the said Award and Arbitrament, and
having heard and viewed the sayings and allegations of either of the said
Parties concerning the premises, and minding to set an unity and friendship
concerning the same, do thereupon make and put in writing this award,
arbitrament, determination and judgment, between the said Parties, for and
concerning the premises, in manner and form following, that is to say: First, I
do award, arbitrate, determine, and judge by these presents, That the said H.
D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall well and truly pay, etc.
That he the said H. D. shall on the, etc. at the Shop of, etc. Seal, and as his
absolute Deed deliver to the said O. L. or to his use, a Release, Acquittance
and Discharge of, and for all and all manner of actions, suits, judgments, etc.
from the beginning of the world, etc. In witness, etc.

A Lease made in consideration of the Surrender of a former Lease for a longer
time, with good Covenants.
THis Indeture made the, etc. Between I.B. of, etc. C. D. of, etc. and J. D.
of, etc. on the one part, and T. W. of, etc. on the other part, witnesses,
That the said J. B. C. D. and J. D. as well for and in consideration of the
Surrender of one former Lease dated the, etc. made from the said J. B. C. D.
and J. D. to H. W. Brother to the said T. W. as also in consideration of the
sum of, etc. to the said J. B. in hand paid, before the ensealing and delivery
of these presents, by the said T. W. the receipt whereof the said J. B. does
hereby acknowledge, and thereof, and of every part thereof, does acquit and
discharge the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these
presents, have demised, granted, and to Farm-letten, and by these presents do
demise, grant, and to farm-let unto the said T. W. all those two Messuages or
Tenements, with the appurtenances, and three-yard Land to the same belonging,
situate, lying and being in the Parish of, etc. late in the several tenures of
the said H. W. deceased, and of A. P. Widow, and now in the Occupation of the
said T. W. and the aforesaid A. P. together with the lops, tops, and shreds of
all the hedg-rows and hedges, growing in and upon eleven Roods of Land in a
Field called Arzons Field, and a furlong called B. furlong, and also the lop
and top of one hedge growing in and upon a Close called K. Close, from the Gate
by the Lane side; and together likewise with Common of Pasture for twelve Kine,
and one hundred and twenty Sheep in the Commons and Fields of D. aforesaid, and
all other Fields, Pastures, Lands, Meadows, Feedings and Grounds whatsoever,
with the appurtenances of them the said I. B. C. D. and I. D. which late were
in the Occupation of them the said H. W. and A. P. or either of them in D.
aforesaid, and together also with all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns,
Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Back-sides, Courts, Ways, Easements, Profits,
Commodities and Advantages whatsoever, to the said two Messuages, and other the
premises belonging or appertaining (except and always reserved out of this
Demise and Grant, the bodies of all Trees of Oak, Ash and Elm, now growing or
being, or which hereafter shall grow, and be, in and upon the premises; or in
and upon any part or parcel thereof, and also except one Barn, called the great
Barn, and the Yard wherein the same stands, (which late were in the the
Possession or Occupation of G. B.) Habend.
To have and to hold the said two Messuages, Tenements, Three-yard Land,
Houses, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens; and all other the
premises, with their appurtenances before by these presents demised, and every
part and parcel thereof (except before excepted) unto the said T. W. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast day of, etc. before the
date of, etc. unto the full end and term of, etc. from thence next ensuing, and
fully to be complete and ended (if T. W. and A. W. party to these presents,
Reddend.
G. W. Son of T. W. or any of them shall so long live) yielding and paying
therefore yearly during the said term unto the said I.B. his Heirs and Assigns,
the sum of, etc. at two usual Feasts or Terms in the year; That is to say, at
the Feast of, To re-enter for non-payment of the Rent.
etc. and at the Feast of, etc. by even and equal portions; and if it shall
happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. to be behind and unpaid, in part or in
all, after either of the said Feasts in any year during the said term, in which
the same ought to be paid, by the space of 28 days, being lawfully demanded,
and no sufficient distress to be had or found, in or upon the demised
premises; That then, and at all times afterward, it shall and may be lawful
to, and for the said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, into all
and singular the said demised premises, and every part and parcel thereof,
wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again and enjoy, as in his or their
former estate; and the said T. VV. his Executors and Assigns, from thence
utterly to expel and put out (this Indenture, or any thing before specified to
the contrary notwithstanding.) And the said T. VV. party to these presents, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, during the continuance of this present Lease, at his and
their proper Costs and Charges well and sufficiently repair, uphold, sustain,
maintain and keep the said Messuages or Tenements, and all the demised
premises, in good and sufficient reparations, and the same so being well and
sufficiently repaired, upholden and kept, in the end of the said term, or other
sooner determination of this Lease, shall leave and yield up unto the said I.
B. his Heirs or Assigns, the said T. VV. from time to time, having and taken
(by the assignment and appointment of the said I. B. his Heirs or Assigns)
sufficient Timber upon the said demised premises for the reparations of the
same, if any such Timber be there to be had; otherwise the said Timber to be
found, and reparations done as aforesaid, at the proper Provisions, Costs and
Charges of the said T. VV. party to these presents, his Executors and Assigns,
and that neither the said T. VV. his Executors or Assigns, or his or their
Under-Tenants shall commit any waste, or strip any Trees, Hedges, Quick-sets,
Mounds or Fences upon the premises; And the said I. B. for himself, etc. does
Covenant and Grant to and with the said T. VV. etc. That the said two Messuages
or Tenements, Three-yard Land, That the Premises are discharged of Encumbrances.
and all other the before demised Premises, with the Appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, now are and be, and so from henceforth, during the
continuance of this present Lease, shall be, and continue clearly acquitted,
exonerated and discharged of and from all and all manner of former Bargains,
Sales, Gifts, Grants, Joyntures, Leases, Annuities, Rents, Arrerages of Rents,
Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions,
Wills, Intails, Legacies, Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever; had,
made, committed, suffered or done, or to be had, made, etc. by the said I. B.
or by the said G. B. deceased, his Father I. B. his Grandfather, and R. B. his
Uncle, or by any of them, or by any of their Heirs, etc. or by any other person
or persons, or by, or through their or any of their means, act, title, consent
or procurement (one Lease heretofore made by the said G. B. of one Message or
Tenement, and other thing, parcel of the premises before by these presents
demised unto the said A. P. for and during the natural life of the said A.
whereupon the yearly Rent of, etc. is reserved, and shall be from henceforth,
during the continuance of the same Lease, due and payable unto the said T. W.
party to these presents, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, (only
excepted and foreprized.) And further, the said I. B. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, does covenant, etc. That if at any time hereafter
during the space of Ten years next ensuing the date of these presents, To
exchange a lease within Ten years.
the said T. W. or his Assigns, shall be minded to exchange, and put in one
other life in the stead and place of any of them the said T. W. the Son of G.
and A. W. the party put out, being then living, That then within three weeks
next after request in that behalf made, and payment of, etc. to the said I. B.
in the consideration thereof, he the said I B. his Heirs or Assigns, shall and
will at the costs and charges of the said T. W. party to these presents, his
Executors or Assigns, make, seal and deliver in due form of Law unto the said
T. W. party to these presents, his Executors and Assigns, one other good and
sufficient Lease for the residue of the said term which shall be then to come
(if any two of the persons before named, and such other person as shall be then
nominated and put in, shall so long live, and under the like Rents, Covenants
and Conditions, as in these presents is expressed, ( Mutatis Mutandis.) And
further, that the said T. W. party to these presents, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, under the Rents and Covenants
herein before mentioned, shall and may peaceably and quietly have, hold,
possess and enjoy the said two Messuages or Tenements, Three yard-land, and all
other the before demised premises, with the appurtenances, and every part
thereof, during the whole Term hereby granted, if the said T. W. the Son of G.
W. and A. W. or such other persons as shall be hereafter named, with two of
them in the stead and place of any of them so dying, or exchanging, shall so
long live, without the lawful let, trouble, eviction or contradiction of the
said I. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or of the Heirs, Executors or Assigns of the
said G. B. deceased, or of any other person or persons whatsoever (except only
the said A. B. for her Lease beforementioned.) And the said C. D. and I. D.
for themselves, and either of them severally and respectively, and not the one
for the other, nor the others act, and for their several Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, do covenant, promise and grant, to and with the
said T. W. party to these presents, his, etc. That he the said T. W. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall and may
according to the tenor and true meaning of these presents, peaceably and
quietly have, hold and enjoy all the said demised premises, with the
appurtenances, and every part thereof free and clear, and freely and clearly
acquitted and discharged of and from all and all manner of former Bargains,
Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Joyntures, Dowers, Uses, Wills, Intails,
Statutes, Recognizances, Judgments, Extents and Executions, and of and from all
other Estates, Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made,
committed, suffered or done by them the said C. D. and I. D. or either of them,
or by any other person or persons, by their, or either of their means, act,
title or procurement. And lastly, the said I. B. for himself, etc. that he the
said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, For further assurance.
shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time upon request
made, at the cost and charges in the Law of the said T. W. party to these
presents, his Executors or Assigns, or some of them, make, do and execute, or
cause to be made, done and executed, all and every such further and other
reasonable act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, for the further and more
better assurance, surety, sure-making, and conveying of the said demised
premises, with the appurtenances, and every part thereof unto the said T. W.
party to these presents, his Executors and Assigns, during the time aforesaid,
and in such manner and farm, and upon such Rents, Covenants and Conditions, as
is before herein mentioned, according to the effect and true meaning of these
presents, as by the said T. W. his Executors or Assigns, or by his or their
Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised or advised and required.
In witness, etc.

A Grant of an Extent penned by Mr. Thomas Bromley, then Solicitor.
THis Indenture made, etc. between B. D. of, etc. and VV. D. of, etc. on the
one party, and T. B. G. B. and T. O. of, etc. on the other party; Witnesses,
That whereas the Right Honorable E. Lord S. by the name of E. S. Esquire Recital
of the Recognizances.
by one Recognizance, bearing date, etc. taken, knowledged and sealed, before
Sir R. D. Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England, according to the form of the
Statute for the Recovery of Debts in that case provided, stands bound to the
said I. D. in the sum of, etc. Payable, etc. as by the same Recognizance, etc.
And whereas also the said I. D. has extended, and to him is delivered in the
Execution, the Manor of N. with the appurtenances, in the County of, etc. at
the yearly Rent of, etc. for non-payment of the said sum of, etc. Now the said
I. D. for diverse good causes and considerations him hereunto specially moving,
has granted, assigned and set over, and by these presents does grant, assign
and set over unto the said VV. D. T. B. G. B. and T. O. all the estate, right,
title, interest and demand whatsoever, which he the said I. has by reason of
the said extent, of, in, and to the said Manor of N. with the appurtenances,
and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof, and of, in, and to all
singular Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leases, Pastures, Feedings,
Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances, so
extended and delivered in execution, as aforesaid: And the said I. D. for
himself, etc. that he the said I. D. his Executors or Assigns, at any time or
times hereafter, shall not do any act or acts, thing or things, whereby the
said extent and extents, or the estate, title or interest of the said VV. D.
etc. or any of them, or of the Executors. Administrators or Assigns, of them,
or any of them, by reason of the said extent, may be in any wise hurt, hindered,
impeached, discharged, undone, or made void. And further, that he the said I.
D. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, shall and will at the reasonable
request, costs and charges in the Law of the said VV. D. or any of them, do and
suffer to be done, made and acknowledged all and every such lawful and
reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device and devices in the Law
whatsoever, for the further assurance, surety, sure-making and conveying of the
premises, for and during all the time and term of the said extent and
execution, unto the said T. B. G. B. and T. O. as by the learned Counsel of
them, or any of them, shall be reasonably devised or advised and required. In
witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Bond for performance of Covenants.
TO all Christian People, etc. I. I. etc. sends greeting, etc. Whereas R. D.
of, etc. by his Obligation bearing date, etc. became bound unto the said I. I.
in the sum of, etc. conditioned for performance of the Covenants contained in
one pair of Indentures of Bargain and Sale, of the Inn called K. in C. etc. in
the, etc. with certain Lands thereunto belonging: which Inn and premises are
now by the said I. I. bargained and sold unto M. W. of, etc. his Heirs and
Assigns. Now the said I. I. for the better enjoying of the said Inn, and other
the Lands and Tenements thereunto belonging, has as much as in him is,
assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely
assign and set over unto the aforesaid M. VV. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns,
the said recited Obligation, and all sum and sums of money therein mentioned,
and the benefit and advantage thereof to be had or made. And the said I. I. for
himself, etc. does covenant and grant to and with the said M. VV. etc. That he
said M. VV. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and may in
lawful manner, at his and their cost and charges, in all things, from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, sue for, levy, recover and enjoy all sum and
sums of money, benefit and advantage whatsoever, which shall or may be gotten
by virtue, force or means of the said recited Obligation, in the name of the
said I. I. his Executors or Administrators, without any manner of nonsuit,
release, trouble, denial or interruption of the I. I. his Executors or
Administrators; unless it be by consent of the said M. VV. his Heirs or
Assigns, in writing first had and obtained. And he the said M. VV. for himself,
etc. does Covenant, etc. That he the said M. VV. his Executors or
Administrators, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
save and keep harmless the said I. I. his Executors or Administrators, and
every of them, of and from all and all manner of costs and charges to arise by
means of any suit, upon or by reason of the said Obligation. In witness, etc.

A Release of Annuity.
TO all Christian People, etc. We N. B. and A. B. of, etc. send greeting, etc.
Whereas Sir J. B. of, etc. by his Deed indented bearing date, etc. for the
considerations therein mentioned, Recital.
did give and grant unto W. L. and R. P. of, etc. one Annuity or yearly Rent
of, etc. to be issuing and going out of all and singular the Manors,
Messuages, Lands and Tenements, called H. and L. within the Parish of, etc. and
out of all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances in H.
and L. within the said Parish of, etc. in the said County of, etc. to have,
hold, receive and enjoy all the said Annuity, or yearly Rent of, etc. to the
said W. L. and R. P. their Executors or Assigns, for and during the natural
life of the said Sir I. B. the said Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc. to be
payable and paid to the said W. and R. their Executors and Assigns, during the
life of the said Sir I. B. at two Feasts in the year, viz. at the Feast of,
etc. at or in the, etc. as by the same Deed indented thereof made, more at
large it does and may appear. Sithence which time, the said W. L. is dead, and
the said R. P. him survived. And whereas also the said R. P. by his Deed
indented, bearing date, etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did
demise, grant, bargain and sell unto the said N. B. his Executors and Assigns,
the said annuity or yearly rent of, etc. and every part thereof, to have and to
hold unto the said N. B. his executors and assigns, for and during the term of,
etc. from thenceforth next and immediately ensuing, and fully to be complete
and ended, if the aforesaid Sir I. B. should so long live, as in and by the
said Indenture last mentioned more, etc. Now know ye, That we the said N. B.
and A. B. for and in consideration of a certain competent sum of lawful money
of England to us in hand paid at and before the, etc. by G. S. and R. G. of,
etc. Esquire whereof and wherewith, etc. have remised, released and quit-claimed,
and by these presents for us and either of us, our and either of our executors
and assigns, and every of us, do fully, clearly and absolutely remise, release,
and for ever quit-claim unto the said G. S. and R. G. their heirs and assigns,
and every of them, in their, or some, or one of their full and peaceable
possession, as well the said annuity or yearly rent of, etc. beforementioned,
and every part and parcel thereof. And all Rents, arrerages of Rents,
Penalties. Forfeitures, nomine poenae's, and distresses whatsoever, at any time
or times heretofore due or forfeited, by reason of the non-payment of the said
annuity or yearly rent of, etc. or any part or parcel thereof: As also all the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Property, term and terms of Life, Lives and
Years, Reversion, Claim and Demand whatsoever, which we the said N. B. and A.
B. or either of us, our, or either of our Executors or Assigns, now have, may,
might, should, or in any wise ought to have or claim of, in and to the said
annuity or yearly rent of, etc. abovementioned, or any part thereof, by force
and virtue of the said several Deeds indented, above-recited or mentioned, or
either of them, or otherwise howsoever; To have and to hold the said annuity or
yearly rent of, etc. and the estate, right, title, interest of all other the
beforementioned premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof unto the said G. S. and R. G. their heirs and assigns for ever, so as
neither we the said N. B. and A. B. or either of us, our, or either of our
executors or assigns, or any of us, shall or will at any time hereafter, ask,
claim, challenge or demand any estate, right, title or interest, in or to the
said annuity or yearly rent of, etc. or any part thereof; But thereof and
therefrom, and from all actions, suits, titles and demands concerning the same,
shall be utterly secluded, and for ever debarred by these presents. In witness
whereof, etc.

A short Lease of certain Tithes.
THis Indenture made the, etc, between Sir E. S. of, etc. on the one part, and
M. D. of, etc. on the other part, witnesses, That the said Sir E. S. for
diverse good Causes and Considerations him moving, and especially of the good
opinion he has and conceives of the said M. D. has demised, granted, Grant.
betaken, and to farm-letten, and by these presents does, etc. unto the said M.
D. and his assigns, all the Tithes of Corn, Grain, and Hay yearly coming,
renewing and growing within the Township of, Habend.
etc. and within the Lordship of, etc. in the County of G. and now held by E.L.
of, etc. To have and to hold, receive, take and enjoy all the said Tithes of
Corn, Grain and Hay, unto the said M. D. and his assigns, from and immediately
after the date of these presents, unto the full end and term of 21 years from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, and that in as large
and ample manner as the same lately were held and enjoyed by the said E. L.
yielding and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said Sir
E. S. Reddend.
his Heirs and Assigns the sum of, etc. at the Feast of, etc. at one whole
entire payment: And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. to be
behind or unpaid, in part, or in all, by the space of, etc. next following the
said Feast, A nomine poenae for non-payment of the Rent.
being lawfully demanded, that then for every such default the said M. D. or
his Assigns, shall forfeit and pay unto the said Sir E. S. his Heirs and
Assigns, the sum of, etc. over and besides such arrerages as then shall happen
to be behind and unpaid; and the said Sir E. S. for him, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, does covenant, etc. That he said M. D. his Executors and
Assigns, shall and may at all time and times from henceforth, for and during
all the said term hereby granted, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy,
possess and enjoy, all the said Tithes of Corn, Grain and Hay (paying the Rent
before reserved) without any manner of lawful let, eviction, disturbance or
contradiction of the said Sir E. S. his Heirs or Assigns, or of any other
person or persons, by his or their means, consent or procurement. In witness,
etc.

A Deed of Gift.
TO all people to whom this present writing shall come, I A. B. of, etc. send
greeting, etc. Know ye, That I the said A. B. for and in consideration of the
sum of, etc. which I the said A. B. do owe and am indebted unto T. S. of, etc.
have given, granted and sold, and by these presents do fully, clearly and
absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto the said T. S. all and
singular such my Goods, Chattels and Implements of Household, and Commodities
whatsoever, as are contained and specified in a certain Schedule hereunto
annexed: Habend.
To have and to hold, all and singular the Goods, Chattels, Implements of
Household, and Commodities whatsoever, as aforesaid, to the aforesaid T. S. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper uses and
behoofs for ever there of and therewith to do, use and dispose, at his and
their will and pleasure, as of his and their own proper Goods and Chattels,
without any manner of challenge, claim or demand of me the said A. B. or of any
other person or persons for me, in my name, by my cause, means, consent or
procurement: And further, know ye, That I the said A. B. have put the said T.
S. in full possession of all and singular the aforesaid premises, by the
delivery unto him (at the ensealing hereof) of one goblet of Silver, in name of
all the said Goods. In witness whereof, etc.

A Release of a Dower.
TO all People to whom this present Writing shall come, Dame Dorothy Williams
late Wife of Sir David Williams Knight, deceased, sends greeting, etc. Know
ye, That the said Dame Dorothy W. for and in consideration of the performance
of a former agreement had and made between the said Dame Dorothy W. and the
said Sir D. W. her late Husband, before their inter-marriage, has remised,
released, and for ever quit-claimed, and by these presents does clearly and
absolutely remise, release, and for ever quitclaim unto Sir D. VV. Knight, T.
VV. and R. VV. Sons of the said Sir D. VV. and to every of them, all and all
manner of Dower, and right and title of Dower whatsoever, which she the said
Dame Dorothy W. now has, may, might, should, or of right ought to have or
claim of, in, or out of all and every the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments whatsoever, which were the said D. VV. at any time during the
Coverture between him and the said Dame D. situate and being in the Counties
of, etc. or in any or every of them, and all and all manner of actions, and
writs of Dower whatsoever, so as neither she the said Dame D. VV. nor any other
for her, or in her name, any manner of Dower or writ, or action of Dower, or
any manner of right or title of Dower, of, or in the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, or of, or in any part or parcel thereof, at any
time hereafter, shall or may have or claim, or prosecute against the said Sir
D. VV. T. VV. and R. VV. nor any of them, their, nor any of their Heirs or
Assigns, but of and from the same shall be utterly debarred, and for ever
excluded by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Release from One that has lost his Articles of Agreement.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I E. W. of, etc. have
remised, released and quit-claimed, and by these presents do for me, my Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of us, fully, clearly and
absolutely remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto I. O. of, etc. his,
etc. all and all manner of Actions, Suits, Plaints, Pleas, Process and Demands
whatsoever, which against the said I. O. I ever had, now have, or at any time
hereafter shall or may have, by reason or means of any Grant, Covenant,
Contract, Promise, Bargain, Clause, or thing mentioned, contained, expressed or
declared, in or by certain articles of agreement, indented, bearing date, etc.
made between the said I. O. on the one part, and me the said E. W. on the other
part, touching or concerning the procuring of a Lease of a Field, or parcel of
Ground, Arable, Meadow or Pasture, called the, etc. of the yearly Rent of, etc.
lying, etc. which said Lease, I do hereby acknowledge is procured and passed by
the said I. O. according to my mind and desire, and of and from all Bonds,
Bills and Writings Obligatory, and all and every penalty, sum and sums of money
in them or any of them mentioned or contained, wherein or whereby the said I.
O. is, and stands bound unto me for the performance of the Covenants, Grants,
Articles and Agreements in the said articles mentioned or contained; I do
acquit and discharge the said, etc. his, etc. for ever by these presents. In
witness, etc.

A Form of a Will.
IN the name of God Amen. The tenth day of, etc. I A. B. of, etc. being sick in
body, but of good and perfect memory, thanks be to Almighty God, and calling to
remembrance the uncertain estate of this transitory life, and that all Flesh
must yield unto Death when it shall please God to call, do make, constitute,
ordain and declare, this my last Will and Testament, in manner and form
following, revoking and adnulling by these presents all and every Testament and
Testaments, Will and Wills heretofore by me made and declared either by word or
writing: and this to be taken only for my last Will and Testament, and none
other: And first, being penitent and sorry from the bottom of my heart for my
sins past, most humbly desiring forgiveness for the same, I give and commit my
Soul unto Almighty God my Savior and Redeemer, in whom, and by the Merits of
Jesus Christ I trust and believe assuredly to be saved, and to have full
remission and forgiveness of all my sins, and that my Soul with my Body at the
general day of resurrection, shall rise again with joy, and through the Merits
of Christ's Death and Passion possess and inherit the Kingdom of Heaven
prepared for his Elect and Chosen, and my Body to be buried in such place where
it shall please my Executors hereafter named to appoint: And now for the
settling of my Temporal Estate, and such Goods, Chattels and Debts, as it has
pleased God, far above my deserts to bestow upon me: I do order, give and
dispose the same in manner and form following (that is to say) First, I will
that all those Debts and Duties as I owe in right or conscience to any manner
of person or persons whatsoever, shall be well and truly comented and paid, or
ordained to be paid within convenient time after my Decease, by my Executors
hereafter named, Item, I give and bequeath, In witness, etc.

An assurance of a Jointure to the Wife, with Remainder in Tail.
THis Indenture made, etc. between H. V. of, etc. on the one part, and L. L.
etc. and G. L. etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That as well for, and in
consideration of a Marriage already had and solemnized between the said V. and
A. now wise of the said H. V. and Sister of the said L. and G. as for the great
good will, love and affection, which the said H. has and bears to the said
A. his wife; and to the intent that the Messuages, Lands and Tenements
hereafter in these presents specified, shall come and continue in the Issue of
the said H. and A. in such sort, manner and form, as hereafter in these
presents is expressed, mentioned and declared; It is covenanted, granted,
condescended, concluded, and fully agreed upon, by and between the said parties
to these presents, in manner and form following: And the said H. V. for the
consideration aforesaid, does covenant, grant and promise, for himself, etc. to
and with the said L. L. and G. L. their, etc. by these presents, That he the
said H. V. his heirs and assigns, and all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, shall stand and be seized of, and in all and singular those his
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leasons, Pastures and Hereditaments
whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances, in the Parish, Town and
Field of C. aforesaid, in the said, etc. which late were parcel of the
possessions of the late dissolved Monastery of, etc. and now be, or late were
in the several Tenures and Occupation of, etc. and their assigns, and the
reversion and the reversions of the premises, and every part and parcel
thereof, to the uses, purposes and intents hereafter in these presents
expressed and limited, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, that
is to say, to the use and behoof of the said H. V. for the term of his natural
life without impeachment, of or for any manner of waste, and after his decease
to the use and behoof of the said A. V. now wife of the said H. V. for the term
of her natural life; and after the decease of the said H. and A. his wife, then
to the use and behoof of such of the Children, between them the said H. and A.
lawfully begotten, as the said A. by her last Will and Testament, or other
Writing to be signed and subscribed by her the said A. in her lifetime, shall
limit, nominate and appoint: And if no such limitation, nomination or
appointment, shall be made by the said A. in her lifetime, then to the use of
the Heirs of the Bodies of the said H. and A. between them lawfully begotten,
and for, etc. to the use of the right Heirs of the said H. V. for ever: And
further, the said H. V. for himself, etc. does Covenant, etc. to and with the
said L. L. and G. L. their Heirs, etc. That he the said H. V. his heirs and
assigns, shall and will permit and suffer the said A. V. and all and every
other person and persons to whom the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
other the premises, or any part or parcel thereof shall happen to come, or of
right ought to come, by reason of these presents, peaceably and quietly to
have, hold, occupy and enjoy all and singular the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, before by these presents expressed and mentioned,
without any manner of let, trouble, eviction, disturbance, suit, vexation or
expulsion, of the said H. V. his heirs or assigns, or any other person or
persons whatsoever, lawfully having, claiming or pretending to have, any Estate
or Title, from, by or under the said H. V. his heirs or assigns, according to
the intent, form, and true meaning of these presents. In witness whereof, etc.

A Lease of a Fee-Farm, and certain Lands, with necessary Covenants.
THis Indenture made, etc. between C. B. of, etc, on the one part, and T. W.
of, etc. on the other part, witnesses, That the said C. B. for diverse good
Causes and Considerations him thereunto especially moving, Has demised,
granted, and to farm-letten and by these presents does demise, etc. unto the
said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all that his Message,
Tenement or Farm-house called W. with the appurtenances, and all Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements,
Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Profits and Commodities whatsoever to the said
Message, Tenement or Farm-house now belonging or appertaining, and being now
in the Tenure or Occupation of the said T. W. or of his Assignee or Assignees,
situate, lying and being in the Parish of, etc. Except and always reserved
unto the said C. B. Exception.
his Executors and Assigns, all and all manner of Woods, Under-woods, Hedges,
Rows and Timber Trees, now standing, growing and being, or which hereafter
shall stand, grow or be in and upon the demised premises, or in and upon any
part or parcel thereof; and also except and always reserved unto the said C.
B. his Executors and Assigns, by the space and for the term of one whole year
next before the end and expiration of the term of seven years, and one
half-year here-under granted, the said Message, Tenement or Farm-house, and
one Close or parcel of Ground, called W. containing, etc. be it more or less;
Together with free liberty of ingresse, egresse, abiding and dwelling, into,
out of, from and upon the said Message, Tenement and Farmhouse, and one Close
called W. by and during the said space and term of, etc. next before the end
and expiration of the said Term of, etc. Habend.
To have and to hold the said Message, Tenement or Farm-house, Houses,
Edefices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Lands, Meadows, Feedings,
Pastures, and other the demised premises, and every part and parcel thereof
(except before excepted) unto the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the Feast day of, etc. for and during the term of, etc. and fully
to be complete and ended. Yielding and paying therefore yearly, during the said
term unto the said C. B. his Executors and Assigns, the Rent of, etc. at four
Feasts or Terms in the year most usual (that is to say) at, Re-enter for
non-payment.
etc. by even and equal portions. And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent
of, etc. or any part or parcel thereof to be behind and unpaid by the space of,
etc. next over or after any of the said Feast-days in which the same ought to
be paid, being lawfully demanded, That then and from thenceforth, and at all
times after it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, into the said Message, Tenements or Farm-house,
Houses, Edifices, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and all the demised premises, with
the appurtenances, and into every part and parcel thereof, wholly to re-enter,
and the same to have again, re-possess and enjoy, as in his or their former
estate, And the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all
other the Tenants and Occupiers of the said demised premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, thereout, and from thence utterly to expel, amove and put out,
this Indenture, or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding. And the said T. W. for himself, does covenant, For
Reparation.
etc. in manner and form following (That is to say) that he the said T. W. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, at his and their own proper Costs and
Charges, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during
the said Term of, etc. by these presents granted, when and as often as need
shall require, well and sufficiently repair, support, sustain, maintain and
amend the said Message, Tenement or Farm-house, and all the Houses, Edifices,
Buildings, Barns and Stables thereunto belonging or appertaining, with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, in, by and with all and all
manner of needful and necessary reparations whatsoever: And also shall and will
at all times hereafter, and from time to time, during the said term, at his and
their like costs and charges, well and sufficiently hedge, fence, ditch,
enclose and amend all and singular the Hedges, Fences, Ditches and Enclosures
belonging to the said demised premises, in, by and with all and all manner of
hedging, fencing, ditching and enclosing, when and as often as need shall
require, during the said term: And as well the said Message, Tenement or
Farm-house, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns and Stables; with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, so well and sufficiently
repaired; As also the Hedges, Fences, Ditches and Enclosures aforesaid, well
and sufficiently supported and amended in the end of the said Term, or other
determination of this present Lease, shall leave and yield up into the hands
and possession of the said C. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns; And
the said T. W. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, A
Covenant for planting an Orchard.
does covenant, etc. That he the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, shall permit and suffer the said C.B. and his Assigns, to plant and
make in and upon some convenient place of the demised premises, one Orchard,
not exceeding the number of two acres of Land, with such store of Fruit Trees,
and other Trees, as the said C. B. or his Assigns, shall think meet; and the
same Orchard and Fruit Trees so made and planted, shall fence, preserve and
keep, so much as in him shall be, from spoil and hurt of Cattle, and from all
other harm and destruction. And further, that the said T. W. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall at all times hereafter, and from time to
time, during the said Term of, etc. find and allow unto G. B. widow, A Covenant
for finding Meat, Drink, Lodging, Apparel, and other Necessaries.
Mother unto the said C. B. competent and sufficient Meat, Drink, Lodging,
Apparel, and all other Necessaries whatsoever, meet and convenient for her
degree, and shall from time to time, and at all times, clearly acquit,
exonerate and discharge the said C. B. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them, of, for and concerning the keeping of the said C.
B. during the said Term of, etc. before by these presents granted. And lastly,
Not to plough up the Meadows.
the said T.W. for himself does covenant, etc. That he the said T. W. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, shall not at any time or
times hereafter during the Term, before in and by these presents granted,
plough up, or otherwise deface or spoil the Meadow-ground belonging to the said
demised premises, or any part or parcel thereof: And also that he the said T.
W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall and will in the end of the
said Term of, etc. before by these presents granted, or other determination of
this present Lease, deliver and yield up the quiet and peaceable possession of
all and singular the before demised premises, and every part and parcel
thereof, unto the said C. B. his Executors, etc. And the said C. B. for
himself, etc. does Covenant, etc. in manner and form following ( viz.) That he
the said T. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them,
for and under the yearly Rent before by these presents reserved, and other the
Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements, in these presents contained, shall
and may peaceably, lawfully and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and
enjoy all and singular the said Message, Tenement or Farm-house, Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Lands, Meadows, Orchards, Gardens, and all other the
before demised premises, and every part and parcel thereof (except before
excepted) for and during the said term of, etc. before by these presents
granted, without any manner of lawful let, suit, trouble, eviction, disturbance
or contradiction of the said C. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
any of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, by his, their, or
any of their means, act, title or procurement; A Proviso.
provided always, and it is meant and intended by and between the said Parties
to these presents, That this Indenture, or any thing herein contained, shall
not extend to charge the said C. B. his executors or administrators, by or with
any action of Covenant, or other action whatsoever, saving only for such an
estate and interest as the said C. B. or any other claiming by, from, or under
him, now have, has or may have, of, in or to the demised premises, or any part
thereof, and not for any o^^er better or former estate, right or title, which
shall or may proceed or extinguish the Grant by these presents made. In
witness, etc.

An Assignment of two several Obligations.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, F. D of, etc.
Gentleman, sends greeting: Whereas R. D. of, etc. Gentleman, in and by one
Obligation or writing Obligatory, with Condition thereupon endorsed, bearing
date, etc. And whereas also M.F. of, etc. Esquire in and by one other Obligation or
Writing Obligatory, with Condition thereupon also endorsed, bearing date, etc.
do stand bound to the said F. D. his executors, administrators and assigns, in
the several sums of, etc. as by the said several Obligations, relation being
thereunto had, may appear. Now know ye, that the said F. D. for diverse good
causes and reasonable considerations him hereunto especially moving, Has
bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and by these presents does fully,
clearly and absolutely bargain, sell, assign, and set over unto R. B. of, etc.
his executors, administrators and assigns, as well the said two Obligations, as
also the several sums of money in them, and either of them, mentioned or
contained; To the only use and behoof of the said R. B. his executors,
administrators and assigns, and without any account, or other thing therefore
to be yielded, paid or done unto the said F. D. his executors, administrators
or assigns, or to any of them. And the said F. D. for himself, his heirs,
executors and administrators, does Covenant, promise and grant, to and with the
said R. B. his executors, administrators and assigns, by these presents, in
manner and form following, that is to say, that he the said R. B. his
executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them, shall and may at all
times hereafter, and from time to time, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy, all and singular the sum and sums of money
whatsoever, contained in the said several Obligations: And also the benefit,
commodity, penalty and advantage whatsoever, which shall or may happen, come,
grow, or be by reason of the said several Obligations or Writings Obligatory
above recited or mentioned, without any manner of suit, trouble, gainsaying,
means, consent or procurement of the said F. D. his executors, administrators
or assigns, or of any other person or persons whatsoever. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of two Apprentices, and their years to come.
TO all Christian people, to whom this present Writing shall come: I A. M.
Citizen and, etc. send greeting, in our Lord God Everlasting. Recital of the
Indentures.
Whereas my Apprentices J. S. and G. R. have certain years yet to come and
unexpired of their several Apprentiships, to wit, the said J S. one whole year
and a half, from the Feast of, etc. last past, and the said G. R. the space of
two years and a half, from the same Feast, as by their several Indentures
thereof unto me the said A. M. made and sealed, at large it does and may
appear: Now know ye, That I the said A. M. for diverse good Causes and
Considerations me especially moving, Consideration.
and the rather for that it stands with the good liking and pleasure of my said
Apprentices; Have given, granted, assigned and set over, and by these presents
do fully and absolutely give, grant, assign and set over unto my well-beloved
Friend R. H. Citizen and Habberdasher of London, all such Right, Title, Duty,
term of Years to come, claim, interest, Apprentiships, Services and Demands
whatsoever which J the said A. M. have, of, in or to the said J. S. and G. R.
my said Apprentices, or which I might or ought to have of and in them, or
either of them, by force and virtue of the above recited Indentures of
Apprentiships: (That is to say) the true and faithful service of J.S. for and
during the time and space of one whole year and a half, from, etc. as
aforesaid, and the like honest and dutiful service of G. R. for and during the
time and space of two whole years and a half, etc. from the Feast Day of, etc.
as is aforesaid declared, giving, and by these presents granting unto the said
C. Grant of their Terms.
B. my full power and lawful authority for the having, keeping and enjoying of
my said Apprentices, J. and G. beforementioned, for and during their several
times yet to come and unexpired: And moreover, I the said A. M. do by these
presents covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said C. B. his Executors
and Assigns, That the said J. and G. Apprentices, shall, during their several
times, well and truly serve the said C. B. as their Master, and his
Commandments lawful and honest every where shall do, and from the service of
him, they nor either of them shall not absent or prolong himself by day or
night, during the said several Terms of their aforesaid Apprentiships yet to
come and unexpired. Provided, That the said C. B. their Master shall well
entreat and use the said J. and G. as becomes Apprentices, in such case to be
used; finding unto them, and either of them, Meat, Drink, Linen, Woollen,
Hose, Shoes, and Bedding, and all other Necessaries during the said Term. In
witness, etc.

A Proviso, That if the Lessor be minded to surrender his grand Lease, to take
a further estate in the premises, then the demise to be void, with a Covenant
to grant a new Lease of the premises.
PRovided always, and be the demise under and upon condition, That if the said
I. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall at any time during the
Demise, be minded to surrender his Grand Lease, by which he has and holds
the afore-demised premises (amongst other things) to the intent to get a new
Lease, or any larger or further estate, of, in and to the same: And therefore
shall give or leave notice in writing to and for the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, at the said demised Mansion House: That then at the
day and time of such notice given, and from thenceforth for ever, this Demise,
Grant and Term of years shall cease, determine and be utterly void and of none
effect, to all intents and purposes, any thing herein contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding; and the said J. B. etc. does covenant and
grant to and with the said A. B. his, etc. That he the, etc. or Assigns,
notwithstanding the surceasing and determination of this Demise, Grant and Term
of years or the said A. B. to be had, claimed and enjoyed as aforesaid, shall
and will not only peaceably and quietly permit and suffer the said A. B. his
executors, administrators and assigns, To have, hold and enjoy, the said
demised Premises, under the yearly Rent aforesaid, by and during the term of
three months from thence next following, but also before the end and
expiration of the same, shall at his and their own proper costs and charges,
make, seal and deliver, or cause, etc. And sufficiently tendered at the said
demised Mansion House unto the said A. B. his executors or assigns a new Lease
or Grant in writing of all the said demised premises, for so much of the said
time of, etc. as shall be then to come and unexpired, and for and under such
Rents, Covenants and Conditions as are contained in this present Lease.

A Letter of Attorney to enter upon Lands, and to deliver a Lease made to
another.
KNow all Men by these presents, That I R. R. of, etc. have made, ordained,
constituted and appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute
and appoint T. C. of, etc. my true and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my stead
and name, to enter and come into and upon the Farm and Lands of T. in the
Parish of, etc. now in the Tenure or Occupation of R. T. or his assigns, or
upon any part thereof then and there for me, and in my stead and name, to
deliver as my act and deed, unto H. M. of, etc. or to his assigns, one
Indenture, whereunto I have already sealed, bearing date, etc. made between me
the said R. R. of the one party, and the said H. M. of the other party,
purporting a Lease of the same Farm and Lands unto the said H. M. his
executors, administrators and assigns, for the term of four years next ensuing:
as in and by the said Indenture more at large appears: which Indenture after
the same shall be so delivered by my said Attorney, I the said R. R. do promise
by these presents, shall be my effectual deed in Law to all intents,
constructions and purposes, as if I the said R. R. had sealed and delivered the
same then and there my self. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to enter upon Lands, and to deliver a Lease.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come: We T. A. and
R. M. of, etc. send greeting. Whereas we the said T. A. and R. M. have signed
and sealed to one Indenture, bearing date with these presents, purporting a
Lease, Demise or Grant, unto J. H. of, etc. of all that our Manor or Farm of,
etc. with the Houses, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, etc. and of all that
our Site of the Rectory or Parsonage of L. in the said County of, etc.
Together with the Demeasn Lands to the said Manor and Farm belonging or
appertaining: To hold from the ensealing and delivery of the same Indenture for
the term of three years then next ensuing: as by the same Indenture of Lease at
large appears. Now know ye, That we the the said T. A. and R. M. have made,
The Letter of Attorney.
ordained, constituted and appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain,
constitute, and in our steads and places put and appoint our trusty and
well-beloved Friend J.H. of, etc. our true and lawful Attorney and Assignee,
for us, and in our steads and names to enter and come into, and upon all that
the said, etc. and other the Lands aforesaid, or into some part thereof, and
then and there (after such entry made) to deliver unto the said J. H. as our
very act and deed, the said Indenture of Lease above mentioned, to hold
according to the tenor of the same Indenture, and further to do and execute all
and every such further thing, and other act whatsoever, as shall be needful to
be done and performed In that behalf, in as large, ample, and effectual manner
as we our selves might or could do, if we were personally present. In witness,
etc.

A Condition to pay money within fourteen days after, if the Parties bound in
an Obligation pay it not at the day.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas W.H. and R. B. by their
Obligation of writing Obligatory, bearing date, etc. are and stand jointly and
severally bounden unto the within named J. L. in the sum of, etc. with
condition endorsed, for the true payment of, etc. on the, etc. as by the same
Obligation with condition endorsed, at large appears. Now if the said W. H.
and R. B. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall make default in
payment of the said sum of, etc. on the said, etc. in which the same ought to
be paid, as aforesaid; then if the within bounden J. L. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, do within fourteen days next and
immediately ensuing the said, etc. well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto
the said J. L. his Executors or Assigns, the sum of, etc. or so much thereof as
shall be behind and unpaid in or upon the said, etc. at or in, etc. without
fraud or coven, that then this present Obligation, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease of partition, wherein three are joint Lessors to a
third person.
THis Indenture made, etc. between H. P. of, etc. of the one part, and W. C.
of, etc. on the other part, witnesses, That whereas G. M. of, etc. and E. his
Wife, Recital.
H. B. etc. and H. his Wife, and T. P. etc. and M. his Wife, in and by their
three several Indentures of Lease, bearing equal date the, etc. for the several
considerations therein mentioned, did demise, grant, and to farm-let unto the
said H. P. all that their said three several third parts, in three parts to be
divided, of all that their Message or Tenement, situate, lying and being in,
etc. then, or late in the tenure or occupation of one R.G. or of his Assignee
or Assignees, with all Shops, Cellars, Sollers, Chambers, Rooms, Lights,
Easements, Buildings and Commodities thereunto belonging, with their
appurtenances, together with all their three several third parts, in three
parts to be divided, of and in such Goods, Wainscot, Implements of Household,
necessaries and things as were specified and contained in three several
Schedules or Inventories indented, and to the same Indenture annexed, Habend.
To have and to hold all their said three several third parts, in three parts
to be divided of and in the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular the
said other demised premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof, unto the said H. P. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from
the Feast day of, etc. then next coming after the date of the said several
Indentures of Lease, unto the end and term of, etc. from thence next ensuing,
and fully to be complete and ended, yielding and paying therefore yearly during
the said term of, etc. unto the said G. M. and E. his Wife, and to the Heirs
and Assigns of the said E. etc. and to the said H. B. and H. his Wife, and the
Heirs and Assigns of the said H, etc. and to the said T. P. and M. his Wife,
and to the Heirs and Assigns of the said M, etc. at four of the most usual
Feasts in the year, (that is to say) at the Feasts of, etc. by even and equal
portions, as in and by the said three several Indentures of Lease, amongst
diverse other Covenants, Grants, Articles, Agreements, and things therein
contained, more fully and at large it does and may appear. Now this Indenture
further witnesses, That he the said H. P. for and in consideration of the sum
of, etc. to him in hand paid, by the said W. C. before the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, whereof he the said H. P. does acknowledge the
Receipt, and of every part and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit and
discharge the said W. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every
of them for ever by these presents, has granted, bargained, sold, assigned and
set over, and by these presents does clearly and absolutely grant, bargain,
sell, assign, and set over unto the said W. C. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, as well the said Message or Tenement, and all other the said
premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, as also
all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, term of years to come, possession,
claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said H. P. now has, may, might,
should, or in any wise ought to have, of, in, or to the said Message or
Tenement and premises, or of, in, or to any part or parcel thereof, by force
and virtue of the said three several recited Indentures of Lease, or any or
either them, or otherwise howsoever, together with the said three several
Indentures of Lease: Habend.
To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, the said several Indentures
of Lease; Estate, Right, Title, Interest, and all and singular other the
premises before by these presents bargained and sold, or mentioned, or intended
to be hereby bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and every part and parcel
thereof, unto the said W. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for and
during all the residue yet to come and unexpired of the said term of, etc. in
the same Indentures of Lease granted, in as large and ample manner and form to
all intents and purposes, as the said H. P. now has, may, might, or in any
wise ought to have and enjoy the same, by force of the same Indentures of Lease
aforesaid, or otherwise however. And the said H. P. does covenant, promise and
grant, for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of
them, to and with the said W. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by
these presents in form following (that is to say) That he the said W. C. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, under the Rents,
Covenants, Provisoes and Agreements in the said several recited or mentioned
Indentures of Lease contained, shall and may, for and during all the rest and
residue now to come and unexpired of the said term, in the said several
Indentures of Lease granted, lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy all the said Message or Tenement, and all other the
premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, without
the let, trouble, interruption, molestation, or contradiction of him the said
H. P. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or of any other person or
persons whatsoever, claiming from, by, or under him the said H. P. his
Executors or Assigns, discharged also of, and from all, and all manner of
former and other Bargains, Sales, Grants, Surrenders, Forfeitures, Re-entries,
cause and causes of Forfeiture and Re-entry, Rents, arrerages of Rents,
Charges, Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed,
suffered or done, or to be had, made, committed, suffered or done, by the said
H. P. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or by any other
person or persons whatsoever, claiming from, by, or under him, them, or any of
them, or by his, their, or any of their means, act, title, consent or
procurement, the Rents, Covenants, Conditions and Agreements in the said
several recited or mentioned Indentures of Lease contained, which from
henceforth on the Tenants part and behalf are, or ought to be paid, performed
and kept, only excepted and always fore-prized. In witness, etc.

A Condition to pay a sum of money to Children at their several Ages, according
to the Will by which it was given. The Bond made to the Executor.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the within-named A. B.
by his last Will and Testament bearing date, etc. did amongst other Legacies
and Bequests, give and bequeath to the Children of his late Brother G. B.
deceased, to every one of them that should be living at the time of his Death,
to be delivered unto them by equal portions, at their several ages of one and
twenty years, Forty pounds a piece, and to G. B. by name, one of his said
Brothers Children, the sum of Forty pounds over and besides the said Forty
pounds formerly to him given as aforesaid: And did ordain, that the said
several sums so bequeathed to his said Brothers Children, should be delivered
to their Mother, his Sister-in-law, for the use and behoof of the said
Children, she putting in sufficient security to his Executors for the payment
of the said sums, at their several ages abovementioned, as by the said last
Will and Testament of the said A. B. may appear the within-named M. E. and G.
H. Executors of the said last Will and Testament of the said A. B. have now
paid and delivered unto the within bounden E. W. the Mother of the said
Children, the sum of, etc. for the several Legacies of such of the same
Children as are yet under the age of One and twenty years (that is to say)
Fourscore pounds for the use of the abovenamed G. B. according to the Bequest
thereof to him made as aforesaid, Forty pounds more for the use of E. B. Forty
pounds more for F. B. and Forty pounds more for A. B. all Children of the said
G. B. deceased, to be paid unto them at their several ages as abovesaid, if
therefore the above-bounden E. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, do and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid
unto every of the said Children before named respectively (viz.) to G. B. E. B.
F. B. and A. B. their said several sums or Legacies abovementioned, at every
of their several respective ages of Twenty one years, according to the effect
and true meaning of the said Will, without fraud or coven; That then, etc.

A Condition for payment of money to a Child when he comes to Age, and in the
mean time to find it, and bring it up.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden T. C. his Heirs, Executors,
etc. do well and truly deliver and pay, or cause to be delivered and paid unto
T. M. Son of J. M. late of, etc. the sum of, etc. within one month next after
that the said T. shall attain and come to his full age of twenty one years: And
also carefully and honestly, according to his Calling and Degree, keep,
educate, and bring up the said T. during his nonage, with necessary and
convenient Meat, Drink, Lodging, Learning and Apparel; and if the said T. M.
shall happen to die and depart this life, before he shall attain his said age
of one and twenty years, Then if the said T. C. his Executors, etc. do within
one year next after the decease of the said T. M. pay, or cause to be paid unto
the within named, etc. his Executors or Assigns, to the use of the Children of
the said T. M. which shall be then living, the said sum of, etc. to be equally
distributed and divided amongst them; That then, etc.

An Assignment of a Wharfstock of Wood, Coals, Lighters, etc. with a general
Release, and Covenants for peaceable enjoying, etc.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between J. G. of, etc. Woodmonger, of the one
part, and J. C. of, etc. in the same Parish and County Woodmonger, of the other
part; Witnesses, That whereas the said J. G. being on the Sixth day of August,
Anno Dom. 1637. and in the 13th. year of His said Majesty's Reign that now is,
lawfully possessed for diverse years then to come, of and in one Wharf in
Milford-lane in the Parish of, etc. and of a certain stock of VVood and Coals
thereupon, and in the Lighters of the VVharf, namely 124 Chaldron of Coals
valued at an hundred and two pounds two shillings and nine pence, forty
thousand of Oaken Billets, at, etc. six Horses, six Carts, with their
furniture, Coal-sacks, Lighters, Planks, Coal-measures, and new and old wheels
about the Yard, valued at, etc. All which did amount in the whole to the sum of
three hundred pounds, five shillings and nine pence; and did commit unto him
the said J. C. the use, occupation and managing of the said stock of VVood and
Coals, and of the sum of one hundred ninety seven pounds fourteen shillings and
three pence of lawful money of England to be laid out in buying of VVood and
Coals to make up the whole stock, Five hundred and two pounds, to be used,
managed and employed, and supplied from time to time by him the said J. C. at
the said VVharf for the term of Seven years then next ensuing, if the said J.
and L. should so long live, upon such Conditions, Covenants and Agreements, and
in such sort as were mentioned, expressed and contained in certain Articles of
Agreements indented, bearing date the sixteenth day of August, 1637. in the
said Thirteenth year of His said Majesty's Reign, made between the said J. G.
of the one part, and the said J. C. of the other part, as in and by the said
Article at large it does and may appear; And whereas it is agreed, that the
agreement in the said articles shall cease and be determined, and that the said
J. C. shall have, hold, retain and keep the said stock of Goods and Money to
his own use, in consideration of the sum of, etc. of lawful Money of England,
agreed to be secured to be paid by the said J. C. to the said J. G. at certain
days agreed upon. Now this Indenture further witnesses, That the said J. G.
for the consideration aforesaid, has granted, bargained, sold, assigned and
set over, and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely grant,
bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said J. C. all the said stock of
Goods and Money before mentioned, formerly delivered into the hands of the said
J. C. as aforesaid; and does also remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto
the said J C. all actions, accounts, claims and demands whatsoever, touching or
concerning the same stock of Goods and Money, or any part thereof, To have and
to hold the said stock of Wood, Coals, Money, and other things before
mentioned, and every part of them unto the said J. C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and behoof, and at
his and their own proper Goods and Chattels for ever. And the said J. G. for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, does
covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said J. C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents,
that he the said J. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and may
from henceforth for ever, peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the said
stock of Goods and Money, and the same and every part thereof, to dispose and
convert to his and their own proper use and behoof, without the let, suit,
trouble, claim and disturbance of him the said J. G. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or of any other person or persons
whatsoever, claiming by, from or under him, them, or any of them, or by, or
under, or by reason of his, their, or any of their act or acts, right, title,
interests, means or procurement, etc. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease of a Message, diverse plats of Ground with Buttals
and Boundals, several Covenants, etc. with an Exception.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of, etc. Anno Domini, 1632. and the Eighth
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, etc. Between S. A. of,
etc. Gentleman, of the one part, and F. L. of, etc. Esquire, of the other part.
Whereas Sir John T. late of, etc. Knight and Baronet, deceased, and the late
right honorable N. Lord Tuston; and Earl of Thanet, by the name of Sir T. N.
Knight, Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir John T. now also deceased, by
their Indenture bearing date the thirtieth day of May, in the fifteenth year of
the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord King Charles over England, etc. for the
consideration therein expressed, did demise, grant and to farm-let unto E. W.
of. etc. his Executors and Assigns, all that the Message or Tenement, shed and
plat of Ground, situate, lying and being in Chick-Lane, etc. containing by
estimation, one hundred foot in length, from the North to the South, and in
breadth forty one Foot, from the East to the West: the Message or Tenement
then in the Tenure of J. W. lying on the East side thereof, and the said
Chick-Lane on the North-side thereof, and the Message or Tenement then in the
Tenure of one R. S. on the West and South-sides thereof. And also their part of
one Message or Tenement, or shed, and parcel of Ground lying and being in
Chick-lane aforesaid, containing by estimation Fourscore and twelve Foot in
length, and in breadth Eighteen Foot, The Message or Tenement then in the
Tenure or Occupation of one A. B. on the West Side thereof, the said Chick-lane
on the North-side thereof: and the Message or Tenement then in the Tenure or
Occupation of one H. S. on the South Side thereof: and then or late before in
the Tenure or Occupation of the said A. B. his Assignee or Assignees, and all
and singular the Messuages, Tenements, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Rooms,
Shops, Cellars, Sollers, and void Ground unto the said Messuages or Tenements,
shed and plats of Ground before mentioned to be demised, belonging, or in any
wise appertaining, To have and to hold to the said Edmund Wright, his
executors, administrators and assigns, from the Feast of the Annunciation of
the blessed Lady Saint Mary the Virgin last past, before the date hereof, unto
the full end and term of Thirty one years from thence next ensuing, and fully
to be complete and ended. Yielding and paying therefore yearly during the said
term unto the said Sir J. T. yearly, during his life, and after his decease to
the said Right Honorable N. Lord T. and Earl of Thanet, his heirs and assigns,
the full sum of Eight pounds of lawful money of England, at two of the most
usual Feasts or Terms in the year: That is to say, at the Feasts of St. Michael
the Archangel, and the Annunciation of the blessed Lady the Virgin Mary; by
equal portions, as by the same Indenture more plainly may appear. And whereas
by certain other Indentures bearing date the said Thirtieth day of May, made
between the said Sir John T. and the said N. Lord T. and Earl of Thanet, by the
name of Sir N. T. Knight on the one part, and the said E. W. on the other part;
It is covenanted, conditioned and agreed by and between all the said Parties:
And the said E. W. for himself, his executors, administrators and assigns, did
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said Sir J. T. and the said N. Lord
T. and Earl of T. their heirs and assigns, by the said last mentioned
Indenture, That the said E. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
should well and truly, yearly, during the said Term of one and twenty years,
pay, or cause to be paid, to the said Sir I. T. during his natural life, and
after his decease, to the said N. Lord T. and Earl of T. his Heirs and Assigns,
the full sum of twenty three pounds of lawful Money, etc. for and in the name
of a Fine or Income for the said Lease, at the two Feasts aforesaid, by equal
portions. And whereas also the said Sir J. T. and the said N. Lord T. and Earl
of T. by the name of N. T. Knight, have by their Indenture, bearing date the
said, etc. day of May, for the consideration therein mentioned, demised,
granted, and to farm-let unto I. VV. of, etc. all that their Message or
Tenement, situate, lying and being in Chick-lane aforesaid, late in the tenure
or occupation of one Agnes VV. and her Assignee or Assignees, containing by
estimation from the East to the West, thirty foot in breadth, and in length
from the North to the South threescore Foot; the Tenement then in the
occupation of the said I. VV. lying on the East Side thereof, the Tenement then
of Ralph F. Gentleman, on the VVest-side thereof: the Tenements then in the
tenure or occupation of the said Ralph E. on the South Side thereof; and also
all the tenement, shed or piece of Ground lying and being in Chick-lane
aforesaid, containing by estimation one hundred and twenty Foot of assize in
length, and twenty eight Foot in breadth, then or late before in the tenure or
occupation of the said I. VV. or his Assignee or Assignees; the Tenement then
in the tenure or occupation of one I. C. lying on the East Side thereof; and
the tenement then in the tenure of one I. VV. on the VVest-side thereof, and
the Tenement belonging to St. Martins Orgars on the South Side thereof, and
also one other little piece or parcel of Ground, situate, lying and being near
Chick-lane aforesaid, etc. containing by estimation in length nineteen Foot,
from the East to the West, and in breadth, from the North to the South,
sixteen Foot, late in the tenure or occupation of R. B. or of his Assignee or
Assignees, the Tenement then in the occupation of the said I. VV. on the
East Side thereof; and the tenement then in the tenure of the said Ralph F. on
the VVest-side thereof, the tenement then in the tenure of R. S. and E. W. on
the North-side thereof; and the tenement then in the tenure of the said R. F.
on the South Side thereof, and also all and singular Houses, Edifices,
Buildings, Stables and Back-sides, Back-houses, Shops, Cellars, Sollers, etc.
unto the said Message, and several plats of Ground before demised, then
belonging or appertaining, or to or with the said demised premises then held,
used, occupied or enjoyed, as part, parcel or member of them, or either of
them. To have and to hold all and singular the said demised premises, with the
appurtenances, to the said I. VV. his Executors Administrators and Assigns,
from the Feast of the Annunciation of our blessed Lady the Virgin Mary then
last past, before the date of the said last recived Indenture, unto the full
end and term of thirty and one years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complear and ended: Yielding and paying therefore yearly, during the said term,
unto the said Sir I. T. during his life, and after his decease to the said
Right Honorable N. Lord T. and Earl of T. and his Heirs and Assigns, the full
sum of Six pounds of lawful money of England, at the two Feasts aforesaid, by
even and equal portions. And whereas by certain other Indentures bearing date
the said thirtieth day of May, made between the said Sir I. T. and the said N.
Lord T. Earl of T. of the one party, and the said I. VV. of the other party: It
is convenanted, concluded, condescended and agreed by and between all the said
Parties: And the said I. VV. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, did covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said Sir I. T. and
the said N. Lord T. Earl of T. their Heirs and Assigns, That the said I. VV.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, should well and truly, yearly,
during the said term of thirty and one years, pay, or cause to be paid to the
said Sir John T. during his natural life, and after his decease, to the said N.
Lord T. Earl of T. his Heirs and Assigns, the full sum of seventeen pounds of
lawful money of England, for and in the name of a Fine or Income for the said
Leases; at the two Feasts aforesaid, by even and equal portions, as by the same
several Leases, relation being unto them had, more at large it does and may
appear: which said several Leases, Estates and Interests of the said E. VV. and
I. VV. of, in and to all and singular the aforesaid premises, in and by the
aforesaid several Indentures of Lease demised, granted and contained, as
aforesaid, were by mean Conveyances; and sufficient Assurances in the Law,
conveyed to John Witherings Esquire, and the said I. VV. by Deed indented under
his Hand and Seal, bearing date the, etc. of, etc. 5 Car. has conveyed his
Estate, Interest, and term of Years in the said premises, unto the said S. for,
during and until all the residue of the time then to come and unexpired of the
said several Indentures of Lease granted, be fully complete and ended, as by
the same Conveyances and Assurances, relation being thereunto had, it does and
may appear: Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said S. H. for and in
consideration of the sum of Three hundred and thirty pounds, etc. to him and
his, at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said F.
H. well and truly paid, whereof the said S. H. does acknowledge the Receipt,
and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does hereby forever acquit
and discharge the said F. H. his Executors and Assigns, and every of them, has
granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents, does
fully, clearly and absolutely grant, bargain, fell, assign and set over unto
the said F. H. and M. his Wife, all and singular the said premises
abovementioned, to be by the aforesaid Indentures, or any of them, demised,
letten or granted, or mentioned, meant or intended, to be in and by the same
demised, letten or granted, with their and every of their appurtenances: And
all the Messuages, Houses, Edifices and Buildings now standing, erected and
built: and all the said original Indentures of Demise, and all mean Conveyances
and Assignments thereof, and of every part thereof, and all the time and term
of years yet to come and unexpired, granted, mentioned or intended to be
granted in or by the said Indentures, or any of them, and all the Estate,
Interest, Right, Title, term and terms of Years, Claim and Demand whatsoever,
which he the said S. H. now has yet to come and unexpired, of and in the said
demised Premises, or any of them; To have and to hold all and singular the said
demised premises by these presents mentioned or intended to be granted,
assigned or conveyed, and all the said original Indentures of demise, and all
mean conveyances and assignments thereof, and all the term of years yet to come
and unexpired, of and in the said demised premises, or any of them, unto the
said F. H. and M. his wife, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
immediately from and after the making hereof, for and during all the residue of
the said several terms of, etc. years therein yet to come and unexpired. And
the said S. H. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, and for every of
them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said F. H. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, That he the said S. H. has not before the day of the date hereof,
made, done or committed any act or acts, thing or things, Grant, Lease, Estate
or Encumbrance whatsoever; whereby, or by reason whereof the said Leases,
Estates and Premises before herein assigned and set over, or any part or parcel
thereof, are or shall be frustrated, avoided, disturbed or encumbered: Except
one Lease made by the said F.M. and S. H. unto R. H. of a Message or Tenement,
with the appurtenances, parcel of the premises aforesaid, now or late in the
Occupation of J. S. by Indenture dated, etc. now last past for the term of
sixteen years, commencing from the Feast, etc. at the yearly Rent of a
Pepper-Corn: and except certain Leases in the said Deed from the said J. VV.
mentioned to be excepted severally and respectively of several parts and
parcels of the said premises, before the said S. had any Estate in the
premises, or any part thereof, by E. VV. to G. VV. H. VV. and T. K. etc. Upon
which Leases diverse several Rents are respectively reserved, amounting in the
whole to the sum of Sixty one pounds yearly, or thereabouts, all which Rents
shall or may be hereafter payable to the said F. H. and M. his wife, their
Executors and Assigns, and except all other Leases and Estates mentioned and
excepted in the said Deed, from the said J. VV. etc. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease, reciting diverse Leases, with several Covenants.
THis Indenture made, etc. Anno Domini, 1633. Between M.F. of, etc. and H. E.
of, etc. of the one part, and I. W. of, etc. and R. H. of, etc. of the other
part. Whereas the Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of Mercers of the City
of London, by their Indenture of Lease under their common Seal, bearing date
the, etc. day of, etc. 1614. in the Twelfth year of King James, etc. for the
consideration therein expressed, did demise, grant, bargain, and to farm-let
unto the Right Honorable T. late Earl of Exeter, deceased, all that their
Close, or parcel of Pasture-ground, called or known by the name of, etc.
containing by estimation ten Acres, be it more or less, situate, lying and
being in, etc. which Close abutteth upon the West, etc. on the East upon
another Lane, then or sometimes called Strewd-Lane, leading from the, etc.
toward the South, upon a Plat called or known by the name of the
Covent Garden; and toward the North, upon certain Lands called the, etc. and a
Garden-plat, sometime in the tenure of W. R. or his Assigns; which said Close
called O. was sometime in the tenure of Sir T. K. deceased, Father of the said
Earl, or of his Assigns, To have and to hold to the said Earl of Exeter, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the said demised Close, or parcel of
Pasture-ground, from the Feast Day of, etc. last past, before the date of the
same Indenture, unto the full end and term of Thirty years from thence next
ensuing; and fully to be complete and ended, at and for the yearly Rent of Ten
pounds payable, as in and by the same Indenture of Lease more at large it does
and may appear. By force whereof the said T. Earl of Exeter entered into the
said premises, and was thereof lawfully possessed accordingly. And whereas the
said T. Earl of E. (being of the premises so possessed, as aforesaid) by this
Indenture bearing date the Nine and twentieth day of October, 1615. and in the,
etc. year of the said Majesty's Reign, for the consideration therein expressed,
did grant, assign, and set over all his Estate and Interest in the premises,
unto Sir W. S. of, etc. Knight, his Executors and Assigns: as by the same
Indenture of Lease more at large appears. And whereas also the said Sir W. B.
by this Indenture of Lease bearing date the fifteenth day of February, Anno
Domini, 1625. and in the, etc. year of the said late Majesty's Reign, for the
consideration therein expressed, did Demise, Grant, and to Farm-let unto C.
Cundal of, etc. All that piece of ground, parcel of the said Close or Pasture,
called and known by the name of E. alias, etc. containing in breadth thoughout
the whole length, Twenty Foot of assize, etc. or thereabouts, adjoining to,
etc. Together with free ingress, egress, regress, way and passage to and for
the said C. his Executors and Administrators, and to and for his and their
Friends, Servants and Assigns, with Horses, Carts and Carriages, or without, at
their wills and pleasures, in and from the said demised premises, at all fit
and convenient times, in, by and through the said ways set forth, or hereafter
to be set forth by the said Sir W. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
in or upon the same Close, To have and to hold the said parcel of Ground, and
other the before demised premises, with the appurtenances to the said C.
Cundall, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from, etc. next ensuing the
date of the same Indenture, unto the full end and term of twenty and eight
years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended. Yielding
and paying therefore yearly, during the said term of eight and twenty years,
unto the aforesaid Sir W. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the sum
of Four hundred pounds, etc. at the Feasts of, etc. as in and by the same
Indenture of Lease, amongst diverse other Covenants, Grants, Articles and
Agreements therein contained, more at large it does and may appear, By force
whereof the said C. Cundall entered into the said parcel of Ground, with the
appurtenances, and was thereof lawfully possessed accordingly. The Estate and
Interest of which said C. Cundall, of, in, and to the same premise^, did
afterward lawfully come to the Hands and Possession of the said J. W. and the
said J. W. did erect and set up certain Tenements, Sheds and Edifices, in and
upon the same parcel of Ground so demised, as the said Sir C. Cundall, as
aforesaid. And whereas also the said Sir W. S. by his Indenture bearing date
the, etc. last past, for the consideration therein expressed, did grant,
bargain, sell, assign and set over all his Estate, Right, Title, Interest,
Reversion, Claim and Demand, of, into and out of the said Close, or parcel of
Pasture Ground, called Flints Field, alias Long-Acre, with the appurtenances,
unto the said H. E. his Executors and Assigns, for and during all the rest and
residue of the aforesaid term of thirty years then to come and unexpired, as in
and by the same Indenture, relation being thereunto had, more at large it does
and may appear. Which Assignment to the said H. E. was in trust for the Use and
Behoof of the said M. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns. Now this
Indenture witnesses, That the said M. F. and H. E. for and in consideration of
the sum of, etc. to the said M. F. by the said J. W. at and before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, well and truly paid, the receipt
whereof the said M. F. does hereby acknowledge, and thereof, and of every part
and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said J. W.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them; have granted,
bargained, aliened, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does
clearly and absolutely grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said
R. H. by and with the consent and direction of the said J. W. all that and
every of their Reversion or Reversions, of and in the said parcel of Ground
demised by the said Sir W. S. to the said C. Cundall, as aforesaid, and of and
in all Houses, Edifices and Buildings, erected, standing or being in or upon
the same parcel of Ground, or any part thereof, and the said yearly Rent of
Four pounds, reserved due and payable for the same premises, and all other
Rents, Issues and Profits of the said premises, and also all the Estate, Right,
Title, Interest, Property, Reversion, Claim and Demand whatsoever, which they
the said M. F. and H. E. or either of them; now have or has, or may, might, or
ought to have, claim and demand of, into, or out of the said parcel of Ground,
Houses, Edifices and Buildings aforesaid, or any of them; or of, into, or out
of any part or parcel thereof: Together also with the Counterpart of the said
Lease, made by the said Sir W.S. to the said C. Cundall as aforesaid, To have
and to hold the said parcel of Ground, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Reversion,
Rents, and all other the premises before in and by these presents granted,
bargained, sold, assigned or set over, and every part and parcel thereof, with
their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said R. H. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from henceforth, for and during all the rest and
residue of the foresaid Thirty years yet to come and unexpired. And the said M.
F. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, does
covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said R. H. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents in
manner and form following; That is to say, that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said R. H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them from time to time, and at all times hereafter, for and during the rest and
residue of the said term of Thirty years yet to come and unexpired, peaceably
and quietly to have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said parcel of
Ground, Houses, Edifices and Buildings, and the Rents, Issues and Profits
thereof, shall or may have, receive, take, and convert to his and their own
proper use and behoof, without the lawful let, suit, trouble, eviction,
disturbance or interruption of them the said M. F. or H. R. or any of them,
their, or any of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or
of any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully having or claiming, or
which shall lawfully have or claim any lawful Estate, Right, Title or Interest
of, in, to or out of the said premises, or any part thereof, by, from or under
them, or either of them, or by reason of their act or acts, right, title, means
or procurement, other than such as shall claim, by force of the said Lease made
to the said C. Cundall, and also free and clear, and freely and clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged by the said M. F. his Executors or
Administrators, or some or one of them from time to time, and at all times
during the residue of the said term of Thirty years yet to come and unexpired,
and well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of, for, from, touching and
concerning the said yearly Rent of Ten pounds, reserved upon the said original
Lease, and by and from the said Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of
Mercers, to the said Earl of Exceter, as aforesaid, as also free of all
Encumbrances, had, made, committed, suffered or done by them the said M. F. and
H. E. and either of them, their Executors, Administrators, or any of them, by
their or any of their act or acts, def^ults, means or procurement. And the said
H. E. for himself, hi^ Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does covenant and
gran^, to and with the said, etc. his Executors, etc. and to and with e^^ry of
them by these presents, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R.
H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, for and during the rest and residue of the
said term of Thirty years yet to come and unexpired, peaceably and quietly to
have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said parcel of Ground, Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Rents, Reversions, and all other the premises before, in
and by these presents granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and
every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their appurtenances,
without the let, suit, trouble, eviction, disturbance or interruption of him
the said H. E. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or any
other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, or which shall or may
lawfully claim, by, from or under him, them, or any of them, or by, from, or
under, or by reason of his, their, or any of their act or acts, right, title,
interest, means or procurement. In witness, etc.

A Lease of diverse Lands, etc. with a Covenant to pay Heriots upon Death, etc.
with many other substantial Covenants.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between Sir H. Oniel, of, etc. Knight, of the
one part, and G. R. of, etc. Gentleman, of the other part; Witnesses, That the
said Sir H. Oniel, as well for and in consideration of a certain sum of Money
to him in hand paid, as also for diverse other good Causes and Considerations
him thereunto moving, has demised, granted, bargained, sold, and to
farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, grant, bargain, sell, and to
farm-let unto the said G R. all those four Towns, or Townlands, commonly called
or known, or reputed to be known by the several names of Cashall K. E. F, etc.
situate and being within the Manor of, etc. in the County of, etc. according
as the same are bounden, meeted or butted, by and with the ancient Meets and
Bounds thereof, and as the said Towns or Townships, and every or any of them
have been enjoyed by the said Sir H. Oniel, or any other his Farmors, Lessees,
or Under-Tenants, and now, or late in the respective Tenures, Possessions or
Occupations of the said Sir H. Oniel, or his Under-Tenants, Farmors, Lessees or
Assigns of him the said H. O. Together with all and all manner of Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Orchards, Garden, Yards, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Ways,
Waters, Water-cour^^s, Commons, Profits, Easements, Commodities, Emoluments and
Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said four Towns, or Town-lands, them, or any
of belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or with them or any of them, used,
occupied or enjoyed: And all Rents, and yearly Profits, and other Duties and
Services reserved or payable upon or by reason of any Lease or Leases, Demises
or Grants heretofore to any person or persons, convenanted or made of the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof, and the Reversion and Reversions of
the said four Towns or Town-lands, and every of them, and of all and every the
before demised premises, depending or expectant, or remaining upon any Demises,
Leases or Grants now in being, or at any time pretended to be of the said
premises, or any part thereof, for term of Life or Lives, or for term of Years,
or otherwise howsoever. Except and always reserved out of this present Demise
and Grant of the said demised premises, unto the said Sir H. Oniel, his Heirs
and Assigns, all Timber Trees, Woods and Under-woods now growing, standing or
being, or hereafter to grow, stand, or to be in or upon the said Towns or
Town-lands, or in or upon any part or parcel thereof, together with all Felons
Goods, Waifs, Estrayes, Mines, Minerals, Privileges, Royalties and Franchises
whatsoever, to the said Towns or Town-lands, or any of them belonging, or in
any wise appertaining; and together also with free ingress, egress and regress,
for taking, having, digging, receiving, selling, footing and carrying away the
said Timber Trees, Woods or Under-woods, or the Royalties, Privileges and
Freedoms aforesaid. To have and to hold the said Towns or Town-lands before
mentioned, and all other the premises, before in or by these presents demised
and granted, bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, with their
and every of their Appurtenances, and the Reversion and Reversions, Rents and
yearly Profits of the same, and of every part and parcel thereof, unto the said
G. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast Day of
All Saints last past, before the date of these presents, unto the full end and
term of Ninety and nine years from thenceforth next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended: Yielding and paying therefore yearly, and for every year
during the said term unto the said H. Oniel, his Heirs and Assigns, the yearly
rent or sum of, etc. of current money of England, at the Feasts of Philip and
Jacob, and All Saints, by even and equal portions; as within one and twenty
days next after any of the said Feasts. And if it happen the said yearly Rent
to be behind and unpaid in part or in all, contrary to the reservation
aforesaid; and no sufficient distress can or may be found or taken in and upon
the said demised premises, (A demand thereof being by the said Sir H. Oniel,
his Heirs or Assigns, first made) That then, and from thenceforth it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Sir H. Oniel, his Heirs or Assigns, or any of
them into the said four Towns or Town-lands, and all and singular the aforesaid
demised premises, with the appurtenances, or into any part or parcel thereof,
in the name of the whole to reenter, and the same to claim, have again, enjoy
and re-possess, as in his and their first and former estate; any thing in these
present Indentures contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding; and
the said G. R. A Covenant for new Building; Messuages on the demised premises.
for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every
of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said Sir H. Oniel,
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by
these presents, in manner and form following, that is to say, That he the said
G. R. his Executors, etc. shall and will within the space of ten years next
ensuing the date of these presents, at his and their own proper Costs and
Charges, erect, new-build, and set up, in and upon some convenient part of the
premises by these presents demised, three Messuages, Tenements or Houses fit
and convenient for habitation, to be so erected of Timber, Stone or Brick,
according to the most usual manner of building now used within the Realm of
England, and the same being thus built, shall from time to time, and at all
times during the aforesaid term of, etc. years, keep and well maintain in good
repair: And shall and will likewise from time to time, during the said term,
well and sufficiently repair, amend, maintain and keep all the Houses,
Edifices, Hedges, Ditches, Fences and Enclosures, in and about the said demised
premises, or any part thereof, in good and sufficient reparations, and the said
demised premises, and every part thereof, being so well and sufficiently
repaired, maintained, hedged, fenced, ditch'd and amended, in the end of the
said term shall and will quietly leave and yield up unto the said Sir H. O. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns. And that the said G. R. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and his and their Under-Tenants, shall and will
from time to time, during the said term, grind all their several kind of Grain
whatsoever, that they, or any of them, A Covenant to pay Heriots.
shall expend in and upon the said demised premises, or any part thereof, at
the Mill or Mills of him the said H. Oniel. And the said G. R. for himself, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, does further
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said Sir H. Oniel, his Heirs and
Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, That he the said G.
R. his Executors. Administrators or Assigns, shall or will well and truly pay,
or cause to be paid unto the said Sir H. O. his Heirs or Assigns, such several
and respective Heriots for the said demised premises, as are hereafter in these
presents mentioned and expressed: That is to say, upon the death of the said G.
R. his Executors or Administrators, dying Tenant in possession of the said
premises, or any part thereof, his or their best Beast in the name of one
Heriot, and upon the decease of every of his or their Lessees, Farmor or
Under-Tenant of the said premises, or any part thereof, one half of the value
of the price of his or their best Beast, in full lieu and satisfaction for the
whole Heriot. And the said Sir H. Oniel for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and for every of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and
with the said G. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with
every of them by these presents, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said G. R his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and his or their Lessees,
Farmors and Under-Tenants, from time to time, and at all times hereafter during
the said term, to have and take, in and upon the said demised premises,
competent and sufficient House-boot, Plough-boot, Cart-boot, Hedge-boot and
Fire-boot to be spent, expended and employed, in, about, and upon the same
premises, and not elsewhere. And the said Sir H. Oniel for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, does further covenant,
promise to and with the said G. R. his Executors. Administrators and Assigns,
and to and with every of them by these presents in manner and form following:
That is to say, That the said Sir H. Oniel is, and stands lawfully seized of
and in the said four Towns, Town-lands or Townships beforementioned in these
presents, and of and in all other the demised premises, with their
appurtenances, of such good, perfect and lawful estate of inheritance in
Fee-simple, as that he the said Sir H. Oniel has in himself good Right, full
Power, and lawful Authority hereby to demise, grant, bargain, sell and to
farm-let the said four Towns or Town-lands before mentioned, and all other the
promises aforesaid, with their and every of their appurtenances, into the said
G. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, f^r such term of years, and in
such manner and form as is herein before mentioned and expressed: And for the
further and better securing and confirming of the said four Towns or Townlands,
and other the premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said G. R. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for and during the term aforesaid, and in
manner and form as is aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning of
these presents, The said Sir H. Oniel for himself, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, does covenant and grant to and
with the said G. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them by these presents, That the said G. R. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them, shall, and lawfully, may, from time to time, and
all times hereafter, during the said term, by these presents granted, peaceably
and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy well and truly the said four
Towns or Townlands, without any molestation or hinderance wrought by the said
Sir H. Oniel, or any claiming by, from or under him, and also shall and may
take, receive and perceive all Rents, and all other profits of the said four
Towns or Town-lands; and all other the premises before in and by these presents
granted, bargained, sold, or to farm-letten, or mentioned, agreed or intended
to be hereby granted, bargained, sold, and to farm-letten, and every part and
parcel thereof, with their and every of their appurtenances, under the Rents,
Covenants and Agreements in these presents reserved, mentioned or contained,
without the lawful let, suit, trouble, eviction, molestation or interruption of
the said Sir H. Oniel, and the Lady M. his Wife, and of the Heirs or Assigns of
the said Sir H. Oniel, or any of them, or of any other person or persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming, or which shall claim, by, from or under him,
her, them, or any of them free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted,
exonerated and discharged, or well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless of,
for, from, touching and concerning all and all manner of former and other
Gifts, Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Estates for years, Statutes-Merchant,
and of the Staple, Recognizances. Judgments, Executions, Annuities, Rents,
Charges, Rents-seck, and all other Charges, Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances
whatsoever, heretofore had, made, committed, suffered, done or assented unto by
the said Sir H. Oniel (except the yearly Rent herein before reserved.) In
witness, etc.

A Jointure with diverse Limitations, etc. with a Proviso for Revocation.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between V. W. of, etc. Esquire and F. his Wife,
formerly the Wife of G. A. Esquire deceased, of the one part: And A. B. of, etc.
Esquire I. P. of, etc. Gent. and I. G. of, etc. Merchant, on the other part,
witnesses, That the said V. W. as well for and in consideration of a Marriage,
heretofore had and solemnized by and between the said V. W. and the said F. his
now Wife, and for settling of a competent Jointure for the said F. if it shall
happen to survive the said V. W. and for the settling, assuring and conveying of
all and singular the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter in
these presents mentioned, with their and every of their appurtenances, in the
Name and Blood of the said V. W. for so long time as it shall please Almighty
God, and to the several uses, intents and purposes, and in such manner and form
as hereafter in and by these presents is expressed, mentioned and declared,
according to, and in pursuit of a certain Agreement made between the said V. W.
and F. before their said inter-marriage. And also for diverse other good and
valuable considerations him thereunto especially moving, has granted, aliened,
infeoffed, released and confirmed, and by these presents does grant, alien,
infeoffe, release and confirm unto the said A. P. J. P. and J. G. their Heirs
and Assigns, all that the Manor of S. M. with all and singular the Rights,
Members and Appurtenances whatsoever thereunto belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, situate and being in the said County of H. And also all and
singular the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Tofts, Crofts, Houses, Edifices,
Buildings, Barns, Stables, Dove-houses, Mills, Orchards, Gardens, Meadows,
Leasoes, Pastures, Closes, Feedings, Parks, Warrens, Commons, Waters, Fishings,
Ponds, Pools, Moors, Marshes, Woods, Under-woods, Furzes, Heaths, Wastes,
Rents, Reversions, Services, Views of Frank-Pledge, Courts, Barons, Perquisites
and Profits of Leets and Courts, Waifes, Estrayes, Felons Goods, Goods of
Fugitives and Outlaws, Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, Royalties, Privileges,
Jurisdictions, Preheminencies and Hereditaments whatsoever of him the said V.
W. situate, lying and being, renewing, growing or coming in V. M. aforesaid,
or elsewhere in the said County of H. And also all that the Advowson, Donation,
Nomination, Presentation, fre^ Disposition, and right of Patronage of the
Parish Church of S. M. aforesaid: And all and every the Profits, Commodities,
Emoluments, and other Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular the
Appurtenances of him the said V. W. situate, lying and being, coming, growing,
arising and renewing within the Towns, Fields, Parish, Hamlets and Territories
of S. M. aforesaid, or elsewhere within the said County of H. and all the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Property, Claim and Demand whatsoever of him
the said V. W. of, in and to the same Manor, Messuages, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and other the premises, and every part and parcel thereof: and
the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders thereof, and of every
part and parcel thereof, and all and every the Rent and Rents thereupon
reserved, due and payable, or any part thereof. All which premises were by the
said V. W. bargained and leased to the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. their
Executors or Assigns, by Indenture bearing date, etc. for the term of three
Months next ensuing the making of the said Indenture, as in and by the same
Indenture, reference being thereunto had, may more fully and at large appear.
To have and to hold the said Manor of S. M. with the appurtenances, and all
and singular the said Messuages, Tofts, Crofts, Lands, Tenements, and the said
advowson and right of Patronage of the Parish Church of S. M. aforesaid, and
every the Profits and Emoluments hereby arising and renewing, and all and
singular other the premises, hereby conveyed and assured, or meant or
mentioned, or intended to be by these presents conveyed and assured; with their
and every of their Rights, Members and Appurtenances, and the Reversion and
Reversions, Remainder and Remainders thereof, and of every part thereof, unto
the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. and their Heirs and Assigns, to the several
uses, intents and purposes, and upon the trust and confidence, and under the
several Provisions, Conditions and Limitations hereafter, in and by these
presents expressed, limited and declared, and to and for none other use, intent
or purpose whatsoever; (That is to say) as for and concerning all the Farm,
Message or Tenement, commonly called or known by the Name of Causin-Farm, and
all and every the Houses, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Yards, Gardens, Orchards
and Lands, Arable, Meadow and Pasture, containing by estimation one hundred
Acres, be the same more or less; to the said Message, Farm or Tenement
belonging; or in any wise appertaining, with the appurtenances, situate, lying
and being in S.M. the appurtenances now or late in the tenure or occupation of
the said A. B. or his Assigns: And all the Farm, Message or Tenement in S. M.
aforesaid, together with all and every the Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns,
Stables, Yards, Gardens, Orchards, arable Lands, containing by estimation sixty
Acres, be the same more or less; and all Closes, Meadows, Pastures, and
Hereditaments to the said Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, with the appurtenances now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of
the said A. B. or his Assigns; and also all that Message or Tenement, Houses,
Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, arable Lands, containing by
estimation an hundred Acres, be the same more or less, Closes, Meadows,
Pastures, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to the said Message or Tenements
belonging, o^ in any wise appertaining, situate, lying and being in S. M.
aforesaid, with the appurtenances heretofore in the Tenure or Occupation of C.
D. and now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of T. W. or his Assigns; and all
those arable Lands, containing by estimation thirty Acres, be the same more or
less; and all those Closes, Meadows, Pastures, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with their and every of their appurtenances, situate and being
in S. M. aforesaid, now or late in the Occupation of, etc. or his Assigns; and
also all those twenty Acres of arable Lands, Meadows and Pasture in S. M.
aforesaid, now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of W. H. or his Assigns:
Together with all and singular Ways, Easements, Commons, Common of Pasture,
Profits and Commodities whatsoever to the said Premises, or any part thereof
belonging or appertaining, or therewith used and enjoyed, or excepted, reputed
or taken as part or parcel, or member thereof, with their and every of their
appurtenances, To the use and behoof of the said V. W. for and during the term
of his natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner of strip o^
waste; and from and after his decease, to the use and behoof of the said F. for
and during the term of her natural life, for her Jointure, and in lieu and
recompense of her Dower and Title of Dower, and from and after the several
deceases of them the said V. W. and F. his wife, then to the use and behoof of
the first Son of the body of the said V. W. on the body of the said F. lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten, and of the Heirs males of the body o^ such first
Son, lawfully to be begotten: and for default of such Issue, then to the use
and behoof of the second Son of the body of the said V. W. on the body of the
said F. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten, and of the Heirs males of the
body of such second Son lawfully to be begotten: and for default of such Issue,
to the use and behoof of the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth,
ninth, tenth, and every other Son on the body of the said F. lawfully begotten,
or to be begotten, and of the Heirs males of the body of every such to be
begotten Son lawfully to be begotten, the eldest Son, and the Heirs males of
his body being always preferred before the younger Son, and the Heirs males of
his body, according to the seniority and priority of Birth and Age: and for
default of such Issue, then as for and concerning all and singular the premises
hereby limited and appointed to and for the Jointure and Livelihood of the said
F. with their and every of their Appurtenances, and the Reversion and the
Reversions, Remainder and Remainders thereof, and of every part thereof, to the
use and behoof of the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. and their Assigns, for and
during the term of their natural Lives, and the life of the longest Liver of
them, and from and after their decease, and the decease of the Survivor of
them, to the use and behoof of the Executors Administrators and Assigns, of the
Survivor or Survivors of them the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. for and during,
and unto the full end and term of Sixty years from thence next ensuing, and
fully to be complete and ended, upon trust and confidence, and to the Uses,
Intents and Purposes hereafter in and by these presents limited, expressed and
declared; (that is to say) from and after the decease of them the said A. B. J.
P. and J. G. and of the Survivor of them, and from and after the end,
expiration and other determination of the said term of Threescore years, as
aforesaid, then as for and concerning the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder
and Remainders of the said Message, Lands, Tenements and Premises so limited,
for Lives and Years aforesaid: And as for and concerning all that the Manor of
S. M. aforesaid, Mannor-house, or Capital Message, and all and every the
Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Yards, Orchards, Gardens, Lands,
Closes, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Tenements and Hereditaments, commonly
called or known by the name of the Demeasn Lands of the Manor of S. M.
aforesaid, situate, lying and being, enclosed and environed with a Ring-hedge,
near about the said Capital Message, and for and concerning all other the
Lands, Closes, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Tenements and Hereditaments, with
their and every of their Appurtenances, and the Reversion and Reversions,
Remainder and Remainders thereof, whereof no Estate, Use or Uses, is, or are
herein formerly limited and declare^ to the use and behoof of the said V. W.
and his Assigns, for and during the term of his natural Life, without any
impeachment of, or for any manner of strip or waste, and from and after his
decease, to the use and behoof of such person or persons, for such Estate and
Estates, and for such use and uses, and in such sort, manner and form, as the
said V. W. by any his Deed or Deeds, in writing, intended, sealed, delivered
and executed in the presence of three credible Witnesses at the least, shall
declare, limit and appoint, and until such declaration, limitation or
appointment, then to the use and behoof of G. W. eldest Son of the body of the
said V. W. and of the Heirs males of the body of the said G. W. lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten; and for default of such Issue, then to the use and
behoof of R. W. second Son of the body of the said V. W. begotten: and of the
Heirs males of the body of the said R. W. lawfully to be begotten, and for
default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the third, fourth, fifth,
sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and every other Son of the body of the
said V. W. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten, and of the Heirs males of the
body of every such to be begotten Son, lawfully to be begotten, the elder Son
and the Heirs males of his body to take place, and be preferred according to
the seniority and priority of Birth and Age; and for default of such Issue, to
the use and behoof of the Heirs of the said V. W. lawfully begotten, or to be
begotten; and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the right
Heirs of the said V. W. for ever. And the true intent and meaning of these
presents, and of all the Parties hereunto upon the execution of these presents
is, and the special trust and confidence in them the said A. B. J. P. and J. G.
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, hereby reposed, is hereby declared
and agreed to be, That if in case the said V. W. shall depart this life, having
no Issue male of his body, upon the body of the said F. lawfully begotten, or
without leaving the said F. with Child of a Son, who hereafter shall be born
alive, and having at the time of his decease, one, two, or more Daughters of
his body, on the body of the said F. lawfully begotten, then living; or if
there be one only Daughter, if she be not preferred in Marriage with Eight
Thousand pounds portion; or if there be two such Daughters, and if they be not
severally preferred in Marriage with One thousand pounds a piece, or if there
be three such Daughters, if they be not preferred in Marriage, with portions of
One thousand Marks a piece, as is hereafter mentioned: Or if the said V. W.
leaving the and F. with Child of one or more Daughter or Daughters, who s^all
after be born alive, that then the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. the Survivor and
Survivors of them, his and their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, out of
the Rents, Issue^ and Profits of the said Messuages, Cottages, Closes,
Pastures, Meadows, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the premises, with the
appurtenances, so to them limited and appointed for Lives and Years, as
aforesaid, shall raise and levy as soon as conveniently may be found for the
portion of such Daughter, if there be but one, the sum of Two Thousand pounds
of lawful, etc. to be paid to such only Daughter, her Executors and Assigns,
at her age of Eighteen years, or day of Marriage, which shall first happen, or
as soon as the said sum of Two Thousand pounds can be raised: And if there
shall be two such Daughters, the sum of One Thousand pounds a piece: Or if
there be three Daughters, then for the portions of the three Daughters, the Sum
of One thousand Marks a piece of current, etc. to be paid to them, their
Executors and Assigns, severally and respectively, at their several and
respective ages of Eighteen years, or days of Marriage, which shall first
happen, or as soon as the same can be conveniently raised: And upon this
further trust and confidence, and to the intent and purpose, that if it shall
happen the said V. W. die, leaving one only Daughter, or two or three Daughters
of his Body, on the Body of the said F. begotten, then living, or afterward to
be born as aforesaid; And that the said only Daughter shall happen to depart
this Life, before she accomplish her age of Eighteen years, or day of Marriage,
or if there fortune to be two or more Daughters, then if both, or all the said
Daughters die, or depart this Life, before either, or any of them, accomplish
their several ages of Eighteen years, or be married, as aforesaid; then the
said several sums of money intended for the portions and advancements of such
Daughter or Daughters, as aforesaid, or so much thereof as shall be raised or
levied out of the Rents, Issues and Profits of all or any the Premises (all
Charges and Expenses being defrayed, wherein full and liberal allowance shall
be made and given) shall be satisfied or paid to such person or persons as the
said V. W. his Heirs or Assigns, by any writing under his or their Hand,
subscribed in the presence of two or more credible Witnesses, shall limit and
appoint. And in default of such limitation and appointment, to the Executors or
Administrators of the said V. W. and his Heirs. And upon this further trust and
confidence, and to the intent and purpose that the said A. B. J. P. and J. G.
and the Survivor and Survivors of them, his and their Executor and Assigns,
shall out of the Rents, Issues and Profits of the aid Messuages, Cottages,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Tremises so to them limited for raising of
portions, as aforesaid, with their and every of their appurtenances, levy and
pay, or cause to be levied and paid to and for the maintenance of such Daughter
or Daughters, as aforesaid; if there be but one only Daughter, the sum of 50 l.
per annum; and if there be two or three Daughters, the sum of 30 l. per annum a
piece, until such Daughter or Daughters respectively, shall attain to her or
their age of Eighteen years, or shall be married, and her or their portions
paid as aforesaid. Provided always, that it is the true intent and meaning of
all the said Parties to these presents, That if the said V. W. shall happen to
depart this Life, without any Issue Female of his Body upon the Body of the
said F. begotten, or without leaving the said F. with Child of one or more
Daughters that shall be after born alive, That then the Estate and Estates so
limited, as aforesaid, to the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. for their Lives; and
after their Deceases, to their Executors and Administrators for Sixty years,
shall cease, determine, and be utterly void. Provided also, that from and
immediately after such time as the aforesaid A. B. J. P. and J. G. their
Executors or Assigns, shall or might have limited and raised the said several
sums for portions, and present maintenance of such Daughter and Daughters, as
aforesaid, that the said Estate for Lives and Years limited to them in trust,
as aforesaid, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void; and the said
Messuages, Cottages, Lands and Tenements, and all and singular other the
premises so to them limited, as aforesaid, in trust, shall immediately go and
be to such person or persons to whom the Rerversions or Remainder of the said
Messuages, Lands and Premises shall belong and appertain. And the said V. W.
for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them, does covenant, grant and agree, to and with the said A. B. J. P. and J.
G. their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of
them by these presents, that the said Messuages, Cottages, Closes, Meadows,
Pastures, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises,
before by these presents (...) ^ectively limited and appointed for the Jointure
of the said (...) are, and so from time to time, and at all times hereafter
(...) notwithstanding any act or default of the said V. W. (...) Assigns, or
any of them) shall remain, continue, and be (...) F. and her Assigns, of the
clear yearly value of, etc. over (...) all Charges and reprizes. Provided
always, and upon (...) condition, and to the further use, intent and purpose,
(...) said V. W. happen to depart this Life, leaving a Son of his Body on the
Body of the said F. lawfully begotten, and the said F. do him survive, and
afterward to inter-marry with any person or persons whatsoever, that then,
from and immediately after the said Marriage, as for and concerning one full
fifth part (in five parts to be divided) of all and singular the said
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances before
hereby specified to be limited and appointed to and for the Jointure of the
said F. aforesaid, that the Use and Uses, Estate and Estates thereof limited to
the said F. shall cease, determine, and be utterly void, and that from
thenceforth they the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. and the Survivor and Survivors
of them, his and their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of the full
fifth part of the said Messuages, Lands and Premises, from and immediately
after the inter-marriage of the said F. to the use and behoof of the said Son
of V. W. on the Body of the said F. begotten, for and during the term of the
natural life of the said F. for her maintenance, any thing herein contained to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided also, and upon this
condition, and so it is covenanted, granted, declared and agreed by and between
all and every of the said Parties to these presents, and their Heirs and
Assigns respectively, and it is the true intent and meaning of these presents,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said V. W. at any time
hereafter, during his natural life, from time to time, by one or more Indenture
or Indentures under his Hand and Seal, to lease, demise, set, and to farm-let
all and every or any of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, with the Appurtenances, which have been usually set
and to farm-letten, unto any person or persons whatsoever, for the term of
three Lives, or for any number of years determinable upon one, two, or three
Lives, or for the term of One and twenty years, or over or under in Possession,
and not in Reversion, so as upon every such Lease and Demise, the ancient and
accustomed Rent, or more, or the Rent or the Rents now payable or paid, or more
(over and besides Duties, Heriots and Services due and accustomed) be thereupon
reserved, and so as such Rents, Duties, Heriots and Services upon such Lease
and Leases, severally reserved, shall and may be, and continue due and payable
unto him, her or them, respectively and successively, unto whom the Reversion
and Reversions, and Remainder thereof, is hereby limited and appointed, as
aforesaid. Provided also, and upon this further ^ondition, and so it is
covenanted and agreed by and between all and every the Parties to these
presents, That if at any time from and after the death of the said V. W. the
said G. W. Son and Heir of the said V. W. or such other person or persons as
shall be Heirs at Law of the said V. W. shall and do well and truly satisfy
and pay, or cause to be satisfied and paid unto the said A. B. J. P. and J. G.
and to the Survivor or Survivors of them, his and their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, if H. A. Son of the said F. be then living, the sum
of four thousand and five hundred pounds of current, etc. And if the said H. A.
be dead, the sum of five thousand pounds of like current money, at or in the,
etc. To the end, that thereby the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, may be thereby enabled to purchase Lands
and Tenements, of the value of, etc. or may employ and dispose of the same, for
the use, benefit and advantage of the Issue of the Body of the said F. lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten, or if the said V. W. or the said Heir at Law, as
aforesaid, or any of them, shall at their own proper costs and charges, settle,
convey and assure, or cause and procure to be conveyed and assured, other
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which shall be of the clear yearly value of
Two hundred and fifty pounds per annum, above all Charges and Reprizes, unto
the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. their Heirs and Assigns, and to the Survivor and
Survivors of them, his and their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
to the like several uses, intents and purposes, and upon the like trusts and
confidences, and under the like Conditions, Provisoes, Powers and Limitations,
as are hereby formerly limited and appointed, excepting only the said
Message, Lands and Tenements herein and hereby limited to and for the Jointure
of the said F. that then and immediately from and after such payment or
settlement, as aforesaid, the several Uses and Estates herein and hereby
limited (other than the Estate for life limited to the said F. as aforesaid)
of, for, or concerning the said Land and Premises, for the use and benefit of
the Issue of the Body of the said V. W. on the Body of the said F. lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten, and every of them shall cease, determine, and be
utterly void. And the said V. W. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, does covenant, grant and agree, to and with the said A. B. J. P. and
J. G. their Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents;
That for or notwithstanding any act or thing whatsoever, heretofore done or
suffered by the said V. W. his Heirs or Assigns, or hereafter by him, them, or
any of ther^, to be done or suffered to the contrary, the said V. W. now is,
and so at the time when the first Estate of the said Manor, Advowson,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof,
shall be conveyed and assured to the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. their Heirs and
Assigns, to the uses aforesaid, shall stand and be seized thereof, of a good,
perfect, absolute and indefeazible Estate of Inheritance in Feesimple or
Fee-tail, without any Reversion or Remainder in the Crown, or without any
Covenant or use to alter, change or determine the same. And also that he the
said V. W. for and notwithstanding any act or thing whatsoever heretofore done
or suffered to the contrary, as aforesaid, has, and so at the time of the
Execution of the said first Estate of the said Manor, Advowson, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their
and every of their appurtenances, to the said A. B. J P. and J. G. their Heirs
and Assigns, shall have full power, good right, and lawful authority to grant,
convey and assure the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Advowsons, Tenements and
Premises, with their and every of their appurtenances, to the said A. B. J. P.
and J. G. their Heirs and Assigns, to the uses, intents and purposes aforesaid,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. And the said V. W.
for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them, does covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the said A. B. J. P.
and J. G. and their Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, That the said V. W. and his Heirs, shall and will from time to time,
and at all times hereafter, during and within the, etc. years next ensuing the
date of these presents, upon the reasonable request, and at the costs and
charges in the Law of the said V. W. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them, do
make, acknowledge, levy, execute and suffer, or cause to be made, done, levied,
acknowledged, executed and suffered, all and every such further and other
lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device and devices,
conveyance and conveyances, assurance and assurances in the Law whatsoever, for
the further, more perfect and better assurance, surety, sure-making, conveying
and assuring of the said Manor, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all and singular the premises, with their and every of their
appurtenances, unto the said A. B. J. P. and J. G. their Heirs and Assigns, to
the uses, intents and purposes and under the conditions, provisoes and
limitations before mentioned, expressed and declared, and to and for none other
use, intent and purpose whatsoever. Be the same by one or more fine or fines,
with proclamations to be levied and executed in due form of Law, Feoffment or
Feoffments, Recovery or Recoveries, with single, double or treble Voucher or
Vouchers, Deed or Deeds, Enrolled or not Enrolled, the enrolment of these
presents, Release, Confirmation with warranty, as aforesaid, or otherwise
without warranty, or by all, every or any of the aforesaid ways or means, or
by any other lawful and reasonable ways or means whatsoever, as by the said A.
B. J. P. and J. G. the Survivor or Survivors of them, his or their Heirs or
Assigns, or as by his, their, or any of their Council learned in the Law, shall
be reasonably devised or required: which said Fine or Fines, Feoffment or
Feoffments, Recovery or Recoveries, and assurances whatsoever, had, made and
executed, or hereafter to be had, made and executed, by the said V. W. his
Heirs and Assigns, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, touching and
concerning all and every, or any of the premises, with their and every of their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, shall be and enure, and shall
be adjudged, demised, construed and taken to be and enure, to the uses, intents
and purposes, before in and by these presents limited, expressed and declared,
and to and for none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, any former or
other Declaration of use or uses to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. Provided nevertheless, and upon the condition, and it is
covenanted, declared and agreed by and between all and every the Parties to
these presents, their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them respectively by
these presents, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said V. W. at
any time or times hereafter, during his natural life, by his Deed or Deeds
indented, to be by him sealed and delivered in the presence of three or more
credible Witnesses, by and with the consent and approbation of the said A. B.
J. P. and J. G. or of the Survivor or Survivors of them, his or their Heirs or
Assigns, testified in Writing, under their Hands and Seals, to alter, change,
revoke, determine, or make void all or any the Estate or Estates, Use or Uses
before by these presents limited and appointed, except only the Uses before
hereby limited and appointed to or for the Jointure of the said F. as
aforesaid, and that from and after such alteration, change, revocation,
determination or making void thereof, or of any part thereof, these presents
and all other assurances in the Law whatsoever, shall be and enure, and shall
be adjudged, deemed, construed and taken to be, and to enure. And they the said
A. B. J. P. and J. G. and their Heirs and Assigns, and their Heirs and Assigns
of the Survivor and Survivors of them, shall stand and be seized of all and
singular the premises (except before excepted) or so much thereof, whereof such
alteration, change, revocation, determination, or making void, shall be had and
made, as aforesaid, to such other use and uses, and to the use of such person
and persons, and for such Estate and Estates, and in such sort, manner and
form, as the said V. W. by any Deed or Deeds indented, settled, delivered and
executed in the presence of three or more credible Witnesses, by and with such
consent and approbation shall declare, limit or appoint: and from and after
such Revocation, in default of such Declaration, Limitation and Appointment,
then to the uses, intents and purposes before by these presents limited,
expressed and declared, and to and for none other use, intent and purpose
whatsoever; any thing in these presents, or in any former or other Declaration
of use or uses contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.
In witness, etc.

A Condition for the payment of Rent Quarterly, for Lands held from year to
year, at the pleasure of the Lessor.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above-bounden T. H.
has and holds from year to year, at the will and pleasure of the above named
J. M. certain Closes and parcels of Ground lying and being in the Parish of S.
above-written in the County of Berks, parcel of the Lands belonging to the
Tenement there called B. for and under the yearly Rent of, etc. to be paid
quarterly. If therefore the said T. H. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
or any of them, do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said J. M.
or to his certain Attorney, Executors or Assigns, the said yearly Rent of, etc.
at the now dwelling house of the said J. M. in T. above-written, in manner and
form, as follows; (that is to say) upon the Four and twentieth day of June
next ensuing the date hereof, etc. upon the Eight and twentieth day of
September next also ensuing other, etc. upon the Four and twentieth day of
December next also ensuing other, etc. other upon the Four and twentieth day of
March, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, etc. and, etc. and so forth
quarterly and every quarter: the one next and immediately ensuing the other
upon the like days, the sum of, etc. during all the time and term that the
said T. H. and his Assigns, shall so hold and enjoy the said Closes and
Grounds, at the Will of the said J. M. And moreover do from time to time during
all the said term, at his own Costs and Charges maintain and keep the same
premises in good and sufficient Fences and Bounds; and in the end of the same
time, do leave and yield up the same well and sufficiently fenced and bounded,
without any cavillation: That then, etc.

A Sale of the Moiety of Rent reserved by Lease.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between R. B. of, etc. Executor of the last Will
and Testament of R. R. late of, etc. deceased, and P. R. etc. on the one part;
and A. G etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That whereas the said P. R. being
interessed and possessed by Lease dated, etc. made and granted unto him the
said P. R. by and from one W. T. of, etc. of all that Message, Tenement or
Inn, called or known by the name or Sign of the Black-Bell, situate in
Fleet Street, in the Parish of St. Dunstans, etc. And of all Cellars, Sollers,
Rooms, Barns, Stables, Haylofts, Gate-houses, Liberties of passage,
Court-yards, Windows, Lights, Watercourse, Racks, Planks, Mangers, and all
other the appurtenances whatsoever to the said Message or Tenement belonging
or appertaining, (except as in the said Lease made to the said P. R. of the
premises, is excepted) did afterward by his Indenture of Lease bearing date,
etc. for the considerations therein expressed, demise, grant, and to farm-let
unto T. R. Citizen, etc. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all those
Rooms, Chambers, Lodgings, Cellars and Easements hereafter particularly
mentioned, being parcel of the said Message, Tenement or Inn called, etc. and
then in the Tenure of the said T. R. or of his Assigns (that is to say) one
Cellar lying under the Shop, then and yet in the Occupation of the said T. R.
or his Assigns, one Room or Chamber toward the Street, called The Crown, being
part over the said Shop, and part over the said Gate or Way leading into the
said Message, Tenement or Inn called the Black-Bell, one other little dark
Room or Chamber called the Faggot-Chamber; lying backward behind part of the
said Room or Chamber, called the G. on the same floor, with liberty to make and
contrive convenient light or lights, from the yard of the said Message,
Tenement or Inn aforesaid, to serve the said Room, called the F. Room, and the
same so made, to enjoy during the said Lease, one other Room, Chamber or
Lodging toward the Street, called The Angel, directly over the said Chamber
called the C. One other Chamber or Lodging, commonly called The two
Bed-Chambers, lying backward, behind part of the said Room or Chamber, called
the A. on the same floor, and all other piece and parcel of the low Rooms then
in the Occupation of the said T. R. or of his Assigns, to contain by
estimation, etc. next behind the West end or side of the said Shop, then in the
Occupation of the said T. R. toward the North, for the making and contriving
of a pair of stairs to lead from the said Shop unto the said demised premises,
and also from thence to make and contrive a convenient way or passage to lead
into the Cellar before mentioned; together with all Lights, Ways, Easements,
Commodities, and Appurtenances, to the said premises belonging or appertaining.
To have and to hold the said, etc. unto the said T. R. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. then next coming after the
date of the said Lease last recited, unto the end and term of, etc. from thence
next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended. And for and under the yearly
Rent or Reversion of the first two years, and one quarter of the said term of
one Pepper-corn, and afterward during the whole term, for and under the yearly
rent of, etc. payable, as in and by the said Indenture of Lease, made to him
the said T. R. (amongst diverse other Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements
therein contained) more fully and at large it does and may appear. And whereas
afterward the whole estate, right, title, Recited
interest, term of years, property, claim and demand of the said T. R. in and
to the said premises before mentioned or recited, by good and sufficient
Conveyances in that behalf made, came into the hands and possession of the said
R. R. who died thereof lawfully possessed, and by and after whose decease, the
said Indenture of Lease first mentioned, term of years and premises aforesaid,
was lawfully vested and settled in the said R. B. as Executor of the last Will
and Testament of the said R. R. And whereas the said R. B. being of the
premises so possessed, as aforesaid, by his Indenture or Deed indented, bearing
date, etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did grant, bargain, sell,
assign and set over unto J. C. etc. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
the moiety or one half part of the Message, Tenement or Inn, called The
Black-Bell. aforesaid, and the moiety of all and singular Shops, Cellars,
Sollers, Rooms, Barns, Stables, Hay-losts, Gate-houses, Liberties of Passage,
Courts, Yards, Windows, Lights, Watercourse, Racks, Planks, Mangers, and all
other the Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message, Tenement or Inn
belonging or appertaining, and the moiety of all Houses, Edifices and Buildings
then standing or being upon the premises, or any part thereof, and the moiety
of all and singular other the premises whatsoever, mentioned to be demised, in
and by the said Indenture of Lease first mentioned (except as in the same
Indenture is excepted) To have and to hold the said moiety or the said
Message, Tenement or Inn, called the, etc. and of all other the premises
aforesaid (except before excepted) unto the said J. C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from thenceforth during the residue then to come
and unexpired of the whole term granted by the said Indenture of Lease first
mentioned, made to the said P. R. as aforesaid; as in and by the last Indenture
or Deed indented (amongst other things also) more at large it does and may
appear. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said R. B. and P. R. for and in
consideration of the sum of, etc. to him the said P. R. by the direction and
appointment of the said R. B. well and truly paid, before the ensealing and
delivery of these presents by the said A. G. whereof they the said R. B. and P.
R. do acknowledge themselves to be fully satisfied, contented and paid; and
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do clearly acquit and discharge
the said A. G. his Executors and Administrators, by these presents, have
granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents do
clearly and absolutely grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said
A. G. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all that the moiety or
half-part of all and singular the said Rooms, Chambers, Lodgings, Cellars,
Ways, Lights, Liberties, Passages, Commodities and Appurtenances; and of all
other the premises demised to the said T. R. by the said P. R. in and by the
said Indenture of Lease, before recited, and of every part and parcel thereof,
together with the moiety or half-part of the said yearly Rent of, etc. reserved
by the said Indenture of Lease, and full liberty, power and authority to
receive and take the same from time to time, at such Feasts and Days as the
same shall grow due and payable by the said Lease during the said term thereby
granted. To have and to hold the said moiety of all and singular the said
Rooms, Chambers, Lodgings, Rents, and other the premises, with the
appurtenances, before by these presents mentioned to be granted, bargained,
sold, assigned and set over, and every part and parcel thereof, with liberty,
power and authority to receive and take the said Rents, as aforesaid, unto the
said A. G. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, for and during all the rest and residue of the said
term of, etc. years to him the said T. R. granted, as aforesaid, now to come
and unexpired, in such like large and ample manner to all intents and purposes,
as they the said R. B. and P. R. or either of them, might, should, or in any
wise ought to have, take and enjoy the same. And the said R. B. and P. R. for
themselves, and either of them, their and either of their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, do covenant, promise and
grant, to and with, etc. (That is to say) That the said R. B. and P. R. or one
of them, at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, are and
stand, or one of them is and stands so lawfully and absolutely possessed of
the premises, as that they the said R. B. and P. R. or one of them, now have or
has good right, full power, and lawful authority thereby to grant, bargain,
sell, assign and set over the said moiety of the said several Rooms, Chambers,
Lodgings, and other the premises, with the appurtenances, before by these
presents mentioned to be granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and
every part and parcel thereof, unto the said A. G. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form aforesaid. And further, that he
the said A. G. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them,
shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter during the rest and residue
of the said term of, etc. years granted to the said T. R. as aforesaid,
peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the moiety of the said Rooms,
Chambers, Lodgings, and other the premises, with the appurtenances before
mentioned to be demised to the said T. R. by the Indenture of Lease
above-recited, and every part thereof; and the moiety of the said yearly rent
of, etc. by the same Indenture reserved, shall or may receive, take and enjoy
from time to time as the same shall grow due during the said term, without the
let, suit, trouble, disturbance, interruption or eviction of them the said R.
B. and P. R. or either of them, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or
any of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever lawfully claiming,
by, from or under them, or either, or any of them; or by, from or under their,
or any of their means, act, title, consent or procurement, or by, from or under
the said R. R. deceased, and also acquitted and discharged of and from all and
all manner of former Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Statute-Merchant and of
the Staple-Recognizance, Judgments, Executions, Surrenders, Forfeitures,
Re-entries, and of and from all other Titles, Troubles, Charges and
Encumbrances whatsover, had, made, committed or done by the said P. R. and R.
B. and R. R. deceased, or any of them; or to be had, made committed or done by
the said P. R. and R. B. and R. R. deceased or any of them; or to be had, made,
committed or done by the said P. R. and R. B. their Executors, etc. or any of
them; or by their or any of their means, act, title, interest, default, consent
or procurement. In witness, etc.

A Lease of Lands by may of Mortgage, in consideration of a sum of money.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between the Right Honorable E. Earl of B. the
Lady L. his Wife, Countess of B. the Right Honorable the Lord M. Baron of R.
in the County of, etc. Sir F. G. of, etc. and E. W. of, etc. on the one part,
and I. W. of, etc. on the other part: Witnesses, That in consideration of the
sum of, Consideration.
etc. to the said E. Earl of B. and the Lady L. Countess of, etc. in hand paid
by the said T. W. before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, whereof
they do acknowledge the receipt, and thereof, and every part and parcel
thereof, do hereby clearly and absolutely acquit, exonerate and discharge the
said I. W. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them,
for ever by these presents: They the said W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. at and
by the special direction and appointment of the said E. Earl of B. and the Lady
L. Countess of B. Have demised, Grant.
granted, bargained and sold, and by these presents do demise, grant, bargain
and sell unto the said I. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all
those Closes or Grounds hereafter particularly named, situate, lying and being
in the Hamlets, Parish or Fields of Butler in the County of R. (That is to say)
One Close of Pasture and Meadow-ground, commonly called or known by the name of
New Cowclose, containing by estimation 100 Acres, now in the Tenure or
Occupation of R. I. Gent. or his Assigns, one other Close of Pasture called,
etc. containing by estimation 170 Acres at least, now in the Tenure or
Occupation of William Dalby, or of his Assigns, two Closes of Pasture, etc.
together with all and singular the ways, passages, profits, commodities,
advantages and appurtenances whatsoever, to the said several Closes or Grounds,
and every or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or with them,
or any of them, now or heretofore usually occupied, demised or enjoyed, or
accepted, reputed, taken or known, for or as part or parcel of them, or any of
them. And the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders, rents and
yearly profits whatsoever, of all and singular the said closes and premises
before mentioned, and of every of them, To have and to hold the said Closes,
Fields, Grounds, Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises, with
their and every of their appurtenances before by these presents demised, or
mentioned to be hereby demised, granted, bargained or sold, and every part and
parcel thereof, unto the said I. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
from the, etc. day of, etc. next ensuing the date of these presents, unto the
full end and term of 99 years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended: yielding and paying therefore yearly unto the said W. Lord
M. Sir F. G. and E. W. their Heirs and Assigns, one Pepper-corn only at the,
etc. if the same be demanded. Provided always, and it is fully agreed between
the said Parties to these presents, and every of them, That if the said E. Earl
of B. the Lady I. Countess of B. W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. or any of them,
their or any of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of
them, do and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the J. W. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the sum of, etc. in or upon the, etc. at
or in the, etc. between the hours of, etc. That then this present demise,
grant, bargain and sale shall be utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect,
any thing herein before contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. For payment of the money.
And that the said E. Earl of B. the Lady L. Countess of B. W. Lord M. Sir F.
G. and E. W. or some of them, their, or some of their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall and will, well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said J. W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said sum
of, etc. in or upon the, etc. at or in the place aforesaid, and between the
hours of, etc. according to the true intent and meaning of those presents. And
further, That the said Close, Grounds, and other the premises before, in and by
these presents mentioned to be demised, granted, bargained and sold, now are
and be, and so during the whole term of, etc. hereby grantted, bargained and
sold, shall be, remain and continue of the clear yearly value of, etc. over and
above all Charges and Reprizes. For the quiet enjoying of the premises, upon
default.
And moreover, if default be made in payment of the said sum of, etc. herein
before in the said Proviso mentioned, or any part thereof, at the day, time and
place before mentioned and limited for the payments thereof: That then the said
J. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall and
may from time to time, and at all times during the said term of, etc. peaceably
and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Grounds, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and all other the premises herein before mentioned to
be demised, granted, bargained or sold, with all and singular their and every
of their appurtenances, and every part thereof, without the let, suit, trouble,
denial, disturbance, expulsion or interruption of the said E. Earl of B. the
Lady L. etc. W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. and of all and every other person
or persons whatsoever, and discharged of and from all other Bargains, Sales,
Gifts, Grants, Leases, Statutes, Recognizances, Extents, Judgments, and all
Charges, Estates, Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made,
committed, suffered or done, or to be had, etc. by the said E. Earl of B. the
Lady L. Countess of, etc. W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. or any of them, or by
any other person or persons whatsoever. For further assurance upon default.
And further, that if default be made in payment of the said sum of, etc. or
any part thereof, at the day, time and place aforesaid, that then the said E.
Earl of B. the Lady L. Countess of B. W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all and every other person or
persons lawfully having, claiming, or pretending to have or claim any manner of
estate, right, title, interest, claim or demand whatsoever, of, in or to the
said Closes, Grounds, Hereditaments and Premises, or any part thereof, shall
and will make, do, suffer and execute, or cause and procure to be done, made,
suffered and executed, all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and
acts, thing and things, device and devices in the Law whatsoever, for the
further, better and more perfect assurance, surety, sure-making and conveying
of the said Closes, Grounds and Premises, with the Appurtenances, and every
part thereof unto the said I. W. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
during the said term of Ninety and nine years, according to the intent and
meaning of these presents, as by the said I. VV. his Executors or Assigns, or
by his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or
advised and required. And the said VV. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. VV. for
themselves severally, and not jointly, nor one of them for each other, their
several Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them
respectively do covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. W. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these presents;
That if default of payment be made of the said sum of, etc. or any part
thereof, at the day, time and place aforesaid, That then the said I. W. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and may from time to time, and at
all times during the said term of, etc. peaceably and quietly have, hold,
possess and enjoy the said Closes, Grounds and other the premises before
mentioned, to be hereby demised, granted, bargained or sold, without the lawful
let, suit, trouble, denial, disturbance, expulsion, eviction or interruption of
them the said W. Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. severally, their and every of
their several and respective Heirs and Assigns, or any of them, or of any other
person or persons, lawfully claiming in, by, from or under them, or any of them
respectively, as aforesaid; And discharged and clearly acquitted of and from
all former Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Statutes, Recognizances, Extents,
Judgments, and of and from all other Charges, Estates, Titles, Troubles and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or done by the said W.
Lord M. Sir F. G. and E. W. or any of them respectively, their or any of their
several Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any other person or
persons, claiming or to claim, in, by, from or under them, or any of them
severally and respectively, their or any of their several estates, act, title,
means, consent or procurement. In witness whereof, the Parties first
abovenamed, to these present Indentures, have interchangeably set their Hands
and Seals. Given the day and year first above written, Annoque Dom. 1634.

A Covenant that after the default of payment, the possession of Lands in
Mortgage shall be delivered to the Mortgagee, and also all Deeds and Writings
concerning the same.
ANd the said A. B. for himself, etc. That he the said A. B. his Heirs and
Assigns, shall and will upon reasonable request to him or them to be made,
after default shall happen to be made of. or in any of the payments aforesaid
(if it shall happen so to fall out) deliver or cause to be delivered unto the
said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns, the quiet and peaceable possession and seizin
of all and singular the before bargained premises. And shall then also after
such default of payment within one month then next ensuing, deliver and cause
to be delivered unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, as well all and
singular the Letters Patent, Deeds, Evidences, Writings, Escripts and
Monuments before by these presents bargained and sold, as also all the true
Copies of all such other Deeds and Writings, as do touch and concern the before
bargained premises, or any part thereof. Together with any other Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments not before mentioned: The said Copies to be written
at the Cost of the said D. his Heirs and Assigns.

An Assignment, with a Proviso, to have the Lease again upon payment of a sum
of money.
THis Indenture made, etc. between G. B of. etc. of the one part, and W. H. of,
etc. of the other part. Whereas one R. G. and his Wife, by their Deed indented,
bearing date, etc. for the consideration in the said Deed indented, expressed,
did demise, grant and to farm-let unto the said G. B. all that the moiety and
half-deal of the Manor of D. with the appurtenances, set, lying and being in,
etc. and the moiety and half-deal of all their Messuages, Dove-houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, Mills,
Meadows, Leasows, Pastures, Woods, Under-woods, Commons, Heaths, Profits,
Commodities and Hereditaments to the said Manor of, etc. belonging, set, lying
and being within the Town, Fields, Parishes and Hamlets of C. N. D. within the
said County of G. or accepted, reputed or taken, etc. To have and to hold, etc.
with diverse Covenants, Articles, Agreements and Reservations in the said
Indenture contained, as by the said Indenture, etc. Now this Indenture
witnesses, That the said G. B. for diverse and sundry, etc. has given,
granted, alienated, assigned and set over, and by these presents does, etc. as
well the said moiety, etc. as also all the Estate, Right, Title, Use, Interest,
Possession, Claim and Demand whatsoever, of the said G. B. had and made, as is
aforesaid, To have and to hold the said moiety and half-deal of the said Manor
of D. with the appurtenances, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Use, Interest,
Clatm, Possession and Demand whatsoever of the said G. B. etc. Provided
nevertheless, and it is agreed between the said Parties to these presents, That
if the said G. B. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or any of them, do at any
time hereafter pay and deliver, or cause to be paid and delivered unto the said
W. H. his Executors or Assigns, or any of them, the sum of, etc. of lawful
money of England, at one entire payment, at or in the Church Porch of the
Parish Church of C. aforesaid, within the said County of G. at or in the place
where the said Parish Church now stands, that then and from thenceforth, as
well this present Grant and Assignment, and every Clause, Article and Sentence
herein contained, to be utterly void, frustrate, and of one effect: as also,
that then, and from thenceforth, the said moiety of the said Manor of D. and
al other the premises whatsoever, with their appurtenances, and every part and
parcel thereof by these presents assigned and set over unto the said W. H.
shall come and be to the said G. B. his Executors and Assigns, for and during
all the number of years that shall (at the time of the payment to be had and
made in manner and form aforesaid) be then to come and unexpired of the said
term of, etc. years granted unto the said G. B. Executors and Assigns, as is
aforesaid, as though this present Indenture of assignment of the premises had
not been had or made. In witness, etc.

A revoking of a pretended Contract of Matrimony.
LEt all Men know and take notice by these presents, That we F. D. of S. and J.
H. of, etc. being desirous to have matters cleared between us concerning such
proceedings as have been about treaty of Marriage between us, and that we both,
notwithstanding any pretense of Contract between us, may hereby declare and
manifest to all people, that there was no absolute Contract or Engagement
between us at any time for Marriage of each other, but that we are free one
from the other in that kind, and may each of us freely marry with others. We do
therefore freely and without any compulsion, declare, manifest, and make known
unto all people, that we the said F. D. and J. H. were never absolutely
contracted together in any Contract of Matrimony, neither did we nor any of us
profess or declare, that we would marry each other; unless, etc. (our Friends,
etc.) we do therefore hold our selves no ways to be tied or obliged each to
other in any manner of Contract of Matrimony, or for Marriage each of other,
and therefore we do hereby freely and absolutely release and discharge each
other of and from all manner of Contracts, of or for marriage heretofore had,
or pretended to be had or made between us; and we do hereby freely and fully
release, acquit and discharge each other of us, and of and from all manner of
Actions, Suits or Claims prosecuted, or which may be begun or prosecuted in any
Court, Ecclesiastical or Civil, concerning the premises. And in testimony of
our free and full consent herein, we the said F. D. and J. H. have hereunto
subscribed our Names, the day of, etc.

An Assignment of Lands taken upon an Extent.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between T. H. of, etc. and W. W. of, etc. of the
one Party, and J. B. of, etc. of the other Party. Whereas the said T. H. lately
recovered by Judgment in His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, the sum of, etc.
against T. C. of B. etc. and thereupon the said T. H. in Michaelmas Term last,
did take and sue forth Execution by Writ of Elegit, directed to the then
Sheriff of the said County of W. Whereupon by Inquisition, and by the Jurors
then and there sworn, taken by the said Sheriff at the City of, etc. The day
of, etc. Amongst other things it was found. That the said T. C. at the time of
the said Inquisition, was possessed for and during the term of, etc. years then
to come, of and in one Message or Tenement, and diverse parcels of Land, Meadow
and Pasture, to the said Message or Tenement belonging or appertaining in C.
in the said Parish of, etc. as his proper Goods; Which said term and interest
of the said T. C. of or in the said Message or Tenement, the Jury at the time
of the said Inquisition, did apprize and value at, etc. pounds, which said term
of years the said Sheriff the day of the same Inquisition, did deliver to the
said T. H. at the price and apprizance aforesaid; To hold unto the said T. H.
and his Assigns, as his proper Goods and Chattels; according to the form of the
Statute in that behalf made: and as parcel of the same debt and damages of the
said T. H. recorded, as aforesaid; And the said Jurors also found, That the
said T. C, was at the time of the said Inquisition seized in his Demeasn as of
Fee, of and in one Message, and diverse parcels of Land, Meadow and Pasture to
the said Tenement belonging or appertaining, lying and being in B. etc. found
by particular names and quantities, and then valued by the said Jurors to be
worth, etc. yearly; the moiety of which said Messuages and Premises in B. by
particular names and quantities, the said Sheriff did then also deliver unto
the said T. H. at the rate and apprizement aforesaid: To hold to the said T.H.
and his Assigns, as his Freehold, according to the form of the Statute made on
that behalf, until the residue of the said Debt of, etc. should be thereby
fully levied, as by the said Inquisition more particularly and at large it does
and may appear. Which said debt so recovered by the said T.H. and the said
Execution thereupon, was nevertheless in trust (...) the said W. W. party to
these presents, and was the proper money of the said W. W. assigned to him the
said T. H. as part of the, Marriage-portion of, etc. Now witnesses these
presents, That the said W. W. and T. H. as well for and in consideration of the
sum of, etc. paid unto the said W. W. as also for diverse good Causes and
Considerations them thereunto moving, have granted, assigned and set over, and
by these presents do grant, assign and set over unto the said J. B. all that
the said Message or Tenement, Lands and Premises in C. aforesaid; and all the
Estate, Interest, Title and Term of Years yet to come, which the said VV. and
T. H. has, or either of them has or have, or might have, of, in or unto the
said Message, Tenement, Lands and Premises, and every or any part thereof, by
the said Extent or Inquisition aforesaid, or otherwise. And also all that the
moiety or half-deal, or part of the said Message or Tenement, Lands and
Premises in B. aforesaid, and all the Estate and Interest which he the said W.
W. and T. or either of them, have, has or might claim, of, in, or unto the
said Message, Lands and Premises in B. or any part or parcel thereof, in as
large, ample, and beneficial manner, to all intents and purposes, as the said
W. W. or T. H. or either of them, have, has or might hold, claim or enjoy the
same, etc. And the said W. W. and T. H. do severally, and not jointly, each one
for himself, his Executors and Administrators, covenant, promise and agree to
and with the said I. B. his Executors, etc. that he the said I. B. his, etc.
shall and may from henceforth quietly hold, occupy and enjoy all and singular
the premises, and every part thereof, free from any former Grants, Charges,
Assignment and Encumbrances of the premises, or any part thereof, made by the
said W. etc. or any claiming from, etc. And the said I. B. does likewise by
these presents for himself, his Executors, etc. covenant, promise and agree to
and with the said VV. etc. That he the said I. B. his Executors, etc. shall and
will save, defend and keep harmless the said VV. VV. and T. H. their Executors,
etc. of and from all manner of Suits, Troubles, Charges, Expenses and Sums of
Money, which the said VV. etc. shall be from henceforth at, put unto, sustain,
disburse or undergo, for or by reason of the said extent, or any matter or
thing therein contained, or that might come to happen to the said VV. etc. for
or by reason of the Estate which they or either of them had by extent
aforesaid, or any the premises hereby assigned, or by any occasion or reason
rising or growing therefrom or by occasion thereof. In witness, etc.

A Charter party for a Ships Voyage.
THis Charter party indented, made the, etc. in the, etc. between L. K. Master
of a Ship or Bark called The Flower-deluce of P. in the County of D. of the
Burden of one hundred Tuns, or thereabouts, of the one part, and C. W. and B.
S. Merchants, of, etc. Witnesses, That the said Master has demised, granted,
and to fraight-letten, and by these presents does demise, grant, and to
fraight-let unto the said Merchants, their Factors and Assigns, all that the
said Ship or Bark, with her Tackling, appurtenances, and her apparel thereunto
belonging or appertaining, for and during one whole Voyage with the same Ship
to be done and made in manner and form following (that is to say) the said
Master covenanteth, grants and agrees, to and with the said Merchants, and
every of them, That the said Ship or Bark, named The Flowerde luce, now being
pressed and ready within the Port of the said Town of S. shall with the first
good Wind and apt Weather (as God shall send) next after the date hereof, make
Sail and Sails from thence directly toward and unto the Key of the City of
Roan, under the Dominion of the French King, and there to tarry and abide by
the space of, etc. days current, during the which space the said Master
covenanteth there to receive into the said Ship, Ware, and other Merchandise,
such as it shall then best please the said Merchants, their Factors or Assigns,
there to load to a complete and full loading of the said Ship. And the said
Merchants, and every of them, covenant to and with the said Master, to load, or
cause to be laden there, within the said space, Wares and such other
Merchandises, as it shall then best please the said Merchants, or their
Factors, for their most profit, to the complete and full loading of the Ship,
as is aforesaid. And moreover the said Master covenanteth, concordeth,
bargaineth and agrees to and with the said Merchants, and every of them, that
the said Ship with her said loading laden in her within the said place, shall
with the first good Wind and Weather (as God shall send) next after the said,
etc. days be come and past, make Sail and Sails from thence directly toward
and unto the said Port of the said Town of S. where the said Ship shall with
convenient speed, after her there arrival, be discharged of her said lading of
Wares and other Merchandise laden in her, as aforesaid: and the same out of the
said Ship there so discharged, shall be delivered unto the said Merchants, or
the Owners thereof, as safely and well-conditioned, (God sending the said Ship
in safety.) And the said Merchants and every of them, covenant to and with the
said Master, then and there to receive the said loading laden in her, as
aforesaid: and at the right discharge thereof, to pay, or cause to be paid to
the said Master, or his Assigns, the sum of, etc. and also to pay during the
said Voyage, Windage, Groundage, Pilotage and Loadmanage, and all other
Arrerages, as in English Ships are accustomed. And the said Master covenanteth,
that the said Ship is, and during the said Voyage shall be stiff, strong and
stanch, well and sufficiently victualled, rigged and apparelled, with
sufficient Mariners for the safe conducting of the said Ship, and keeping of
the Merchants Goods during the said Voyage. In witness, etc.

A Mortgage of Lands upon Money, etc.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between T. A. of, etc. of the one part, and T.
M. Vintner and Citizen of London, of the other part; Witnesses, That the said
T. A. for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. of lawful money of England,
in hand paid unto him the said T. A. by the said T. M. at and before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents; the receipt whereof the said T. A.
does hereby acknowledge, and thereof and of every part thereof does hereby also
clearly acquit and discharge the said T. M. his Heirs and Assigns; and for
diverse other good Causes and Considerations him the said T. A. thereunto
moving, Has demised, granted, bargained, and to farm-letten, and by these
presents does, etc. unto the said T. M. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, all those three several Pastures of Grounds, lying in S. within the
parts of Holland, in the County of L. containing by estimation, etc. be they
more or less, now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of one I. B. his Assignee
or Assignees, To have and to hold the said three Pastures, and every part and
parcel thereof, with their and every of their appurtenances, unto him the said
T. M. his Executors and Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. now next ensuing the
date of these presents, for, during, and until the full end and term of 99
years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be computed, complete and ended.
Yielding and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said T. A.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, one Pepper-corn, if it be
lawfully demanded, at, or on the Feast Day of St. Michael the Archangel. And it
is hereby concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents, and the said T. A. does for himself, and A. his wife, their Heirs,
Executors, etc. covenant, promise and agree, to and with the said T. M. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said T. M. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, quietly and
peaceably to have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy all and singular the said
three Pastures, or Grounds and Premises, with their and every of their
appurtenances, from time to time, and at all times hereafter during the said
term; without the lawful let and interruption of him the said T. A. and A. his
wife, their and either of their Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming from, by, or under them, or
either of them; And also freed and discharged of, and from all and all manner
of former Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Judgments, Executions, and other
Charges of Encumbrances whatsoever had, made, done or suffered by them, or
either of them: Provided always, and it is nevertheless agreed and concluded
by and between the said Parties to these presents, and it is the true intent
and meaning thereof, That if the said T. A. his Executors, Administrators; etc.
or either of them, shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said
T. M. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the full and entire sum of,
etc. of lawful money of England, on the day of, etc. next ensuing the date of
these presents, at or in, etc. That then this present Indenture, Demise and
Grant, and every Clause and Article therein contained shall cease, determine,
be void, and of none effect; any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary thereof in any wife notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Bargain and Sale of a Manor, with necessary Covenants.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between J. W. of, etc. on the one part, and R.
D. of, etc. and B. his wife on the other part, Witnesses, etc. Has granted,
aliened, bargained and sold, and by these presents does grant, allen, bargain
and sell unto the said R. D. and B. his wife, their Heirs and Assigns, all that
the Manor of, etc. with the appurtenances in the County of Essex: And all the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances whatsoever, by what
name or names soever the same, or any of them, be known or called, now in the
Tenure or Occupation of W. E. or his Assigns. Together with all and singular
the Lands, Tenements, Profits, Commodities and Hereditaments to the said Manor
of H. belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or with the same at any time
heretofore demised, used or occupied, or reputed, taken, occupied or known, as
any part, parcel or member thereof. And all other his Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying and being in the Parish of, etc.
or in any of them in the said County in E. And all and singular the Reversion
and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of them, and every of them, and all
Rents reserved upon any Demise or Lease of them, or any part of them; And also
all the Estate, Right, Title or Interest, Use, Possession, Claim and Demand
whatsoever, which he the said J. W. now has, may, might, should, or in any
wise ought to have, of, in and to all and singular the said bargained premises,
or any part thereof; Together with all and singular Evidences, Deeds, Escripts,
Charters, Writings, Court-Rolls, Books of Survey, and Monuments whatsoever
concerning the same, as be now in the Hands, Custody and Possession of the said
I. W. or in the Hands, Custody and Possession of any other person or persons
whatsoever, to his use, by his delivery, or which he may lawfully get or come
by without suit in Law. And the said J. W. does covenant, promise and grant for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, to and
with the said R. D. and B. his wife, their Heirs and Assigns, upon reasonable
request, to deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the said R. D. and B. or
either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, at or before the
Feast Day of St. Michael the Archangel, next ensuing the date of these
presents, true Copies of all such Evidences and Writings as concern the said
Lands, together with any other Lands of the said J. W. to be written at the
Costs and Charges of the said R. and B. or either of them, their Heirs or
Assigns. Habend.
To have and to hold all and singular their said Manor of H. Lands, Tenements,
and all other the aforesaid premises, and all and singular their appurtenances,
before in and by these presents bargained and sold, and every part and parcel
thereof, unto the said R. D. and B. his wife, their Heirs and Assigns for ever.
And the said J W. for himself, his Heirs, That he is seized in Fee, and has
power to grant.
Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with the said R.
D. and B. his wife, their Heirs and Assigns, by these presents, in manner and
form following: (that is to say) That he the said J. W. at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, is, and stands lawfully and
sufficiently seized of such a good, perfect, lawful and absolute, and
indefeazible estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple or Fee-tail, and no Reversion
or Remainder thereof in the Kings Majesty, and to his and their own use and
uses, without any manner of condition or limitation of any other use or uses,
to alter, change or determine the same estate, of and in the said Manor,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other the aforesaid premises,
before in and by these presents mentioned or intended to be granted, aliened,
bargained and sold, as he the said J. W. can and may lawfully and sufficiently
grant, convey and assure all and singular the said Manor of H. Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other the aforesaid premises, with all and
singular the appurtenances, unto the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. That the premises
are discharged of Encumbrances.
And also the said J W. for himself, etc. does covenant to and with the said R.
D. and B. his wife, and either of them, their and either of their Heirs and
Assigns by these presents, That all and singular the said Manor of H. Lands,
Tenements, and all other the foresaid premises, with the appurtenances, before
in and by these presents granted, aliened, bargained and sold, and every part
and parcel thereof, at the time of ensealing and delivery of these presents,
are and be, and at all times hereafter shall be, remain and continue clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged; or otherwise upon request sufficiently
saved and kept harmless, of and from all and all manner of former Bargains,
Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Rents, Charges and Arrerages of Rents, Duties,
Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or
done, or to be had, made, etc. by the said J. W. his Heirs or Assigns, or by
any other person or persons whatsoever, by his or their means, acts, titles,
consents and procurements; except our Lease, etc. And also that they the said
R. D. and B. his wife, and either of them, their and either of their Heirs and
Assigns, and every of them, shall and may at all times hereafter, and from time
to time for ever, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents,
peaceably, lawfully and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy all
and singular the said Manor of A. Lands, Tenements, and all other before
bargained premises, with all and singular their appurtenances, before, in and
by these presents mentioned to be granted, aliened, bargained and sold, and
every part and parcel thereof, without any manner of lawful let, suit, trouble,
eviction or disturbance of the said J. W. or his Assigns, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, claiming or lawfully having, or which shall
hereafter have any manner of Estate, Right, Title, Charge or Interest, of, in
or to the said Manor, and all other the premises, or of, in or to any part or
parcel thereof, by, from, or under the said J. W. his Heirs or Assigns (all
such persons as do claim by force of the Lease before excepted only excepted.)
And furthermore, that the said Manor of H. and all other the aforesaid
premises, or any part or parcel thereof, are not holden of his Majesty in
Capite, whereby any License of Alienation shall be needful to be had or sued
forth, for the bargaining, sale, conveying and assuring of the said Manor, and
other the premises, unto the said R. D. and B. their Heirs and Assigns; Nor
that the said R. D. his Heirs or Assigns, shall at any time or times hereafter
be Ward or Wards unto our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, for or in respect of the said Manor of, etc. and all other the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof. And also the said J. W. for himself,
his Heirs, Covenant for further assurance.
Executors and Administrators, does Covenant, etc. That the said J. W. and M.
now his wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said L. and all and every other
person and persons whatsoever, now having, or lawfully claiming, or which shall
hereafter rightfully claim any manner of Estate, Right, Title or Interest, of,
in and to the said Manor, and all other the said premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, by, from or under the said J. W. his Heirs and Assigns, except
such person or persons as shall claim by force of Lease before excepted, shall
and will at all times hereafter, for and during the term of three years next
ensuing the day of the date of these presents, do make, acknowledge, execute
and suffer, or cause to be made, done, acknowledged, executed and suffered all
and every such further lawful act and acts, thing and things, device and
devices, conveyances and assurances in the Law whatsoever, with warranty
against him the said J. W. and his Heirs, for the further and more assurance
and sure-making of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and of all and singular
other the premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel hereof,
to be had and made sure unto the said R. D. and B. their Heirs and Assigns for
ever absolutely, without any manner of Condition, or other Limitation; be it
Fine or Fines, with Proclamation, with Warranty against him the said J. W. his
Heirs and Assigns, recovery with double and single Voucher or Vouchee, Deed or
Deeds enrolled, the Enrolment of this present Feoffment, with warranty against
him the said J. W. his Heirs or Assigns, release with confirmation with the
like warranty, or without warranty, or by any, or as many of the devices, ways
and means aforesaid, as by the said R. D. and B. or either of them, their Heirs
or Assigns, or by their or any of their Council learned in the Law, shall be
reasonably devised, or advised and required, at the only Costs and Charges of
the said R. D. and B. their Heirs and Assigns, so that the said I. nor M. his
wife, be not compelled to travel from his or their Homes, or usual places of
abode, further than the Cities of London and Westminster, If the Buyer be
lawfully evicted within 12 years, the Seller's to pay 51. an Acre.
about the same assurances. And moreover the said J. W. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the
said R. D. and B. and either of them, and to and with the Heirs and Assigns of
either and every of them by these presents, in manner and form following: (that
is to say) That if it shall happen at any time within twelve years next after
the date hereof, the said R. D. and B. and either of them, their or either of
their Heirs or Assigns, to be lawfully evicted of, or from the said Manor, or
any of the Lands, Tenements, and other the aforesaid premises, without any
fraud or covin of the said R. D. and B. or either of them, their Heirs or
Assigns, by reason of any Right, Title, Estate of Interest to be had or made by
R. W. the Grandfather, or I. W. the Father of the said I. or the said I. or by
any other person or persons claiming in, by or under their, or any of their
Estates, Titles or Interests: That then he the said I. his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, or some of them, shall and will within six months next after
such eviction so to be had of the said Manor, or of any other the premiles, or
any part or parcel thereof, upon reasonable request to be made at or in the,
etc. well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said R. D. and B. their
Heirs and Assigns, for every Acre five pound, and so after that rate, and
rate-like, and that without fraud, covin, or further delay. In witness, etc.

An Indenture to lead the use of a Fine.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between F. G. of, etc. of the one part, and R.
VV. of, etc. of the other part: Whereas it is condescended unto, and agreed
between the said F. G. his Heirs, etc. and the said R. VV. his Heirs, etc. that
the said F. G. his Heirs, shall from time to time, during two years, next
ensuing the date of these Indentures, do cause, suffer and make such assurance
of his Manors of M. and S. in the County of D. and the Advowson of the Church
of A. and of all his Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and
Hereditaments whatsoever in M. and D. in the County of D. in such manner and
form as by the said R. VV. his Heirs and Assigns, or his or their Council
learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised or required, at the
Costs and Charges of the said R. VV. Now witnesses this Indenture, That the
said R. VV. has devised, that the said F. G. at the term of Saint Hillary next
ensuing the date above-written, shall levy and acknowledge one Fine, etc. of
the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Advowsons, and all other the premises, to
the said R. VV. and his Heirs, in due form of Law: which Fine so to be had,
levied and executed, touching and concerning the said Manor of M. etc. and all
the Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leasows, Pastures and Hereditaments, with the
appurtenances, to the said Manor of M. etc. belonging, to the said F. G. for
himself and his Heirs, does covenant and grant to and with the said R. VV. by
these presents, shall stand and be to the use of the said F. G. during his
life, without impeachment of waste; and after his Decease, to the use of the
said R. VV. and D. his wife, and of the Heirs of the said R. on the body of the
said D. lawfully begotten; and for default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of
the said R. VV. for ever. And which Fine to be levied and executed, touching
and concerning all the residue of the premises, the said F. G. for him and his
Heirs, does covenant and grant to and with R. VV. by these presents, that the
said Fine shall stand, and be to the use of the said F. G. and I. now his wife,
and the Heirs of the said F. upon the Body of the said I. begotten. And for
default of such Issue, then to the use of the said R. VV. and D. and of the
Heirs of the Body of the said R. and D. between them lawfully begotten; and for
default of such Issue, then to the right Heirs of the said R. VV. for ever. In
witness, etc.

An Indenture of Demise of diverse Lands, etc. in consideration of a sum of
Money, paying a Pepper-corn yearly.
THis Indenture made the third day of May, 1649. etc. between Sir T. B. of D.
in the County of, etc. Knight and Baronet, and M. H. of D. aforesaid,
Gentleman, Servant to the faid Sir T. B. of the one part, and Sir W. T. of C.
in the County of N. Knight, of the other part, Witnesses, That the said Sir T.
B. and M. H. as well for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. of lawful
money of England to them in hand paid, before the ensealing and delivery
hereof, by the said Sir W. T. whereof and wherewith the said Sir T. B. does
acknowledge himself satisfied, contented and paid, and thereof, and of every
part and parcel thereof, does acquir and discharge the said Sir W. T. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, by these presents, as
also for diverse other good Causes and Considerations them hereunto moving; Have
demised, granted, and to farm-letten, and by these presents do demise, grant,
and to farm-let unto the said Sir W. T. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, all those several Closes or parcels of Land, Meadow, Pasture and
Arable, called or known by their several Names following, (That is to say) one
Close or parcel of Ground called D. containing by estimation, etc. Acres, be
the same more or less; and one other Close or parcel of Land called E.
containing by estimation, etc. Acres, be the same more or less; And one Close
or parcel of L. and called C. containing by estimation, etc. Acres, be the same
more or less, etc. All and singular which said Closes and parcels of Lands, are
situate, lying and being within the Fields, Parishes, Precincts and
Territories of H. alias H. in the County of L. and are part and parcel, or
reputed and taken to be part or parcel of the Manor of H. alias H. aforesaid:
And also all and singular Messuages, Tenements, Buildings, Orchards, Gardens,
Commons, Common of Pasture, Waters, Fishings, Woods, Underwoods, Trees, Bushes,
Fences, Free-boards, Ways, Easements, and all other Rights, Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Franchises, Liberties, Profits, Conditions, Emoluments and
Hereditaments whatsoever, growing, arising, being, coming or issuing in, upon
or out of the premises, and every part and parcel thereof, or to the same, or
any part thereof belonging or appertaining. To have and to hold all and
singular the said Closes and parcels of Land, and all and singular the
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their
Rights, Members and Appurtenances, unto the said Sir W. T. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the first day of May last past, before the
date hereof, unto the full end and term of One thousand years from thence next
immediately ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended: Yielding and paying
therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said Sir T. B. his Heirs or
Assigns, one Pepper-corn at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel only, if
the same be lawfully demanded. And the said Sir T. B. and M. H. for them, their
Heirs and Assigns, do jointly and severally covenant, grant and agree to and
with the said Sir W. T. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them by these presents, That the said Sir W. T. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, shall and may lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy,
possess and enjoy all and singular the premises before by these presents
demised, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their
rights, members and appurtenances, without the lawful let, suit, trouble,
eviction, expulsion, interruption or demand of, or by the said Sir T. B. and M.
H. or the Heirs or Assigns of either of them, or of, or by any other person or
persons, lawfully claiming from, by or under them, or any of them, or their, or
any of their uses; or by, from or under their, or any of their title, estate,
means or procurement; as also acquitted and discharged, or within convenient
time after reasonable request thereof to be made, well and sufficiently saved,
and kept harmless of and from all, and all manner of former or other Bargains,
Sales, Estates, former Leases, Titles, Dowers, Rights, Titles of Dowers,
Joyntures, Uses, Entails, Wills, Rent-Charges, Rent-Services, Arrerages of
Rents, Statutes, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, Titles, Troubles,
Charges and Demands whatsoever, had, made, done, committed, or willingly and
wittingly suffered by the said Sir T. B. and M. H. their Heirs or Assigns, or
any of them, or of, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully
claiming by, from or under them, or any of them, or to their, or any of their
uses, or by their, or any of their titles, estates, means or procurement. In
witness whereof, the Parties first abovenamed to these present Indentures,
have interchangeably set their hands and seals the day and year first above
written.

An Indenture of re-demise of the former demised premises to the same Parties,
reserving the Rent of 250 l. with a Proviso, that the same shall cease upon the
payment of the sum of Money in the former Demise specified.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of, etc. between Sir VV. T. of G. in the
County of N. Knight, of the one part, and Sir T. B. of D. in the County of N.
Knight and Baronet, and M. H. of D. aforesaid, in the said County of N.
Gentleman, Servant of the said Sir T. B. of the other part; Witnesses, That
the said Sir VV. T. as well for and in consideration of the yearly Rent
hereunder reserved, well and truly to be contented and paid in manner and form
hereunder expressed; As also for diverse other good Confiderations him at this
present thereunto especially moving, Has demised, granted, and to farm-letten,
and by these presents does demise, grant, and to farm-let unto the said Sir T.
B. and M. H. and the Executors, Administrators and Assigns, of the said Sir T.
B. all those several Closes, or parcels of Lands, Meadows, Pastures and Arable,
called or known by the several Names following (That is to say) one Close or
parcel of Ground called D. containing by estimation, etc. Acres, be the same
more or less (and so go on, as in the demise.) All and singular which said
Closes and parcels of Lands, are situate, lying and being, within the Fields,
Patishes, Precincts and Territories of H. alias H. in the County of L. and are
part and parcel, or reputed and taken to be part and parcel of the Manor of H.
alias H. aforesaid; And also all and singular Messuages, Tenements, Buildings,
Orchards, Gardens, Commons, Common of Pasture, Waters, Fishings, VVoods,
Under-woods, Trees, Bushes, Fences, Free-boards, VVayes, Easements, and all
other Rights, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Franchizes, Liberties, Profits,
Commodities, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, growing, being, arising,
coming or issuing, in, upon, or out of the premises, and every part and parcel
thereof, or to the same, or any part thereof belonging, To have and to hold all
and singular the said Closes and parcels of Land, and all and singular the
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their
Rights, Members and Appurtenances, unto the said Sir T. B. and M. H. and the
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, of the said Sir T. B. from the first of
May last past, before the date hereof, unto the full end and term of Nine
hundred ninety and nine years, from thence next and immediately ensuing, and
fully to be complete and ended. Yielding and paying therefore yearly, during
the said term, unto the said Sir VV. T. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, at or in the South-porch of the Parish Church of D. aforesaid, the sum
of Two hundred and fifty pounds of current English Money, at two usual Feasts
or Terms of the year; that is to say, at the Feast of Philip and Jacob and
All Saints, by even and equal portions. And if it shall happen the said yearly
Rent of, etc. or any part or parcel thereof, to be behind and unpaid, after
either of the aforesaid Feast-dayes of payment, in which the same ought to be
paid, by the space of fifteen days, that then, and from thenceforth, it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said VV. T. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them, in all and singular the said Closes and parcels of
Land, and all and singular the premises, and every part and parcel thereof,
with their and every of their appurtenances, wholly to re-enter, re-possess,
re-enjoy, have again and detain, as in his and their former Estate, this
Indenture, or any, thing therein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. Provided always, and it is covenanted, Proviso.
condescended unto, concluded and agreed, by and betwixt all the Parties in
these presents, That if the said Sir T. B. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, upon half a years warning thereof, by writing under his or their Hands
beforehand to be given by the said Sir T. B. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, unto the said Sir VV. T. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
shall and will, at or on the first day of May, or the Feast of All Saints,
during the said term in and hereby demised, at or in the place aforesaid, pay,
or cause to be paid unto the said Sir VV. T. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, at one whole and entire payment, the sum of Five hundred pounds of
current English Money, over and besides the said Rent above reserved, at such
day or days as before in these presents are limited and appointed, to and for
the payment of the said Rent before reserved: that then from and after such
payment or payments of every of the said sum or sums of five hundred pounds, as
aforesaid, endorsed upon both parts of these Indentures, and subscribed by the
said Sir VV. T. his executors, administrators or assigns, for every five
hundred pounds, that shall be paid as aforesaid, the full and entire sum of
fifty pounds of the said two hundred and fisty pounds Rent, reserved, as
aforesaid, shall cease and be determined; the said reservation, or any thing in
these Indentures contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.
And the said Sir W. T. for him, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does
covenant, grant and agree, to and with the said Sir T. B. and M. H. their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, and to and with every of them, by these
presents, that he the said Sir W. T. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
shall and will within six months next after the payment of the sum of two
thousand five hundred pounds, by such payment or payments of five hundred
pounds, as aforesaid, deliver, or cause to be delivered up unto the said Sir
T.B. and the said M. H. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or one of
them, one Indenture of Demise made from the said Sir T. B. and M. H. unto the
said Sir W. T. of all and singular the premises herein before demised, as
aforesaid, bearing date the third day of May, in the year of, etc. In witness
whereof, the Parties above mentioned, etc.

A Lease of a House in London.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between R. R. Citizen, and, etc. on the one
part, and N. D. Citizen, and, etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That the said
R. R. for diverse good Causes and valuable Considerations him hereunto
especially moving, has demised, granted, betaken and to farm-letten, and by
these presents does demise, grant, betake and to farm-let unto the said N. D.
all that the Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, lying and being in
or near Fleet Street in the Parish of St. Dunstans in the West, London, between
the Message or Tenement there called the F. now in the Occupation of P. G.
Merchant-Taylor, or his Assignees, on the East Side, and the Message or
Tenement now in the Tenure or Occupation of one A. M. Widow, on the West Side,
and abutting upon the Garden adjoining to the Temple-Church, toward the South;
and upon the high Street, toward the North, together with all and singular
Shops, Cellars, Sollers, Chambers, Rooms, Ways, Entries, Yards, Backsides,
Houses, Buildings, Gutters, Watercourse, Easements, Profits, Commodities and
Appurtenances whatsoever to the said Message or Tenement belonging, or in any
wise appertaining; and also all manner of Wainscot, Glass-windows, Doors and
Locks, in and upon the same Message or Tenement, and other the premises before
mentioned, to be demised belonging, which said Message, and all and singular
other the demised premises, are now in the Tenure or Occupation of the said N.
D. To have and to hold the said Message, Tenement, Shops, Cellars, Sollers,
etc. and all other the aforesaid premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances, before, in and by these presents demised, and every part and
parcel thereof unto the said N. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
from the Feast Day of, etc. unto the full end and term of, etc. years, from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended: Yielding and paying
therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said R. R. his Heirs and
Assigns, the sum of, etc. at four of the most usual Feasts or Terms of payment
in the year (that is to say) at the Feast of, etc. by even and equal portions;
And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. to be behind or unpaid, in
part or in all, by the space of, etc. next over or after any of the said Feasts
or Days of payment, in which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, being
lawfully demanded, that then and from thenceforth, and at all times afterward
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. R. his Heirs and Assigns, and
every of them, into the said Message or Tenement, and all other the aforesaid
premises, with all and singular their appurtenances before by these presents
demised, or mentioned to be demised, and into every part and parcel thereof
wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain, enjoy and re-possess,
as in his and their first and former Estate or Estates; and the said N. D. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all other the Occupiers and
Possessors thereof, thereout and from thence utterly to expel, put out and
amove, any thing herein before specified to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. A Covenant to lay out the Jum of, etc. on repair and new
building the premises within three years.
And the said N. D. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
for every of them, does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said R. R.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them, by
these presents, in manner and form following, (viz.) after the date. That he
the said N. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, at
his or their own proper Costs and Charges, shall and will within the time and
space of three years next ensuing the date of these presents, expend and bestow
in and about the new building, repairing or bettering in the premises, hereby
demised, the value or sum of, etc. of lawful Money of England, at the least;
And also shall and will at his and their like cost and charges, well and
sufficiently repair, uphold, sustain and keep, maintain and amend the said
Message or Tenement, and new building to be erected, and all and singular
other the premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof,
in, by and with all and all manner of needful and necessary reparation
whatsoever, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, when and as often as
need and occasion shall require, during the said term hereby granted; And also
all the Pavements, Privies, Sedges and Widdraughts to the said Message or
Tenement belonging, shall cause to be paid, purged, scowred, emptied and made
clean, as often, and when as need shall be and require, during the said term
of, etc. by these presents granted: and the same premises so well and
sufficiently repaired, supported, maintained, purged, paved, scowred, emptied,
made clean and amended, together with the Locks, Keys, Bolts, Staples, Latches,
Hooks, Hinges, Windows, Doors, and Glass of the same premises, so well and
sufficiently made, glazed and amended, in the end of the said term of, etc. or
other sooner expiration or determination of this present Lease, shall leave and
yield up unto the said R. R. his Heirs and Assigns. And also that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said R. R. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and every of them, four times, or oftener in the year, yearly
during the said term, to enter and come into, and upon the said Message or
Tenements, and all other the premises, with the appurtenances, and into every
part and parcel thereof, there to view, search and see what defaults, for want
of reparations, shall be found defective, and necessary to be done, in and
about the demised premises, or any part thereof, and of all such defaults for
want of reparation then and there found to give or leave notice, admonition or
warning in writing: to and for the said N. D. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, for the repairing and amending thereof. And further, that the said N.
D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, shall and will
within one month next ensuing every such admonition or warning, left or given,
as aforesaid, well and sufficiently repair and amend the same, and shall also
discharge and pay all Church-duties, Scavengers-wages, Watchings, Wardings, and
all other Taxes, Impositions, Duties and Charges which shall or may at any time
or times hereafter, during the said term, be charged or imposed upon him the
said N. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for or by reason of the
premises hereby demised, or any part thereof. And lastly, the said R. R. for
himself, his Executors, etc. that he the said N. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, for, by, and under the payment
of the yearly Rent aforesaid, above, in and by these presents reserved, and
under the Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements, in these presents
contained, shall and may, for and during all the said term of, etc. by these
presents granted, lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy,
possess and enjoy the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the
premises, with the appurtenances, by these presents demised, or mentioned to be
demised, and every part and parcel thereof, without any manner of lawful let,
suit, trouble, disturbance or eviction of the said R. R. his Heirs or Assigns,
or of any other person or persons whatsoever, by or through his means, assent,
consent, right, title or procurement. In witness whereof, etc.

A Defeizance upon a Bond sued to a Judgment.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between W. R. of, etc. on the one part, and J.
P. and G. A. of, etc. on the other part; Witnesses, That whereas the said J.
and G. together with one E. A. of, etc. by one Obligation bearing date, etc.
became jointly and severally bounden unto the said W. R. in the sum of, etc.
with condition thereupon made for the payment of, etc. as by the same
Obligation and Condition thereof at large appears, which said sum of, etc. or
any part thereof, or any thing in lieu of the same was not paid unto the said
W. R. in the said Obligation named, nor at any time before or sithence: By
means whereof the said Obligation became forfeited; and whereas the said W. R.
has brought several Actions of Debt in the Kings Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster upon the said Obligation against the said J. P. and
G. A. upon which said Actions, several Judgments are had and obtained in the
said Court: yet nevertheless the said W. R. is contented and pleased, and does
covenant, that neither he the said W. R. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, shall at any time before, Not to take out execution
until, etc.
etc. take out any Execution or Executions upon the said Judgments, or either
of them. And further the said W. R. does, etc. that if the said J. P. and A. G.
or either of them, etc. do pay, etc. That then he the said W. R. his Executors
or Administrators, shall upon request made, To acknowledge satisfaction on
pa^ment of the, etc.
and at the Charges of the said J. P. and G. A. etc. acknowledge satisfaction
upon Record of and for the said several Judgments: And shall also deliver unto
them the said, etc. the said Obligation to be cancelled: And the said J. P. and
G. A. to be thereof, and of the said several Judgments discharged. In witness,
etc.

An Indenture of Partition, where one had a greater share than the other, for
which a sum was paid, etc.
THis Indenture made, etc. between J. H. etc. on the one part, and J. M. etc.
on the other part, Witnesses, That the said J. H. and J. M. are and do now
stand seized in their Demeasn, as of Fee in Common and undivided of and in one
Message or Tenement, and one Yard-land thereunto belonging, now or late in the
Tenure of, etc. situate, etc. It is (now to the end a perpetual portion and
division shall be had and made between the said Parties, of and in the said,
etc. and other the premises aforesaid) covenanted, concluded and agreed by and
between the said Parties to these presents in manner and form following. And
first, the said J. H. for himself, etc. that he the said J. M. his Heirs and
Assigns shall from henceforth have, hold, and peaceably enjoy in severalty to
him and to his Heirs for ever, to his and their own proper use and behoof, the
one moiety or half-part of the said Message or Tenement, and one Yard-land
with the appurtenances, that is to say, etc. And that he the said J. H. nor his
Heirs, shall from henceforth claim or demand any Right, Title, Use or
Possession in or to the same, or any part thereof, but that the said J. H. and
his Heirs and Assigns, shall at all time and times hereafter, from all Actions,
Rights, Title and Demand thereof, or thereunto be utterly excluded, and for
ever debarred by these presents. And the said J. M. for himself, etc. that he
the said J. H. his Heirs and Assigns, shall from thenceforth have, hold, and
peaceably enjoy in severalty to him the said J. H. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, to his and their own proper use and behoof, the other moiety or half-part
of the said Message, etc. and that he the said J. M. nor his Heirs, shall not
from henceforth claim, etc. (ut supra) and in consideration of the said
portions, and forasmuch as the part and portion by these presents, allotted and
assigned to the said J. H. and his Heirs, were at the ensealing hereof, of more
and greater value than the said part or portion before allotted and assigned to
the said J. M. and his Heirs, he the said J. H. has at the ensealing and
delivery of these presents well and truly paid to the said J. M. the sum of,
etc. the receipt whereof the said J M. does hereby acknowledge, and thereof and
of every part thereof does acquit, exonerate, and for ever discharge the said
J. H. etc. by these presents. In witness whereof, etc.

A Grant of Rent reserved by Lease.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between W. B. of, etc. and A. P. of, etc.
Witnesses, That whereas the said W. B. by his Indenture of Lease bearing date
the, etc. (reciting the Lease) as in and by the same recited Indenture of
Lease, etc. Now this Inderture further witnesses, That the said W. B. for and
in consideration of a certain competent sum of, etc. Has demised, granted,
bargained, and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, grant, and to
farm-let unto the said A. B. the reversion and r^mainder of the said Shop,
Warehouse, Chambers, and other the premises, by the said Indenture of Lease
demised, Together also with the said yearly Rent of, etc. thereby reserved, and
the counter-part of the same Indenture of Lease, under the Hand and Seal of the
said, etc. To have, hold, possess and enjoy the said Reversion and Rent of,
etc. and every part thereof, unto the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, from the day of the date of these presents forwards, for and
during all the residue of the aforesaid term of, etc. yet to come and
unexpired; Yielding and paying therefore yearly during the said term, unto the
said W. B. his Executors or Assigns, at the Feasts of, etc. only one
Pepper-corn, if the same shall be lawfully demanded. And the said W. B. for
himself, etc. that he the said W. B. at the time of the ensealing and delivery
of these presents, is the true, perfect, and lawful Owner and Possessor of the
said demised reversion and rent: And is at the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, lawfully and absolutely possessed thereof. And that he the said W. B.
has sull Power, good Right, true Title, and lawful Authority, to demise and
grant the said reversion and rent of, etc. unto the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, for and during all the rest and residue of the said
term of, etc. in manner and form aforesaid, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents. And further, that the said W. B. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them from time to time, and
at all times hereafter, during the said term, shall and will clearly exonerate,
acquit, discharge, save and keep harmless as well the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, as the said demised Reversion and Rent, of and from
all former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Forfeitures,
Titles, Claims, Demands and Encumbrances whatsoever. And moreover, the said W.
B. for himself, etc. That the said yearly Rent of, etc. shall continue, remain,
and be from henceforth during the rest and residue of the said term yet to come
and unexpired, before mentioned, due and payable unto the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, according to the said Indenture of
Lease, and the tenor, effect, and true meaning of these presents. In witness,
etc.

Note, that the Tenant must Attorn. or nothing passes, etc.

An Annuity or yearly Rentcharge.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A. B of, etc. Gentleman, on the one part,
and C. D. of, etc. on the other part; Witnesses, That the said A. B. for and
in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him in hand paid, before the ensealing
and delivery hereof by the said C. D. the Receipt whereof he the said A. B.
does acknowledge, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof does
acquit, exonerate, and for ever discharge the said C. D. his Executors, etc. by
these presents has given, granted and confirmed, and by these presents does
give, grant and confirm unto the said C. D. one annuity or yearly rentcharge
of, etc. to be had, taken, perceived and received, and to be issuing and going
out, of, and in all and singular the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments whatsoever of the said A. B. as well in, etc. as elsewhere within
the Realm of England, to be paid at four Feasts or Terms in the year, that is
to say, at the, etc. by even and equal portions; the first payment thereof to
be made and begin on the, etc. To have, hold, receive, perceive, take and enjoy
the said Annuity or yearly Rentcharge of, etc. unto the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, to be paid at the four Feasts aforesaid,
in form before declared, from the day of the date of these presents, unto the
full end and term of, etc. And if it shall happen the said Annuity or yearly
Rent of, etc. to be behind and unpaid in part or in all after any of the said
Feast days or Terms of payment thereof as aforesaid, in which it is appointed
to be paid, That then and so often as the same, or any part thereof, shall so
be behind and unpaid, the said A. B. grants and agrees for himself, his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to and with, etc. that it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every or any of them, into all and singular the said Messuages,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, of the said A. B. as well in, etc.
aforesaid, as elsewhere within the Realm of England, to enter and distrain,
both for the Annuity aforesaid and the Arrerages thereof (if any be) and the
Distress and Distresses there from time to time found and taken, to bear, lead,
drive, take and carry away, and the same to withold, detain, keep and
impound, until the same Annuity or yearly Rentcharge of, etc. and the
arrerages thereof (if any such shall be) the said C. D. his, etc. be fully
satisfied, contented and paid. And the said A. B. has put the aforesaid C. D.
in full possession of the said Annuity or yearly Rentcharge of, etc. in form
as aforesaid (to be had, received and taken) by the delivery and payment of the
sum of, etc. which the said A. B. has at the ensealing and delivery of these
presents given and delivered unto the said C. D. in name of possession of the
said Annuity; and the said A. B. for himself, etc. that the said A. B. his,
etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times during the said term
of, etc. well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said C. L. his, etc. or
some of them, the said annuity or yearly rent of, etc. in manner and form
aforesaid, and according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. In
witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture of Apprentiship.
THis Indenture witnesses, That E. B. Son of J. B. late of, etc. of his free
and voluntary will has put himself Apprentice to R. W. C. and, etc. the
Science or Trade which he now uses to be taught, and with him after the manner
of an Apprentice to dwell and serve from the Feast of, etc. unto the full end
and term of, etc. from thence next ensuing, and, etc. By all which term of,
etc. the said Apprentice, the said E. B. well and truly shall serve, his
Secrets shall keep close, his Commandments lawful and honest every where, he
shall gladly do; hurt to his said Master he shall not do, or suffer to be done,
to the value of twelve pence or more by the year, but shall let if he may, or
else immediately admonist his said Master thereof; the Goods of his said Master
he shall no inordinately waste; nor them to any body lend. At Dice, or at any
other unlawful Game he shall not play, whereby his Master may incur any hurt;
Fornication in the house of his said Master, or elsewhere, he shall not commit;
Matrimony he shall not Contract: Taverns he shall not frequent, with his own
proper Goods, or any others, during the said term, without the special license
of his Master, he shall not Merchandise from the Service of his said Master day
nor night, he shall not absent or prolong himself, but in all things as a good
and saithful Apprentice, shall bear and behave himself toward his said Master
and Mistress, and all his, during the term aforesaid. And the said R. B. to his
said Apprentice, the Science or Art which he now uses, shall teach and inform,
or cause to be taught and informed the best way that he may or can: and also
shall find to his said Apprentice Apparel, Meat, Drink and Bedding, and all
other Necessaries meet and convenient for an Apprentice, for and during the
term aforesaid. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of a Manor.
THis Indenture made, etc. between J. H. of etc. and R. B. of; etc. Esquires,
on the one part, and W. of, etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas T.
H. of, etc. Father of the said I H. by his Writing or Deed indented, bearing
date the, etc. in the Sixteenth year of, etc. for the considerations therein
expressed, did demise, grant, and to farm-let unto the said I. H. his said Son,
etc. all those Three-yard-lands, with the appurtenances in W. aforesaid, being,
or being accounted to be the ancient Demeasn Lands of the Manor of W.
heretofore purchased by the said T. H. of R. S Esquire and also all that his yard
or half of Land being in W. aforesaid, then lately purchased of one H. H. with
all Hades, Leyes-Banks, Let-grass, Commons, Profits, Ways, Easements,
Commodities and Appurtenances, etc. thereunto belonging: and all that
Dove-house, Close and new Orchards in W. aforesaid, to the said, etc. belonging
or appertaining, or therewith used, occupied or enjoyed, as in, etc. except,
etc. To have and to hold the said Three-yard-lands, Close, Orchard, and all
other the premises (except before excepted) unto the said I. H. his Executors
and Assigns, for and during and unto the full end and term, etc. from
thenceforth next and immediately ensuing, if the said T. H. and his Assigns so
long live, for and under the, etc. payable, as by the said Deed or Writing
indented, relation being thereunto had, more at large it will and may appear.
And whereas further, the said T. H. by one other Writing or Deed indented,
bearing date, etc. for and in consideration of the natural love and fatherly
affection that he the said T. H. did bear to the said J. H. and to the Children
of the said J. H. being his Grandchildren, and for the settling of the Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments (in the said Deed indented expressed) in his
Name and Blood, did, in and by the said last mentioned Deed indented, covenant
and grant for himself and his Heirs, to and with the said J. H. and his Heirs,
that the said T. H. and his Heirs, should and would immediately from
thenceforth stand and be seized of and in all that the Manor or reputed Manor
of W. in the County of O. and of and in all that the Capital Message of W. in
the County of O. wherein the said T. H. then dwelt; with all and singular their
and every of their Rights, Rents, Quit-rents, Members and Appurtenances
whatsoever; And of and in all those Three-yard-lands, called or known by the
name of the Ancient-Demeasn-Lands of the said Manor, and of and in all that
yard and half of Land lying in W. aforesaid, which the said T. A. had lately
purchased, as aforesaid, is expressed: And of and in all and singular
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said T.H. in W. aforesaid,
(the advowson of the C. of W. aforesaid excepted) to the use and behoof of the
said T. H. for and during his natural life, without impeachment of or for any
manner of waste: and after his decease to the use and behoof of the said J. H.
and his heirs for ever, as by the said last mentioned Indenture acknowledged
and enrolled in his Majesty's High and Honorable Court of Chancery more at
large it will and may appear. By force and virtue of which said recited
Indenture of Lease, he the said J. H. is in and upon the said premises entered,
and was and is by force of the said recited Indenture, and by force of the
Statute made the, etc. in the, etc. for the transferring of uses into
possession, as well of the said term of threescore years, as of the said
remainder expectant, after the death of the said T. H. possessed and seized.
And he the said J. H. being so of the said premises possessed and seized, did
afterward by his Indenture bearing date, etc. and enrolled in the high Court
of Chancery, for the consideration therein expressed, give, grant, bargain,
sell, assign, set over and confirm unto the said R. B. his Executors, etc. all
and singular the before mentioned premises, with the appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, as in and by the said last mentioned Indenture,
whereunto relation being had, more fully and at larg^ it does and may appear.
Which said Bargain and Sale was and is upon condition, that if the said J H.
etc. should or did pay, etc. on the, etc. at or in the, etc. unto the said R.
B. his, etc. That then the said Indenture of Bargain and Sale to be void, as in
and by one Indenture made between the said J. H. on the one part, and the said
R. B. on the other part, bearing date, etc. to which reference being had, more
at large it does and may appear. Now this Indenture further witnesses, That
the said J. H. and R. B. for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to them
by the said W. P. before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, well and
truly in hand paid, whereof and wherewith the said J. H. and R. B. do
acknowledge themselves to be fully satisfied, contented and paid, and thereof,
and of every part and parcel thereof, etc. have granted, bargained, sold,
assigned, set over and confirmed, and by these presents do fully, clearly and
absolutely grant, bargain, sell, assign, set over and confirm unto the said W.
P. his, etc. not only the said recited Indenture of Lease, and all their
estate, right, title, interest and term of years therein yet to come and
unexpired; but also all the said Manor of W. and Capital Messnage in the said
County of O. with the appurtenances; Together with the said Three-yard Land,
called by the name of the ancient Demeasn Lands of the said Manor: And also
all that yard and half of Land in W. aforesaid, which the said T. H. purchased
of the said H.H. as aforesaid; And also all and singular Outhouses, Barns,
Stables, Dove-houses, Yards, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Meadows, Pastures,
Feedings, Commons, Common of Pasture, Woods, Under-woods, Water, Watercourse,
Fishings, Ways, Easements, Profits, Commodities and Hereditaments whatsoever,
to the said Manor of W. and other the premises aforesaid, or to any part or
parcel thereof belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or therewithal now
used, occupied or enjoyed, as part, parcel or member thereof, and all the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said J. H. belonging,
lying and being in W. aforesaid, and the said remainder expectant upon the
death of the said T. H. and all and every other Reversion and Reversions,
Remainder and Remainders of the said bargained premises, and of every part and
parcel thereof, and the Rent and Rents, and yearly Profits whatsoever, reserved
upon whatsoever, Demise, Lease, Estate or Grant, Demises, Leases, Estates or
Grants heretofore made of the before bargained premises, or any part or parcel
thereof; Together with all Evidences, Charters, Escripts, Monuments and
Writings to^ching or concerning the premises, which he the said J. H. has or
may come by, without Suit in Law, To have and to hold the said Manor of W.
Lands, Tenements, and all and singular other the premises abovementioned to be
hereby bargained and sold, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof, and all the estate, right, title, interest, term and terms of years,
Reversion, Remainder, Claim and Demand whatsoever, of the said J. H. and R. B.
and of either of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, in and to
the same, unto the said W. P. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
to the sole and proper use and behoof of the said W. P. his Heirs, etc. for
ever. And the said J. H. and R. B. for themselves severally and respectively,
and for their several and respective Heirs, etc. all and singular the before
bargained premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof,
unto the said W. P. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to the
use and behoof aforesaid, shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these
presents. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Defeizance for the making void of all former Statutes, payment
of a sum of, etc. and performance of Covenants, etc.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between A. B. of, etc. on the one part, and E.
A. of, etc. on the other part; witnesses, That whereas the said E. A. in and
by one Recognizance or writing Obligatory, of the nature of a Statute-Staple,
lately made and provided for the recovery of Debts, bearing date, etc. taken,
sealed, acknowledged and entered into before Sir T. R. Lord Chief Justice of
England, is and stands bounden unto the said A. B. in the sum of, etc.
payable, as in and by the said Recognizance or Writing Obligatory, of the force
of a Statute-Staple, more fully and at large it does and may appear. It is now
nevertheless covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between the said
Parties to these presents, and the true intent and meaning of these presents,
and of the Parties hereunto is, and the said A. B. is contented and pleased,
That if the said E. A. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, do or shall, at or
before the, etc. discharge and clearly make void upon Record, as well all and
every Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple, as also all Recognizances
heretofore acknowledged and entered into by the said E. A. either by himself
alone, or jointly with any other person or persons (the Statute above recited
only excepted.) And thereof bring, deliver and leave Certificates under the
hands of the Clerks of the several Offices, or their Deputies in that behalf,
at or in the, etc. to and for the said A. B. his Executors or Assigns, at or
before the, etc. day of, etc. next ensuing; And also if the said E. A. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid, unto the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or to some
or one of them, the full sum of, at or in, etc. in manner and form following
(that is to say) the sum of, etc. on the, etc. and the sum of, etc. on the,
etc. in full satisfaction and payment of the sum of, etc. And also if the said
E. A. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, do and shall well and truly observe,
perform, fulfill, accomplish and keep all and singular the Covenants, Grants,
Articles and Agreements, which on his and their parts and behalfs are, or ought
to be observed, performed, fulfilled, accomplished and kept, comprised and
specified in one pair of Indentures, bearing date, etc. made between the said
E. A. of the one part, and the said A. B. on the other part, according to the
true intent and meaning of the said Indentures: that then the said Recognizance
or Writing Obligatory above recited or mentioned, shall be utterly void and of
none effect, otherwise the same shall stand and abide in full force, etc.

A Release of Lands upon performance of Articles.
TO all Christian people, etc. I E. J. of, etc. send greeting in our Lord God
everlasting. Know ye, That I the said E. J. as well in consideration of the
full performance of certain covenants and agreements mentioned and expressed in
one pair of Indentures bearing date, etc. last past, etc. made between me the
said E. J. on the one part, and Sir H. W. etc. as also for diverse other good
Causes and Considerations, etc. have remised, released, and for ever
quit-claimed, and by these presents do for me, my Heirs and Assigns, and every
of us, freely, clearly and absolutely remise, release, and for ever quit-claim
unto the said Sir H. W. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in his and their full
and peaceable possession, seizin and being all the Estate, Right, Title,
Interest, Possession, Reversion, Claim and Demand whatsoever which I the E. I.
now have, may, might or ought to have, or which I or my Heirs at any time
hereafter shall or may have, might or ought to have, or claim of, in or to all
those the Rectories of B. etc. and also of, in and to all and singular
Messuages, Mills, Lands, Tenements, etc. to the said, etc. belonging or
appertaining. To have and to hold the said Rectories, etc. unto the said Sir H.
W. his Heirs and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and behoof for ever,
so as neither I the said E. I. nor my heirs, shall or may at any time hereafter
ask, claim, challenge or demand any right, title, interest, claim or demand
whatsoever, of, in, or to the premises before mentioned, or of, in or to any
part or parcel thereof, but thereof and therefrom shall be utterly 'debarred,
and for ever secluded by these presents. And I the said E. I. and my heirs, the
said Rectories, and all and singular other the premises above mentioned, and
with their appurtenances, unto the said Sir H. W. his Heirs and Assigns, to the
uses and behoofs aforesaid, against me the said E. I. and my heirs, and against
my Father I. I. and W. E. my Uncle, their and either of their Heirs and
Assigns, or any other person or persons whatsoever claiming by, from or under
me, them or any of them, shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these
presents. In witness, etc.

A Conveyance in Fee-simple of a House and Land, etc.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between G. C. of, etc. on the one part, and H.
H. of, etc. and S. his wife, on the other part, Witnesses, That the said G. C.
for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him at and before the ensealing
and delivery of these presents well and truly in hand paid by the said H. H.
and S. his wife, where of and wherewith he the said G. C. does acknowledge
himself, etc. has granted, aliened, bargained, sold and confirmed, and by
these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely grant, alien, bargain, sell
and confirm unto the said H. H. and S. his wife, all that Message or Tenement,
situate or being in T. in the County of S. now in the Tenure or Occupation of
the said G. C. or of his Assignee or Assignees, and three acres of Land, or
thereabouts, lying on the Backside of the said house, be it more or less, and
all Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Buildings, and other hereditaments to
the same belonging or appertaining, or with the said House or Tenement commonly
used, occupied or enjoyed, or which are accepted, reputed or taken to be part,
parcel or member of the same, and now in the Tenure or Occupation of him the
aforesaid G. C. his Assignee or Assignees, with all Commons, and Common of
Pasture whatsoever to the same belonging; and also of those two Cottages or
Tenements in T. aforesaid, standing together, adjoining to the said Message or
Tenement, and one parcel of Ground adjoining to the said Cottages, which said
Cottages and parcel of Ground last mentioned, do contain by estimation, on the
side toward the Kings High Street, Twenty yards of Ground, or thereabours, and
on that side toward the Garden, now or late of the said G. C. thirteen yards
of Ground, or thereabouts, and now are in the several Tenures and Occupation of
M. J. and F. L. and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders,
Rents and yearly Profits whatsoever, of all and singular the said premises, to
every part and parcel thereof, together with all and singular Deeds, Evidences
and Writings touching or concerning only the premises, or any part thereof; To
have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and the said three Acres of
Land, and the said two Cottages or Tenements, and the said parcel of Land
adjoining to the said Cottages, and other the premises, with their
appurtenances, before by these presents bargained and sold, or mentioned or
intended to be thereby granted, aliened, bargained, sold and confirmed, and
every part and parcel thereof, unto the said H. H. and S. his wife, and to the
Heirs and Assigns of the said H. H. to the only proper use and behoof of the
said H. H. and S. his wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said H. H. for
ever, and the said G. C. for himself, etc. that he the said H. H. for and
notwithstanding any act done by him the said G. C. to the contrary, at the time
of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is and stands lawfully and
rightfully seized in his Demeasn as of Fee-simple, in his own Right, and to his
own right Use, without any condition, limitation, or other use or or trust, to
alter, change or determine the same Estate, of and in the said Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Cottages and Premises before mentioned, to be hereby granted,
bargained and sold, and of and in every part and parcel thereof, and that the
said G. C. for and notwithstanding any act done by him to the contrary, now
has, and at the time of the first Estate to be had and executed to the said H.
H. and S. according to the intent and true meaning of these presents, shall
have full Power, just Right, and lawful Authority to grant, bargain and sell
the same, and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, unto the
said H. H. and S. and the Heirs and Assigns of the said H. H. in manner and
form as is before in these presents expressed, and that the same Messuages or
Tenements, Lands, Cottages and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof,
with the appurtenances, shall from henceforth for ever remain and continue unto
the said H. H. and S. his wife, and to the Heirs and Assigns of the said H. H.
freely and clearly acquit^ed, exonerated and discharged of and from all and all
manner of former Bargains, Sales, Gif^^ Grants, Dowers, Joyntures, Leases,
Rents, Charges, Rent-seck, Arterages of Rents, Annuities, Uses, Entails,
Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple, Judgments, Forfeitures, Executions,
Intrusions and Encumbrances whatsoever, and of and from all other Charges,
Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, or
wittingly or willingly suffered or done by the said G. C. or by any other
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, by, from, or under him the
said G. C. or by his means, assent, privity or procurement (the Rent and
Services from henceforth to grow due to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or
Fees of the premises, for and in respect of his or their Seigniory or
Seigniories only excepted and foreprized.) And further, that he the said G. C.
and his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will at all time and times hereafter
within the space of five years next ensuing the date of these presents, upon
the reasonable request, and at the Costs and Charges in the Law of the said H.
H. and S. his wife, or of the Heirs and Assigns of the said H. H. make, suffer,
do, knowledge and execute, or cause to be made, done, knowledged, suffered and
executed, all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing
and things, device and devices, conveyances and assurances in the Law
whatsoever, for the further, more perfect, and better assuring and sure-making
of the premises before mentioned, to be hereby bargained and sold, and of every
part and parcel thereof, unto the said H. H. and S. his wife, and to the Heirs
and Assigns of the said H. H. for ever. Be it by Fine or Fines, Feoffment or
Feoffments, Recovery or Recoveries, with single or double Voucher or Vouchers,
Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, the entolment of these presents,
release, confirmation with warranty of the said G. C. and his Heirs, only
against him the said G. C. and his Heirs, or otherwise without warranty, or by
all, every or any of the said ways or means, or by any other ways or means,
which by the said H. H. etc. or his or their Council learned in the Law shall
be reasonably devised, advised or required, so as the same do not contain or
extend unto any further warranty, than against him the said G. C. his Executors
or Assigns, or against any further act or acts, than as aforesaid; and so as
neither he nor they that make such further assurance, be compelled or
compellable to travel further than the Cities of London and Westminster, for
the doing, making or executing of such further assurances and conveyances, as
aforesaid. And lastly, it is agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents, That all and every the said assurances and conveyances so as
aforesaid, hereafter to be had of the premises, shall be and shall be esteemed
and taken to be to the only use of them the said H. H. and S. his wife, and of
the Heirs and Assigns of the said H. H. for ever, and to no other use, intent
and purpose whatsoever; any thing in these presents contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof, etc.

A Jointure to the Wife made before Marriage.
THis Indenture made, etc. between I. C. the younger of, etc. on the first
part, and I. C. the elder, etc. on the second part, and R. W. of, etc. on the
third part, Witnesses, That the said I. C. the younger, for and in
consideration of a Marriage (by Gods Grace) intended, and shortly to be had and
solemnized between the said I. C. the younger, and A. the Daughter of T. C. of,
etc. And that the said A. may be provided of a sufficient Jointure, in case she
shall survive the said I. C. the younger, and for diverse other good Causes and
Considerations him the said I. C. the younger hereunto especially moving, Does
for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, covenant, promise and
grant, to and with the said I. C. the elder, and R. W. their Executors, etc.
and to and with every of them by these presents, that he the said I. C. the
younger, shall and will, before the end of Easter Term now next, etc before the
Justices (of our Sovereign Lord the King) of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, or some other person or persons thereunto lawfully
and sufficiently authorized, acknowledge and levy one Fine, ( Sur conusence de
droit come ceo que ills ont de son done) with proclamation thereupon to be
made, according to the common course of Fines in that behalf made and provided,
unto the said I. C. the elder, and R. W. and their heirs, or the heirs of one
of them, of, in and upon all that Message or Tenement wherein T. B. Vintner
now dwells, and whereof he the said I. C. the younger is seized in his
Demeasn as of Fee in his own proper right, commonly called or known by the,
etc. situate, etc and of all the Shops, Cellars, Sollers, Chambers, Rooms,
Easements, Commodities and Appurtenances to the said Message or Tenement
belonging, or to or with the same used, occupied or enjoyed, or reputed, or
taken, as part, parcel or member of the same, or as belonging thereunto, by
such name or names, and in such manner of form as by the said I C. the elder,
and R. W. or their Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised and
advised, or required, at the only proper Costs and Charges in the Law of the
said J. C. the younger, the true intent and meaning of which said Fine so to be
levied and executed of the said premises, between the said Parties is to be,
and so shall be construed, intended and adjudged to be to the Use and Behoof of
the said J. C. the younger, during his natural life, without impeachment of or
for any manner of waste, and after his decease, to the use and behoof of the
said A. etc. for and during the term of her natural life, without any
impeachment, etc. and after her decease to the use and behoof of the Heirs of
the Body of the said J. C. the younger, on the Body of the said A. lawfully to
be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of the said A.
for ever. Provided always, that if the said Marriage shall not take effect,
nor be had or solemnized between the said J. C. the younger. and the said A. T.
before the, etc. next ensuing, etc. That then the said Fine so to be made,
levied and acknowledged of the said Message and Premises aforesaid, shall be,
and shall be taken, deemed, adjudged and construed to be to the use of the said
J. C. the younger, and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever, any thing herein
contained to the contrary, etc. In witness, etc.

A Lease to try a Title.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. A. and R. M. etc. of the one part, and W.
M. of, etc. on the other part, witnesses, That the said T. A. and R. M. for
diverse good Causes and Considerations, etc. have demised, granted, etc. and by
these presents do, etc. unto the said W. M. all that their Site of, etc. and
all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Easements
and Commodities thereunto belonging or appertaining, To have and to hold the
said, etc. and all other the demised premises with the appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, unto the said W. M. his, etc. from, etc. unto the end
and term of, etc. from thence next, etc. Yielding, etc. unto the said, etc.
their, etc. one P. etc. if it be demanded. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of a House in London.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R. B. of E. in the County of N. Esquire of the
one part, and J. H. of L. Esquire of the other part, witnesses, That the said R.
B. for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. of lawful, etc. to him in hand
paid before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, by the said J. H.
whereof the said R. B. does acknowledge the Receipt, and thereof and of every
part and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit and discharge the said I. H. his
Heirs and Assigns, and every of them for ever by these presents, has given,
granted, bargained, sold, aliened, infeoffed and confirmed, and by these
presents does fully, clearly and absolutely, give, grant, bargain, sell, alien,
infeoss and confirm unto the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever; All
that Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, commonly called or known by
the name of, etc. now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of one W. S. etc. or
of his Assignee or Assignees, situate, lying and being in, etc. together with
all and singular Shops, Cellars, Sollers, Chambers, Rooms, Entries, Ways,
Passages, Yards, Back-sides, Lights, Watercourse, Easements, Profits,
Commodities and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement now
or at any time heretofore belonging or appertaining, or therewith now or
heretofore demised, used, occupied or enjoyed, or accepted, reputed or taken as
part, parcel or member thereof, or of any part thereof: And the reversion and
reversions, remainder and remainders of all and singular the premises, and of
every part and parcel thereof: And the Rents and yearly Profits of all and
singular the premises, and of every part and parcel thereof: And also all and
singular Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Letters Patents, Exemplifications of
Records, Counter-parts of Leases, Writings, Escripts and Monuments touching and
concerning the before bargained premises, and every part and parcel thereof. To
have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, Shops, Cellars, Sollers,
Chambers, and all and singular other the premises, with their and every of
their apputtenances, before by these presents bargained and sold, or meant,
mentioned or intended to be hereby granted, bargained and sold, and every part
and parcel thereof, unto the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only use
and behoof of him the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And the said
R. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of
them, does covenant, That he is seized in Fee-simple, and has power to sell.
promise and grant to and with the said I. H. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, in
manner and form following (that is to say) that he the said R. B. at the time
of the ensealing hereof is, and until the first execution of an Estate to the
said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns, by force of these presents, shall stand and
be lawfully seized to him, his Heirs and Assigns, of and in the before
bargained premises, and of and in every part and parcel thereof, of a good,
sure, lawful, absolute and indefeazible Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple,
without any conditions, limitation, use, or other thing to determine, alter or
change the same. And also that he the said R. B. now has full Power, good
Right, lawful Authority, and true Title to grant, alien, bargain, sell and
confirm the before bargained premises, and every part and parcel thereof, unto
the said I. H. his Heirs or Assigns, in manner and form aforesaid, and
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents; And the said R. B.
for himself, That the premises are discharged from Encumbrances.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, does further
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. H. his Heirs, Executors and
Assigns, by these presents, that the said Message or Tenement, Shops, Cellars,
Sollers, etc. and all other the premises above by these presents mentioned to
be granted and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, on the day of the date
hereof, and from time to time, and at all times hereafter for ever, shall be,
remain and continue to the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper
use and behoof of him the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, free and
clear, and freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or
otherwise by the said R. B. his Heirs or Assigns, sufficiently saved and kept
harmless of and from all and all manner of former Bargains, Sales, Joyntures,
Dowers, Leases, Annuities, Rentcharge, Rent-seck, Arrerages of Rents,
Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions,
Intrusions, Issues, Fines, Amerciaments, and of and from all other Charges,
Titles. Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or
done by the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns, one Lease heretofore made by T.
P. of, etc. unto the before-named W. S. of the said Message or Tenement and
Premises, for the term of, etc. whereupon the yearly Rent of, etc. is reserved:
which said yearly Rent from henceforth during the residue of the said Term,
shall be due, payable and paid to the said J. H. his Heirs and Assigns (only
excepted and foreprized) and also that he the said J. H. his Heirs and Assigns,
For quiet enjoying.
shall and may from henceforth for ever peaceably and quietly have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message or Tenement, Shops, Cellars,
Sollers, and other the premises above by these presents mentioned to be
bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, and the Rents, Issues
and Profits thereof, shall and may receive and take, without the let,
interruption or contradiction of the said R. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or of any
other person or persons, claiming from, by or under him, them, or any of them,
or by his or their means, right, title, consent, privity or procurement. And
further, For further assurance.
the said R. B. does covenant, promise and grant, for him, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, to and with the said J. N. his Heirs and Assigns, and to
and with every of them by these presents, That he the said R. B. and his Heirs,
and all and every other person or persons, having and claiming, or which shall
or may have, claim or pretend to have any manner of Estate, Right, Title or
Interest, into, or out of the before bargained premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, by, from, or under the said R. B. shall and will from time to time,
and at all times hereafter during the time and space of, etc. next ensuing the
date of these presents, upon every reasonable request, and at the Costs and
Charges in the Law of the said J. H. his Heirs or Assigns, do, make,
acknowledge, execute and suffer, or cause to be made, done, acknowledged,
executed and suffered all and every such further act and acts, thing and
things, assurances and conveyances in the Law whatsoever, for the further, more
better and perfect assurance, surety and sure-making of the said Message or
Tenement, Shops, Cellars, Sollers, and all other the premises, with the
appurtenances above by these presents mentioned to be bargained and sold unto
the said J. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever: be it by Fine or Fines, with
Proclamation, Recovery or Recoveries, with double or single Voucher or
Vouchers, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, the inrolment or
acknowledgment of these presents, release, confirmation with warranty against
the said R. B. and his heirs, or without warranty, or by all or any, or as many
of the ways means and devices aforesaid, or by any other ways or means
whatsoever, as by the said J. H. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their
Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised or advised, and
required. And also it is agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents, that all and every the said Conveyances and Assurances so, as
aforesaid, hereafter to be had, made, levied or executed of the before
bargained premises, and every or any part or parcel thereof, shall be and
inure, and shall be esteemed, adjudged and taken to be and inure to the only
use and behoof of him the said J. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to no
other use, intent or purpose whatsoever; any thing in these presents contained
to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants for passing of a Recovery in the Common Pleas to cut
off an Intail.
THis Indenture made, etc. between E. C. of, etc. of the one part, and W. O.
and J. H. of, etc. of the other part; Witnesses, That it is covenanted,
granted, concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents; and the said E. C. does covenant and grant to and with the said W. O.
and J. H. that he the said E. C. shall and will permit and suffer the said W.
O. and J. H. to purchase and sue forth out of the High-Court of Chancery one or
more Writ or Writs of Entry sur discesin en le post, returnable before the
Justices of the Common Pleas at Westminster, at some certain day of Return in
Easter-Term next coming, by which Writ or Writs the said W. O. and J. H. shall
demand against the said E. C. all that Message, Tenement or Farm, with the
appurtenances, situate, etc. which late were in the possession of, etc. and
also all that Close of Pasture-ground, commonly called, etc. containing, etc.
and all that Close of Pasture, etc. and also all and singular Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Reversions, Services, Commons, Profits, Commodities, Emoluments and
Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular the Appurtenances to the
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof belonging, or in any wise appertaining,
by such name and names and in such manner and form, and by such number and
quantity of Acres, as the said W. O and J. H. or the survivor of them, or the
Council learned of them, shall be devised or advised; to which Writ the said E.
C. shall appear personally, or by Attorney, in the said Court of Common Pleas,
and enter into the said warranty and imparl, and vouch the warranty the Common
vouchee, who shall after depart in contempt of the Court; so as a good and
perfect recovery shall and may be had in due form and order of Law, of the said
Messuages, Lands, etc. and all other the premises, with the appurtenances,
according to the usual course of common Recoveries for assurance of Lands and
Tenements in the said Court of Common Pleas; and that a Writ of Habere fac'
seisinam shall be thereupon awarded, executed and returned accordingly. And it
is further condescended unto, and agreed by and between all the said Parties to
these presents, That as well the said Recovery so to be had and executed, as
aforesaid, as also all and every other Recovery or Recoveries, Conveyances and
Assurances whatsoever, which before the Feast of, etc. shall be had and
executed by and between the said Parties to these presents, or any of them, of
the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all and every other
the premises, with the appurtenances, or of any part or parcel thereof, by what
name or names soever the same shall be so had and executed: and the full force
and execution of them, and every of them, shall be and enure, and shall be
construed, adjudged and taken to be and enure to the only use and behoof of
the said W. O. his, etc. for ever. And the said W. O. and J. H. and the
survivor of them, and the heirs of the survivor of them, shall ever from
thenceforth stand and be seized thereof, and of every part thereof, to the only
use and behoof of the said W. O. his heirs and assigns for ever, and to no
other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease.
THis Indenture made, etc. between P. S. of, etc. and M. his Wife, and
Executrix of the last Will and Testament of I. C. late of, etc. deceased, on
the one part, and W. W. of, etc. Yeoman, on the other part, witnesses, That
whereas T. M. of, etc. in and by one Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc. for
the consideration therein mentioned, did demise, grant, and to farm-let unto
the said I. C. (reciting the Grant) as in and by the said recited Indenture of
Lease amongst diverse other Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements therein
contained, more fully and at large it does and may appear. Now this Indenture
witnesses, That the said P. S. and M. his wife, as well for and in
consideration of the sum of, etc. to them in hand paid, before the ensealing
and delivery of these presents, by the said W. W. whereof they do acknowledge
the Receipt; and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do acquit,
exonerate, and for ever discharge the said W. W. his, etc. by these presents,
has given, granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these
presents do give, grant, etc. unto the said W. W. his, etc. all that parcel of
Ground or Garden-Plat, with the appurtenances, before mentioned, and all
Houses, Edifices, Buildings, etc. and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest,
Possession, Term of Years to come, Claim and Demand whatsoever, which they the
said P. S. and M. his wife, or either of them now have or has, may, might,
should, or in any wise ought to have or claim, of, in or to the said parcel of
Ground and Gardenplat, and other the premises, with the appurtenances, and
every or any part or parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said Indenture
of Lease. To have and to hold Habend. the said parcels of Ground or
Garden-plat, and all Houses, Edifices and Buildings thereupon, or upon any part
or parcel thereof, now standing or being; And also all the said recited
Indenture of Lease, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Term of Years;
and all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances, in and before
by these presents bargained, sold, assigned and set over, or mentioned, or
intended to be hereby given, granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over,
and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said W. W. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and behoof, during
the residue of the said term, in and by the said Indenture of Lease granted,
and therein now to come and unexpired, in as large, ample and beneficial
manner, to all intents, constructions and purposes, as they the said P. S. and
M. his wife, or either of them, now have or has, may, might, should, or in any
wise ought to have and enjoy the same, by force and virtue of the said recited
Indenture of Lease, or otherwise howsoever; and the said P. S. and M. his wife,
for themselves, their Executors, etc. and for either of them, and either of
their, etc. does convenant, etc. that the said recited Indenture of Lease, etc.
at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is a good, sure,
perfect and indefeizable Lease in the Law, of and for the said parcel of Ground
or Garden-plat, and premises hereby demised, and so shall stand, remain,
continue and be unto the said W. W. his Executors, etc. to his and their own
proper use and behoof, for and during all the term of years thereby granted,
and yet to come and unexpired, under the Rents and Covenants therein mentioned
or contained. And also that the said W. his, etc. and every of them, under the
Rents, Covenants, Articles and Agreements in the said recited Indenture of
Lease contained, shall or may for and during all the rest and residue yet to
come and unexpited of the said term in the said recited Indenture of Lease
contained, lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and
enjoy the said parcel of ground or Garden-plat, and all other the premises,
with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, without the let,
trouble, contradiction or interruption of them the said P. S. and M. his wife,
or either of them, their, or either of their Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or of
any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, or to claim any
Estate or Interest in the premises, or any part thereof, by, from, or under
him, them, or any of them, discharged also of and from all former Bargains,
Sales, Gifts, Surrenders, Forfeitures and Re-entries, Rents, Arrerages of
Rents, Charges and Encumbrances done or to be done by the said P. S. and M. his
wife, or either of them, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully
claiming from, by or under him, them, or either, or any of them, as aforesaid;
or by his, their, either or any of their means, act, title, interest,
forfeitures or procurement, the Rents and Covenants in the said recited
Indenture of Lease herein before mentioned and expressed, only excepted and
fore-prized. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Moiety of a House and Goods, with good Covenants.
TO all Christian people, to whom, etc. R. B. of L. etc. Executor of the last
Will and Testament of R. R. late of L. deceased, and P. K. Citizen, etc. send
greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas W. T. of, etc. by his Indenture
of Lease dated, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned, did demise,
grant, and to farm-let unto the said P. K. his, etc. all that the Message or
Tenement, called, etc. situate and being, etc. together also with all the Goods
and Utensils of Household Stuff, then being and belonging to the said Message
or Tenement, mentioned and comprised in a Schedule to the said Indenture
annexed: To have and to hold, etc. as in and by the said, etc. And whereas the
said P. K. by Deed-pole dated, etc. for the considerations therein expressed,
did demise, etc. the said last mentioned Indenture, etc. and all his Estate,
etc. of, in and to the said, etc. unto the said R. R. the Estate and Interest
of which said R. R. of and in, etc. did after come to the said R. B. as
Executor of the last Will and Testament of the said R. R. And the said R. B.
being thereof possessed by the means aforesaid did by Indenture dated, etc. for
the considerations, etc. grant, bargain, etc. The moiety of the said, etc. unto
J. C. of, etc. And the said J. C. by Deed-pole dated, etc. did make over the
said moiety of the said, etc. unto A. B. Innkeeper, etc. and the other moiety
of and in the same, etc. now remaining in the said R. B. and P. K. or one of
them; together with the whole right, title, etc. Now know ye, That we the said
R. B. and P. K. for and in consideration of, etc. Have given, granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents, etc. unto the
said R. M. the said last mentioned moiety of the said Message or Tenement,
with the appurtenances, called the, etc. aforesaid. And also all out right,
title and interest, of, in, and to the said moiety of the said Goods and
Chattels before mentioned, thereunto belonging, and every part and parcel
thereof: As also all the Estate, right, title, interest, term and terms of
years, property, claim and demand whatsoever, which we the said R. B. and P. K.
or either of us, now have, may, might, should, or in any wise ought to have and
enjoy, of, in or to the said Message or Tenement, called, etc. and of, in or
to the moiety of the said Goods and Chattels thereunto belonging: Together with
all Writings, Leases, Counterparts of Leases, Escripts and Monuments, touching
and concerning the same premises, in as large and ample manner, as we or either
of us now have, and may hold the same by force and virtue of the said several
Indentures before mentioned, or any thing therein contained, or otherwise
howsoever: To have and to hold all and singular the before bargained premises.
with their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said R.M.
his, etc. to his and their own proper uses and behoofs, as fully, and in as
large and ample manner and form, as we the said R. B. and P. K. or either of
us, now have, may, might, should or ought to have and enjoy the same. And we
the said R. B. and P. K. for us, and either of us, and either of our Heirs,
etc. and for every of us, do covenant, promise, etc. that we the said R. B. and
P. K. or one of us (at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these
presents) are or is the very true and right Owners and Possessors, or owner and
possessor of the premises hereby before mentioned to be bargained and sold,
with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, for and during all
the rest and residue of the said several terms yet to come and unexpired in the
said several recited Indentures of Lease; granted that we, or one of us, have
or has full power and good right, true title, and absolute authority, to give,
grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over the said premises hereby bargained
and sold, with their and every of their appurtenances; unto the said R. M. his,
etc. in manner and form aforesaid. And also that all and singular the said
premises hereby mentioned to be bargained and sold, with their and every of
their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of these presents are and be, and so at all times
hereafter from henceforth during all the rest and residue of the said several
terms, in and by the said several recited Indentures of Lease granted, shall
be, remain and continue unto the said R. M. his, etc. free and clear, and
freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise well and
sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of and from all and all manner of former
and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Fines, Forfeitures, Rents,
Arrerages of Rents, cause and causes of Forfeitures and Re-entry; and of and
from all other Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, heretofore had,
made, committed, suffered or done by us the said R. B. and P. K. or either of
us, our Executors, etc. or any of us, in any manner of wise howsoever; And so
shall be during all the rest and residue of all and so many years as are yet to
come and unexpired of the said several terms, in and by the said several
recited Indentures of Lease granted, according to the true intent and meaning
of these presents (the several Rents, Payments, Covenants and Agreements in the
said several recited Indentures of Lease respectively comprised and specified:
which from henceforth on the Tenants (and Lessees parts and behalfs, are or
ought to be observed, performed, fulfilled and kept, according to the true
meaning of the several recited Indentures of Lease, and the moiety of one half
part of the yearly Rent of, etc. reserved for certain Rooms and Chambers
belonging to the, etc. now in the Occupation of, etc. which moiety of the said
Rent is formerly sold and released unto the said A. B. his, etc. only excepted
and foreprized) any thing in these presents contained, etc. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease, in trust whereof the Assignor is to take a further
Estate in the premises.
THis Indenture made, etc. between Sir A. C. of, etc. on the one part, and E.
H. and C. D. of, etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas Sir J. D.
etc. by his Indenture of Lease beating date the, etc. ( reciting the Grant and
Habend.) as in and by, etc. Now this Indenture further witnesses, That the
said Sir A. C. for and in consideration of the trust hereafter mentioned, and
for diverse other good Causes and Considerations him thereunto moving, has
granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does
grant, bargain, etc. unto the said E. H. and C. D. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to the Survivor of them the said E. H. and C.
D. and to the Executors, Administrators and Assigns, of the Survivor of them
all, etc. (mentioning all that is assigned and set over) To have and to hold
the said Lordship, etc. and all other the premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances, before by these presents bargained, sold, assigned and set over,
and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said E. H. and C. D. their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to the Survivor or Survivors of them
the said E. H. and C. D. and to the Executors, Administrators and Assigns, of
the Survivor of them all, etc. ( mentioning all that is assigned, etc.)
Nevertheless upon this trust and confidence in them, and every of them reposed,
that they the said E. H. and C. D. and the Survivor of them, and the Executors,
etc. of the Survivor of them, shall and will at all times hereafter, and from
time to time, upon the reasonable request to them, or any of them to be made,
and at the Costs and Charges in the Law of the said Sir A. C. his Executors,
etc. assign, convey and assure all and singular the before bargained premises,
and every part and parcel thereof, unto such person or persons, their
Executors, etc. by the said Sir A. C. his Executors, etc. shall be nominated
and appointed, in such manner and form, as by the said Sir A. C. his Executors,
etc. or his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or
advised, and required, and upon further trust and confidence, that they and
every of them, shall and will upon the like request to be made, do and perform
all and every lawful act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, for the
extinguishment of this present bargain, sale and assignment of the premises
abovementioned, as by the said Sir A. C. his Executors, etc. or by his or
their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or advised, and
required. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Judgment.
THis Indenture made, etc. between M. M. etc. on the one part, and R. T. etc.
on the other part, witnesses, That whereas the said M. M. has recovered a
Judgment in His Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, in Hillary
Term, Anno, etc. against E. G. for xx l. Debt, besides costs of Suit, as by the
Records of the said Court more at large may appear: Now the said M. M. for good
Considerations him moving, Has bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and by
these presents does bargain, sell, assign, and set over unto the said R. T. his
Executors, etc. as well the said Judgment, and all and every sum and sums of
money therein mentioned and contained: As also, all benefit and advantage which
shall or may be had, obtained, or gotten by reason or means of the said
Judgment, or any Process or Execution thereupon to be had, sued out, or
executed: To have and to hold the said Judgment, sum and sums of Money,
benefit, advantage, and other the premises aforesaid, unto the said R. T. his,
etc. to his and their own proper uses and behoofs, in as ample manner, as he
the said M. M. his Executors or Assigns, might or could have and enjoy the
same, if these presents had never been had or made; and the said M. M. his
Executors, etc. shall and will justify, maintain and avow, all and every
lawful act and thing that shall be done in and about the premises, without
releasing or discharging the same. So as there be no further benefit taken,
than only the due Debt, Interest and Charges, and that all the benefit which
shall be obtained or gotten upon the said Judgment, shall wholly remain and be
unto the said R. T. his Executors, etc. to his and their own proper uses and
behoofs, without any account, or other thing to be therefore yielded or done
unto the said M. M. his, etc. for the same. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of an Annuity.
TO all Christian people, etc. I J. W. of, etc. Gentleman; send greeting in our
Lord God everlasting: Whereas J. C. Citizen, etc. by his Deed indented, bearing
date, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned, did give, grant and confirm
unto me the said J. W. one Annuity or yearly Rent, or Pension of, etc. to be
issuing and going out of all and singular the Messuages or Tenements, Lands and
Premises of the said J. G. situate and being in, etc. for the term of the
natural life of me the said J. W. as in and by the said Deed indented (among
diverse other Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements therein contained) more
fully and at large it does and may appear: Now know ye, That I the said J. W.
for good Considerations me moving, have assigned and set over, and by these
presents do assign and set over unto S. L. of, etc. the said Annuity or yearly
Pension of, etc. To have and to hold the said Annuity or yearly Rent of, etc.
aforesaid, unto the said S. L. and her Assigns, in as large and ample manner
and form as I the said J. W. may or ought to have and enjoy the same by force
of the said Deed indented, or any thing therein contained (together with the
said Deed indented.) In witness, etc.

A Release for one used in trust.
TO all Christian people, etc. R. M. of, etc. sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting: Whereas C. G. and T. T. for and in consideration of a certain sum
of money to them paid by J. L. of, etc. by their Indenture of Bargain and Sale,
bearing date, etc. did grant, bargain and sell unto the said I. L. and R. M.
their Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that their third part in three parts
equally to be divided, of all that their Message or Tenement called, etc. with
the appurtenances, situate, etc. late in the Tenure of, etc. And also all that
their third part in three parts equally to be divided, of all that their Mine
of Coals opened, or to be opened, or to be gotten or dug, within the Grounds
or Lands to the said Message or Tenement, called, etc. belonging or
appertaining, or in any part or parcel thereof, as by the same Indenture among
diverse other Covenants and Agreements, more at large it does and may appear:
All which premises in the Indenture specified, so sold and granted to the said
I. L. and R. M. as aforesaid, was before and at the ensealing of the said
Indenture, intended and meant to be to the only use and behoof of the said I.
L. and his Heirs, and to no other use or purpose whatsoever: Now know ye, That
I the said R. M. for and in regard of the trust and confidence in me reposed by
the said I. L. have remised, released, and for ever quit-claimed, and for me
and my Heirs do by these presents remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto
the said I. L. and his Heirs, All my Right, Interest, Estate, Title and Demand
which heretofore I have had, or now have, of and in the said premises, in the
said Indenture specified, or in any part or parcel thereof. In witness, etc.

A Surrender of a Lease for Lives, for the obtaining of a new Lease.
TO all, etc. I A. S. etc. send greeting, etc. Whereas I the said A. now am,
and stand lawfully seized and possessed of a Lease for term of my life, to be
made and granted by, etc. bearing date, etc. of and in, etc. all which premises
are situate, etc. and are of the yearly value of, etc. as by the said
Indenture of Lease, Relation, etc. Now know ye, That I the said A. have granted
and surrendered, and by these presents do fully and absolutely grant and
surrender unto the said, etc. his Heirs and Assigns, the said Message, etc.
demised by the said, etc. to me the said A. by the said recited Indenture of
Lease, as aforesaid; And all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, term of Life,
and Demand whatsoever, of me the said A. of, in and to the said Message, and
other the premises, with the appurtenances, and of, in and to every of them,
and every part and parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said recited
Indenture of Lease, or otherwise howsoever: Together also with the said
Indenture of Lease, To the intent nevertheless, and upon condition that the
said, etc. may by his Indenture of Lease, make a new demise and grant of the
premises to J. H. and C. his wife, and N. their Son, for term of their natural
Lives, and the life of the longest Liver of them successively, or otherwise as
shall be thought convenient, and for and under the yearly Rent, and under such
Provisoes, Covenants and Articles, as shall be thought fit therein to be
comprised. In witness, etc.

A Revocation of a Suit.
TO all, etc. I A. B. send greeting, etc. Whereas an Action has been brought
at the Common Law in my name, against P. F. upon a Bond, wherein the said P. F.
and one W. D. became bound unto me in the sum of, etc. on the, etc. as by the
same Obligation, etc. Now know ye, That I the said A. B. do by these presents
revoke, and withdraw the said Action and Suit brought against the said P. F.
upon the said Obligation, and all proceedings thereupon had in my Name, and do
also countermand all Letters of Attorney, and other Authorities whatsoever, by
me heretofore made, or given to any person or persons, for the prosecution of
any Action or Suit upon the said Bond, and do also signify and declare, that
my will and pleasure is, that no action or suit shall at any time hereafter be
brought and commenced against the said P. F. and W. D. nor either of them, nor
their, nor either of their Heirs, etc. upon the said Obligation. In Witness,
etc.

A Release for waste done.
TO all, etc. W. S. of, etc. sends greeting in our Lord God God everlasting:
Whereas J. S. of, etc. being possessed of a Lease for diverse years yet to come,
of and in one parcel of Woodground, commonly called, etc. situate, etc.
containing, etc. being parcel of the possession of W. S. etc. aforesaid; and
whereas the said J. S. for the better advantage to himself, and for the
increase of his own yearly profit to be made of the same Wood-ground, and for
the better and more profitable manuring of the said ground, has for that
purpose cut down, and grubbed up diverse Trees in and upon the said parcel of
Wood-ground, and has converted the same Ground into Tillage, whereby a far
greater annual profit is, and yearly advantage will be made thereof, than if
the same should continue Wood-ground, which in time to come will turn to the
better benefit and advantage of the said W. S. and his Heirs, after the end and
determination of the said Lease, made to the said J. S. yet notwithstanding the
said J. S. is subject and liable to be questioned and troubled by action to be
commenced against him, both for the waste he has committed by cutting down
Trees, and for not preserving of the said Woods, according to the Covenants
comprised in the said Lease. Now know ye, That the said W. S. etc. for and in
consideration of, etc. and for diverse good causes, etc. has for himself, his
Heirs, Executors, etc. remised, released and quit-claimed, and by these
presents does clearly and absolutely remise, release and quit-claim unto the
said J. S. etc. all and all manner of Actions of waste, and all manner of Suits
for any Wastes or Spoils done or committed by him the said R. S. in the said
Wood and Wood-ground, called, etc. aforesaid, until the date of these presents:
And all, and all manner of actions of Covenants, and other Actions, Suits or
Demands, Concernings, Covenants, Provisoes or Agreements for not cutting down,
or grubbing up the same Woods or Under-woods heretofore cut and grubbed up. In
witness, etc.

A Release of Errors.
BE it known, etc. That I A. B. etc. have remised, released, quit-claimed and
discharged, and always for me, my Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and every
of them, for evermore do quit-claim and discharge unto C. D. of, etc. all and
all manner of Error and Errors, cause and causes of Error and Errors,
Misprisions, Mis-entries, and erroneous Proceedings whatsoever, had, made,
committed, omitted, suffered or done, in all, every or any Plaint, Plea,
Process, Judgment and Execution whatsoever, had, made, etc. by the said, etc.
against me the said A. B. in any Court or Courts of Record, at any time from
the beginning of the World, etc. In witness, etc.

A Discharge of an Apprentice from hsi Service.
TO all, etc. I F. W. of, etc. send greeting, etc. Whereas M. N. by his
Indenture bearing date, etc. did put himself Apprentice to me for the term of,
etc. commencing, etc. as by the said Indenture may appear: Now know ye, That I
the said F. W. for good Considerations me thereunto moving, do by these
presents clearly and absolutely discharge and set free the said M. N. of and
from my Service, so as neither I, nor any for me, shall or may at any time
hereafter, ask, claim or demand any Service of the said M. N. by virtue of the
said Indenture, or otherwise: And also I do hereby remise and release unto the
said M. N. all Actions, cause and causes of Actions, Service and Demands
whatsoever, which I now have, or hereafter may have against him, by reason of
any act whatsoever, from the beginning of the World, until the day of the date
of these presents. In witness whereof, etc.

A Letter of Attorney, to receive Money due upon a Bond.
KNow all Men by these presents, That I T. A. of, etc. have assigned, ordained
and made, and in my stead and place, by these presents, put and constituted my
trusty and well-beloved Friend I. B. of, etc. my true and lawful Attorney, for
me, and in my stead and name, but to the use and behoof of him the said I. B.
to take, recover, and receive of W. S. of, etc. O. T. of, etc. and L. M. of,
etc. the sum of, etc. due unto me for non-payment of the sum of, etc. of like
money, on the twentieth day of, etc. last past, before the date of these
presents, as by one Obligation with condition there-under written, bearing
date, etc. in the year, etc. it does and may more plainly appear, giving, and
by these presents granting unto my said Attorney, my full power and lawful
authority in the premises, to do, say, perform, conclude and finish, for me and
in my name, as aforesaid, all and every such act and acts, thing and things,
device and devices in the Law whatsoever, for the recovery of all the Debts
aforesaid, as fully, largely and amply in every respect, as I my self might or
could do, if I were personally present; And upon the receipt thereof,
acquittances, or other discharges for me, and in my name, to make, seal and
deliver, ratifying, allowing and holding firm and stable, all and whatsoever my
said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done in or about the execution
of the premises, by virtue of these presents. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to enter upon Lands, and deliver a Lease.
KNow all men, etc. that I R. R. of, etc. have, made, ordained, constituted and
appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute and appoint T. C.
of, etc. my true and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my stead and name, to
enter and come into and upon the Farm and Lands of T. in the Parish of, etc. in
the County of, etc. now in the Tenure or Occupation of K. T. or of his Assigns,
and upon any part thereof, then and there for me, and in my stead and name, to
deliver as my act and deed, unto H. M. of, etc. or to his Assigns, one
Indenture, whereunto I have already sealed, bearing date, etc. made between me
the said R. R. on the one part, and the said H. M. on the other part,
purporting a Lease of the said Farm and Lands unto the said H. M. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for the term of Ten years next ensuing;
as in, and by the said Indenture more at large appears. Which Indenture,
after the same shall be so delivered by my said Attorney, I the said R. R. do
promise by these presents, shall be my effectual Deed in Law, to all intents,
constructions and purposes, as if I the said R. R. had sealed and delivered the
same them there my self. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney upon a Specialty being not due, with Covenant to justify
Actions.
TO all, etc. to whom this present writing shall come, Sir T. R. of, etc.
sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas H. F. on, etc. Gentleman,
in and by one Obligation, with condition thereupon endorsed, bearing date, etc.
is and stands bound unto the said Sir T. R. in the sum of, etc. of lawful,
etc. conditioned for the ture payment of, etc. on the, etc. next, etc. at or in
the, etc. as in and by the said Obligation and Condition thereof at large
appears. Now know ye, That the said T. R. for diverse good Causes and
Considerations him moving, has assigned, ordained and made, and in his stead
and place put and constituted his trusty and well-beloved Friend R. D. Citizen,
etc. his true and lawful Attorney, for him, and in his stead and name, and to
the only proper use and behoof of the said R. D. to ask, require and receive
of the said H. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said sum of,
etc. at the said day and place aforesaid. And if default be made in payment of
the said sum of, etc. as aforesaid: then he the said Sir T. R. does by these
presents make, ordain, constitute and appoint the said R. D. to be his true and
lawful Attorney, for him, in his name, and to the only use of the said R. D. to
ask, levy, demand, recover and receive of the said H. F. his Executors and
Administrators, the said sum of, etc. so forfeited unto him the said Sir T. R.
for non-payment of the said sum of, etc. at the day, time and place aforesaid:
Giving, and by these presents granting unto his said Attorney, his full Power
and lawful Authority in the premises: and upon default of the said sum of, etc.
or any part thereof, the said H. F. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, etc.
or any of them, to arrest, sue, implead, imprison, and out of Prison to
deliver, and Pleas and Prosecutions against them, and every of them, to sustain
and maintain according to the course of the Law; and upon the receipt of the
said sum of, etc. or any part thereof, acquittance or other Discharges for him,
and in his name, to make, seal and deliver, and one Attorney or more under him
to substitute, and at his pleasure to revoke, and all and every other act and
acts, thing and things, device and devices in the Law whatsoever needful, or
requisite to be done in or about these premises, for him, and in his name to
do, execute and perform, as fully, largely and amply in every respect, as he
himself might or could do, if he were personally present; ratifying, allowing
and holding firm and stable, all or whatsoever his said Attorney, or his
Substitute, lawfully authorized, shall lawfully do, or cause to be done in or
about the execution of the premises by these presents. And the said T. R. for
himself, etc. that he the said T. R. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and every of them, at all time and times hereafter, upon the reasonable
request, or notice to him given, and at the Costs and Charges in the Law of the
said R. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, shall and
will maintain, justify and avow with effect, all and every such Action or
Actions, Writ or Writs, Pleas, Process, Judgments and Executions whatsoever,
which by the said R. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall at any
time hereafter be lawfully sued, commenced, had or brought in his name against
the said H. E. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or any of them, upon or by
reason of the Obligation above mentioned, or of any sum or sums of money
therein mentioned or contained. And also that he the said T. R. has not at any
time heretofore, neither he, his Executors, or Administrators, or Assigns, or
any of them, at any time hereafter shall or will remise, release, or otherwise
discharge the said H. F. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or any of
them, of the said Obligation above-recited: nor yet of any sum or sums of money
therein contained, without the special license, consent or agreement of the
said R. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, thereunto
first had and obtained in writing under his or their Hands and Seals, and that
all the benefit and commodity that shall be recovered, obtained or gotten by
means of any such Action, Suit, Plaint, Judgment or Execution shall redound,
come and be to the only use and behoof of the said R. D. his, etc. without any
account or other thing therefore to be yielded or done to the said Sir T. R.
his, etc. or any of them. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney General to receive Debts and Rent.
KNow all men by these presents, That I A. W. of, etc. have assigned, ordained
and made, and in my stead place by these presents, put and constitute my truly
and well-beloved servant H. H. of, etc. to be my true and lawful Attorney, for
me, and in my name, and to my use, to ask, sue for, levy, require, recover and
receive all and every such Debts, Rents, and sums of Money as now are due unto
me, or which at any day or days, time or times hereafter, shall be due, owing,
belonging or appertaining unto me by any manner of ways or means whatsoever,
from any person or persons whatsoever, giving and granting unto my said
Attorney by these presents, my full and whole power, strength and authority in
and about the premises; and upon the receipt of any such Debts, Rents and sums
of Money aforesaid, Acquittances or other Discharges for me and in my name, to
make, seal and deliver, and all and every other act and acts, thing and things,
device and devices, in the Law whatsoever, needful and necessary to be done in
or about the premises for the recovery of all or any such Debt, Rents, or sums
of Money, as aforesaid, for me and in my name to do, execute and perform, as
fully, largely and amply to every respect, to all intents, constructions and
purposes, as I my self might or could do, if I were personally present;
ratifying, allowing and holding firm and stable all and every such act and
acts. In witness, etc.

A Short Letter of Attorney for the setting over of a Bond forfeited.
KNow all men, etc. That I H. H. of, etc. have made, ordained, constituted and
appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute and appoint my
trusty and well-beloved Friend W. M. of, etc. to be my true and lawful
Attorney, for me, and in my stead and name, and to his own use, to ask, levy,
recover, demand and receive of T. M. and N. L. of, etc. Gentlemen, and either
of them, their, and either of their Executors and Administrators, the sum of,
etc. which they have forfeited, and from me unjustly do detain and keep for
non-payment of the sum of, etc. at a certain day past, as by one Obligation
with Condition thereupon endorsed, bearing date, etc. more at large it does and
may appear. Giving, and by these presents granting unto my said Attorney, my
fall power and authority in all things touching this my present business, and
in my name to commence and prosecute any Action or Actions, Suit or Suits, for
the recovering and getting of the said sum of, etc. and every or any part or
parcel thereof, and Attorney or Attorneys in that behalf to constitute and
make, and upon receipt thereof, or of any part thereof, acquittances, or other
lawful discharges, in my stead and name to make, seal and deliver; ratifying
and allowing by these presents all and whatsoever my said Attorney, or his
Assigns, shall for obtaining and recovery of the said sum of, etc. or any part
thereof, do or cause to be done in my stead and name. And also I the said H. H.
do covenant and promise by these presents, That I the said H. H. have not
released, nor will release the said T. M. and N. etc. of the said Bond, nor of
the penalty therein contained, nor countermand this present Letter of Attorney,
nor the authority thereby granted, nor any suit, act or proceeding at any time
hereafter by virtue of these presents to be brought or done. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to take possession of Lands, delivered by a Sheriff upon
an Extent.
KNow all men by these presents, That I A. B. etc. Esquire have made, ordained,
constituted, and by these presents, put and appointed my well-beloved Friend C.
D. to be my true and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my stead and name to enter
into the Manor of H. with the appurtenances, in the County of L. and now in
the Tenure or Occupation of, etc. of the yearly value of, etc. and full and
peaceable possession and seizin thereof, for me, and in my stead and name, and
to my use, to take, receive, retain and keep, as to him the same shall be
delivered by the Sheriff of the same County of, etc. according to the tenor,
purport and effect of His Majesty's Writ of Extent unto the said Sheriff in
that behalf directed. Giving and granting by virtue of these present unto my
said Attorney, my full power and authority, and all and every thing and things,
needful, necessary or requisite to be had made or done for or concerning the
said possession, taking or the retaining of the same to my use, as aforesaid,
the same for me, in my stead and name to do, use, execute and exercise, as
fully and wholly, and in as large and ample manner and form, and to all intents
and purposes, as I my self might and could do, if I we^^ personally present;
ratifying, allowing and holding firm and stable all and whatsoever my said
Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause t^ be done in or about the execution of
the premises, by virtue of these presents. In witness, etc.

A Covenant for the levying of a Fine.
ANd the said C. D. for himself, his Executors, etc. and for every of them,
does covenant and grant to and with the said W. G. and F. W. their Executors,
Administrators, etc. That the said C. D. or his Heirs, shall and will at and
before the, etc. at the proper Costs and Charges in the Law of the said C. D.
his Heirs, etc. according to the usual course of Fines and Recoveries used and
accustomed, levy one lawful and sufficient Fine, and su^er a lawful and
sufficient recovery to be had and made against him the said C. D. and his
Heirs, unto the said W. C. and F. W. and their Heirs, or the Survivor of them,
or to such other person or persons, as they the said W. and P. or the Survivor
of them, or their Heirs, shall nominate and appoint, of all that Message, etc.
(naming the Lands) with all and singular their appurtenances, situate and
being in C. aforesaid, in the County of B. which said Fine or Fines, Recovery
or Recoveries, and all other Assurances and Conveyances to be had, made,
levied, acknowledged and executed of the premises, or any part thereof, by the
name or names aforesaid, or by any other name or names, or in any other manner
or form shall be, and the said W. C. and F. W. and their Heirs, and all and
every other person and persons, and the Survivor of them, and their Heirs, to
whom the said Fine shall be levied or acknowledged, as aforesaid, shall stand
and be seized of all and singular the premises, and every part thereof, to the
only proper use and behoof of the said W. and F. and their Heirs for ever, to
the intent a lawful and sufficient recovery may be had of all and singular the
premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, according to the true intent
and meaning of these presents, which said recoveries shall be, and shall be
always deemed, adjudged, and taken to be to the only use and behoof of the
said W. C. and F. W. and of the Heirs males of their Bodies to be begotten, and
for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of the said W. C. and of
his Heirs and Assigns for ever. In witness, etc.

A Covenant to Surrender a Copyhold at the next Court.
ANd the said, etc. for himself, his, etc. does covenant and grant to and with
the said, etc. his, etc. that at the next Court holden at the Manor of E. in
the County of W. the said R. I. and his wife, shall come and personally appear
in the Face of the said Court of the said Manor, and in the open Face of the
said Court, according to the usual Custom of the said Manor, shall into the
Hands of the Stewards of the said Court, or his Deputy, surrender, assign and
yield up to the use of the said T. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, all that the right, estate, title, interest and demand, which they now
have, or by any means may have of and in the said Copyhold Land and Tenements,
with the appurtenances, called, known by the said name or names of, etc. or any
other Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, which are claimed to be holden by him
the said R. I. by Copy of Courtroll of the said Manor of W. or to the same, or
to any part or parcel of the same belonging, or so reputed, esteemed or taken,
etc.

A Covenant for a further Assurance.
ANd the said L. M. for himself, his, etc. That he the said L M. and A. his now
wife, and the Heirs of the said L. and all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, having or claiming, or which shall or may have or claim, or pretend
to have any manner of right, title, interest, or other thing, into or out of
the before mentioned premises, or any part or parcel thereof, from or under the
said L. M. shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter upon
every reasonable request, and at the Costs and Charges in the Law of the said,
etc. his Heirs and Assigns, make, do suffer, acknowledge and execute, or cause
to be made, done, acknowledged, suffered and executed, all and every such
further lawful act or acts, thing and things, device and devices, conveyances
and assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further, better, and more perfect
assurance, surety, sure-making and conveying of all and singular the said
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other the premises
aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said L. B. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever; be it by Fine or Fines, with Proclamation, Recovery or
Recoveries, with double or single Voucher or Vouchers, Deed or Deeds, enrolled
or not enrolled, the enrolment of these presents, release, confirmation, with
warranty, against all and every person or persons, or without warranty, or by
all, any or as mady of the ways, means and devices aforesaid, or by any other
ways or means whatsoever, as by the Council learned in the Law, of the said J.
B. his, etc. shall or may be devised or required, so as the said J. M. and A.
his wife, their Executors, etc. be not enforced or compelled to travel above
twelve Miles from his or their dwelling place, or the Cities of London and
Westminster, for the making, doing and executing thereof, etc.

A Covenant that he is lawfully seized in Fee-simple, or Feetail, and has
power to demise.
ANd the said G. H. for himself, etc. that he the said G. H. at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, is and stands lawfully seized of an
indefeizable estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple or Fee-tail, of and in all and
singular the before demised premises, with the appurtenances, and every part
and parcel thereof, without any manner of condition or limitation of use or
uses, to alter or change the same: And also that he the said G. H. now has
full power, true title, and absolute authority, to demise, grant, etc. the
said, etc. and all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances
before demised, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said J. P. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for the term of, etc. in manner and
form, as in and by these presents is mentioned, limited and expressed.

A Covenant that the Lessee shall not cut down or fell the Trees, without the
consent of the Lessor.
ANd the said T. H. for himself, etc. that he the said T. H. his, etc. or any
of them, shall not at any time hereafter during the said term, commit or cause,
procure, or wittingly suffer to be committed or done, any manner of wilful
waste or destruction, in or upon the premises, or any part thereof, nor shall
cut down, fell, take or carry away any of the Woods, Under-woods or Trees
growing, standing or being, or which hereafter shall grow, stand or be, in or
upon the premises before demised, or in or upon any part or parcel thereof,
without the license, consent or agreement of the abovenamed U. B. his Heirs or
Assigns, in writing first had and obtained.

A Condition of Arbitrament general and special.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden R. C. and R. A. their, etc. and
every of them do and shall, for their, and every of their parts and behalfs, in
all things well and truly stand to, abide, obey, observe, perform, fulfill and
keep the award, arbitrament, order, rule, determination and judgment of, etc.
Arbitrators indifferently chosen, elected and named, as well on the part and
behalf of the said R. C. R. A. as on the part and behalf of the within-named R.
S. and, etc. to arbitrate, award, rule, decree and judge of, for, upon,
touching or concerning all Actions, Suits, Doubts and variances concerning,
etc. out of the Manor of L. in the Parish of W. in the County of, etc. now in
question and controversy between the said Parties; and also for, touching and
concerning all and all manner of other Suits, Quarrels, Debts, Debates, Duties,
Bonds, Specialties, Controversies, Transgressions, Offenses, Strifes,
Contentions, Reckonings, Accounts and Demands whatsoever, which between the
said R. C. and R. A. on the one part, and the said J. G. the elder, and the
said J. S. the younger, and diverse other persons on the other part, at any time
from the beginning of the World, until the day of the date of these presents,
have been had, moved, stirred, or are in any wise depending; so always as the
same award, arbitrament or determination, and judgment of the Parties, in and
upon the same premises, be made and given up in writing indented, under their
Hands and Seals, ready to be delivered to the said Parties, at or in, etc. on
or before, etc. That then this, etc.

A Condition for the truth of an Apprentice, and to restore the value of all
such Goods, as by proof shall appear be has imbeazled.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas J. D. etc. Son of, etc. by his Indenture of
Apprentiship, to the within-named W. G. has bound himself to the said W. G.
with him to dwell and abide, from the Feast of, etc. unto, etc. from thence
next ensuing, fully to be complete and ended, as in and by the said, etc. more
fully may appear: If therefore the said J. D. the Apprentice, do, or shall at
any time or times hereafter, during the said term of, etc. wilfully waste,
imbeazle, consume, spend or make away, or otherwise deliver, or lend upon
trust, without ready money, to any person or persons, without the consent of
the said W. G. his Master, and of the Goods, Wares, Moneys or Merchandise of
the said W. G. his Executors or Assigns: Then if the above bounden L. M. his
Executors or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall within two Months next
after request made, and notice thereof given, from time to time, during the
said term, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said W. G. his
Executors or Assigns, the full sum and value of all such Goods, Wares, Money or
Merchandise, as by the just and true proofs shall appear, the said J. D. to
have spent, imbeazled, wasted, consumed or lent, without consent, as aforesaid,
to the h^rt and hinderance of the said W. G. his Executors or Assigns, without
fraud or coven, That then, etc.

A Condition to acknowledge satisfaction upon a Judgment.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden J. P. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do or shall before the end of Easter
Term now next coming, after the (...) within written, by himself, or by his or
their lawful Attorneys, in the Kings Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, confess
and acknowledge satisfaction of all such Judgments and Executions, as the said
J. P. has recovered in the said Court against W. L. of, etc. Gentleman: That
then, etc.

A Condition to make assurance upon request.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden H. S. or his Assigns, shall and
will at all times hereafter, upon reasonable request, and at the Costs and
Charges of the within named J. F. his Heirs and Assigns, by such lawful act and
acts, thing and things, conveyances and assurances in the Law whatsoever, as by
the said J. F. his Heits or Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law
shall be reasonably devised or required, lawfully and sufficiently give, grant,
convey and assure unto the said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that,
etc. in the Town and Parish of I. in the County of D. now in the Tenure of,
etc. clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved and kept
harmless of and from all and all manner of former Bargains, Sales, Charges,
Titles, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever had, made, committed or done, by
the said S. H. or by any other person or persons whatsoever: That then, etc.

A Condition to find one his Diet by the year.
THe Condition, etc. that if the within-bounden. T. W. his Executors or
Assigns, do and shall at his and their own proper Costs and Charges, find,
provide and allow unto J. B. or any servant of the within-named I. B. in his
stead and place, good, wholesome and sufficient Diet, and Victuals of Meat and
Drink meet and convenient, and in such sort as is now by the above-bounden T.
W. allowed, for the time and space of one whole year, from the Feast of the
Nativity of, etc. next ensuing, etc. at or in the now, etc. And if at any time
the said I. B. or such said Servant of the said I. B. so to be dyeted for the
time being, shall absent himself from his said Commons, by the space of six
weeks or more together, at any time or times during the said term; If then and
so often as he shall be absent, the said T. W. his Executors or Assigns, do and
shall find Diet and Victuals for the said I. B. etc. for so long time after the
end of the said terms, as they shall have been absent, as aforesaid, according
to the true meaning of these presents: That then, etc.

A Condition to repay all such Charges as the Tenant shall be at, by reason of
the payment of his Rent, there being controversy concerning the Title of the
House.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas there is a Controversy or question between
the above-bound E. H. and others, touching their several right or interest in
the now dwelling House of the abovenamed T. T. situated, etc. And whereas
upon an agreement between the said E. H. and T. T. the said T. T. is c^ontented
to pay the Rent of the said House, it being 50 l. per annum unto the said B. H.
as the same shall grow due, according to his Lease. If therefore the said E. H.
his, etc. do and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said E.
T. his Executors or Assigns, all such Rent, sum or sums of Money, Charges and
Damages whatsoever, as shall by due proceeding in Law be adjudged or decreed
against him the said T. T. his Executors, etc. and all other Costs and Damages
whatsoever, which he the said T. T. shall sustain or be at, by reason of any
Actions, Suits or Forfeitures whatsoever, which shall or may happen or be unto
the said T. T. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by reason or means of
the payment of the said Rent, or any part thereof, unto the said E. H. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, That then, etc.

A Condition to discharge the Churchwardens and Parishioners of a Child born
in the Parish.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas one M. H. has of late been delivered of a
Man-child within the Parish of, etc. within written, to the which Child the
within-bound E. G. by his own voluntary confession does acknowledge himself to
be the Father; If therefore the said E. G. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or
every or any of them, do from time to time, and at all times hereafter, full
and clearly acquit, discharge and save harmless, as well the within-named J. B.
and H. T. Churchwardens of the Parish Church of, etc. aforesaid, and their
Successors for the time being, and every of them; as also all the Inhabitants
and Parishioners of the said Parish, which now are or hereafter shall be for
the time being, and every of them, of and from all and all manner of Costs,
Charges and Expenses whatsoever, which shall or may in any manner of wise at
any time hereafter arise, happen, come, grow or be imposed upon them, or any of
them, for, or by reason or means of the Birth, Education, nourishing and
bringing up of the said Child: And of and from all other Actions, Suits,
Charges, Troubles, Impeachments and Demands whatsoever, touching and concerning
the same: That then, etc.

A Condition for the surrender of Copyhold Lands, and to cause him to be
admitted Tenant.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden J. K. and his Heirs, do and
shall at the next Court to be holden for or within the Manor of H. in the
County of E. sufficiently and in due form of Law surrender and yield up unto,
or for the use and behoof of the within-named L. M. his Heirs and Assigns, or
of such other person or persons, and their Heirs and Assigns, as the said L. M.
shall nominate and appoint, All that his Copyhold, Message or Tenement, and
Lands thereunto belonging, containing by estimation sixteen Acres, be it more
or less, now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of N. O. or of his Assigns,
parcel of the Manor of H. aforesaid, with all and singular Outhouses,
Easements, Commodities and Appurtenances to the same appertaining, clearly
acquitted and discharged of all Dowers and titles of Dower whatsoever, and do
then and there also procure and cause the said L. M. or such other person or
persons by him to be nominated as aforesaid, to be only and lawfully admitted
Tenant of the same premises, so to be surrendered, according to the custom of
the said Manor: That then this, etc.

A Condition for quiet enjoying a Manor, according to an Assignment thereof.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-named R. J. his, etc. and every of
them, shall or may lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy
the Manor of S. with the appurtenances, in the County of O. with all Lands,
Tenements, Profits, Privileges, Rents, Court Leet, and Advowson, Woods,
Under-woods, and all other Hereditaments thereunto belonging or appertaining,
without the let, trouble, suit, eviction, disturbance or contradiction of the
within-bounden W. G. L. G. and M. G. or any of them, their, or any of their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or any other
person or persons whatsoever, having, claiming, or pretending to have any
manner of Right, Title, Interest, Property, Claim or Demand, of, in or to the
said Manor and Premises aforesaid; or of, in and to any part or parcel
thereof, by, from or under the said W. G. M. G. and L. G. or either or any of
them, according to the tenor, purport, effect and true meaning of one
Indenture of assignment, bearing date the, etc. made and sealed by the said W.
G. unto the said R. J. of the premises aforesaid, as by the said Indenture may
appear; That then, etc.

A Condition for assurance of Lands.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden W. B. shall upon reasonable
request to him to be made by the within-named T. H. his Heirs or Assigns, on
this side, and before the Feast Day of, etc. next ensuing the date
within-written, convey and assure unto the said T. H. his Executors and Assigns
for ever, one Close of Pasture; containing by estimation one Acre abutting upon
F. toward, etc. one other Close, etc. all which premises are situate, lying
and being in the Parishes, Towns and Fields of W. and G. or in some or one of
them, in the County of B. by such Conveyances and Assurances in the Law, as by
the said T. H. his Heirs and Assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the
Law, shall be reasonably devised, or advised and required (discharged of all
Encumbrances whatsoever, the chief Rents and Services thereof due and payable
to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the premises only excepted.)
And also if the said W. B. his, etc. and every of them, do and shall until the
said conveyance and assurance shall be made and passed, as aforesaid, quietly
permit and suffer the said T. H. his Heirs and Assigns to have, receive,
perceive, and take to his and their own proper uses and behoofs, the Rents,
Issues and Profits of all and singular the premises, and of every part and
parcel thereof, without any manner of let, suit, trouble, disturbance or
contradiction of the said W. B. his, etc. or any of them, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, by his or their, or any of their means, right,
title, interest or procurement, and without any account, or any other thing
therefore to be yielded, paid or done unto the said W. B. his Heirs or Assigns,
or to any other person or persons whatsoever: That then this, etc.

A Condition to pay a sum of Money quarterly.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden B. M. his, etc. or any of them,
do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the within-named N. D. his,
etc. the full sum of, etc. at or in the, etc. in manner and form following,
(viz) on the, etc. next ensuing the date above-written, the sum of 5 l.
thereof, at the place aforesaid, on, etc. 5 l. more thereof at, etc. on, etc. 5
l. more at, etc. and so forth every quarter of a year quarterly, one next and
immediately ensuing another; on every of the quarter days aforesaid, and at
the place abovenamed, for payment thereof, 5 l. until the said sum of, etc.
shall be in such sort, and after such manner, fully satisfied, contented and
paid, That then, etc. But if default of payment shall be made of or in the
payment of the said sum of, etc. or any part thereof, contrary to the manner
and form above-rehearsed, then it shall stand and abide, etc.

A Condition to lend a sum of Money at a certain day nominated, for a certain
time then following without interest.
THe Condition, etc. that if the within-bounden I. W. and N. Y. or either of
them, do and shall on the, etc. next ensuing the date within-written, deliver
and lend unto the within-named E. P. at or in the, etc. the full sum of, etc.
upon the single Bond of the said E. P. until the, etc. day of, etc. next
ensuing, without loan, interest, or other considerations to be had for the
same: That then, etc.

A Condition for payment of an Annuity.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound T. R. and T. P. or either of
them, their, or either of their, etc. or any of them, do and shall every year
yearly, for and after the Feast Day of, etc. next ensuing the, etc. well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid to the within-named J. S. his, etc. one Annuity,
yearly Rent, or Sum of, etc. of lawful, etc. at four usual Feasts or Terms in
the year; That is to say, on the Feast Day of, etc. by even and equal portions,
the first payment thereof to begin on the, etc. next ensuing the, etc. that
then the, etc. But if default shall happen to be made of, or in the payment of
the said Annuity, yearly Rent, or Sum of, etc. at any of the said Feast-dayes,
on which the same ought to be paid, at any time during the said term of, etc.
contrary to the true intent and meaning of these presents, That then it shall
stand and abide in full force, strength and virtue.

A Condition to pay a certain sum of Money at a day, and then to put in another
Surety, for payment of another Sum at a day then following.
THe Condition, etc. that if the within-bounden J. G. his, etc. or any of them,
do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the within-named C. D. his, etc.
the full sum of, etc. at or in the, etc. on the, etc. and then also do and
shall procure and cause another sufficient Surety to become bound with him the
said I. G. his, etc. unto the said C. D. his, etc. by their Obligation in due
form to be made, in the penalty of, etc. for the true payment of, etc. more of,
etc. then next following, and which shall be in the year of our Lord God, 1649.
at the place aforesaid, without fraud or coven, That then, etc.

A Condition for performance, concerning Co-partnership of an Award.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden W. D. his, etc. do for his and
their parts and behalfs, in all things well and truly stand to, observe,
perform, fulfill, and keep the Award, Arbitrament, Order, Final end,
Determination or Judgment of A. B. of, etc. and C. D. of, etc. Arbitrators
indifferently chosen, elected and named, as well on the part and behalf of the
said W. R. as on the part and behalf of the within-named W. I. to arbitrate,
award, order, judge, determine, and a final end to make, of, upon, touching and
concerning all and every Action and Actions, Suits, Variances, sum and sums of
Money, Claims and Demands whatsoever, had, moved, depending or stirring, or
having been, or now being in question, suit, trouble or controversy between
the said Parties, for, by reason or means of any manner of dealing, etc. during
the late Co-partnership, between the said W: and I. in any manner of wise, so
as the same Award, Arbitrament, etc. of the said Arbitrators, of, and upon the
Premises, or any part thereof, be made and put in Writing under their Hands and
Seals, ready to be delivered to the said Parties, on or before the, etc. next
ensuing the, etc. That then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless of a Recognizance taken for ones Appearance.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden J. R. his Heirs, do at all
times hereafter, and from time to time, clearly acquit and discharge, or
sufficiently save and keep harmless the within-named G. S. and B. N. and every
of them, their and every of, etc. against our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty,
and all others, of and from all and every such Recognizances, wherein and
whereby they the said G. S. and B. N. or either of them, stand charged or bound
to our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, for the said R. J. or for his personal
appearance in His Majesty's Court of Record, called the Kings Bench at
Westminster, in Trinity Term next, to answer all such matters as shall be
objected against him, and of, and for all and every sum and sums of money,
matters, thing and things, the said Recognizance and Recognizances, and every
of them mentioned or contained, and of and from all Actions, Suits, Costs,
Losses, Troubles, Extents and Damages, that shall or may arise or grow,
touching or concerning the same, or any of them, in any manner or wise: That
then, etc.

A Condition to save one harmless, for the bailing of one at two several
Actions.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-named J. D. at the special
instance and request of the within-bounden W. W. has main-prized or taken to
bail the said W. W. in the Sheriffs Court holden in the Compter in Wood-street,
London, of and for two Actions, the one of Trespass, Damages xx l. at the suit
of, etc. and the other of Debt, upon the demand of, etc. at the suit of, etc.
as by the Records of the same Court may appear; if therefore the said W. W.
his, etc. and every of them, do at all times hereafter, and from time to time
clearly acquit and discharge, or otherwise sufficiently save and keep harmless
the said J. D. his, etc. and every of them, and all his and their Goods and
Cha^tels, and every part and parcel of them, against all persons whatsoever, of
and for the main-prizing and taking to bail of the said W. W. and of and for
the several Actions aforesaid, and of and for all Actions, Suits, Costs,
Troubles, Demands, Executions and Damages whatsoever, that shall or may arise
or grow, touching or concerning the premises, or any of them, in any manner or
wise; That then this present Obligation to be void, etc.

A Condition for payment of Money, if a man be nonsuited.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas one E. G. is admitted to sue in Forma
Pauperis, in his Majesty's Court of, etc. against W. W. and A. B. for the
recovery of certain Lands and Tenements in the County of K. if the said E. G.
shall be Nonsuited in the said Action, or that the same Action shall pass
against him by Verdict, or otherwise, that if the above-bounden R. R. or E.G.
their Executors or Assigns, or any of them, do, or shall truly pay or cause to
be paid, all and fingular such Costs and Charges and sums of Money, as by any
the Justices of the said Court shall in that case be thought convenient, or
awarded without fraud, etc. That then, etc.

A Condition for performance of Covenants.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden H. W. his, etc. and every of
them, do well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, accomplish and keep all and
singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles, Clauses, Conditions and Agreements
whatsoever, which on his and their parts and behalfs, are, or ought to be
observed, performed, fulfilled and kept, mentioned and comprised in one pair of
Indentures of Lease, bearing date within-written, made between the within-named
E. W. of the one part, and H.W. of the other part, according to the tenor,
effect and true meaning of the same Indenture; That then, etc.

A Condition for passing of a Fine.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden W. E. and A. his now Wife, and
the Heirs of the said W. at the Costs and Charges in the Law of the
within-named R. M. his, etc. next ensuing the date, etc. shall levy one Fine,
etc. in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, of one Message or Tenement,
mentioned to be demised to the said R.M. in and by one Indenture of Lease,
bearing date, etc. made between the said W. E. on the one part, and the said R.
M. on the other part, according to the due course of Law, by such name or
names, and in such manner and form, as by the said R. M. his, etc. or by his or
their Council learned in the Law, shall be devised or required, as well for the
barring of the said A. from the Title of Dower in the premises, as for the
better assuring and confirming of the premises unto the said R. M. his, etc.
for and during all the said term, by the said Indenture of Lease, granted under
the Rent, in and by the said Indenture reserved against the said W. E. his
Heirs and Assigns, according to the true meaning of the said Indenture: That
then, etc.

A Condition concerning a Marriage.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas there is a Marriage (by Gods Grace) intended
to be shortly had and solemnized between the above-bounden A. B. and E. B.
Daughter of F. B. late of G. in the County of C. deceased; if after the said
Marriage shall be solemnized between the said Parties, it shall happen the said
A. shall die, and her the said E. shall survive, then if the said A. B. shall
at the time of his death, leave unto the said E. the sum of, etc. or the value
of, etc. for Goods and Chattels to be freely taken, had, used and disposed of,
by her the said E. her, etc. at her and their own wills and pleasures, without
any Claim, Challenge, Suit, Trouble, Disturbance, Contradiction or Demand, of,
for, in or to the said sum or value of, etc. or of any part or parcel thereof,
thereunto to be made by the Executors, etc. of the said A. B. or by any other
person or persons whatsoever: That then, etc.

A plain Bill of Debt.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I A. B. of, etc. do owe and
am indebted unto C. D. of, etc. in the sum of, etc. of lawful Money of England
to be paid unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, on
the, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, To the which payment well and truly to
be made, I bind me, my Heirs, Executors and Administrators, firmly by these
presents: In witness whereof, etc. I do hereunto set my Hand and Seal this
fourth of July; Anno Dom. 1648.

^ Bill Obligatory.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I A. B. of, etc. do owe and
am indebted unto C. D. of, etc. in the sum of, etc. of lawful money of England,
to be paid unto the said B. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, on
the, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, at, etc. To the which payment well and
truly to be made, I bind me, my Heirs, Executors and Administrators, in the sum
of, etc. of lawful money of England, firmly by these presents. In witness, etc.

A General Release.
KNow all men by these presents, That I J. K. of, etc. have remised, released,
and quit-claimed, and by these presents do for me, my Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto C. D. of, etc. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all and all manner of Actions and Suits,
cause and causes of Actions and Suits, Bills, Bonds, Writings and Accounts,
Debts, Duties, Reckonings, Sum and Sums of Money, Controversies, Judgments,
Executions and Demands whatsoever, which I the said J. K. ever had, or which my
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of us in time to come, can or may
have, to, for, or against the said C. D, his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, for or by reason of any matter, cause or thing whatsoever, from the
beginning of the World until the day of the date hereof. In witness, etc.

A Release upon the Receipt of a Legacy.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I T. B. of, etc. have the day
of the date hereof received of J. T. widow, Executrix of the last Will and
Testament of, etc. H. T. of, etc. deceased, all that Legacy or sum of, etc. to
me the said T. B. by the name of T. B. of, etc. given and bequeathed, of which
said sum of, etc. by me received as aforesaid, I acknowledge my self fully
satisfied and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do
clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said T. W. her Executors and
Administrators, and every of them by these presents: In witness whereof I have
hereunto set my Hand and Seal, etc.

A Release of Lands.
TO all Christian people, etc. Know ye, That A. B. of, etc. for diverse good
Causes and Considerations him moving, has remised, released, and for ever
quit-claimed, and by these presents for himself and his Heirs, does fully,
clearly, and absolutely remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto C. D. of,
etc. in his full and peaceably possession and seizin, and to his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, all such Right, Estate, Title, Interest and Demand
whatsoever, as he the said A. B. had, or ought to have, of, in, or to all, etc.
that the Manor of, etc. and, etc. by any ways or means whatsoever. To have
and to hold all the said Manor, etc. unto the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns, to the only use and behoof of the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, so that neither he the said A. B. nor his Heirs, nor any other person
or persons for him or them, or in his or their names, or in the name, right or
stead of any of them, shall or will by any way or means hereafter, have, claim,
challenge or demand any Estate, Right, Title or Interest, of, in, or to the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof; But from all and every Action, Right,
Estate, Title, Interest and Demand, of, in or to the premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, they and every of them, shall be utterly excluded and barred
for ever by these presents; And also the said A. and his Heirs, the said
Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and other the premises, with the
appurtenances to the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, to his and their own
proper use and uses, in manner and form afore-specified, against their Heirs
and Assigns, and every of them, shall warrant, and for ever defend by these
presents. In witness, etc.

A Release of Lands, with a Covenant to lead to the use of a Fine.
TO all Christian people, etc. I E. F. of, etc. send greeting, Know ye, That I
the said E. F. for good and valuable Considerations me moving, have given,
granted, remised, released, and quit-claimed, and by these presents do for me
and my Heirs, grant, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto T. M. of,
etc. (in his full, peaceable and quiet possession, and seisin being) and to his
Heirs and Assigns for ever; all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Use, Claim
and Demand whatsoever, which I the said E. F. now have, or had, or which my
Heirs, Executors or Administrators, at any time hereafter shall or may have or
claim, of, in, or to all the Message, Tenement or Farm, called, etc. in the
said County of, etc. or of, and into all and every, or any part or parcel
thereof, by force and virtue of any Fine, or other assurance thereof, or any
part thereof, acknowledged or made by the said T. M. and G. his wife, to me the
said E. F. And I the said E. F. do covenant and grant, for me, my Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, to and with the said T. M. his Heirs, Executors
and Assigns, that all Fines and other assurances whatsoever, heretofore
acknowledged, or levied of the premises, or any part thereof, by the said T. M.
and G. his wife, to me the said E. F. shall be for ever hereafter, and shall
inure to the use of the said T. M. and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said T.
M. for ever: and I the said E. F. and my Heirs, and all and singular the
premises unto the said T. M. and his Heirs, to the use aforesaid against me,
and my Heirs, etc. shall and will warrant and defend for ever, by these
presents. In witness whereof, etc.

A Revocation of uses.
BE it known, etc. That J. T. of, etc. do by this my present writing, sealed
with my Seal, and subscribed with my name, in the presence of H. S. T. O. C. B.
three credible witnesses, whose Names are subscribed, revoke, determine and
make void and frustrate, all and every the Uses and Estates mentioned, raised,
created, limited and made, in and by one Indenture of Lease, bearing date the,
etc. in the year of the Reign of, etc. made between me the said T. C. of the
one party, and J. B. of, etc. of the other party, of and for the house and site
and all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances,
in the said Indenture mentioned, and of and for every part and parcel thereof;
And I do by these presents absolutely limit, determine and appoint, that all
and singular the Feoffees, Parties and Persons in the said Indenture mentioned,
and their Heirs and Assigns, shall immediately, and from henceforth, stand and
be seized of the Site, House, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in
the said Indenture mentioned, and of and in every part and parcel thereof, to
the only use and behoof of me the said T. C. my Heirs and Assigns for ever, in
a pure and absolute estate in Fee-simple, and to none other use, intent or
purpose: In witness whereof, I the said T. C. have to this my present writing
put my Hand and Seal, and subscribed my Name in the presence of the said H. S.
T. O. C. B. three credible witnesses, whose names are likewise subscribed, the,
etc. in the year of the Reign, etc.

A Defeazance upon a Statute.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between J. J. of, etc. of the one part, and W.
G. of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses; That whereas the said W. G. by his
Recognizance in the nature of a Statute-Staple, bearing date with these
presents, taken and acknowledged before Sir J. L. Knight and Baronet, Lord
Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench Westminster, is and
stands bound unto the said J. J. in the sum of, etc. payable, as in the said
recited Recognizance or Statute-Staple may appear: Nevertheless, the said J. L.
is contented and pleased, and does for himself, his Executors or
Administrators, covenant, promise and agree, to and with the said W. G. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, by these presents, that if the said W. G.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and
truly content and pay, or cause to be paid unto the said J J. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of, etc. on the, etc. next ensuing the
date of these presents, at or in the, etc. That then the said recited
Recognizance or Statute-Staple of, etc. shall be utterly void and of none
effect, or else shall stand and abide in full force and virtue. In witness, etc.

A Defeazance upon a Judgment.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. and W. C. of, etc.
witnesses; That whereas the said A. B. has in Trinity term last, recovered
against W. C. the sum of, etc. besides Costs of Suit in his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, and thereupon had Judgment against the said W. C.
as by the Record thereof remaining in his Majesty's said Court, more at large
it does and may appear; Nevertheless, the said A. B. is contented and pleased,
and does covenant and grant by these presents for him, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, to and with the said W. C. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, That if the said W. C. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, do and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said A. B.
his Executors or Assigns, the full sum of, etc. at or in the, etc. That then
and in the mean time he the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall not take out any Execution against the said W. C. his Goods,
Chattels, Lands or Tenements; And that upon payment of the said sum of, etc. at
the day and place abovenamed for payment, the said A. B. his, etc. at the
request, costs and charges in the Law of the said W. C. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall and will acknowledge satisfaction upon Record,
of and for the said Judgment, so as he the said W. C. do make unto the said A.
B. his Executors and Administrators, good, lawful and sufficient releases of
Errors, and of all Mis-prisions, Desaults and Imperfections, had, committed,
omitted or perpetrated, in or about the said Judgment or Recovery, or any
Entries, Pleas, Pleadings, Process, Proceedings, or other matter touching or
concerning the same. In witness, etc.

A Defeazance upon a Mortgage of Lands formerly forfeited.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between R. T. of, etc. on the one part, and E.
F. of, etc. of the other part, witnesses; That whereas the said E. F. by his
Indenture bearing date, etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did
give, grant, bargain, sell, and confirm unto the said R. T. his Heirs and
Assigns, all that the Manor of, etc. with the right, members and appurtenances
thereof, in the County of, etc. and also diverse other Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, in the same Indenture specified, in which said Indenture there
is contained a Condition or Proviso, to this effect following; That is to say,
That if the said E. F. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or any of them, do
truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the said R. T. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of, etc. at or in, etc. that then, and
from thenceforth, from and after such full payment, had and made in manner
aforesaid, the said recited Indenture, and every the Covenants, Grants,
Articles and Agreements therein contained, shall be utterly void and of none
effect, as by the said Indenture, amongst diverse Covenants, Grants, Articles
and Agreements therein contained, may more at large appear. Which said sum of,
etc. was not paid at the day and place of payment before limited for the
payment thereof, according to the tenor of the said Proviso or Condition. By
reason whereof, the said Manor, Lands, and other the premises in the said
Indenture mentioned, are absolutely vested and sealed in the said R. T. yet
nevertheless the said R. T. is contented and pleased, and does covenant and
grant to and with, etc. that if the said E. F. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, etc. or any of them; do well and truly content and pay, or
cause to be paid unto the said R. T. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
the full sum of, etc. on the, etc. at or, etc. That then (upon the said payment
of the said sum of, etc. in manner and form aforesaid) and from thenceforth the
said recited Indenture of Bargain and Sale made of the said Manor and other
premises, shall be utterly void, and of none effect, the breach made in
non-payment of the said sum of, etc. in the Proviso of the said Indenture
mentioned, or any other grant or thing therein contained to the contrary
thereof, in any wise notwithstanding. And that, also upon full payment of the
said sum of, etc. that at any time or times after, within the space of seven
years then next following, He the said R. T. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and
will, at the reasonable request, costs and charges in the Law of the said E. F.
his Heirs and Assigns, grant, convey and assure unto the said E. F. for ever
the said Manor of, etc. with the appurtenances, and all and singular other the
premises, in and by the said recited Indenture granted as aforesaid, in such
manner and form, as by the said E. F. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their
Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or required; so as in
the said conveyance and assurance so to be made by the said R. T. his Heirs and
Assigns, there be no further or other warranty, than only against him and his
Heirs. And so as also the said R. T. his Heirs or Assigns, be not compelled to
travel further than the Cities of London or Westminster, for the doing and
executing of the same assurance. And also that he the said R. T. his Heirs,
Executors or Assigns, shall and will deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the
said E. F. his Heirs or Assigns, within six Months next after such payment
made, all and every the Deeds, Evidences and Writings which the said R. T.
has, touching or concerning the premises, safe, whole, uncancelled and
undefaced. In witness, etc.

A Bill of Sale, with a Proviso, That if the Money, with allowance, be paid by
a day, then to be void.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I A. B. of, etc. for and in
consideration of the sum of 10 l. to me in hand paid at the ensealing and
delivery of these presents by C. D. of, etc. Have bargained and sold, and in
plain and open Market, according to the Custom of the City of London, Have
delivered unto the said C. D. these several parcels hereafter mentioned (viz.)
etc. To have and to hold the said several parcels, and every of them bargained
and sold as aforesaid, unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns for ever: Provided always, that if I the said A. B.
my Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do well and truly content and pay, or
cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
the full fum of 10 l. 10 s. of, etc. on, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, at
or in the, etc. that then, etc. And I the said A. B. for my self, my Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, do covenant and grant to and with the said C. D.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, That if default
be made of or in payment of the said sum, or any part thereof, contrary to the
form aforesaid, That then I the said A. B. my Executors and Administrators, and
every of us, shall and will warrant, and for ever defend the said several
parcels, and every of them, unto the said C. D. his Executors and Assigns,
against all men by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Household Stuff.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I T. N. of, etc. for and in
consideration of the sum of 25 l. of, etc. to me in hand paid at the ensealing
and delivery of these presents by A. R. of, etc. whereof I acknowledge my self
fully satisfied and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do
clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said A. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, have granted, bargained and
sold, and by these presents, do fully, clearly and absolutely grant, bargain,
sell and deliver unto the said A. R. all such Goods and Household Stuff, and
Implements of Household, and all other things mentioned and contained in a
Schedule hereunto annexed, now remaining and being in one Message, House or
Tenement, and the Garden and Yard thereunto belonging, called Dales, situate,
lying and being in Hammersmith, in the County of Middlesex, and now in the
Tenure or Occupation of the said T. N. or of his Assigns. To have and to hold
all and singular the said Goods, Housholdstuff and Implements of Household, and
every of them, before by these presents bargained and sold, or mentioned to be
bargained and sold unto the said A. R. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns for ever, to do and dispose of them, and every of them, at his and
their will and pleasure. And the said T. N. for himself, his Executors,
Administrators and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and with
the said A. R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents,
that he the said T. N. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them, all and singular the said Goods, Utensils, Implements of Household and
Housholdstuff before bargained and sold, and every of them, unto the said A. R.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, against all and every other person
and persons whatsoever, shall warrant and for ever defend by these presents. In
witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Leases and Goods, on Condition to pay Debts and Legacies.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I A. T. of, etc. Have given,
granted, bargained, sold, and by this my present Deed do give, grant, bargain
and sell unto R. T. my Son, all my Leases, or Lands held by Lease for years,
and all my Goods and Chattels, both real and personal, both moveable and
unmovable, quick and dead, of what kind soever they be of, and in whose Hands,
Custody or Possession soever they be; To have and to hold to the said R. and
his Assigns for ever, to his and their own proper use and behoof for evermore,
upon condition following, (that is to say) that the said R. shall well and
truly content and pay, or cause to be contented and paid all my Debts
whatsoever, and also shall pay and perform, or cause to be performed and paid
all my Gifts and Legacies, which I the said A. T. shall ordain and appoint by
my last Will and Testament. In witnes^, etc.

The form of an Award.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing of Award indented shall
come, G. M. of, etc. sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting: Whereas
diverse Questions, Controversies and Suits, have been had, moved and depending
between J. P. of, etc. of the one party, and R. H. of, etc. of the other party;
as well for and concerning the interest and profits of the Rectory and
Parsonage of, etc. as also for other causes and actions, for the appeasing
whereof, either of the said Parties have elected and chosen me the said G. M.
to be Arbitrator indifferently between them, and to that end have bound
themselves either to other by Obligation, in the sum of 100 l. to stand to, and
abide the Award, Arbitrament and Judgment of me the said G. M. touching the
premises. Now know ye, That I the said G. M. taking upon me the charge of the
said Award, and minding that a final end and agreement shall be had and
continued from henceforth between the said Parties touching the premises, do
make and declare this my Award in manner and form following: That is to say;
First, I award, etc.

A Protection in time of Parliament.
FOrasmuch as I have special Occasions to employ the Bearer hereof, A. B. my
Servant, in and about my Service and Occasions, during this present Session of
Parliament: These are therefore to will and require you to forbear to arrest,
attach or imprison him the said A. B. but to permit and suffer him peaceably
and quietly to go about his business, at his will and pleasure, during all this
present time of Parliament, without any your suit, arrest or disturbance, as
you will answer the contrary at your peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal the, etc.
A Surrender of Copyhold Land, by way of Mortgage.
MEmorandum, That the day and year above-written E. L. of, etc. did out of
Court by the hand of R. G. and J. F. two of the customary Tenants of the said
Manor, Surrender by the Rod into the Hands of the Lord of the said Manor, two
parcels of Land, with the appurtenances, containing by estimation seven acres
or thereabouts, one parcel whereof lies in Hammersmith, within the aforesaid
Parishes of, etc. Between the Lands of G. L. and R. M. Esquire on the East; and the
Lands of G. M. Gentleman, on the Weft; the Common Sewer on the North; and the
Lands of W. H. on the South; and the other parcel of Land, containing by
estimation four acres, being in, etc. between the Land of the Bishop of, etc.
on the West; the Glebe-lands belonging to the Parsonage of, etc. on the East;
the Lands of, etc. on the North; and the Lands of the said E. P. on the South;
To the only use and behoof of J. P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. To have and
to hold the said parcels of Land, and every of them, with their and every of
their appurtenances unto the said J. P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
according to the custom of the said Manor. Provided always nevertheless, and
upon this condition, That if the said E. L. his Heirs or Assigns, do well and
truly content and pay, or cause to be paid unto the said J. P. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of one hundred thirty and four pounds
of lawful money of England, on the, etc. next ensuing the date within-written,
at or in, etc. That then this present Surrender to be void and of none effect,
or else to stand and abide in full force and virtue.

An Assignment of a Judgment.
TO all, etc. A. C. of, etc. sends greeting. Whereas T. W. of, etc. and H. F.
of, etc. by their Obligation bearing date, etc. in the tenth year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES, etc. are and stand jointly and severally bound
unto the said A. C. in the sum of, etc. with condition of payment of, etc. on
the, etc. then next following at, etc. as by the same Obligation may appear,
which sum of, etc. was not paid at the day and place before expressed for the
payment thereof, whereby the said Obligation became forfeited: sithence which
time the said A. C. has commenced her Action of Debt upon the said recited
Obligation, in His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench at Westminster, and has
thereupon recovered and obtained a Judgment of 200 l. and 25 s. costs of Suit,
against the said T. W. in Hillary Term last past, before the date of these
presents. Now know all men by these presents, That she the said A. C. for
diverse good Causes and Considerations her thereunto moving, has constituted
and appointed her well-beloved Friend T. K. of, etc. her true and lawful
Attorney for her; and in her Name to demand, ask, levy, recover, receive and
take of the said T. W. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the
said sum of 200 l. and 25 s. costs of Suits, and for default of payment
thereof, or of any part thereof, to sue forth one or more Writ or Writs of
Execution, or other lawful Process whatsoever, and further do, and use all
other lawful ways and means for the recovery thereof, as by the said Attorney,
or his Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised, advised or
required, and the said sum and sums of Money so to be had and received upon the
said Judgment, or upon any Execution thereon to be prosecuted and taken out, to
detain and keep to the only use and behoof the said T. K. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns; without any account thereof or therefore to be
rendered to her the said A. C. and the said A. C. does hereby covenant, promise,
grant and agree, to and with the said T. K. her said Attorney, that at the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, the said Judgment is and remains
unpaid and unsatisfied, and that she the said A. nor her Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, nor any of them, shall or will at any time
hereafter, release, discharge, or otherwise do or suffer to be done, any act or
thing whatsoever, to discharge or impeach the validity of the said Judgments,
without the consent and agreement of the said T. K. in writing under his Hand
and Seal first had and obtained; Nor shall revoke or countermand the authority
and power to him by these presents given and granted, she the said A. C. hereby
ratifying and approving all and every lawful act and acts, and other
proceedings whatsoever, which her said Attorney shall prosecute, commence or
sue forth, for, upon or by reason of the said Judgment, so always that he the
said T. K. do and shall at all times hereafter, and from time to time, pay and
bear all such sum and sums of Money, Costs and Charges of Suit, as the said A.
C. or her Executors, Administrators or Assign^, shall be compelled to disburse
for or concerning the premises; and do and shall also save, defend and keep
harmless and indemnified her the said A. C. her Executors and Administrators,
and her and their Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels and Hereditaments
whatsoever, of and from all and all manner of Costs, Charges, Suits, Troubles
and Detriments whatsoever, that shall or may happen or come against her the
said A. C. her Executors and Administrators, for or by reason of the said
Judgment, or any execution thereof had or taken. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of an Annuity.
TO all Christian people, etc. T. D. of, etc. sends greeting, etc. Whereas T.
D. of, etc. late Uncle of the said T. D. party to these presents, in and by one
Indenture bearing date the, etc. and in the, etc. made between the said T. D.
Uncle to the, etc. of the one part, and B. E. and G. C. of, etc. of the other
part, purporting certain uses, as in the same Indenture is limited and
expressed, Did give and grant unto the said T. D. party to these presents, one
annuity or yearly payment of 10 l. of, etc. per annum, for and during the
natural life of the said T. D. party to these presents, to begin to be paid
yearly to the said T. D. party to these presents, from and after the decease of
A. D. late wise of the said T. D. the Uncle, as by the said Indenture, among
diverse other things therein contained, more at large appears. Now know ye, That
the said T. D. party to these presents, for and in consideration of the sum of,
etc. to him in hand at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents
by W. P. of, etc. well and truly paid, whereof and wherewith the said T. D.
party to these presents, acknowledges himself fully satisfied, contented and
paid by these presents, and for diverse other, etc. Has given, granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully,
clearly and absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the
said W. P. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as well the said annuity
or yearly payment of, etc. as also the Estate, Right, Title, Interest,
Property, Claim and Demand, which the said T. D. party to these presents, has
or may, can, might, should or ought to have of, in or to the same, by force and
virtue of the said Indenture of uses, or any thing therein contained, or
otherwise. And the said T. D. party to these presents, for him, his Executors
and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said W. P.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, in manner and
form following: That is to say, that he the said T. D. party to these presents,
now has lawful authority to give, grant, bargain and sell the said annuity, in
manner and form aforesaid: And that heretofore neither he, nor any other by his
appointment, or with his consent, has made any former bargain, sale, gift,
grant, assignment, surrender, extinguishment, charge or encumbrance of the said
annuity, or yearly payment of, etc. or of any part thereof, Nor that he the
said T. D. party to these presents, nor any other by or from him, or with his
consent, have or has done, nor hereafter at any time shall do, commit or
suffer to be done, any act, deed or thing whatsoever, whereby the said W. P.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall or may be hindered or let of,
or in the having, receiving and enjoying of the said annuity or yearly rent, or
any part thereof; and that the said W. P. his Executors. Administrators or
Assigns, shall and may from time to time, and at all times from and after the
decease of the said A. D. for and during the natural life of the said T. D.
party to these presents, lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use and
possess, occupy and enjoy the said annuity or yearly rent of, etc. and every
part and parcel thereof, To the only proper use and behoof of the said W.P. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns for ever, without the let, trouble,
molestation, interruption or disturbance of him the said T. D. party to these
presents, or any other person or persons, by his means, title or procurement.
And further, that the said T. D. party to these presents, shall and will from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, at the reasonable request, costs and
charges in the Law of the said W. P. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
do or cause, procure or suffer to be done, all such further act and acts, thing
and things, for the further assuring of the premises to the said W. P. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during the natural life of the
said T. D. party to these presents, after the death of the said A. D. as by the
said W. P. his Executors or Assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the
Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised or required. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease.
THis Indenture made, etc. between H. S. of, etc. of the one part, and R. L.
of, etc. of the other part; Whereas J. H. of, etc. by his Indenture of Lease
bearing date the, etc. for the consideration therein expressed, did demise,
grant, set and to farm-let unto the said H. S. all that Message or Tenement,
called or known by the name of, etc. situate, lying and being in Feet-street,
London, and then in the Tenure or Occupation of the said J.H. together with all
Watercourse, Lights, Ways, Easements, Commodities and Appurtenances
whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the
premises thereby granted, or any of them then made or belonging. To have and to
hold the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the before
mentioned premises, with their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said
H.S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast Day of, etc.
last past, before the date of the same Indenture, unto the full end and term of
twenty one years from thenceforth next ensuing, and fully to be complete and
ended: Yielding and paying therefore yearly, during the said term of twenty one
years, the yearly rent of, etc. at the four usual Feasts or Terms in the year,
that is to say, at the, etc. or within ten days next ensuing any of the said
Feasts, by even and equal portions, as in and by the said Indenture of Lease,
among diverse Covenants, Grants, Articles, Clauses and Agreements therein
contained, whereunto relation being had, more fully and at large appears. Now
this Indenture witnesses, That the said H. S. for and in consideration of the
sum of, etc. to him in hand at and before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents by the said R.L. well and truly paid, whereof and wherewith he
acknowledges himself fully satisfied and paid; and thereof, and of every part
and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit and discharge the said R. L. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for ever, by these presents, Has
granted, bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and by these presents does
grant, etc. unto the said R. L. all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, term of
years yet to come and unexpired, property, claim and demand whatsoever, which
he the said H. S. now has, or may, might or ought to have or claim of, in or
to the before mentioned premises, and every or any part or parcel thereof, with
the appurtenances, by force and virtue of the said Indenture of Lease, or any
thing therein contained, or otherwise howsoever, Together with the said
Indenture of Lease, To have and to hold as well the said premises before
mentioned to be demised, in and by the said Indenture of Lease, as also all the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Use, Possession, Claim and Demand whatsoever of
him the said H. S. of, in and to the premises, unto him the said R. L. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the day of the making hereof; for
and during all the residue and number of years yet to come and unexpired of the
said term of, etc. in and by the said Indenture of Lease granted in such like,
and in as large and ample manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as the
said A. S. now has, or enjoys, or may, might, or ought to have and enjoy the
premises, by force, virtue and means of the said Indenture of Lease, or any
thing therein contained, or otherwise howsoever; Together with the said
Indenture of Lease as aforesaid. And the said H.S. for himself, his Executors
and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said R. L.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, That the said R.
L. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and may lawfully, peaceably
and quietly have, hold, possess and enjoy the before mentioned premises, and
every part thereof, with the appurtenances, for and during the residue and
number of years yet to come and unexpired, of the said term of, etc. in and by
the said Indenture of Lease granted, without any lawful let, suit, trouble,
denial or interruption of him the said H. S. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, and that freely and clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise
well and sufficiently save and keep harmless, of and from all other Gifts,
Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Rents, Arrerages of Rents, Forfeitures,
Re-entries, cause and causes of Re-entries, Troubles and Encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, committed or done by the said H. S. his Executors,
Administrators, etc. the Rents and Covenants in and by the said recited
Indenture of Lease reserved, which on the Tenants or Lessees part and behalf of
the same premises from henceforth are or ought to be paid, performed and done
(only excepted and foreprized) of which said Rents and Covenants, the said R.
L. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does covenant, promise and
grant to and with the said H.S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by
these presents, clearly to acquit and discharge, or otherwise from time to
time, and at all times hereafter from henceforth, well and sufficiently save
and keep harmless and indempnified the said H. S. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and every of them by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Preamble of a Will.
IN the Name of God, Amen. The sixteenth day of October, 1647. in the twenty
third year of, etc. IG. H. of, etc. being sick and weak in Body, but of sound
and perfect memory (praise be given to God for the same) and knowing the
uncertainty of this life on Earth, and being desirous to settle things in
order, do make this my last Will and Testament in manner and form following:
That is to say, First and principally I commend my Soul to Almighty God my
Creator, assuredly believing that I shall receive full pardon and free
remission of all my Sins, and be saved by the precious Death and Merits of my
blessed Savior and Redeemer Christ Jesus, and my Body to the Earth, from
whence it was taken, to be buried in such decent and Christian manner, as to my
Executors hereafter named shall be thought meet and convenient. And as touching
such worldly Estate as the Lord in mercy has lent me, my Will and meaning is,
the same shall be employed and bestowed, as hereafter by this my Will is
expressed; And first, I do revoke, renounce, frustrate and make void all Wills
by me formerly made, and declare and appoint this my last Will and Testament.
Item, I give and bequeath, etc.

A Condition to pay Money at the day of Marriage, or day of Death.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the within bounden A. B. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, do well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto the within-named C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at
or in the, etc. the sum of, etc. within six Months next after the
Solemnization of the Marriage of the abovesaid A. B. or the day of death and
decease of B. C. of, etc. Gentleman, which shall first happen after the date
within-written, without fraud or coven: That then, etc.

A Condition to deliver Hay and Cats by a day, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden J. A. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, do and shall well and truly deliver, or cause to be
delivered unto the within-named T. J. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
at, etc. five Cart-loads of good, sweet, well made, and well-dryed Hay, every
Load containing, etc. and twenty quarter of sound, wholesome and sweet Oats,
good and Merchantable ware, every quarter to contain, etc. between the
Feast Day of St. John the Baptist, and St. James the Apostle, next ensuing the
day within-written, frank and free, without any thing therefore to be paid,
without fraud or coven: That then, etc.

A Condition to perform Covenants.
THe Condition, etc. that if the within-bound L. R. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, do and shall at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, pay,
do and keep all and every the Covenants, Grants, Articles, Clauses, Provisoes,
Payments and Agreements, which on his or their parts and behalfs are and ought
to be observed, performed and fulfilled, paid, done and kept, specified and
comprised in a certain pair of Indentures of Lease bearing date within-written,
made between the within-named L. R. on the one part, and N. G. on the other
part, and that in and by all things, according to the true intent and meaning
of the same Indenture; That then, etc.

A Condition to abide the Award of Arbitrators, if they make an arbitrament,
and if not, then to abide the umpirage of an umpire.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bounden A. S. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, for his and their parts and behalfs in all
things, do well and truly stand to, and abide, observe, perform, obey, fulfill
and keep all and every the award, arbitrament, doom, determination, final end
and judgment of Sir T. S. of, etc. and H. S. of, etc. Arbitrators indifferently
nominated, elected and chosen, as well on the part and behalf of the
within-bound A. S. as on the part and behalf of the within-named F. F. to
award, arbitrate, determine and judge of, for, upon, or concerning all and all
manner of Judgments, Executions, Actions, Suits, Cause and Causes of Action and
Suit, Accounts. Reckonings, Sum and Sums of Money, Trespasses, Strifes,
Variandes, Quarrels, Controversies, Judgments, Executions and Demands
whatsoever, had, made, moving or depending, or having, being and beginning
between the said Parties at any time or times, before the day of the date of
these presents. So always, that the said award, arbitrament, doom,
determination and judgment of the said arbitrators of, for, or upon the
premises, be made or put in writing indented under their Hands and Seals, and
ready to be delivered to the said Parties, or to such of them as shall come and
require the same of the said arbitrators, on this side or before the, etc. and
if the said arbitrators shall make and put in writing indented no such award or
arbitrament, as aforesaid, for and upon the premises, at or before the said day
of, etc. if then the said A. S. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and
every of them, for his and their part and behalf, in all things, do well and
truly stand to, abide, obey, observe, perform, fulfill, pay and keep all and
every the award, umpirage, arbitrament, determination, final end and judgment
of Sir R. R. of, etc. Umpire indifferently elected and chosen on the part and
behalf of either of the said Parties to award, arbitrate, determine, and
finally to judge of, for, upon or concerning all and singular the aforesaid
premises; so always that the said award, umpirage, arbitrament, determination,
final end and judgment of the said Umpire, of, for, or concerning the same
premises, be had and put in writing indented under his Hand and Seal, at or in
the, etc. and ready to be delivered to the said Parties, or to such of them as
shall come and require the same of the said Umpire. That then, etc.

A Condition that one shall not demise or alien, without consent.
THe Condition, etc. That if neither the above-bound R. R. nor his Assigns, nor
any of them, do or shall at any time hereafter, demise, grant, bargain, sell,
or otherwise do away his or their Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Claim and
Demand either in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or otherwise, to any person or persons
whatsoever, of, in or to that the Manor of, etc. in the County of, etc. with
the right, members and appurtenances thereof in the said, etc. whatsoever, or
of, in or to any part or parcel thereof, which he the said R. R. or his Heirs,
have, has or had, may, might, should or ought to have or claim of, in or to
the said Manor, with the appurtenances, without the consent and agreement of
the abovenamed T. J. his Heirs or Assigns, or some of them to that effect
first had and obtained in writing, under his, their, or some of their Hands and
Seals. That then this, etc.

A Condition to justify all such Actions as shall be commended by reason of a
Letter of Attorney.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound J E. by his Deed, or Letter
of Attorney, bearing date, etc. has made and constituted the within-named W.
D. his true, lawful and sufficient Attorney, to ask, levy, recover and receive,
for him, and in his name, to the only proper use and behoof of the said W. D.
his Executors and Administrators, 200 l. of, etc. wherein R. C. of, etc. by his
Obligation bearing date, etc. is and stands bound unto the said J. E. as by
the same Letter of Attorney more at large it does and may appear. If therefore
the said J. E. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do at all
times hereafter, and from time to time, avow, justify and maintain all and
every such lawful action and actions, plaints, process, suits, judgments and
executions, as the said W. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or
such as the said W. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall
thereunto assign, name and appoint, shall attempt, commence and pursue in the
name of the said J. E. his Executors or Administrators, against the said R. C.
his Executors or Administrators, or any of them, upon or by reason of the said
recited Obligation. And also that if neither the said J. E. his Executors or
Administrators, or any of them, shall hereafter willingly do or procure to be
done any manner of act or acts, thing or things, whereby the said debt of 200
l. or any part or parcel thereof, is or shall be released, or in any wise
discharged, or whereby or by reason whereof any action or actions, writ, plea,
process, or execution to be had, attempted, brought or executed, for, touching
or concerning the suing for, or recovery of the said sum of 200 l. shall be any
way impeached, abated, withdrawn, delayed or hindered, except it be by and with
the consent of the said W. D. his Executors or Administrators, under his or
their Hands and Seals, first had and obtained in writing; That then, etc.

A Condition for payment of Money yearly, with a Clause to find new Sureties,
upon death of any of the former.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound R. D. W. D. and R. B. or any of
them, their, or any of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the within-named J. A. his Executors or
Assigns, yearly from henceforth, for and during the term of twenty one years,
the yearly sum of, etc. at or in, etc. at the four usual Feasts or Terms in the
year: that is to say, at the Feast of, etc. or within twenty days next after
every of the said Feasts, by even and equal portions to be paid; And if it
shall happen the said R. D. W. D. or R. B. or either of them, to die or depart
his or their natural life or lives before the said term of twenty one years
shall be fully ended, next after the date within-written: If then the said R.
D. his Executors or Administrators, do within three Months next after request
in that behalf to him or them to be made by the said J. A. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, procure and cause such other sufficient and able
person or persons to become bound, and enter into Bond unto the said J.A. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by Obligation in due form to be made for
the same payment of the said yearly sum of, etc. for and during so many years
as shall be then to come and unexpired of the said term of twenty one years,
and with the like clause for putting in other new Sureties, as herein is
expressed, as shall be of sufficient ability to answer and pay the sum of
money, wherein he or they shall so stand bound, if the same should be
forfeited: That then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless from Legacies.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound W. W. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, do and shall from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise well and
sufficiently save and keep harmless the within named B.F. his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, and every of them, and his and their Goods, Chattels,
Lands, Tenements, Possessions and Hereditaments, and every of them, as well
against the Children of R. E. late of, etc. deceased, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, as also against all and every
other person or persons whatsoever, of, for, from and concerning all and all
manner of Gifts, Legacies, Childrens Portions, sum and sums of Money, and
Bequests whatsoever, given and bequeathed unto them, and every or any of them,
in and by the last Will and Testament of the said R. E. or otherwise, and of
and from all Actions, Suits, Costs, Judgments, Extents, Executions and Demands
whatsoever, which shall or may at any time hereafter happen to arise, come or
grow, to, for of against the said R. F. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, or any of them, upon or by reason of the same: That then, etc.

A Condition not to molest, sue or trouble for any matter or cause before past.
THe Condition, etc. That if neither the within-bound A. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any other person or persons, for him or them, or
in his or their name or names, do not at any time or times hereafter, molest,
sue, vex or trouble the within-named C. D. his Executors or Administrators, or
any of them, by any manner of ways or means whatsoever, for, upon or by reason
of any matter or cause whatsoever had, made, moving or depending between the
said Parties, from the beginning of the world, until the day of the date
within-written: That then, etc.

A Condition to seal a Counter-part of an Indenture by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if one A. B. of, etc. shall on this side, and before
the first of, etc. seal and subscribe to the Counter-part of one Deed indented,
bearing date, etc. made between the within named W. M. of the one part, and the
said A.B. of the other part: and the same so sealed and subscribed, to deliver
as his proper act and deed, to the only use and behoof of the said W. M. and
also the said Counter-part of the said Deed indented, so sealed, subscribed and
delivered by the said A. B. in manner and form aforesaid, do on this side, and
before the, etc. then next, ensuing, deliver or cause to be delivered unto the
said W. M. his Heirs or Assigns, whole, uncancelled and undesaced, at or, etc.
That then, etc.

A Condition for acknowledgment of a Fine.
THe Condition, etc. that if the above-bounden G. S. and A. his Wife, do and
shall at and before the, etc. next ensuing the date within-written, at the
Costs and Charges in the Law of the within-named R. P. his Heirs or Assigns,
before the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, acknowledge
and levy one Fine, Sur conusans de droit comme ceo ont de ils done, etc. unto
the said R. P. his Heirs, etc. with Proclamation according to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm in that behalf provided, of all those Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, lying and being in P. in
the County of E. which by one Deed indented, bearing date with these presents,
are mentioned to be bargained and sold by the said G. S. to the said R. P. his
Heirs, etc. and every part and parcel thereof, to the only use and behoof of
the said R.P. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to the true
intent and meaning of the same Deed, as by the said R. P. his Heirs or Assigns,
or by his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised and
required: That then, etc.

A Condition to deliver an Obligation by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-named T. M. by his Obligation
bearing date, etc. and stands bound unto the within-bounden P. F. in the sum
of 100 l. with Condition, etc. as by the same Obligation may appear, if
therefore the said P. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do or shall
on or before the, etc. next ensuing the date within-written, deliver or cause
to be delivered unto the said T. M. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
the said recited Obligation cancelled or to be cancelled; That then, etc.

A Condition to pay Money during life.
THe Condition, etc. that if, etc. W. W. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, do or shall yearly, for and during the natural life of
A. W. of, etc. well and truly pay of cause to be paid unto the within-named W.
M. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for and toward the maintenance of
the said A. the sum of, etc. at or in, etc. on four days in every year: That
is to say, on the, etc. by even and equal portions, the first payment thereof
to be made and begin on the, etc. next ensuing the date within-written, he the
said W. W. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, every such payment,
sealing and delivering to the said W.W. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, to his and their use, a sufficient acquittance and discharge in
writing under his Hand and Seal of the money so paid, and so from time to time
received; That then this, etc.

A Condition to assign over a Lease by a day.
THe Condition, etc. that if, etc. J. W. in consideration of 300 l. to him in
hand paid by the within-named P. C. do and shall on this side, and before, etc.
next ensuing the date within-written, at the Costs and Charges in the Law of
the said P. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by good conveyance and
assurance in the Law, grant, convey and assure unto such person and persons as
the said P. C. shall nominate and appoint; as well one Indenture of Lease made
by and from A. B. to the said J. W. bearing date, etc. and all Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments therein and thereby demised and granted, as also all the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Rent, Reversion, Property, Claim and Demand
whatsoever of him the said J. W. of, in or to the premises, clearly discharged
of all Encumbrances whatsoever, done or to be done by the said J. W. or any by
his means, consent or procurement, except one Lease heretofore made by the said
J. W. to one T. T. of the premises, whereupon the yearly Rent of 100 l. is
reserved, which said yearly Rent shall or may from henceforth be paid to the
said P. C. or such person or persons as he shall name or appoint during the
continuance of the said Lease; and if the said J. W. do and shall permit and
suffer the said P. C. and his assigns, from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, to have, receive and take the Rents, Issues, and Profits of the
premises, without the let or denial of the said J. W. or his Executors: That
then, etc.

A Condition for quiet enjoying of a Message.
THe Condition, etc. that if the within-named J. M. his Heirs and Assigns, and
every of them, shall and may for ever from henceforth peaceably and quietly
have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy all that Message or Tenements, and
Lands, situate, lying and being in, etc. and every part and parcel thereof,
mentioned to be bargained and sold by the within bound R. W. to the said J. M.
in and by a certain Indenture of Bargain and Sale, bearing date the day of the
date within-written, made between the within bound R. W. and A. his wife on the
one part, and the abovenamed J. M. on the other part, clearly discharged or
otherwise sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of and from all and all manner
of Estates, Titles, Troubles, Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, or any time
heretofore had, made, committed, permitted, suffered or done by the said R. W.
and A. his wife, or either of them, or by his or their means or procurement.
That then, etc.

A Condition not to do any act to prejudice the Estate of the Obligee in a
Lease, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound R. R has not done, nor that he,
his Executors or Administrators, at any time hereafter, shall wittingly or
willingly do, or assent unto any manner of act or acts, device or devices
whereby or by reason whereof, the interest, estate and term of years, which the
withinnamed H. B. has of, in or to any the Messuages, Lands, Grounds,
Tenements or Hereditaments, called, etc. or any part or parcel thereof, is, or
shall be alienated, bargained, sold, assigned, determined, avoided or
encumbered, or whereby one Obligation or Deed obligatory, bearing date the, etc.
last past before the date within-written, is or shall be discharged, released
and made void, or lose any manner of force or strength, except it be by and
with the assent, consent and agreement of the within-named H. B. his Executors
or Administrators, wherein one R. A. Citizen, etc. stands bound to the said
R. R. in the sum of, etc. with a certain condition thereupon endorsed, touching
the Messuages, Lands and Tenements called, etc. as by the same may appear: That
then, etc.

A Condition to pay Rent during a Lease parol, and at the end to depart,
leaving the Goods and Household Stuff mentioned, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the abovenamed T. L. has by Lease parol set
and to farm-let to the above-bound T. D. all that Capital Message, etc. for
the term of, etc. to be reckoned and accounted from the, etc. at and for the
yearly Rent of, etc. of lawful, etc. payable in form following: that is to say,
on the, etc. If therefore the said T. D. his Executors, Administrators,
Under-Tenants or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said T.L. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said
yearly Rent or Sum of, etc. in manner and form, as is before expressed. And
also if the said T. D. his Executors, Administrators, Under-Tenants and
Assigns, do at the end and expiration of the said term of, etc. to be reckoned
as aforesaid, depart out of the said house, and leave the possession thereof,
and other the premises, and leave behind him all such Locks, Keys, Bolts,
Hinges, Doors, Easements, Glass, Glass-windows, Wainscot, Dressers, Shelves,
and other things as now do belong or appertain to the said Message, etc. or
which at any time hereafter, during the said term, shall be set up, placed,
made or provided in or about the same premises, at the Costs and Charges of the
said T. D. unto the said T. L. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, that
then, etc. But if the default be made in payment of the said Rent of, etc. in
manner and form above declared, or if the said T. D. his Executors or Assigns,
shall not perform the other Clauses and Agreements herein contained, without
fraud or coven: That then, etc.

A Condition that he shall enjoy quietly the aforesaid Message without
interruption of any, during the said Lease parol.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above-bound T. L. has the day of the
date above-written by Lease parol, demised and to farm-letten unto the
abovenamed T. D. all that Capital Message, etc. for term of, etc. to be
accounted from the, etc. and for the yearly Rent of, etc. And whereas the said
T. D. by his Obligation bearing date the day of, etc. with condition
there-under written for payment of the said Rent or Sum of, etc. and performing
other clauses and things in such manner and form, as in the said Condition is
mentioned, as in and by the Obligation and Condition before mentioned may more
at large appear. If therefore the said T. D. his Executors, Administrators,
Under-Tenants and Assigns, and every of them, shall or may from time to time,
and at all times during the said term of, etc. lawfully, peaceably and quietly
have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy all that the said Capital Message,
etc. and appurtenances thereunto belonging, in as full, large and ample manner,
as he the said T. L. had, used or enjoyed the said premises, without any let,
suit, trouble, interruption or disturbance of the said T. L. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or of any other person or persons by his or their
means, act, consent, title, interest, privity or procurement; That then, etc.

A Condition where Money is given by a Will to a Wife and her Children, and the
Money being paid by the Executor to the Husband of the Wife, to be employed for
their Benefits, the Husband is bound to employ it well, or to repay it, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas T. H. of, etc. Gentleman, deceased, did by
his last Will and Testament in writing, give and bequeath unto M. one of the
Daughters of E. H. and now the wife of the above-bound J. S. the sum of, etc.
and the sum of, etc. to the four Children of them the said J. and M. which said
sum of, etc. together with the said sum of, etc. more, the abovenamed H. H.
and W. H. have at and before the ensealing and delivery of this present
Obligation, paid and delivered unto the said J. S. to be by him employed in
stock, for the benefit and advantage of the said M. and the said four Children.
If therefore the said J. S. do and shall from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, use his best skill and endeavor to manage and employ the said, etc.
in a stock for the best benefit and advantage of the said M. and her said four
Children. And if the said J. S. do not, nor shall not employ the said, etc. in
good manner as the same ought to be, according to the true intent and meaning
hereof: Then if the said J. S. do within six months next after request to him
made in that behalf by the said H. H. and W. H. or either of them, their or
either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for the use and behoof of
the said M. and her said four Children, pay unto the, etc. the full sum of,
etc. or the full worth or value thereof, in good and valuable Goods and
Chattels, without fraud or coven: That then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless an Executor, he not meddling with the Executorship.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas W. H. late of, etc. by his last Will and
Testament in writing, did nominate and appoint the within-named J. L. and
others, Executors of his said Will: since which time the said J. L. is become
sole Executor of the said Will. And whereas the said J. L. has not at any time
or times intermedled with, had taken or received any of the Debts, Goods,
Housholdstuff, Plate, Chattels or Hereditaments, of or belonging to the said W.
H. but that the same have been equally divided and distributed to and amongst
the, etc. part and part alike. And forasmuch as the, etc. did of their own
accord satisfy and pay such Debts, Duties and Legacies, as the said W. H. did
owe, give and bequeath, and had and received the acquittances for the same,
without the consent of the said J. L. If therefore the said, etc. and every or
any of them, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every or any of
them, do and shall from time to time, and at all and every time and times
hereafter, freely and clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge; or otherwise,
upon request made, well and sufficiently save and keep harmless and
indempnified the said J. L. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and his
and their Goods, Chattels and Hereditaments, and every of them, of and from all
sum and sums of Money, Bills, Bonds, Debts, Duties and Demands whatsoever,
which shall or may at any time or times hereafter, happen to be demanded or
recovered of and from the said J. L. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or
any of them, for or by reason of the Executorship of the said last Will and
Testament, and of and from all Actions, Suits, Troubles, Costs, Charges and
Demands whatsoever, which shall or may happen, arise or grow, for or by reason
of the same premises, without fraud or coven: That then, etc.

A Condition to discharge an Executor from an Orphans portion in London, being
received without consent.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas A. H. Spinster, one of the Daughters of W. H.
late of, etc. deceased, has taken and received the full third part of the sum
of, etc. Which he the said W. H. left in his house at the time of his decease,
his several Charges, Debts and Legacies, being paid and discharged out of the
said sum of, etc. And her full fourth part of all the Goods, Plate, Chattels,
Utensils, and Implements of Household, as were belonging unto the said W. H. at
the time of his decease, and also her full fourth part of the sum of, etc.
which was paid upon Bond due from, etc. For all which said sums of Moneys,
Plate and Goods, the within bound R. H. and R. A. have hereby undertaken to
acquit, discharge and save harmless the within-named R. M. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns. If therefore the said R. H. and R. A. or either of
them, their or either of their executors, administrators or assigns, do and
shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, clearly acquit, exonerate
and discharge, or otherwise upon request made, well and sufficiently save, keep
harmless and indempnified the within-named R. M. his executors, administrators
and assigns, and his and their Goods, Chattels and Hereditaments, and every of
them, as well against the Officers of the City of London, for the Court of
Orphans, and every of them, and against all and every other person and persons
whatsoever. As also of and from all actions, suits, costs, losses, charges, sum
and sums of money, and demands whatsoever, which shall or may at any time or
times hereafter happen to arise or grow, or to be demanded or recovered of and
from the said R. M. his executors, administrators or assigns, or any of them,
for or by reason of the same several sums of Money and Household Stuff so by the
said A. H. had, taken and received, as aforesaid, and every of them, without
fraud or coven; That then, etc.

A Condition for an hired Servants truth.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the abovenamed H. H. has taken and received
into his Service the above-bound T. K. If therefore the said T. K. do and shall
at all times hereafter, and from time to time, during so long time as the said
T. K. shall dwell with the said H. H. well and truly serve the said H. H. his
Master, without consuming, imbeazling, wasting, losing, mispending, or
unlawfully making away any of the Money, Plate, Goods and Chattels of the said
H. H. his Master, or any person or persons whatsoever, which shall be committed
to his charge and custody, by reason of his said Service. And if the said T. K.
shall by negligence or otherwise consume, imbeazle, waste, lose, mis-pend, or
unlawfully make away any Moneys, Plate, Goods and Chattels of the said H. H.
his Master, or any other person or persons whatsoever, that shall be committed
to his Charge and Custody, by reason of his said Service, as aforesaid: Then if
the said T. K. the above-bound P. W. and J. K. or any of them, their or any of
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall within
three months next after the due proof thereof, either by the confession of the
said T. K. or otherwise howsoever; and notice or warning thereof given or left
at or in, etc. in writing, or otherwise, unto or for the said P. W. and J. K.
or either of them, make sufficient recompense, satisfaction and payment unto
the said H. H. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for the said Moneys,
Goods, Chattels, so consumed or imbeazled as aforesaid; Then this present
Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else, etc.

A Condition to pay Rent reserved upon a Lease.
THe Condition, etc. that if the within-bound K. H. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, or some of them, do well and truly pay, or cause to
be paid unto the within-named D. F. and J. S. and the Heirs and Assigns of the
said J. All that yearly Rent reserved and payable unto the said D. F. and J. S.
and unto the Heirs and Assigns of the said J. upon and by virtue of a certain
pair of Indentures of Lease, bearing date the day of the date within-written,
made between them the said D. F. and J. S. on the one part, and the said R. H.
on the other part, at such days and times, by such equal and quarterly
portions, and in such manner and form during all the said term thereby granted,
as the same in and by the said Indenture is limited and appointed to be paid,
without fraud or coven: That then, etc.

A Condition to discharge Executors from the payment of Legacies to Nonage.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas M. H. Widow, by her last Will and Testament
bearing date, etc. did give and bequeath unto three Sons of M. T. Widow, the
sum of, etc. a piece to each of them. And whereas also the within-named T. P.
at and before the day of the date within-written, has paid unto the
within-bound R. M. to and for the use of the said three Sons of M. T. Widow,
(viz.) J. H. and M. the said sum of 300 l. given unto them by the said M. H.
deceased. If therefore the said R. M. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
do well and sufficiently save and keep harmless and indempnified the said T. P.
and R. E. Executors of the said last Will and Testament, and either of them,
their and either of their Executors, Administrators and Assigns; as also their
and either of their Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as
well against the said I. H. and M. and every of them, as against all other
person and persons whatsoever, of, or concerning the said Legacy of, etc.
apiece, to them the said I.H. and M. given and bequeathed as aforesaid. And
also do obtain and get sufficient and lawful releases and acquittances, or
other discharges from them the said J. H. and M. and every of them
respectively, as they shall attain their full ages of twenty years, or within
three months next ensuing their said full ages of, etc. respectively to be
made unto the said T. P. and R. F. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
purporting discharges for their said Legacies given and bequeathed as
aforesaid, without fraud or coven: That then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless from a Letter of Attorney.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bound A. C. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, do and shall from time to time, and
at all and every time and times for ever hereafter, acquit, discharge, save,
defend and keep harmless and indempnified the abovenamed R. N. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and his and their Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, and every of them, of, and from all and all manner of
Actions and Suits, Costs, Charges, Troubles, Losses and Detriments whatsoever,
which shall or may at any time or times hereafter, arise, happen or be, unto,
for, or against the said R. N. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for,
concerning, or by reason of one Letter of Attorney, bearing date the day of the
date above-written, which the said A. C. has sealed and delivered unto the
said R. N. or any Suit or Suits commenced, or to be commenced by virtue
thereof. And also if the said A. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
do or shall, upon re quest to him or them to be made, well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid unto the said R. N. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns
all such sum and sums of Money as the said R. N. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, shall be compelled to disburse or lay out, for or by reason of any
Suit or Suits, arrests, or other things whatsoever, concerning the premises:
That then, etc.

A Condition to pay Money at the expiration of an Apprentiship.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas M. C. Daughter of, etc. by her Indenture of
Apprentiship bearing date with these presents, has put her self an Apprentice
unto the within-bound J. S. and L. his Wife, and with them to dwell and serve,
as their Apprentice, from the Feast of, etc. unto the end and term of, etc,
from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, as by the same
Indenture of Apprentiship more at large appears. And whereas also the
within-named I. P. the day of the date hereof, has lent, disbursed and
delivered to the said I. S. the sum of 20 l. of, etc. to occupy as a stock
during the term. If therefore the said I. S. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them do well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said M. C. or her assigns, the full sum of, etc. at the full end
and expiration of the said term of seven years, or at the day of the Marriage
of the said M. which of them shall first and next happen to be or come after
the date hereof, without fraud or coven: That then, etc.

A Condition of an Obligation, wherein one Executor stands bound to another to
do his diligence in the execution of a Will, and from time to time to give a
just account.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas I. B. of, etc. Gentleman, has named and
appointed the within-bounden T. A. to be one of his Executors, together with
the within-named G. B. If therefore the said T. A. do from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, use his utmost diligence and endeavor for the true
execution of the said last Will and Testament, according to the trust in him
reposed by the said I. B. do also from time to time yearly, until the said last
Will and Testament be fully and wholly fulfilled and performed, make by
himself, or by some other lawfully authorized by him, a true account to the
said G. B. at or in, etc. at any time between the first and last day of
November yearly. And (...) upon he making up of every such account or accounts,
the said T. A. his, etc. shall make delivery of the moiety and one half of all
sums of Money, Goods and Chattels that the said T. A. his, etc. shall have in
his or their Custodies, or shall have received by virtue of the said
Executorship of the said last Will and Testament of the said I. B. That then,
etc.

A Condition that the Lessor shall pay Money back upon the Lessees dislike of a
Farm.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas there has been communication between the
within bound T. B. and the within-named P. C. for and concerning one Farm,
called A. in the County of S. now in the Occupation of the said T. B. to be
granted by the said T. to the said P. for the term of six years. If in case the
said P. C. shall mislike to proceed in the same, and of such misliking to give
notice to the said T. B. before the last day of, etc. next ensuing, at the
Message of the said Farm. Then if the said T. B. his Executors, etc. do within
three days next after such notice of misliking given, well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid to the said P. not only the sum of 61. of, etc. to him the
said T. delivered at the ensealing hereof, but also do pay or satisfy unto the
said P. all such sums of money and other things as the said P. has, or before
that time shall have paid or be at, for the sowing and manuring of the said
Farm, or any part thereof: That then, etc.

A Condition for building and setting up a Farm or a House.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-named E. W. his executors,
administrators or assigns, do at his and their own Costs and Charges, on this
side, and before the Feast of, etc. next coming after the date above-written,
not only well work, and substantially erect, build and set up, or cause to be
erected, built and set up one good and substantial new frame or building, of
good, new, sufficient and well-soasoned Timber of heart of Oak, to serve for
the Plat or Foundation already set forth or made within the Message or Inn,
called or known by the name or sign of the Ship, in the Parish of Saint
Clements Danes, in the County of Middlesex, which shall contain from the West
toward the East, forty Foot of Assize, and in breadth from North to South,
twenty five Foot of Assize, and with part thereof, which shall extend from the
South-part of the measure beforementioned toward the South, shall continue in
length twenty Foot, and in breadth eighteen Foot and twelve Inches: All which
said building shall contain in height three Stories and an half, and every
Story to contain in the height seven Foot of Assize at the least: But also do,
before the said Feast of, etc. at his like Costs and Charges, fit and furnish
the same Building with Floors boarded, Doors, Stairs, Pent-houses, and other
things pertaining to, or being Carpentary work, with sufficient Nails for the
same, and Hooks and Hinges for all the Doors: in which said Building there
shall be such and so many stairs as the within-named P. G. shall appoint, and
to be set in such place and places as the said P. shall nominate; and there
shall be in the Stories extending West and East, partitions, and three several
Rooms; and in every Room one imbowed Window, with such and so many clear
Windows as the said P. shall appoint, and in every of the Stories of the
Building, extending from North to South, one Partition, and one Room, in every
of which Room there shall be one imbowed Window: all which to be well and
sufficiently finished, as aforesaid, before the said Feast, etc. next coming.
That then, etc.

A Condition to save Three harmless which are bound for One by Recognizance to
the Chamber of London for Orphans money.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas the within-named J.
C. J. L. and W. G. at the instance and request of the above-bound E. K.
together with the said E. K. in the Inner-Chamber of the Guild Hall of the City
of London, are become jointly and severally bound unto R. B. Chamberlain of the
City of London aforesaid, and to his Successors Chamberlains of the same City,
in the sum of 350 l. of, etc. with condition amongst other articles in the said
Recognizance specified, for the true payment of 300 l. of like money unto the
said Chamberlain, or his Successor, to the use of E. and J. Orphans of T. B.
late Citizen and Grocer of London, deceased, at such time as they or either of
them, shall accomplish their several ages of twenty one years, as by the said
Recognizance and Condition thereof more at large may appear. If therefore the
said E. K. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, do from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, discharge, exonerate, acquit, or otherwise well and
sufficiently save and keep harmless the said J. C. J. L. and W. G. and every of
them; and the Heirs, Executors and Administrators of them, and every of them,
and all and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels
of them, and every of them, against the said Chamberlain and his Successors,
and against all and every other person or persons whatsoever, of, for and
concerning the said Recognizance and all and singular sums of money, penalties,
forfeitures, and things whatsoever, in the said Recognizance, or condition
thereof, or either of them, contained or specified: and also of, for and
concerning all and singular Actions, Suits, Judgments, Extents, Executions,
Molestations, Costs, Charges, Troubles, Encumbrances and Demands whatsoever,
which shall or may arise, grow, happen or be, by reason or means of the said
Recognizance. And also if it happen the said E. K. before the said sum of 300
l. be fully paid to the said Chamberlain, or his Successors, according to the
tenor and purport of the said condition of the said Recognizance, to decease,
or by any means to come to poverty and insufficiency of himself, to his goods
and chattels, out of the liberties of the City aforesaid, to absent, withdraw
or purloyn: Then if the said E. K. his heirs, executors or administrators,
within six months next after such decease, coming to poverty and
insufficiency, or such withdrawing, absenting or retaining himself, or his
Goods or Chattels out of the liberties of the City aforesaid, or upon
reasonable request, do make true payment unto the said Chamberlain or
Successors, of the said sum of 300 l. to the use aforesaid: and then also
within the same six months, or upon such request, as aforesaid, do cause and
procure the said Recognizance, and all Extents and Executions of the same, to
be clearly and lawfully discharged and made void: That then, etc.

A Condition from the Undersheriff to a High Sheriff for saving harmless.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the abovenamed Sir M. G. Knight, Sheriff of
the County of B. has assigned and deputed the abovenamed R. B. his
Undersheriff: If therefore the said B. N. the above-bound C. R. and G. D.
their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do at all time
and times hereafter, save and keep harmless and indempnified, as well the said
Sir M. G. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them,
as also the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of the
said Sir M. G., of, for, touching or concerning the returns, and executions
(...) all such Process, Writs and Warrants of what nature soever they be, as
are or shall be hereafter directed to the Sheriff of the said County of B. and
shall be brought and delivered, or offered to be delivered to the said B. N.
during the term that the said Sir M. G. shall be Sheriff of the said County:
And of and from all Issues, Fines and Amerciaments, which shall happen to be
imposed or taxed upon the said Sir M. G. for or concerning the not executing,
wrongful executeing, or detaining in his hands, any Writs, Process or Warrants;
and of, for and concerning all Escapes of all and every person or persons that
shall be arrested or apprehended by virtue of any such Process, Writ or
Warrant; during the time that the said Sir M.G. shall continue Sheriff of the
said County of B. And also if the said B. N. C. R. and G. D. their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, shall save harmless and
indempnified the said Sir M. G. and his Heirs and Assigns, and his and their
Lands, Goods and Chattels of, for and concerning all such account and accounts,
as the said Sir M. G. is and shall be charged withal, as Sheriff of the said
County of B. to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, in any of
His Majesty's Courts, and of all sums of money which shall be levied or
received by the said B. N. as Undersheriff of the said Sir M. G. or any
Bailiff, or other person by the direction or assent of the said B. N. to the
use of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors. That then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless a Surety from a Bond of Arbitrament.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bound A. D. his Executors and
Administrators, or any of them, do and shall from time to time, and all times
hereafter, well and sufficiently save and keep harmless and indempnified the
abovenamed G. M. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and his and their
Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels and Hereditaments, of, for, from and
concerning one Obligation bearing date the day of the date above-written,
wherein the said G. M. at the request of the said A. D. is and stands bound
unto R. M. Gentleman, in the sum of 100 l. with Condition there-under written,
that the said A. D. abide the award of W. M. and T. B. Esquires, Arbitrators,
and of and from all Actions, Suits, Arrests, Costs, Charges and Demands
whatsoever, concerning the premises, without fraud or coven: That then, etc.

A Condition, if money be not paid at the day, then to surrender certain
Copyhold Lands, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound B. L. do not, or shall not well
and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the within-named J. P. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of, etc. on the, etc. next ensuing the
date within-written, at, etc. according to a Proviso or Condition mentioned in
a Deed or Surrender, bearing date the day of, etc. Then if the said E. L. and
A. his wife, do and shall at the next Court to be holden for the Manor of, etc
lawfully and absolutely surrender into the hands of the Lord of the said
Manor, to the only use and behoof the said J. P. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, according to the custom of the said Manor, the said several parcels of
Land, with their and every of their appurtenances in the said Surrender
mentioned. And also if the said J. P. his Heirs or Assigns, shall or may
peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the said parcel of Land, and every
of them, with their and every of their appurtenances so surrendered, as
aforesaid, freely and clearly acquitted of and from (...) and all manner of
former and other Surrenders, Bargains, (...) Gifts, Grants, Troubles and
Encumbrances whatsoever, and of and from the Thirds of the said M. now of the
said J. P. That then, etc.

A Letter of an Attorney, or an Assignment to receive and keep money due upon a
Bond, wherein is a forfeiture, or nomine poenae upon discharge without consent.
TO all Christian people, etc. I W. S. of, etc. send greeting in our Lord God
everlasting. Whereas B. S. of, etc. and R. B. of, etc. by one Obligation
bearing date, etc. Anno Domini, 1647. are and stand jointly and severally bound
unto the said W. S. in the sum of, etc. with condition there-under written, for
the true delivery of forty six Quarters of Rye, as by the said Obligation with
condition, more at large appears. Now know ye, That I the said W. S. as well
for and in consideration that the Obligation was made in the name of me the
said W. S. only in trust, for the use of R. S. of, etc. as for diverse other
good Causes and Considerations me hereunto moving, have given, granted,
assigned and set over, and by these presents do give, grant, assign and set
over unto the said R. S. his Executors and Assigns, as well the said Obligation
and Sum of, etc. therein mentioned; as also all my right, action and demand to
and in the same: Giving, and by these presents granting unto the said R. S. by
virtue hereof, my full and whole power and authority, for me, and in my name,
but to the only use of the said R. S. his Executors and Assigns, to demand,
ask, levy, recover and receive of the said R. S. and R. B. and of either of
them, their Executors or Assigns, the said sum of, etc. mentioned, and due by
the said Obligation, and to use all lawful ways and means for the recovery
thereof: and the same so had and received, to detain and keep to his own use
and behoof, without any account thereof, or therefore to be rendered. And I the
said W. S. do covenant and agree, that for any act or acts, thing and things
whatsoever by me, or by any other heretofore by my appointment done or
committed, or hereafter to be done or committed, the said Obligation now is,
and hereafter shall stand and continue in full force and effect, and that
neither I the said W. S. my Executors or Assigns, shall nor will acquit,
release, or otherwise discharge the payment or delivery of forty six Quarters
of Rye, to the condition of the said Obligation mentioned, without the special
license, consent and agreement of the said R. S. his Executors or Assigns,
first had and obtained in writing, under his or their Hand and Seal. And to the
true performance of all and every the Articles and Agreements hereby expressed
on the part of me the said W. S. to be done and performed, I bind me, my Heirs,
Executors and Administrators by these presents, in the sum of, etc. (nomine
poenae) to be forfeited and paid unto the said R. S. his, etc. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive Rents.
TO all, etc. I E. D. of, etc. send greeting, etc. Know ye, That I the said E.
D. for diverse good causes me hereunto moving, and especially for the trust and
confidence which I have and do repose in C. K. of, etc. have made, ordained,
constituted and invested, and in my place and stead by these presents, have put
the said C. K. to be my lawful Attorney, for me and in my name, and to the use
and behoof of me the said E. D. my Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to
ask, demand, levy, recover and receive of G. H. of, etc. the sum of, etc. for
one half-years Rent of and for the Manor of B. in the County of, etc. due at
the Feast of, etc. last past, before the date hereof: Giving, and by these
presents granting unto my said Attorney, by virtue hereof, full power and
absolute authority, for me, and in my name, and to and for my use, benefit and
commodity, to ask, levy, recover, receive and demand of the said H, G. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the said Rent or Sum of, etc. due and
payable, as aforesaid. And upon the receipt thereof; or any other agreement on
that behalf had and made, for me, and to my use, to make, seal and deliver, for
me, and in my name, and as my Deed, all and every such acquittance and
acquittances, or other discharges, as to the said C. K. shall be thought meet
and convenient to be given: And to do, follow, execute and finish for the
receipt and recovery thereof, all and every such act and acts, thing and
things, device and devices, as to the said C. K. shall be thought fit and
convenient, ratifying, allowing, confirming and approving all and whatsoever my
said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done in or about the premises
by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to demise, survey or sell a Manor.
TO all, etc. Know ye, That we the said G. S. and E. M. for diverse good causes
and considerations us hereunto especially moving, Have made, ordained,
constituted, and in our place and stead, put and authorized R. N. and H. B. or
either of them, our true, sufficient and lawful Attorney and Attorneys, for us,
and in our names, and for the use of us the said G. S. and E. M. to enter into
all those the Manors of W. T. and J. with their rights, members and
appurtenances in the County of C. and in the advowsons of or belonging to them,
or any or either of them, and into every part and parcel thereof: and the same
Manors, or either or any of them, for us, and in our names to view and survey;
And by these presents, for us, and in our names, do give full power and
authority to the said R. N. and H.B. and to either of them, to be our Steward
or Stewards of our said Manors, and either of them, and to keep such Court and
Courts of Survey, and other Court-leets, and Law-days, of and upon the said
Manors, or any of them, as our said Attorneys, or either of them shall
appoint, or shall be by them, or either of them thought fit: And the same
Manors, and every and any of them, for us, and in our names to bargain, sell,
lease or grant to such person and persons, and for such estates, for life or
lives, inheritance, or otherwise, and for such Sum and Sums of Money, as to our
said Attorneys, or either of the^ I shall be thought meet and convenient, to
the uttermost and best commodity and profits of us the said G. S. and E. M. and
the Deed and Deeds of the same Grant, and Estates so to be made, for us and in
our names, to seal, and as our Deed or Deeds, to deliver unto the Parties to
whom the same shall be so made, or to any other to their use and uses, and the
counterparts of the same, for us and in our names, to accept and receive: And
also all such Fines, and other sum and sums of Money, as shall grow due for the
same, for us and in our names, and to the use of us the said G. S. and E. M. to
collect, gather, receive and take, and all such Rents, Duties, Heriots,
arrerages of Rents, and profits of Courts, as are already, or hereafter shall
be due or payable, for, out of or concerning the premises, or any of them. to
receive: Giving, and by these presents granting to our said Attorneys, and
either of them, our full power and lawful authority, touching and concerning
the premises, to do, execute, proceed and finish in all things, in as ample
manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as we the said G. S. and E. M. or
either of us, might or ought to do, if we, or either of us, were then and there
personally present: And ratifying and allowing all and whatsoever our said
Attorneys, or either of them, shall do in or about the premises, or any of
them, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. In witness,
etc.

A Letter of Attorney to deliver a Lease upon the Land.
TO all, etc. I J. M. of, etc. Whereas I the said J. M. have subscribed and
sealed one writing, bearing date with these presents, and hereunto annexed,
purporting a Demise unto W. W. of, etc. of all that the Manor of G, with the
appurtenances, in the County of Y. and of one Message, 300 acres of Land, 100
acres of Meadow, 200 acres of Pasture, and 100 acres of Wood, with the
appurtenances in C. aforesaid, now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of W. C.
his Assignee or Assignees: To have and to hold the said Manor, and all other
the premises, unto the said W. W. his Executors or Assigns, for the term of
five years, under the yearly Rent of, etc. as by the said Deed indented may
appear. Now know ye, That I the said J. M. for diverse good Causes and
Considerations me hereunto especially moving, have made, ordained, constituted
and authorized, and in my place and stead by these presents, have nominated and
put W. G. of, etc. my true sufficient and lawful Attorney, for me and in my
name, into all that the said Manor of C. and into the said Message. 300 acres
of Land, 130 acres of Meadow, 200 acres of Pasture, and 100 acres of Wood, with
the appurtenances, and into every or any part or parcel thereof, in the name of
the whole to enter, and peaceable and quiet possession and seisin thereof, for
me, and in my name, to take, and for every such possession and seisin thereof,
or any part thereof, had and taken, as aforesaid, for me, and in my name, as my
act and deed, to deliver unto the said W. W. or his certain Attorney, upon some
part of the aforesaid premises, the said Writing or Deed indented, subscribed
and sealed, as aforesaid; And all and every other act and thing requisite and
necessary to be done in, about or concerning the premises, for me, and in my
name, to do or cause to be done. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to keep Court.
KNow all men by these presents, That we P. L. and H. S. of, etc. do hereby
authorize, constitute and appoint G. C. of, etc. Gent. our lawful Deputy and
Attorney, for us, and in our names to appoint a Steward and Bailiff of and for
our Manor of B. and H. and by himself, or his sufficient Deputy, to and for
our use, to keep Courts within the said Manors, or either of them, and to give
admittance upon alienation or death, and to take and receive Attornments of all
and every the Tenants thereof, and to and for our use, to assess Fines upon
such admittances, and for us, and in our names, and to our use, to receive the
said Fines: and also such Heriots as shall be due upon such death or
alienation, and likewise to receive all Rents and arrerages of Rents, and also
all Amerciaments, Perquisites and Profits, that shall arise or grow due to us,
or any of the said Courts. We do also further authorize and appoint the said G.
C. to gather, take up and seize to our use, all Wayfes, Estrayes, Deodands,
Outlaws and Felons Goods, which shall happen to arise, be due, or fall within
the said Manors, or either of them.

Given under our Hands and Seals the, etc. In the, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to take possession of Lands newly purchased.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I J. H. Citizen, etc. have
made, ordained, constituted, authorized and appointed, and by these presents do
make, ordain, constitute, authorize and appoint, and in my stead and place by
these presents, put T. C. of, etc. my true, sufficient and lawful Attorney, for
me, and to my use, to take and receive peaceable and quiet possession and
seizin of, and in all that Message or Tenement, and all and singular the Lands
and Premises thereunto belonging, with the rights, members and appurtenances,
situate, lying and being in, etc. lately bargained and sold by B. P. unto me
the said J. H. and the same possession so had and taken, to detain and keep to
the only use, and behoof of me the said J. H. my Heirs and Assigns, according
to the tenor and true meaning of the Indenture, whereby the said premises are
conveyed unto me, ratifying, allowing and confirming all and whatsoever my said
Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done, in or about the premises, by
these presents. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney, for a Steward of a Manor to receive Rents, with
authority to impound and distrain.
TO all, etc. I G. K. of, etc. send greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know
ye, That I the said G. K. for and in consideration of the special trust and
confidence which I have and do repose in my well-beloved Friend C. P. of, etc.
Gent. have made ordained, constituted, authorized and appointed the said C. P.
my true, sufficient and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my name, stead and
place, to the only proper use and behoof of me the said G. K. my Executors and
Administrators, to collect, gather, demand and receive, of all, every or any my
Tenants or Farmers, of all, every or any my Lordships, Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, in the County of G. all and every such
sum and sums of Money, Rents, arrerages of Rents, Amerciaments, Heriots, Fines,
Issues and Profits whatsoever, as shall any wise grow due, accrue, be issuing
or payable unto me the said G. K. out of all or any my said Lordships, Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Heredital ^ents: And upon the receipt of all, every, or
any such sum or sums of Money, Rents and Profits, for me, and in my name, to
make and give acquittances, or any sufficient discharges to any of my said
Tenants or Farmers, requiring the same. And the same sum and sums of Money,
Rents, Issues and Profits so had and received, to pay and deliver to me the
said G. K. my Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to be accomptable unto
me the said G. K. my Executors and Administrators, from time to time, for all,
every or any the said sum or sums of Money, so as asonesaid, by the said C. P.
had, taken and received at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, next ensuing
the date hereof, or before the end of Candlemas Term then next ensuing; and at
the Feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Lady St. Mary the Virgin then next
following; or before the end and expiration of Trinity Term then next ensuing,
and so from time to time, at the Feasts and Days before prefixed, to give and
make a true account or accounts to me, during the continuance of the power to
him given and granted, as aforesaid. And further, I do by these presents give
full power and authority to my said Attorney, at any time hereafter, to elect
and choose some one sufficient and able person to be Steward of my Courts of my
said Manors, etc. and also to place and displace at his will and pleasure,
upon just occasion, any Bailiff, or other Officer or Officers whatsoever, as
occasion shall require; and also giving, and by these presents granting unto my
said Attorney, full power and lawful authority, for me, and in my name, stead
and place, and to my use, as aforesaid, for non-payment of all, every or any my
said Rents, arrerages of Rents, Issues, Amerciaments and Profits, to distrain,
impound, arrest, sue, implead and imprison all, every, or any my said Tenants
or Farmers, which shall refuse to pay my said Attorney, all or any such sum and
sums of Money, Rents, Issues and Profits, by them, or any of them, respectively
due and payable unto me, as aforesaid, and the same persons again to discharge,
acquit and release of and from the same, at his will and pleasure. And further,
to do or cause, or procure to be done in and about the premises, all and
whatsoever to the said C. P. shall seem requisite and needful to be done, as
effectually, as if I my self were then and there personally present. And which,
etc. so to be done, I do hereby covenant and grant, for me, my Heirs, etc. to
justify, aver and maintain, as fully and perfectly, to all intents,
constructions and purposes, as though the same were actually done by my self.
In witness, etc.

A Warranty of Attorney to confess a Judgment.
WHereas K. B. widow, of, etc. Executrix of the last Will and Testament of J.
B. Esquire has sued out of the High-Court of Chancery, an Original Writ of Debt
for Two hundred pounds, against me T. H. and J. W. of, etc. Esquire and Sir R. B.
of, etc. Knight, my Sureties, returnable this Trinity Term in the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster: These are therefore to require you to appear for
me, and my Sureties, and to make Declaration for us the said T. H. J. W. and
Sir R. B. at the suit of the said K. B. and thereupon to confess a Judgment,
either by non sum informat, nihil dicit, or otherwise, as you shall think
fitting, and this shall be your sufficient warrant in that behalf. In witness,
etc.

A Warrant to acknowledge satisfaction.
Mr. T. W.
Whereas in Trinity Term, in the Twentieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord King Charles over England, etc. there was a Judgment had and obtained, in
His Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, against A. P. of, etc. for,
etc. Debt and, etc. Damages and Costs, at the suit of, etc. These are to
require you to acknowledge satisfaction upon the said Judgment, and this shall
be your sufficient warrant for the same, In witness, etc.

Another Warrant to acknowledge satisfaction.
Mr. T. F.
Whereas I heretofore retained you my Attorney, in His Majesty's Court of
Kings Bench at Westminster, to sue, charge and implead R. E. upon several
actions, and a Habeas Corpus depending against him, and whereas you thereupon
further proceeded by my direction, to the recovery and entry of four several
Judgments, the one of 50 l. Debt, and 7 l. 10 s. and 8 d. Damages; another,
etc. another, etc. and the other, etc. for that I have received full
satisfaction from the said R. E. for and concerning all those actions, and
several executions by you in my behalf obtained and entered against him, by
force whereof he remains Prisoner in the custody of the Marshal of His
Majesty's said Court: These are therefore to will and require you to discharge
those several actions, by search, or otherwise, out of the Entry-Book of the
Marshal of that Court, or other declarations remaining on file there: And
further, I do hereby direct and authorize you to acknowledge satisfaction upon
Record, upon the several Judgments above specified, and all other Judgments
chargeable against him for my satisfaction, and so to release his person out of
the Marshals custody, from all causes touching me; And for the doing thereof,
this shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge. In witness, etc.

An Indenture for suing forth a writ of Entry of a Manor, to the intent a
Recovery may be had.
THis Indenture tripartite made the, etc. between H. E. of etc. of the first
part, W. G. of, etc. of the second part, and A. B. and C. D. of, etc. of the
third part, Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended
unto, and fully agreed upon, by and between the said Parties to these presents:
And the said H. E. does for himself, his Heirs, etc. covenant, etc. that he the
said E. or his, etc. before the Feast of, etc. at the proper Costs and Charges
in the Law of the said W. G. his Heirs or Assigns, shall permit and suffer the
said A. B. and C. D. to bring and sue forth out of His Majesty's High-Court of
Chancery, one Writ of Entry sur disseisin en le post, against the said W. G.
returnable before the Justices of the Common Pleas at Westminster, at a
certain day before the said Feast of, etc. by which Writ the said A. B. and C.
D. shall demand against the said W. G. all that the Manor of, etc. by the name
of, etc. or by any other name or names whatsoever, whereunto the said W. G.
shall appear before the said Justices, at the said day of return, to be
contained in the said Writ in his own proper person, or by his Attorney
sufficiently authorized by the Law for the same, upon which appearance the said
A. B. and C. D. shall declare against the said W. G. according to the nature of
the said Writ, and that he the said H. E. shall permit and suffer the said W.
G. to make defense, and vouch over to warranty the said H. E. and the same E.
by himself, or his Attorney, sufficiently authorized by Law for the same, shall
vouch over to warranty the common Vouchee, and thereupon imparl, and after the
same imparlance in the same Term, shall make default, and depart in contempt of
the Court, to the intent a perfect recovery and judgment in the said Court, may
be had against the said H. E. of the said Manor and Lands, and all other the
premises, according to the course of common Recoveries in such cases used: and
further, that the said Recovery and Execution thereupon so as aforesaid; to be
had and pursued by the said A. B. and C. D. shall be to the only use and behoof
of the said W. G. and of his Heirs and Assigns, and to no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever (A Covenant for Encumbrances.) In witness, etc.

A Revocation of a Protection during the Parliament-time.
Whereas I the Right Honorable J. Earl of R. granted a Protection under my
Hand and Seal, unto C. R. Esquire bearing date on or about the, etc. last past, to
endure for the time of this present Parliament: Now these presents witness,
That for diverse good Causes and Considerations me moving, I do hereby revoke,
disannul and make void the said Protection, to all intents and purposes
whatsoever, so as the said C. R. shall not from henceforth have any benefit,
privilege or advantage thereby, but be therefore and therefrom utterly
debarred and excluded for ever by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Trees.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A. B. of, etc and T. H. of, etc. of the one
part, and G. F. of, etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said A. B. and
T. H. for and in consideration of, etc. to them in Hand paid, before the
sealing and delivery of these presents, the receipt thereof, etc. have
bargained and sold unto the said T. F. one hundred Trees of Oak, to be taken
and chosen by the said T. F. his Executors or Assigns, within, amongst, and out
of the Woods and Trees, standing and growing within the Park of S. in the
County of, etc. or in or upon the Banks or Bounds of the said Park (all such
Trees as now are already felled and marked) always excepted out to this
present Bargain and Sale: And the said A. B. and T. H. do, etc. to and with,
etc. That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T. F. his Executors
and Assigns, at seasonable times in the year, at his and their free liberty,
wills and pleasures, before the Feast of, etc. to fell, cut down, take and
carry away the said Trees, before by these presents bargained and sold, and
every of them; so that the said G. P. his Executors and Assigns, at his and
their, or any of their proper costs and charges, do from time to time, make up
and repair all such breaches and hurts as he or they shall commit or do, or
cause to be committed or done in any of the Hedges, Pales or Ditches of or
belonging to the said Park, or any the Grounds thereunto belonging or
adjoining, for or by reason of the felling, cutting down, carting or carrying
away of the said Trees, or any of them, and so that all the said Trees, and
every of them, before bargained and sold, be carried and rid off, from and out
of the said Park, and bounds thereof, before the said Feast of, etc. And the
said A B. and T. H. all the said Trees, before bargained and sold to the said
T. F. in manner and form, as aforesaid, against all men, at all times, shall
warrant and for ever defend. And it is further agreed and declared between the
said Parties, That all such and so many of the said Trees before mentioned,
bargained and sold, as shall remain, and not be carried away out of the said
Park and bounds thereof, before the said term of, etc. shall from thenceforth
remain and be to the only use of the said A. B. and T. H. their Executors and
Assigns, any thing before mentioned to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Lease of a House and Lands in the Country.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. of the one party, and C. D.
of, etc. of the other party, witnesses, That the said A. B. for and in
consideration of the Rents and Covenants hereafter in and by these presents
reserved and contained, which on the part and behalf of the said C. D. are and
ought to be paid, done, performed, fulfilled and kept: Has demised, granted,
betaken, and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, grant, betake,
and to farm-let unto the said C. D. all that Message or Tenement, etc. And
also that Close of Meadow-ground, called, etc. and all that, etc. which said
premises now are in the Tenure or Occupation of the said C. D. or his Assigns,
situate, lying and being in the said Parish of, etc. Except, and always
reserved out of this present Demise and Grant, all Trees, Woods and Underwoods,
now standing, growing or being, or which hereafter shall stand, grow or be in
or upon the same premises; and free liberty of ingress, egress, regress, way
and passage to and for the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and his and their
Workmen and Servants, at any seasonable time or times in the year, to come in
and upon the demised premises, and every or any part thereof, to fell, cut
down, lop and top the same Trees, and every or any of them: And the same Trees,
lop and tops, with Carts and Carriages, to take, load, bear and drive away, at
his and their wills and pleasures, To have and to hold the said Message or
Tenement, Close of Meadow, and, etc. and all and singular other the before
mentioned premises to be demised, with the appurtenances (except before
excepted) unto the said C. D. his, etc. from the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel last past, before the date of these presents, for and during, and
unto the full end and term of twenty and one years from thence next ensuing,
fully to be complete and ended: Yielding, and paying therefore yearly and every
year, during the said term of one and twenty years to the said A. B. his, etc.
at or in, etc. the yearly Rent or sum of, etc. at two of the most usual Feasts
or Terms of payment in the year, that is to say, the Feast of, etc. by even and
equal portions. And the said C. D. for himself, his, etc. that the said C. D.
his, etc. or some of them, shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said A. B. his, etc. at or in, etc. the said yearly Rent of, etc.
during the said term of, etc. on the Feast aforesaid, or within fifteen days
next ensuing either of the said Feasts, by even and equal portions, in manner
and form aforesaid: And that he the said C. D. his, etc. or some of them, at
his and their own proper costs and charges, shall and will from time to time,
and at all times hereafter, when and as often as need shall require; during the
continuance of this present demise, well and sufficiently repair, support,
maintain, uphold, hedge, ditch, scowre, fence, amend and keep the said Capital
Message or Tenement, and all and singular the before mentioned to be demised
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, in, by and with all and all manner
of needful and necessary reparations, pailing, hedging, ditching, sencing and
amending whatsoever (principal Timber only excepted;) and the said Message or
Tenement, and all and singular other the before mentioned to be demised
premises with the appurtenances, being so well and sufficiently repaired,
supported, maintained, upholder, ditched, hedged, fenced, amended and kept
together; with such Household Stuff, and appurtenances of Household, as are
mentioned in a Schedule hereunto annexed, in as good case and plight, as the
same now are (reasonably wearing only excepted) in the end of the said term of
one and twenty years, or other sooner determination of this present Lease,
shall and will peaceably and quietly leave, surrender and yield up the same
unto the said A. B. etc. And also that it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said A. B. his, etc. with Workmen and others in his or their company, or
without, twice in every year yearly, during the said term, or oftener, to come
into and upon the before demised premises, and every or any part thereof, there
to view, seatch and see the estate and condition of the reparations of the
same. And upon every such view or search, to give, or leave notice in writing,
at the said demised Message, to or for the said C. D. his, etc. of all
defaults and lacks of reparations, then and there found, to repair and amend
the same, within six months, after such view made, and notice given, as
aforesaid, within which time and space of six months, he the said C. D. etc.
does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said A. B. his Heirs and
Assigns, by these presents, well and sufficiently to repair and amend the same.
And further the said C. D. for himself, his, etc. that he the said C. D. his,
etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times during the continuance
of this present Demise, bear, pay, discharge, and disburse all such Tithes,
Churchduties, Taxes, Subsidies, and other payments whatsoever, wherewith the
same premises, and every or any part thereof, shall or may be charged, or
liable to pay, during the said term (except the quit-rent due for the said
Message to the Lord of the Manor of Harrow) and thereof shall and will acquit
and discharge the said A. B. his, etc. and also the said demised Message and
Premises, and every part and parcel thereof; And also that he said C. D. his,
etc. shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said A. B.
his, etc. the full sum of 10 l. of, etc. over and above the said yearly Rent
of, etc. for every or any acre or acres of Land that shall be at any time or
times hereafter, during the continuance of this present Demise, ploughed,
dug, broken up or carried in the said Closes, called, etc. or any of them,
or in any other of the said Closes not heretofore dug, ploughed, or broken
up: and so proportionably, according to the rate of Ten pounds every acre of
Land; and according to the rate, for every acre or part or parcel of an acre of
Land for every time, every or any acre or acres, part or parcel of acre or
acres shall be so ploughed, dug, or broken up and carried in any of the said
Closes, the same to be paid unto the said C. D. his, etc. at such days and
times as the yearly Rent hereby is reserved and appointed to be paid, according
to the true intent and meaning of these presents. And further, that neither the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall or will at any time
or times, during the continuance of this present Demise, fell, cut down, lop or
top any of the Timber Trees, or any other Trees now standing, growing or being,
or which hereafter shall stand, grow, or be in or upon the said demised
premises, or any part thereof, without the good will and license of the said A.
B. his, etc. in that behalf first had and obtained in writing, under his or
their Hands and Seals; nor shall demise, grant, let, sell, assign and set over
the said demised Messuages, and other the premises, or any part thereof, or his
or their estate or term of years, or any part thereof, of, in or to the same
pemises, during the term by these presents granted, to any person or persons
whatsoever, except it be by and with the consent and agreement of the said A.
B. his, etc. in that behalf first had and obtained in writing, under his or
their Hands and Seals. Provided always, and it is covenanted, granted,
concluded and fully agreed upon, by and between the said Parties to these
presents. That if the said A. B. his, etc. or any of them, shall at any time or
times hereafter, during the said term of one and twenty years, be minded and
desirous to have again, resume and take the said Message or Tenement, and all
and singular other the before demised premises, with the appurtenances, into
his or their Hands and Possession, before the expiration of this present Lease:
And of such his or their desire, to give notice in writing unto the said C. D.
his, etc. at any of the days or times of payment, wherein or whereat the said
yearly Rent hereby reserved is appointed to be paid: That then the said yearly
Rent shall determine at the end of one whole year next after such notice given,
to have again the said Message, and all other the before demised premises: And
that then also at the next Feast, or time of payment, which shall be one whole
year next ensuing such notice or warning given as aforesaid. And from
thenceforth this present Indenture of Lease, and every Covenant, Article and
Agreement herein contained, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void, and of
none effect, as if these presents had never been had or made. And that then,
and from thenceforth, and at any time or times then afterward, it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said A. B. his, etc. into all and singular the
before demised premises, and every part thereof, wholly to re-enter, and the
same to have again, re-possess and enjoy, as in his or their first and former
estate, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding. And the said A. B. does for himself, his, etc. covenant,
promise and grant to and with the said C. D. his, etc. and every of them by
these presents, That if the said C. D. his, etc. or any of them, shall at any
time or times hereafter, during the time and term by these presents granted,
desire to depart from the said Message or Tenement, and Premises hereby
demised, and to surrender and yield up the same Premises unto the said A. B.
his, etc. and of such his or their desire, to give warning in writing under his
or their Hands to the said A. B. his, etc. at the house of the said A. B. at
any of the Feasts or Days of Payment aforesaid, one whole year before he or
they shall depart from the premises: And do and shall accordingly surrender and
yield up the said Premises unto the said A. B. his, etc. well and sufficiently
repaired, hedged, ditched, amended, pailed and fenced, as the same ought to be;
together with the said Implements of Household, according to the true meaning of
these presents, that then upon such warning given and surrendered, or other
assurance made of the premises, as aforesaid, he the said A. B. his, etc. shall
and will accept the same, and take into their Hands and Possession the said
Capital Message or Tenement, and all other the premises, with their
appurtenances, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.
Provided also, if it shall happen the said yearly Rent, or Sum of, etc. or any
part thereof to be behind and unpaid, in part or in all by the space of ten
days, next over or after any of the Feasts or Days of payment aforesaid,
wherein the same ought to be paid, as aforesaid, being lawfully demanded, or if
the said C. D. his, etc. do not well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, pay
and keep all and every the Covenants, Articles, Payments and Agreements in
these presents contained, which on his and their parts are and ought to be
observed, performed, paid, done, fulfilled and kept, that then in any of the
said cases, and from thenceforth at any time after, it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said A. B. his, etc. into the said Capital Message or Tenement,
and all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances, and every part
thereof wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain, re-possess, and
re-enjoy, as in his and their first and former estate, and the said C. D. his,
etc. thereout, and from thence utterly to expel, put and amove, this Indenture,
or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof, in any wise
notwithstanding. And lastly, the said A. B. for himself, his, etc. that he the
said C. D. his, etc. and every of them, paying the said yearly rent of, etc.
and paying, doing and performing the covenants, payments, provisoes and
agreements in these presents mentioned, which on his or their parts are or
ought to be paid, done, performed and kept, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, shall or may lawfully, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message or Tenement, and all
other the premises before by these presents demised (except before excepted)
for and during all the said term of one and twenty years before granted,
without any lawful let, suit, trouble, denial, eviction, interruption or
disturbance of the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
or any of them, or any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming
by, from, or under him, them, or any of them. In witness, etc.

An absolute Bargain and Sale of a House and Land.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. of the one part, and C. D of,
etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said A. B. for and in
consideration of the sum of, etc. to him in hand, at and before the sealing and
delivery of these presents, by the said C. D. well and truly paid, the receipt
whereof he the said A B. does hereby acknowledge himself therewith fully
satisfied and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does
clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators for ever, by these presents has given, granted, aliened,
bargained, sold, enfeoffed and confirmed, and by these presents does fully,
clearly and absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell, alien, enfeoff and confirm
unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that the, etc. with all
and singular it is rights, members, jurisdictions and appurtenances, together
with all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Yards,
Back-sides, Easements, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods,
Under-woods, Ways, Easements, Profits, Commodities, Common of Pasture,
Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement
and Premises, or to any part or parcel of them belonging, or in any wise
appertaining; all which said Message, Lands, Tenements, Feedings, Pastures,
Closes and Hereditaments with their and every of their rights, members and
appurtenances whatsoever, before, in and by these presents mentioned or
intended to be granted, are situate, lying and being within the Township of H.
aforesaid, in the said County of, etc. and now or late in the Tenure or
Occupation of the said A. B. or of his Assignee or Assignees, and the Reversion
and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, of all and singular the before
mentioned premises, and all Rent and Rents reserved upon any Grant and Grants,
Demise and Demises made of the premises, or of any part or parcel of them; And
also all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Use, Possession, Property, Claim
and Demand whatsoever, of him the said A. B. in or to the same, and all Deeds,
Writings, Evidences, Charters, Transcripts of Fines, Court-Rolls, Escripts and
Monuments whatsoever, touching or concerning the premises, or any part or
parcel of them, To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and all and
singular other the premises hereby granted, bargained and sold, or mentioned to
be herein, or hereby granted, bargained and sold, with their and every of their
rights, members and appurtenances whatsoever, unto the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And the said A. B. for himself, and his Heirs, etc. the said
Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the premises before granted,
bargained and sold, with the appurtenances, unto the said C. D. and his Heirs,
to the only proper use and behoof of the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, against him the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and all and every other
person and persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him, them or
any of them, shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these presents: And
the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, do
covenant, promise, grant and agree, to and with the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns, and every of them, by these presents, in manner and form following,
that is to say; That he the said A. B. at the time of the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, is, and until a good, pure, perfect, and absolute
estate of Inheritance, of all and singular the before granted premises, and
every part thereof, shall be fully vested, settled and executed, in and upon the
said C. D. and his Heirs, according to the true meaning of these presents,
shall remain, continue, and be seized of, and in the said Message or Tenement,
and all and singular other the premises, in and by these presents granted,
bargained and sold, with all and every their rights, members and appurtenances,
of a good, pure, perfect, and absolute Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple,
without any Condition, Reversion, Remainder or Limitation of any Use or Uses,
Estate or Estates, in or to any person or persons whatsoever, to alter, change,
defeat, determine or make void the same. And that the said A. B. at the time of
the ensealing and delivery of these presents, has full power, good right, and
lawful authority, to grant, bargain, sell and convey all and singular the
before hereby granted, or mentioned to be granted premises, with their and
every of their appurtenances, unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, in
manner and form aforesaid. And that he the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns,
and every of them, shall or may by force and virtue of these presents, from
time to time, and at all times for ever hereafter, lawfully, peaceably and
quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message or
Tenement, and all and singular the before granted premises, with their and
every of their rights, members and appurtenances, and have, receive and take
the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, to his and their own proper use and
behoof for ever, without any lawful let, suit, trouble, denial, interruption,
eviction or disturbance of the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him, them, or
any of them, or by his or their means, act, consent, title, interest, privity
or procurement. And that free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted,
exonerated and discharged, or otherwise from time to time, well and
sufficiently saved and kept harmless by the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, of and from all and all manner of former and other Gifts,
Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Mortgages, Joyntures, Dowers, Title of Dower,
Statute-Merchant and of the Staple, Recognizances, Extents, Judgments,
Executions, Uses, Entails, Rents and arrerages of Rents, Forfeitures, Fines,
Issues and Amerciaments, and of and from all and singular other Titles,
Troubles, Charges, Demands and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed,
suffered, omitted or done by the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or by any
other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him,
them, or any of them, or by, from or under his or their means, act, consent,
title, interest, privity or procurement (the Rents and Services which from
henceforth from time to time, for or in respect of the premises, shall grow due
and payable to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the promises only
excepted and fore-prized.) And further, the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, does, etc. that he the said A. B. his Heirs and
Assigns, and all and every other person and persons, and their Heirs lawfully
having or claiming, or rightfully pretending to have, or which hereafter shall
or may lawfully have or claim, or rightfully pretend to have any Estate, Right,
Title, Interest or Demand, into or out of the premises, or any part or parcel
of them, by, from or under the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will
from time to time, and at all times, for and during the space of seven years
next ensuing the date of these presents, at and upon the reasonable request,
and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns,
make, do, perform, acknowledge, levy, execute and suffer, or cause to be made,
done, performed, knowledged, levied, executed and suffered all and every such
further lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device and
devices, assurance and assurances, and conveyances in the Law whatsoever: for
the further, better and more perfect assurance, surety, sure-making and
conveying of all and singular the before hereby granted, or mentioned to be
granted premises, with their, and every of their rights, members and
appurtenances, unto the said C. D. his, etc. be it by Fine or Fines, Feoffment
or Feoffments, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, the enrolment of these
presents, recovery or recoveries, with single or double Voucher or Vouchers,
release or confirmation, or by all and every or any the ways or means
aforesaid, or by any other ways or means whatsoever, as by the said C. D. his,
etc. or by his or their Council learned in the Laws, shall be reasonably
devised, advised or required, so as the said A. B. his, etc. or such other
person or persons who shall be required to make such further assurance, be not
compelled or compellable to travel further than the Cities of London and
Westminster, or either of them, in or about the making thereof. And lastly, it
is covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended unto, and fully agreed upon, by
and between the said Parties to these presents, for them, their Heirs and
Assigns by these presents, That all Fines, Feoffments, Recoveries and
Affurances in the Law whatsoever, had, made, levied, knowledged, suffered or
done, or hereafter to be had, made, knowledged, suffered, levied or done, by or
between the said Parties to these presents, or any of them, of, for, touching
or concerning the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the
before hereby granted premises, with their rights, members and appurtenances,
and every or any part thereof, shall be and enure, and shall be construed,
esteemed, adjudged and taken to be and enure, to the only proper use and
behoof of the said C. D. his, etc. for ever, and to none other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever. In witness, etc.

A Conveyance of a Manor and Lands, in consideration of a Marriage, etc.
THis Indenture made, etc. between J. M. of, etc. of the one part, and E. F.
of, etc. and G. M. of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That for the
preferment and advancement of P. M. natural Son of him the said J. M. and one
of the Heirs males of the said P. M. and for and in consideration of the great
fatherly love and natural affection, which he the said J. M. bears to the
said P. M. his Son, and to the intent and purpose that the Manor, Lands and
Tenements hereafter mentioned, shall and may be and continue in the Stock,
Blood and Kindred of the said J. M. and for and in consideration of a Marriage
by Gods permission shortly to be had and solemnized between the said P.M. and
one F. Daughter of E. T. of, etc. and for diverse other good causes and
considerations him the said J. M. especially moving, it is concluded,
covenanted, granted and agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents; And the said J.M. on his part, for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, does by these presents covenant and grant, to and with the said
E. F. and G. M. and either of them, and the Executors and Administrators of
them, and either of them, that for the considerations aforesaid, he the said J.
M. and his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons now standing or
being seized, or that hereafter shall stand and be seized of and in all that
the Manor of S. in the County of B. with all and singular the rights, members
and appurtenances thereof, and of and in all and singular Messuages, Tenements,
Houses, Buildings, Orchards, Lands, Meadows, Leasows, Pastures, Feedings,
Commons, Mills, Woods, Under-woods, Advowsons, Reversions, Rents, Services,
Wastes, Estrayes, Royalties, Liberties, Privileges, Jurisdictions,
Hereditaments, and all other the rights, members and appurtenances whatsoever,
to the said Manor and Lands incident, belonging, or in any wise appertaining;
or accepted, reputed, taken or known, or occupied, demised or letten, as part,
parcel or member thereof shall from thenceforth stand and be seized of and in
the same Manor, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all other the premises,
and of and in every part and parcel there of, with the appurtenances, to the
uses, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents mentioned and expressed,
and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever: That is to say, unto and
for the use of the said J. M. until the said Marriage shall be had and
solemnized between the said P. M. and F. and immediately from and after the
said Marriage so had, to the use of the said P. M. and F. and of the Heirs
males of the said P. M. on the body of the said F. lawfully begotten: and for
default of such Heirs males, to the use of the right Heirs of the said J. M.
for ever. And further, the said J. M. does by these presents covenant and grant
for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them,
to and with the said E. F. and C. M. and either of them, their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form following: That is to
say, That the said Manor, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other
the premises, with their appurtenances, now are and be, and at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, shall and may continue, remain and be clearly
acquirted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise well and sufficiently saved
and kept harmless, by the said J. M. his Heirs, Executors, etc. or by some or
one of them, at his and their own proper costs and charges of and from all and
all manner of former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases,
Joyntures, Dowers, Titles of Dower, Uses, Wills, Entails, Rents, Charge-Rents,
Seck arrerages of Rents, Titles, Recognizances, Statutes-Merchant and of the
Staple, and of and from all other Charges, Encumbrances and Demands whatsoever
had, made, committed or done by the said J. M. or by his Heirs or Assigns, or
by any other person or persons, or by his or their assent, consent, means,
privity or procurement: The Rents and Services which from thenceforth shall
grow due to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the premises, and all
lawful Leases or Grants, heretofore made or granted of the premises, or of any
part thereof, which shall not continue above four years, or thereabouts, next
after the date hereof, whereupon several yearly Rents are reserved, amounting
in the whole to, etc. which shall be yearly payable to the said P. M. and F.
and the Heirs males of the said P. M. for and during the continuance of the
said Leases and Grants, only excepted and foreprized. And that the said Manor,
and other the premises, at the end and determination of the said Leases and
Grants, shall remain and from thenceforth shall and may continue and be unto
the said P. M. and F. and the Heirs males of the said P. M. of the clear yearly
value of, etc. or thereabouts. And moveover, that he the said J. M. his Heirs,
etc. shall and will at this time, and from time to time, during the space of
one whole year next after the said Marriage had and solemnized, when as often
as he or they, or any of them, shall be thereunto reasonably required by the
said E. F. and G. H. or either of them, their Heirs or Assigns, or any of them,
do, make, knowledge, levy and execute, or cause and suffer to be made, done,
knowledged, levied and executed, all and every such further act and acts, thing
and things, device and devices, assurance and assurances in the Law whatsoever,
be it by Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, Fine with Proclamation,
Feoffment, Recovery, with Vouches and Vouchers, release or confirmation with
warranty, against the said J. M. and his Heirs, or otherwise, or without
warranty, or by all or so many of the ways, means and devices aforesaid, or by
any other ways or means whatsoever, as by the said E. F. or G. H. or either of
them, their Heirs or Assigns, or by their, or any of their Council learned in
the Law shall be reasonably devised, or advised and required, at the costs and
charges only in the Law of the said P. M. for the further, better, and more
perfect assurance, surety, sure-making and conveying of the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises,
with the appurtenances, in and by these presents mentioned and intended to be
conveyed and assured, in manner and form above in these presents declared, and
every part and parcel hereof, unto the said E. F. and G. H. to the uses,
intents and purposes above in these presents mentioned, and to no other uses,
intents or purposes whatsoever. In witness, etc.

An assurance of a Jointure made before Marriage, with special Covenants
concerning Children by a former Husband.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R.L. of, etc. of the one part, and A. B. and
J.G. of, etc. of the other part; Witnesses, That in consideration of a
Marriage shortly to be had and solemnized between the said R. L. and A. H. late
Wife of, etc. deceased, for the future good and advancement of the said A. H.
and in testimony of the singular good will and affection which he the said R.
L. has, and bears to the said A. H. and for diverse other good and weighty
considerations him the said R. L. thereunto especially moving, it is
covenanted, granted, concluded and fully agreed upon by and between the said
Parties to these presents, in manner and form following; That is to say, And
the said R. L. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every
of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said A. B. and J. G.
and either of them, and the Executors, etc. of them, and either of them, by
these presents, that he the said R. L. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will
from and after the Feast of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle, and from and after
the said Marriage so had and solemnized, stand and be seized of and in all that
the Site or Seat of the Rectory or Parsonage of East-Church, and of, and in all
Houses and Buildings thereupon built, standing or being; And of, and in one
Field or Close of Pasture, with the appurtenances thereunto adjoining,
containing together with the said Site of the said Rectory, by estimation
forty acres, be it more or less; And of and in a parcel of Ground called
Harleys Spring, containing by estimation one acre, etc. And of and in one
Meadow containing by estimation forty acres, be it more or less; And of and in
one piece of Ground called Reeds Meadow, containing by estimation nine and
twenty acres, be it more or less; And of and in one Field called Frogs-Field,
containing by estimation two and fifty acres, be it more or less; And of and in
one parcel of Land called Parsonage Hill-field, containing by estimation 37
acres, be it more or less; And of and in all those Lands, Closes, Meadows,
Feedings and Pastures, called or known by the name or names of Stone-pit and
Stone-pike, containing in the whole by estimation four hundred acres, be they
more or less; And of and in one other piece of Land called Bercon-field,
containing by estimation twenty nine acres, be it more or less; And of and in
one Cottage, with one Rood of Land thereunto belonging, or occupied with the
same, in which Cottage or House, one R. D. did lately dwell: All which premises
are situate, lying and being in E. aforesaid, and now are in the occupation
of, etc. and of and in all other the Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions,
Services and Hereditaments of the said R. L. in the said Parish of E. in the
said County of K. to the only use and behoof of the said R. L. and the said A.
and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said R. L. for ever, for the Jointure of
the said A. if the said A. shall happen to survive and over-live the said R. L.
And the said R. L. does covenant and grant for himself, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, by these presents; to and with the said A. B. and
J. G. and either of them, and the Heirs, Executors and Administrators of them
and either of them, in manner and form following; That is to say, That he the
said R. L. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall and will at
all time and times hereafter, and from time to time, sufficiently save, and
keep harmless and indempnified the said Site, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all other the premises, and every part and parcel thereof,
of and from all former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases,
Statutes-Merchant and of the Staple, Recognizances, etc. and of and from all
other Charges, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed or
done by the said R. L. or by any other person or persons whatsoever, by his
means, title, consent or procurement (the Rents and Services from thenceforth
to grow due to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the premises, only
excepted and fore-prized) and that the said Site, Lands, Tenements, and other
the premises, now be of the clear yearly value of 200 l. over and above all
charges and reprizes. And further, that the said R. L. and all and every other
person and persons, and his and their Heirs, lawfully having, claiming, or
rightfully pretending to have any Estate, Right, Title or Interest, of, in or
to the said Site, Lands, Tenements, and all other the premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, by or from the said R. L. shall and will from time to time, and
at all times hereafter, during the space of two years next ensuing the date
hereof, further do, make, acknowledge and execute all and every such other
reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device, and devices, assurance and
assurances in the Law whatsoever, as by the said A. B. and J. G. or either of
them, or the Executors or Assigns of either of them, or their or any of their
Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or advised, and at the
costs and charges of the said R. L. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, for
the better and more perfect assuring and making sure of all and singular the
premises to the said A. for term of her life only in form aforesaid; so that
there be not any other or further warranty therein comprised, than only against
the said R. L. and his Heirs. And further it is covenanted, granted and agreed
by and between the said Parties to these presents, and the said R. L. does
covenant, etc. to and with, etc. that all Feoffments, Fines, Conveyances and
Assurances to be had, made, knowledged, done, suffered or executed by the said
R. L. during the life of the said A. H. shall be to the uses, intents and
purposes aforesaid, and to none other, etc. And further, that she the said A.
from and after the decease of the said R. L. during her natural life shall or
may have, hold and quietly enjoy the said Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions,
Services, and all other the premises, without any lawful let, suit, trouble,
eviction, interruption or disturbance, of the Heirs and Assigns of the said R.
L. or of any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or
under the said R. L. his, etc. And further, it is covenanted, etc. by and
between the, etc. and the said R. L. does covenant, etc. in manner, etc. that
he the said R. L. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, shall not at any time
or times hereafter inter-meddle with, have, receive or take the portion or
portions, legacy or legacies, sum or sums of money, pertaining or belonging,
given and bequeathed, due or to be due to W. H. T. H. and J. H. the Children of
the said, etc or any of them, or with the increase and profits thereof, or by
reason of the same arising, coming or growing, or that shall hereafter arise,
come or grow of the same, or any part or parcel of the same increase, other
than such parcel thereof, as by covenant hereafter in these presents expressed,
is yearly to be paid unto the said R. L. or his Assigns, for and toward the
charges of bringing up the said Children, but shall permit and suffer the said
J. G. to have the ordering and disposing of the said increase and profits
coming of the portions aforesaid, for the benefit of the said Children, by the
appointment of the said A. and that he the said R. L. shall upon reasonable
request, deliver or cause to be delivered to the said J. G. all such Bonds and
Obligations, wherein any person or persons, are or stand bound unto the said A.
for, touching and concerning the portions of the said Children, or otherwise,
as shall come to the hands and possession of the said R. L. and make, seal and
deliver to the said J. G. such Letter or Letters of Attorney, for the recovery
of the sums of money contained in the same Bonds and Obligations, or any of
them, as by the Council learned of the said J. G. shall be thought meet and
convenient, and by the said J. G. required, for and to the use of the said
Children; And that he the said R. L. shall not release or discharge the said
Bonds or Obligations, or any of them, without the consent and agreement of the
said J. C. nor revoke or countermand the said Letter of Attorney: And that the
said R. L. shall permit and suffer the said A. and give his assent that she
shall make a Will, and by the same to give and bequeath at her liberty and
pleasure the sum of 500 l. and shall not countermand or revoke the same; And
that if it shall happen the said A. to die, leaving the said R. L. that he the
said R. L. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall well and truly
content, etc. or cause, etc. the said Legacies, or so much of them as shall not
exceed the said sum of 500 l. within one year next after the decease of the
said A. at the Mansion House of the said R. L. in T. asoresaid. And further it
is covenanted granted, etc. between the, etc. and the said J. G. for himself,
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does covenant and grant to
and with the said R. L. his Executors and Administrators, in manner and form
following; that is to say. That he the said J. G. or his Assigns, shall yearly,
from and after the said Marriage so had and solemnized as aforesaid, and during
so long time as the said Children, or any of them shall be at the finding and
providing for of the said R. L. well and truly content, etc. or cause, etc. to
the said R.L. or his Assigns, for every of the said Children so being, etc. the
yearly sum of, etc. at the Feasts of, etc. by even and equal portions out of
the increase and profits of their respective portions, as aforesaid; and that
he the said J. G. shall employ and bestow the residue of the increase and
profits, which shall come or grow of the said portions or stocks from time to
time, in such sort and manner as the said A. shall appoint, for the further
benefit and condition of the said Children; and then he the said J. G. shall
from time to time, when he shall be thereunto required by the said A. yield and
make unto the said A. a just, true and perfect account of the said increase or
profits coming or arising of the portions aforesaid. In witness, etc.

A Condition where one buyeth Lands, the Seller is bound that the Land is free
from Encumbrances.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bonnden A. B. has bargained and
sold unto the within-named C. D. and his Heirs for ever, all that his Message
or Dwelling House, Lands, Feedings, Meadows, Pastures, Rents, Profits and other
Hereditaments whatsoever thereunto belonging, with their appurtenances, et,
lying and being in the Town and Field of, etc. in the County of, etc. If
therefore the said Message or Dwelling House, Lands, and all other the
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, at the day of the date within
written, be clearly discharged of and from all and all manner of former and
other Gifts, Grants, Leases, Bargains, Sales, Joyntures, Dowers, Rights and
Titles of Dower, Rents, arrerages of Rent, Statutes-Merchant and of the Staple,
Feoffments, Annuities, etc. and of and from all other Titles, Charges and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, committed or suffered; or to be had,
made, done, committed or suffered by the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or by
any other person or persons, by his, their, or any of their means, act, title,
consent, assent or procurement (the Rents and Services which from the day of
the date within-written shall grow due to be paid and performed to the chief
Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the premises only excepted) That then, etc.
or else, etc.

A Condition for a Brewers Clerk.
THe Condition of, etc. That whereas the within-named J. D. has before the day
of the date within-written, entertained into his Service the within-bound J. H.
to serve in the room, place or office of a Dray-Clerk or Beer-Clerk; If
therefore the said J. H. does and shall during the time of his service in the
said Office or Place carefully and diligently use and employ himself, and his
best endeavors in the said Room or Office, and do once in every week weekly
during the continuance of his service in the said Office, make and give to the
said J. D. his Executors or Assigns, a true, just and perfect account in
writing, at the Message or Beerhouse of him the said J. D. situate, etc. of
all such Beer, Goods and Money of the said J. D. as by any ways or means shall
come to the Hands, Charge, Custody or Possession of the said J. H. And likewise
do from week to week, upon every Monday weekly, during the said term, at the
place aforesaid, content and pay unto the said J. D. his Executors or Assigns,
all such sum and sums of Money as the said J. H. shall have received of any
person or persons whatsoever, due or any wise belonging unto the said J. D. his
Executors or Assigns: And further, if the said J. H. do not deliver on trust to
any Customer or Customers, or any other person or persons now not served by the
said J. D. above four Barrels of Beer at the most, before such time as he shall
have made the said J D. acquainted therewith, and of what estate and condition
all and every such new Customers are of; and also shall have the consent of him
the said J. D. thereunto; And further, if the said J. H. do not depart from the
service of him the said J. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, before
such payment and satisfaction shall be made by him the said J. H. unto the said
J. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, of all such Goods, Arrerages,
Debts, Sum and Sums of Money, as he the said J. H. shall be found to be
indebted unto the said J. D. his Executors or Assigns, or any of them, and if
in case it shall happen the said J. H. to die or depart this life during the
continuance of the said Office or Place of Beer-Clerk to the said J. D. his
Executors or Assigns, Then if the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of the
said J. H. do or shall (within one month next ensuing after the decease of the
said J. H.) well and truly satisfy and pay, or cause to be satisfied and paid
unto the said J. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at the said
Brew House, all such Arrerages, Debts, Sum and Sums of Money as the said J. H.
shall be found to be indebted and to ^^e unto the said J. D. his Executors or
Assigns, or any of them, at the time of such decease of him the said J. H.
without fraud or coven. That then this, etc. or else to, etc.

The End of the First Part.
Part 2.
A Deed of Jointure, whereby Tho. N. in consideration of a Marriage intended,
between Tho. his Son, and Sarah Mer. grants and infeoffeth Lands to Friends
in trust under a Proviso, to be void upon Assurance of other Lands by John N.
Heir of Thomas the Father of as good value, and to the like uses.
THis Indenture made the first day of June, in the year of our Lord God,
according to the computation used in England, 1651. between T. N. of, etc. of
the one part, and I. I. H. E. and S. R. of the other part, witnesses, That the
said T. N. for and in consideration of Marriage already agreed upon, and
shortly by Gods Grace to be had and solemnized between T. N. second Son of the
said T. N. and Sarah M. single-woman, Daughter of M. N. late of, etc. deceased,
and for the love and affection which he bears to his said Son, and for a
competent Jointure to be had and provided to and for the said Sarah, and for
provision of maintenance for her, and for settling the Inheritance of the Lands
and Tenements herein after-mentioned to such use and uses, and upon such trusts
and confidence, as are herein declared, limited or expressed, and for diverse
other good considerations him moving, has granted, enfeoffed, released and
confirmed, and by, etc. unto the said I. I. H. and R. and to their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, all that Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances
situate, etc. and one Yardland, Meadow or Pasture to the said Message or
Tenement belonging, that is to say, one Close, etc. and also all Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Back-sides, Courts,
void Grounds, Lands, Meadows, Leasows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Woods,
Under-woods, Trees, Hedges, Rows, Ways, Waters, Ponds, Pools, Fishings,
Fishing-places, Profits, Commodities, Hereditaments and Appurtenances
whatsoever, to the said Message, Tenement, Yard-land and Premises, or any part
or parcel thereof, now, or at any time heretofore belonging or appertaining,
and all Rents, Reversions, Remainders and Services of the said premises, and
every part thereof, To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and all
and singular other the premises before mentioned, meant, or intended to be
granted, infeoffed and confirmed, and every part and parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances to the said I. I. H. E. and S. R. to their Heirs and Assigns for
ever, to the only use, intents and purposes, hereafter in these presents
limited, expressed and declared; and to none other use, intent or purpose (that
is to say) to the use and behoof of the said I. I. H. E. and R. S. and of their
Heirs, until the solemnization of the said Marriage, between the said T. N. and
Son, and Sarah the M. and from and after the solemnization of the said
Marriage, to the use and behoof of the said I. I. H. E. and S. R. and of their
Heirs, for and during the natural life of the said Sarah, and from and after
the decease to the use and behoof of the said T. N. her Son, for and during the
term of his natural life, and from and after the death of the said Sarah M. and
T. N. to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body of the said Sarah M. by
the said T. N. the Son, begotten, and to be begotten, and for default of such
Heirs, to the use and behoof of the said T. N. the Son, and of the Heirs of his
Body, and for default of such Heirs, to the use of the said T. N. the Father,
and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever; and the said T. N. the Father, for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, does
covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said I. I. H. E. and S. R. and
every of them, their and every of their Heirs and Assigns by these presents,
that he the said T. N. the Father, at the time of the ensealing and delivery
thereof, is the true and lawful Owner of the Messuages, Tenement and Premises,
and every part thereof, and of and in the same and every part and parcel
lawfully and rightfully seized of a good Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple;
and also that he the said T. N. the Father, at the time of the ensealing and
delivery hereof, has full Power, good Right, and lawful Authority, to grant,
convey and assure the said premises, and every part thereof, to the said I. I.
H. E. and S. R. their Heirs and Assigns, in manner and form aforesaid,
according to the true intent and meaning thereof; and that the said Message,
Tenement and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances, now be and are, and so from time to time, and at all times
hereafter for ever shall or may be, remain and continue unto the uses, intents
and purposes aforesaid, and according to the true intent and meaning hereof,
clearly acquitted and discharged of and from all and all manner of former and
other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Mortgages, Joyntures, Statutes,
Recognizances, Judgments, Extents, and of and from all other Titles, Charges,
Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, committed or suffered to
be done, by him the said T. N. the Father, or by any other person or persons
whatsoever, except one Indenture of Lease bearing-date, etc. made and granted
of the premises by T. H. to the said N. H. and M. his Wise, and to M. their
Daughter for term of their Lives, successively one after another, at and under
the yearly Rent of Forty shillings of lawful money of England, quarterly to be
paid by even portions, and also except one other Lease or Indenture, bearing
date, etc. made and granted of the said premises by the said T. N. the Father
of G. M. etc. for One thousand years, with a Proviso, to be void upon payment
made of certain sums of money, at certain times therein mentioned, whereof only
one day is past, and the money then due is paid, and without any let,
interruption, challenge, claim, disturbance or encumbrance, of or by him the
said T. N. the Father, or his Heirs, and without any lawful let or
interruption, challenge, claim, disturbance or encumbrance, of or by him the
said T. N. or any other person or persons, claiming or to claim, by or under
him, or his Estate, Right, Title or Interest, except such as shall or may claim
by or under the Leases before excepted, or either of them, and for the term
thereby granted only: and the said T. N. the Father, does further for himself,
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, covenant, promise and grant, to and
with the said I. I. H. E. and S. R. and every of them, their Heirs and Assigns
by these presents, that he the said T. N. the Father, and his Heirs, and all
and every other person and persons lawfully claiming, or to claim by or under
him (except such as shall or may claim by or under the Leases before excepted)
shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, upon the
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said I. I.
H. E. and S. R. or any of them, their Heirs or Assigns, make, do, and execute
all such further acts, things and assurances, for the further and better
assuring the said premises, and every part thereof, to the uses, intents and
purposes aforesaid, as by them the said I. I. H. E. S. R. or any of them, their
Heirs or Assigns, shall be in that behalf reasonably devised or advised and
required, and that all Fines and other assurances, at any time hereafter to be
had, levied or executed of the premises, or any part thereof shall be, and
shall be deemed, adjudged and taken to be, to and for the uses, intents and
purposes in these presents mentioned, limited and declared, and it is expressed
and declared by all the said Parties, that the said Estate for the life of the
said Sarah, limited to the said I. I. H. E. S. R. as aforesaid, is so limited
upon special trust and considence in them reposed, that they and every of them,
their Heirs and Assigns respectively, to whose Hands or Custody any of the
Rents, Issues or Profits of the said premises shall come, during the life of
the said Sarah, shall from time to time pay, deliver, dispose, and employ the
same Rents, Issues and Profits, and every part thereof, either to the said
Sarah her self, or to such other person and persons, use or uses, as she the
said Sarah shall by any writing under her Hand from time to time, limit or
appoint: provided always, and it is nevertheless covenanted and granted by and
between the said Parties, that in case John N. Son and Heir apparent of the
said T. N. the Father, shall within seven years next ensuing the date hereof,
at his own proper Costs and Charges, well and sufficiently convey or assure, or
cause to be conveyed and assured by good and sufficient ways and means in the
Law, to the said I. I. H. E. S. R. and to their Heirs, or to the Survivor or
Survivors of them, and to his or their Heirs, to and for, and upon the like
uses, intents, trusts, confidences and purposes, as are before herein limited,
expressed and declared, Messuages, Lands and Tenements, situate, lying or being
in, etc. and which shall be of as much more clear yearly value, as the said
Message, Tenement and Premises hereby mentioned, meant or intended to be
granted, and of every part thereof shall be then worth, that then, from and
after such conveyance and assurance, passed and perfected, the use and uses,
trusts and confidences, herein before limited and expressed, shall cease,
determine and end, and then, and from thenceforth, they the said I. I. H. E.
and S. R. and their Heirs, shall stand and be seized of and in the said
Message, Tenement and Premises hereby mentioned, meant or intended to be
granted, and of every part thereof, to the use and behoof of him the said I. N.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to no other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever, any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

A Charterparty of a Freightment.
THis Charterparty of Freightment indented, made the, etc. by R. H. and A. N.
Owners of the good Ship called the H. of London, of the burden of, etc. now
riding in the River of Thames (whereof is Master under God I. P.) of the one
part, and H. S. of the other part, witnesses, That the said Owners have
granted and letten to Freight to the said H. S. the aforesaid Ship; and that
the said H. S. has hired her for a Voyage to be made with her by Gods Grace in
manner and form following, viz. the said Owners covenant and grant by these
presents, to and with the said H. S. his, etc. that the said Ship, with the
first and next good Wind and Weather that God shall send after the first day
of, etc. shall depart from the said River of Thames, and directly sail to B. in
the Realm of France, with such Goods, Wares and Merchandises, as the said H.
his Factor, or Assigns, before the said Feast Day of, etc. next coming, shall
think good to charge and lay in her, viz. so much as she may reasonably carry,
and being arrived and come to the said Port of B. or so nigh to the same, as
she safely and conveniently may come, shall there tarry by the space of thirty
days next after her arrival, as well there to discharge and unlade such Goods
and Merchandises, as shall be so freighted and laden in her, as aforesaid, as
also to receive her full lading of such Goods, Wares and Merchandise, as the
said H. S. his Factor or Assigns shall think good, viz. as much as she may
reasonably carry, within which time and days above limited and appointed, the
said H. S. covenanteth and grants by these presents to discharge and relade,
or cause to be discharged and relade the aforesaid Ship, in manner and form
aforesaid. Which Ship so being able, the said Owners convenant and grant by
these presents, that she shall with the first and next good Wind and Weather,
next after that she shall be reladen, as aforesaid, depart and return from B.
aforesaid, and by Gods Grace directly sail, and come to the Port of the City of
London, or as nigh the same as she can safely come, where she shall tarry by
the space of, etc. after her arrival there, to make her right discharge. And
the said H. S. covenanteth, etc. within the space o^ etc. next after the
arrival of the said Ship at the Port of the City o London, as well to receive,
or cause to be received the Ships lading, as also to content and pay, or cause
to be paid unto the said Owners, their Executors or Assigns, the sum of, etc.
for the freight and lading of the said Ship, both outward and homewards, at
the place of the right discharge of the said Ship, together with average,
poynage, and petty lodenage, and all other Duties due and accustomed, according
to the use of Eastern Ships: And the said Owners covenant and grant by these
presents, to warrant and prepare the said Ship, strong and stanch both above
and beneath, and well and sufficiently tackled and apparelled with Masts, Sails
and Sail-yards, Anchors, Cable-Ropes, Cords, Guns. Powder, Shot, and all other
Instruments, Munitions, Artillery, Furniture, Tackling and Apparel, necessary
and convenient for such a Ship, with an able Master, eleven Men and a Boy,
which shall be ready at all times convenient, with the Boat of the same Ship,
to serve the said H. S. his Factors and Assigns, to and from Land during this
present Voyage aforementioned. And to the observing of all and singular the
Covenants, Grants, Articles, Deliveries, Receipts and Agreements, and all other
things above rehearsed, which on the part and behalf of the said Owners are to
be observed and kept in form aforesaid, the said Owners bind them, and either
of them, their Executors, Goods, and especially the same Ship with his Freight,
Tackle and Apparel, to the said H. S. his, etc. in the penalty of, etc. well
and truly by these presents to be paid. And likewise to the observing of all
and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles, Deliveries, Receipts, Payments
and Agreements, and all other things above rehearsed, which on the part and
behalf of the said H. S. are to be observed and kept in form aforesaid, the
said H. S. binds himself, his Executors, and Goods, whatsoever they be, and
wheresoever they may be found, to the said Owners, and their Executors, in the
penalty of, etc. well and truly to be paid by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Transport of Goods in a Ship.
TO all, etc. I A. P. of, etc. send greeting, etc. Whereas I the said A. P. in
the Month of, etc. last past, did lade in the Port of London of my own proper
Goods, and for my own proper use and account into and aboard the good Ship
called, etc. wherein one T. C. was then Master, for and during her then
intended Voyage, so much, etc. to the intent and purpose, that all the
aforesaid Kersies and Cloth should be transported for and in trade of
Merchandise, in and with the said Ship (amongst other her lading) in her Voyage
then intended to be made to Constantinople, and other places beyond the Seas,
and within the Streights of Gibralter, and to return again into the Port of
London. Now know ye, That I the said A. P. for and in consideration of the sum
of, etc. by F. L. of, etc. to me paid, whereof I acknowledge the receipt by
these presents: Have given, granted, aliened, bargained, sold, transferred,
assigned and set over, and by these presents do absolutely give, grant, alien,
bargain, sell, transfer, assign and set over unto the said F. L. as well all
and every the said Kersies and Cloths aforesaid, which are laden into the said
Ship, for the use, account or behoof of me the said A. P. as before is
mentioned; As also all and every such adventure and adventures, sum and sums of
Money, Goods, Wares, Merchandise, and increase whatsoever, which is or shall be
returned, had, gained or gotten, by reason or in respect of the said Kersies
and Cloths so laden outward, as aforesaid, or for or in respect of any part or
parcel thereof, in any manner of wise, to have, hold, take, receive and enjoy
all the Payments aforementioned, to be hereby given, granted, aliened,
bargained, sold, transferred, assigned and set over, and every part and parcel
thereof, to the said, etc. to his and to their own proper use and uses, to his
and their own proper Goods, from henceforth freely for ever, and to the intent
and purpose that the said F. L. his, etc. may the better have, receive and
enjoy all the Goods, Merchandises, and Premises before hereby granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and every part thereof, according to
the true meaning and purport of these presents, I the said A. P. do hereby
make, authorize and appoint him the said, etc. my true and lawful Attorney
irrevocable in my name and stead, but to his own use to do, execute, etc. all
and every act, matter and thing whatsoever, touching or concerning the
premises, or any part thereof, in as ample manner, etc. giving, and by these
presents granting, etc. and I do hereby covenant, etc. to ratify all and
whatsoever, etc. Covenants for quiet enjoying, without any let, reclaim, etc.
and to do any further act, etc. but the said F. L. to abide the bazard at Sea.
In witness, etc.

A Deed of Gift in consideration of the discharging of Debts.
TO all, etc. I J. W. of, etc. send greeting. Whereas I am indebted, and do owe
unto diverse persons diverse sums of Money, which I cannot satisfy, or make
payment of, as my said Creditors do desire, by reason many Debts are owing unto
me; And whereas my loving Friends, etc. have undertaken to give satisfaction to
my said Creditors, for my said Debts owing, as aforesaid: Know ye, That I the
said J. W. for and toward the indemnity and saving harmless them the said,
etc. for and concerning the payment of the said Debts, have given and granted,
and by these presents do, etc. unto the said, etc. all and every such sum and
sums of Money, Goods, Chattels and Debts, as I now have and am possessed of,
and which are due, owing, or payable unto me in the Hands or Custody of any
person or persons whatsoever, mentioned in a Schedule or Inventory to these
presents annexed; To have, hold, receive, take and enjoy the said Goods,
Chattels, Credits, Sum and Sums of Money, unto the said, etc. their Executors
and Administrators, to their and every of their use and uses, and as their and
every of their own proper Goods for ever, absolutely, without any reclaim,
challenge or contradiction of any person or persons whatsoever. And I have set
and put the said, etc. in full and peaceable possession of all and every the
premises, by the delivery unto them of a piece of Money, called Six pence,
fixed in the Seal hereof. And for the better recovery of the said Debts, I the
said J. W. have made, ordained and authorized, and by these presents constitute
and appoint the said, etc. and every of them, to be my true and lawful Attorney
irrevocable in the name of me, my, etc. but to and for, etc. to ask, sue for,
levy, recover and receive all and every such Goods, Chattels, Credits, Debts,
Sum and Sums of Money, as are in these presents, and in the said Schedule
specified; And all and every the Debtor and Debtors, Detainer and Detainers
thereof, or of any part thereof, to sue, implead and prosecute by due course of
Law in any Court of Record or Equity: Giving, and by these presents granting,
etc. my full power, strength, etc. (as in a Letter of Art.) A Covenant for
allowing and justifying all Actions, etc. without any nonsuit, retraxit, or
other act or thing, or without any account, etc. and to make further Letters of
Art, and assurance for the recovery of the premises; to the true performance
whereof I bind me, my, etc. in the said his, etc. in the sum of, etc. firmly by
these presents. In witness, etc.

A Deed of Gift of Goods of Warranty.
TO all, etc. I A. B. etc. send greeting: Know ye, That I the said A. B. being
of a good and perfect mind, and without fraud or deceit, for diverse good Causes
and Considerations me hereunto moving, have given, granted and confirmed, and
by these presents do give, grant and confirm unto, etc. All and singular my
Goods, Chattels, Implements, Debts, Bills, Bonds, Specialties, Necessaries,
Sums of Money, and other things whatsoever, as well moveable, as immovable, of
what nature, kind or quality soever they be, and in whose Hands, Custody,
Possession, Governance or Keeping, or whatsoever place or places they be or may
be found, as well on this side, as beyond the Seas. To have and to hold, levy,
perceive, use, receive and enjoy all and singular the said Goods, Chattels,
Implements, Credits, Debts, Specialties, Sums of Money, and all other the
premises, with all and singular their appurtenances unto the said C. D. his,
etc. to the only proper use and behoof of the said C. D. his, etc. for ever.
Freely, peaceably and quietly, without any manner of reclaim, challenge or
contradiction of me the said A. B. my, etc. or of any other person or persons,
by any means, title or procurement in any manner or wise, and without any
account, reckoning, or answer therefore to me, or any in my name, to be given,
rendered, or done in time to come; So that neither I the said A. B. my, etc. nor
any other person or persons by us, for us, or in our names, or in the name or
names of us, or any of us, at any time or times hereafter, may ask, claim,
challenge or demand in or to the premises, or any part thereof, any interest,
right, title, ose or possession, but from all action of right, title, claim,
interest, use, possession and demand thereof, we and every of us to be utterly
excluded, and for ever debarred by these presents. And I the said A. B. my,
etc. all the said Goods, Chattels, and other things above mentioned, with their
appurtenances, unto the said C. D. his, etc. to the use above said, against all
people will warrant, and defend by these presents, of which said Goods,
Chattels and other things, I the said A. B. have put the said C. D. in
peaceable possession, by the delivery of Six pence, which I have paid and
delivered to the said C. D. the day of ^^e date hereof. In witness, etc.

Nota.
If a Deed of Gift be made of Money owing to the Donor, let there be a Letter
of Attorney comprehended therein.

If the Deed be made of good Chattels in consideration of a Debt, let there be
a Covenant in the same Deed, that the Donor shall permit the Donee to come into
the House, or any other place where the Goods be, quietly and peaceably to
receive and carry away the same to the use of the Donee.

If that there be an Inventory of parcels annexed to the Deed, let there be a
Covenant in the Deed, that the same Goods and Chattels shall not be wasted, and
that they are free from any former Gifts or Encumbrances at the ensealing, by a
penny fixed in the Seal, or some part of the said Goods. But assurance for Debt
of Goods and Chattels, is best to be done by Bargain and Sale, indented with an
Inventory.

A Covenant that the Lessor shall seal a new Lease, and in the interim the
Lessee to enjoy, though the old Lease be surrendered.
TO all, etc. I B. H. send greeting: Whereas J. M. at the request of me the
said B H. and for the consideration hereafter specified, has granted and
surrendered by his writing, beating date with these presents, one Indenture of
Lease bearing date the, etc. and all the right, interest, and term of years,
which he the said J. M. now has, or of right ought to have of, in and to, etc.
in the said Indenture of Lease, specified by me the said B. H. unto him the
said J. M. demised for the term of, etc. and for the Rent of, etc. payable
quarterly. Now know ye, That I the said B. H. for me, my Executors and
Administrators, do covenant and grant to and with the said J. M. his, etc. and
to and with every of them by these presents, that I the said B. H. my, etc. in
consideration of the said Surrender of the said Lease and premises, and for
other good Considerations me moving, shall and will at the Costs and Charges of
me the said B. H. my, etc. at or before, etc. make, seal, and in due form of
Law deliver unto the said J. M. his, etc. one other good and sufficient new
Lease of the said, etc. for the remainder of the said term of, etc. then to
come, for and upon such Rent, Covenants and Conditions as are specified and
contained in the Lease above receited, made by me the said B. H. unto the said
J. M. And that the said J. M. his, etc. shall and may in the mean time, until
the said new Lease of the premises shall be by me unto him so made, sealed and
delivered, as is aforesaid, peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the said
Message or Tenement, Shop and Premises, with the appurtenances, and every part
and parcel thereof, without any let, trouble or contradiction of me the said B.
H. my, etc. or any other person or persons, claiming, or which shall or may
claim any Estate or Interest in or to the premises, or any part thereof, by,
from, or under us, or any of us, in as large and ample manner and sort, to all
intents and purposes, as if the same Indenture of Lease had been in full force,
and still remaining in the Hands of him the said J. M. In witness, etc.

A Covenant not to commence any Action or Suit against a Surety that stands
bound.
TO all, etc. Whereas J. M. and F. F. of, etc. by their Obligation dated, etc.
are and stand bound unto me the said J. in the sum of, etc. conditioned for
payment of, etc. at a day long sithence past, as by the same Obligation and
Condition thereof, more plainly appears, which said sum of, etc. or any part
thereof, was not paid according to the Condition of the said Obligation,
whereby the said Obligation became forfeited. And whereas the said J. in Easter
Term, in the year, etc. in the Court, etc. obtained judgment of, etc. together
with, etc. Costs against the said, etc. as by the Records of the said Court
more plainly may appear: Now know ye, That I the said, etc. for diverse good
Causes and Considerations me especially moving, am pleased and contented, and
for me, my, etc. do covenant, promise and grant to and with the said their,
etc. That neither I the said, etc. my, etc. nor any of us, nor any other person
or persons whatsoever, in the name of us, or any of us, shall at any time or
times hereafter use, implead, molest, arrest, attach, imprison and condemn, or
cause to be, etc. the said I. M. his, etc. or any of them, for or upon the
aforesaid Obligation so forfeited, as aforesaid, or by virtue of the said
Judgment, or of any Execution or Elegit to be had or procured thereupon, or by
any other ways or means whatsoever. In witness, etc.

A Covenant to pay the Sheriff, or his Bailiff, for apprehending a man.
TO all, etc. I T. O. of, etc. send greeting. Whereas, etc. does owe and is
indebted unto me the said, etc. in the sum of, etc. by Bill or Writing
Obligatory under his Hand and Seal, upon which Bill I have commenced a Suit at
Law, and thereupon had Judgment, upon which I have taken out Execution: And
whereas M. F. Sheriff of, etc. or T. S. Bailiff of the Wapentake or Hundred of,
etc. for the considerations here-under written and agreed upon, has undertaken
to do his best endeavor for the serving of the said Execution, and by virtue
thereof to apprehend the Body of the said J. S. Now know ye, That I the said T.
O. for me, my, etc. do covenant, etc, That if the said M. F. or T. S. do serve
the said Execution upon the Body of the said J. S. and him imprison and commit
unto the Goal, whereupon he may remain charged with the said Debt; or if upon
serving the said Execution, the said J. S. do pay, etc. the said Debt, or
compound with me for the same, that then in any of the cases aforesaid, I the
said, etc. shall and will forthwith pay the said M. F. or T. S. the sum of,
etc. in consideration of the said business so to be performed, etc. In witness,
etc.

Covenants between two Partners, at the dissolution of their Co-partnership.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. H. C. and G. of London of the one part,
and W. I. C. and G. of London aforesaid, of the other part, witnesses, That
whereas the said T. and W. by their Indenture of Co-partnership, beating date,
etc. for the confideration in the said Indenture specified, did condescend,
conclude and agree to become and continue Joynt-Dealers and Copartners
together, in the Art and Mystery of, etc. and in buying, selling and uttering
of, etc. and all other Wates, Commodities and Merchandises belonging, or
commonly used to and with the said Trade for the term of, etc. from the
Feast Day of, etc. last past, etc. (if the said T. and G. should so long live:
and unless they the said T. and W. should otherwise agree together, as by the
said Indenture of Co-partnership (whereunto relation being had) more at large,
etc.) And whereas the said T. and W. by their mutual consents, free will and
agreement, and for very good Causes and Considerations them thereto moving,
have thought good to dissolve and break off the Co-partnership, and from
thenceforth to become no Copartners together. Now this Indenture further
witnesses, That it is covenanted, concluded and fully agreed, by and between
the said, etc. for and concerning the premises, in manner and form following,
viz. first the said W. for, and in consideration of a certain sum of money to
him the said W. in Hand, at the ensealing and delivery of these presents by the
said T. well and truly paid and delivered for him, his, etc. does covenant and
grant, etc. by these presents to assign and set over, remise and release unto
the said T. his, etc. all and every such part, portion and share, as he the
said W. his, etc. has, may, might or ought to have, of, in and to all and
singular the Goods, Chattels, Housholdstuff, Wares, Merchandises, Debts,
Obligations, Specialties, Bills Obligatory, Sum and Sums of Money, and other
things whatsoever incident, or belonging to the said late Co-partnership, or
joynt-dealing in any manner of wise, and also his Estate, Interest, Right and
Demand therein, or in or to any part thereof, together with all such benefit
and commodity as he the said W. his, etc. might or ought to have, had, taken or
received, upon for or by reason of the said Bills, Bonds, Books, Obligations,
or Speci^lties belonging to the said Co-partnership. And that it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said T. his, etc. to have, keep, receive and enjoy as
well all and every the Goods, Chattels, Household Stuff, Wares and Merchandises
belonging to the said late Co-partnership, as also all and every such Debts,
Duties, Sum and Sums of Money, as shall be had, received, obtained or gotten by
virtue of the said Book, Bills, Bonds, Obligations or Specialties, or any of
them, or of any Suit, Judgment, Execution or Process thereupon to be commenced,
pursued, had or taken without the let, trouble or contradiction, or the unjust
Plea in Bar arising from any act or thing heretofore done, or hereafter to be
done, or willingly suffered by the said W. his, etc. or any of them, and
without any account or other thing to be therefore rendered, or yielded to the
said W. his, etc. or any of them. And further, that he the said W. heretofore
has not received any sum or sums of money, belonging to the said late
Co-partnership (other than such as are already allowed upon account) nor has
released or discharged, nor that he, his Executors or Administrators shall or
will hereafter receive, release, discharge or make frustrate all or any of the
said Debts, Duties, Sum or Sums of Money, Bonds, Specialties or Demands, due or
to be due, by virtue of the said Bills, Books, Specialties, Obligations or
Agreements, or any of them other than such as are allowed upon account, as
aforesaid) without the consent or agreement of the said T. H. his, etc. first
had and obtained in writing, under his or their Hands, nor voluntarily or
willingly discontinue, disavow or suffer to be nonsuited in, or make any
retraxit, or otherwise discharge, hinder or delay any Action, Suit or Plaint
whatsoever, which he the said T. H. now has, or at any time hereafter shall
commence, prosecute or pursue in the name of the said W. G. his, etc. for the
recovery or obtaining of the said Debts, Duties, Sum or Sums of Money, or
Demands belonging to the said late joint dealing, but that he the said W. G.
his, etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, upon
the reasonable request, and at the costs of the said T. H. his, etc. justify,
allow, maintain and avow all and every such action, suit, plaint and arrest, as
he the said his, etc. shall commence, etc. for the recovering, levying,
obtaining or getting of all or any the Debts, etc. belonging to the said late
Co-partnership, ratifying, etc. all and every lawful act, matter and thing
whatsoever, which he the said his, etc. shall commence, prosecute, etc. for the
recovering, etc. the said Debts, Duties, etc. or any of them. And lastly, that
he said T. H. his, etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, well and sufficiently acquit and discharge, save and keep harmless
the said W. his, etc. of and from all and all manner of Troubles, Damages,
Artests, Costs, Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, which shall or may be
taxed, urged, or happen to be had, recovered or obtained against the said T.
his, etc. for or by reason or means of any action, suit, etc. which the said T.
H. now h^th, or shall hereafter commence, etc. or cause to be commenced, etc.
against any person or persons, for recovering, having or obtaining any of the
said Debts, Duties or Demands above specified, or for any the Debts, Duties,
Sum or Sums of Money, or any thing whatsoever, touching the said late
Co-partnership now owing, or which hereafter shall be due or payable to the
said T. and W. or either of them, or any person or persons whatsoever, or for
or by reason of any Debts now owing, or Wares taken up upon credit by him the
said T. his, etc. and not charged upon the said partible account, wherewith or
whereby he the said W. G. his, etc. shall or may be charged or chargeable. In
witness, etc.

A Partition of Debts between one Co-partner, and the Executor of the other,
and to sue, etc.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R. E. Citizen, etc. and R. S. of London.
Gentleman, Son and Heir appatent of W. S. late Citizen, etc. deceased, and
Executor of the last Will and Testament of the said W. S. of the other part,
witnesses, That whereas the said R. E. and W. S. in the lifetime of the said
W. S. for many years together, did deal and traffic as joint Partners and
Occupiers in the Trade of, etc. and other Merchandises, and in buying, selling
and merchandising, and by reason thereof diverse and sundry sums of money, by
diverse and sundry persons became due and payable to them jointly as Debts,
owing to the said R. and W. jointly. And whereas therefore the said R. E. and
W. S. in the lifetime of the said W. S. by agreement between them, diverse
Debts due and owing between them, did sever and part in such manner and form,
as in and by a certain pair of Indentures, bearing date the, etc. (and certain
Schedules thereunto annexed) made between the said R. E. of the one part, and
the said R. S. etc. is mentioned, and more plainly does and may appear,
sithence which time, diverse and several of the Debts therein mentioned, have
been received and compounded for, as well by the said R. E. and W. S. in the
lifetime of the said W. as also by the said, etc. Executor of the said W.
sithence the decease of the said W. And whereas also diverse and sundry other
sums remaining then and yet unpaid, and uncompounded for, for the better
recovery whereof, and for the continuing of peace and amity between them, they
the said R. E. and R. S. have equally divided those Debts, yet remaining
unreceived or compounded for, as in and by two several Schedules thereof made
(the one called the first Schedule, wherein the Debts, Duties, Sums of Money
and Demands, yet unreceived, now allowed and appointed to the said R. S. are
contained and mentioned; and the other called the second Schedule, wherein the
Debts, Duties, Sums of Money and Demands, yet unreceived and now appointed to
the said R. E. are likewise contained and mentioned, and hereunto annexed) more
plainly it does and may appear.

This Indenture now further witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted,
concluded and fully agreed between the said R. E. and R. S. for and concerning
the premises, in manner and form following, viz. first the said R. E. for him,
etc, does by these presents grant, assign and set over, remise and release unto
him the said R. S. all and every the Debts, Obligations and Bills Obligatory,
and several sums of money in the said Schedule annexed unto this present
Indenture, called the first Schedule mentioned and expressed, and all his part,
portion, interest, right and demand therein or thereof, with all such benefit
and commodity, as the said R. E. his, etc. can or may lawfully take, receive or
have upon or by reason of any the said Obligations, Bills, Debts, Duties or
Demands contained or mentioned in the said Schedule called the first Schedule
allotted to the said R. S. And further, the said R. E. does by these presents,
for him, his, etc. constitute, and in his place appoint the said R. S. during
his life, and after the death of the said R. S. his Executors and
Administrators, to be his lawful Attorney irrevocable, for and in the name of
the said R. E. during his life, and after his decease, for and in the name of
his, etc. to ask, take, etc. of all the Debtors in the said Schedule, called
the, etc. and annexed to this present Indenture mentioned, or any of them, or
of the Heirs, etc. all and every the sum and sums of Money in the said
Schedule, called the first Schedule, mentioned or contained; and the said R. E.
for him, his, etc. does covenant and grant to and with the said R. S. his, etc.
by these presents, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. S.
during the life of the said R. S. and to and for the Executors of the said R.
S. after his decease, at the only costs and charges of the said R. S. his, etc.
or some of them in the name of the said R. E. during his life, and after his
death, etc. to prosecute any Actions, Suits or Plaints for the recovery of all
or any the Debts, Duties or Demands in the said Schedule annexed to this
present Indenture, called, etc. contained or mentioned, against all or any of
the Debtors therein named; their, etc. and the same Actions, Suits and Plaints,
and every or any of them, at the like costs and charges of the said R. S. his,
etc. without the let, trouble, contradiction, or the unjust plea in bar,
arising from any act heretofore done by the said R. S. his, etc. to prosecute
and pursue, until judgment and execution thereupon shall be had and taken, and
all such sum and sums of money, as shall upon or by reason of any such suit or
suits, happen to be recovered, had, levied or received, to take and keep to the
only use and behoof the said R. S. his, etc. without any account, or other
thing therefore to be rendered or yielding to the said R. his, etc. or any of
them, ratifying, etc. all and every action, act and thing, which the said R.
his, etc. shall make, do, commit or execute, or cause, etc. in of about the
premises, for and touching the recovery, or receiving of all or any the said
Debts in the said Schedule mentioned. And the said R. E. his, etc. does by
these presents covenant, etc. to and with the said R. S. his, etc. that the
said R. E. has not heretofore released or discharged, nor that he, his, etc.
shall or will release or discharge all or any the Debts, Duties, sums of Money
or Demands in the Schedule, etc. without the consent or agreement of the said
R. S. his, etc. first had and obtained in writing under his or their Hand, or
voluntarily or willingly discontinue, disavow, or be nonsuited in, or make any
retraxit, or otherwise discharge, to hinder or delay any such action, suit or
plaint, which the said R. E. his, etc. shall at any time hereafter commence,
etc. in the name of the said R. S. for recovery or obtaining of all or any the
said, etc. in the said Schedule, etc. mentioned. But that the said R. E. his,
etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, justify,
avow, etc. all and every such actions, suits, etc. which he the said R. S. his,
etc. shall at any time hereafter commence or prosecute at the costs and charges
of the said R. S. his, etc. against any person or persons, for recovery or
obtaining of all or any the said Debts, etc. in the said Schedule annexed to
this present Indenture, called, etc. mentioned or expressed. Ratifying, etc.
all and every matter and thing whatsoever, which the said R. S. his, etc. or
any of them shall commence, make, do, execute or prosecute, for the receiving,
recovering, levying, etc. the said Debts, etc. or any of them. And the said R.
S. for him, his, etc. and every of them in consideration of the premises, does
by these presents covenant and grant to and with the said R. E. his, etc. and
every of them, that he the said R. S. his, etc. shall and will from time to
time, and at all times hereafter sufficiently acquit, discharge and save
harmless the said R. E. his, etc. and every of them, of and from all manner of
Damages, Troubles, Suits, Arrests, Costs and Charges whatsoever, which shall be
taxed upon, or happen to be had, brought, recovered, or obtained against the
said R. E. his, etc. Goods, Chattels or Lands, for or by reason of any Action,
Suit, Plaint, Process, Judgment, Arrest or Execution, which the said R. S. his,
etc. shall hereafter bring, commence, pursue or prosecute, or cause to be, etc.
against any person or persons, in the said Schedule annexed to this present
Indenture, called the first Schedule, named, contained or mentioned there, etc.
for the recovering or obtaining of any the said Debts, Duties, etc. in the said
Schedule mentioned. And the said R. S. for him, his, etc. does further
covenant, grant, assign, set over, remise and release unto the said R. E. all
and every the Debts, Obligations and Bills Obligatory, and several sums of
Money, Duties and Demands in the said Schedule called, etc. annexed to this
present Indenture allotted to the said R. S. contained and expressed, and all
Bills, Bonds, Obligatory Writings and Specialties whatsoever, touching or
concerning the same, or any of them, and all his part, portion, interest or
demand therein or thereunto, or of any part or parcel thereof, together with
all such benefit and commodity as the said R. S. his, etc. can or may lawfully
have, take or receive, upon or by reason of any the said Debts, Duties or
Demands, contained or expressed in the said Schedule, etc. And that all and
every the several sums of money in the said Schedule, etc. annexed to these
presents, contained and expressed, shall be and remain fully and wholly to the
said R. S. his, etc. without let, trouble or contradiction, or without any
account, or other thing to be therefore rendered or yielded unto the said R S.
his, etc. or any of them. And the said R. S. does by these presents further
covenants, promise and grant, to and with the said R. E. his, etc. That neither
the said W. S. in his lifetime, nor the said R. S. sithence the time of his
decease, nor either of them heretofore have not received, released or
discharged, nor that the said R. S. his, etc. shall or will receive, release or
discharge all or any the said Debts, Duties, Sum or Sums of Money or Demands
in the said Schedule, etc. contained and expressed, and allotted to the said R.
E. for his part of the premises, as aforesaid, without the consent of the said
R. E. his, etc. therennto first had and obtained in writing, under his or their
hands. Nor otherwise voluntarily or willingly discharge, hinder or delay any
Action, Suit or Plaint whatsoever, which the said R. E. his, etc. shall at any
time hereafter commence, etc. for recovery or obtaining of all or any the said
Debts, etc. in the said Schedule, etc. mentioned; and whereas the Debt-Books,
and other Books, Bills, Bonds, Obligations and Specialties, wherein the Debts,
Duties and Demands before mentioned, and wherein and whereby any Wares or
Merchandises were sold, or delivered to the persons in the said Schedule named,
are contained or expressed, are now in the hands and possession of the said R.
S. therefore the said R. S. does covenant for him, his, etc. to deliver the
same to the said R. E. his, etc. upon demand, and shall and will likewise upon
the like request at the place aforesaid, produce and show forth to the said R.
E. the said Book called the Debt-Book, and all other Books, Scores and
Writings, which remain in the hands, possession or custody of the said R. S.
wherein the said Debts, Duties or Demands, or any of them contained in the said
Schedule, etc. are mentioned or expressed, or whereby or wherein any Wares or
Merchandises, touching or concerning the same, were sold or delivered to any
the persons in the said Schedule, etc. whereby the said R. E. may have and take
the view, benefit and use thereof to be showed or produced forth in any Court
or Courts of Record, or elsewhere for the declaring, proving or recovering of
all or any the said Debts in the said Schedule, etc. or other occasions
whatsoever, without any let, etc. In witness, etc.

A Conveyance from J. T. and El. his Wife (being Tenant in tail) to R. H. and
El. his Wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of R. H. for ever.
THis Indenture, etc. between J. T. of, etc. Gent. and Elinor his wife, Cousin
and next Heir of T. L. late of the City of, etc. Gent. deceased, without Issue
of his Body (that is to say) the only Daughter and Heir of W. L. Gent. elder
Brother and Heir of the said T. L. of the one part, and R. H. of, etc. and El.
his wife, of the other part, witnesses, That they the said J. T. and El. his
wife, as well for and in consideration of the sum of 210 l. of, etc. by the
said R. H. unto them the said J. T. and El. his wife, at the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, well and truly in hand paid, the receipt whereof
they the said J. T. and El. his wife, do hereby acknowledge, and thereof, and
of every part and parcel thereof, do fully, clearly, and absolutely acquit,
exonerate and discharge the said R. H. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and every of them by these presents, have granted, aliened, bargained, sold and
confirmed, and by these presents, etc. unto the said R. H. and El. his wife,
all that one Message or Tenement, etc. together also with all and singular the
Rooms, Cellars, Sollers, Halls, Parlours, Chambers, Houses, Housings, Vaults,
Pavements, Courts, Yards, Easements, and other Hereditaments, Emoluments and
Appurtenances whatsoever, unto the said Message or Tenement and Premises, or
any of them appurtenant, belonging or appertaining, or^had, used, demised,
occupied or enjoyed as part, parcel or member thereof, or as thereunto, or to
any part thereof belonging or appertaining, and the reversion and reversions,
remainder and remainders of them, and every of them, and also they the said J.
T. and El. his wife, for the consideration aforesaid, have granted, bargained
and sold, and by, etc. unto the said R. H. his Heirs and Assigns, all and
singular Letters Patent, Exemplifications of Fines and Recoveries,
Chirographies of Fines, Charters, Deeds, Indentures, Counterpanes, Writings,
Evidences, Escripts and Minuments whatsoever concerning only the premises
hereby mentioned, to be bargained and sold, or only any part thereof, and which
now are in the Hands, Custody or Possession of the said J. T. or any other
person or persons, by his delivery or appointment, or to his use, or to the use
of the said El. his wife, and which he may have, obtain or come by, without
suit in the Law, and also true Copies of all such other Letters Patent,
exemplifications of Fines and Recoveries, Chirographies of Fine;, Charters,
Deeds, Indentures, Counterpanes, Writings, Evidences, Escripts and Minuments
whatsoever, amongst other things concerning the premises, or any part thereof,
and which now are in the Hands, Custody or Possession of the said J. T. or any
other person or persons, by his delivery or appointment, or to his use, or
which he may have, obtain or come by, without suit in the Law; all and singular
which said Letters Patent, Exemplifications, Chirographies, Charters, Deeds,
Indentures, Counterpanes, Writings, Evidences, Escripts and Minuments, so
hereby bargained and sold by the said J. T. he the said J. T. does hereby grant
and agree to deliver, or cause to be delivered to the said R. H. his Heirs or
Assigns, on this side the Feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary
now next coming, safe, uncancelled and undefaced, as now the same are, together
with the said Copies, the writings of the said Copies to be paid for by the
said R. H. to the receipt of the said Copies, To have and to hold the said
Messnage or Tenement and Backside, and all and singular other the premises
hereby mentioned, to be bargained and sold, and every of them, with their and
every of their appurtenances, and the Reversions and Remainders of them, and
every of them, unto the said R. H. and El. his wife, and the Heirs and Assigns
of the said R. H. to the only proper use and behoof of the said R. H. and El.
his wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said R. H. for ever, without any
Mortgage, Condition, redemption, use or limitation to recall, alter, charge or
determine the same to be holden of the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees,
whereof the premises have been holden by the Rents and Services therefore due
and of right accustomed. And the said J. T. for himself, his Heirs, Executors
and Administ^ators, does covenant and grant to and with the said R. H. his
Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, that she
the said El. his wife, is seized of the reversion of the said bargained
premises of an Estate to her and the Heirs of her Body lawfully begotten,
immediately expectant upon an estate for the life of Hellen Cl. now wife of Leo
Cl. of, etc. Gent. with further remainder or reversion immediately expectant
upon the said Estate-tail, to the right Heirs of the said El. for ever (without
any reversion or remainder of the same, or of any part thereof, in our
Sovereign Lord the King, or otherwise) of the full, absolute reversion, in
Fee-simple expectant, upon the said Estate for life of the said Hellen: And the
said J. T. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does covenant
and grant to and with the said R. H. his Heirs and Assigns, and to and with
every of them by these presents, that they the said R. H. and El. his wife, and
the Heirs and Assigns of the said R. H. and every of them, shall and may from
time to time, and at all times hereafter for ever, after the decease of the
said Hellen, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the
said Message or Tenement, Backside and Premises, without the let,
interruption, trouble, expulsion or eviction of the said J. T. and El. his
wife, or either of them, or of their or either of their Heirs, of their or
either of their Bodies begotten, or to be begotten, or any other Heir or Heirs
of them, or either of them, or of any heir or heirs of T. L. Gent. deceased,
and without any lawful let, trouble, interruption, expulsion or eviction of any
other person or persons whatsoever, now having, or lawfully claiming to have,
or which hereafter may have, or lawfully claim to have any manner of estate,
right, title, interest, thing or demand, of, in, to, or out of the said
bargained premises, or any of them, by, for, from, or under them, or any of
them, or by, from or under the said Hellen, or by their or any of their means,
consent or procurement (except such person and persons, which may lawfully
claim under the Leases and Estates herein after excepted) and freed and
discharged, or otherwise within convenient time, after reasonable request, well
and sufficiently saved and kept harmless, and indempnified by the said J. T.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, or some or one of them, of and from a
land all manner of former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants,
Alienations, Estates, Leases, Joyntures, Dowers, Uses, Wills, Entails, Rents,
Charges, Rents-seck, and arrerages of all manner of Rents, Statutes-Merchant,
and of the Staple recognizances, Judgments, Executions, Fines, Post-sines, and
of and from all other Titles, Troubles, Charges and Incumb^a^ces whatsoever
heretofore had, made, done, committed, omited, or wittingly or willingly
suffered or procured, or hereafter to be had, made, done, committed, wittingly
or willingly suffered or procured by the said I. T. and El. T. L. and H. or
either or any of them, their or either, or any of their Heirs or Assigns, or by
any other person or persons whatsoever, by their or any either of their means,
assent, consent or procurement, one estate thereof heretofore made by the said
T. L. and Hellen his late wife, by Fine and other assurances to the use of the
said T. L. and Hellen, and the Heirs of the said T. L. and one Lease made by
the said Hellen and J. T. and El. his wife to R. by Indenture bearing date,
April 25. in the Twelfth year, etc. and all arrerages of rents, now accrued, or
to accrue, by reason of the same, and one other Lease made by the said J. T.
and El. to the said Hellen, for One hundred years, for better security of
payment of six pounds per annum, to the said Hellen, and her Assigns, during
her life only excepted, and fore-prized: and the said J. T. for himself, his
Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant, to and with the said R.
H. and El. his wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said R. H. by these
presents, that they the said J. T. and El. his wife, and either of them, and
their and either of their Heirs, and all and every other person and persons,
now having, or lawfully claiming to have, or which at any time hereafter shall
or may lawfully claim to have any estate, right, title or interest, of, in or
to the said premises, and every or any of them, by, from, or under the said J.
T. and El. his wife, and T. L. or by, from or under either or any of them,
other than the said Hellen, and such as may claim under her, for her Estate, as
aforesaid, and other than such, which may claim under the said excepted Leases,
or either of them, shall and will from time to time, and at all times after the
date of these presents, at and upon the reasonable request, and only cost and
charges in the Law of the said R. H. and El. his wife, and the Heirs and
Assigns of the said R. H. or any of them, do, make, knowledge, execute and
suffer, or cause to be done, made, knowledged, executed and suffered, all and
every such further, lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things,
device and devices, assurances and conveyances in the Law whatsoever, which
shall be or may be for the more better and perfect assurance, sure-making and
conveying of all and singular the said bargained premises, and every part and
^arcel thereof, with the appurtenances unto the said R. H. and El. his wife,
and the Heirs and Assigns of the said R. H. to the only proper use and behoof
of the said R. H. and El. his wife, and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said R.
H. for ever, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, be it
by Fine, Feossment, recovery, with single, double, or more Voucher or Vouchers,
over Deed or Deeds enrolled or not enrolled, the inrolment of these presents,
release or confirmation with warranty, or without warranty, or by all, every,
or as many of the said ways and means, as by the said R. H. and El. his wife,
his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their, or any of their Council learned in the
Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised and required, so as for the making,
doing, knowledging, executing, suffering or performing such further acts,
things, devices, assurances and conveyances, or any of them, the person or
persons that are to make such further assurance by force of this Covenant, or
any of them, be not compelled to travel above the space of twenty Miles, nor by
such acts, things, devices, assurances or conveyances, or any of them, be
compelled or compellable, to warrant, acquit or defend the premises, or any of
them, more largely, or more generally, than only against acts, charges, titles,
troubles and encumbrances, had, made or done, or wittingly or willingly,
suffered by them, or by any of their means, assent, consent, privity or
procurement, but not in any ways to warrant against the said Leases and Estates
before excepted, or either or any of them. And moreover it is covenanted,
granted, concluded and agreed upon, by and between all and every the said
Parties to these presents, that all and every Fines, Feoffments, Recoveries,
Acts, Things, Assurances and Conveyances in the Law whatsoever, hereafter to be
had, made, levied, suffered, executed or performed, of the said premises, or
any part thereof, and whereunto the said J. T. and E. his wife, or either of
them, or their or either of their Heirs shall in any wise be Party or Parties,
Vouchee or Vouchees, shall be and enure, and shall be deemed, construed,
reputed, adjudged, and taken to be and enure, to the only proper use and behoof
of the said R. H. and E. his wife, and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and
to none other use or uses, intents or purposes whatsoever. And this Indenture
further witnesses, That the said J. T. for the consideration aforesaid, has
granted, bargained, sold and confirmed, and by, etc. unto the said R. H. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all such Goods, Implements,
Housholdstuff, Utensils, and things which are mentioned in a Schedule indented,
hereunto annexed; and does hereby also covenant and grant to and with the said
R. H. his executors, admin^ strators and Assigns, that he has full power and
sufficient and good right and property to grant the same accordingly: and the
said J. J. for himself, etc. does covenant to and with the said R. H. his heirs
and assigns, that he, his heirs and assigns, shall and will at all times
hereafter, upon the request, and at the charges of the said R. H. his heirs and
assigns, show, or cause to be shown forth in any Court of Law or Equity, or
other place necessary, all Evidences which he or they shall have in their
hands, or may lawfully come by, without s^^t of Law, concerning the said
bargained ^^remises, or any part thereof, for maintenance of his Estate hereby
mentioned, to be assured unto him and his heirs, and shall and will permit and
suffer the same to remain in such Court or place, so long as shall be necessary
in such behalf. In witness whereof, etc.

Robert Far being seized of a Tenement in Fee with remainders, wherein Eliz.
Far. has an Estate for her life, having levied a Fine, now suffers a
recovery, and setleth and assures the same to Robert Bleck, and his heirs in
Fee-simple by the subsequent Deed.
THis Indenture Quadripartite, etc. between Robert Far, Son and Heir of, etc.
G. G. and E. Ar. of, etc. of the first part, Robert Bleck of, etc. of the
second part, W. H. and T. H. of, etc. of the third part, and I. P. and H. Bl.
of the fourth part, witnesses, That for and in consideration of the sum of 200
l. of, etc. to the said R. F. before the ensealing and delivery hereof, well
and truly satisfied and paid by the said R. Bl. whereof the said R. F. does by
these presents acknowledge the receipt, and whereof, etc. He the said R. F. and
the said G. G. and E. Ar. at his request and nomination have, and every of them
has (by and with the consent and direction of the said R. B.) granted,
bargained, sold, aliened and confirmed, and by, etc. unto the said W. F. and T.
Y. all that great Message, etc. together with all Houses, Buildings, etc. and
the Rents, Services, Reversions and Remainders thereof, and also all the
estate, right, title, interest, challenge, claim and demand whatsoever, of them
the said R. E. G. G. and E. Ar. and every or any of them, of, in and to the
laid granted Tenement, etc. and also all Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Writings,
Escripts and Minuments whatsoever, which do touch or concern the said granted
premises, or any part thereof, To have and to hold the said Message or
Tenement, Garden and Premises, before hereby granted or conveyed, or mentioned
or intended to be hereby granted and conveyed, and every part and parcel
thereof, with the appurtenances, unto the said W. F. and T. Y. their Heirs and
Assigns, to the only uses, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents
limited, expressed and declared, that is to say, to the use of them the said W.
F. and T. Y. and of their heirs, until a good and perfect common recovery shall
be in due form of Law, at the costs and charges of the said R. B. or his heirs,
had and executed, of and for the said hereby granted, or intended to be
granted, Message, Tenement and Premises against them the said W. F. and T. Y.
before the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminister, according to
the usual course of common Recoveries in the same Court used for assurance of
Lands and Tenements, in which recovery the said I. P. and H. B. shall be
demandants and recoverers, and the said R. F. shall be vouched to warrant, so
as such recovery so to be had, be had and executed before the end of the term
of St. Hillary next ensuing the date hereof, and from and after the full
execution of the said recovery (in case the same shall be had and executed
before the end of the same term of St. Hillary, the said recoveries intended
shall stand seized, or in case the said recovery intended to be had shall not
be had and executed by the time aforesaid) then from and after the end of the
same Term of St. Hillary, to the use of the said R. B. and of his Heirs and
Assigns for evermore, and to and for none other use, intent or purpose, to be
holden of the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the premises by the
rents and services therefore due, and of right accustomed, and the said R. F.
for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them,
does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said R. B. his Heirs and
Assigns by these presents, that for and notwithstanding any act, matter or
thing, had, made or done to the contrary by him, and the said E. F. his Father
deceased, or either of them (except as herein after is excepted) the said R. F.
G. G. and E. A. or some of them, are, or one of them is, at the ensealing and
delivery hereof, the true and lawful Owners or Owner of the said granted, or
intended to be granted premises, and every part and parcel thereof, and of and
in the same, and every part and parcel thereof lawfully and rightfully seized
of a good, sure, sufficient and absolute Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple,
in his or their own right, and to the only use of them, or some or one of them,
his or theirs, by good assurance, right or title in the Law indefeazible,
without any reversion, remainder, or further interest in the Commonwealth, or
any other person or persons whatsoever, and also that notwithstanding as
aforesaid (except as herein after is excepted) the said R. F. G. G. and E. A.
or some or one of them have or has, at the time of the ensealing and delivery
hereof, full power, good right and lawful authority, to grant, convey and
assure the said granted, or intended to be granted premises, and every part and
parcel thereof, in manner and form aforesaid, and according to the true intent
and meaning thereof: and further also, that the said granted Message, Tenement
and Premises, and every part thereof, with their appurtenances, now be and are,
and so from time to time, and at all times hereafter, shall or may be, remain
and continue to the uses, intents and purposes aforesaid, in manner and form
aforesaid, and according to the true intent and meaning of these presents,
clearly acquitted (freed) and discharged of and from all and all manner of
former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Mortgages, Joyntures,
Dowers, Wills, Covenants, Intails, Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple,
Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Rents, Charge-rents, Seck,
arrerages of rents, and of and from all other Titles, Charges, Troubles and
Encumbrances whatsoever, at any time heretofore had, made, done, committed,
omitted, or suffered to be done, or at any time hereafter to be had, made,
done, committed, omitted, or suffered to be done by him the said R. F. and the
said E. F. his Father, or either of them, except an Estate assured to and upon
E. H. widow, late wife of the said E. F. by him the said E. for the term of the
life of the said E. of the premises hereby conveyed, or intended to be
conveyed, which is intended to be surrendered for the better execution of the
said intended recovery, and also except a Bargain and Sale lately made by the
said R. F. G. G. and E. A. to the said W. F. and T. Y. of the same premises, to
hold from December 20. last past, for the term of one whole year, which Bargain
and Sale was intended, and made for the better execution of these presents; and
the said R. F. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does
further covenant, promise and grant to and with the said R. B. his Heirs and
Assigns by these presents, that he the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns, shall
or lawfully may from time to time, and at all times hereafter for ever,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, peaceably and
quietly enter into, have, hold and enjoy the said granted Message, Tenement,
Garden and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances,
without any let, interruption, challenge, claim, disturbance, eviction,
ejection, molestation, hinderance or denial, of or by the said R. F. or of or
by any other person or persons whatsoever, having or claiming, or pretending to
have any lawful estate, right, title or interest in or to the premises, or any
part thereof, from, by or under him, or his said Father deceased (except the
said El. F. and such as shall or may claim, for, by, from or under, and only
for, by, from or under the estate for life of the said El. F. and the Bargain
and Sale before herein excepted) and further also, that he the said R. F. and
his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons, having or claiming to
have, or that shall or may have, or claim to have any right, title, estate or
interest, of, in or to the premises, from, by or under him, or his said Father
(except before excepted) shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, during the space often years next ensuing the date hereof, upon the
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges of the said R. B. his Heirs or
Assigns, make, do, suffer, acknowledge and execute, or cause or suffer to be
done and executed, all such further and other lawful and reasonable acts,
things and assurances, for the further, better and more perfect granting,
assuring and conveying of the said Message, Tenement, Garden and Premises,
before hereby granted or mentioned, meant or intended to be hereby granted,
with the appurtenances, to the use of the said R. B. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, according to the true meaning of these presents, as by him the said R. B.
his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be
in that behalf reasonably devised, or advised and required, so as for the
making of such further assurance, neither the said R. F. nor any other person,
by whom such assurance is to be made, shall be compelled or compellable to
travel for the doing thereof, further than the Cities of London or Westminster,
and so as such further assurance contain not, nor imply any further or more
general warrant or acquittal, than is before herein comprised. And it is
concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents; that
all and every fine and fines, recovery and recoveries, and other assurances
whatsoever, at any time here^ofore had, made, suffered or executed of the
premises, or at any time hereafter be had or executed of the premises, or any
part thereof, either alone by it self, or together with any other Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, and whereunto the said R. F. has been, or he or
his Heirs shall be in any sort Conusor or Conusors, Vouchee or Vouchees, Party
and Patties, shall be and enure, and shall be deemed, adjudged and taken to be
and enure, as touching the said granted premises, to and for the only use of
the said R. B. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to or for none other
use, intent or purpose whatsoever; provided always, and it is the true intent
and meaning of these presents, and of all the Parties hereunto, that neither
these presents, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend, or be construed
to extend to charge the said G. G. and E. Ar. or either of them, their or
either of their Heirs, with or for any warranty or acquittal of the said
premises, or any part thereof, other than against him and themselves
respectively, and his and their respective Heirs. In witness, etc.

Note.
A Demise, Bargain and Sale was made by R. H. G. G. and E.A. to W. F. and T. Y.
Habend. to them for one year, from December. 25. last, that the Estate of
Freehold might rest in them without Livery.

Note.
A Surrender is made by El. to R. F. of her Estate for life; for otherwise W.
F. and T. Y. could not have been made perfect Tenants of the Freehold.

John Vaugh ( seized of a Tenement jure uxoris for her life, the remainder in
Fee-tail belonging to Tho. M.) together with his wife, and the Tenant in tail,
conclude to convey the same to T. S. and his Heirs, the assurance is by Fine
and Recovery intended to be executed, the use whereof being to T. S. and his
Heirs, is directed by the following Deed; wherein are comprised necessary
Covenants.
THis Indenture Quadripartite, made, etc. between I. V. of, etc. and Mary his
wife, late the wife of E. M. late of, etc. deceased, of the first part, Tho. M.
of, etc. Son and Heir of the said E. M. on the Body of the said Mary begotten,
of the second part, Tho. S. of, etc. of the third part, and W. F. of, etc. of
the fourth part. Whereas the said I. V. and M. his wife, stand seized in the
right of the said M. of an Estate of Freehold, for term of the life of the
said M. the remainder thereof in Fee-tail to the said T. M. party to these
presents, belonging with diverse remainders over, of and in all that one great
or Capital Message, etc. and also of and in all Houses, Edifices, etc.
witnesses now this present Indenture, that for and in consideration of the sum
of 600 l. of, etc. to the said, etc. well and truly paid and satisfied, it is
concluded and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, that a
good and perfect Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple, shall be conveyed, settled
and assured to and upon the said T. S. of and in all and singular the said
great Capital Message or Tenement and Mansion House, now used as two Houses,
as aforesaid, and all other the premises before mentioned, with their and every
of their rights, members and appurtenances, and that to that end, intent and
purpose, the said John V. and Mary his wife, and Tho. M. party to these
presents, shall and will before the end of Michaelmas Term, now next ensuing
the date hereof, acknowledge and levy to the said W. F. and his heirs, one Fine
sur conuzance de droit come ceo, etc. to be sued out with Proclamations,
according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided, of all and
singular the said Capital Message or Mansion House, and other the Premises,
with the appurtenances, by the name of two Messuages, with the appurtenances,
in the Parish of, etc. or by some other apt name or names, as by counsel shall
be thought meet, to the intent to make the said W. F. perfect Tenant of the
Freehold of the premises, that so one Writ of Entry sur disseisin en le post,
issuing out of the High-Court of Chancery, and to be returnable before the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, may be obtained and sued
out, whereby the said T. S. shall demand against the said W. E. all the said
Capital Message or Mansion House and Premises, by some apt name or names, as
by counsel shall be advised, to which Writ the said W. F. shall appear in
person, or by Attorney thereunto lawfully authorized, and after count or
declaration against him by the said T. S. he the said W. F. shall make defense
by words of course, and vouch to warranty the said T. M. party to these
presents, who shall likewise appear in person, or by his Attorney in that
behalf lawfully and sufficiently authorized, and after count or declaration
against him by the said T. S. shall make defense by words of course, and vouch
to warranty the common Vouchee, who shall appear in person at the Bar of the
said Court of Common Pleas, and after declaration against him, shall make
defense, and enter into the warranty, and afterward make default; whereupon
several judgments shall or may be had, that so a good and perfect common
recovery with double voucher, according to the course of common recoveries in
the said Court of Common Pleas used, may be had and executed of the premises:
And this Indenture further witnesses, and it is the true intent and meaning of
these presents, and of all the parties to the same, that the said recovery so,
or in any other manner to be had or executed, and the whole execution of the
fine and recovery of the said Capital Messuages and Premises, to be had or
executed, as aforesaid, shall be and enure, and shall be deemed, adjudged,
construed and taken to be and enure, to and for the only proper use and behoof
of the said T. S. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to none other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever. And the said John V. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the
said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents, that (saving and excepting
the terms and estates herein after excepted) he the said J. V. and Mary his
wife, at the time of the ensealing and delivery hereof, are, and so until the
Fine aforesaid, by them to be levied, as aforesaid, shall be fully executed, as
aforesaid, shall be seized in the right of the said Mary, of a good Estate of
Freehold for the life of the said Mary, of and in the Capital Message,
Mansion House and premises before mentioned, to be settled and assured to or
upon the said T. S. or his Heirs aforesaid, and that the said J. V. and Mary
his wife, now have, and until as aforesaid, shall have full power, good right,
and lawful authority to convey and assure the premises to the said T. S. and
his Heirs, for the life of the said Mary, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, and also that the said Capital Message or
Mansion House and Premises before mentioned, or intended to be hereby settled or
assured, as aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances, now be and are, and so from time to time, and at all times for
ever, shall or may be, remain and continue unto the said T. S. his Heirs and
Assigns according to the limitation aforesaid, and according to the true intent
and meaning of these presents, clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or
otherwise by the said J. V. his Executors or Administrators, well and
sufficiently saved and kept harmless of and from all former and other Grants,
Leases, Mortgages, Estates, Acts, Titles, Charges, Troubles and Encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made or done, or to be had, made, done or committed by him the
said John V. and Mary his wife, or either of them, except and foreprized one
Lease of Indenture bearing date, etc. made and granted by the said John V. and
Mary his wife, and T. M. party to these presents, of certain parts of the said
Capital Message, then, etc. for the term of one and thirty years, from the
Feast of the Birth of our Lord God, then last past, upon which is reserved the
yearly rent of 30 l. and 10 s. and also excepted and foreprized such term and
interest as Tho. A. has in the other parts of the said Capital Message, by
virtue of a Lease heretofore made to Simon L. Mercer, deceased, for certain
years yet to come, under the yearly rent of 44 l. and 10 shillings, which said
several yearly rents from henceforth, for and during the rest and residue to
come, of the respective terms before mentioned, to grow due and payable, it is
concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents, and
every of them, and declared to be their true intent and meaning, shall
continue, and be due and payable, and ought to be paid to the said T. S. his
Heirs or Assigns; and the said J. V. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, does further covenant and grant to and with the said T. S. his
Heirs and Assigns by these presents, that he the said T. S. his Heirs and
Assings, shall or lawfully may from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
for ever peaceably and quietly enter into, have, hold and enjoy all and
singular the Capital Message, Mansion House and Premises before mentioned, or
intended to be hereby settled or assured, and every part and parcel thereof,
with their and every of their rights, members and appurtenances, without any
let, interruption, disturbance or encumbrance, of or by them the said J. V. and
Mary his wife, or either of them, or of or by any other person or persons
lawfully claiming, or to claim, or having right or title from, by or under
them, or either of them, their or either of their act, right, title or estate,
except such as shall or may claim by or under the Leases before excepted, or
either of them, and for the terms or interest in or by the same Leases granted
only, and also that he the said J. V. and Mary his wife, and either of them,
shall and will from time to time, upon the reasonable request, and at the costs
and charges in the Law of the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, make, do,
suffer, execute and acknowledge all and every such further and other lawful and
reasonable acts, things and assurances in the Law, containing or implying no
further or more general warranty or acquittal, than only against them the said
J. V. and M. his wife, and either of them, for the better assuring and
sure-making of the said Premises to the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, as by
him or them, or by his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be in that
behalf reasonably devised, advised or required, and so as for the doing
thereof, neither the said J. V. or Mary be compelled to travel above Ten Miles
from the place of his or her respective dwelling or abode, at the time of such
request to be made. And the said T. M. party to these presents, for himself,
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, does covenant and
grant, to and with the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents, that
saving and excepting the terms and interests herein before excepted, he the
said T. M. at the time of the ensealing and delivery hereof, is seized of a
good, perfect and absolute Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple, of and in the
said Capital Message, Mansion House and Premises before mentioned, or intended
to be settled or assured, and until, etc. shall be settled and assured to and on
the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, according to the limitation aforesaid,
and the true intent and meaning of these presents, shall be seized of all and
singular the same Capital Message, Mansion House and Premises, with the
appurtenances of a good, lawful and sufficient Estate of Inheritance, in
Fee-tail expectant, upon the death of the said Mary Vaughan, and at the time of
the ensealing and delivery hereof, has, and until as aforesaid, shall have
full power, good right, and lawful authority, to convey, settle and assure the
premises, to and upon the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in form
aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, and also
that all and singular the said Capital Message or Mansion House, and other the
premises before herein mentioned, or intended to be conveyed, settled or
assured, as aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances, now be and are, and so from time to time, and at all times
hereafter for ever, shall or may be, remain and continue unto the said T. S.
his Heirs and Assigns, according to the limitation aforesaid, and the true
intent and meaning of these presents clearly acquitted, exonerated and
discharged, or otherwise by him the said T. M. party to these presents, his
Heirs, Executors or Administrators, well and sufficiently saved and kept
harmless, of and from all and all manner of former and other Bargains, Sales,
Gifts, Grants, Leases, Mortgages, Estates, Joyntures, Dowers, Wills, Covenants,
Entails, Statute-Merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances, Judgments,
Executions, Extents, Debts to the Commonwealth, Debts of Record, and of and
from all other Titles, Charges, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, at any
time heretofore had, made, done, committed or suffered to be done, or at any
time hereafter to be had, made, done, committed or suffered to be done by them
the said T. M. and the said E. M. his Father, and T. M. his Grandfather, or any
of them, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, the said Leases therein
before mentioned to be excepted, and either of them, and the said Estate, for
life of the said M. V. and the Fee-farm rent of 16 sh. issuing, or yearly due
and payable out of or for the said premises, to the Mayor and Commonalty of the
said City of B. only excepted and fore-prized, and the said T. M. for himself,
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does further covenant and grant to and
with the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents, that he the said
T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, and his and their Farmers and Tenants shall, or
lawfully may from time to time, and at all times hereafter for ever peaceably
and quietly enter into, have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy all and
singular the said Capital Message, Mansion House and Premises before
mentioned, or intended to be conveyed, settled or assured, and every part and
parcel hereof, with the appurtenances, and take, receive and enjoy the Rents,
Issues and Profits thereof, to his and their own use, without any let,
interruption, disturbance or encumbrance of or by him the said T. M. or his
Heirs, or of or by any other person or persons whatsoever, claiming or to
claim, or having or pretending to have any lawful Estate, Right, Title,
interest or thing, of, in, to or out of the premises, or any part thereof
(except such as shall or may claim for, by or under the Leases, Estates and
Rents before herein excepted, or any of them.) And further, that he the said T.
M. and his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons, that shall or may
claim from, by or under him, shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, upon the reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law
of the said T. S. his Heirs or Assigns, make, do, suffer, execute and
acknowledge, or cause to be made, done, suffered, executed and acknowledged,
all and every such further, and other reasonable and lawful acts, things and
assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further and better assuring,
sure-making, settling and conveying to the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, of
all and singular the said Capital Message or Mansion House and Premises before
hereby mentioned, or intended to be hereby settled, conveyed or assured, and
every part and parcel thereof by such ways and means in the Law, as by him the
said T. S. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Law,
shall be in that behalf reasonably devised or advised and required, so as for
the doing thereof, the said T. M. and such others as are or ought to make such
further assurance by force of these Covenants, be not compelled or compellable
to travel above Fifty Miles from the place of his or their respective dwelling
or abode at the time of such request to be made: and it is declared to be the
true intent and meaning of these presents, and of all the Parties to the same,
that all Fines, Feoffments, Recoveries, Conveyances and Assurances at any time
hereafter to be had, levied, suffered, executed or acknowledged, by or between
the said Parties hereunto, or any of them, or any other person or persons
whatsoever of the said Capital Message or Mansion House and Premises before
mentioned, or any part thereof, either alone by it self, or together with any
other Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, shall be and enure, and shall be
deemed, adjudged, construed and expounded to be and enure, to and for the only
use and behoof of the said T. S. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to
none other use, intent or purpose; and the said J. V. and Mary his wife, and J.
M. party to these presents, for the considerations aforesaid, have granted,
bargained and sold, and by these presents do grant, bargain and sell to the
said T. S. and his Heirs, all and every the Deeds, Charters, Evidences,
Writings, Counterparts of Leases, Escripts and Minuments, which do touch or
concern the said Message and Tenement, or any part or parts thereof, all
which, or as many of them as now are, or be in the hands or possession of the
said J. V. and M. his wife, or either of them, or any other person or persons,
to his, her, or their own use, or by his or her delivery, or in the hands or
possession of the said T. M. party to these presents, or of any other person or
persons, to his, or by his delivery, the said J. V. for himself, his Executors
and Administrators respectively, and the said T. M. for him, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, do severally and respectively covenant and agree,
to deliver, or cause to be delivered, uncancelled and undefaced, or in as good
condition and plight, as now the same are unto the said T. S. his Heirs or
Assigns, before the Feast Day of the Birth of our Lord God next ensuing the
date hereof. In witness whereof, all the said Parties to every part of this
Indenture Quadripartite, have put their Hands and Seals, etc.

William King (being seized of Lands, and, etc. in Fee-tail with remainders)
dies, having Issue three Daughters, who as Coheirs enter. Now S. N. and Hest.
his Wife, one of the Coheirs, (for the better conveying of Hesters third part
to J. F. and his Heirs) suffer a recovery, and by this Deed, together with the
Tenants of the Free-bold, and the Recoverors direct the use of the same
Recovery.
THis Indenture Tripartite, etc. Between Sam. N. etc. and Hest. his Wife, (one
of the Daughters and Coheirs of W. K. late of, etc. deceased) of the first
part, J. F. the younger of, etc. of the second part, and T. Y. of, etc. and N.
L. and B. T. of the third part, witnesses, That whereas the said S. N. and
Hester his Wife, in the right of the said Hester were at the beginning of the
Term of St. Michael now last past, and before seized in Fee-rail, with diverse
remainders over, of and in one full third part (the whole into three equal
parts to be divided) of all that Tenement, etc. containing by estimation one
Yard-land, with the appurtenances, set, lying and being in Dundry aforesaid, in
the said County of Somerset, and of and in all Houses, Edifices, Buildings,
Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Backsides, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Leasows, Pastures, Commons, Common of Pasture, Woods, Under-woods, Profits,
Commodities, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Message and
Premises, or any of them, or to any part and parcel of them belonging, or in
any wise appertaining; and whereas the said S. N. and H. his Wife, being so
seized as aforesaid, since the beginning of the said last Term of Saint
Michael, did, for and in consideration of the sum of 100 l. of, etc. to them by
the said J. F. before the ensealing and delivery hereof, well and truly paid
and satisfied, whereof they do hereby acknowledge the receipt, and thereof and
of every part and parcel thereof, do clearly acquit and discharge the said J.
F. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators by these presents, conclude and
agree, to and with the said J. F. to convey and assure to the said J. F. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only and proper use and behoof of him the
said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns for evermore, the one full third part of all
and singular the Tenement, Cottages, Lands and Premises before in these
presents mentioned or expressed, and of all and singular other the Messuages,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever within the Parish of Dundry and
Chiew aforesaid, or either of them, whereof the said William King the younger,
(Father of the said Hester) in his lifetime, and at the time of his death was
seized of an Estate of Inheritance by such ways, means and assurance in the
Law, as by the Council of the said J. H. should be advised and thought meet,
and whereas it was advised and thought meet by the Council of the said I. F.
and concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents,
that a common recovery with double Voucher should be suffered and executed of
the said third part, by the said S. M. and H. his Wife, of the Messuages,
Tenements, Cottage, Land and Premises, before in these presents mentioned or
expressed, for the cutting off the said intail, and barring all remainders, and
for the assuring and settling of the Inheritance of the same third part, to and
on the said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in pursuance of which said
advice, conclusion and agreement, they the said S. N. and Hester his Wife, by
their Deed indented, bearing date the first day of this instant Month of
November, and enrolled in the High Court of Chancery the nineteenth day of the
same Month, (made between them the said S. N. and Hester of the one part, and
the said T. Y. of the other part) have granted, bargained and sold to the said
T. Y. and his Heirs, one full third part (the whole in three equal parts to be
divided) of all and singular the Tenement, Cottage, Lands and Premises before
in these presents mentioned or expressed, and of all and singular other the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, within the Parishes of Dundry
and Chiew aforesaid, or either of them, whereof the said W. King the younger,
(Father of the said Hester) in his lifetime, and at the time of his death was
seized of an Estate of Inheritance, and the Rents, Reversions and Services
thereof, to be had and holden to the said T. Y. perfect Tenant of the Freehold
of the premises, that a good, perfect and common recovery, with double Voucher,
might thereof be had and executed, in pursuance of, and according to the said
conclusion and agreement; and whereas afterward in the same Term of St.
Michael, according to the conclusion and agreement aforesaid, the said N. L.
and B. T. did pursue out of the said Court of Chancery one Writ of Entry sur
disseisin en le post, returnable before the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, whereby the said N. L. and Ben. T. demanded
against the said T. Y. the said part of the Message, Tenement, Cottage, Lands,
and things herein before mentioned or expressed, and by the said conclusion and
agreement, meant or agreed to be assured or conveyed to the said J. F. and his
Heirs as aforesaid, by the names of the third part of two Messuages of thirty
acres of Land, of ten acres of Meadow, of thirty acres of Pasture, of three
acres of Wood, and Common of Pasture, with the appurtenances, in Dundry and
Chiew in the County of Somerset, to which Writ the said T. Y. appeared in
person, and after declarations against him by the said N. L. and B. T. he the
said T. Y. appeared in person at the Bar of the said Court, and vouched to
warranty the said S. N. and H. his wife, who likewise appeared in person, and
did enter in the warranty, and afterward vouched over the common Vouchee, who
did likewise appear in person, and after declaration against him, made defense,
and afterward made default, whereby several Judgments were had according to
the course of common recoveries used in the said Court of Common Pleas,
witnesses now further this present Indenture, and it is hereby explained,
declared and expressed, that the true intent and meaning of all the said
Parties to these presents before, and at the time of the suffering the said
recovery, was, and ever since has been and yet is, that the said recovery, and
the whole execution thereof should, and for ever hereafter shall be and enure,
and the said recoveries, and their Heirs shall for ever hereafter stand and be
seized of, and in the said third part of the said Tenement, Cottage, Lands and
Premises beforementioned, with the appurtenances, to and for the only proper
use and behoof of him the said J.F. and of his heirs and assigns for ever, and
to or for none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, and for that end and
purpose, (according to the advice of the Council, and the conclusion and
agreement aforesaid) the said S. N. and H. his wife, for them and their Heirs,
and every of them do, and either of them does by these presents remise, release
and quit-claim all Errors, Writ and Writs of Error, cause and causes of Error,
Misprisions and Mis-entries and Demands, which they the said S. and H. or
either of them, their or either of their heirs have, or hereafter may or ought
to have, for or by reason of any Errors, Imprision, Mis-entry, Erroneous
obtaining or prosecution of the said Writ of Entry and Judgments aforesaid, or
any of them, or other matter or thing whatsoever, in or about, or any way
touching or concerning the said recovery, or any the proceeding or prosecution
thereof; And the said S. N. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and for every of them, does covenant, promise and grant, to and
with the said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by
these presents, that he the said S. N. and H. his Wife, at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of the said recited Deed, made to the said T. Y. and
before mentioned to be enrolled as aforesaid, were lawfully and rightfully
seized in the right of the said H. of, and in one full third part (the whole in
three equal parts to be divided) of all and singular the Tenement, Lands and
Premises before herein mentioned, in Fee-simple or Fee-tail, and at the time of
the ensealing the said Deed as aforesaid, had full power, good right, and
lawful authority, to grant, convey, settle and assure the said third part, in
manner and form aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, and also that the said third part of the said Tenement, Land and
Premises before herein mentioned or intended to be conveyed, settled or assured
to the said J. F. as aforesaid, now be and are, and so from time to time, and
at all times hereafter for ever shall or may be, remain and continue unto the
said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns, according to the limitation aforesaid, and
the true intent and meaning of these presents, clearly acquitted, exonerated
and discharged, or otherwise by them the said S. N. and Hester, their Executors
or Administrators, well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of and from
all and all manner of former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases,
Mortgages, Estates, Joyntures, Dowers, Wills, Covenants, Entails,
Statutes-Merchant and of the Staple, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions,
Extents, Debts to the Commonwealth, Sequestrations, Debts of Record, Fines,
Issues, Amerciaments, and of and from all other Titles, Charges, Troubles and
Encumbrances whatsoever, at any time heretofore had, made, done, committed or
suffered to be done, or at any time hereafter to be had, made, done, committed
or suffered to be done by the said S. N. and Hester, William King the younger,
and William King the elder, Father and Grandfather of the said H. K. or any of
them, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, claiming or to claim, from,
by or under them, or any of them, and the said S. N. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, does further covenant, promise
and grant, to and with the said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them
by these presents, that he said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns, and his and their
Farmers and Tenants, shall, or lawfully may, from time to time, and at all
times hereafter for ever, peaceably and quietly enter into, have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy one whole third part of all and singular the
Tenements, Lands and Premises before mentioned, and take, receive and enjoy the
Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, to his and their own use, without any let,
interruption, challenge, claim, disturbance or encumbrance, of or by them the
said S. N. and Hester, or either of them, their or either of their Heirs, etc.
or of or by any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, or
having, or pretending to have any lawful estate, right, title, interest or
thing, of, in, to or out of the said granted third part, from, by or under the
said Hester, and he the said Father and Grandfather, or any of them. And
further that the said S. For better assurance.
N. and Hester his Wise, and the Heirs of the said Hester shall and will from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, upon the reasonable request, and at
the costs and charges in the Law of the said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns, make,
do, suffer, execute and acknowledge, or cause to be made, done, suffered,
executed and acknowledged, all and every such reasonable and lawful acts, thing
and assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further and better settling,
assuring, sure-making and conveying to the said J. F. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, the said
third part before hereby mentioned or intended to be conveyed, and assured of
and in the Tenements, Lands and Premises aforesaid, by such ways and means in
the Law, as by him the said J. F. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their
Council learned in the Law, shall be in that behalf reasonably devised, or
advised and required, for the making whereof, the said S. N. or Hester shall
not be compelled to travel above twenty miles from the place of his, her or
their dwelling or abode, at the time of such request to be made, nor to enter
into any further or more general warranty, or acquital than is herein
comprised, and the said S. N. and H. his wife, for the considerations
aforesaid, have granted, bargained and sold, and by, etc. to the said J. F. his
Heirs and Assigns, all Deeds, Charters, Writings and Evidences which do touch
or concern the premises aforesaid, or any part thereof, and all the Right,
Title, and Demand of them the said S. and H. of, in and to all and every or any
the same Deeds, Evidences and Writings. In witness whereof, all the said
Parties have to each part of this Indenture Tripartite, etc.

W. B. being possessed of Lands, etc. for a term of years, (the Inheritance of
which Lands in Fee-simple, were conveyed to R. R. and W. B. in trust, to be
disposed of as W. B. and his wife shall appoint) contracts with W. for sale,
the assurance advised thus, That for keeping on foot the term, and preventing
Encumbrances, the term should be granted to W. D. himself, and the Inheritance
to W. D. his Son, the Inheritance is conveyed to the Son, as follows.
THis Indenture, etc. between W. B. of, etc. R. R. and W.K. of, etc. of the one
part, and W. D. and W. D. of, etc. witnesses, That for and in consideration of
the sum of, etc. to the said W. B. by the said W. D. the elder, before the
ensealing hereof paid, as well for certain terms and interests by the said W.
B. to him the said W. D. already made and granted of the parcels of Land herein
after granted, as for the Inheritance thereof, hereby intended to be granted
and conveyed, the said R. R. and W. K. at the request of the said W. B. and by
the appointment, and with the atturnment of the said W. D. the elder, have, and
either of them has granted, bargained, sold, aliened and confirmed, and by,
etc. to the said W. D. the Son and his Heirs, all that Message, Tenement, etc.
and all Rents, Reversions, Remainders and Services of the said premises, and
all their and either of their Right, Title, Interest, Challenge, Claim and
Demand whatsoever, of, in and to the same premises, to have, hold and enjoy the
said, etc. unto the said W. D. the Son, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to his
and their own use for evermore, to be holden of the chief Lord or Lords of the
Fee or Fees of the premises, by the Rent and Services therefore due, and of
right accustomed; and it is concluded and agreed by and between the said
Parties, that neither these presents, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to be construed to extend to bind or charge the said R. R. and W. K. or
either of them, their or either of their Heirs touching the premises, otherwise
than against his and their own acts respectively. In witness whereof, etc.

Note.
That in respect of the Atturnment of Tenant, the Estate of Inheritance passes
legally without Livery.

B. M. being seized of Lands, (jure uxoris) she being a Coheir purchases of
J. B. (to whom the Estates of the other Coheirs is come) all the Lands, the
Conveyance is by recovery concluded to be suffered by J. B.
THis Indenture, etc. Between J. B. of, etc. Son and Heir of William Beaumont
late of, etc. deceased, and M. his Wife, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of
D. S. Gent. deceased, of the one part, and B. M. of, etc. William H. J. H. of,
etc. and Rich. C. of, etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said John
Beaumont, for and in consideration of the sum of 200 l. of, etc. to him by the
said B. M. before, etc. whereof, etc. has agreed to grant, convey and assure
to the said B. M. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that toft, and eight
acres of Land by estimation, be they more or less, called, etc. and also Common
Pasture for six young Beasts, and one House with the appurtenances in Wickware
Heath, all which premises are situate, etc. and now are in the tenure, holding
or occupation of the said B. M. in the right of E. his Wife, the Daughter of R.
W. deceased, for term of her life, and which said premises late were the
Inheritance of the said D. S. and by and after his death, descended and came to
his three Daughters, viz. the said M. E. the Wife of R. C. and B. the Wife of
J. M. the parts and portions of which E. C. and B. he the said W. B. purchased
and dyed thereof seized. And also the said J. B. for the Confiderations
aforesaid, has agreed to grant, convey and assure to the said B. M. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, all other the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments of him the said J. B. within the Parish of W. aforesaid, and all
Rents, Reversions and Services of the premises, and every part thereof, as by
such ways and means as by him the said B. M. or his Council learned in the
Law, shall be in that behalf reasonably devised and required: and this present
Indenture further witnesses, That the said I. B. does for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, covenant, promise and grant to and with the said
B. M. his Executors, and Administrators and Assigns by these presents, that he
the said I. B. shall and will before the end of Easter Term now next ensuing,
by Deed indented and enrolled in the High Court of Chancery, bargain and sell
to the said W. H. and I. H. and their Heirs, all the said toft and premises, To
have and to hold to the said W. H. and I. H. and their Heirs, during the
natural life of the said I. B. to the intent and purpose to make them Tenants
of the Freehold of the premises, and that a Writ of Entry sur disseisin en le
post, shall be brought and prosecuted by the same R. C. against the said W. H.
and I. H. whereby he shall demand the said premises by some fit or apt names
against them the said W.H. and I.H. who shall appear in person, and vouch to
warranty the said J. B. who shall likewise appear in person, and vouch over to
warranty the common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear in person, and enter
into the warranty, and afterward make default, and depart in contempt of the
Court, whereby several Judgments shall be had, (viz.) for the said R. C. to
recover the premises against the said W. H. and I. H. and for them to recover
in value against the said I. B. and for the said I. B. to recover over in value
against the said common Vouchee, which said recovery, so or in any other manner
to be had and executed, and all Fines, Feoffments, and other Assurances at any
time hereafter to be had or executed of the premises, or any part thereof,
shall be and enure, and shall be deemed, adjudged, construed and expounded to
be and enure, to and for the only use and behoof of the said B. M. and of his
Heirs and Assigns for ever: and the said I. P. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the
said B. M. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents, that he the said I. B. at
the time of the ensealing and delivery thereof is, and until the said premises
shall be fully and perfectly conveyed and assured to the said B. M. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, shall be the true and lawful Owner of the said premises, and every
part thereof, and of and in the same, and every part thereof lawfully and
rightfully seized of a good Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple, in his own
right, and to the only use of him and his Heirs, by good, sure, sufficient and
absolute conveyance, assurance, and title in the Law indeseazible, and also,
that he the said I. B. at the time of the ensealing and delivery hereof, has,
and until the said premises shall be assured as aforesaid, shall have full
power, good right, and lawful authority, to bargain, sell, convey and assure
the said premises, and every part thereof to the said B. M. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, according to the true intent and meaning of these premises,
and also that the said premises, and every part thereof, now be and are, and so
from time to time, and at all times hereafter for ever, shall or may be, remain
and continue to the said B. M. his Heirs and Assigns, clearly acquitted and
discharged, or otherwise by him the said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns, well and
sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of and from all and all manner of former
and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Mortgages, Joyntures, Dowers,
Wills, Covenants, Statutes, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, Extents,
Rents, Charge-rents, Seck, arrerages of Rents, and of and from all other
Titles, Charges, Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, at any time heretofore
had, made, done, committed or suffered to be done, or at any time hereafter to
be had, made, done, committed, omitted or suffered to be done by him the said
J. B. or by the said W. B. or by any other person or persons whatsoever,
(except the Estate of the said E. M. for her life, and except the Rents and
Services from henceforth to be due and payable to the Chief Lord or Lords of
the Fee or Fees of the premises) and also the said I. B. for himself, his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant, to and
with the said B. M. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents, that he the said
B. M. his Heirs or Assigns shall or lawfully may, from time to time, and at all
times hereafter for ever, peaceably and quietly have, hold, and enjoy the said
premises, and every part thereof, without any let, interruption, challenge,
claim, disturbance or encumbrance of or by him the said I. B. or his Heirs, and
without any lawful let, interruption, challenge, claim, disturbance or
encumbrance of, or by any other person or persons (except such as shall or may
claim, by or under the right or title of the said E. M. or for the Rents and
Services aforesaid:) And further that he the said I. B. and his Heirs, and
every other person or persons, lawfully claiming or to claim any manner of
lawful estate, right, title or interest in or to the premises (except before
excepted) shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter upon the
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said B. M.
his Heirs or Assigns, make, do and execute all and every such further acts and
things, for the further and better assuring of the said premises, and every
part thereof to the said B. M. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, as by him the
said B. M. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their Council, etc. so as for the
doing thereof, etc. a Bargain and Sale of Deeds, etc. In witness, etc.

Note.
B. M. demised the Lands to A. and B. Habend. forty years, (if the Coverture
between him and E. his wife so long continue) on trust, to suffer him to enjoy
and make such Grants as he shall appoint.

Nota.
B. M. surrendereth to I. B. the premises Habend. to him and his Heirs,
provided, if I. B. or his Assigns pay not 200 l. before Midsummer next, etc. to
be void, B. M. to enjoy the premises in the mean time.

P. H. purchases Lands of W. H. and Uxor (other Lands he holds in Right of I.
his wife, to whom the same were devised by R. I. her Brother in Fee-simple) the
Brother and Heir of the Devisor intends to settle other Lands which came to
him by Descent, on the said P. and I. in tail. Now for the settling as well the
Lands purchased of H. as all the rest, a Fine is levied by W. H. and Uxor I. I.
(Heir to the Devisor) and Uxor, and the said P. and Uxor, and T. P. and I. C.
The uses whereof are declared by the Deed following.
THis Indenture Tripartite, etc. between W. H. of, etc. and M. his Wife, T. I.
of, etc. Brother and Heir of R. I. late of, etc. deceased, who was Son and Heir
of I. I. late of, etc. deceased, (begotten on the Body of I. his Wife, Daughter
of T. P. of, etc. deceased) and A. the Wife of the said T. I. of the first
part, P. H. and I. his Wife of the second part, and T. P. and I. C. of, etc. of
the third part, witnesses, That whereas the said W. H. by his Deed indented,
bearing date April 18. in the sixteenth year of, etc. for the consideration
therein expressed, did grant, bargain, sell and convey to the said P. H. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, two several Messuages or Tenements, with the Garden
and appurtenances thereunto belonging, situate and being, etc. and then and
yet in the several holding of, etc. and also three several holdings of, etc.
and also three several Messuages or Tenements, with a Garden or Out-ground on
the back part thereof, and to the same three Tenements, or some of them
belonging or appertaining, situate and being, etc. and then and yet in the
several Tenures or Occupation of, etc. as in and by the same Deed indented more
at large appears, and whereas also the said R. I. being in his lifetime
lawfully seized in Fee-tail, of and in all the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, (that is to say) all that great Message or
Tenement, wherein, etc. situate and being, etc. and also two other Messuages
or Tenements, etc. and also three Gardens, etc. and in his lifetime (viz.) in
the Term of Easter, in the sixteenth year of, etc. acknowledge and levy to the
said P. H. and T. P. one Fine, sur conuzance de droit come ceo, etc. which was
sued out with Proclamation; according to the form of the Statute in that case
made and provided, before the then Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, of all the said Message, Lands, Tenements and Premises, by the
names of nine Messuages, and four Gardens, with the appurtenances in, etc. as
by the said Fine remaining of Record in the said Court more at large may
appear. Which said Fine was levied to the intent and purpose, to make the said
R. I. Tenant of all the said premises in Fee-simple, as by Indentures to that
purpose made, bearing date April 20. in the said sixteenth year of, etc. made
between the said R. I. of the one part, and the said T. P. and P. H. of the
other part, more at large it does and may appear: and whereas the said R. I.
after the levying of the said Fine, (that is to say) April 25. in the
seventeenth year, etc. by the last Will and Testament in writing, bearing date
the day and year last mentioned, did give and devise in these words, (viz.) I
give and bequeath all that Tenement, etc. unto Joan H. my Sister, Wife of Peter
H. and to her Heirs and Assigns for ever, and also in another place of the said
Will gave and devised in these words, (viz.) Item, I give to my Sister J. H.
and to her Heirs and Assigns for ever, my House, Lodge and Orchard, with the
appurtenances, lying and being, etc. as by the said Will and Testament may
appear, and whereas the said Richard Joanes afterward died, leaving all the
residue of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises, to descend and
come to the said T. I. as Brother and Heir of the said R. I. witnesses now
further this present Indenture, that for the consideration aforesaid, and for
and in consideration of the sum of 40 l. to him the said T. I. by the said P.
H. before the ensealing and delivery hereof, well and truly satisfied and paid,
whereof he acknowledges the receipt, and thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof, does clearly acquit and discharge the said P. H. his Heirs, etc. and
every of them for ever by these presents, and for settling the Inheritance of
all the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements. Hereditaments and Premises, in such
manner and form as hereafter in these presents is mentioned, limited and
declared, and for diverse other good Causes and Considerations, all the said
Parties moving, it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, by and between
all the said Parties to these presents, that they the said W. B. and M. his
Wife, T. I. and A. his wife, P. H. and J. his wife, shall and will before the
end of Easter Term next, acknowledge and levy to the said T. P. and J. C. and
to the Heirs of one of them one Fine, sur conuzance, etc. to be sued out with
Proclamations according to the form of the Stature in that case made and
provided, before the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, of
all the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises before mentioned, by the names
of thirteen Messuages and seven Gardens, with the appurtenances in, etc. which
Fine so or in any other manner to be acknowledged and levied, and all other
Fine or Fines to be had, levied or acknowledged by or between the said Parties,
or any of them, or any other person or persons of the said premises, or any
part thereof, shall be and enure, and shall be deemed, adjudged, construed, and
expounded to be and enure, to and for the only uses, intents and purposes
hereafter in these presents limited, expressed and declared, (that is to say)
as touching and concerning all the said Messuages, Tenements, Gardens and
Premises before mentioned, to be granted, bargained, sold or conveyed by the
said W. Ho. in and by the said recited Deed indented, to the use and behoof of
the said P. Hobbs, and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and as touching all
other the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises before
mentioned, meant or intended to be comprised in the said Fine thereby agreed to
be levied, whereof no use is herein therefore expressed, and of every part and
parcel thereof, with the appurtenances, to the use and behoof of the said Peter
H. for term of his natural life, and from and after his decease, to the use and
behoof of the said Joan H. for the term of her natural life, and from and after
her decease, to the use and behoof of the first Son of the said P. Hobbs, on
the body of the said Joan his wife begotten, and to be begotten, and of the
Heirs males of the body of such first Son lawfully to be begotten; and for
default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the second Son of the said
Peter Hobbs on the Body of the said Joan his wife begotten and to be begotten,
and of the Heirs males of the body of such second Son lawfully to be begotten;
and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of all and every other Son
and Sons of the said P. H. on the body of the said Joan his wife to be
begotten, one after another, as they shall be in seniority of age, and priority
of birth, and of the Heirs of the body of every of the same Sons respectively
to be begotten, the elder of the said Sons and the Heirs of his body, being
always preferred before the younger, and the Heirs of their bodies, and for
default of such Heirs, to the use and behoof of all the Daughters of the body
of the said P. H. on the body of the said J. his wife begotten and to be
begotten, and of the Heirs of the body of the same Daughters respectively,
lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Heirs, to the use and behoof
of the said P. H. and J. his wife, and of their Heirs and Assigns for ever:
provided always, and it is explained and declared to be the true intent and
meaning of these presents, and of all the Parties to the same, that it shall be
lawful to and for the said P. H. and J. his wife, at any time during the
Coverrure between them by any writing or writings indented to be by them signed
and sealed in the presence of three or more credible witnesses, who shall
thereunto subscribe or indorse their names or marks, testifying the same to
alter, change, revoke, determine, diminish or enlarge all or any of the use or
uses herein before limited, touching or concerning the said Messuages,
Tenements and Premises herein before limited, to the said P. H. and I. his
wife, or either of them for their lives, or any part or parcel thereof, and by
the same writing or writings, or by any other writing or writings indented, so
signed, sealed, and testified as aforesaid, to limit and appoint any other use
or uses of the same Message or Messuages, Tenements and Premises last
mentioned, or any part or parcel thereof, to the said person or persons, or to
any other person or persons, and of such Estate and Estates as to them shall
seem best, and in case any such new limitation or appointment of uses shall be
made, that then the said Fine so to be levied, shall be and enure, and shall be
deemed, adjudged, construed and expounded to be and enure, as touching the said
Messuages, Tenements, Lands and Premises last mentioned, and every part
thereof, to and for such new use and uses, as in and by such writing or
writings, so to be signified, sealed and testified as aforesaid, shall be
expressed, limited and declared, any thing, etc. And the said Thomas Joanes for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does covenant, promise and
grant to and with the said P. Hobbs, and Joan his wife, and either of them,
their and either of their Heirs, etc. by these presents, that all the said
Messuages, Tenements and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances now are and be, and so from time to time, and at all times
hereafter for ever, shall or may be, remain and continue to the several and
respective uses before herein mentioned, limited and declared, according to the
true intent and meaning hereof, clearly freed and discharged of and from all
former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Mortgages, Charges,
Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever had, made, committed or done by him the
said Tho Joanes, or any other person or persons, lawfully claiming or to claim,
by, from or under him. In witness, etc.

A Marriage is intended between Tho. Geo. Esquire, and Ph. B. single Woman, Ph.
(in regard the Jointure agreed on cannot presently be assured) with consent of
Tho. makes over all her Land, etc. Jewels, Moneys, etc. to Eliz. her Sister in
trust, etc.
THis Indenture Tripartite, etc. between T. Geo. Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir
Tho. G. of, etc. Knight, of the first part, Ph. E. single woman, and Daughter
of, etc. of the second part, and Eliz. B. Sister of the said Ph. B. of the
third part, witnesses, That whereas there is a Marriage agreed upon, and
shortly (by Gods Grace) to be had and solemnized, between the said T. G. and
the said Ph. B. and whereas the said P. B. is, and stands possessed and
interessed in certain Leases, Moneys, Jewels, Debts, Goods and Chattels; and
whereas also the said T. G. by reason of the present distractions of the times,
is not able presently to assure unto the said P. B. such Jointure as is agreed
on to be assured to her, witnesses now further this present Indenture, that it
is covenanted, granted, condescended unto and agreed upon, by and between all
the said Parties to these presents, in manner and form following (that is to
say) the said P. B. by and with the consent and good will of the said T. G.
Party to these presents testified by being party, and putting his Hand and Seal
to one or more parts of this Indenture, has granted, aliened, assigned and set
over, and by, etc. unto the said Eliz. B. all such Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Services and Hereditaments whatsoever situate, lying and
being in, etc. or elsewhere in England, whereof or wherein she the said Phil.
is or stands possessed or interessed, and all her Estate, Right, Title,
Interest, Claim and Demand whatsoever, in and to the same Manors, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements and Premises, and every or any part thereof, together with all
Leases, Deeds and Writings, touching the same premises, and every part thereof.
To have and to hold the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises,
and every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances to the said Eliz. B.
her Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from henceforth, for and during all
the respective time and times, term and terms, as she the said P. B. has, or
ought to have thereunto to come and unexpired, and also the said Ph. B. by and
with the like consent and agreement of the said T. G. party to these presents,
testified as aforesaid, has granted and delivered, and by, etc. to the said
Eliz. B. all her Jewels, Moneys, Bonds, Specialties, Debts, and other Goods and
Chattels whatsoever, before hereby mentioned, meant or intended to be granted
and delivered, and every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances to the
said Eliz. B. her Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to the uses, intents
or purposes hereafter in these presents mentioned and declared: and it is
expressed and declared to be the true intent and meaning of all the said
parties to these presents, that the several Grants herein before made to the
said Eliz. B. are so to her made upon trust and confidence in her reposed, as
well by the said T. G. Party to these presents, as the said P. B. that in case
the said Marriage take effect, and that the said T. G. shall, during the
Coverture between him and the said Ph. cause to be assured by good and
sufficient ways and means in the Law to the said Ph. for her life, and after
her death to the Heirs of her body by the said T. party, etc. to be begotten,
the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, situate, lying and
being in the Counties of Wilts and Gloucester, or either of them, of the clear
yearly value of 250 pounds of, etc. over and above all Rents, Charges,
Deductions and Reprizes, or that after such Marriage solemnized, if the said
Ph. shall happen to depart this transitory life before the said T. G. and
before such assurance made as aforesaid, which shall first happen, she the said
Eliz. B. her Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will upon the
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in all things of the said T.
G. his Executors, etc. not only grant, assign and set over to the said T. G.
party, etc. his Executors, etc. all the said Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises before hereby granted or assigned by the
said Ph. B. to the said Eliz. B. as aforesaid, for all such time and times,
term and terms respectively, as shall be then therein to come and unexpired,
discharged of all other Grants and Encumbrances made or done by the said
Elizabeth, except such as she shall make or do by consent of the said T. G. his
Executors, etc. but also grant and re-deliver to the said T. G. his Executors
or Assigns, all such Moneys, Jewels, Bonds, Specialties, Debts, and other Goods
and Chartels whatsoever, as in the mean time shall come to the hands of the
said Eliz. her Executors, etc. by force of these presents, and which shall
remain or be in her or their hands, custody or possession, by the true meaning
hereof, and also, that in such case, she the said Elizabeth, her Executors,
etc. shall from time to time, in the mean time after Solemnization of the said
Marriage, pay and deliver to the said T. G. all such Rents, Issues and Profits
of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Moneys and Debts, as shall come to her
or their Hands or Custody, and also upon further trust and confidence in the
said Elizabeth B. reposed, that in case the said Marriage take effect, and the
said T. G. happen to depart this transitory life before the said P. B. and
before he shall have assured or caused to be assured to the said P. B. any
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the value aforesaid,
and in form aforesaid; that then in such case she the said Elizab. B. her
Executors, etc. shall and will not only re-grant, re-assign and set over to the
said Ph. B. all the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises
before hereby granted or assigned by the said Ph. B. as aforesaid, for all such
time and times, term and terms respectively, as shall be then therein to come
and unexpired, discharged of all other Grants and Encumbrances made or done by
the said Elizabeth B. her Executors, etc. except such as she shall make or do
by the consent of the said P. H. but also re-grant and re-deliver to the said
Phil. her Executors or Assigns, all such Moneys, Jewels, Bonds, Specialties,
Debts, and other Goods and Chattels whatsoever, as in the mean time shall come
to the Hands or Custody of the said Eliz. her Executors or Assigns by force of
these presents, and which shall remain or be in her or their Hands, Custody or
Possession, by the true meaning of these presents, and the said T. G. for
himself, his Executors, etc. does covenant, promise, grant and agree, to and
with the said Eliz. B. her Executors, etc. by these presents, that neither he
the said T. G. nor his Heirs, etc. nor any other person or persons, claiming or
to claim by or under him, or deriving any authority by or under him, them or
any of them, shall at any time hereafter enter into, receive, take or
intermeddle with the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Jewels, Moneys, Bonds, Specialties, Debts, or other things before hereby
mentioned, meant or intended to be granted, assigned or delivered by the said
Phil. B. to the said Eliz. B. as aforesaid, or any part or parcel thereof, or
any Rents, Issues or Profits thereof, or of any part thereof, other than
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents; provided always,
and it is declared to be the true intent and meaning of these presents, and all
the parties to the same, that in case the said Marriage shall not be solemnized
on or before the, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, that then, and from
thenceforth, these presents, and every grant, matter and thing herein
contained, shall cease, determine, and be utterly frustrate and void to all
intents and purposes; and that the said P. B. her Executors, etc. shall from
thenceforth have and enjoy again, to her and their own use and right, all, etc.
any thing, etc. In witness whereof to one part of this Tripartite Indenture,
remaining with the said Eliz. B. the said T. G. and P. B. have put their Hands
and Seals; to one other part remaining with the said P.B. the said T. G. and
Eliz. B. have, etc. to the other part remaining with the said T. G. the said P.
B. and E. B. have, etc.

A. and B. his Wife being possessed of a certain Manor and Lands, Covenants
with C. D. to levy a Fine thereof to certain uses, with a Covenant, that
himself and his Wife together, shall have power to let Leases for Lives or
Years.
THis Indenture, etc. Between A. and B. his Wife, of the one part, and C. etc.
and D. of, etc. of the other part, witnesses, That for the settling of the
Inheritance of the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, hereafter in
these presents mentioned, to such use and uses, and in such manner and form as
is hereafter in these presents limited, expressed and declared, and for the
enabling of the said A. and B. his Wife, to make and grant Leases and Estates
of and in the said Manor, Lands and Premises, in such manner and form, and
according to the power and authority, to them hereafter in these presents
mentioned, reserved and raised, and for other good Causes and Considerations,
them the said A. and B. his Wife thereunto especially moving, it is agreed
between the said Parties, and they the said A. and B. his Wife do covenant,
grant and agree, to and with the said C. and D. and either of them, their
Executors and Administrators by these presents, that they the said A. and B.
his Wife, shall and will before the end of Michaelmas term next ensuing the
date hereof, acknowledge and levy to the said C. and D. and to the Heirs of the
said C. one Fine sur conuzance de droit, etc. to be sued out with
Proclamations, according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided, of all that the Manor, Capital Message, Farm, Baron and Demeasn
Lands of, etc. with all and singular the Rights, Members and Appurtenances
thereof, thereunto or to any of them belonging, or reputed, or used, as
thereunto or to any of them belonging, and of all other the Message, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Services and Hereditaments whatsoever, wherein T. J. Gent.
deceased, had any Estate of Inheritance in possession, reversion or remainder,
situare, lying and being, or to be had or taken, in or near the Towns,
Parishes, Fields and Hamlets, etc. with the appurtenances, and of twelve
Messuages, two Cottages, one Water-Mill, twelve Gardens, three hundred Acres of
Land, two hundred Acres of Pasture, forty Acres of Wood, with the
appurtenances, in, etc. or by such other fit name or names, quantities and
qualities of Acres as shall be thought fit, which said Fine so or in any other
manner to be had and levied, shall be deemed, adjudged, construed and
expounded, to be to and for the only uses, intents and purposes, hereafter in
these presents limited, expressed and declared, and to and for none other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever, that is to say, to the use and behoof of the said
A. for and during the term of his natural life, and from and after his death to
the use and behoof of the said B. for and during the term of her natural life,
and from after the decease of the said A and B. his Wife, to the use and behoof
of the Heirs of the body of the said A. on the body of the said B. begotten,
and to be begotten; and for default of such Heirs, to the use and behoof of the
right Heirs of the said A. for ever: and it is promised, covenanted, concluded,
agreed and declared by and between all and every the said parties to these
presents, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. from time to
time, and at all or any time or times, during his natural life, by an Indenture
or Indentures to make any Demise or Demises, Grant or Grants of the said
premises, or of any part or parts thereof, alone or amongst other things, as
well in possession for the term of twenty one years or under, or for one, two
or three life or lives, or for any term or number of years determinable, on
one, two or three Lives, at, for and under such Rents, Covenants and
Conditions, as to him the said A. shall seem meet, so as she the said B. shall
be made a Party to every such Indenture, whereby any such Demise or Grant shall
be made, during the life of the said B. and that the said B. shall seal and
deliver every such Indenture, and that at all times from and after the making
of any such Demise or Demises, Grant or Grants, the said Fine to be levied as
aforesaid, and the Conuzes of the same Fine and their Heirs, and the Heirs of
the Survivor of them, shall stand and be seized of and in such part and parts
as shall be so demised or granted, to the use and behoof of every such Lessee
or Lessees, Grantee or Grantees, to whom any such Demise or Demises, Grant or
Grants shall be so made, and according to the true intent and meaning of every
the same several and respective Demise or Demises, Grant or Grants, so as the
same Lessee or Lessees, Grantee or Grantees, their Executors and Assigns, shall
pay the Rents, and perform their Covenants and Conditions in such Indentures of
Demises or Grants, to be specified and contained, according to the true intent
and meaning of the same Indenture. In witness, etc.

R. C. being possessed of a Message, etc. in Fee-simple, grants the same to
J. P. C. P. and G. C. Habend. to them and their Heirs, to certain uses, viz.
the use of himself for life, yet so as to pay 20 l. per annum, and Meat, Drink,
etc. to his eldest Son, his Wife, etc. and after his decease to several other
uses and profits.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R. C. of, etc. of the one part, and J.P. C. P.
and G. C. of the other part, witnesses, That the said R. C. for diverse
considerations him thereunto moving, and especially for the preferment of A.
his eldest Son, and next Heir, and for the Jointure of Alice, the now Wife of
the said A. and for the preferment of the Issue between the said A. and Alice,
lawfully begotten and to be begotten, has given, granted, enfeoffed and
confirmed, and by, etc. unto the said J.P. C.P. and G. C. and their Heirs, all
that Mansion House or Message, with the appurtenances, wherein the said R. C.
now dwells, set, lying and being, etc. and all the Orchards, Gardens, Lands,
Tenements, Pastures, Meadows, Woods, Commons, Profits, Commodities and
Advantages whatsoever, to the said Message and Premises belonging, or in any
wise appertaining, or being accepted, reputed or used, as part, parcel or
member thereof, and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders,
Rents and Services of all and singular the aforesaid premises, and every part
and parcel thereof; To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, Lands,
Meadows, Leasoes, Feedings, Pastures, Rents, Reversions. Services and
Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises, with their and every of
their appurtenances, unto the said J. P. C. P. and G.C. their Heirs and Assigns
for ever, to this end, meaning, intent, construction and purposes, that they,
etc. and their Heirs, and the Heirs of the Survivor or Survivors of them, shall
from henceforth stand and be seized of the said Message, and all and singular
other the above mentioned premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, to
the uses, intents and purposes hereafter in these premises limited and
declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, (that is to say)
to the use and behoof of the said R. C. for and during his natural life, so as
and upon condition that he the said R. C. shall from time to time during his
natural life, pay or cause to be paid unto the said A. and Alice his Wife, and
the longest liver of them, the sum of 20 l. by the year, at the two most usual
Feasts in the year, that is to say, the Feast of, etc. by even portions to be
paid, during the said term, or within fourteen days next after every of the
said Feast-dayes, and the first payment to be had and made upon the Feast Day
of, etc. and the same payments to be yearly had and made in manner and form
aforesaid, at or within the now dwelling house of the said A. situate, etc. and
also upon condition that he the said R. C. shall from time to time during his
natural life, find, give and provide unto the said A. and the said Alice his
Wife, and to all such Children, as shall between them begotten, competent,
sufficient and convenient Meat, Drink, House-room and Lodging within his said
Mansion House, and after the decease of the said R. C. the said Parties
abovementioned, and the Heirs of the longest liver of them shall stand and be
seized of all and singular the said premises, with their and every of their
appurtenances, to the use and behoof of the said A. and of the said Alice his
Wife, and of the Heirs of their two Bodies, between them lawfully begotten, and
to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of R. C.
one other of the Sons of the said R. C. and of the Heirs males of his Body
lawfully to be begotten; and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof
of W. C. one other of the Sons of the said R. C. and the Heirs males of his
Body, lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the use of the
said R. C. of his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

R. C. covenanteth, that he is lawfully seized, has power to grant, that the
premises shall remain free from Encumbrances, prove usual.

A settlement by Fine and Recovery of several Manors, Lordships, etc. for the
raising of Moneys for payment of Debts and Childrens portions, as also for
entailing thereof under several Provisoes and Legacies.
THis Indenture Tripartite, etc. between the Right Honorable Edward Lord
Herbert and Richard Herbert Esquire Son and heir apparent of Dame Mary late wife of
the said Edward Lord Herbert, and sole Daughter of Sir William Herbert of St.
Julians in the County of Monmouth, Knight, deceased, of the first part, the
Right Honorable John Earl of Bridgewater, and Edward Herbert of the
Inner Temple, London, Esquire of the second part, and Moses Loyd of, etc. and Henry
Githins of, etc. of the third part, witnesses, That whereas the said Edward
Lord Herbert, or some in trust for him, is or are seized in his or their
Demeasn, as of Fee, of some part of the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
hereafter mentioned, and is also seized for term of his life, as Tenant by the
courtesy of England of the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments hereafter specified, the Reversion thereof in Fee-simple, being
descended by and after the decease of the said Mary unto the said Richard
Herbert: now to the end, that the Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and other Hereditaments hereafter mentioned and expressed, may be
established, vested and settled unto the said Edward Lord Herbert, during his
natural life, and after his decease upon the said Richard Herbert, and upon his
name, stock and posterity, and to such other uses, intents and purposes as are
hereby appointed, it is covenanted, promised, granted, condescended, concluded
and agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents: and the said
Edward Lord Herbere, and Richard Herbert, do for themselves, their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenant, promise and grant, condescend
and agree, to and with the said John Earl of Bridgewater, and Edward Herbert,
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of
them by these presents, that they the said Edward Lord Herbert, and Richard
Herbert, shall and will on this side, and before the end of Michaelmas Term
next ensuing, and coming after the date of these presents, in due form of Law,
and at the equal costs and charges in the Law of the said Edward Lord Herbert,
and Richard Herbert, levy and acknowledge to the said Moses Loyd, and Humphry
Githins, and the Heirs of the said Moses, one or more Fine or Fines sur
conuzance de droit come ceo, etc. with Proclamations thereupon to be had and
made, according to the form of the Statutes in that behalf made and provided,
of all that Capital Message or Mannor-house of St. Julians, with the Rights,
Members and Appurtenances thereof, and of all and singular the Manors,
Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, of them
the said Edward Lord Herbert, and Richard Herbert, or either of them, whereof
they the said E. Lord R. and H. or either of them are or do stand seized of any
Estate or Inheritance within the Kingdom of Ireland, by such name or names,
quantities, qualities, contents and numbers of acres of things, in such manner
and form as by the said E. L. H. and R. H. or either of them shall be
reasonably devised, or advised and required, in and by which Fine or Fines so
as aforesaid, or in any other sort to be levied and acknowledged, the said E.
L. H. and R. H. shall acknowledge the said Manors, Lordships, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises, with
their and every of their appurtenances, to be comprised in every such Fine, to
be the right of the said M. L. as those which the said M. L. and G. H. have, of
the gift of the said E. L. H. and R. H. the which said Fine or Fines so as
aforesaid, or in any other sort to be levied and acknowledged, shall be and
enure, and shall be deemed, adjudged, esteemed, reputed, and taken to be and
enure, to the use and behoof of the said M. L. L. and G. H. and their Heirs, to
the intent and purpose that they the said M. L. L. and H. G. may become perfect
Tenants of the Freehold of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, with their appurtenances, whereby one or more
perfect common Recovery or Recoveries, shall or may thereof be had and
suffered, in manner and form hereafter following, for which intent and purpose,
it is hereby further covenanted and agreed, by and between the said parties to
these presents, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said J. E. of B.
and E. H. to bring, pursue and prosecute against them the said M. L. L. and H.
G. one or more Writs of every sur disseism en le post, of and for the said
Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Hereditaments, and all
and singular other the premises, with their and every of their appurtenances,
by such name or names, quantities, qualities, contents and numbers of acres and
things, in such sort, manner and form, as by the said E. L. H. and R. H. or
their, or either of their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised, advised and required; the which said writ or writs of Entry sur
disseisin en le post; so as aforesaid, or in any other sort to be had or
brought, shall be returnable in such Courts, and before such Judges or
Justices, as the said E. L. H. and R. H. or the Survivor of them, his or their
Council learned in the Law shall advise or think fit, before the end of
Michaelmas Term next ensuing after the date of these presents, and the said M.
K. K. and H. G. shall thereunto appear gratis, and vouch over to warranty the
common Vouchee, who shall also appear, and after imparlance had, shall make
default and depart in contempt of the said Court, whereby one or more perfect
common recovery or recoveries shall or may he had or suffered against them the
said M. L. L. and H. G. of and for the said Manors, Lordships, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, with their appurtenances,
according to the usual course of common recoveries in such cases used and
accustomed, for assuring of Lands and Tenements, the which said common recovery
or recoveries, so as aforesaid, or in any other manner to be had and suffered,
and all other common Recoveries, Fines, Feoffments, Conveyances and Assurances
in the Law whatsoever, since the death of the said Lady Mary Herbert, wife to
the said Edward Lord Herbert, had, made, levied, suffered, acknowledged or
executed, or at any time hereafter to be made, levied, suffered, acknowledged
or executed, by or between the said Parties to these presents, or any of them,
or whereunto they, or any of them shall be parties, of or concerning the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments or Premises, or any of
them, or any part or parcel of them, or any of them, shall be and enure, and
shall be adjudged, deemed, esteemed, reputed and taken to be and enure, to the
uses, behoofs, intents and purposes, and with, upon and under such Provisoes,
Conditions, Powers and Limitations, as are hereafter in and by these presents
mentioned, declared, limited and appointed (that is to say) as for and
concerning all and singular the said Messuages, Farms, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments in Tanterne in the said County of Monmouth, etc. to the use and
behoof of the said Richard Herbert, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and as for
and concerning all and every other the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Meadows. Leasowes, Pastures, Feedings, Commons, Woods, Under-woods, Rents,
Services and Hereditaments whatsoever, to them the said Ed. L. H. and R. H. or
either of them, with their and every of their appurtenances in the said County
of Monmouth, to the use and behoof of the said Richard Herbert, for and during
the term of his natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner of
waste, and with full power to do or commit waste, and after the decease of him
the said R.H. to the use and behoof of the said E.L. H. for and during the term
of his natural life, and after the decease of the said E. L. H. to the use and
behoof of Edward Herbert, eldest Son of the said Richard Herbert, and of the
Heits males of his body lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue,
to the use and behoof of John Herbert, second Son of the said Richard, and of
the Heirs males of his body lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such
Issue, to the use and behoof of Richard Herbert, third Son of the said R. H.
party to these presents, and of the Heirs males of the body of Richard Herbert,
Son of the said R.H. party to these presents, lawfully to be begotten, and for
default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the fourth Son of the body of
the said Richard Herbert, party to these presents, on the body of the Lady Mary
Herbert his wife, Daughter of the said Jo. E. of B. begotten, or to be
begotten, and of the Heirs males of the body of such fourth Son lawfully to be
begotten; and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the fifth Son
of the body of the said Richard Herbert, party to these presents, on the body
of the said Lady Mary Herbert his wife begotten, or to be begotten, and of the
Heirs males of the body of such fifth Son lawfully to be begotten, and so the
sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth, and for default of such Issue, to the
use and behoof of all and every other Son and Sons of the body of the said
Richard Herbert, party to these presents, to be begotten successively one after
another, as they and every of them shall be in seniority of age, and priority
of Birth, the eldest of the said Sons, and the Heirs males of his body, being
ever preferred before the younger of the said Sons, and the Heirs males of his
body, and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of Edward Herbert,
second Son of the said E. Lord H. and of the Heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the use and
behoof of the Heirs males of the body of Richard Herbert Esquire, deceased,
Father of the said Edward Lord Herbert lawfully begotten, and for default of
such Issue, to the use and behoof of the Heirs males of the body of Edward
Herbert, Grandfather to the said Edward Lord Herbert; and for default of such
Issue, to the use and behoof of the right heirs of him the said Richard
Herbert, Son of the said Edward Lord Herbere for ever. And as for and
concerning the Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Mills, Lands, Tenements,
Orchards, Gardens, Tosts, Crofts, Meadows, Leasows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods,
Under-Woods, Rents and Hereditaments whatsoever of the said Edward Lord
Herbert, and Richard Herbert his Son, or either of them, with their and every
of their appurtenances, in the said County of Anglesey, to the use and behoof
of the said Jo. Earl of Bridgewater, and Edward Herbert, party to these
presents, and of their Heirs and Assigns for ever; upon trust and confidence
nevertheless, and to the end, intent and purpose, that they the said John Earl
of Bridgewater, and Edward Herbert, party to these presents, and the Survivor
of them and his Heirs, shall and will at his and their free will and pleasure,
sell, convey and assure the said Manors, Lands and Premises in the said County
of Anglesey, and every part thereof, for the best benefit, profit and
advantage, which shall or may be ( bona fide) had or gotten for the same, and
that the money to be raised by every or any such sale, and as every such sale
shall be made, shall be forthwith paid and disposed of as follows, that is to
say, out of the money that shall be raised by sale of such of the premises in
the said County of Anglesey, as were the Lands of Dame Herbert, late of, etc.
there shall be forthwith, and in the first place so much money paid to the said
Edward Lord Herbert, his Executors or Administrators, as according to the true
yearly value of those Lands, shall come to five years and an half purchase, and
the residue of the moneys that shall be raised by the sale of the same Lands,
which were the Lands of Dame Herbert late of, etc. shall be disposed of for and
toward the payment and of the Debts of the said Richard Herbert, party to
these presents, and sums of money mentioned in the Schedule hereto annexed, as
the said Jo. Earl of B. and Richard H. party to these presents, or the
Survivors of them, shall think fit, and of the money that shall be raised by
the sale of the residue of the said Manors, Lands and Premises in the said
County of Anglesey, there shall be forthwith and in the first place, so much
paid to the said Ed. Lord Her. his Executors or Administrators, as according to
the yearly value of the same Manors, etc. shall come to sixteen years
purchase; and if those Manors and Lands shall be sold for more than sixteen
years purchase, then the one moiety of such surplusage (if any shall be) shall
be forthwith, and in the first place paid to the said Ed. L. H. his Executors
or Administrators, and the other moiety thereof shall be disposed of, for and
toward the payment of such of the Debts of the said Richard Herbert, party to
these presents, and sums of money mentioned in the said Schedule, as the said
John Earl of B. and Edward Herbert, party to these presents, or the Survivor of
them shall think fit, and the overplus thereof (if any shall be) shall be paid
to the said Richard Herbert, or to such other person or persons, as he the said
Richard Herbert, party to these presents, by any writing under his Hand and
Seal, shall direct, nominate, appoint, to be disposed of in the buying of Land,
to be estated in the same manner, as the Lands in the said C. of Carnarvan, are
by these presents limited: and for want of such direction, nomination or
appointment, to the Executors or Administrators of the said Richard Herbert,
party to these presents, the further trust, intent and meaning of these
presents, and the parties hereunto-being, that the said Edward Lord Herbert,
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall or may have, receive and take,
to his and their own proper use, all and singular the Rents, Issues, Revenues
and Profits of the said Manors, Lands and Premises hereby limited and intended
to be sold, until sale be thereof made, as follows. Provided always, and it
is hereby declared and agreed, by and between all and every the said parties to
these presents, and the true intent and meaning of these presents, is, That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said Ed. L. Her. (paying to Sir Richard
Eaton of Newport in the County of Salop Knight, his Executors and
Administrators, to be disposed according to the trust hereafter mentioned, the
sum of 1000 l. of good and lawful money, or such less sum of money, as the said
Jo. Earl of Bridgewater, and Edward Herbert, party to these presents, or the
Survivor of them, shall think fit and appoint) at any time or times, during the
term of his natural life, by Indenture, or by any Deed or Deeds, Writing or
Writings to be by him the said Ed. Lord Herbert, sealed and subscribed in the
presence of two or more credible Witnesses, to declare, limit and appoint all
or any the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Hereditaments and
Premises, with their appurtenances, in the said County of Monmouth (the said
Capital Message called by the name of St. Julians, and the Lands late in the
tenure or occupation of John Morgan Esquire, and the Lands and Tenements
whereof the use is herein before limited to the said Richard Herbert, party to
these presents, or the Survivor of them, in possession always excepted and
reserved) to and for the Jointure of any wife or wives, which he the said
Edward Lord Herbert shall hereafter happen to marry, for and during the natural
life and lives of such wife and wives, or for any number or term of years
determinable upon her or their life or lives, the same to take effect after the
death of the said Edward Lord Herbert; and that then and so often, and from
thenceforth the said Recovery or Recoveries shall be and enure, and the
Recoverer and Recoverers therein named, his and their heirs shall stand and be
seized of and in the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments in the said County of Monmouth, with their rights, members and
appurtenances, or of or in so much or such part thereof, of, for and concerning
the which such Indenture, Deed or Writing shall be made by the said Edward Lord
Herbert, as aforesaid, for the Jointure of any such Wife or Wives, or number of
years determinable, upon her or their life or lives, as aforesaid, according to
the true intent and meaning of the same Indenture, Deeds and Writings, and of
these presents. And it is hereby declared and agreed by and between the said
Parties hereunto, that the said sum of 1000 l. herein before mentioned, or such
less sum as aforesaid, to be paid by the said Edward Lord Herbert, to the said
Richard Eaton, as aforesaid, shall go and be employed upon the trust herein
after following ( viz.) in case the Debts and Sums of Money mentioned in the
Schedule hereunto annexed, be not then paid, then the same, or so much thereof
as shall be sufficient to pay and satisfy such of the said Debts or Sums of
Money mentioned in the said Schedule hereunto annexed, as the said Jo. Earl of
Bridgewater, and Edward Herbert, party to these presents, or the Survivor of
them and his heirs shall think fit, shall be disbursed and employed to that
purpose, and after the said Debts and Sums of Money, or such of them as the
said Jo. Earl of Bridgewater, and Edward Herbert shall think fit, shall be paid
or satisfied, then the surplusage (if any be) of the said, One thousand pounds,
or such less sum, as aforesaid, shall be disposed and employed, for the
purchasing and buying of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, to be settled on
the said Edward Herbert, party to these presents, for and during the term of
his natural life, and after his decease to the use and behoof of such person
and persons, and in such manner and form as the said Lands; Tenements and
Hereditaments in the County of Monmouth herein before limited, to the said
Richard Herbert, party to these presents, for his life, with remainder over,
are limited, estated and settled: Provided always, and it is covenanted,
granted, condescended, concluded and agreed by and between all the said parties
to these presents, and the true intent and meaning of them, and every of them,
and of these presents is, that if the said Richard Herbert, party to these
presents, or some other person or persons, to whom any Estate is hereby limited
or intended to be limited, of and in the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments within the Kingdom of Ireland, or any of them, their or some of
their heirs or assigns, or some of them, shall not within two years next after
the decease of the said Edward Lord Herbert, well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid of the said Edward Herbert, Son of the said Edward Lord Herbert (if he the
said Edward Herbert, Son to the said Edward Lord Herbert, shall so long live)
the sum of 2000 l. of, etc. that then and immediately after such default of
payment, all and every, use and uses herein before limited and declared as for
and concerning all and every the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
within the Kingdom of Ireland, shall cease and be void, and then also and from
henceforth the said recovery and recoveries, so as aforesaid, or in any other
sort to be had and suffered, and the Recoverer and Recoverers therein named,
his and their heirs shall stand and be seized of and in all and singular the
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances, within
the said Kingdom of Ireland, to the use and behoof of the said Edward Herbert,
Son of the said Edward Lord Herbert, his heirs and assigns, until he or they
shall and may, out of the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, have fully levied
and received the said sum of 2000 l. together with consideration after the rate
of 8 l. per centum, per annum, for the forbearance thereof, from the end of the
said two years next ensuing the death of the said Edward Lord Herbert, and all
Damages, Costs and Charges which he the said Edward Herbert, Son of the said
Edward Lord Herbert, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, shall sustain to
be put unto, in or about the recovery of the said premises, or of the said sum
of 2000 l. or any part thereof, or in or about any Suit concerning the same:
Provided also, and it is covenanted, granted, condescended, concluded and
agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents, and the true intent
and meaning of them, and every of them, and of these presents is, That it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said Richard Herbert, party to these presents,
by Indenture, or by any Deed or Deeds, Writing or Writings, indented or poll,
to be by him the said Richard Herbert, party to these presents, sealed and
subscribed in the presence of two or more credible. Witnesses, to declare,
limit or appoint all or any of the said Manors, Lordships. Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, in the Kingdom of Ireland, to and for
the Jointure of any Wife or Wives, which he the said Richard Herbert, shall
hereafter happen to marry, or to take to Wife, for and during the natural life
or lives of such Wife or Wives, or for any number or term of years
determinable, upon her or their life or lives, the same to take effect upon the
decease of the said Edward Lord Herbert, and Richard Herbert, and the Survivor
of them, to be subject to the use herein before limited, to the said Edward
Herbert, Son of the said Edward Lord Herbert, and his Heirs in the manner
aforesaid, and then and from thenceforth, the said recovery and recoveries
shall be and enure, and the Recoverer and Recoverers therein named, his and
their Heirs shall stand and be seized of and in the said Manors, Lordships,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises in the Kingdom of
Ireland, with the rights, members and appurtenances thereof, or of, or in, or
so much, or such part thereof, for or concerning which such Indenture, Deed or
Writing, shall be made by the said Richard Herbert, as aforesaid, for the life
of any such Wife or Wives, or number of years determinable upon her or their
life or lives, as aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning of the
said Indenture, Deeds or Writings, and of these presents, subject nevertheless
to the said use herein before limited, to the said Edward Herbert, Son of the
said Edward Lord Herbert, his Heirs and Assigns in manner aforesaid: Provided
also, and it is nevertheless covenanted, concluded, condescended and agreed by
and between the said Parties to these presents, that it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said Richard Herbert, party to these presents, at all or any
time or times hereafter, during his natural life, being then actually seized of
the immediate estate of Freehold in possession, of or in the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or any of them, by virtue or
means of the said Recoveries, or any of them, and of these presents, or of any
the limitations, of uses herein limited, to demise or to Farm-let by Indenture
or Indentures, such or so much of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, whereof he shall be then so seized in possession of
such Estate, as aforesaid, or any part thereof chargeable and charged,
nevertheless with the liberties and powers herein contained, and with the terms
and estates hereof, thereby, or in pursuance thereof made or raised unto any
person or persons whatsoever in possession, for any number of years not
exceeding the number of Twenty one years, from the making thereof in
possession, or for the term of three lives, or for any fewer number of years or
lives, or for any number of years determinable on three lives, or any fewer
number of lives in possession, so as upon every such Demise, Lease or Grant so
to be made, as aforesaid, there be reserved respectively such Rents and
Services, as at any time within the space of Seven years last past, before the
date of these presents, have been reserved for the same, or more or greater
Rent payable for the same, during the continuance of every such several or
respective Demise or Lease, so to be made, as aforesaid, to such person or
persons, as by force of these presents, shall or ought to have the immediate
Reversion or Remainder thereof, and that immediately from and after every or
any such time, as any such several and respective Demise, Lease or Grant shall
be made as aforesaid, the recovery and recoveries, and every of them shall be
and enure, and shall be taken to be and enure; and the said Recoverer and
Recoverers in the said Recovery named, and every of them, their and every of
their Heirs, and all and every other person or persons, which at any time
hereafter shall be seized of such parts and parcels of the premises, as shall
be demised or leased, as aforesaid, shall stand and be seized thereof, and of
every part thereof, to the use and behoof of such several and respective person
and persons, to whom any such Demise or Lease shall be so made, as aforesaid,
their several and respective Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to such
several and respective estate and estates, term and terms, and such manner and
form, as in such several and respective Demises or Leases to be made, as
aforesaid, shall be mentioned and expressed, subject to the Rents, Covenants,
Conditions, Provisoes and Agreements, as therein shall be severally and
respectively contained and expressed, and of the Reversion and Reversions,
Remainder and Remainders thereof, to the use of such person or persons, as by
force of these presents shall or ought to have the immediate Reversion or
Remainders thereof, any thing, etc. Provided always, and it is, etc. and the
true intent, etc. is, that it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said
Richard Herbert, party to these presents, at any time or times after the
decease of the said Edward Lord Herbert, during his natural life, by Indenture,
Deed or Writing to be by him the said Richard Herbert, party to these presents,
sealed and subscribed in the presence of two or more credible Witnesses, to
make any Lease or Leases, Demises or Grants, of all or any part of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Premises, with their appurtenances, as well those
within this Realm of England, and the Principality of Wales, as those within
the said Kingdom of Ireland (except such of the Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Premises in the said County of Monmouth, as shall be limited to or for the
Jointure of such wife or wives as the said Edward Lord Herbert shall hereafter
marry, for and during the life or lives of such Wife or Wives only) for the
term of 21 years, or under, or for one, two, three, or more lives, or for any
number or term of years determinable, upon one, two, three, or more lives in
possession or reversion, or otherwise, with reservation of Rent, or without
reservation of Rent, at his and their will and pleasure unto any person or
persons, subject nevertheless to the use herein before limited, to the said
Edward Herbert, Son of the said Edward Lord Herbert, his Heirs and Assigns in
manner aforesaid, upon trust for the raising of the several portions herein
after mentioned, for such Daughter and Daughters, as the said Richard Herbert,
Son of the said Edward Lord Herbert, shall happen to have, and not otherwise,
Provided (that is to say) if one Daughter only, then for the raising of 3000 l.
for that Daughter; if more than one Daughter, then for the raising of 2000 l.
apiece, for each and every one of the said Daughters; and that all or every
such Lease or Leases, Demises or Grants so to be made, as aforesaid, shall
stand and be good and effectual in the Law, to all intents and purposes; and
that the said Recovery and Recoveries so as aforesaid, or in any other sort to
be had and suffered, and the Recoverer and Recoverers therein named, his and
their Heirs, shall stand and be seized of and in such part, and so much of the
Manors, Messuages, Lands and Premises, with the appurtenances, as shall be so
demised or leased, as aforesaid, and every part thereof (except as is before
excepted) to the use of such person and persons, his and their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to whom such Demises, Leases or Grants shall be so
made, as aforesaid, for and during such Leases, Estates and Terms, as shall be
so demised and granted, as aforesaid, subject nevertheless to the said use
herein before limited, to the said Edward Herbert; Son of the said Edward Lord
Herbert, his Heirs and Assigns, in manner aforesaid; Provided also, and it is,
etc. and the true intent, etc. that it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said Richard Herbert, party to these presents, from time to time, and at all
times during his natural life, by any his Deed or Deeds, Writing or Writings,
indented or poll, to be by him the said Richard Herbert, party to these
presents, signed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of two or more credible
Witnesses, to revoke, annihilate, frustrate and make void all or any of the use
or uses, estate or estates, or limitations herein before limited, declared and
appointed, of, for, or concerning any three Plough-lands of the premises, in
the Kingdom of Ireland, not exceeding in the whole the clear yearly value of
150 l. per annum, over and above all Charges and Reprizes, other than the use
herein before limited to the said Edward Herbert, Son of the said Edward Lord
Herbert, and his Heirs, in the manner aforesaid, and other than the use herein
before limited to the said Edward Lord Herbert, for his life; and that then and
from thenceforth, the use and uses, estate and estates, and limitations herein
before declared, limited or appointed, of, for, or concerning such of the last
mentioned premises, for, or concerning which any such nomination shall so be
had or made, other than the uses herein before limited, to the said Edward Lord
Herbert, and Edward Son of the said Edward Lord Herbert, and his Heirs, in the
manner aforesaid shall cease, determine, and be utterly revoked, frustrate and
made void; and then also it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said
Richard Herbert, party to these presents, by the same Deed or Deeds, or by any
other Deed or Deeds, to be signed, sealed and delivered by him the said Richard
Herbert, as aforesaid, to declare, limit or appoint any other new use or uses,
estate or estates whatsoever, of the said premises, of, for, or concerning
which any such revocation shall be so made, or any part or parcel thereof, unto
any person or persons whatsoever, subject nevertheless to the said use herein
before limited, to the said Edward Herbert, Son of the said Edward Lord
Herbert, and his Heirs, in the manner aforesaid, any thing in these presents
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding: and that then
also, and from thenceforth, the said recovery and recoveries, as to such of the
premises, concerning which any such revocation and new declaration shall be so
made, to such uses, intents and purposes as the said Richard Herbert, party to
these presents, by any such Deed or Deeds, as aforesaid, shall declare, limit
or appoint; Provided also, and it is, etc. that if the said Edward Lord
Herbert, and Richard his Son, shall both of them be minded to make sale of the
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, within the County of Monmouth, or
any of them (other than such as herein are before limited, to the said use of
the said Richard Herbert, party to these presents, and his Heirs in possession)
which Sales is not meant or intended by any of the parties to these presents to
be made, but for raising of money to be employed and bestowed upon the purchase
of some other Lands of as good value, or in some other place or places, to be
settled and estated, to the same uses and estates, and with the same powers and
provisoes, and in the sort and manner, as those Lands so to be sold, are hereby
limited, and mentioned to be settled and estated, and being both so minded,
shall at any time during their Joynt-lives, by any Deed or Deeds, Writing or
Writings to be by him the said Edward Lord Herbert, and Richard Herbert his
Son, party to these presents, sealed and subscribed in the presence of two,
etc. declare and publish their mind, intent and meaning to be, to revoke, alter
and frustrate the said uses and estate, before in these presents mentioned,
declared, limited or appointed, or any of them, or for or concerning the said
last mentioned Manors and Premises, or any of them, or any part or parcel
thereof, or any of them, that then from and after such Declaration or
Publication, so to be made as aforesaid, the same use and uses, estate and
estates, in and by these presents limited, expressed, declared or appointed,
of, for or concerning the which any such declaration or limitation shall be
made as aforesaid, shall cease and become utterly void, frustrate and of none
effect, to all intents, constructions and purposes whatsoever, and that then
and from thenceforth, the said recovery and recoveries, so as aforesaid, or in
any other sort to be had and suffered, shall be and enure, and the Recoverer
and Recoverers therein named, his and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of
and in the said Manors, Lands and Premises last mentioned, or so much, or such
part thereof, concerning which any such Declaration or Publication shall be
made as aforesaid, to such uses, intents, trusts and purposes, as the said
Edward Lord Herbert and Richard, party to these presents, by any Deed or Deeds,
etc. sealed and subscribed in the presence of two, etc. shall declare, limit or
appoint. And it is further, etc. for the considerations aforesaid, that in case
any of the said Manors, intended to be comprised in the said Fine or Fines,
Recovery and Recoveries, shall be omitted or left out, and not be comprised in
the said Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, or in case there shall happen
to be any defect in the assurance of the premises, or any of them, according to
the true, etc. that they the said Edward Lord Herbert, and Richard Herbert,
party to these presents, their Heirs and Assigns, and all and every other
person and persons, which now are, or hereafter shall be seized of, and in such
of the said Manors, etc. as shall be so omitted or left out, and not to be
comprised, as aforesaid, or whereof such Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries
shall not be levied and had, or whereof the assurance hereby intended to be
made, shall be any way defective, shall stand and be seized thereof, and every
part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their appurtenances, and the
reversions thereof, to and for the several and respective estate and estates
thereof, herein before severally and respectively limited unto them, or any of
them, as aforesaid, under the several Provisoes herein before mentioned, and to
none other uses, intents and purposes. In witness, etc.

J. W. being seized of a Manor, and other Lands (conceiving he should die
without Issue, and intending to settle the same to good uses) by Deed, grants
and conveyeth the same to A. B. C. etc. in trust to the use of himself for
life, and after of Rachel his wife for life, the remainder to the Heirs of his
Body; and in default of such Heirs, to grant the same as he should by Will, or
other writing, limit or appoint, etc. with several Provisoes, etc.
THis Indenture made, etc. between J. W. of, etc. of the one part, and A. B. C.
D. etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said J. W. for and in
consideration of the better confirmation and strengthening of a Jointure
already made and granted to R. his now wife, and for her better maintenance and
livelihood in time to come, and for the natural love and affection which he the
said J. W. bears to the Heirs of his body, begotten, and to be begotten, and
for settling and establishing of the Inheritance of the Lands and Tenements
hereafter mentioned, to and in the said A. B. C. D. etc. and their Heirs, to
the uses, intents and purposes hereafter specified: Has given, granted,
enfeoffed and confirmed, and by, etc. unto the said A. B. C. D. etc. their
Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that the Manors, Capital Messuages, and Farm
of B. in, etc. with the rights, members and appurtenances thereof; and all that
the Advowson, Patronage and Gift of the Parish Church of B. and all and all
manner of Houses, Edifices, Dove-houses, etc. and all those Thirteen Messuages
or Tenements, etc. and all Shops, Cellars, Sollers, etc. and all other the
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments whatsoever,
which he the said J. W. stands seized of any Estate of Inheritance, within
the Counties of, etc. aforesaid, or elsewhere within the Kingdom of England;
and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of all and singular
the said premises, and all Rents and yearly Profits reserved, due or payable by
or upon any Demise, Lease or Grants, Demises, Leases or Grants made of the said
premises, or any part thereof, and all the estate, right, title, interest,
claim and demand whatsoever, of him the said J. W. of, in and to the same
premises, and every or any part or parcel thereof, and also such Deeds,
Charters, etc. To have and to hold the said Manors, Messuages, Farms,
Tenements and Rectory, and all and singular other the premises before by these
presents granted or mentioned, meant or intended to be granted, with their and
every of their appurtenances unto the said A. B. C. D. etc. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents
limited, expressed and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose,
(that is to say) as for, touching and concerning the said Manor, Capital
Message and Farm of Burnet, and all Lands, Meadows, Pastures, etc. And the
said Rectory and Parsonage of Chewion, alias Chewton, and with the rights,
members and appurtenances thereof, and all and all manner of Tithes of Corn,
Hay and Wool, and all Obligations, Obventions, Profits, Commodities and
Hereditaments whatsoever, coming, growing, yearly renewing or happening in
Chewton aforesaid, or elsewhere, to the said Rectory or Parsonage belonging,
or in any wise appertaining, and the said Message or Tenement, etc. and the
said three Messuages or Tenements, etc. and all Cellars, Sollers, Houses, etc.
and the Reversion and Reversions thereof, etc. and all Rents and Services
thereunto belonging, or in any wise appertaining, to the use and behoof of J.
W. and his Assigns, for and during the term of the natural life of the said J.
W. without impeachment of, or for any manner of waste, and after the decease of
the said J. W. then to the only use and behoof of the said Rachel, for and
during the term of her natural life, for and in the name of her Jointure, and
in full recompense of her Dower, and title of Dower, which she the said Rachel
shall or may have of or to the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said
J. W. and after the decease of the said J. W. and Rachel, then to the use and
behoof of the Heirs of the body of the said J. W. lawfully begotten, or to be
begotten; and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the said A.
B. C. D. etc. their Heirs or Assigns for ever; upon this hope, trust and
confidence nevertheless in them reposed, by the said J. W. that they the said
A. B. C. D. etc. and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and his and their
Heirs and Assigns, and at all times after the ending of the said Estates of the
said J. W. and Rachel his wife, of and in the said Manors and Premises to them
above-limited, make such Grants and Conveyances of the same, and dispose,
distribute and employ the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, to such person and
persons, and in such manner and form as the said J. W. by his last Will and
Testament in writing, (by him) to be subscribed with his own hand, and sealed
with his Seal in the presence of three or more Witnesses, or by any other
writing to be by him subscribed and sealed in the presence of so many
Witnesses, as aforesaid, shall nominate, declare or appoint; and for and in
default of such nomination or appointment, then that the persons trusted, and
the Survivors and Survivor of them, his and their Heirs and Assigns shall
convey and assure the said Manor and Premises, to and on the right Heirs of
the said J. W. for ever, and as for, touching and concerning all other the said
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Premises residue with the appurtenances,
whereof no use is before by these presents limited or declared to the use and
behoof of the said J. W. and of the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and to
be begotten: and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the said
A. B. C. D. etc. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, upon the like hope, trust
and confidence in them reposed, that they the said persons trusted, and the
Survivors and Survivor of them, and his and their Heirs and Assigns, at all
times, from and after such time as the said J. W. shall be dead, without Heir
of his body, shall make such Grants and Estates of the said Lands and Premises
residue, etc. or any part or parts thereof, and distribute, dispose and employ
the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, to such person and persons, and in such
manner and form as the said J. W. by his last Will and Testament in writing to
be by him subscribed with his own hand, and sealed in the presence of three or
more witnesses, or by any other writing to be by him subscribed and sealed in
the presence of so many Witnesses, as aforesaid, shall nominate, declare, limit
and appoint, and for and in default of such nomination or appointment, then
that the said person or persons trusted, and the Survivors or Survivor of them,
his and their Heirs and Assigns shall convey and assure the same Lands and
Premises residue with the appurtenances, to and upon the right Heirs of the
said J. W. for ever. Provided always, and it is fully and plainly convenanted,
concluded and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these presents, for
them, their Heirs and Assigns, that it shall be lawful to and for the said John
W. and that the said J. W. shall have full power and authority from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, at will and pleasure, by his Deed or Deeds in
writing to demise, grant, and to farm-let all or any the said Manor,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and every or any part or parts
thereof, as well in possession, as in reversion, or in possession, or in
reversion, unto any person or persons for one, two or three lives, or for any
number of years whatsoever, by and under such Rents, Reservations, Covenants,
Conditions, Limitations and Agreements, as to him shall seem meet, or without
any Rent, Reservation or Condition, at his will and pleasure; at that when, and
as often as any such Demise, Grant or Lease shall be so made by the said J. W.
of the premises, or any part or parts thereof, the said parties trusted, and
every of them, and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and every of them, and
his and their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of such part, parts
and parcels of the said Manor, Messuages, Farms, Tenements, Rectory and
Premises, as shall be so demised, leased or granted, immediately from and after
every such Demise, Lease or Grant made, to the use and behoof of every such
person and persons, to whom any such Lease, Demise or Grant shall be so made,
and of their Executors, Administrators and Assigns repectively, only for and
during the continuance of the estate and estates, term and terms, interest and
interests, to be limited and expressed, in such Lease, Demise or Grant, under
such Rents, Reservations, Condition and Conditions, Limitation and Limitations,
as in or by such Leases, Demises or Grants shall be limited, expressed or
contained respectively, according to the intent, purport and true meaning of
every such Demise, Grant and Limitation, and of the Reversion and Reversions,
Rents and Services reserved, and depending upon the same Leases and Grants, and
also after the end and expiration of every such Demise, Lease and limitation to
be made, and as the same shall respectively end and determine then from time to
time of all and every such part and parts of the premises, as shall be so
demised, leased or limited, as aforesaid, to the use of such person and
persons, and in such manner and form, and of such Estate and Estates, with such
Remainder and Remainders over, as are before herein and hereby limited,
appointed and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose. Provided
likewise, and it is further covenanted, concluded, condescended unto, and
agreed by and between the said Parties to those presents, that if the said J.
W. do and shall at any time or times hereafter, in or by any Writing under his
Seal, and by him subscribed with his Hand in the presence of three or more
Witnesses, signify and declare that he is minded to alter, change, revoke,
determine, frustrate or make void all or any the uses or estates hereby made,
limited or appointed, that then and from thenceforth all and every such use and
uses, estate and estates, whereof or concerning which he shall so signify or
declare his said mind as aforesaid, shall respectively be frustrated, void,
revoked, determined, and of no force or effect, only of, for and concerning all
such and so much of the said Manor, Rectory, Farms, Lands and Premises before
herein mentioned, whereof he the said J. W. shall so signify and declare his
mind as aforesaid, and then and from thenceforth this present Feossment and
Grant shall enure and be, and the said A. B. C. D. etc. and their Heirs shall
stand, and be seized of, for and concerning all such, and so much of the said
Manors, Lands and Premises, whereof or concerning which he the said J. W.
shall so signify and declare his mind as aforesaid, to the only use of such
person and persons, and of and for such Estate and Estates, and with such
Remainder and Remainders thereof, over and for, upon and under such Conditions
and Provisoes, and in such manner and form as the said J. W. shall by any such
writing or writings, by him to be subscribed and sealed as aforesaid, limit or
appoint any thing in these presents contained, or any other matter or cause to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

Note.
This precedent Deed was executed with Livery and Seifin, and attornment, the
Livery being severally made in the several Counties aforesaid.

The Donor made his Will, and thereby devised to the Mayor and Commonalty of B.
several Annuities to be issuing out of the Lands granted by the precedent, and
appointed the same to be employed to Charitable Uses, and constituted Rachel
his Wife Executrix, and dyed without Issue.

The Executrix proved his Will.
THe Sisters and Sisters Children of the Donor (as Heirs at Law) question the
validity of the Deed; whereupon the Mayor, Commonalty, and Feoffees in trust,
exhibit their Bill in Chancery against the Coheir and Executrix, and
afterward the matter coming to the hearing, by Decree the Deed and Uses are
confirmed.

A Condition to pay money weekly.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. or
any of them, or the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them, or any of
them, do truly pay, or cause to be paid to the within-named M. P. and J. G. or
either of them, or to the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them, or
either of them, at or in the, etc. the sum of 4 l. of, etc. in manner and form
following, that is to say, every week weekly on the Saturday in every week, one
next and consequently ensuing another, the sum of two shillings, until the said
sum of 4 l. shall be fully satisfied and paid, the first payment thereof to
begin and to be made on Saturday next, being the twenty day of this instant
Month of September, within-written, that then, etc. but if default shall be
made of or in any of the payments, that then, etc.

A Condition to pay a sum of money, and three years payment given.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound J. W. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do truly pay, or cause to be paid to
the abovenamed J. P. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the sum of 7 l.
and 10 sh. of good and lawful money of England, at or in the, etc. in manner
and form following, that is to say, on the third day of Jan. which shall be in
the year of our Lord, 1632. 50 sh. thereof, on the third of Jan. which shall be
in, etc. 1633. 50 sh. more thereof, and on the third day of Jan. which shall be
in, etc. 1634. 50 sh. residue of the said sum of 7 l. 10 sh. without fraud or
delay, that then this, etc. but if default shall be made of or in any of the
said payments, in part or all, then this, etc.

A Condition to perform Covenants in a Lease, and not to seek for a new Lease
from the chief Landlord.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-named M. H. by her Indenture of
Lease, bearing date the day of the date within-written, has leased unto the
within-bound E. M. part of a Message or Tenement called the Peter and Paul,
situate in Paternoster-Row, in the Parish of St. Michael at Quern in London,
from the Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist last past, before the date
within-written, for the term of twenty one years, as by the said Indenture of
Lease may appear; if therefore the said E. M. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them, do well and truly observe, perform, fulfill and
keep, all and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles, Conditions and
Agreements, specified and declared in the said Indenture of Lease, which on his
or their parts are or ought to be observed, performed, fulfilled and kept in
and by all things according to the tenor, purport, effect and true meaning of
the said Indenture: And further, if the said E. M. his Executors,
Administrators nor Assigns, nor any other person or persons whatsoever, for him
or them, or by his or their, or any of their means, occasion or procurement, do
directly or indirectly procure, get or obtain, or endeavor to go about to
procure, get or obtain any Lease or Grant from the Mayor, Commonalty, and
Citizens of the City of London, of the said Message or Tenement, or any part
thereof, or of that part of the said Message or Tenement, which he the said M.
H. has leased unto the said E. M. that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Collateral Condition.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas A. B. and C. D. Citizens and Drapers of
London, by one Obligation of the date within-written, are and stand jointly and
severally bound to the within-named E. F. in 100 l. of, etc. with condition for
the payment of 52 l. or the, etc. at or in the, etc. as by the, etc. and if in
case the said A. B. and C. D. and either of them, and either of their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall make default of and in the payment
of the said sum of 52 l. to the said, etc. his Executors and Assigns, on the
day, and at the place of payment thereof aforesaid; if then the within-bound L.
M. his Executors or Administrators, do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid
unto the said, etc. the sum of 52 l. within the space of eight days next after
such default of payment made as aforesaid, he the said E. F. his Executors or
Administrators, upon the receipt thereof, delivering unto the said L. M. his
Executors or Assigns, the above-recited Obligation uncancelled and
undischarged, together with an irrevocable, absolute and sufficient Letter of
Attorney or assignment thereof, unto the said L. M. his Executors and Assigns,
by and from the said E. F. his Executors and Assigns, and sealed and delivered
in due form of Law before two or three sufficient witnesses at the least, that
then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to erect a Barn.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound T. S. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, do at or before the Feast Day of, etc. next coming
after the date within-written, at his and their own proper costs and charges,
well, work-man-like, and sufficiently make, build, erect, set up, and fully
finish, or cause to be made, etc. (in all things belonging to the Art or Trade
of a Carpenter) in and upon one piece of Ground, now in the Occupation of, etc.
one new Barn, with twelve several Bays or Rooms in the same, of good, new and
seasonable Timber, and one strong Door with four Windows to the same, and the
said Barn to contain in length 116 Foot of Assize, and in breadth 22 Foot, and
in height eighteen Foot of Assize at the least, and also do, at or before the
said Feast Day of, etc. make, or cause to be made, at his or their like Costs
and Charges, within the said Barn so to be builded and set up, the one half and
moiety thereof meet and convenient for a Stable-room, and a sufficient floor
for the same moiety, upon the main ground, with good, new and seasonable planks
of Oaken Timber, together with Racks and Mangers, sufficient and convenient for
the same, and do also to the other moiety of the same Bays or Rooms, make one
substantial Floor of seasonable Boards, and do likewise at his and their like
Costs and Charges, find and allow all such nails, as shall be needful to be
spent and occupied in and about the erecting, setting up and finishing of the
same Barn and Stable with Floors, Racks, Mangers, Doors, Windows and Planks,
(except if any be excepted) that then, etc. (or you may proceed thus) And the
within-named D. E. in consideration of the premises, is to pay unto the said T.
S. his Executors or Assigns 20 l. 10 sh. of, etc. in form following, viz. at
the ensealing hereof 6 l. 8 sh. 4 d. thereof, which he had paid accordingly on
the, etc. and at the fully finishing of the same Barn as aforesaid, other, etc.
in full payment of the said sum of, etc. that then, etc.

A Condition, that whereas A. B. had delivered a Bond and a Letter of Attorney
to C. D. to recover a Debt of, etc. the said C. D. it bound to re-deliver the
Bond or the money.
THe Condition, That whereas the within-bound C. D. the day of the date
within-written, has received and had of the within-named A. B. one Bond or
Obligation, bearing date, etc. (and so recite the Bond) as by the said
Obligation and Condition may more plainly appear, which said Bond or
Obligation, together with one other Writing or Letter of Attorney of the date
within-written, the said A. B. has delivered to the said C. D. in trust only
for the recovery and receiving of the said Debt of, etc. mentioned in the
Condition of the said Obligation, together with Costs, Damages, and reasonable
interest, if any shall be, of and from the said, etc. his Executors or
Administrators: if therefore that the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, do at any time hereafter, within the space of one whole year next
coming after the date within-written, either well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid to the said A. B. his Executors or Assigns, the full sum of, etc. at or in
the, etc. or otherwise re-deliver, or cause to be re-delivered to the said A.
B. his Executors or Assigns, the said Obligation or Bond, and the said Letter
of Attorney, safe, whole, uncancelled and undischarged, and in as good
condition as he received them, or either of them (the perils and dangers of the
Seas and Pirates only excepted) within the time and space before limited, that
then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to pay a sum of money at ones return from beyond Sea.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-named A. B. the day of the date
within-written, has paid and delivered unto the within-bound C. D. the sum of,
etc. which said sum the said A. B. is contented, that the said C. D. shall
employ and adventure in a Voyage, wherein the said C. D. is bound in the good
Ship called the, etc. unto the East Indies, upon the condition that the said C.
D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said A. B. his Executors or Assigns, the full sum of, etc. at the
return of the said C. D. and the said Ship, or either of them, which shall
first and next happen from the East Indies as aforesaid, into the Realm of
England. If therefore the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
do or shall within one month next after the return either of himself, or of
the said Ship, called the, etc. from the East Indies aforesaid, into the Realm
of England, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said A. B. his
Executors or Assigns, the said sum of, etc. of like lawful money of England,
without fraud or delay, that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition for delivery of Wool.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound A. B. for the sum of, etc.
to him by the within-named C. D. in hand, at the sealing of this Obligation
truly paid, whereof he the said A. B. acknowledges the Receipt, has bargained
and sold to the said C. D. one hundred Tod of merchantable Wool, good and
lawful, viz. at the rate and price of 10 sh. the Tod, if therefore the said A.
B. his Executors, etc. do well and truly deliver, or cause to be delivered unto
the said C. D. his Executors, etc. all the said one hundred Tods of Wool,
sorted and packed by an indifferent sworn Wooll-packer, frank and free at the
Warehouse of, etc. on or before, etc. without any delay, that then, etc.

A Condition to make an Assurance by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound A. B. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, do before the twentieth day of May next coming after the date
within-written, make, or cause to be made unto the within-named C. D. and to
his Heirs and Assigns, such a good, sure, sufficient and indefeazible Estate of
Inheritance in the Law, to the only use and behoof of the said C. D. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, or to the use of such person, and his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, as he the said C. D. shall then name and appoint of and in all that
Message, etc. (as the bounds thereof are known) by Deeds and Evidences
sufficient in the Law, or by Fine and Recovery if need shall be or require, or
by any other Suit or lawful means, as by the said C. D. or his Heirs, or by the
Assigns of him or them, or by their, or any of their Council learned in the
Law, shall be reasonably advised, devised or required, and also if the same
Messuages, etc. now are and be, and so from, etc. for ever shall remain,
continue and be unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, or to such other
person as he the said C. D. shall name and appoint, and his Heirs and Assigns
free, clear, and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise
upon request sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of and from all and all
manner of former and other Bargains, Sales, Leases, Gifts, Grants, Surrenders,
and Encumbrances whatsoever, (if need be you may proceed further) and also if
the said A. B. his Heirs, etc. do at all times hereafter, and from time to
time, and from and after the said, etc. for and during the space of ten years,
upon reasonable request to be made by the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns, do
make, knowledge and execute, and suffer to be done and executed, all such
further act and acts, thing and things, device and devices, for the better
assuring and conveying of the premises unto the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns, as aforesaid, be it by Fine, Feoffment, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not
enrolled, recovery, release, or by any other ways or means whatsoever, with
warranty against the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns, and all other claiming
by, from or under him, them, or any of them, or otherwise without warranty, as
by the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their County learned, at
his and their own proper costs and charges in the Law shall be reasonably
devised and required, that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition for the renewing of a Lease, when the Lessor shall come to the age
of twenty one years.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound R. R. and E. his wife, late
wife of the within-named T. W. by Deed indented, bearing date, etc. have
demised, granted and to farm-letten unto the within-named J. G. and A. P. all
those Copyhold or customary Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leasoes,
Pastures, Commons, Woods, Under-woods and Hereditaments, commonly called or
known by the several and proper names of, etc. or any of them, or by any other
name or names, situate, lying and being within the Manor or Lordship, and
Parish of Woodford in the County of Essex, which were at the time of the
decease of the said T. W. in the Tenure or Occupation of G. H. or his Assigns:
To have and to hold from the, etc. last past, before the date thereof, unto the
end and term of forty years, from thence next ensuing, and sully to be complete
and ended, if the said E. shall happen so long to live, by the yearly Rent of,
etc. as by the said Deed indented amongst other things, Covenants, Grants and
Articles therein contained, whereunto relation being had more at large it may
appear: if therefore the said R. R. and E. his Wife, within one half year, next
after that the said E. shall come to and accomplish her full age of twenty one
years, upon reasonable request made by the said J. and A. or either of them,
their Executors or Assigns, at the now, etc. and at the only Costs and Charges
for writings, or otherwise of the said J. and A. their Executors or Assigns,
shall make and seal, and as their Deeds deliver to the said J. W. and A. P.
their Executors or Assigns, one Indenture of Lease, of all and singular the
said Copyhold or customary Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
before by the said Deed indented, demised, and of every part and parcel
thereof, and which Indenture so to be made, sealed and delivered, shall in all
things and in every Covenant, Grant and Article of the same, agree verbatim
with the said Deed indented, which bears the date within-written, and not
otherwise, save only that after the commencement and beginning of the same, it
shall be made to hold and continue the rest of the said term of forty years,
which shall be then to come and unexpired, comprised in the said Deed indented,
which bears the date within-written, ( viz.) to continue the rest of the
years which shall be then to come, and no otherwise, that then, etc. or else,
etc.

A Condition to gather Rents, and to yield an account thereof.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound A. B. or his sufficient Deputy,
do from henceforth during his natural life, well, truly and entirely levy,
collect and gather all and singular the Rents, Revenews, Emoluments, Perquisits
of Courts, Issues and Profits whatsoever, of, or belonging to the Lordship or
Manor of, etc. and of all the members and parcels of the same, at the Feasts
of, etc. yearly, during the said term, and all the same Rents, etc. and all the
money thereof coming, hereafter to be coming of the same, and every, or any
part thereof, well and truly content and pay to the within-named C. D. at the
Feasts of, etc. yearly, and also do from time to time, as often as he shall be
thereunto required by the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, make,
render and deliver to the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns, a just, true and
perfect Account of all the same Rents, Revenews, and other the premises, and of
all the arrerages thereof (if any be) do at the end of every such Account made,
make just and true payment to the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns, and further
do well and truly administer, serve and execute all Process to him to be
directed from the Stewards and Officers of the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns,
concerning the premises, or any part thereof; and moreover do, during all the
said term, demean and behave himself as an honest and true Bailiff ought to do,
that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition of a Deputy Rent-Gatherer to give Account for the Receipt of Rents.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound A. B. has retained, (to and
with the within-named R. C.) Renter of the Manor of Finsbury, for the
collecting of all the Rents, coming or growing out of the Manor of Finsbury,
in the County of Middlesex, and of Lands, Rents and Tenements, belonging to the
Major, Aldermen, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, Farmers of the
said Manors, Lands, Rents and Tenements, for term of years yet to come, if
therefore the said A. B. do well and truly behave himself in the said room or
office of Rentership, for the Collection of the said Rents and Profits of the
said Manors, Rents, Lands, etc. and well and truly from time to time collect
the said Rents, and every part thereof to the hands of the Chamberlain of the
City of London for the time being, to the use and behoof of the said Major,
Aldermen, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and make yearly the
Account of the said Rents, and of every part thereof in the name of the said R.
C. if he then be living, of Record in the Chamber of the said City to the
Office of the same, to whom it does or may appertain, to take and engross the
same Account; and also if the said A. B. during the life of the said R. D. do
no act or acts, thing or things, directly or indirectly, to the prejudice and
hindrance of the right of the said R. O. in and to that Office, called the
Rentership of Finsbury, and further do from time to time, clearly acquit,
discharge or save and keep harmless the said R. C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, against the Major, Aldermen,
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and against all and every person
and persons, to whom it may or shall of right in that behalf belong, that then,
etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to make true Account of one Bayliffship.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas Sir H. H. Knight and Baronet, chief Justice
of the Common Pleas; Sir J. D. Knight, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster;
T. N. Esquire, Surveyor-General, do stand and are possessed amongst other
things, of the Manor of, etc. for diverse yet to come, upon trust and
confidence and to and for the only use of C. P. have by the commandment and
warrant of the said C. P. by Deed under his Hand and Seal, constituted and
appointed the within-bound H. L. to be Bailiff of the Manor of Westham
aforesaid, and Collector of the Rents and Revenues, perquisits and Profits
there, during the pleasure of the said C. P. If therefore the said H. L. by
himself, for his sufficient Deputy or Deputies, his or their Executors or
Assigns, do and shall from time to time, for and during their continuance and
exercise of and in the said place or office demean himself and themselves
therein, without voluntary concealment, deceit or fraud toward the said C. P.
and do and shall yearly during such his and their continuance and exercise as
aforesaid, at the Audit and Audits to be held and kept for the said C. P. yield
and make just and true Account to and before the said Auditors, for the time
being of the said Manor and Premises, and thereupon make payment and
satisfaction to the said C. P. his Officer or Officers, in that behalf to be
authorized and appointed, to and for the said C. P. his use, at or before every
such Audit or Audits, of and for all and every such Rents, Sum and Sums of
Money, and other Issues, Revenues, Goods, Chattels, Perquisits and Profits, as
then shall come to the hands of the said H. L. or his Deputy or Deputies, or as
he or they then ought rightly to be charged withal to the said C. P. his use,
for or by means or in respect of the said Office or Place, that then, etc. or
else, etc.

A Condition for payment of a sum of Money within three days after request, if
the Obligee may not enjoy a Message.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound C. D. by a Deed bearing date
within-written, for the consideration therein, has assigned and set over unto
the within-named A. B. one Indenture of Lease, bearing date, etc. made and
granted to him the said A. B. by one, etc. of a Message or Tenement, with the
appurtenances, lying and being, etc. now in the tenure of, etc. for the term
of, etc. and all his Estate, Right, Title, Interest and Term of years to come,
in and to the same Message or Tenement, and other the premises by the said
Lease demised, as by the said Poll. Deed or Writing more at large appears; if
therefore the said A. B. his, etc. paying the said Rent, and performing the
said Covenant and Duties in the said Lease contained on the Tenants part, from
and after the, etc. to be paid and performed, shall not or may not peaceably
and quietly have, hold and enjoy the said Message or Tenement, with the
appurtenances for and during all the residue of the said term, without any let,
trouble, interruption, of or by the said, etc. then if the said C. D. his
Executors, etc. do within one Month next after notice thereof to him or them
to be given by him the said A. B. his, etc. well and truly repay, or cause,
etc. to the said, etc. his Executors or Assigns, the sum of, etc. of, etc. the
said A. B. them also re-delivering and re-assuring unto the said C. D. his
Executors, etc. the said Indenture of Lease, safe and uncancelled, and all his
Estate, Interest and Term of years in and to the same, and the premises thereby
demised, clearly discharged of all Forfeitures, Re-entries and Encumbrances
whatsoever then to be had, made, committed or permitted by the said A. B. his,
etc. together with the Poll-deed aforesaid, that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to bring an Inventory into the Prerogative Court by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if M. H. Wife of J. H. while he lived, of the Parish
of, etc. do make or cause to be made a true and perfect Inventory of all and
singular the Goods, Chattels, and Debts of the said J. H. and the same so made,
to exhibit or cause to be exhibited into the Prerogative Court of Canterbury,
the, etc. and the said Goods, Chattels and Debts do well and truly administer,
(viz.) do pay the Debts of the said deceased, which he did owe at the time of
his decease, as far as the said Goods, Debts and Chattels will thereunto
extend, as the said Law will charge her; and further do make or cause to be
made a true and perfect account of and upon the said administration, the second
day next after the Feast of, etc. and such part and portion of the said Goods,
Chattels and Debts, which shall be found remaining upon her said account,
examined and adjudged by the said Prerogative Court of Canterbury for the time
being, shall distribute and dispose, as by the same Judge shall be limited and
appointed; and if hereafter there shall appear any lawful Testament or last
Will made by the said deceased, and the Executor or Executors therein named do
exhibit the same, making request to have the same approved of accordingly, then
if the said Administratrix, after lawful request to her made, do render and
deliver into the said Court the said Letter of administration to her committed
without delay; and lastly, do at all and every time and times hereafter,
clearly acquit, discharge or save harmless the within-named, etc. and all other
the Officers of the said Prerogative Court of Canterbury, against all persons
having or pretending to have any estate, right, title or interest to the said
goods, chattels and debts, that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition never to vex or trouble one hereafter for any former matter.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound A.B. his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, or any other person or persons for him or them, or in his or
their name or names, or by his or the^r title or procurement, or means, do at
any time or times hereafter claim, challenge, demand, vex, sue, molest or
trouble the within-named C. D. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
or any of them, for any of the goods, money, plate or debts, which late were
belonging to E.F. of, etc. deceased, or for any other matter, reckoning, cause
or account, thing or things whatsoever, had, moved, stirred, depending or being
between the said A.B. and C.D. before the date within-written, that then, etc.
or else, etc.

A Condition for the assurance of Mortgaged Lands, after default of Redemption.
THe Condition etc. That whereas the within-bound A.B. and C. his Wife, by
their Deed indented, beating date the withinwritten, have given, granted,
bargained and sold unto the within-named D. E. his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
all that Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances thereto belonging, or in
any wise appertaining, upon condition, That if the said A.B. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said D. E. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
the sum of, etc. that then the aforesaid gift, grant, bargain and sale of the
premises, and all conveyances and assurances thereupon had and made, should be
utterly void, frustrate and of none effect, as by the said deed indented
amongst other things therein contained, more plainly at large appears: If
therefore the said A B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall
make default of or in the payment of the said sum of, etc. on the said, etc.
then if the said A.B. and C. his Wife, and their Heirs, and all and every other
person and persons, and their Heirs, having or lawfully claiming to have any
lawful right, title or interest, of, in or to the said Message or Tenement, or
other the premises with the appurtenances, or of, in or to any part or parcel
thereof, shall from time to time, and at all times after such default of
payment of the said sum of, etc. in form aforesaid had and made, upon the
reasonable requests, and at the only costs and charges in the Law of the said
D. E. his Heirs and Assigns, further do, cause, make, knowledge and suffer, or
cause to be done, made, knowledged and suffered, all and every such further
lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device and devices in the
Law, be it by fine or fines, deed or deeds, etc. or by all, any, or as many of
the said ways or means, as the said D. E. his Heirs and Assigns, or his or
their Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably advised or devised, for
the further assurance, sure-making and conveying of the premises, and of every
part and parcel thereof, to be had and made sure unto the said D. E. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, absolutely, without any manner of condition or mortgage,
that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to acknowledge a Statute by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound A.B. and one R. L. of, etc. do
upon or before, etc. seal and subscribe one Recognizance or Writing obligatory,
to be made according to the form of the Statute lately made and provided for
recovery of debts, wherein and whereby the said A. B. and R. L. shall stand
bound to the within-named T. W. in the sum of, etc. payable at some Feast soon
after the date of the same Writing, and the same so sealed and subscribed, do
upon or before, etc. in lawful and due manner acknowledge before one of the two
Chief Justices appointed for the acknowledging of such Writings by the Statute;
or in their absence, out of the Term before the Major of the Staple at
Westminster, and the Recorder of the City of London for the time being, and the
same so acknowledged and sealed, to deliver or cause to be delivered to the
said T.W. at his now dwelling house, situate, etc. upon or before the, etc.
safe, whole and uncancelled, to the end that a pair of Defeazances may be
thereupon made, that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to meddle with the Executorship upon assignment thereof.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound T. T. has assigned and
committed all his right of Executorship of the Testament and Will of Sir J.
late deceased, unto the within-named R. B. and has fully for his part
authorized, licensed and assigned the said R. only to do all and every thing
and things, by himself and his Assigns, concerning the execution of the said
last Will and Testament. Therefore if the said T. T. shall not intermeddle with
the administration of any part of the Goods and Chattels, Money, Debts or Plate
of the said Testator, without consent of the said R. his Heirs or Executors,
but shall at all times hereafter, and from time to time permit and suffer the
said R. B. his Executors and Assigns, to administer all such Goods, Chattels,
Money, plate and debts, as at the day of the making hereof be in the custody of
the said R. B. to be administered, or in the hands or possession of any other
person or persons, except such Goods, Chattels, Money and Plate, now in the
possession and custody of the said T. T. of the said Testators, which is, or
are to be administered as shall be thought good by the said R. B. And further,
if the said T. T. his Heirs or Executors, do not discharge any debts of the
said Testators, without the consent of the said R. B. his Executors or
Administrators, nor any Action which the said R. B. or his Executors shall
justly attempt and bring against any person or persons, to or for the recovery
of any of the Debts, Goods and Chattels of the said Testator, that then, etc.
or else, etc.

A Condition not to do any act as Executors, without consent of his Co-Executor.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas one C. B. late of N. deceased, by her
Testament and last Will, named, ordained and constituted the within-bound M. B.
and the within-named N. J. to be Executors of the same her Testament and last
Will, as by the same last Will and Testament among other things appears; if
therefore the said M. B. shall not at any time hereafter make, or cause to be
made any release, acquittance or other discharge, to any person or persons, for
or concerning any of the debts, goods or chattels, which were the said C. B.
the day of her decease, nor shall do or suffer, or cause to be done or
suffered, any other act or acts, thing or things, in or about the Execution of
the said Testament and last Will of the said C. without the consent, assent and
agreement of the said N. I. that then, etc.

A Condition to procure one to seal an acquittance by a day, and to save
harmless.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-named A. B. has the day of the
date within-written, paid and delivered to the within-bound C. D. for and to
the use of L. O. now Resident in France, in the parts beyond the Seas, the sum
of, etc. if therefore the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, shall and
do before the, etc. cause and procure the said J. O. to seal and deliver as his
Deed to the use of the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators, in the
presence of two or three sufficient and credible witnesses, a sufficient and
lawful acquittance, testifying the receipt of the said sum of, etc. and also if
the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do deliver, or cause
to be delivered to the said A. B. his Executors or Administrators, at or in
the, etc. the same acquittance sealed and delivered as aforesaid, and certified
under the hands of the same witnesses, whole, uncancelled and undesaced, at or
before, etc. and also do in the mean time save and keep harmless the said A. B.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, and all and every
of his and their Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, and every part thereof,
against the said L. O. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them, of and for the same sum of, etc. and every part thereof, and of and from
all Actions, Suits, Costs, Charges, Damages and Demands, for or concerning the
same, and every or any part thereof, that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to acknowledge satisfaction of a Judgment.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound A. B. in M. term now last
past, has obtained against the within-named L. O. in the Court commonly
called, etc. a Judgment in an action of debt, as by the Records in the said
Court remaining, etc. if therefore the said A. B. do in Easter Term now next
ensuing, at the costs and charges of the said L. O. cause satisfaction to be
acknowledged and entered upon Record in full discharge of the same Judgment,
that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to procure two to seal Releases for Legacies, and to save harmless.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas R. B. late Citizen and Haberdasher of London,
and Brother to the above bound W. B. in and by his last Will and Testament, did
give and bequeath unto W. B. and F. B. Sons of the aforesaid W. B. their Father
40 l. a piece Legacies to be paid, as in and by the said last Will and
Testament of the said R. more at large appears. And whereas also the
abovenamed M. H. the now husband of R. the late Widow and Executrix of the
said R. B. before the ensealing hereof, at the earnest request and desire of
the said W. B. the Father, has paid unto the said W. to and for the use and
behoof of the said W. and F. his Sons, the said Legacies of 40 l. a piece in
lawful English Money, the receipt whereof the said W. B. the Father, does
hereby acknowledge and confess: If therefore the said W.B. the Father, or
above-bound T. D. and W.F. or any of them, their or any of their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, within twenty eight days next after that the said
W. and F. B. Sons of the said W.B. the Father, shall severally attain their
several ages of 21 years, shall give and deliver unto M. H. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, good, lawful and sufficient Releases or
Acquittances, under the hands and seals of the said W. and F. the Sons of the
said W. of and for the said Legacies of 40 l. or else do in the mean time, and
also at all times afterward acquit and discharge, or else save and keep
harmless and indempnified the said M. H. his Executors and Administrators, from
and against the said W. and F. B. the Sons, of and for the said Legacies, and
also of and from all actions, suits, troubles, costs, charges and damages that
shall be commenced, prosecuted or any way happen to or against the said M. H.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for or concerning the said Legacies
by the said W. and F. or either of them, or any other person, for, by or under
them, or either of them, that then, etc. or else, etc,

A Condition that a Woman shall release her Dower.
THe Condition, etc. That if L.O. of W. Widow, late Wife of T.O. of, etc. do
before the, etc. by her writing under her hand and seal, remit, release and
quit-claim unto the within-named R.O. such estate, right, title, interest,
claim and demand whatsoever, which she the said L.O. has, may, might, should,
or of right ought to have, in, or to all, or any part of the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments which were the inheritance of the said T. O. her Husband
deceased, or any part thereof, for or by reason of her Dower, or of any
Jointure heretofore made, or by reason of any other right, title or means
whatsoever, at any time before the date hereof, come, grown or accrued: And
also if the said within bound A. B. his executors, administrators or assigns,
do before the, etc. leave and deliver, or cause to be left and delivered to and
for the said R. O. at, etc. the said Writing or Release sealed and delivered as
aforesaid, being certified under the hands of two or three sufficient
witnesses, safe, whole, uncancelled and undefaced, that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to suffer a man's Wife to make her Will.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound A. B. shall shortly by Gods
Grace, marry and take to Wife C. D. late the Wife of E. F. deceased, and by
reason and means of the said Marriage, he the said A. B. shall be greatly
preferred and advanced in substance and riches, in consideration whereof, if so
be that the said A.B. after Marriage had and solemnized between him and the
said C. D. do quietly permit and suffer the said C.D. (if she fortune to
decease before the said A. B.) to declare and make her Will in writing, or
otherwise by word of mouth, and in the same to give, will and bequeath, or
otherwise to assign and dispose of, at her free will and pleasure, to and
amongst her kindred, friends and acquaintance, or to any of them, or to any
other person or persons, as to her shall be thought meet and convenient, the
sum of, etc. of, etc. And further, If the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, upon reasonable request to him,
them, or any of them to be made, by any such person or persons, to whom the
said C. D. shall so give and bequeath any such sum or sums of Money, extending
no further than to the said sum or value of, etc. as is aforesaid, do well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid, all and every the said several sum and sums of
Money, Gifts and Requests, so to be given and bequeathed by the said C. D. and
in such manner as shall be by her appointed, that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to Marry one by a day, or else to pay a sum of Money.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound A. B. do on or before the, etc.
of, etc. lawfully espouse, marry and take to Wife one E. K. the daughter of,
etc. if she the said E. will thereunto assent and agree, and the Ecclesiastical
Laws permit and suffer the same: But in case it shall happen the said E. K. and
A. B. and either of them, to die or decease before such Marriage had and
soIemnized, as aforesaid, then if the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, do well and truly pay, etc. to the said E. K. her Executors or
Assigns, the sum of, etc. on, etc. at, etc. that then etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to be a true Prisoner.
THe Condition, etc. That if J. H. Merchant of St. Lucus, which now is in the
prison of the Kingdom of England, under keeping of the Sheriff within-written,
as well by reason of writ of, etc. of the Statute of the Staple, containing the
sum of, etc. as also for other certain Actions, Causes and Suits on the behalf
of R. S. etc. moved and commenced, be from henceforth a true and faithful
Prisoner, tarrying and remaining with the said Sheriff and his Deputies, till
the same J. H. be fully discharged and acquitted of the said Actions, and then
content and pay to the said Sheriff, etc. all and singular costs, charges,
fees, and other duties, in such cases heretofore accustomed to be paid, that
then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to save harmless for being bound for the appearance of a man.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-named O. P. at the special
instance, request and desire of the within-bound Sir E. G. by one Obligation
bearing the date within-written, stands bound jointly and severally with the
said Sir E. G. and the within-bound A. M. unto R. H. and H. H. Sheriffs of the
City of London, in the sum of, etc. of, etc. with a Condition
there-underwritten, for the appearance of the said Sir E. G. before the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, on, etc. next, etc. to
answer to C. G. of a Plea of Trespass, as by the same Obligation and Condition
thereof more at large appears. If therefore the said Sir E. G. do according
to the tenor and true meaning of the Obligation, and condition above-recited,
appear before the said Justices of the said Court, etc. on the day in and by
the condition of the said Obligation limited and appointed for his appearance,
to answer unto the said C. G. of a Plea of Trespass. And also if the said Sir
E. G. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do from time to
time, and at all times hereafter freely and clearly acquit, discharge, or save
and keep harmless the said G. P. his Heirs, etc. and his and their Goods, and
every of them, against the said Sheriff of the City of London, and against all
other persons whatsoever, of and for the said Obligation and Condition
above-recited, and penalty of the said Obligation contained, and every part and
parcel thereof, and of and from all Actions, Suits, Judgments, Executions,
Condemnations, Damages and Demands, touching or concerning the same, that then,
etc. or else, etc.

A Condition wherein the Factor is truly bound to serve the Merchant, and no
other.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound J. O. do from the day of the date
within-written, unto the end and term of four years from thence next ensuing,
and fully to be complete and ended, well, truly and faithfully serve the
within-named L. S. and his Assigns, in the Trade and Traffic of Merchandises,
as well in this Realm of England, as in any other parts beyond the Seas; and
also if the said J. O. at all times hereafter, and from time to time, during
the said term of Four years, upon the reasonable request of the said L. S. his
executors, administrators or assigns to be made to the said I. O. do make,
yield and deliver unto the said L. S. and his assigns, as from any other person
or persons, by his or their assigns, notes and rest of all such Sum and Sums of
Money, as shall appear upon the foot of every such account or reckoning, as
shall be so yielded, made and delivered by the said I. O. to the said L. S. his
executors, administrators or assigns, in form aforesaid; And further, if the
said I. O. at any time hereafter, during the said term of Four years, as the
said I. O. shall be Factor, Doer or Agent to the said L. S. and his assigns, by
any manner of ways or means, do not traffic or merchandise, or the affairs
or business of any manner of person or persons whatsoever, other than the said
L. S. and his assigns, without the special license, consent, will, knowledge
and agreement of the said L. S. his executors, administrators or assigns,
thereunto first had and obtained in writing, under his and their hand and seal,
that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to pay use for Orphanage or Legacy-money, belonging to Orphans.
THe Condition, etc. whereas the within-bound A. B. and C. D. on the day of the
date within written, have in their hands, possession and custody, the sum of,
etc. of, etc. being Orphanage or Legacy-money, appertaining unto E. F. and G.
H. Children and Orphans of I. K. late Citizen and Grocer of London deceased,
for the sure payment whereof at such time or times, as the said Orphans shall
be severally capable of their several portions, according to the custom of the
City of London, or according to the days and times limited in the Testament
and last Will of the said I. K. Father of the said E. F. and G. H. the said A.
B. and C. D. with other Sureties stand obliged and bounden by Recognizance,
taken and acknowledged in the Orphans Court of the City of London, to the
Chamberlain of the said City for the time being, in certain competent penalty
of certain penalties, according to the custom of the said City: And whereas
the charge, education, keeping and bringing up of the said Orphans, is
committed unto the said I. K. and S. his wife, Mother of the said Orphans, if
therefore the said A. B. and C. D. or either of them, or the executors,
administrators or assigns of them, or either of them, do every year yearly,
during so long time as the said Sum of etc. or any part thereof shall continue
and be in the use and occupation of them the said A. and C. or either of them,
or of the executors, administrators or assigns of them, or any of them, do well
and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said I. K. his executors or assigns,
for and toward the charge and education of the said Orphans, or of such of
them as shall longest continue, and be in his or their Orphanage or Minority,
for the use, loan, or occupation of the sum of, etc. or of such part thereof,
as shall longest continue and be in the use, possession or occupation of them
the said A. B. and C. D. or either of them, or the executors or assigns of
them, or any of them, after the rate and allowance of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. of, etc,
for every hundred, and so after that rate for a lesser sum, as the cause shall
require, the same allowance to be paid quarterly, at the Feasts of, etc. yearly
by equal portions, at or in the, etc. that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition for the executing of a Goalership.
THe Condition, That if the within-bound I. W. his executors or assigns, do
well and truly execute and use the Office of Goalership, in the County of E.
and also do well, surely and safely keep all and every such person and persons,
now being in the prison of the Kingdom of England, in the same County of E. or
that hereafter shall be committed to the said Goal, or to the said I. W. and
further, That if the said I. W. his executors or assigns, at his or their
proper costs, do safely carry, bring and re-carry all persons in the said Goal
now being, or that at any time hereafter shall be Prisoners there, to any such
place or places as the said Sheriff, or his assigns shall appoint or name
within the said County of E. and furthermore be truly and diligently attending,
aiding and assisting the said Sheriff, and his Undersheriff and Deputies, at
all and every time and times, when any execution shall be done within the said
County, to and upon any person or persons, attainted, or to be attainted for
Treason, Felony, Murder, or Heresy, or otherwise, or for any other cause,
unto the end of the execution. And further, if the said I. W. his executors and
assigns, do discharge and save harmless the said Sheriff, his heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns, against the Kingdom of England, and against all and
every other person and persons, and from all manner of escapes, damages and
losses, fines, issnes and amerciaments, which by the negligence or otherwise of
the said I. W. his executors or assigns, that the said Sheriff shall or may in
any wise be charged or encumbered, or ought to be charged by the Law, by reason
of the office of the Sheriffwick of the said County, from time to time, and do
content and pay to the said Sheriff, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, all such
Sum and Sums of Money, as the said Sheriff, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns
ought to pay to the Kingdom, or to any other person or persons, to be due to
the said Sheriff, by reason of the said Office of Goalership, that then, etc.
or else, etc.

A Condition for the re-assurance of Lands.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound A. B. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, do from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, upon the reasonable request, at the costs and charges in the
Law of the within-named C. D. make, knowledge and suffer unto the said C. D.
his Heirs or Assigns, or unto such other person or persons, as he or they shall
name or appoint, all and every such lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing
and things, device and devices in the Law, as by the said C. D. his heirs or
assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
advised or devised, for the assurance and conveying unto him the said C. D. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, absolutely without any manner of condition or
mortgage, all such Tenements, Lands, Meadows, Leases, Pastures, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances, situate,
lying and being in, etc. all which, etc. now are, or late were in the tenure or
occupation of, etc. or his assigns, and sometime were in the tenure of, etc. or
his assigns, which said Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leases, Pastures and
Hereditaments, were lately conveyed, bargained and sold unto the said A. B. and
his Heirs, by W. M. of, etc. as by an Indenture thereof made between the said
W. M. on the one part, and the said A. B. on the other part, bearing date the,
etc. last past, before the day within-written, more plainly at large it may
appear. And also if the said Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leases, Pastures, and
Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises, with the
appurtenances, now be, and at all times hereafter shall be free and clearly
discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved and kept harmless by the said A. B.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, of and from all and every bargain,
sales, leases, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made or done,
or hereafter to be had, made or done by the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns,
that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Letter of Attorney contained in the latter end of an Indenture.
ANd furthermore the said G. C. and T. N. have made, ordained, nominated and
appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, nominate and appoint R.B. Esquire
and T.W. Gent. their true, sufficient and lawful Attorneys, jointly and
severally for them, and in their names and stead, into and upon all and
singular those the said two parts, etc. and other the premises, or into any
part thereof, in the name of the whole to enter, and peaceable and quiet
possession and seizin thereof, for them and in their names to take, and after
such possession and seizin thereof had or taken as aforesaid, for them and in
their names, stead and places, peaceable and quiet possession, livery and
seizin of all and singular the said premises, or any part thereof, in the name
of the whole, to deliver unto the said H. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or
their certain Attorney in that behalf, ratifying, allowing and confirming all
and whatsoever their said Attorney, or either of them, shall do or cause to be
done in or about the premises by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Release of a Proviso.
KNow all men by these presents, That I B. C. of etc. for diverse good causes
and considerations me hereunto moving, have remised, released and quit-claimed,
and by these presents for me, my executors, administrators or assigns, do
remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto L. M. of, etc. his Heirs,
Executors or Assigns, as well one proviso or condition, and all and every the
Sum and Sums of Money, specified in the same proviso or condition, contained
and comprised in one pair of Indentures of bargain and sale, bearing date the,
etc. in the, etc. made between me the said B.C. of the one party, and the said
M. L. of the other party, as also all and all manner of actions and suits,
cause and causes of actions and suits, for or concerning the said proviso, In
witness, etc.

A Release of a Covenant mentioned in an Indenture of Lease.
TO all, etc. A. B. of etc. sends greeting. Whereas in and by one Indenture
of Lease, bearing date, etc. made between E.B. of the one party, and the said
A. B. of the other party, there is contained a Covenant in these words
following, viz. (reciting the Covenant vetbatim, as therein contained)
whereunto relation being had, it does and may more at large appear: Now know
ye, That I the said A. B. for diverse good causes and considerations me hereunto
especially moving, have remised, released, and quit claimed, and by these
presents for me, my Executors and Administrators, do fully and clearly remise,
release and quit-claim unto the said E. B. his Executors and Assigns, the said
Covenant, Grant, Clause, Agreement and Article, before rehearsed and mentioned,
and all and every other matter, thing and things specified, declared and
contained in the same Covenant, Clause and Agreement, and all the benefit,
profit, advantage and commodity, that by any manner of means may or might
arise, grow, come or happen to me the said A. B. for or by reason, or touching
or concerning the same Covenant, Clause, Article or Agreement, or any word,
sentence, matter, thing or things therein contained; so that the said E. B. his
Executors and Assigns, and every of them, from henceforth for ever, shall be
clearly and fully acquitted, released and discharged against me the said E. B.
my Executor and Administrators, and every of us, of, from, and for the said
Covenant, Grant, Clause, Article and Agreement before rehearsed, and of and for
every thing and things touching or concerning the same, and that this present
release shall not in any wise extend to any other covenant, clause or article
before rehearsed, for and during the said term, etc. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Woods.
THis Indenture, etc. between, etc. witnesses, That the said J. M. for the
Considerations hereafter in these presents expressed, has bargained and sold,
and by these presents does bargain and sell unto the said F. M. all those
Woods, Under-woods and Trees whatsoever, standing, growing, lying or being in
and upon all that wood and wood-ground, called or known by the name of, etc. in
the County of, etc. parcel of the Manor of, etc. in the same County (except,
and always reserved) out of this present Bargain and Sale, unto the said I. M.
his heirs and assigns, 50 Trees of Oak to be taken and marked by the said I. M.
or his assigns, in such manner as hereafter in these presents is expressed,
viz. It is agreed between the said parties to these presents, and either of
them severally for himself, his executors and administrators, cov^nanteth and
grants to and with the other of them, his executors and administrators, That
the said F. M. shall or may first choose ten Oaks, and after the said I.M. to
choose ten other, so either of them one after another ten Oaks, until the said
I.M. or his assigns, have made choice of the said number of 50 Trees before
excepted, in consideration of which said bargain and sale, the said M.F. does
coverant, etc. to and with the said, etc. That he the said F. M. his, etc.
shall well and truly pay, etc. unto the said I. M. his, etc. the sum of etc. on
the, etc. at, etc. And further, the said I. M. does covenant, etc. to and with,
etc. That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said I M. his executors and
assigns, at all seasonable times of the year, after choice made by the said I.
M. or his assigns, to the said 50 Trees to him excepted, as aforesaid, during
the space of, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, to fell, cut down and carry
away, the said Woods, Under-woods and Trees before by these presents bargained
and sold, and every of them, except before excepted, and (...) wise the said
F.M. does covenant, etc to and with, etc. that he the said F. M. his executors
or assigns, shall and will at every felling, of which he or they shall make of
the said Woods, Underwoods or, Trees, leave standing or growing, so many
staddles and stories, as by the Laws and Statutes in that case provided, are or
ought to be left, for and in recompense of which staddles and sto^es so to be
left, the said I.M. for him, his executors and administrators, does covenant,
promise, grant and agree to pay, or cause to be paid upon reasonable request
unto the said F. M. his executors or assigns, so much money, as by two persons,
whereof the one to be chosen by the said I. M. the other by the said F. M.
shall be thought reasonable, and by them limited and appointed. And furthermore
the said I.M. does covenant, etc. to and with, etc. that if the said F. M. his,
etc. do pay, etc. unto the said I. M. his, etc. the said sum of, etc. at the
days, time and place before limited for the payment thereof, and in such
manner and form, as aforesaid, that then one Recognizance, in the manner of a
Statute-staple, bearing date, etc. taken and knowledged, etc. wherein the said
F. M. stands bound to the said I.M. in the sum of, etc. shall be utterly
void, and of none effect. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of an Extent upon a Statute.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between T.O. of, etc. of the one party, and Sir
L.L. of, etc. and L.B. of, etc. of the other party, witnesses, That whereas
T.R. of, etc. R.R. of, etc. and R.B. of, etc. by their Recognizance in the
nature of a Statute Staple, bearing date the, etc. taken and acknowledged
before, etc. did acknowledge themselves to owe to the said T. O. the sum of,
etc. payable, as in and by the said Statute or Recognizance more at large
appears. And whereas also certain Writs of Extent, bearing date the, etc. in
the, etc. were awarded out of the Court of Chancery, being directed to the then
Sheriff of the County of York, by virtue of which Writ so directed into the
County of York, the same then Sheriff did extend all that the Manor or Capital
Message, etc. in the, etc. and diverse Lands, Tenements, etc. as in and by an
Inquisition thereof, had and taken by the said Sheriff, at R. in the County of
York aforesaid, bearing the, etc. then last past, annexed to the said Writ of
Extent, and remaining of Record in the High Court of Chancery, more at large it
does and may appear: And whereas also afterward Sir M.W. Knight, then Sheriff
of the said County of York, by virtue of a Writ of Liberate, likewise directed
to the said Sheriff, has delivered possession and seizin of the said Manor or
Capital Message, and of and in diverse Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings and
Pastures, with their appurtenances in M. aforesaid, in the said County of York,
etc. unto the said T. O. to have and to hold the said recited premises in the
said Writ mentioned, unto him the said T. O. and his Assigns, as his Freehold,
until the said debt of, etc. with costs, charges and damages, should be of the
said Manor, Lands and Tenements so extended and delivered should be paid, as
in and by the said Writ of Liberate remaining of Record in the High Court of
Chancery, more at large appears. Now this Indenture further witnesses, That
the said T. O. for and in consideration of a competent sum of good and lawful
money of England, to him in hand, at and before the ensealing and delivery of
these presents by the said Sir R. L. and L. B. well and truly contented and
paid, whereof and wherewith he acknowledges himself fully satisfied and paid,
and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does clearly quit, exonerate
and discharge the said Sir R. L. and L. B. their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and every of them for ever, by these presents has given,
granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does
fully, clearly and absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over
unto the said Sir R.L. and L.B. their executors, administrators and assigns,
all the estate, right, title, interest, property, claim and demand whatsoever,
which he the said T.O. now has or had, or may, might or ought to have, of, in
or to the said Manor or Capital Message, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
Premises in M. aforesaid, and of, in and to the moiety, etc. and of, in and to
every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances, by force and virtue of
the said extent, inquisition and Liberate aforesaid, and every or any of them,
or in them, or any of them contained, to have and to hold, occupy, possess,
receive, take and enjoy the said Manor of M. the said moiety of, etc. and all
and singular other the premises before mentioned, with their appurtenances,
together with all rents, issues, profits, commodities and advantages thereof
whatsoever, unto the said Sir R.L. and L.B. their Heirs and Assigns, to the
only proper use and behoof of them the said Sir R.L. and L. B. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, for and during the term and continuance of the said Extent,
until the said sum of, etc. with the costs, damages and charges be out of the
said Manor, and other the premises extended, as aforesaid, fully satisfied,
contented and paid, as is aforesaid. In witness, etc.

A Condition for finding Apparel for an Apprentice by his Friends.
THe Condition, That whereas J. R. Son of the within-bound E. R. by his
Indenture of Apprentiship, bearing date, etc. last past, before the date
within-written, has put himself Apprentice to the within-named H. S. to the
Art which he now uses, and with him to serve and dwell after the manner of an
Apprentice, from the day of the date of the same Indenture, for and during the
term of eight years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and
ended, as by the same Indenture may appear: And whereas it is intended and
agreed upon by and between the said E. R. and H. S. that he the said E. R. his
Executors or Administrators, or some of them, shall from time to time, and at
all times, during the said term of eight years, find and provide to and for the
said J. K. good, sufficient and necessary Raiment and Apparel, as Doublet,
Hose, Shoes, Stockings, Shirts, Bands, Cloak, Hat, and all things needful and
convenient for such an Apprentice: If therefore the said E. R. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, do and shall yearly, and every year, at or before
the Feast of Easter, during all the said term of, etc. find and provide to and
for the said J. R. such sufficient Raiment and Apparel, as aforesaid, and at
all other time and times needful, during all the said term, or otherwise in
default thereof, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said H. S.
his executors, administrators and assigns, at or in, etc. the sum of 3 l. 6 sh.
8 d. of, etc. for and toward the said Apparel, on or before the said Feast Day
of the Ascension of our Savior, in every year yearly, during the said term,
without fraud or coven, that then this, etc.

A Condition for Money (given by Will) to be lent gratis.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas A.B. etc. by his last Will and Testament
bearing date, etc. did give and bequeath unto the Parson and Churchwardens of
the Parish of, etc. the sum of, etc. to be lent unto young men of the said
Parish, upon sufficient Sureties for two years gratis; and so from two years to
two years, to some other young men of the same Parish, by 10 l. a man, without
paying any consideration for the same, as by the same Will more at large may
appear, of which said sum of, etc. the within-bound W.L. the day of the date
within-written, has had and received 10 l. according to the meaning of the
said Will; If therefore the said W. his L. Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly content and pay, or cause to be paid
unto the within-named H.I. T.I and R.I. or any of them, their or any of their
executors, administrators or assigns, the said sum of, etc. on the, etc. which
shall be in the year of our Lord God, 1631. at or in, etc. that then this, etc.

A Condition that one shall not become bound for any person, by Writing, or
Promise; without consent.
THe Condition, etc. That if, etc. A.B. shall not at any time or times
hereafter, by his writing Obligatory, signed or sealed with his hand, make or
feal, or by any other writing or bale, promise or contract whatsoever, or
otherwise solely by himself, or jointly or severally, with any person or
persons, become or stand bound as Surety with, to or for any person or persons,
in or for payment of any sum or sums of money, to any manner of person for the
debt, duty, or any cause whatsoever, of any person or persons whatsoever (above
the sum of 40 l. of, etc.) other than for his own only debt, duty or ^ause,
without the special consent, assent and license of the within-^^^^ed C. D.
first had and obtained in writing, under his hand and seal, that then, etc.

A Condition to surrender Land, or pay money in lieu thereof.
THe Condition, etc. That if, etc. A.I. and his heirs, or some of them, within
the space of, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, upon reasonable request to him
or them made, by the within-named R. H. his heirs or assigns, or any of them,
and at his or their costs and charges in the Law, do make and procure, or cause
to be made and procured, to the use of the said R. H. and his Heirs for ever,
according to the custom of the Manor of, etc. sufficient and lawful surrender
and assurance, of and in one Message or Tenement customary, sometimes called
the, etc. with all barns, stables, or chards, gardens, and other the
appurtenances to the same adjoining and belonging, situate, etc. discharged or
saved harmless from all former surrenders, charges and encumbrances, made, done
or committed by him the said A.I. or his Heirs, or by any other person or
persons, by whom such Surrender shall be so made, the fine or fines, for or by
reason of such surrender or admission upon the same, and the rents and services
from henceforth to be due to the Lord or Lords of the said Manor of whom the
premises are holden, or by parcel (only excepted and foreprized) and if in
case the said R H. or his Heirs, within the space of, etc now next ensuing,
shall dislike to accept of such Surrender, and shall not make any such request
for the same, as is aforesaid, then if in lieu and recompense thereof, the said
A. I. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do at
the end of the same year now next ensuing, at the furthest within three months
then next following, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said R H.
his executors or assigns, at or in, etc. the sum of, etc. of lawful, etc.
without fraud or coven, that then, etc.

A Condition, etc. to keep Peace.
THe Condition etc. That if, etc. B. W. at all times hereafter do well and
honestly bear and behave himself as well in word as in deed toward the
within-named J. R. and all his, as any honest man ought to do, and also if the
same B. W. at all times hereafter do keep the, etc. in his own proper person
toward the (...) J.R. and all his. And further, If the said B. W. at no time
hereafter, do vex, sue, molest or trouble, or cause to be sued, vexed, molested
or troubled, the said J. in his body, goods, or otherwise, by any manner of
means, for any matter, cause or thing, whatsoever it be, that then, etc.

A Condition to pay Money according to a ^^oviso in a Bill of Sale.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound R.H. by his Bill of Sale,
bearing date the day of the date within written, has bargained, sold and
delivered in plain and open market, according to the custom of the City of
London, unto the withinnamed T.C. three gilt bowls, weighing 60 ounces, etc. To
have and to hold, with a Proviso contained in the said Bill of Sale, That if
the said R. H. his, etc. do pay, etc. unto the said, etc. that then this, etc.
as by, etc. And whereas the said T.C. does esteem and value that the said 3
gilt bowls, etc. nor to be worth the said Sum of, etc. contained in the said
Bill of Sale; if therefore the said R. H. his etc. do pay, etc. unto the said
T.C. his, etc. the said sum of, etc. on the day, and at the place mentioned in
the said Proviso, and thereby redeem the premises out of the hands and
possession of the said T.C. his, etc. that then, etc.

A Condition to do ones endeavor for the recovery of the Debt against the
Surety.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above-bound J.H. has obtained several
Judgments against M. W. Esquire and T. B. Gent. upon one Obligation, wherein the
said T. B. and M. W. stand bound unto the said J.H. in the sum of 215 l. with
condition for payment of 107 l. 10 sh. as by the Records remaining in the Court
of Common Pleas at Westminster may appear: If therefore the said J. H. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, do and shall from time to time, and at
every time and times hereafter, do and use his and their best means and
endeavors, with effect, by Writ or Writs of Execution, or by other writs or
means, lawfully to recover and receive of the said M. W. his Heirs, Executors
o^ Administrators, or of his or their lands, tenements, goods, chattels or
hereditaments, the said Sum of 215 l. and costs of suit heretofore obtained by
Judgment, as aforesaid, without releasing the said Sum of money as aforesaid,
or any part thereof, except it be by agreement and consent of the said H. B.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or also do, and shall well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid unto the said H. B. his Executors, Administrators o^
Assigns, the said Sum of, etc. and costs of suit, or so much thereof as shall
be received by the said J. H. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns of the
said M. W. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or his or their goods,
chattels, lands or tenements, upon or by reason of the said Judgment, and that
within two months, next after he or they shall have received the same without
fraud or coven, that then, etc.

A Condition for quiet enjoyment of a Message sold.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-named J.M. his Heirs and Assigns, and
every of them shall and may for evermore from henceforth peaceably and quietly
have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy, all that Message, Tenement and Lands,
situate, lying and being in, etc. and every part and parcel thereof mentioned
to be bargained and sold, by the within-bound R.W. to the said J.M. in and by a
certain Indenture of bargain and sale, bearing date the day of the date
within-written, made between the within-bound R.W. and A. his wife on the one
part, and the abovenamed J.M. on the other part, clearly discharged, or
otherwise sufficiently saved harmless, of and from all and all manner of
estates, titles, charges and encumbrances whatsoever, at any time heretofore
had, made, committed, permitted, suffered or done by the said W. or by his
means or procurement, that then, etc.

A Condition to pay a yearly sum of Money for a Wives Jointure during her life.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bound P. P. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay, or cause to
be paid unto K. the now wife of the said T. P. for and in the name of her
Jointure, yearly, and every year for and during the term of the natural life of
the said K. if she shall survive and over-live the said T.P. her Husband, the
yearly sum of, etc. at Four most usual Feasts in the year, that is to say, at,
etc. by even and equal portions, the first payment thereof to begin and to be
made at the Feast of the said Feasts which shall first and next happen after
the death of the said T.P. if she the said K. shall be then living, and also if
when any of them, the Sureties of the said T.P. shall happen to die or depart
this natural life, the said K. living, the survivor of them, within one month
next after his death, shall procure one sufficient Surety to become bound with
the then surviving Obligor in the like sum, and under the same condition, and
so from time to time during the life of the said K. upon the sealing and
delivery of every which new Bond, the former. Bond to be delivered to the
survivor to be cancelled, that then, etc.

A Condition to endeavor to discharge an Obligation by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if, etc. do and shall use his best endeavor for and
in discharge of one obligation, bearing date the, etc. wherein the within-named
D.W. and B B of, etc. are and stand bound unto the said M. B. deceased, in the
sum of 100 l. for payment of 52 l. at a day already past, and do thereof acquit
and discharge the said D.W. and B. B. and either of them, their and either of
their executors, administrators and assigns, of and from all actions, suits,
troubles, costs and charges whatsoever, of, for and concerning the said
Obligation, or sums of money therein contained, that then this, etc.

A Condition, reciting an absolute bargain and sale is made to one for the
Indemnity of a Bond, if the money be paid upon the Bond, the Grantee is bound
to re-assure.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-named J. T. by his deed indented,
bearing date the day of the date within written, for the indempuity, discharge
and saving harmless of the within-bound Sir M. W. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, of, for, from and conderning one Obligation, bearing date the,
etc. within-written, wherein the said Sir M. W. for the only debt of the said
J. T. together with the said J. T. is and stands bound unto (...) Esquire in the
sum of, etc. with condition for payment of, etc. on (...) etc. next coming,
has granted, bargained, sold and confirmed unto the said Sir M.W. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, all that Close, etc. with the appurtenances, called or
known by the name of, etc. situate, lying and being in, etc. as by the same
deed enrolled in the High Court of Chancery amongst diverse other things therein
contained, may more at large appear: If therefore the said Sir M W. his Heirs
or Assigns, in whom the estate of the beforementioned premises is or shall be
vested or settled, do and shall upon reasonable request to him of them to be
made in that behalf by the said J. T. his Heirs or Assigns, (after that the
said J. T. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall have paid the
said 104 l. and acquitted and discharged the said Sir M.W. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, of and from the said Obligation, and the
sum and sums of money therein contained) at the costs and charges in the Law of
the said J.T. his heirs or assigns, re-convey and re-assure unto the said J.T.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, the said Close called etc. with the
appurtenances, with warranty therein to be contained against the said Sir M.W.
his heirs and assigns only, so as he or they be not compelled to travel for
the making of the said assurance, further than the place of his or their abode
and residence at the time of such request made, that then, etc.

A Condition, (reciting a Surrender of Land upon condition) that if the money
be not paid according to the condition, the Obligor may enjoy the Lands, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound T. J. has the day of the
date within-written, surrendered into the hands of the Lord of the Manor of H.
in the County of, etc. out of Court, by the hands of A. B. and C. D. two of the
customary Tenants of the said Manor, according to the custom of the said
Manor, one Message or Tenement, etc. with all and singular their and every of
their appurtenances, now or late in the tenure or occupation of the said T.J.
his assign or assigns, to the only use and behoof of the within-named F.A. and
of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to the custom of the said Manor;
nevertheless, upon condition of non-payment of, etc. at or in, etc. as by the
same Surrender more at large appears: If therefore the said F. A. his Heirs
and Assigns, and every of them, shall or may from time to time, and at all
times for ever, from and after default made in payment of the said sum of etc.
at the day and place appointed for payment thereof, as aforesaid, lawfully,
peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the same Message
or Tenement, Lands, and all and singular other the premises, in and by the
said surrender mentioned and expressed, clearly and absolutely acquitted and
discharged, or otherwise by the said T. J. and his Heirs, sufficiently saved
and kept harmless, of and from the Jointure, Dower and Thirds of K. now Wife of
the said T. ^. to be claimed or challenged, of or in the said premises, or any
part thereof, and of and from all and all manner of former and other bargains,
contracts, surrenders, and other charges, titles, troubles and encumbrances
whatsoever, by the said T. J. his Heirs and Assigns, in any wise heretofore
had, made, committed, suffered or done, or to be had, made, committed, suffered
or done, the rents and services to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee thereof,
and from thenceforth growing due therefore, only excepted and fore-prized, that
then, etc.

A Condition that whereas one has an Annuity issuing out of the Manor of,
etc. which said Annuity he has released, etc. for payment of, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound J.B. has and holds for
the term of his natural life, of the grant of the within-named R.L. one annuity
or yearly rent of, etc. by the year, issuing and going out of the Manor of,
etc. and out of certain other Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in the County
of, etc. as by the same grant thereof made, more at large it does and may
appear; which said annuity or yearly rent of, etc. the said J.B. by his Deed
indented, bearing date the day of the date of these presents, has bargained,
sold and released unto the said R. L. upon and under a certain condition in the
same Deed indented, expressed, as by the same also it does and may appear; If
therefore the said J.B. has not at any time before the ensealing and delivery
of the said Deed indented, bargained, sold, given, granted, assigned or set
over, or by any other means encumbered the said annuity or yearly rent of 100 l.
or any parcel thereof, that then, etc.

A Condition, whereas the Obliges has owing by one a sum of money, which is to
be paid to a Creditor of the Obligor, who is bound to repay within ten days
after notice of the receipt.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-named J.F. has remaining in the
hands and custody of G. etc. the sum of, etc. which sum of, etc. the said J.F.
is contented at the request and desire of the within-bound J. etc. shall be
paid and delivered by the said G. etc. unto one L. etc. If therefore the said,
etc. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do well and truly pay, or cause
to be paid unto the said J. F. etc. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
at or in, etc. the said sum of, etc. within ten days next after the said J.F.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall give sufficient notice or
testimony unto the said, etc. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, from
the said J^^testifying that he the said L. has received the said sum of, etc.
of the said, etc. as aforesaid, without fraud or coven, that then, etc.

A Condition where a Bond is assigned, and that if the Obligees in the assigned
Bond do not pay, then the Obligee in this is bound to pay, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound A.B. has by his Deed in
writing, bearing date, etc. assigned over unto the within-named C. D. one
Obligation bearing date the, etc. wherein E.F. and G.H. stand bound unto the
said A. B. in the sum of, etc. with condition of payment of, etc. on the, etc.
at, etc. as by the same Deed of assignment and obligation may appear, if in
case the said E.F, and G.H. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do not
pay unto the said C. D. his Executors or Assigns, the said sum of, etc. on or
before the, etc. with such considerations as shall be therefore due; If then
the said A.B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do well and truly pay,
or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, on the, etc. at or in, etc. the said sum of, etc. with consideration
for the same, after the rate of 8 l. per cent. to be accounted from the day of
the date with-in-written, until such time as the same shall be fully paid,
that then, etc.

A Condition upon an Attachment.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the abovenamed Sir R. L. Knight, is to pay
unto Sir M.R. of, etc. the sum of 150 l. of, etc. upon Bond, bearing date on or
about the, etc. last past, before the day of the date above-written: and
whereas the day of the date above-written, the above-bound W. S. has attached
the said sum of, etc. in the hands of the said Sir R. L. If therefore the said
W. L. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them do and shall
at all times hereafter, and from time to time, well and sufficiently save,
defend, keep harmless and indempnified the said Sir R. L. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, as well against the said Sir M.
R. his executors, administrators and assigns, as against all and every other
person and persons, for or concerning the said Obligation, or any sum or sums
of money therein contained, and of and from all and all manner of actions,
arrests, suits, costs, losses, chattels, forfeitures, payments and detriments
whatsoever, which shall or may be commenced, or happen against the said Sir R.
L. his Goods or Chattels, for or by reason of the non-payment of (...): said
Sum of, etc. unto the said Sir M. R. his executors, administrators or assigns,
on the said, etc. in regard the same is attached by the said W. S. as
aforesaid, that then, etc.

A Condition to pay Rent quarterly for certain Rooms, etc,
THe Condition, etc. That if J.A. of, etc. the within-bound I.P. and T. A. or
any of them, their or any of their executors, administrators or assigns, do
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the within-named G. P. his
executors, administrators or assigns, the yearly sum of, etc. for those Rooms,
parcel of the Capital Message, situate, etc. wherein the said I. A. now
inhabiteth, for and during the full term of, etc. to be accounted from the,
etc. last past, before the date within-written, at the Four most usual Feasts
or Terms in the year, that is to say, at the Feast of, etc. or within ten days
next ensuing every of the said Feasts, by even and equal portions, at or in,
etc. the first payment to begin and to be made at the Feast day of, etc. next
ensuing the date within-written, or within ten days next ensuing the same
Feast, that then, etc.

A Condition to surrender Land to certain uses.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bound M. W. S. W. and J. W. and every of
them and their Heirs, do and shall at the next Court to be holden for the
Manor of W. in the County of, etc. which shall be after request made by the
abovenamed A. L. her Heirs or Assigns, the said request being made eight days
before any such Court be holden, surrender into the hands of the Lord of the
said Manor, to the only use and behoof of the said A. L. her Heirs and
Assigns for ever, according to the custom of the said Manor, all that little
Close or Land with the appurtenances, lying and being in a place called G. in
the County of E. being Copyhold Land of the said Manor, the same premises
being at the time of the said Surrender to be made freely and clearly acquitted
and discharged, of and from all former surtenders, grants and encumbrances
whatsoever, that then, etc.

A Condition, that the Sheriff executing a Writ, may detain out of the Goods
and Lands extended, so much money, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-bound R. W. the day of the date
hereof, has delivered to the hands (...) within-named G.M. and W.M. the Writ
of Execution, (...)ing and extending the goods, chattels, and moiety of (...),
Tenements and Hereditaments of one Sir W. M. of, etc (...) or the use of the
said R. W. whereby the same R. may be (...) of the sum of 200 l. mentioned in
the said Writ, (...) case the said G. M. and W. M. or either of them, do
lawfully execute, or cause to be lawfully executed the said Writ, according to
the nature, meaning and purport thereof, by the impannelling of Twelve lawful
and indifferent men to be sworn of the Contents of the said Writ, if then the
said R.W. his Executors and Administrators, do quietly permit and suffer the
said Sheriff or Undersheriff to have, take, receive and detain, to his and
their own proper use and behoof, out of such moneys, goods or chattels, as
shall be had, levied or received by virtue of the said Writ, or the execution
thereof, as much in lawful money of England, or other benefit as they or the
said Sheriff, or Undersheriff, or one of them shall think reasonable or
sufficient for their satisfaction, of and for such travel, pains or charges as
they shall be at in and about the execution of the said Writ and Extent
thereupon to be had or made, otherwise within, etc. next after the said Writ
shall be executed, and return thereof made accordingly, do pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said Sheriff, or Undersheriff, or their Deputy or Deputies, so
much lawful money of England, as they shall for the causes aforesaid reasonably
demand, that then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless from a Bond of Arbitrament.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bound A.D. his Executors and
Administrators, or any of them, do and shall from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, well and sufficiently save and keep harmless and indempnified
the abovenamed G. M. his heirs, executors and administrators, and his and
their lands, tenements, goods, chattels and hereditaments, of, for, from and
concerning one Obligation, bearing date the day of the date above-written,
wherein the said G. M. at the request of the said A. D. is and stands bound
unto R. M. Gent in the sum of 100 l. with condition there-under written, that
the said A. D. abide the award of W.N. and T.B. Esquires, Arbitrators, and of
and from all actions, suits, arrests, costs, charges and demands whatsoever,
concerning the premises, without fraud or coven, that then, etc.

A Condition where Purchase-money is to be paid at two payments, if default be
made in the first, the whole with allowance to be paid at the second.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas in and by one pair of Indentures, bearing
date the day of the date within-written, made between the within-named A. L. of
the one party, and the within-bound J. I. of the other party, the said J. I. is
to pay to the said A. L. the sum of 200 l. of, etc. on the, etc. at or in, etc.
being the first payment of the sum of, etc. which the said J.I. is to pay
unto the said A.L. for the Purchase of the Keepership, Herbage and Pannage of
B. Park of, etc. in the County of, etc. as by the said Indenture may more at
large appear: And if it shall happen the said J.I. his executors,
administrators and assigns, to make default in payment of the said Sum of 200
l. unto the said A.L. his executors, administrators and assigns, on the said,
etc. next coming, contrary to the tenor of the same Indenture, then if the said
J. I. his executors, administrators or assigns, do well and truly pay, or cause
to be paid unto the said A.L. his executors, administrators or assigns, the
full sum of, etc. on the, etc. at or in, etc. without fraud or coven, that
then, etc.

A Condition where money is lent upon a Bond, and a Letter of Attorney to
receive the money due upon the Bond, the Obligor in this Bond is to pay, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas A.B. of, etc. and C D. of, etc by their
Obligation bearing date the, etc. in the, etc. are and stand jointly and
severally bound unto E. F. etc. in the sum of, etc. for payment of, etc. on
the, etc. at, etc. as by the said Obligation and Condition thereupon made, more
at large appears. And whereas J.F. by his Letter of Attorney bearing date
the, etc. in the, etc. did make, ordain and constitute the within-bound P. V.
his lawful Attorney, irrevocable to ask, levy, recover and receive to his own
proper use and behoof, of the said A.B. and C D or either of them, the said sum
of, etc. on the, etc. according to the tenor of the said Obligation, as by the
said Letter of Attorney more at large likewise appears: upon which said
Obligation and Letter of Attorney, the within-named H. B. has lent unto the
said P. V. the full sum of, etc. and has assigned the said Condition over unto
the said H B. with the said Letter of Attorney so made unto the said P. V. by
the said E. F. as aforesaid; If in case therefore the said sum of, etc. be not
well and truly paid to the said H. B. his Executors or Assigns, at or upon the
said etc. next ensuing the date hereof, by the said A. B. and C. D. or one of
them, according to the true intent and meaning of the said recited Obligation
and Condition hereof, to the proper use and behoof of the said H.B. then if the
said P. V. and the within-bound M.C. or either of them, or the Heirs, Executors
or Assigns of them, or either of them, do and shall well and truly repay, or
cause to be repaid unto the said H. B. his Executors or Assigns, the sum of,
etc. on the, etc. at or in, etc. in lieu of the said, etc. so to be paid as
aforesaid by the said A. B. and C. D. that then, etc.

A Condition that the Obligor shall pay, etc. within three months next after
default of payment made by another.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas Sir F.C. of, etc. Knight, by his Obligation,
bearing date the day of the date abovewritten, is and stands bound unto the
abovenamed R. N. in the sum of, etc. for the true payment of, etc. on the,
etc. next ensuing the date above written, at or in, etc. as by the same
Obligation may appear: And forasmuch as the said R. N. has credited the said
F. C. for the said sum of, etc. at the request of the above-bound A. M. and
upon his the said A. M's promise, and undertaking to pay unto the said R. N.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said sum of, etc. within three
months next after the day of etc. with consideration for the forbearance
thereof after the rate of 8 l. per cent. (in case the said Sir F.C. his
Executors, Administrators or Affigns, do not pay the said, etc. on the said,
etc. next coming) if therefore the said F. C. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, do not well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said R. N. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said sum of, etc. on the said, etc.
next following, and at the place of payment aforesaid, then if the said A. M.
his executors, administrators or assigns, do not well and truly pay, or cause
to be paid unto the said R. N. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the
said Sum of, etc. on the said, etc. then next ensuing, and at the place and
payment aforesaid, he the said R. N. his executors, administrators or assigns,
upon the payment or receipt thereof, delivering up unto the said A. M. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said Obligation, wherein the said F.
B. stands bound unto him, as aforesaid, that then, etc.

A Condition, that if the Obligee do not receive the sum of, etc. of the, etc.
according to a Letter of Attorney, then the Obligator to pay the said sum in
the, etc. next after.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above-bound T. P. has by Deed or Letter
of Attorney, bearing date the day of the date above-written, authorized and
appointed the abovenamed G.M. to ask and receive, of and from the
Commissioners appointed for the payment of Moneys to Soldiers the full sum of
17 l. of, etc. as by the same Letter of Attorney may at large appear: If
therefore the said G. M. his executors, administrators or assigns, shall not
receive the said sum of 17 l. from the said Commissioners, on or before the,
etc. next ensuing the date within-written, then if the said T. P. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said G. M. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said sum
of 17 l. etc. on the, etc. next ensuing the date above-written, at, etc.
without fraud or coven, that then, etc.

A Condition for payment of Money within ten days next after delivery of
assurance of Land.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-bound K.T. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do pay, or cause to be paid unto the
within-named H. E. the full sum of 100 l. within ten days next after that he
the said H E. or his Heirs, shall make and deliver, or cause to be made and
delivered unto the said I.T. or his Heirs, a good, perfect and lawful assurance
in the Law, in Fee-simple, of and in certain Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, lying and being in D. or elsewhere in the County of S. amounting
in the whole to the yearly value of 40 l. according to the tenor and plain
meaning of certain Articles indented, bearing date the day of the date of these
presents, made between the said H. E of the one party, and the said I. T. of
the other party, that then, etc.

A Condition to procure one to seal the Counter-part of an Indenture.
THe Condition, etc. That if I. J. Son of the above-bound R.I. do and shall,
when he shall accomplish the full Age of Twenty one years, upon request to him
made, sign and deliver, as his act and deed, unto the use of the within-named
G. C. and H. C. the Counterpart of one Indenture bearing date, etc. made
between, etc. and the said Counterpart being so sealed and signed, as
aforesaid, shall deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said G. C. his, etc.
safe, whole, uncancelled and undefaced, that then, etc.

A Condition to permit the Obligee to receive Rents and Tithes to his own house.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within-named N.B. his Executors, dministrators
or Assigns, shall and may at all times hereafter, and from time to time, ask,
collect, gather, perceive, receive, take, keep and enjoy to his and their own
only use and behoof, all and all manner of rents, issues, tithes, fruits,
obligations, obventions, offerings, profits, commodities and advantages
whatfoever they be, and of what quality, nature, kind or condition the same be,
now belonging or appertaining, and now being due, or which hereafter shall
belong, appertain, grow or become due to W.A. Clerk, as Parson of the
Parish Church of, etc. out of or belonging to the Parsonage of, etc. or any
parcel thereof, of all and every person or persons whatsoever, for and during
so long time as the said W.A. shall be, or of right ought to be Parson of the
Parsonage aforesaid, and also all and singular arrerages of the premises,
without let, interruption or disturbance of the within holden R. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or of any other person or persons, claiming by, of
or from the said R. or by his assent, means or procurement; and also, if
neither the said R. at any time heretofore has released, nor that he, his
executors nor administrators, at any time hereafter shall release, acquit or
discharge the said W. A. his executors or administrators, of or concerning any
Bond, Covenans, Authority, Contract or Agreement, heretofore had or made by the
said W. A. to the said N. and R. touching or concerning the premises, or any
of them, nor do any act or acts, whereby or by reason whereof, the same
obligations, bonds, writings, covenants, authority, contract or agreement, or
any of them, shall in any wise be made frustrate or void; And also if the said
R. do permit and suffer the said N. to have, take and enjoy to his and their
own use, the whole profit, benefit, advantage and commodity, which shall or may
arise or grow, for, upon or by reason of the said obligations, bonds, writings,
covenants, authority, contract or agreement, or any of them, that then, etc.

A Condition to save one harmless from all debts that may be duly demanded as
Executor of, etc. and also that one shall seal a Release, when she comes to the
Age of, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bound E.T. and W.T. their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall at any time hereafter,
and from time to time, clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise
well and sufficiently save and keep harmless and indempnified the abovenamed
I. E. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and his and their goods,
chattels, lands, tenements and hereditaments, and every of them, of and from
all debts, duties, bills, bonds, specialties, and demands whatsoever, which at
any time and times hereafter, shall and may be duly and lawfully demanded or
recovered, of or from the said I. B. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
by any person or persons whatsoever, for or by reason of any reckoning, duty,
specialty, debt or demand whatsoever, due, owing or payable by the abovenamed
R. T. deceased, to any person or persons whatsoever, and also of and from all
costs, charges, suits, arrests, judgments, executions and demands whatsoever,
which shall or may happen, come, grow, to be unto or against the said I.B. his
Executors, Administrators, or any of them, for, upon or by reason thereof; and
also if A. T. daughter of the said E. T. and such persons as she shall
intermarry withal, within one month next after she the said A. shall be
lawfully married, or shall accomplish her full Age of Twenty one years, which
shall first or next happen, do and shall make, seal and deliver, as his, her,
or their act and deed, a good, sufficient and lawful acquittance, discharge and
release, under his, her, or their hands and seals, unto the said I. B. his
Executors and Administrators, of, for, or concerning all sum and sums of money,
gifts, legacies, bequeaths and demands whatsoever, given and bequeathed unto
the said A. in and by the last Will and Testament of the said R. T the same
release to be made in such manner and form, as by the said I.B. his Executors
or Administrators, or his or their Council shall be reasonably devised or
required, that then, etc.

A Condition from a Jailer to an Undersheriff, for saving harmless.
THe Condition, That if the above-bounden A. B. Deputy-Goaler to T.T. Servant
to, etc. do from time to time receive and take into his ward and custody,
within the Goal at the Castle of Lancaster, in the County of Lancaster
aforesaid, all such person and persons, prisoner and prisoners, which shall
fortune to be committed or sent to the said Goal, or committed to the ward and
custody of the said Jailer, by the said Sheriff or his Deputy, or by any
Justice or Justices of Peace, or by any other having lawful authority to
commit persons or prisoners to the said Goal, and the same person or prisoners
so committed as aforesaid, do well and truly, duly and sufficiently by his own
proper person, or by his sufficient Deputy or Deputies, so keep, that the said
Sheriff, his Heirs and Executors, all the Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels
of the said Sheriff, be saved harmless from all losses, penalties, amerciaments
and damages whatsoever, as well against the Commonwealth of England, as also
against all other person and persons, of, for and concerning the custody and
keeping of the said Geal and prisoners within the said Castle of Lancaster, or
elsewhere in the said County of, etc. and likewise do discharge, save and keep
harmless the said Sheriff, his Heirs and Executors, and all those his Lands,
Tenements. Goods and Chattels, from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
of and from all and every escape and escapes, as well of convict persons,
Reprieves and Felons, and of all other persons now committed, for any
contempts, condemnations, trespasses or misdemeanors, which may happen, or
chance hereafter to be committed to the said Goal for any the causes aforesaid,
during the time the said A.B. shall be Deputy or Jailer to the said T. T. and
the said T.T. continue Sheriff; And likewise that if the said A.B. or any other
by his consent, privity or appointment in any wise let to bail or mainprize,
any prisoner or prisoners to him committed as aforesaid, not bailable by the
Laws of the Realm, without the special commandment or appointment of the aid
Sheriff, and if the said A. B. or his sufficient Deputy, be ready to give his
attendance upon the said Sheriff, and his Deputy, at all times necessary and
convenient, and all and every lawful thing and things, that he shall be
required to do by the said Sheriff, or his Deputy, touching or concerning the,
etc affairs and business wherewith the said Sheriff is or shall be charged or
employed in or about the keeping of the said Goal or Prison, that then, etc,

A Release of Recognizance assigned to one.
TO all Christian People, etc. P. V. of London Merchant, stranger, sends
greeting in our Lord God everlasting, That whereas the Right Honorable W. Earl
of Derby, Lord Stanley, Lord of Man and the Isles. T. Ireland of Grayes-Inn in
the County of Middlesex Esquire H. C. of Knowsley in the County of Lancaster Gent.
and H. Adys of Button in the County of Dorset Gent. by other writing of
Recognizance or Statute-Staple, bearing date the sixth day of July, etc. taken
and acknowledged before Sir J. P. Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England, stand
bound to Peter H. Citizen and Alderman of London in 3200 l. of, etc. payable,
as in and by the same Writing of Recognizance or statute more at large does
appear: And whereas the said Peter H. by his sufficient Deed or Assignment in
writing, bearing date the five and twentieth day of, etc. in the, etc. did for
diverse and certain considerations him thereunto especially moving, grant,
assign, and set over unto me the said P. Vanloor, as well the said Recognizance
or Statute, and the said debt of 3200 l. and all his said right, title and
interest, which he the said Peter Houghton then had, or ought to have had in
and to the same, to have and to hold the said Recognizance or Statute, and the
said debt of 3200 l. aforesaid, and all his said right, title and interest in
and to the same, unto the said P. V. my executors and assigns, as our own
proper goods and chattels for ever, as by the said Assignment amongst other
Covenants and Clauses therein contained, more fully at large it does and may
appear. Now know ye, That I the said P. V. for diverse good Causes and
Considerations me hereunto especially moving, have remised, released, and
quit-claimed, and by these presents for me, my executors, administrators and
assigns, and every of us, do remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto the
said Henry Adys, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them, the Recognizance or Statute aforesaid, and the penalty and forseiture
thereof, and also all and all manner of Actions, Arrests, Extents, Judgments,
Executions, Condemnations, Liberates, Seizures, Debts and demands whatsoever,
which I the said P. V. or the said P. H. or either of us now have, shall, may,
might or ought to have against the said H. Adys, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, or his, their or any of their
Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels, for or by reason of the said Recognizance
or Statute, or of the penalty or forfeiture thereof in any wise: so that
neither I the said P.V. nor the said P. H. our Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, nor any of us, any action, arrest, extent, judgment, execution,
condemnation, Liberate, seizure, debt or demand, upon the said Recognizance or
Statute, shall or may from henceforth commence, prosecute or pursue against the
said Henry Adys, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of
their Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels, but shall be thereof utterly
debarred and excluded for ever by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to take possession, and to deliver a Lease upon the
ground.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I W. D. of etc. have made,
ordained, constituted and authorized, and in my place and stead by these
presents, have put my well-beloved Friend I. D. of, etc. my true, sufficient
and lawful Attorney, for me and in my name, and to the use and behoof of me the
said W. D. my Heirs and Assigns, to enter into all the Manor of, etc. with all
and singulat the appurtenances, situate and being in K. in the County of S.
and now or late in the tenure or occupation of I. A. or of his Assigns, and
peaceable and quiet possession and seizin thereof, for me and in my name to
take, and as my deed deliver unto one E.B. upon the premises, or some part
thereof, one Indenture bearing date with these presents, made by me the said W.
D. to the said E.B. mentioning a demise of the premises, for term of, etc.
from the Feast of, etc. last past, then next ensuing, and fully to be complete
and ended, under the yearly rent of, etc. unto which said Indenture I have
subscribed my name with my own hand, and sealed with my seal, and delivered the
same as my Escrowe unto the said I. D. to be delivered as my Deed upon the
premises, or some part thereof, after an entry made by him the aid I. D. into
the premises, or some part thereof, in the name of the whole, and all and
every other thing requisite and necessary to be done, in or concerning the
premises, for me and in my name, to do as fully and effectually, and in as
large and ample manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as I my self
might or ought to do, if I were then and there personally present. And I shall
and will ratify, allow and confirm all, and whatsoever my said Attorney shall
do, or cause to be done in or about the premises by these presents. In
witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to take possession of the Lands and the same Lands to
demise, survey or sell, and to receive, etc.
TO all, etc. R.E. of; etc. G.M. of; etc. and H. L. of, etc. send greeting:
Know ye, That we the said R.E. G.M. and H.L. for diverse good causes and
considerations in that behalf moving, have made, ordained, constituted, and in
our stead and places by these presents, have put and authorized our servants,
R. N. and H. B. Gent. and either of them, our true, sufficient and lawful
Attorneys, for us, and in our names, and to the use and behoof of us the said
R. E. etc. to enter into all those the Manors of, etc, with their rights,
members and appurtenances in the County of, etc. and into the advowsons of or
belonging to the same, or any of them, and into every part and parcel thereof,
and the said Manors, and every or any of them, for us and in our names to
survey, and we do by these presents give full power and authority to the said
R.N. and H.B. and either of them, to be our steward or stewards of the said
Manors and every of them, and to keep such Court and Courts of Survey, and
other Court-Leets and Law-dayes of and upon the same Manors, or any of them,
as to our said Attorney, or either of them, or such other as they or either of
them shall appoint, shall be thought fitting, and the same Manors and every or
any of them, for us, and in our names, to bargain, sell, lease or grant to such
person and persons, and for, such estate for life, inheritance or otherwise,
and for such sum and sums of money, as our said Attorneys, and either of them,
shall be thought fit and requisite, to the uttermoit and best commodity and
profit of us the said R. E. G. M. and H. L. and the Deed and Deeds of the same
grants and estates, so to be made for us, and in our names to feal, and as our
Deeds to deliver unto the parties to whom the same shall be so made, or to any
other to their use or uses, and the Counterparts of the same, for us and in our
name, to accept and receive, and also all such fines, and other sum and sums of
money, as shall grow due to the same, for us and in our names, and to the use
of the said R. E. G. M. and H. L. to accept, receive and take, and upon the
receipt thereof, any acquittances or discharges for us and in our names, to
make, seal, and deliver, and also for us and in our names, and to the use of
the said R. E. G. M. and H.L. to collect, gather, receive and take all such
rents, duties, heriots, arrearages of rents and profits of Courts as are
already, or shall be due or payable, for, out of or concerning the premises,
or any of them, giving and granting unto our said Attorneys, and to either of
them, our full power or lawful authority in, touching and concerning the
premises, to do, execute, proceed and finish in all things, in as large and
ample manner and form, as we the said R. E. W.M. and H.L. or any of us, might
or ought to do, if we or any of us were then present, and ratifying and
allowing whatsoever our said Attorneys, or either of them shall do in the
premises, or any of them, according to the intents of these presents. In
witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney of a Bond, for performance of Covenants of an Indenture
of Lease.
TO all, etc. I J. K. of etc. send greeting: Whereas I. B. of, etc. M. A. of,
etc. by their Obligation bearing date the, etc. are and stand bound unto me the
said J. K. in the sumof, etc. with condition thereupon endorsed, for the true
performance of the Covenants, Rents and payments, mentioned and contained in
and by one pair of Indentures of Lease bearing date the day of the date of the
said Obligation, made between the said I.K. of the one part, and the said L. B.
of the other part, as by the same Obligation and Condition may appear. Now know
ye, That I the said J.K. for diverse good causes and considerations me hereunto
especially moving, have given, granted, assigned and set over, and by these
presents do give, grant, assign and set over unto J.C. of, etc. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, as well the said recited Obligation and sums of
Money therein contained, as all my right, action and demand in and to the same,
giving, and by these presents granting unto the said J. C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, full power and authority, from time to time, and at
all and every time and time hereafter, from and after breach made, and
nonperformance of the Covenants, Grants, Articles, payments or agreements,
which on the part and behalf of the said L. B. are or ought to be observed,
performed, fulfilled, paid and kept, mentioned and contained in and by the said
Indenture of Lease, for me and in my name, nevertheless to the only use and
behoof of the said J. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to sue,
arrest, implead and imprison, and at his and their will and pleasure, out of
prison again to deliver and release the said L. B. and M. A. and either of
them, their, and either of their executors, administrators and assigns, for the
breach or nonperformance of any the Covenants, and all and every Sum and Sums
of Money recovered upon or by reason of the said recited Obligation, to detain
and keep to the only proper use and behoof of the said J. C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, without any account therefore to be rendered, or for
any part thereof, and I. etc. shall and will ratify, allow and maintain all
and whatsoever the said J. C. his executors or assigns shall do or cause to be
done in or about the premises; and I the said J. K. for me, my Executors and,
Administrators, do covenant, promise and grant to and with the said J. C. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by these presents, That neither I the
said J. K. my Executors or Administrators, have released the said Obligation,
or any Sum of Money therein contained, nor shall or will acquit, release, or
otherwise discharge the same, or any the Obligors therein mentioned, their
Executors, Administrators, or either of them, without the special license,
consent and agreement of the said J. C. his Executors or Assigns, in that
behalf first had and obtained. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive Rent when it shall grow due.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I T. B. of, etc. for diverse
good causes and considerations me moving, have made, constituted and appointed,
and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute and appoint R. R. of, etc. my
true, sufficient and lawful Attorney and Assign, for me and in my name,
nevertheless to the only use and behoof of the said R. R. to demand, collect
and receive of W. R. A. H. and J. D. all that sum of, etc. and of W. T. all
that Sum of, etc. which said Sum of, etc. will be due and payable unto me the
said T. B. for one half years Rent at, etc. next ensuing the date of these
presents, for Lands by them holden of me, lying and being in M. aforesaid,
giving, and by these presents granting unto my said Attorney, full power and
authority, for me and in my name to take and receive the said Sums of, etc. due
to me, as aforesaid, and the same so had and received, to detain and keep to
his own proper use, without any account therefore to be rendered unto the said
T. B. my Heirs or Assigns, and also upon the receipt thereof, to deliver unto
them acquittance in my name, testifying the receipt thereof; and I shall and
will ratify, allow and confirm all, and whatsoever my said Attorney shall do
or cause to be done, in or about the premises, by these presents. In witness
whereof, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to take possession of a Message, etc. from the Sheriff
taken upon an Extent.
TO all, etc. I Sir T. B. of, etc. send greeting. Know ye, That I the said T.
B. have made, ordained, constituted, authorized and appointed, and by these
presents do make, ordain, constitute, authorize and appoint T. W. and H. D. of,
etc. or either of them, my true and lawful Atturneys or Attorney, jointly or
severally for me and in my name, to take and receive of the now Sheriff of the
County of Y. peaceable and quiet possession as well of and in one capital
message, etc. as of and in, etc. all and singular which said lands and
premises were lately belonging unto I. B. Gent. and which the said now Sheriff
has intended by virtue of a Writ of Extent, to him directed upon a Statute of
200 l. acknowledged and entered into by the said I. B. unto me the said T.B.
giving, ^^d by these presents granting unto my said Atturneys, or either of
them, full power and authority, for me and in my name, to do, execute,
accomplish and finish all and whatsoever shall be needful and necessary to be
done, in or about the premises by these presents. And I shall and will
ratify, allow and confirm all and whatsoever my said Atturneys, or either of
them shall do or cause to be done, in or about the premises, by these
presents, as if I my self were then and there personally present. In witness,
etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive a Legacy, and the same to pay in discharge of
a Bond.
TO all, etc. I R. F. of, etc. send greeting. Whereas R. B. and R. M. of, etc.
together with me, etc. by one Obligation, etc. (general words of the recital of
the Bond) Now know ye, That I the said R.D. for the indemnity and saving
harmless of the said R.B. and R.M. and either of them, their and either of
their executors, administrators and assigns, of and from the payment of the
said sum of, etc. unto the said T. G. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, on the said etc. next coming and at the place of payment aforesaid,
have made, ordained, constituted, authorized and appointed, and by these
presents do make, ordain, constitute, authorize and appoint, the said W.M. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, my true and lawful Attorney for me, and
in my name or names of me the said R. B. my Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, to demand, ask, levy, recover and receive of M. B. of etc. J.T. of,
etc. and G.J. of, etc. or any of them, their or any of their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of, etc. parcel of such sum of money
as is or shall be due and payable unto me, as a Legacy given unto me, in and by
the last Will and Testament of W. B. my Father, late of, etc. Esquire deceased,
and upon the receipt of the said sum of, etc. to give and to deliver unto them
the said, etc. or some or one of them, their executors or assigns, one
acquittance bearing date the day of the date thereof, made, sealed and
delivered by me to their use, testifying the receipt thereof, and the said sum
of, etc. had and received as aforesaid, thereout to satisfy and pay unto the
said T.C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the said sum of, etc. on
the said, etc. in discharge of the recited Obligation, and the remainder of the
same to detain and keep to the only use and behoof of me the said R.B. my
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and thereof be accomptable, giving and
by these presents granting unto the said R.M. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, full power and lawful authority, for me and in my name, stead and
place to do or cause to be done, all and every such act and acts, thing and
things, as he or they shall think meet or requisite to be done concerning the
premises by these presents, as if I my self were then and there personally
present. And I shall and will ratify, allow and maintain all and whatsoever
the said R. M. his Executors or Assigns, shall lawfully do or cause to be done
in or about the premises by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to make Leases of Lands, and to make sale of Woods and
Goods, and to make a Grant of a Stewardship during pleasure.
TO all, etc. E.M. of, etc. and wife of me the said E. Daughter and heir of,
etc. and sole Executrix of the last Will and Testament of T. S. Esquire
deceased, send greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye, That we the said
E. and M. for diverse good and reasonable causes and considerations us
especially moving, have given and granted, and by these presents do give and
grant unto our very trusty and well-beloved Friend J.T. of, etc. the Office of
the Stewardship of all those our Manors, Lordships, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, within the Counties of, etc. late the Lands and Tenements of the
said T. S. and him the said J. T. Steward of the said Manors, Lands and
Tenements, do by these presents nominate, appoint, make, create and constitute,
to have, exercise, use and hold the said Office, with the appurtenances unto
the said J.T. for and during our will and pleasure; and we do by these presents
further give and grant unto the said J.T. full power, liberty, license and
authority, for us, and in our names, not only to demise, grant, let and to set
out by Copy or Court-Roll, according to the customs of the said Manors
respectively to such person or persons, in Fee-simple, Fee-tail or term of
life, lives or years, and for such fines, rents and services as to the said J.
T. shall be thought meet and convenient, all such Copyhold and customary Lands
of the said Manors, or any part or parcel thereof, which now are demisable or
grantable, or lawfully may be demised, granted or set out within the said
Manors, or any of them, but also to do, perform, execute, use and accomplish
all and every other acts, things, demise or matter, which any Steward or
Stewards of the premises, or any of them, at any time heretofore might or
could do, or which we may or can in any wise license or authorize the said J.D.
or give commission or power unto him, to do, execute, perform or undergo. And
furthermore we the said E. and M. for diverse good considerations, and upon
mature advice and deliberation, have given and granted, and by these presents
do give and grant unto the said J.T. and our trusty servants, J.E. and C.B. or
to two of them, whereof the said J.T. to be one, full power, liberty, license
and authority, for us and in our names by writing indented or otherwise, to
demise, grant, let and to set out, for life, lives or years, all and singular
the said lands, tenements and hereditaments, or any part or parcel thereof, to
such person or persons, and for such sum and sums of money, and for such rents
and services, and with and under such covenants, conditions, limitations,
articles and agreements, in such manner, order, form and sort, as to the
discretion of them the said J. T. J. E. and C.B. or two of them, whereof the
said J.T. to be one, shall seem meet and convenient, and also to grant, bargain
and sell the Woods, Trees and Under-woods of the premises, and every or any
part and parcel thereof, and to grant, bargain and sell all such goods,
chattels and substance, which we or either of us have, or ought by any means or
title to have within the said Counties, to such person or persons, and for such
sum and sums of money, and in such manner and form as to the said J.T. J. E.
and C. B. or two of them, whereof the said J.T. to be one, shall be thought
good and reasonable. And moreover, we the said F. and M. have named, appointed,
ordained and constituted the said J. T. or two of them, whereof the said J. T.
to be one, our true and lawful Atturneys, to ask, demand, recover, levy,
receive and gather in our names and to our use, not only all such rents, and
arrearages of rents, debts, duties and services, that by any means, degree or
sort, are due and payable unto us, or either of us, or that we ought or should
have of any person or persons within the said Counties, and in our names, or in
the name of either of us, as the case shall require, to sue, arrest and implead
such of the said persons as will not make payment of the said rents, services,
debts and duties, and of every of them, and to sue execution upon any
condemnation in that behalf, and also in our and either of our names, to make,
seal and deliver releases, acquittances, or other discharges, of or for the
said rents, debts, duties and services, in every or any of them, to any person
or persons, in such manner, sort and form, as to the said I.T. etc. or to two
of them, whereof, etc. shall be thought meet and convenient, and whatsoever the
said I. T. shall do in, etc. for or touching the demising, granting or setting
out of the said Copyhold or customary Lands, as a Steward of the premises
aforesaid, and whatsoever the said I. T. etc. or any two of them, whereof, etc.
to be one, shall do, use or cause to be done, in, for or touching any other
thing or matter before mentioned, we do by these presents grant and promise,
for us, our heirs, executors and administrators, to establish, ratify,
confirm, stand to, allow, avow, as fully and as perfectly to all intents,
constructions and purposes, as though the same were done by us our selves
actually in our proper persons. In witness. etc.

A Warrant for an Attorney to confess a Judgment, in case satisfaction be not
made by a certain day.
MAster Barnet Whereas I E. F. Esquire, together with C. D. etc am and stand
bound by Obligation in the Sum and Penalty of etc. conditioned for payment of,
etc. at a certain day long since past if in case I the said E F. my, etc do not
well and truly satisfy and pay or cause to be paid unto the said G B. his,
etc. all such Sum or Sums of Money as shall be due to him upon the said last
recited Obligation, on or before the, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, then
the said E. F. do hereby give Warrant and authority unto you the said R. B. or
any other of the Atturneys of the Court of the Kings Bench at Westminster, to
appear for me in the said Court of the Kings Bench at Westminster, unto an
Action or Suit there to be brought or commenced against me the said E. F. by
the said G. B. his etc. upon the said Obligation, and to acknowledge and
confess a Judgment upon the same Obligation in Michaelmass Term next ensuing
the date hereof; and this shall be your sufficient Warrant for the same. In
witness, etc.

To T.S. and R.B. Attorneys in the Court of the Kings Bench at Westminster,
jointly and severally, and to any other Attorney of the said Court.
WHereas I A. B. of, etc. do stand bounden by Obligation, bearing date the day
of the date hereof, unto C. D. etc. in the Sum of, etc. conditioned for the
payment of, etc. on the, etc. next ensuing, etc. as by the same, etc. Now I do
hereby authorize the said Atturneys or either of them, to appear for me, and to
receive a Declaration on the said Obligation, and to plead Non si^m informatus
to the same. And I do agree, That if the said, etc. be not paid according to
the tenor of the Condition of the said, etc. then Judgment is to be entered,
then as now for the said, etc. And I do also hereby release unto the said C.D.
all error and errors touching the said Judgment and proceeding thereupon to be
had. And I will not release or revoke the authority and power hereby given to
my said Attorney. In witness, etc.

A Release of an Extent by an Administratrix.
REceived by me Grace H. Widow, administratrix as well of the goods and
chattels of William Blithe, Gent. as of E. T. Spinster deceased, the sum of,
etc. of, etc. being the consideration-money which the said H.H. pays to me
for the vacuating and discharging of an Extent upon a Statute of, etc.
heretofore acknowledged and entered into by J.D. Gent, unto the said W.S. and
also for the buying in and compounding of the said Extent, by virtue or color
of the said Statute, and also for all my interest and demand in the same
Statute and Extent, of which said sum of, etc. I do hereby acknowledge the
receipt, and by these presents do for me, my Executors and Administrators,
remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto the said J. D. the said Statute
and Extent, or all manner of process or proceeding whatsoever, occasioned by
reason of the said Extent. In witness, etc.

A Release of a Bond, it being lost.
TO all Christian People, etc. I M. Longton of, etc. send greeting, etc.
Whereas R.L. S.L. and T.W. by their Obligation bearing date (recite the Bond)
as by the same Obligation appears; and forasmuch as the said sum of, etc.
together with all such sum and sums of money as are due for the interest and
forbearance, are and is well and truly satisfied and paid unto me the said M.
L. in full discharge of the said recited Obligation; which said Obligation is
lost and cannot be found: Now know all men by these presents, That I the said
M.L. have remised, released and quit-claimed, and do hereby for me, my
Executors and Administrators, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto the
said R.L. S L. and T.W. and every of them, their and every of their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, as well the recited Obligation,
and all such Sums of money as are therein mentioned, to be due and payable unto
me the said M. L. my Executors, Administrators or Assigns, as also all and all
manner of actions and suits, cause and causes of actions and suits, accounts,
debts, reckonings, sum and sums of money, judgments, executions and demands
whatsoever, which I the said M.L. ever had, now have, or that I* my Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of us in time to come, can or may have, to,
for or against the said R L. S. L. and T.W. or any of them, their or any of
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for or by reason of the said
recited Obligation: or any other matter, cause or thing whatsoever, concerning
the premises, from the beginning of the world until the day of the date
hereof. And I the said M.L. do for me, my Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
covenant, promise and agree, to and with the said R.L. S. L. and T.W. and every
of them severally, their and every of their several, etc. and to and with every
of them by these presents, That if I the said M.L. my Executors or Assigns, or
any of us at any time or times hereafter, do find or can have, or obtain the
said recited Obligation, being lost as aforesaid, then I the said M. L. my
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of us, shall and will within two
months next after the said Obligation shall be found as aforesaid, deliver and
restore, or cause to be delivered and restored the said Obligation unto the
hands of them the said R.L. S.L. and T.W. or some or one of them, their, etc.
or some of them. In witness, etc.

A Release of all Legacies and demands given and bequeathed by ones last Will
and Testament.
KNow all men by these presents, That I E.T. of, etc. Widow, have remised,
released and quit-claimed, and by these presents do for me, my Executors and
Administrators, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto I. B. Gent. and
H. H. Citizen, etc. Executors, etc. and either of them, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, of and from all Legacies, Gifts, Bequests, sum and
sums of money and demands whatsoever, be^ueathed and given unto me the said E.
T. in and by the last Will and Testament of R. T. etc. deceased, and of and
from all manner of actions, and suits, cause or causes, or actions and suits,
sum and sums of money, debts, duties, reckonings, accounts and demands
whatsoever, which I the said I. T, ever had, now have, or that I, my executors
or administrators, can or may at any times hereafter, have, challenge or demand
against the said I. B. and H. H. or either of them, their and either of their
executors, administrators for or by reason of any matter, cause or thing
whatsoever, from the beginning of the World, until the day of the date hereof.
In witness, etc.

To I. K. of, etc. one of the Attorneys, etc.
I A. B. do hereby desire you, and do give you full power, license and
authority to appear for me, and for, etc. in the said Court, as of this last M.
Term in an action of debt, for, etc at the suit of, etc. upon an Obligation
conditioned for the payment of, etc. in which said Obligation I stand bound as
principal; And this shall be your sufficient Warrant in that behalf. In
witness, etc.

A Warrant to acknowledge satisfaction.
WHereas there is one Judgment depending in the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, of Trinity Term in the, etc. against I.F. of, etc. Esquire for 500 l.
debt, besides the costs of Suit for Sir H.H. Knight, as by the Records of the
said Court more at large may appear. These are therefore to authorize, and give
full power to you and either of you, to acknowledge satisfaction upon the said
Judgment, and for your so doing this shall be your sufficient warrant
irrevocable. Witness, etc.

To R. P. and R.S. or any other Attorney of the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster.
A Condition for the truth of a Merchants Apprentice, and that he shall give
just accounts or demands, and pay what he shall fall short in.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within-named H.S. at the instance and
request of the within-bound Sir S. A. has accepted and taken T.A. Son of the
said S A. to be the Apprentice of him the said H. S. for the term of, etc. to
be commenced from the day of the within-written, as in and by the said
Indenture, etc. I therefore the said T.A. his executors and administrators, do
from time to time hereafter, upon every reasonable request in that behalf to
him or them to be made by the said H.S. his Executors, Administrators,
Servants, Factors or Assigns, or any of them, yield, make and deliver up just
and true account and accounts, and duly discharge him and themselves unto the
said H. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, of, for, from and
concerning, all, etc. such Wares, Goods, Moneys, Merchandises, Specialties,
Bills of Debt, and other things which shall be committed, or come to the hands,
charge, possession or disposition of the said T. A. by reason or means of his
said Service, either in the parts beyond the Seas, or on this side: And in case
it shall happen or fortune that he the said T. A. at any time or times during
the said term, to imbeazle, steal, purloin, mispend, or unlawfully to detain,
consume or make away any of the Moneys, Wares, Goods, Merchandises,
Commodities, Specialties, Bills of Debt, and other things, which do or shall
belong or appertain to the said H. S. or any his partner or partners, his or
their or any of their Executors or Administrators, or to any other person or
persons, wherewith he or they, or any of them, are or shall be in any wise
charged or chargeable, if then and so often the said Sir H.S. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, from time to time
hereafter, always within two months next after notice and knowledge in that
behalf, in writing to him, them or any of them, to be made or given, by the
said H.S. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, do well and truly make or
cause to be made unto the said H. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
at or in, etc. sufficient recompense and satisfaction, in good and lawful,
etc. for all such Goods, Wares, Moneys, Merchandises, Specialties, Bills of
Debts, and other things, which upon any account or otherwise shall truly appear
to be found to have been by the said T. A. so imbezelled, stolen, purloined,
misspent, or unlawfully consumed, detained or lost, as aforesaid. And further,
if the said T. A. do not at any time or times hereafter during the said Term,
unlawfully depart or absent himself out, of or from the Service of the said H
S. his Master, without his license and consent in that behalf first had and
obtained, nor to do at any time or times hereafter, merchandise or trade for
himself, or undertake to do any business or businesses, in the Trade or
Merchandising, for any person or persons, nor accept or pay any Bills of, or
give Bill or Credit for any person or persons, unless it be by and with the
like consent or license of the said H. S. his Executors or Administrators in
that behalf first had and obtained in writing, that then, etc.

A Lease of a Warren of Conies.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A.B of, etc. of the one part, and C.D. of,
etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said H. B. for, etc. has demised,
granted and to farm-letten, and by these presents does, etc. unto the said C.
D. his, etc. in the C. of K. and all the Conies in the said ground being, with
the increase, gains, profit and advantage, from time to time, arising, coming,
growing and renewing of the said Conies in the said ground being, and to the
same ground belonging, there to hunt, hey, ferret and pitch Nets, or otherwise
to use, for the most benefit and advantage of the said A.B. and his assigns,
that he can or may devise, in large, ample and beneficial manner and form as
the said A.B. or any other person or persons heretofore have had, held, used,
occupied or enjoyed the same, To have and to hold the said ground and game of
Conies, in the same being, and to the same belonging, with all the gain,
profits and advantages to the same belonging, and renewing as aforesaid, unto
the said C.D. his executors and assigns, from the, etc. yielding, etc. A
Covenant on the Tenants part to do reparations on the Warren-house, and on the
fences, ditches, hedges and mounds. And at the end, etc. to leave the Berry and
Coney-clappers sufficiently covered with thorn, and also the same ground and
Berry of Conies sufficiently replenished and stored with Conies, Covenants for
enjoying, etc.

A License to Hawk, Hunt, and Fish.
TO all Christian People, etc. I Dame O.S. etc. send greeting. Know ye, That I
the said O. Lady S. for diverse good causes and considerations me hereunto
especially moving, have given and granted, and by these presents do give and
grant unto Sir T.L. of, etc. Knight, and his assigns, full, free and absolute
power, liberty, license and authority to hawk, hunt, fish and fowl, from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, at the will and pleasure of him the said
Sir T. L. and his assigns, for and during the natural life of me he said O.
Lady S. in, upon and within the Manor or Lordship of M. Super S. in the said
County, and in and upon all the Lands and grounds thereof, and within the
bounds and precincts, limits and circuits of the same, in as full, free, ample
and beneficial manner and form, as I my self might or could do, in all and
every respect or degree whatsoever or howsoever, and without any manner of let,
denial or contradiction or interruption of me the said O. Lady S. or of any
other person or persons whatsoever, in, by or through any act, means, consent,
privity of concurment. And I the said O. Lady S. do covenant, promise, grant
and agree, to and with the said Sir T. L. and his assigns by these presents,
That it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said Sir T. L. and his assigns,
from time to time, and at all times hereafter during my natural life, as
occasion shall be offered, to have and take as well all, and every the Nets,
and other Engines and Instruments of what kind soever, as also all the Dogs and
Spaniels of whatsoever sort or kind, of all or any persons whatsoever, that
shall at any time or times hereafter hawk, hunt, fish or fowl, within or upon
the said Lordship or Manor of M. super S. or within or upon any part or parcel
thereof, without the license or consent of the said Sir T. L. or his assigns,
or some of them, thereunto first had and obtained, he the said Sir T. L or his
assigns, delivering or causing to be delivered unto the Bailiff or Steward for
the time being, of me the said O. Lady S. of the said Manor or Lordship of M.
super S. the aforesaid Nets, Engines, Instruments and Dogs, so to be taken as
aforesaid, to be used, bestowed and employed, to and for the use and behoof of
me the said O. Lady S. in such manner and form as I the said Lady S. or my
assigns, shall think fit. In witness, etc.

A Lease of Cole-Mines.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between J.L. of, etc. and A. B. of, etc.
witnesses, That the said I. L. for and in consideration of, etc. has demised,
granted, and to farm-letten, and by these presents does, etc. unto the said
A.B. all and all manner of Mines, Pits and Veins of Cole now open and known, or
that may be found out by digging, finking or otherwise howsoever, lying or
being in certain Lands, called or known by the name of, etc. within the Manor
of, etc. with free liberry to and for the said A.B. his executors and assigns
from time to time, and at all times during the term hereafter mentioned, to
dig, search, sink, trench and mine, in and upon the said Lands called W. and
every part and parcel thereof, at his and their wills and pleasure, for the
searching out, having and taking up of Coals, and the same so trenched, dug
and found, to take and carry away from time to time and at all times during the
term by these presents demised, except and always reserved, unto the said J.L.
his Heirs and Assigns, all and all manner of quarries heretofore demised by the
said J. L. to C.D. of, etc. To have and to hold the said Mines and Pits of
Coals, with free liberty of digging, trenching, searching and carrying away the
same; with all and singular other the premises, except before excepted unto
the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of,
etc. unto, etc. yielding, etc. and if it happen the said yearly rent of, etc.
to be behind, etc. and the said A.B. for himself, etc. covenanteth, etc. That
he the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at his and their
own proper costs and charges, shall and will from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, during the said term of, etc. so long as any such Mine or Pit
shall be dug or trenched, for searching out of Coals as aforesaid, fill up
the said Mine or Pit with meaner Earth, and then level the same in such sort
again, as the same may not be to the annoyance of the Occupiers of the said
Lands, called W. or any of them. In witness, etc.

A Letter of License.
TO all Christian People, to whom these presents shall come: We A. B. of London
Alderman, R. L. J. D. and J. P. Merchants, etc. send greeting in our Lord God
everlasting. Whereas J. C. Citizen and Vintner of London (for and by reason of
the Commerce, diverse Contracts, Agreements, and other causes between him and us
the abovenamed persons, passed and had) stands, and is severally indebted
unto the said A.B. R. L. I. D. and I. P. and others, in diverse and sundry great
Sums of Money, as by several Obligations and Writings under his Hand and Seal
unto us severally made, and otherwise it does and may appear. Now know ye, That
we the said A. B. R. L. I. D. and I. P. and the rest, for diverse and many good
and charitable causes and considerations us especially moving, have given and
granted, and by these presents do give and grant, full license and liberty unto
the said I. C. quietly and freely to go about, attend and negotiate, as well
his own private affairs, business and causes, as also all other matters and
things whatsoever he has, or shall have or do for any other person or persons
whatsoever, as well within the City of London, as within all other the, etc. at
all and every time and times from thenceforth, for and during the space of,
etc. to begin at the Feast of, etc. next ensuing the date hereof, without any
manner of let, disturbance, molestation, stay, arrest, attachment or suit of
his person, or of his Goods, Chattels, Money, Merchandises, or of any other
Commodities or appurtenances whatsoever, by us the said, etc. or any of us, or
by the Executors or Administrators of any of us on this side, or within the
said space, time or liberty of, etc. And we the said, etc. are not only
contented and agreed, to give and grant this our present License and respite to
the said J. C. for the payment of his said Debts, but also every one of us, for
his part, do by these presents freely and clearly release, remit, quit-claim
and forgive unto the said J. C. all and every such Sum and Sums of Money, as he
the said J. C. at this present does severally owe unto us, in case any of us,
at any time or times during and within the said space of, etc. as aforesaid,
shall do, move, procure, practice by or attempt, or cause to be by any ways or
means, any manner of act and acts, thing or things to be done, moved, procured,
practiced or attempted against the said J. C. or his Goods, Chattels, Money,
Merchandises, or any other of his things whatsoever, contrary to the purport,
true meaning, tenor and effect of this our present license and grant. And
further, our meaning and intent is, That after the said, etc. shall be fully,
etc. expired, we do by these presents give and grant license to the said J.C.
that if he, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do from thenceforth
yearly, at the end of every year, for and during the term of, etc. pay or cause
to be paid unto us the said several Creditors, or to the several Executors,
Admin strators or Assigns of us and every of us, the full fourth part of the
debt to us and every of us owing, that then we, nor any of us, nor any other by
our or any of our means or procurement, shall do any thing or act against the
said J. C. or any of his Goods, Chattels, Moneys, Merchandises, or any other of
his things whatsoever.

An Indenture upon the choosing of a Burgess to serve in Parliament.
THis Indenture, etc. between H. D. etc. High Sheriff of the County of, etc. of
the one part, and H.B. and R.G. etc. Burgesses and Burrough-men of the Borough
and Town of etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said Burgesses and
Burrough-men, according to the Proclamation made by the said Sheriff for the
election of Burgesses in every Borough or Town within the said County, have
the day of the date hereof at A. aforesaid, elected, named and appointed H. B.
and R. G. Esquires, Burgesses of the said Town of A. and they to give their
attendance, advice and counsel at the High Court of Parliament, to be holden at
Westminster the, etc. next coming. In witness whereof, the said Burgesses and
Borrough-men to these present Indentures have put their seals, and subscribed
their names and marks, the, etc.

A Testimonial for the relief of one that had his House and Goods burnt.
TO all Christian People, etc. Know ye, That we Sir J.T. and T.G. Knights, T.W.
E.P. etc. Esquires, for the succouring and relieving of our poor distressed
Brother S. S. of etc. do by these our Writings testify, declare and bear
witness, That on Friday the tenth of, etc. the said S. S. being at Wakefield
Market traveling for his livelihood, a sudden and lamentable Fire happened,
which burnt down his dwelling house, with all his Goods therein, and his Barn,
wherein was all his Corn and Hay, to the utter undoing of the said S. his Wife
and small Children. Now for that the said S. was an honest painful man, and is
now brought to so great misery and distress, that he knows not where or how
to provide for his Wife and Children, without the charitable relief of well
disposed Christians; therefore we pray and desire all charitable and
godly-minded persons, to help, succor and relieve the said S. with their
charity toward his livelihood; and in recompense of his losses, and in so
doing they shall oblige us to show the like charity to any of their Neighbor,
in their distress and necessity. In witness, etc.

The beginning of a Demise of Copyhold Lands, etc.
THis Indenture, etc. witnesses, That whereas at a Court Baron, holden for the
Manor of, etc. on the, etc. last past, the Lord of the said Manor, by, etc.
the Steward, did give license to the said J. T. to demise and grant the
Message, Lands and Tenements hereafter in these presents mentioned, unto any
person or persons for the term of 21 years, from the Feast of, etc. then last
past, as by the Rolls of the said Courts appears; Now the said J.T. in
pursuance of the said License to him granted as aforesaid, and for and in
consideration of the Sum of, etc. to him, etc. has demised, granted, and to
farm letten, and by these presents, etc. all that Copyhold Message or
Tenement, with the appurtenances, commonly called or known by the name of, etc.
situate, lying and being in, now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of, etc.
and all, Prout, in ordinary Lands.

A Release from two joynt-Purchasers to the other two.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, Sir T. W. of, etc. Knight, and T. S.
of, etc. Esquire, send greeting. Know ye, That the said Sir T. W. and T. S. for
good Considerations them hereunto moving, have remised, released, and for ever
quit-claimed and by these presents do for them, and either of them, their and
either of their heirs, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto, etc.
their Heirs and Assigns, all the estate, right, title, interest, claim and
demand whatsoever, of them the said Sir T. W. and T. S. of, in and to all that
the Manor and Lordship of, etc. with the rights, members and appurtenances
thereof, and of, in and unto all and singular other the Manors, Lordships,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which in and by one Indenture enrolled in
the Chancery, bearing date the, etc. made between the Right Honorable, etc. of
the part, and the said, etc. on the other part, were granted, bargained, and
sold, or mentioned or intended to be thereby granted, bargained and sold unto
the said, etc. and their heirs, and of, in and unto every part and parcel of
them, every or any of them. In witness, etc.

A sale of goods to the Plantiff levied upon a Scire facias by the Sherisss
Bailiff.
KNow all men, etc. That I G. B. Bailiff of the Wapontake of, etc. in the
County of etc. by virtue of the Writ of Sciri facias, to the Sheriff of the
said County directed, have levied of the goods and chattels, etc. the sum of,
etc. part of a debt due to, etc. and levied by virtue of the Writ aforesaid to
his use. In full satisfaction of which said sum of, etc. I do by virtue of the
Writ and Warrant to me directed, as aforesaid, assign, sell and set over unto
the said, etc. all the goods and chattels, in the apprizement hereto annexed,
nominated at the rate of, etc. to have, etc. the said goods and chattels, to
him, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, as his own proper goods and
chattels, as fully and absolutely, as I the said G. B. might, could or ought to
do by force and virtue of the said Warrant and Apprizement, or otherwise
howsoever. In witness, etc.

A Lease of Goods levied by the Sheriff upon Judgment.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between M. F. of, etc. of the one part, and J.F.
of, etc. of the other part. Whereas the fard M. F. did in Michaelmass Term in
the, etc. by due course of Law, obtain and recover one Judgment in the Court
of Kings Bench at Westminster against the said J.F. for the sum of, etc. debt
and costs of suit, as by the Records remaining in the said Court, Rot. 232.
Whereunto relation being had, more at large it does and may appear; and whereas
Sir J.S. Sheriff of the said County of, etc. did (...) or about the, etc. by
virtue of a Writ of Sciri facias upon the said Judgment to him directed,
returnable, etc. levy of the goods and chattels of the said I. F. the sum of,
etc. in part and satisfaction of the said Judgment, which goods and chattels
were sold by the said Sheriff or his Deputy unto the said M. F. as by a
particular Schedule or Indenture hereunto annexed appears. Now this Indenture
witnesses, And it is fully concluded and agreed by and between the said parties
to these presents, in regard the said goods and chartels mentioned in the said
Schedule, cannot be presently sold for the best benefit and advantage of the
said M. F. that the same goods and chattels shall remain and continue in the
custody and possession of the said I. F. for the use and behoof of the said
M.F. his, etc. for and during the space and time of six months, next after the
date hereof; and if any of the said goods and chattels, mentioned in the said
Schedule hereunto annexed, have been already, or hereafter during the said
space of six months, shall be sold or disposed of by the said I.F. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, then he the said I. F. for himself, his
Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, does by these presents
covenant, promise, grant and agree, to and with the said M. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to give a true and just account or accounts,
together with the proceed or increase thereof in writing, unto request made,
and to pay or cause to be paid unto him the said M. F. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, all such sum or sums of Money as shall be found due
upon the said account or accounts, so to be made or given, and at the end and
expiration of the said term, shall and will well and truly deliver, or cause to
be delivered unto the said M.F. if the said I.F. his executors, etc. shall be
thereunto required, the residue and remainder in specie, with the proceed and
increase thereof, of all such goods and chattels mentioned in the said Schedule
or Inventory, as shall be so sold or undisposed of, the said M.F. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, allowing in the mean time unto the said
I. F. his Executors or Administrators, all the benefit and advantage of the
Wool, Milk, and work of the Cattle, comprised in the said Schedule hereunto
annexed, and the use of the other goods comprised in the said Schedule or
Inventory, for the pains and care of the said I. F. to be taken in and about
the selling, disposing and keeping of the said goods and chattels, or any of
them. In witness, etc.

A Lease of Lands in Barbados.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R. C. of, etc. and M. S. of, etc.
witnesses, That the said R. C. for diverse good causes and considerations him
hereunto especially moving, has demised, granted and to farm letten, and by
these presents does demise, grant, and to farm let unto the said M. S. all that
his own sh^^e^ part and portion of Land, containing in all by estimation forty
acres of Land, be it more or less, situate and being in, etc. as the same was
lately and now is separated and divided from other Lands now inhabited by the
English Merchants and Planters, or their assigns, and allotted unto the said
R.C. for one of his shares of his Adventure with the said Company of the said
Islands, and now are, or late were in the Tenure or Occupation of R. P. or his
Assigns; and also one Acre of Land, being part or parcel of, etc. lying within,
etc. likewise allotted unto the said R. C. for another share of his Adventure
to the said Island, the same Acre of Land to be measured, and set out in some
convenient place of the said share of Land, adjoining upon or near unto the
fresh water, together with free ingress, egress, regress, way and passage to
and for the said M. S. his Executors, Servants and Assigns, by and through,
etc. at all convenient times, and by all fitting and convenient ways and
passages, to fetch water from the Springs and Rivulers thereunto adjoining, as
need shall require; To have and to hold the said share of Land, and acres of
Land, and all other the above demised or meant, mentioned or intended to be
demised premises, with their and every of their rights, members and
appurtenances unto the said M.S. his, etc. from, etc. for and during the term
of, etc. M.S. his, etc. yielding and paying therefore yearly, and every year,
during the said term of, etc. unto the said R.C. his, etc. the moiety or one
half part of all the profits and gains whatsoever, which shall yearly be made
or raised by, or by means of the digging, setting, planting, sowing, manuring
and employing the said Lands and premises above by these presents demised or
meant, or mentioned to be demised, and every or any part thereof, or by any
other ways or means whatsoever, the same to be yearly and every year, once or
oftener, (as Shipping may conveniently be had) sent into England to and for the
use of the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, for and in full satisfaction and
payment of all manner of Rents whatsoever; and the said M S. for him, his, etc.
does covenant and grant to and with the said R.C. his, etc. by these presents,
in manner and form following, that he the said M. S. shall and will once in
every year yearly, or oftener, during the said term hereby granted, and as
shipping may be conveniently had as aforesaid, make and send unto the said R.
C. his Heirs or Assigns, a just and true account how the same Lands and
premises hereby demised, have until that time been employed and used, and
likewise with the same account shall and will send and deliver, or cause to be
delivered unto, and for the use and behoof of the said R C. his Heirs and
Assigns, unto the City of London, the said moiety or one half-part of all the
increase, profit and gains above by these presents reserved, which shall happen
to be accrued or risen by the means of the husbanding and employing of the said
Lands and premises by these presents demised, and also shall and will from
time to time send and deliver, together with the said Rent above reserved, unto
the said R.C. his Executors or Assigns, all the other moiety or half-part of
all the profits and gains, which shall happen to be accruing and arising, by
means of the said husbanding and employing of the said Lands and premises in
sort, as is aforesaid, or so much thereof over and above the said Rent, as
shall be due and payable by virtue of these presents, until the Sum of, etc.
shall be fully satisfied and paid unto the said R. C. his, etc. which Sum he
the said R. C. at and before the ensealing of these presents, did disburse and
lay out for the furnishing of the said M. S. with implements, utensils and
other necessaries, to be used and employed in and about the manuring, managing
and dressing of the said Lands abovementioned to be demised. And further, That
he the said M. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them,
shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the
continuance of this demise, in good order of husbandry, set, sow, plant and
employ the Lands and Premises hereby demised, to the best advantage, according
to the Custom of the Country there used and to be used. And also shall and
will at his and their own proper costs and charges, erect, build, and set up in
good order of workmanship, one convenient house, upon some most commodious
place of the premises. And further, That he the said N.S. his, etc. shall not
and will not at any time or times hereafter, during the continuance of this
present Lease, demise or grant the premises to any person or persons
whatsoever, for and during the term hereby granted, or any part thereof,
without the license of, etc. or make any wilful waste or spoil upon any the
Cedar or Timber Trees now standing, growing or being, or which at any time
hereafter shall stand, grow or be upon the premises, or any part thereof,
other than for their necessary use. Covenant for reparations and for quiet
enjoying, etc. Provided always, That if it should happen the said yearly rent
to be behind, etc. or if default shall be made of or in the performance of any
the covenants, grants, articles, payments and agreements herein contained on
the parts, etc. that then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful, etc.
In witness, etc.

A Lease from a Company.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. witnesses, That the said Master and
four Wardens, by and with the assent and agreement of the more part of the most
ancient and discreet persons of the said Fraternity, their assistants, as well
for and in consideration of the Sum of, etc. have demised, etc. all that their
Message, etc. To have and to hold, etc. yielding, etc. A Covenant for
reparations, for emptying the sedges, widraughts and privies, to leave it in
good repair, with all doors, locks, keys, bolts and glass-windows, wainscots,
partitions, and such like as shall be fixed, fastened and set within or about
the premises, and are not removeable by the Custom of the City of London
without defacing, spoiling or destroying the same; and that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Master, etc. their Rent-gatherer, Officers and
Assigns, to enter and come into and upon the premises, there to view, search
and see the estate of the reparations of the same, and of the decays and
defaults there found, to give or leave warning of the premises aforesaid, to
and for the said L. W. his, etc. to repair and amend all and every the said
decays and defaults within the space of, etc. Provided always, That if it
shall happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. or if the said L. W. shall grant,
assign or set over his, etc. to any person or persons without the, etc. or if
the reparations of the premises or any part thereof, shall not be made and done
within the space of, etc. above limited for the doing of the same, that then
and from thenceforth in every or any the cases aforesaid, this present Lease
and term of years shall cease, determine and be utterly void; and that then or
at any time after, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Master, and
four Wardens of the Fraternity aforesaid, and their Successors for the time
being, and their Rent-gatherer, Officer, or any other certain Attorney in their
name, and to their use, into the premises above demised, with the
appurtenances, to re-enter, and the same to have again, etc. and the said L. W.
and all other occupying, etc. thereof, thereout to expel, etc. In witness, etc.

A Lease from a Parson and Churchwardens, with a Covenant for building, etc.
THis Indenture made between G. G. Dr. of Divinity, Parson and Proprietor of
the Parish Church of, etc. J. M. and C. H. Churchwardens, of the goods, works,
rents and ornaments of the said Parish Church of the one part, and C. L. of,
etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said Dean and Chapter, and
Churchwardens, with the whole assent and consent of the Parishioners of the
said Parish, for diverse good causes and considerations them thereunto
especially moving, hereafter in these presents mentioned, viz. as well for the
new building and erecting of the Tenement which is ruinous and in decay,
hereafter in these presents, by them demised to the same W. as also for the
increase of the yearly Rent of the said Tenement being lately demised to, etc.
deceased, have demised, granted and to farm-letten, etc. unto the said W. N.
all that Tenement, with a Garden lying on the backside thereof, belonging to
the Parish of, etc. late in the tenure of, etc. situate in, etc. between, etc.
which said Tenement and a Garden on the South-part thereof, contains in
length from, etc. eighty four Foot assize, and in breadth from the North-corner
of, etc. to the, etc. twenty Foot of assize, and in length, from the East Side
of, etc. and from the South-corners of, etc. to, etc. Nineteen Foot and two
Inches of assize, and all Rooms, Chambers, Cellars, Sollers, houses, gardens,
yards, Entries, Easements, and all other Edifices and buildings, with all and
singular their appurtenances whatsoever to the said Tenement and Garden
belonging or appertaining, in as large and ample manner as the same were
demised, used and occupied by the said, etc. his assigns, or any of them, To
have and to hold, etc. yielding, etc. unto the Churchwardens of the Parish for
the time being, and to their Successors, to the use of the said Church the sum
of, etc. at the, etc. And whereas the said Tenement is at this present in utter
ruin and decay, and not meet to be inhabited, therefore the said W. N. for the
consideration beforementioned, does for him, his, etc. covenant and grant to
and with the said Churchwardens, and their Successors, Churchwardens of the
said Parish by these presents, that he the said W. N. his, etc. shall and will
for his most benefit and commodity, erect and new build the said Tenements,
with good and well-seasoned Timber, within the space of, etc. and the same
erected and built, shall and will sufficiently repair, maintain and keep, with
all manner of reparations in and by all things whatsoever, as often as need
shall require, during the said term-Covenant for re-entry upon non-payment or
non-repairing. Covenant for quiet enjoying. Et similia.

A Lease from a Town or Corporation to commence at the end of a former, with
several Provisioes.
THis Indentute made between the Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses of the Borrough
and Town of, etc. in, etc. and H. T. of, etc. witnesses, That the said Mayor,
Bailiffs and Burgesses, by and with one full assent, consent and agreement, as
well for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to be paid unto the said
Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses at the commencement of this present Lease, as
also for diverse, etc. and for and upon the conditions and provisoes, hereafter
in these presents expressed, have demised, granted, set and to farm-letten, and
by these presents do, etc. unto the said H. T. all that their Burgage, Message
and Tenement with the appurtenances, situate, lying and being in P. aforesaid,
upon the Eastside of a certain Close, there commonly called the, etc. late in
the tenure of, etc. and also all that Shop, etc. and all and singular other the
Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Shops, Rooms, Losts, Folds,
Courts, Yards, Back-sides, Curtillages, Commons, Common of Pasture, and Turbury
ways, Waters, Easements, Liberties, Profits, Commodities, Emoluments,
Advantages and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Messuages, Burgage or
Tenement, or Shop, or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof belonging, or
in any wise appertaining, or heretofore, etc. To have and to hold the said,
etc. to the said, etc. from and after the end and expiration of one Lease
heretofore made, etc. of the said premises unto J. T. late Father of the said
H. T. for the term of, etc. yielding and paying therefore yearly during the
said term, unto the said Bailiffs for the time being, and their Successors, to
the use of the said Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses, and their Successors, the
annual or yearly Rent of, etc. at the Feast of, etc. only, during the said
term, or within, etc. next after the same, if it be lawfully demanded, either
by public notice, or otherwise, for all manner of Rents, Boons, Duties, Suits,
Services and Demands whatsoever; and if it shall happen the said yearly Rent
of, etc. that then and from thenceforth it shall be lawful to and for the said
Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses, theirs, etc. into the said demised premises,
etc. and the distress or distresses, etc. until such time as the said Rent,
etc. be fully satisfied and paid unto the said Mayor, Bailiffs, etc. and if no
sufficient distress may or can be found in and upon the said demised
premises, or any part thereof, to satisfy the said Rent with the arrerages
thereof; or that the said Bailiffs for the time being, be interrupted or
hindered to distrain for the same, that then and from thenceforth, it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses, their Heirs
and Successors, or any of them, into the said demised premises, or any of
them, with the appurtenances, to re-enter, and the same to have again,
re-possess and enjoy, as in, etc. this present Indenture, or any thing, etc.
Covenant for reparations, and to leave it so. Proviso, That in case of
nonpayment of the Rent, or if the premises shall be assigned to any person not
dwelling or inhabiting within the said Borough or Town, and who is not a free
Burgess of the said Town, that then and from thenceforth, etc. Provided
further, and upon this condition, That if it shall happen the said H. T. to dye
without issue male of his body lawfully to be begotten, before the commencement
of these presents, and before the payment of, etc. being the consideration
agreed upon to be paid for the same, then if R. T. of, etc. or the issue male
of his body lawfully begotten, or J. T. or the issue male of his body lawfully
begotten, do pay to the said Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses for the time being,
their Heirs and Successors, the said sum of, etc. in manner and form as
aforesaid, and also 20 l. to the issue female surviving of the said H. T. if
there be any such then living within one year, then after their or either of
their entry, that then and from thenceforth the said R. T. shall be interessed
in these presents, to him and the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten;
and for default of such issue, to the said J. T. youngest brother of the said
H. and of the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, he the said J. T. or
his issue male paying the said sum of, etc. to the said Mayor, Bailiffs and
Burgesses, and the said sum of, etc. to the issue male of the said T. H. in
such manner and form, as is herein expressed, limited and appointed: and for
default of such issue, then to the Heirs and Assigns of the said H. during the
residue of the said term. In witness, etc.

A Lease for Three Lives, with a Letter of Attorney to take and give possession.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. witnesses, That the said. etc. for
and in consideration of, etc. does demise, etc. all that his Message and
Tenement, with the appurtenances, and all and singular Shops, Cellars, Sollers,
Chambers, Rooms, Entries, Ways, Yards, Back-sides, Lights, Easements, Profits
and Commodities whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement belonging or
appertaining, or to or with the same used, occupied or enjoyed, late in the
tenor, etc. situate, etc. Habend the said Message or Tenement, and other the
premises, with the appurtenances, to the said, etc. and to his Assigns, for
and during his natural life, the remainder thereof to the said F. his Wife, and
to her Assigns, for and during the term of her natural life; Yielding, etc.
during the said term or estates, and every or any of them, unto the said J. his
Heirs and Assigns, the Rent of, etc. at the, etc. by even and equal portions,
and yielding and paying therefore also unto the said J. his, etc. for and upon
any alienation, demise or grant of the premises, or of the greater part of
them, and for and upon any change of Tenant or Tenants of the premises, during
the said term or estates, or any of them, the Sum of etc. (toties quoties)
for every change, alienation or demise, in the name of a fine for alienation,
the same fine or fines to be paid to the said, etc. at the Message or Tenement
aforesaid, within the space of, etc. next ensuing the first of the Feasts
aforesaid, which shall next come or happen to be after any such alienation,
etc. of the premises, or the greater part thereof. A Covenant that they the
said H. P. his Wife, and S. their, etc. or some of them, shall or will at or
before the, etc. expend, disburse and lay out, in, upon or about the building,
repairing, strengthening or bettering of the said Message or Tenement, with
the appurtenances, and other the demised premises, the Sum of, etc. at or
before the Feast of, etc. Provided always, That if it shall happen the said
yearly Rent of, etc. or the said fine or fines that shall grow due, etc. at any
time during the life of, etc. to be behind and unpaid, in part or in all, by
the space of, etc. next after, etc. or if the demised premises, or any part
thereof, shall be in decay or unrepaired by the said space of, etc. next after
notice given, that then the estate of the said H for and during his natural
life, shall cease, determine and be utterly yoid and of none effect, to all
intents and purposes; or if at any time after the decease or determination of
the said estate of the said H. and during the life of the said F. it shall
happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. or at the said fine or fines to be behind
and unpaid, etc. by the space of, etc. or that the said demised premises shall
be in decay or want repairing, etc. by the space of, etc. that then likewise
the said estate of the said F. shall cease, determine, etc. and that then and
at all times from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
J. his, etc. into the said demised premises, with the appearances, and into
every part and parcel thereof to re-enter, and the same to have again,
repossess and enjoy, as in his and their former estate, and that thereupon this
present Indenture of Lease to be void and of none effect, any thing herein,
etc. And lastly, the said J. P. does by these presents make, ordain,
constitute, authorize and appoint, and in his state and place put his trusty
and well-beloved Friends P. W. and J. M. to be his true and lawful Atturnies,
jointly or severally for him, and in his stead and name, to enter into and upon
the said demised premises, or into or upon any part or parcel thereof, in the
name of the whole, for him, in his name, and to his use to take and keep, and
after such possession so had and taken, full and peaceable possession and
seizin of the same premises, or of any part or parcel thereof in the name of
the whole, for him, in his stead and name, to give and deliver unto the said M.
R. F. his now wife, and S. B. or any of them, or to their or any of their
certain Attorney or Attorneys, in that behalf authorized, according to the
tenor, purport, effect, and true meaning of these presents, ratifying, allowing
and holding firm, all and whatsoever his said Attorneys joy^^tly, or either of
them severally, shall do, or cause to be done, in or about the premises, by
the tenor of these presents. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to deliver two Leases.
TO all to whom, etc. I W. L. of, etc. sends greeting: Whereas the said W. L.
has caused two several Indentures bearing date with these presents to be drawn
and engrossed, purporting several demises and grants from the said W. L. unto
R. G. of, etc. the one of them purporting a demise of all that one Close, etc.
(as in the Lease is recited) with their appurtenances, now or late in, etc.
lying and being in, etc. To have and to hold the said several Closes and
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said R. G. his, etc.
from the, etc. as in the Lease yielding, etc. if demanded; and the other of
them purporting a demise of all that Message or Tenement, with the
appurtenances, etc. as in the Lease: To which several Indentures the said W. L.
before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, has put his hand and
seal. Now know ye, That the said W. L. has made, ordained, constituted,
authorized and appointed, and by these presents does, etc. his trusty and
well-beloved Friends R. S. etc. his true and lawful Attorneys jointly and
severally, for and in the name and place of him the said W. to enter and come
into and upon the said several grounds, and all and singular other the
premises above severally mentioned to be demised, or any part or parcel
thereof, for, or in the name of the whole, and full and peaceable possession
and seisin thereof to take and have, and being so entered, and thereof, or of
any part thereof quietly possessed, then and there for and in the name, and as
the proper act and deed in the Law of the said W. L. to deliver to the said R.
G. or his lawful Attorney or Assigns in that behalf, to his proper use and
behoof, the said several Indentures, to which the said W. L. has put his hand
and seal, as aforesaid, and also to do, say, exercise, execute, conclude,
determine and finish, all and every other act and acts, matter and thing
whatsoever, which in and about the delivery of the same several Indentures, or
either of them, shall be requisite and expedient to and for his said Attorneys,
or either of them to do by all due and lawful circumstances so fully and
effectually in every respect, as he the said W. L. might or could do, being
personally present at the doing thereof: Giving and by these presents granting
unto the said, etc. the full and whole power, strength and authority of him the
said W. L. in the execution of the premises, and ratifying and allowing all
and whatsoever the said, etc. or either of them shall lawfully do or cause to
be done in the execution of the premises, for and in the name of the said W.
L. as the proper act and deed of him the said W. L. In witness, etc.

An Assignment of certain Debts by an Administratrix to Creditors.
TO all to whom, etc. I E. B. of London, Widow, Administratrix of all and
singular the goods, chattels, debts and credits, which late were R. B. my
husbands, deceased, send greeting, etc. Whereas the said R. B. my said late
husband, in his lifetime stood indebted unto, etc. and unto every of them
severally, in certain several Sums of Money: Know ye therefore, That I the said
E. B. intending as much as in me lies, to give content and satisfaction unto
them, and every of them, Have given, granted, bargained, assigned and set over,
and by these presents do fully, clearly and absolutely, etc. unto the said,
etc. and to every of their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all and every
the Book-debts, Specialties, Obligations and Writings Obligatory, Acquittances
and Receipts named and mentioned in a Schedule, etc. which are due and owing
unto me the said E. as Administratrix, as aforesaid, by one, etc. and one, etc.
by what name or names soever they be called or known, and by such their
Sureties, as in the said Obligations or Writings obligatory, are named, as in
and by the, etc. more plainly, etc. together also with all and every sum and
sums of Money, commodity, profit, benefit and advantage, that shall or may
come, grow or be had, made, gotten or obtained, of or by the said Bookdebts.
Obligations and Writings obligatory, and every of them, and all my right,
title, interest, property, claim and demand, of, in and to the same, and every
part thereof. And I the said, etc. for me, my Executors and Administrators, do
covenant, grant and promise, to and with the said, etc. and every of them,
their and every of their, etc. by these presents, That I the said E. B. have
not heretofore released, or by any ways or means discharged, the said
Book-debts, obligations, writings obligatory, acquittances or Receipts, or any
of them, or the several sums of Money in them comprised, or any part or parcel
thereof; and I the said, etc. my, etc. shall not, nor will not at any time or
times hereafter release, or by any ways or means discharge the said
Book-debts, obligations, writings obligatory etc. or the said several Sums of
Money, in them, or any of them contained, without the consent of, etc. first
thereunto had, etc. and that I the said, etc. my, etc. shall and will permit
and suffer the said, etc. jointly and severally, at their costs and charges, to
commence, pursue and prosecute all and every such lawful actions, futes and
executions, which shall or may in any wise be commenced, prosecuted or brought
against the said, etc. by reason of the said Book-debts, etc. and the same
Actions, etc. shall and will avow, justify and maintain, without fraud or
guile. And that the said, etc. their, etc. shall or may quietly have, possess
or enjoy to their own proper use and uses all and every such Sum and Sums of
Money, Executions, and the benefit thereof which shall be had, levied,
recovered or obtained by reason of the same, and shall have power and authority
in the name of me to acquit, release, etc. the said, etc. for, touching, etc.
the said Bookdebts, etc. In witness, etc.

A Letter for Composition of half-debts.
TO all whom, etc. We E. E. etc. Citizens, etc. of London, Creditors of P. P.
etc. send greeting: Whereas the said P. P. the day of the date of these
presents, is and stands justly indebted, and does owe unto us the several
Parties abovenamed, diverse and several Sums of Money: And by reason of the
many losses, great hindrances, and other damages happened unto him, he is
utterly unable (as he affirms, and as appears unto us) to give other
satisfaction for our said debts, than by and with such goods and wares as are
now remaining in his hands, and such debts, as are now at this present owing
unto him, which we the said Creditors are unwilling to accept of, or any ways
to intermeddle with, but have rather resolved and made choice to undergo a
certain loss, and to accept of 10 s. per l. or one half of the debts by him
owing unto us, to be duly paid in full satisfaction of our said debts, in
manner and form following, viz. When and as soon as all and every of us the
Creditors abovenamed, have subscribed, sealed, and in due form of Law
delivered in this present Writing to the use of the said P. P. then he the said
P. P. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall pay, or cause to be paid
unto every of us the said Creditors, our, etc. one fifth part of, etc. after
the rate of 10 s. in the l. by these presents agreed upon to be accepted of, in
full satisfaction of our said debts, and the remainder of our said debts, after
the rate and agreement aforesaid in six parts being divided, to be paid at six
several payments half-yearly, at such indifferent place and places, as we the
said Creditors and every of us, our, etc. shall nominate and appoint. The
first, payment whereof to begin and to be made on he, etc. next ensuing the
date of these presents. The second payment to be made, etc. Now know ye
therefore, That we the said Creditors do covenant and grant, and every of us
for his own part, and for his own, etc. does covenant and grant to and with the
said P.P. his, etc. and to and with every of them by these presents, That if
the said P.P. his, etc. or any of them, upon the ensealing and delivery of this
present Writing, by all and every of us the said Creditors, according to the
effect and true meaning of these presents, do and shall well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid unto every of us the said Creditors, our and every of our,
etc. the said fifth part of our said Debts, after the rate of 10 s. per l.
according to the agreement aforesaid, at the, etc. without any fraud, coven or
further delay: And also, if the said P. his, etc. for the more sure payment of
the residue and remainder of our said Debts, after the rate aforesaid, in six
parts to be divided, and to be paid at six several payments, at such days,
time, place and places; and in such manner and sort as is above limited and
expressed, do and shall at and before the, etc. become bound unto us, and every
of us, our, etc. in double the Sum or Sums, in the condition or conditions in
the same Obligation or Obligations, or Writing Obligatory to be specified. And
further, if the same Obligations and every of them, shall be delivered unto
every of us, or the Assign or Assigns of us, and every of us, at or before the
said, etc. at such indifferent place or places as we the said Creditors, our,
etc. shall nominate, that then from and after such payment made of the said
first part of our said Debts, after the rate of 10 s. in the l. and after the
same Obligation made and delivered unto us, for the several payments aforesaid,
according to the limitation, effect, tenor and true meaning of these presents,
we the said Creditors, and every of us the Executors, etc. shall and will bold
our selves well contented and fatisfied, for all such debts as he the said P.P.
his, etc. did formerly owe unto us, and every of us, before the ensealing of
the same Obligations, and that then also we the said Creditors, and every of
us, or the Executors, etc. within fourteen days next after the ensealing and
delivery of the same Obligations unto us and every of us, according to the true
meaning of these presents, shall and will seal, subscribe, and in due form of
Law deliver unto the said P.P. his, etc. one general release or other discharge
of all debts, duties and demands whatsoever by the said P.P. unto us and every
of us formerly owing or payable, from the beginning of the world, until some
few days before the dare of the same obligation, so to be sealed and delivered
unto us, as aforesaid. Provided always, That these presents, nor any
agreement, matter or thing herein contained, shall be of any force or effect to
bind or charge us, or any of us the said Creditors, which have, or shall
hereunto agree, seal and subscribe, before the first day of, etc. next coming
after the date of these presents. In witness, etc.

A Letter of License and Composition for payment at several times.
TO all, etc. we Creditors of, etc. send greeting. Whereas the said J.M. at
this present time does stand indebted, and justly owes unto us the said
Creditors diverse and sundry Sums of Money, which by reason of many debts, and
some of them very great, that are likewise justly owing him, and cannot be had
and recovered without some respite of time, and some of them not without Sure,
he is very much disabled to make present payment unto us the said Creditors, of
our whole and just debt, as he seems willing and desirous. In consideration
whereof, he instantly desires and requires, that we the said Creditors, and
every of us, will be pleased to give and grant unto the said, etc. such liberty
and respite of time, for the payment and satisfaction of our several debts, as
he thinks reasonable, for the obtaining, getting and recovering of his said
debts, viz. that we and every of us would be contented to take, and accept of
our said whole debts, in three equal parts to be divided, and to be paid at 3.
several payments in manner and form following, viz the first payment thereof to
be one equal third part of the said whole debt, and to be made on the, etc. the
other two third parts thereof residue, to be divided into 4 equal parts, and to
be paid at 4 six months then next following, viz. on the, etc. one equal part
thereof, namely the other two, and one other 4th part thereof, residue on the,
etc. in full payment and satisfaction of the said several debts; and for the
more sure performance of the said several payments aforesaid, in such manner
and form as is above limited and declared, according to the intent and true
meaning of these presents, he the said L.M. shall and will at or before the,
etc. become bound unto us, and every of us the said Creditors respectively, by
one obligation in due form of Law to be made, with condition including all and
every the said payments in such sort as is above limited, at some convenient
place or places within the City of London, by every of us the said Creditors to
be nominated and appointed, and the penalty of every obligation to be double
the whole Sum included in the condition of the same to be delivered to us, and
every of us, our, etc. at or before the, etc. next ensuing the date hereof.
Know ye therefore, That we the said Creditors, whose names are hereunder
subscribed, and every of us for his own part, and for his own, etc. for the
consideration above specified and expressed, do by these presents willingly
consent, covenant, promise and agree to and with the said J.M. his, etc. by
these presents, That we the said Creditors and every of us, our, etc.
respectively, shall and will accept and take of the said J. M. his, etc. all
and every the said several debts and sums of money by the said J. unto us and
every of us owing and payable upon such obligation and obligations, assurance
and assurances, as aforesaid, to be paid in such manner and sort, and at such
days and times as is above-limited and required. And further, That we the said
Creditors, and every of us, our and every of our, etc. respectively, upon the
delivery of the said Obligation unto us, and every of us, our and every of our,
etc. shall and will at the charge of the said L.M. his, etc. seal, subscribe,
and in due form of Law deliver unto the said J. M. one sufficient general
Acquittance to be rendered by him the said J.M. his, etc. and to bear date and
limitation before the day of the date of the said new Obligation to be made for
the same debt, and also for and upon every payment made according to the
Limitations aforesaid, and the intent and true meaning of these presents, at
the like charge of him the said I.M. his, etc. shall and will seal and deliver
unto the said I M. one sufficient Acquittance to be rendered by him the said I.
M. his, etc. testifying every such payment, as aforesaid, for the better
discharge of him the said I.M. his, etc. and every of them in that behalf.
Provided always, and upon condition nevertheless, That these presents, nor any
promise, agreement, matter or thing herein contained, nor any act or thing
acted by us, or any of us, or formerly done, knowledged or suffered touching
the premises, or to be done, knowledged or suffered, shall be of any force or
effect, to bind or charge us, or any of us the said Creditors, who have or
shall hereunto agree, seal and subscribe, unless all, and until all and every
the rest, and every of us the same Creditors abovementioned, do and shall
likewise before the, etc. now next coming, subscribe, seal and deliver these
presents, in due form of Law, according to the intent and true meaning hereof,
any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.
In witness, etc.

A Declaration upon a Bond made in a third persons name in trust.
TO all, etc. I, etc. send greeting. Whereas C. and E. by their Obligations,
etc. (recite the Bond.) Now know ye, That I the said I. do hereby acknowledge
and confess, That although the said Bond is made and taken in my name, yet
nevertheless it is so taken only upon trust and confidence in me reposed by
I.L. of, etc. and E. his wife, and to and for the uses, intents and purposes
hereafter mentioned; that is to say, That he the said I. L. shall have, receive
and take the use and benefit of the said 300 l. during the joint natural lives
of them the said I. L. and E. his Wife, and that the said principal Sum, with
the interest thereof, after the decease of either of the said, etc. is to
remain, and be to and for the use of the Survivor of them, and for no other end
or purpose. In witness, etc.

A Declaration (by a Wife) concerning the disposition of a Sum of Money
according to a power reserved to her by her Husband, before Marriage, well
penned.
TO all Christian People, to whom this present writing duplicate indented shall
come, I E.T. Wife of R. T. of the Parish of, etc. in the County of S. send
greeting. Whereas by an Indenture Tripartite, made the 12th day of May in the
16th year of, etc. between the said R.T. by the name of R. T. Citizen and
Salter of London of the first part, and me the said E. by the name of E. M.
Widow of the second part, and W.H. of the said Parish of St. O. in S.
aforesaid, Distiller, T.S. of the Inner Temple, London, Gent. J A. of L. Clerk,
and N.M. of the Parish of, etc. aforesaid, Clerk, of the third part; in
consideration of a Marriage then shortly after to take effect between him the
said R. T. and me the said E. it appears, that at the time of the making of
the said Indenture, it was then indented, concluded and agreed betwixt him the
said R. T. and me the said E. That I the said E. or any other person or
persons, whom I shall think good, nominate or appoint (notwithstanding the said
Marriage shall take effect) should and might have the full and free disposing
of the Sum of one thousand pounds of lawful money of England, and of the
benefit and profit thereof, and of every part thereof, from time to time, and
at all times ensuing the said Marriage; and to that end, intent and purpose, he
the said R. T. by the said Indenture did for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, covenant, promise, grant and agree, to and with the said W.H.
T.N. J.A. and N.M. and every of them, and the Executors and Administrators of
them and every of them, that he the said R.T. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or some or one of them, should well and truly satisfy, pay and
deliver, or cause to be satisfied, paid and delivered unto the said W.H. T.N.
J.A. N.M. or to the Survivors or Survivor of them, or to the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of such Survivors or Survivor, the full Sum of a
thousand pounds of lawful money of England, upon or before the first day of
May, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, 1636. if I the said E. shall
be living on the said first day of May, or within two years next after the
death or decease of me the said E. or within three months next after the death
or decease of the said R.T. at such of those cases which shall first and next
happen, come or ensue after the date of the said Indenture, to be employed and
disposed of to such person and persons, and to and for such use, uses, intents
and purposes, according as I the said E. should at any time or times then
following, during my life, think good, order, appoint, give, limit, devise or
dispose of the same, or any part or parts thereof, or otherwise, according to
the intent and true meaning of the said Indenture. And it was hereby further
covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed upon, by and between the said parties
to the said Indenture, and the said R.T. did thereby for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, covenant, promise and
grant, to and with the said W.H. T.N. J.A. and N.M. and every of them, and the
Executors and Administrators of them, and every of them, that the said Sum of
one thousand pounds, and every part and parcel thereof, should or might from
time to time, be quietly had, taken, received and enjoyed, unto and by such
person and persons, whom I the said E. should at any time or times during my
life think good, limit, give, devise, order, appoint or dispose of the same one
thousand pounds, or any part or parts thereof, either by my last Will and
Testament in writing, or by any writing, purporting or intending to be my last
Will and Testament, or by any other writing to be signed with my hand, or to
which my mark should be put, in the presence of two or more credible persons as
witnesses thereunto, as in and by the said Indenture, among other Covenants, at
large appears; which Marriage (by the grace of God) sithence the making of
the said Indenture, was solemnized and consummated, and no declaration as yet
has been by me made, concerning the disposing of the said one thousand pounds,
or any part thereof, when it shall be due and payable; Now this present Writing
witnesses and declares, That I the said E. T. hereby express my Will and
Mind concerning the said one thousand pounds, when it shall become due, or be
paid as aforesaid, to be as follows; that is to say, If my said Husband R.T.
be then living, and will become bound for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, by three several Obligations, of one thousand Marks apiece,
unto them the said W.H. T.N. J.A. and N.M. or the Survivors or Survivor, or any
them, or the Executors and Administrators of such Survivors or Survivor
respectively and severally, conditioned for the payment unto them of three
several equal parts of the said one thousand pounds, at the three such several
and respective times or days, as my three Children by my former Husband shall
attain to the Ages next hereafter mentioned, that is to say, K.M. to the age of
twenty years, and T. and W. M. shall attain or come to their several ages of
Twenty one years, that then the said W.H. T.N. J.A. and N. M. and the Survivors
and Survivor of them, and the Executors and Administrators of such Survivor,
shall upon such Obligations entered into, as aforesaid, quietly suffer him the
said R.T. to detain in his hands the said one thousand pounds, and every part
thereof, until such several days and times, as the same shall be payable by
the several Conditions of the said Obligations, so to be entered into by him, as
aforesaid, without paying or allowing any interest or consideration for the
same, and the said one thousand pounds, so payable by such Obligations or
Conditions, of them, and by me dispensed withal as aforesaid, or otherwise
sooner payable by the said recited Indenture, if my said Husband shall die,
viz. within three months after his death (in which case of the death of my
Husband, I do give no manner of dispensation for the payment thereof,) I do
hereby also concerning the same express, assign and appoint (if I shall not
otherwise hereafter declare and appoint) that is to say, that the said one
thousand pounds (and the whole proceed thereof, not disposed of, as aforesaid)
shall be, come and redound, to and for the use and benefit of my said three
Children, for them severally and respectively to have and receive immediately
after and upon their several ages abovementioned, by such several and equal
third parts, as aforesaid. Provided always, and it is my meaning, and I do
hereby appoint, That if any of my said Children shall happen to die before any
of their several and respective ages abovementioned, that then such third part
of the said thousand pounds, as should otherwise have been payable unto such
Child, shall remain and be paid by equal portions unto the Survivors of them;
and if one of them only survive, and the other two both of them happen to die
before such their several ages, then both the parts hereby allotted unto them,
shall wholly accrue and come unto such surviving Child only. And if all my said
Children shall dye before they come to their said several ages, then my will
and meaning is, That the said one thousand pounds, and the whole proceed
thereof, shall come and be paid unto my loving Husband before-named, his
Executors, etc. if I shall not otherwise hereafter dispose of the same,
according to the power and authority to me reserved, given and appointed by the
said recited Indenture. In witness, etc.

An Indenture reciting a Lease for a year, and a Grant of a Reversion upon a
trust, to several uses, reserving power to make Leases, and to revoke the trust.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A.B. and C. D. of the one part, and E.F. and
G.H. of the other part, witnesses, That whereas the said A.B. and C.D. by
their Indenture bearing date, etc. made between the said A. B. and C. D. of the
one part, and the said E.F. and G.H. of the other part, did bargain and sell
unto the said E.F. and G.H. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all
that, etc. To have and to hold all and singular the said Manor Messuages,
Lands, etc. unto the said E.F and G H. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel last past, before the
date of the said recited Indenture, unto the full end and term of one whole
year from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yielding and
paying therefore unto the said A.B. and C.D. their Heirs and Assigns, the Rent
or Sum of 5 s. of lawful money of England, on the Feast day of the Nativity of
St. John Baptist now next ensuing, as by the said Indenture may more better
appear; by virtue whereof, and of the Statute for transferring of uses into
possession, the said E.F. and G.H. were and yet are possessed of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with all and singular the
Premises, with their Appurtenances. Now this Indenture further witnesses,
That the said A.B. for diverse good causes and considerations him thereunto
moving, and that the said C.D. by express direction and appointment of the
said A. B. hereby testified, have granted, released and confirmed, and by these
presents do grant, release and confirm unto the said E.F. and C.H. their Heirs
and Assigns, all and singular the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Mills, Herediments and Premises, before in these presents particularly
mentioned, or which in and by the said recited Indenture were bargained and
sold, or meant, mentioned or intended to be hereby bargained and sold to them
the said E.F. and G.H. as aforesaid, with all and every of the Appurtenances,
together with the said Rent of 5 s. hereby reserved, and the reversion and
reversions, remainder and remainders of all and singular the said Manors,
Messuages, Lands and Premises, and every of them, and every part and parcel
thereof, and all their and either of their estates, right, title, interest,
use, possession, reversions remainders, claim and demand whatsoever, of, in and
to the said Manor, Messuages, Mills and Premises, and every of them, and
every part and parcel of them; To have and to hold all and singular the said
Manor, etc. and every of them, with all their and every of their
appurtenances, unto the said E. F. and G. H. their Heirs or Assigns, to the
several uses, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents mentioned; that
is to say, to the use and behoof of the said A.B. during his natural life,
without impeachment of any waste, and with liberty and power to commit any
waste, and after his decease to the use and behoof of J. B. now Wife of the
said A. B. And the said E. F. G. H. and C. D. their Heirs and Assigns for ever,
upon special trust and confidence that they the said J.B. E.F. and G.H. or the
Survivor or Survivors of them and their Heirs, shall and will make sale of all
the said Lands and Premises to the best advantage, and to dispose of all such
Sum and Sums of Money which shall be raised hereby, in such manner, and to
such purposes as the said A.B. shall in his lifetime, by any writing to be by
him subscribed and sealed in the presence of two credible witnesses or more, by
his last Will and Testament in writing, declare or appoint. Provided always,
and it is hereby agreed, by and between all the parties to these presents, and
by them declared to be their true intent and meaning, that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said A B. at any time or times during his natural life,
to make any demise, lease or grant, demises, leases or grants by Indenture or
Indentures, of all or any part of the said Manor, Messuages, etc. either in
possession or reversion, or otherwise, to any persons whatsoever, or for any
term or terms of years, or for the life or lives of any one or more person and
persons, or for any term or terms of years determinable upon the death of any
one or more person or persons, or for any other term or terms whatsoever, with
or without any Rent or otherwise howsoever, as by the said A.B. shall be
thought fit and convenient, and that from and immediately after the making of
such demise, lease or grant, demises, leases or grants, the said E.F. and G,H.
and their Heirs, during the life of the said A.B. and after his death, they the
said J.A. E.F. G.H. and C.D. and the Survivor or Survivors of them, and their
heirs, shall stand and be seized of such part, or so much of the said Manor,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises, as shall be at any time or times
hereafter leased or demised, as aforesaid, to the use of such person or persons
respectively, to whom the same, or any such demise, lease or grant shall be so
made, of such estate, term and interest, and in such manner and form as the
same shall so happen to be leased or demised, according to the true meaning of
these presents, and of every such demise and lease, so that such lessees or
grantees, during his or their several lease or leases, grant or grants, or
interests, do pay, or cause to be paid the Rents or Sums of money reserved or
appointed to be paid, and expressed in and by the Indenture of his or their
said lease or grant to such person or persons, to whom the same from time to
time shall by the purport and true meaning of these presents belong, or
appertain, according to the purport and true meaning of the same leases, any
thing before in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. Provided also, and it is further agreed by and between all the
parties to these presents, and by them declared to be their true intent and
meaning, That if the said T.G. shall at any time during his natural life be
minded to alter, change or make void all or any the use or uses, trust or
trusts hereby declared, or any of them, and shall to that purpose by any
writing to be by him sealed in the presence of two or more credible witnesses,
declare and signify such his mind and intention, that then and from
thenceforth, from and after such signification and declaration so to be made,
as aforesaid, such of the uses and trusts hereby limited of, for and concerning
the said Lands and Premises, and the profits of them, or of or concerning such
part, and so much thereof, concerning which such declaration shall be made,
shall cease, determine and become utterly void, frustrate and of none effect,
and that then and from thenceforth the said E.F. and G.H. and their Heirs,
shall stand and be seized thereof, or of such part thereof, concerning which
such declarations shall be made, to and for such uses, or such declarations
shall limit, declare and appoint the same; and for default of such declaration
or limitation, then to the use, benefit and behoof of the said T.G. his Heirs
and Assigns, and to and for no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, any
thing before herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Memorandum, That after the sealing and delivery of the bargain and sale
within-mentioned, by the said A. B. and C. D. to the within-named E. F. and G.H
and after that the said E. F. and G.H. had accepted of the said Bargain and
Sale, and had sealed and delivered the Counter-part thereof, as their act and
deed, then this present Deed was sealed and delivered by the within A.B. and
C.D. in the presence of, etc.

An Assignment and Letter of Attorney of several Bonds.
TO all Christian People, to whom these presents shall come, I T.G. of, etc.
send greeting. Whereas T.E. of, etc. L.H. of, etc. and Sir W.H. of, etc. in and
by their obligations bearing date the, etc. do stand jointly and severally
bounden unto me the said, etc. in the Sum of 800 l. with condition thereupon
endorsed for the payment of 406 l. on the thirteenth day of December, then next
ensuing the date of the said Obligation, at or in the then dwellinghouse of
W.C. in, etc. And whereas also Sir T.B. Esquire, Sir E.S. Knight, and Sir T.M.
Knight, in and by their obligation bearing date the, etc. do likewise stand
bound unto me in the Sum of 600 l. with condition thereupon endorsed for
payment of 310 l. on the nineteenth day of November then next ensuing the date
of the said Obligation, at or in the, etc. And whereas also, etc. as in and by
the said several recited Obligations more at large it does and may appear. Now
know ye, That I the said T.G. for diverse good and valuable considerations me
hereunto especially moving, have granted, assigned and set over, and, etc. to
W.P. of the Middle Temple London, Gent. all and singular the bonds and debts
aforesaid, and have made, assigned, constituted and ordained, and in and by
these presents do make, assign, constitute and ordain the said W.P. my true,
lawful and irrevocable Attorney in my name, but to the only proper use and
behoof of him the said W.P. his Executors and Administrators, to ask, demand
and receive of the said several Obligors bound by the said recited Obligations,
the said several Sums of money in the said recited conditions mentioned
respectively, giving, and by these presents granting unto my said Attorney full
power and authority, if need shall be, to sue, arrest, attach, implead, condemn
and imprison the said parties Obligors, and every of them, and their, or every
or any of their bodies, goods and chattels in execution to take, and out of
execution to deliver, either upon satisfaction, composition, or otherwise, at
the will and pleasure of my said Attorney, acquittance or any other discharges
in my name to seal and deliver; Attorney or Atturneys, one or more under him
the said W. P. his Executors and Administrators, to make, substitute and
revoke, and generally to do, execute, prosecute and determine all and every
other act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, which in or about the
Premises, or any part thereof, shall be needful, necessary or convenient, as
fully, wholly and effectually, and in as large and ample manner and form, to
all intents and purposes, as I the said T. G. my Executors and Administrators,
might or could do personally without any account thereof to be yielded to me,
my Executors or Assigns; and whatsoever my said Attorney shall do or cause to
be done, in, about or concerning the Premises, I do by these presents ratify,
confirm and allow the same, and also do for my self, my Executors and
Administrators covenant, etc. to and with the said W. P. his Executors and
Administrators, that the said recited Obligations and every of them, now are
and stand in full force and effect; and that neither I, my Executors and
Administrators shall not at any time hereafter acquit, release or discharge
them, nor any of the Moneys due upon the aforesaid Obligations, or any of the
said parties Obligors bound in and by the said recited Obligations, or any of
them, their or any of their Executors or Administrators, or any of them, of and
from the same, or the Sums of Money in them or any of them mentioned, or any
part thereof, without it be by the consent of the said W. P. his Executors or
Administrators in writing. And further, That I the said T. G. my Executors and
Administrators, shall and will ratify, confirm and allow all such lawful
Actions and Suits, and other things whatsoever, as he the said W. P. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, shall at any time
hereafter bring, sue, commence, prosecute or proceed in or against the said
Parties Obligors bound in or by the said recited Obligations, or any of them.
And lastly, That I, my Executors or Administrators, shall upon every reasonable
request of the said W. P. his, etc. give to the said W. P. his, etc. such
further Letter or Letters of Attorney, and power for the receiving and recovery
of the debts aforesaid, and every of them, as by the said W. P. his Executors
or Administrators shall be reasonably demised and acquired.

A Condition upon the granting of a Toties quoties for Replevin.
WHereas the abovenamed G. S. by virtue of his Office, as Steward of the
Manor of S. abovenamed, has granted forth a Precept for the replevying and
delivering of one Bay Gelding of the Goods and Chattels of the above-bound G.
S. unto him the said G. being now impounded by N. out of his Lease of ground
in, etc. and also to replevy the said Gelding of the said G. so often as he
shall be impounded by the said N. or any of them: Now therefore the Condition,
etc. That if the said G. S. with effect do prosecute the said Action, and all
other such Actions as shall be brought by him for the impounding of the said
Gelding, and return the same so often as return by Law thereof shall be adjudged,
and him the said G. from time to time, and at all times hereafter, do and shall
well and truly save, defend and keep harmless and indempnified against all men
for and concerning the granting of the said Replevin, that then, etc.

A Condition that a Lords Bailiff shall give a true account of his Bayliffship.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the Right Honorable, etc. has constituted
and appointed the above-bound J. S. to be Bailiff in his Manor of, etc. and
Collector of his Rents, Revenues, Perquisites, and Profits there, during his
Lordships pleasure; if therefore the said J. H. by himself, or his sufficient
Deputy, do and shall from time to time, for and during his continuance and
exercise of and in the said place and office, demean himself therein, without
voluntary concealment, fraud or deceit, toward his said Lordship, and do and
shall yearly, during such his continuance and exercise at the audits to be kept
for his said Lordship, yield and make true and just accounts to the auditor for
the time being, of the said Manor and Premises, and also make current payment
and satisfaction to his Receiver of the Premises for the time being, or other
Officer or Officers in that behalf to be authorized and appointed, at or before
every such audit and audits, of and for all and every such Sum and Sums of
Money, Rents, Revenues, Fines, Issues, Goods, Chattels, Profits and Perquisits
as then shall have come to the hands of the said J. S. his Deputy or Deputies,
or as he or they ought justly to be charged withal to his said Lordship, for or
in respect of the said office or place, that then, and.

A Condition to pay Childrens Portions and shares of their deceased Fathers
estates.
THe Condition, That if the above-bound R. Y. his, etc. pay and deliver, or
cause to be paid and delivered unto the abovenamed W. E. and M. natural
Children of the abovenamed N. late of R. aforesaid, their late Father
deceased, their several filial portions, or child's parts of the goods and
chattels of their said late Father deceased, according to the Inventory
thereof, and also account and render unto them their just shares of all other
their rights due unto them by virtue of the last Will and Testament of their
said father, when they come to the full age of twenty one years; or happen to
be married; and also honestly, according to their degrees educate, and bring up
the said children, during the time of their nonage, with meat, drink, apparel
and learning; and if it happen any of the said children to dye before they come
to full age, or to be married, then if the said R. Y. do content and pay the
portion, and other rights of him, her or them so dying, to whom the Law shall
appoint the same to be paid, or who by proximity of blood ought to have it, and
also save and keep harmless the above named, etc. Comissary, and all other the
officers, that then, etc.

A Condition that the Heir shall make no claim.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas R. G. of, etc. father of the above-bound R.
is possessed of one message or tenement, and certain customary Lands thereunto
belonging, holden of the Right Honorable, etc, as of the Manor of, etc.
called or known by the name of, etc. now in the occupation of, etc. out of
which message or tenements is issuing the yearly rent of, etc. and whereas the
said R. the son, for and in consideration of a certain competent sum of, etc.
to him the said R. by the said J. well and truly contented and paid, whereof
and wherewith the said R. acknowledges himself fully satisfied, has granted
and agreed that the said J. (by and with the consent of the said R. the father)
shall have and enjoy to his own use for ever, the said message or tenement,
lands and premises, and all the estate, right, title and interest, which the
said R. the son now has, or at any time hereafter may, might, should or ought
to have, of, in and to the same, from, by or under the right, title or interest
of the said R. the Father, or as heir unto him; if therefore the said R. the
Son, his, etc. nor any of them, do not at any time hereafter make or cause to
be made any claim or demand, of, in or to the said Message or Tenement and
premises, or any part thereof, from and after the decease of his said Father,
but to permit and suffer the said J. G. his, etc. and every of them, to have,
possess and enjoy, to his and their own use for ever the said, etc. and every
part thereof, without any let or disturbance of or by him the said R. the Son,
his, etc. or of or by any other person or persons, or by his, their or any of
their acts, means, consents or procurements, clearly released, acquitted and
discharged of and from all encumbrances whatsoever, by him, them, or any of
them had, made, committed or done, or to be had, made, committed or done in any
wise, that then, etc.

A Condition to appear before the Justices of Peace, etc.
COndition, etc. That if the above-bound S. T. do personally appear in the
custody of the Bailiff within-written, or his Deputy, before the Justices, etc.
the Monday next after the Nativity of St. John Baptist, at the Town of, etc. to
find there before the said Justices, good and sufficient Sureties for the
Peace, and to behave and bear himself well and peaceably against, etc. and in
the mean time keep the peace of the Commonwealth, and from thenceforth save
and keep harmless the within-named, etc. for and concerning the premises, that
then, etc.

A Condition to suffer ones Wife to make a Will, and to surrender a Copyhold
to his and her use.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas there is a Marriage, etc. Now if the said J.
F. do and shall after the celebration of the said Marriage, and during the
coverture, permit and suffer the said F. S. to make her last Will and Testament
in writing, or otherwise, and by the same to give and dispose of the Goods and
Chattels, or ready money of him the said J. F. to the value of, etc. or under,
at her will and pleasure, to such person and persons, and for such intents and
purposes as she the said S. shall by the same Will nominate and appoint; And
also if the said J. F. his, etc. (after the said Will shall be so made and
published under testimony of sufficient witnesses) do and shall well and
faithfully execute and perform the same Will, or suffer the same to be duly
executed and performed. according to the intent and true meaning of the said S.
F. and also if the said I. F. do and shall at the next Court to be holden for
the Manor of, etc. surrender into the hands of the Lord of the said Manor,
according to the custom of the same, all that his Mansion House, etc. to the
use and behoof of the said I. F. and S. F, for and during their natural lives,
and the life of the longest liver of them; and after the decease of the
Survivor of them, then to the use and behoof of, etc. that then, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive money due upon several Bonds, allowing the
Attorney his reasonable charges, and out of that money which he shall receive,
to satisfy himself of such moneys as are due to him for him which makes this
Letter.
TO all men to whom these presents shall come, W. R. of Tattersel in the C. of
Lincoln Yeoman, sends greeting. Know ye, That I the said W. R. for diverse
good, sufficient, and reasonable causes and considerations me hereunto moving,
but especially for and in respect of certain several Sums of money heretofore
to me paid by C. H. of T. in the said C. of Lincoln, Gentleman, have
authorized, constituted, nominated, made and ordained, and by these presents do
authorize, constitute, nominate make, ordain, and in my place put in the said
C. H. my true, faithful, lawful, undoubted and irrevocable Attorney, from
henceforth for me and in my name to ask, receive, gather and take all such Sum
and Sums of money, as are already due, or hereafter shall or may become due
unto me the said W. from any person or persons herein hereafter mentioned and
expressed; as also all such Sum and Sums of money as were due unto E. now my
Wife, in her Widowhood, or hereafter may or shall be due to her by any person
or persons whatsoever, and herein hereafter mentioned and expressed, by virtue
of any Bill, Bond, or any other Writing or ways whatsoever; that is to say, to
ask, gather, receive and take of A.B. of C. in the C. of E. Yeoman, the Sum of
Ten pounds of lawful English Money, due unto me by virtue of one Bond or
Writing Obligatory, from the said A B. to me the said W. R. dated the last day
of June last past, before the date hereof, as in and by the Condition of the
said obligation, reference being thereunto had, more plainly and at large it
does and may appear, and also Forty shillings of lawful English money, from,
etc. Then name every particular Sum, and set them down according to their
several names, sums and dates as they are, and insert these Covenants
following, as in and by the several conditions of the said Bonds, whereunto
relation being had, more plainly and at large it does and may appear: For the
recovery of all which said several Sums of money, which shall arise or grow due
unto me the said W. R. by virtue of any or either of the said Bonds, yet in
arrear, due and unpaid, I do by these presents give full power and authority
unto the said C. H. for me, and in my name, and to my use as aforesaid, to
receive, and upon non-payment of them or any of them, to bring, sue and
prosecute for me, and in my name, all and all manner of Actions whatsoever, as
well real as personal, and the same to prosecute and follow by suit, arrest,
imprisonment, judgment, condemnation, execution or otherwise: And one Attorney
or more for the doing of the premises to make, and the same at his will and
pleasure to revoke, and new in his or their place to be put, in as large and
ample manner as I might do, if the same were by me in proper person done,
commenced, sued or taken, to the only benefit and behoof of me the said W. R.
allowing to the said C. out of the said Sum or Sums of money, so by him
received, his reasonable, lawful and necessary expenses and charges laid out or
disbursed in hand or otherwise, in and about the recovery, getting and
procuring of the said Sums of Money, or any of them, with allowance and payment
of all such reckonings, Sum and Sums of money as are due to him the said C. by
me the said W. as shall or may appear upon any reckoning, bill, bond or
otherwise, under my hand and seal, or by sufficient witness. And I do by these
presents covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said C. his Executors,
etc. That I, my Heirs and Assigns, shall and will at all times hereafter,
ratify, confirm and allow whatsoever my said Attorney shall do, or cause to be
done, in or about the Premises. In witness, etc.

A Copy of a Lease to try a Title.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. witnesses, That the said A.B. for
diverse good causes and considerations him thereunto especially moving, has
demised, granted, and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, grant,
and to farm let unto this said W. M. all that Message or Tenement with the
appurtenances, situate and being in N. aforesaid, and all Houses; Edifices,
etc. now or late in the tenure or occupation of C.D. or his assigns, To have
and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and Premises, with the
Appurtenances, before by these presents mentioned to be demised, etc. for 3.
years, or more, etc. yielding and paying, etc. being lawfully demanded.
Provided always, and upon this condition, That if the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay, or
tender, or cause to be tendered or paid to the said W. M. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, at any time, during the continuance of this present
Demise, the Sum of 12 d. of lawful English money, that then and from
thenceforth this present Indenture, and every article and thing herein
contained, shall be utterly void, and of none effect: And that then also, and
from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, into the said Message
or Tenement, and Premises, with the Appurtenances, and in every part and
parcel thereof, to re-enter, and the same to have again, repossess and enjoy,
as in his and their former estate, any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary thereof containing in any wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof,
etc.

A Discharge made to the Sheriff (for a Prisoner) from him to whom the Prisoner
is indebted.
KNow all men by these presents, That I A. B. of C. in the C. of L. have
remised, released, acquitted and discharged, and by these presents do for me,
my Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, remise, release, and fully and
absolutely acquit and discharge T. J. High Sheriff of the C. of L. aforesaid,
and J. B. his Undersheriff, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, of and
from all and all manner of escapes as well voluntary as negligent, and of and
from all Actions, cause and causes of Actions, for or concerning the enlarging
or setting at liberty of the body of J. S. taken at my suit by virtue of a
Capias ad Satisfaciendum to the said Sheriff directed of 8 l. debt, and 15 s.
costs of suit, returnable in the Court of Common Pleas, in Hilary Term last
past; And I the said A. B. do hereby discharge the said Sheriff from all
Actions, Reckonings, Duties and Demands whatsoever, concerning the executing of
the said capias ad Satisfaciendum. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture of Partition, where two have taken a joint Lease of Message and
Lands, etc.
THis Indenture made the 5. day of June in the year of our Lord God, according
to the account used in England, One thousand six hundred fifty and one, between
A. B. of, etc. of the one part, and C.D. of, etc. of the other part. Whereas
the said A.B. and C.D. do hold jointly for term of certain years, yet during
and unexpired, all that Message, Tenement or Farm-house called, etc. situate
in B. in the County of, etc. and all houses, edifices, buildings, barns,
stables, orchards and gardens thereunto belonging, with their appurtenances,
and also all those several Closes of arable Land, called or known by the name
of, etc. and containing by estimation, etc. and all that great Meadow situate,
etc. containing, etc. and all those Parcels or Cow-Pasture, next adjoining to,
etc. called, etc. and containing, etc. And all that parcel of wood-ground
called B. Wood, with diverse other Parcels; with all and singular Profits and
Commodities thereunto belonging or appertaining, by one Indenture or demise,
bearing date the, etc. made between W. L. of, etc. Gent. of the one part, and
the said A.B. and C.D. of the other part, yielding and paying therefore the
yearly Rent of, etc. at two usual days of payment in the year, that is to say,
etc. by equal portions: And the said A. B. and C D. do thereby covenant to pay
the said Rent of, etc. in manner, etc. and also for and during the said term to
repair the said Message, and all other the Premises, as also the Hedges,
Ditches and Mounds belonging to the demised Premises, and at the end of the
said Term, do Covenant to leave the same well and sufficiently repaired into
the hand of the said W. L. his, etc. as in and by the said Indenture of Demise,
relation being thereunto had, it does and may more fully and at large appear.

Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said A.B. and C.D. have with their
full and whole consent, and by and with the advice and assistance of E.F. of,
etc. and G.H. of, etc. by them respectively chosen for that purpose, made an
equal division and partition of the said demised Premises, into two equal
parts or moieties, to the end, intent and purpose that the said A.B. and C.D.
and their several and respective Executors, etc. may have, hold, occupy,
possess and enjoy the said equal parts and moity of the said demised Premises,
during the remainder of the said term, in manner and form following, that is to
say, That he the said A.B. his Executors, etc. shall and may during the
remainder of the said term, have, hold, and enjoy the moity, partition or
half-part of the said Message or Tenement, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns,
Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Lands and Premises, as the same are divided and
set apart, as aforesaid, that is to say, all those several Rooms situate at
the West End of the said demised Message, called by the name of the, etc. the,
etc. the. etc. and all that great Barn situate at the, etc. and all that, etc.
(so naming every parcel as allotted) in full recompense of his due part and
portion between them, of the said demised Premises, and that the said C.D. his
Executors, etc. shall during the remainder of the said terms, have the other
moity, partition or half-part of the said Message or Tenement, Houses, etc. as
the same are divided and set apart as aforesaid, that is to say, all those
several Rooms situate at the East End of the said Messuages, etc. (as
abovenamed the parcels) in full recompense of his due part and portion between
them of the said demised Premises: To have and to hold, to either of the said
parties, their Executors, etc. severally, as is abovesaid, from the day of the
date hereof, unto the full end and term of, etc. And it is covenanted, granted
and agreed by and between the said Parties, That the said yearly Rent of, etc.
to be due to the said W. L. or his Assigns, from time to time during the
continuance of, etc. shall be equally paid between them the said A. B. and C.D.
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as Tenants of the said demised
Message and other the Premises, from time to time, during the said term,
either of them for the said part and portion allotted, as is aforesaid. And the
said A.B. for him, his, etc. does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the
said C.D. his, etc. to save, defend and keep harmless and indempnified the
said C.D. his Executors, etc. of and from all prejudice, loss or damage which
shall happen or come unto him the said C D. his, etc. for or by reason of any
breach of any of the covenants and agreements specified and comprised in the
said Indenture of Lease, or other things whatsoever which shall or may be had,
made, done, committed, omitted or suffered by him the said A.B. his. etc. for
or in respect of his said moity, or half-part of the demised Premises, or any
part thereof: And the said C.D. does for him, his, etc. covenant, promise,
grant and agree, to and with the said A.B. his, etc. ut supra.

And for the true keeping, performance and observation of all and singular the
said partitions, covenants, conditions, payments, agreements and articles here
before expressed, either Party binds himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, to the other by these presents in the Sum of, etc. In witness,
etc.

Judge Cook his Articles, which the Chief Constables of every Hundred are to
observe and answer unto at the beginning of every Assize, viz.
IMprimis, What Felonies have been done within their Hundred from the Assizes
next before, against whom, and at what time, and wherefore, and what pursuit
has been made for the Felonies, and in whom default of pursuit of Felonies
has been?

2. Item, what vagrant and suspected persons have been apprehended within that
time within their Hundred, and what has been done with them, and by whose
default any such persons have escaped from apprehension, and how the watches
have been kept in every Township, between the Ascension and Michaelmas?

3. Item, what Recusants are within their Hundreds, and come not to the Church
according to the Law?

4. Item, what decay of Houses, Husbandry, has been since the beginning, etc.
within their Hundreds, which had twenty Acres of Land, Meadow and Pasture, to
them, when decayed, and by whom?

5. Item, what grounds within your Hundreds that have been used to be tilled
ordinarily, any twelve years since the beginning, etc. been turned from Tillage
to Pasture, by whom, and when?

6. Item, How many Alehouses be in that Hundred, and in what places, and where
they be? How many be licensed, and by whose license, and how many without
license, and who they be, and whether punishment have been done to the
offenders, according to the Statute?

7. Item, whether such Alehouses as are licensed, do observe the Articles
prescribed to them?

8. Item, who have made any engrossing, fore-stalling or regrating within their
Hundred, and whereof, and where put in ure?

9. Item, who they be that make Malt to sell, of Corn not being of their own
tilth or rent-corn, not being licensed thereunto, according to the Statute
lately made?

10. Item, To observe and answer how Vagabonds are taken up and punished, and
to see how the impotent poor are provided for, without being suffered to wander
abroad for relief out of the Parish.

11. Item, You shall enquire of what value and sufficiency of estate and
discretion, the Petty Constable is within every several Town within his County,
that hereafter no man be admitted to be a Petty-Constable, except he be a
Subsidy-man, and of good understanding.

12. Item, You shall inquire and present all Masters that shall retain their
Servants out of their general Petty-Sessions, or give greater Wages than shall
be set down by the Justice, and whether the Petty Sessions be duly kept at the
times accustomed, so as none may be retained but in Petty Sessions, except it
be in cases of necessity, and then the said retainer to be known unto the
Chief-Constable of the Hundred, and to be entered into their Book.

13. Item, You shall give warning to every Petty Constable, that every one in
his or their several Parish or limit, do take heed that no Cottage be newly
builded, that every Constable when he shall see any stuff or stone, clay or
timber provided by any Inhabitants within his Parish, and minded to build a
Cottage, shall speedily give notice thereof to the Justices of Peace for that
limit, that the said Justices of the Peace may take present order for the
suppressing thereof.

14. Item, If any Lord or Freeholder, out of his private Devotion, or
otherwise, shall build or erect any Cottage, not laying thereunto four Acres of
Lands, according to the Statute, then the Justices of the Peace shall take
order, that the said Lord or Freeholder shall maintain the Poor that shall
inhabit in the said Cottage; and if the said Lord or Freeholder shall refuse
so to be ordered, then the said Justices of the Peace shall take Recognizance
of such Lord or Freeholder for their appearance at the next Assizes, and
general Jail-delivery, to answer for his refusal and contempt, as for the
building of the said Cottage.

15. Item. You shall make diligent inquiry, what unlawful games, drunkenness,
whoredom, incontinency, evil, vile and other disorders, be committed by Masters
of Households in their several Families, or by their Children or Servants for
want of good government of the Householders, and to present the same, for that
upon the good ordering of private Families, the Commonwealth does depend.

16. Item, You shall make diligent inquiry, what Servants before the time they
were retained to serve, were turned out of service, and for what cause the
Servant is so turned away; for that thereby many become Rogues and idle
persons; and to present the same, to the end Masters may be punished for such
offense, according to their demerit in that behalf.

17. Item, To inquire of all Purveyors and Poulterers which but any Victuals,
and sell the same again at unreasonable Rates.

18. Item, To inquire of all Dove-houses erected or maintained by any not being
Lord of the Manor, or Parson of the Town.

Points of Law by R.O. concerning Lord and Tenant, etc.
1. IF the Lord take away any part of the Demised Premises, and exclude the
Tenants by walls, etc. it is an extinguishment of his Rent.

2. If a Landlord covenant with his Tenant to rebuild any Room, and do not,
whereby the Tenant receives loss, the Tenant may have an Action upon the Case,
upon his Parol-covenant, wherein he may recover what he can prove himself
damnified.

3. If the Landlord has manure lying in the ground of the Tenant, and except
it not at the Demise, the Tenant may dispose the same as he sees cause for his
own convenience; for being a place for a manure-hill, the Tenants necessity
will require use of it; and that the Tenants may better and safer dispose it,
let him mix some of his own manure with it, and then he may either sell it, or
lay it upon what ground he will.

4. The Landlord digs a Saw-Pit, etc.

After the ground let, it is the Tenants, and he may have an Action against any
that during that time, without his consent meddles with it.

5. The Landlord after the Demise, lops, tops, cuts and fells Timber, Willows,
Sallows, Thorns and other Wood; during the Lease the Landlord cannot without
consent of the Tenant meddle with the Woods not being excepted in the Lease.

6. The Tenant may cut any Water-boughs, Thorns, Willows, Alders, etc. for
necessary Hedge-boot, Fire-boot, but not to sell; and if he left Ashes, it is an
Action of Waste in the Tenant.

7. If the Landlord lay Hay in any Room of the Tenant, etc. and the Tenants Man
or Maid, or himself fodder his Cattle with it, what remedy has the Landlord
against the Tenant, and the Tenant against the Landlord?

An Action lies against the Lord for laying his Hay there; but the property of
the Hay there is still notwithstanding in the Landlord; and if the Tenant
fodder his Cattle with it, the Lord has his Action.

8. If a man let a Cow to her, and after take her to the Market to sell, and do
not, an Action of Trespass lies against the Owner for driving of her to the
Market.

9. If he (...) the Cow is letten sell the Cow, and render the mon^^ (...)
Owner, what danger to him that sold her?

The Cow is to be returned, and not her price; and (...) refuse the price, he
may bring his Action, but shall recover but her worth.

10. If the Lord promise to put in repair any houses, etc. and do not, if any
of them fall down for want of mending, what remedy has the Landlord against
his Tenant for not repairing the same?

An. If any of these things that the Lord was first to put in repair, and did
not, decay, the Tenant is not bound to repair them; and if by permission they
come to ruin, it is the Landlords fault, and the Tenant is free.

11. If the Landlord promise to fence in a piece of ground, where the Tenant is
to sow Hemp and Corn, and do not, but so as the Tenants goods cannot be kept
out, but destroy his Corn.

An Action upon the Case lying against the Lord upon the Promise.

12. Cutting up Timber Trees, Fruit Trees, Hedgerow-Trees that shelter the
houses, are waste; the Tenant has interest in the rest, if not excepted.

13. A.B. has his Horse strayed from him, and finds him in the custody of C.D.
and demands him of C.D. finding him in C.D. his draught, and C.D. will not
deliver him without 8 d. per week allowance, and by delays detains the Horse
till the year be expired.

A.B. may recover his Horse by Detinue, or Action upon the Action of Trover and
Conversion, wherein he must prove the Property of the Horse to be his, and the
other will be allowed fitting recompense for his Food, but no longer than until
he was owned, and amends rendered.

14. If a Tenant upon an arbitrament give a Release to the Landlord, whether
will that Release free any other that the Landlord has caused to wrong the
Tenant?

Ans. For any thing that any other has done jointly with the Lord wherein the
Tenant was indamaged, this Release may be pleaded in Law, but not in actions
done by any other without the Lords joining.

A Charter-party with extraordinary Covenants and Clauses therein contained.
THis Charter-party made and indented the Three and twentieth day of August, in
the year of our Lord God, One thousand, six hundred, thirty and eight,
according to the new style, between H C. of Slego in the Kingdom of Ireland,
Merchant, of the one part, and R. T. of Newcastle upon Tine, Master, under God,
of the good Ship called the William of Newcastle, burden Fourscore Tuns, or
thereabouts, of the other part, witnesses, That the said Master has letten to
Freight the said Ship unto the said Merchant, and to the said Merchant has
hired her for a Voyage (by Gods grace) to he made in manner and form following;
that is to say, the said Master, for him, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, does covenant, promise and grant unto and with the said Merchant, to
take, receive and load in his said Ship, the William, all such goods and
Merchandises, as the said Merchant shall please to put aboard her, and the said
Ship can conveniently carry over and above her Victual, Tackle and
Appurtenances, and with the next good wind and weather which God shall send to
depart hence, and sail directly for the Island of Scotland, called by the name
of the Liewes, to a Port lying there called L. of Holiard, or to any other
convenient Port or Harbor in the said Liewes, where other Shipping goes to
take in Fish, and the said Merchant shall appoint, and there with all
expedition to discharge all or any of the said goods, and re-lade fish to the
full and sufficient loading of the said Ship, and being dispatched to depart
thence, and sail directly for the Downs, or any other Place or Places, Port or
Ports where the Merchant or his Assigns shall please to order him, there to
discharge and deliver the said fish, and other goods whatsoever, laden by the
said Merchant or his Assigns in the said Ship, and so to finish and end the
said intended Voyage: And the said Merchant, for him, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the
said Master, not only to go with him in Person for the said Liewes, and there
to load the Ship with Fish, or any such other Goods as he shall please, and
thence to Sail with them for the Place or Port of their discharge; but also
then and there before Bulk-breaking, to give sufficient security unto the said
Master for the payment of his Freight, and after safe delivery of his said
Goods to pay for Freight 50 l. sterling per month, for so long time as the
said Ship has been in Service of the said Merchant, the days less than a
month after the same rate, the months pay to begin on Friday next, the Seven
and twentieth day of this present month, and to end when the last goods are
delivered out of the said Ship, at the place of her right discharge, and the
said Freight to be paid within -- days at the longest, with Averige and
Primage, according to the Custom of the Sea. And moreover, The said Merchant
does promise to provide the said Master a sufficient Pilot to bring the said
Ship in and out of the Liewes, and to pay all other Pilotage, Anchorage, and
other Duties which in any Port or Harbor during the said Voyage shall or may
be claimed in respect of the said Ship and Goods, and to provide the said Ship
of sufficient Convoy, if he the said Merchant or his Assigns do require that
the said Ship shall make her Discharge in any unfree place: Provided, That the
said Master in his going for the said Islands or Liewes is to put into
Tinmouth-Haven, there to victual and provide himself, which time from his first
coming in, until his coming out again to Sea, is not to be reckoned to the
Merchants charge. And the said Master does promise and warrant his Ship to be
strong and stanch, and to Man and Victual her fitting to perform the said
Voyage, with all other necessary Appurtenances. For the true performance of all
which Premises, the said Parties do bind themselves unto each other in the
penalty of 500 l. sterling, to be paid by the party defective unto the party
observant.

And it is agreed by and between the said Parties, That the Monthly Freight
abovementioned shall run and continue until the same Freight be fully paid,
and that the said Master shall not abide or tarry in Tinmouth-Haven longer than
six days, if wind and weather serve. Provided, That the half-deck and
forecastle is to be for the Masters use and stowage.

In witness whereof, the said Parties unto two Charter-parties of this tenor,
interchangeably have put their hands and seals. Dated in, etc. the day and year
above-written.

A Deed to revoke several uses in settlement, according to a power therein
reserved.
TO all Christian People, to whom this present Writing shall come, Sir R.C. of
Slefford in the County of Lincoln, Baronet, sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting. Whereas in and by one Indenture bearing date, etc. and made
between Sir R. C. on the one part, and I.S. Gentleman, servant of the said Sir
R. C. on the other part, There is (amongst other things) one proviso contained
in these, or the like words, in effect hereafter following (that is to say)
Provided likewise, that it is hereby further declared and agreed by and between
the said parties to these presents, and the true intent and meaning of them,
and of these presents is, that if the said Sir R. C. shall at any time
hereafter during his natural life, be minded or purposed to alter, determine,
revoke or make void all or any of the use or uses, estate or estates, trust or
trusts herein before mentioned, declared, limited or appointed, and shall by
any Deed or Writing to be by him the said Sir R. C. sealed and subscribed in
the presence of two or more credible witnesses, declare and publish his mind,
intent and meaning to be, to revoke, alter, or make void and frustrate the said
several uses, estate and trusts, before in these presents mentioned, declared,
limited or appointed, or any of them, of, for or concerning the said Castle,
Manors, Messuages, Lands and Premises, or any of them, or any part or parcel
of them, or any of them; that then and from and after any such declaration or
publication so to be made, as aforesaid the same use and uses, estate and
estates, trust and trusts, in and by these presents limited, expressed,
declared or appointed, of, for and concerning the which any such declaration or
publication shall be made, as aforesaid, shall cease and become utterly void,
frustrate, and of none effect, to all intents, constructions and purposes
whatsoever, and that then and at all times from thenceforth, the said J. S. and
his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons, standing and being, or
which at any time hereafter shall stand and be feized of the said Castle,
Manors, Lands and Premises, shall stand and be seized of the same, or of such
part, or so much thereof, concerning the which any such declaration or
publication shall be made, as aforesaid, to such uses, intents, trusts and
purposes, as the said Sir R.C. in or by any such deed or writing, as is
aforesaid, or by any other Deed or writing to be by him the said R.C. sealed
and subscribed in the presence of three or more credible witnesses, shall
declare, limit or appoint; and for default of such declaration, limitation or
appointment, to the use and behoof of the said Sir R. C. his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, and to or for none other use, intent, meaning or purpose whatsoever,
as in and by the said Indenture (amongst diverse other Provisoes and things
therein contained) more plainly and at large it does and may appear.

Now know ye, That I the said Sir R.C. do by this my present Deed or Writing
sealed and subscribed by me the said R. C. in the presence of (three) credible
witnesses, declare and publish my mind, intent and meaning to be, to revoke,
alter and make void and frustrate, and I do by these presents revoke, alter and
make void and frustrate all and every the use and uses, estate and estates,
trust and trusts in and by the said Indenture declared, limited or appointed,
of, for and concerning all and every the Castle, Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Advowsons, and all other Hereditaments mentioned, contained and
specified in the said Indenture with their and every of their appurtenances,
and of, for and concerning every part thereof: And I do hereby further declare,
limit and appoint, That the said Castle, Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Advowsons, and all other Hereditaments with their appurtenances, shall remain
and be, and that the said J. S. and his Heirs, and all and every other Person
and Persons standing and being, or which at any time hereafter shall stand and
be seized of and in the same, shall stand and be seized thereof, to the use and
behoof of me the said Sir R. C. my Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to and for
none other use, intent, meaning or purpose whatsoever. In witness whereof, I
the said R. C. have hereunto set my Hand and Seal the 28. day of February, in
the year of our Lord God, according to the computation used in England, 1651.

An Indenture of Co-partnership, between four Merchants.
THis Indenture Quadripar^ite, made the, etc. between R. B. Citizen and
Goldsmith of London, of the first part, W. C. Citizen and Goldsmith of London,
of the second part; T. B. Citizen and Goldsmith of London, of the third part,
and T. L. of London, Merchant-Adventurer, late Servant of the said R.B. on the
fourth part, witnesses, That the said R.B. W.C. T.B. and T.L. in consideration
of the fidelity, trust, confidence and good opinion which every one of them
always has had, and yet has and reposeth in every other of them, have joined
themselves to be Copartners together in the Trade of Merchandising, that is to
say, in buying, selling, uttering, vending or retailing of all sort and kinds
of wares, and all other kinds of businesses to the Trade of a Merchant
incident, belonging or appertaining, and the said Co-partnership to continue
between them, from the first day of this instant Month of March, for and during
the term and space of three whole years from thence next ensuing and fully to
be complete and ended; And to that end and purpose, they the said R.B. W.C.
T.L. and T.B. have before the day of the date of these presents delivered into
stock (to be used and employed in the said Trade of Merchandising, as well
within the Territories of England, as elsewhere in several places in the Parts
beyond the Seas;) in Money, Cloth, Wares, Debts, Merchandises, Adventures,
abroad, and here in England, Adventures now already upon the Seas, and beyond
the Seas, such several stock and stocks, and Sum and Sums of Money as are
specified and expressed in a Schedule indented to these presents annexed of the
particular and proper Stock severally put in, and severally belonging to each
one of the said several parties for their several quantity and proportion,
being in the said Schedule severally set down, mentioned and declared, as by
the same more fully and plainly it does and may appear: It is now covenanted,
granted, concluded, condescended and fully agreed by and between all the said
Parties to these presents, and each one of the said several Parties for himself
respectively, and for his own particular part, and for his own several and
particular Executors and Administrators, do and does severally, and not
jointly, covenant, grant, promise and agree to and with every and each other of
the said Parties, his and their several Executors and Administrators by these
presents in manner and form following, that is to say, That every and each of
the said Parties for himself during and by all the said space of three years
(if all the said Parties shall so long live) shall continue and abide together
as joynt-Occupiers and Partners, and that every and each of the said Parties
shall from time to time, during and by all the said term (if they shall so long
live) do their and every of their reasonable endeavors and diligence, by all
the ways, labors, and means that each of them can or possibly may, to the
uttermost of their power, wit, cunning and knowledge, and for the most benefit,
profit and advantage of every and each other, faithfully and truly employ, buy,
sell, and merchandise, with all such and so much of the said whole stock, as
shall in all manner of wise come to be committed to each one of their several
charge, dispositions and government, and the gains and increase of every such
part. And it is the true intent and meaning of all the said Parties to these
presents, That the said W. C. shall manage the business and affairs for, etc.
in the Parts of Spain during the good liking of the said R.B. and there for the
most part reside, and have his continuance and being; the said T. L. to manage
the business and affairs for Stoade, Germany, and those Parts, during the good
liking of the said R.B. and there be for the most part to reside and have his
continuance and being, and the said R.B. and B.T. to manage the business and
affairs for England. And it is covenanted, granted and agreed by and between
all and every the said Parties to these presents, That all such gain, profit
and increase as God shall send, and as shall come, grow or arise by reason of
their said Trade and joynt-occupying, as is aforesaid, shall be from time to
time during the said joynt-occupying, equally and indifferently parted and
divided in manner following, that is to say, to every one of the said Parties,
their Executors and Administrators, a just, equal and rateable part and
proportion in and upon every 100 l. rateable and proportionable, according as
to the quantity of each ones several stock by them severally put in and
appearing in the said Schedule, the same for his and their parts of the gains,
profit and increase, shall arise and mount unto. And likewise that all such
losses, hurt and detriment as shall happen by the said joynt-occupying by evil
Debtors, Adventures of the Seas, or otherwise, without fraud or coven, shall be
paid and born in each ones several part and portion, according to the manner
and form of the Divident of the gains aforesaid. And it is covenanted, granted
and agreed by and between all and every of the said Parties to these presents,
and each one of the said Parties for himself respectively, for his own several
and particular part, and for his own several Executors and Administrators, do
and does severally, and not jointly, covenant, promise, grant and agree to and
with every and each other of the said Parties, his and their several Executors
and Administrators by these Presents, That there shall be had and kept from
time to time, during all time of their joynt-occupying and Co-partnership
together, as aforesaid, as well for the account and affairs on this side the
Sea, and likewise for the several accounts and affairs severally beyond the
Sea, perfect, just and true Books of Accounts and reckonings of all the said
whole Trade and Dealing, as much as in each one his several power, and as
concerning that place or places, and the business and affairs thereunto
appertaining, wherein or whereunto he shall be used or employed, shall and may
be and lie, which shall be had, used and occupied by reason of the said
joynt-occupying. And that the said R.B. and T.B. shall have the custody and
keeping of the books of account for England, and all things concerning the
Trade of England, the said W.C shall have the custody for the Books concerning
the Trade for Spain, and the said T.L shall have the custody and keeping of the
Books concerning the Trade of Stoade and Germany, in every of which the said
Books, shall be according to the possibility of each ones power, justly and
truly entered and set down all manner of goods, wares, and Merchandises
whatsoever, either bought or sold by means or reason of the said Copartnership
and joynt-occupying, with all debts thereof or therefrom from time to time to
be made, together also with all the gains, profit, commodity, winning or
increasing that God shall send, and shall come of and by reason of the said
joynt-occupying and also of such costs, losses, charges and expenses, as are or
shall be expended, disbursed, laid forth, had or suffered by any ways or means
by reason of the said joynt-occupying; which said Book shall be used in common
to and for the behoof of every and each of the said several Parties, their and
every of their several Executors and Administrators, to have free access and
recourse unto, without let or interruption of each other, or the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of each other. And also, that every and each one of
the said Parties shall from time to time, during all the time of their said
joynt-occupying and co-partnership together as is aforesaid, according to the
possibility respectively in each one of them, show and make privy each unto
other, and to such of the said Servants and Apprentices of each other, that
shall attend upon the said Trade, all the affairs and dealings of the said
Trade needful and necessary therein, thereabouts or thereunto belonging or to
be manifest, or made known. And also, that every and each one of the said
parties twice in every year yearly during the said term (or oftener if need
require) at, and upon the reasonable request of any of them to the other, shall
to the best and uttermost of each ones power and knowledge, and as much as in
him or them be or may be, make, yield, render and perfect unto every, and each
other, or to the Executors or Assigns of every and each other, at or in the
City of London a just true and perfect account and reckoning of all the said
stock and stocks in the said Schedule mentioned; and also of all such other
goods, wares, merchandises and ready-money, as at any time hereafter during
their said Trade and joynt-occupying together, shall come to any of their
several hands, occupying, custody or governance, or to the hands of any other
person or persons, to any of their several or joint uses, or by any their joint
and several deliveries or appointments, or by the delivery or appointment of
any the Factors, or Servants of them, or any of them, by reason of the said
joynt-occupying: And also of all the gains, profits and increase that God shall
send of the same stock, goods, wares, merchandises, and ready money, or
otherwise, by reason or occasion of the said joynt-occupying, and also of all
such debts and duties as shall be owing unto the said parties, or any of them,
and by them to be owing to any person or persons by reason of the said
joynt-occupying; and that upon the perfecting and finishing of every such
account, all the said parties, their Executors and Administrators shall
subscribe their names to the same, witnessing each ones consent and agreement
thereunto, for avoiding of doubts and questions which otherwise might happen or
ensue.

And further, That it shall and may be lawful to and for every, and each of the
said several parties, and the Executors, Administrators, Servants, Factors and
Assigns of them, and every or any of them, at all convenient and seasonable
time and times, during all the time of their joynt-occupying together, at the
liberty and pleasure of any of the said parties, their or any of their
Executors, Administrators, Servants, Factors or Assigns, to have access and
recourse to the Books of Account and reckonings, and to the notes and
remembrances appertaining to the same any ways touching or concerning the said
Trade of joynt-occupying; and to search, peruse, and examine for the better
discerning and trying out of all things, how and in what sort and condition the
said Trade and joynt-occupying does and shall from time to time proceed and
stand. And it is further covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and
between the said parties to these presents, and every one of the said several
parties before named for himself respectively, and for his several Executors
and Administrators, do and does severally, and not jointly, covenant, promise,
grant and agree to and with the other of them, his and their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns by these presents, That no Bill, Writing, Contract
or Bargain shall be made, at any time, during the said joynt-occupying together
in the parts beyond the Seas, for any matter touching the said Trade, otherwise
than in the name of the said R.B. etc. if the same with reasonable convenience
may be done: And that there shall no private occupying or Trade of buying and
selling, be had, used or occupied by any the said several parties, or any of
their Factors, Servants or Apprentices, or any of them, or by any other to or
for their uses, benefits or behoofs, in any wise or condition whatsoever, at
any time or times during the time of their said Co-partnership, to the hurt and
injury of the said General Trade, other than such as that the gain, commodity,
advantage and profits thereof, shall equally be to the use of them the said
R.B. W.C T.L. and T. B. proportionably, according to the rate and proportion of
their several Stocks aforesaid, saving, That it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said R. B. at his liberty and pleasure, with his overplus of stock at
any time or times during the Co-partnership, to use his Trade to and for the
East Indies, and also for employing of his Ships, and to send and dispose any
other his money out by way of Loan or Use, and saving, that it shall or may be
lawful to and for all the said parties, during the term of their said Trade,
to deal for other men, with whom they shall no ways have any partnership, and
not hinder or be injurious to the said joynt-Trade, and to receive the
Factorage thereof to their own proper use, any thing aforesaid to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding.

And it is further covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between the
said parties to these presents, and each one of the said several parties for
himself respectively, and for his several Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, do and does interchangeably, severally and respectively, and not
jointly, covenant, grant and agree to and with the other of them, his and their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, That they the said
R.B. W.C. T.L. and T.B. their and every of their Executors and Administrators,
shall and will within the space of two months next ensuing the end,
determination or dissolution of the said term of Copartnership, whether the
same be by expiration of the said term of three years, or by the death and
decease of any of the said parties, which soever of the same shall first
happen, at or upon the request of every or any of them, unto the other, or the
Executors or Administrators of any of them, make, yield, render and perfect
every one each of them to the other, and the Executors and Administrators of
every and each of them, unto the other, at the now dwelling house of the said
R. B. situate, etc. a just, true, perfect and final account and reckoning in
writing to the uttermost of every and each man's power and knowledge, of all and
every the said Stock and Stocks mentioned in the said Schedule, and of all the
gains and increase, loss and damage which God shall send, and which shall grow
to or by the same, and of all Goods, Wares, Merchandises and Commodities,
before that time, had, bought, sold or dealt in with the same stock or stocks
and gains aforesaid, and of all debts made and being due, Sum and Sums of money
received or paid out by means or in respect of the said Trade, and generally of
all buying, bargaining, selling, trading and merchandising, by the said Parties
or any of them, with the said Stock or Stocks, and gains and increase thereof
aforesaid; and that then upon the perfecting and finishing of the said final
account, so as aforesaid to be made and done, all and every the said stock and
stocks in the said Schedule mentioned then remaining, and the gains, winning
and increase which God shall send, and shall appear to become and growing
thereof, or by reason of the said Trade aforesaid, whether the same shall
consist in Money, Wares, Debts or otherwise, shall be indifferently parted,
shared, paid and divided to and amongst the said parties, their Executors and
Administrators, in kind proportionably and rateably, without fraud, deceit or
diminishing, in that full measure, as each ones several part shall justly and
truly, in a true reckoning and computation thereof, arise and amount unto, in
and upon every hundred pounds thereof, according to the quantity of each ones
several stock and stocks in the said Schedule appearing and mentioned, and
according to the plain true intent and meaning of these presents; and that such
part and portion of the said stock and gains, as upon the perfecting of the
said final account, shall appear to be and consist in the said debts and
duties, due and owing to the said Parties, or any of them, shall also from time
to time, as the same, or any of them shall be recovered or gotten in, by the
said parties, or any of them, be also parted, shared and divided to and amongst
the said parties, according to the like rate, order, division and proportion as
is before herein also expressed and set down, the debts, duties and other
charges then to be owing or payable by the said parties, or any of them, for or
in respect of the said joint Trade, being first and before all things, thereout
paid, deducted and allowed, and likewise the losses, if any shall be, to be in
like proportion born and sustained according to the rateable division of the
gains aforesaid, and that then they the said Parties and every of them, their
Executors and Administrators, immediately upon the perfecting and finishing of
the said final account, partition and division as aforesaid, shall and will do
their, and every of their endeavors, by all the lawful ways and means that
they, or any of them may or can, for the more speedy recovery and getting in of
all and every the said several debts and duties, from time to time to be due,
or owing to them or any of them, as part of the games and stock aforesaid. And
that the charges of suing for, and getting in of the said debts and duties from
time to time, shall be born and paid by all the said parties rareable according
to the quantity of their several stocks and gains aforesaid. And that if it
shall happen any the said parties to die, or depart this life during the said
Co-partnership, that then in any such case no Right or Survivor or Survivorship
shall hold or take place, or be by them, or any of them any wise challenged,
claimed or demanded, but that they the said parties, and every of them, shall
and may lawfully give, devise, dispose and distribute his and their parts and
portions of the said stock and stocks, gains and increases to them severally
and properly to belong and to be due, and belonging by the true intent and
meaning of these presents, by their, or any of their last Wills and Testaments,
or by any other gift or devise, as fully and amply, as they, or any of them
could or might do of their own proper money and goods, not pertinent to this a
count or joint tra^. And likewise the executors and administrators of every
such person and persons so deceasing, may have and enjoy his and their full
rateable partand portion of the stock and stocks aforesaid, and of the gains
and increase thereof, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, without any let, nouble, hinderance or interruption of anyother of
the said parties surviving or overliving, his or their executors,
administrators or assigns, or any of them, any usage, law, custom or other
impediment to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And that all the said
parties and persons, before mentioned, their executors and administrators, at
all times, as well during the said term of Co-partnership, as afterward,
until the end of the whole business shall be fully finished and brought to
perfection, by all the good waves and means that possibly can or may be, shall
be aiding and assisting unto every and each other of them, their executors and
administrators, for the obtaining, speedy getting quiet holding and enjoying of
every and each ones private and particular parts or portion to him or them to
be due upon the partition or division aforesaid, according as to right and
equity therein appertains and belongs, and that without fraud or coven; And
it is the intent, plain and true meaning of every and each one of the said
parties to these presents, and each one of the said parties for himself
respectively, for his own several and particular part, and for his own several
and particular Executors and Administrators, do and does interchangeably,
severally, and not jointly, covenant and grant to and with every and each one
of them the said Parties, his and their several Executors and Administrators,
by these Presents, That it shall not be lawful to or for any of the said
Parties at any time, during the said Co-partnership, to take out or diminish
any part of the said stock, or any the gains and increase thereof, other than
such Sum and Sums of money as hereafter in and by these presents, is licenced
and allowed, and that no charge shall in any wise be put to the account of the
Co-partnership, but such as shall be for the Trade of Merchandising in Trade
and occupying of the Stock and Stocks aforesaid, and the gains and increases
that of them and concerning the same shall come, arise or increase, unless it
be convenient house-room, and ware-house-rooms in the Parts beyond the Seas,
and for suing and getting in of debts and duties belonging to the joynt-Trade,
and other necessary charges belonging to Merchandise, necessary and behoveful
for their said joynt-occupying, to be born to the general Account of the said
joynt-Trade, the charges or ware-house-room diet, lodging, and such like, for
the time any of the said Parties shall be within the City of London, during the
time of the said Co-partnership; to be upon the particular and sole charge
only of the said R.B. his Executors and Administrators.

And it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between all the
said Parties to these presents, and each one of the said Parties for himself
respectively, and for his own several and particular part, and for his own
several Executors and Administrators, do and does, etc. by these presents, That
he the said W.C. by way of further recompense, his Executors or Administrators,
shall every year yearly, for and during all the time of the said Copartnership,
be yearly allowed out of the joyntstock and general Account, and thereby to be
born, the yearly Sum of 148 l. of lawful, etc. over and above all other his
gains and allowance herein before mentioned, 100 l. yearly, whereof it shall or
may be lawful to and for the said W. C. to take out of the same to use, spend,
bestow and convert at his own free will and pleasure, so far forth that the
said W. C. do leave yearly the residue, being the Sum of 84 l. to rest, remain
and run to and in use to and with the said general Stock, during the said
Co-partnership; The profit and loss of which yearly Sum of 84 l. to be
divident to and amongst the said Parties in like manner, according to the
division and proportion of their several stocks aforesaid, and the 84 l. yearly
being the Principal, together with so much of the said yearly Rent of 100 l.
not formerly taken out, at the end and determination of the Co-partnership, to
be to the said W. C. his Executors and Administrators, fully satisfied and
paid, or otherwise by him the said W. C. his Executors or Administrators out of
his account to be deducted, and defaulked; and that he the said T. L. his
executors or administrators, shall by way of further recompense every year
yearly for and during, etc. prout supra, for W. C. any matter, cause article or
thing before in these presents contained or rehearsed to the contrary thereof
in any wife notwithstanding. And finally, it is covenanted, granted and agreed
by and between the said parties to these presents, that each one of the said
several parties before named, for himself respectively, and for his several
Executors and Administrators, do and does interchangeably, severally, and not
jointly, covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with each other and every of
them, his and their several Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these
presents, that if it shall fortune any variance, suit, difference, doubt,
controversy, discord or contention to happen, grow or be moved by and between
the said parties, or any of them, or the Executors or Administrators of them,
or any of them for, or upon, or by reason of the said Trade and joint
occupyings, or any matter or thing theteupon depending, upon, or by reason of
any matter or thing in these presents expressed or set down, that then, and so
often from time to time, as the same shall so happen, and before any suit
arise, or trouble shall be attempted or sought by any of them, against the
other: all and every the said variances differences, strifs, doubts,
controversies and contentions, shall from time to time, be referred and
submitted to the hearing, order, award and determination of four honest
persons, being of the Company of Merchant-adventures of England, for the time
being, whereof one shall be chosen for the said R. B. his executors or
administrators, one other, etc. for the other three, as arbitrators in an for
all and every the premises, if that shall be content to undertake the
variances, strifes and contentions, so to them be referred within the space of
one Month next after such referment and submission to them made: And further,
that they the said R.B. W.C. T.L. and T. B. and every of them, their and every
of their executors and administrators respectively, for their and every of
their own several and particular parts, shall and will from time to time stand
to, abide, obey, perform, fulfill and keep all and every such end and ends,
determination and judgment, as by the said four persons, so as aforesaid to be
chosen, shall from time to time be had, made and given up in writing, for and
the behalf of the said parties as touching, any the variances or differences
a^orsaid, without any further coven or deceit. In witness, etc.

An acknowledgment of a trust in an Indenture of bargain and sale.
THis Indenture made, etc. whereas T. W. of, etc. by this Indenture of bargain
and sale, bearing date, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned, did
grant, bargain and sell unto he said I.H.S.T.A.P. and R.L. their heirs and
assigns for ever, all that Manor, etc. (recite the bargain and sale to the end
of the Habend) as in and by the said Indenture of bargain and sale, amongst
diverse other Covenants, grants and agreements therein contained, more at large
it does and may appear. Which said recited Indenture of bargain and sale was
so made unto the said I.H.S.T. and A.P. of meet and special trust and
confidence, to and for the only use, benefit and behoof of the said S.S. his
Heirs and assigns. Now this Indenture witnesses, that the said I.H. etc. do
hereby confess and acknowledge, that the said recited Indenture of bargain and
sale, was, and is made to and in the names of them the said I. H. etc. of mere
and special trust and confidence, to and for the use and beh^of of the said
S.S. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And further the said I H. etc. in
accomplishment and performance of the trust and confidence aforesaid, do for
them, and every of them, covenant and grant jointly and severally to and with
the said S.S. their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and assigns, by these
presents, that they the said I. H. etc. their Heirs and assigns, shall and will
from time to time hereafter, upon reasonable request therefore to be made, and
at the costs and charges in the Law of the said S.S. his Heirs, and Assigns,
bargain, sell, convey and assure the said Manors, and all and singular other
the premises by the said recited Indenture of bargain and sale granted and
sold, or meant, mentioned or intended to be thereby bargained and sold, and
every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their appurtinances,
unto the said S.S. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in such sort, man^r and
form, as by the said S.S. his Heirs and Assigns, or his or their Council
learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or advised vised and required,
so always, that the same Conveyances or Assurances, or any of them, contain no
further or other warranties than only against the said J. H. etc. and their
Heirs. And further, That at any time of the making and passing of such
Conveyance or Assurance as aforesaid, the said Manor, and all and singular
other the Premises shall be free, clear and discharged of and from all and all
manner of former bargains, sales, gifts, grants and encumbrances whatsoever,
then before had, made, committed or d^ne by them the said J H. etc. or any of
them, or of or by any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by,
from or under them, or any of them, In witness, etc.

An acknowledgment of a Trust by a Deed-Poll of a Lease.
TO all, etc. I T.M. of, etc. send greeting, etc. Whereas C. D. of, etc. by one
Indenture of Lease made between, etc. and, etc. has demised, etc. as in and
by, etc. Now know ye, That I the said T. M. do hereby confess and acknowledge,
that the Lease or demise of the Premises aforesaid, was and is made to and in
the name of me the said T.M. in trust and confidence, and to the intent that I
the said T.M. should upon the request of the said E. G. her Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, assign and convey the said Lease and Premises to
her the said E.G. her Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or to such other
person or persons as she or they in that behalf shall name or appoint: and
therefore in accomplishment and performance of the trust and confidence
aforesaid, I the said T.M. for me, mine Executors and Administrators, do
covenant and grant to and with the said E.G. her Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, by these presents, That I the said T.M. my Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, shall and will from time to time, upon the reasonable request, and
at the costs and charges of the said E.G. her Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, assign and set over the abovementioned premises, and every of them,
and all the estate and interest of me the said T.M. my Executors and
Administrators, in and to the same, clear and discharged of all encumbrances by
us, or any of us to be done or committed unto the said E.G. her Executors or
Administrators, or to such person or persons as she or they shall name or
appoint. In witness, etc.

A Conveyance of Lands to the use of a man's Heirs, with the profit during the
Heirs minority, limited to the payment of the Donors debts, and porformance of
the Testament.
THis Indenture made, etc. between the Right Honorable W. Viscount Hereford,
etc. of the one part, and the Right Honorable A. Lord Gray, and alii, etc. on
the other part, witnesses, That the said Viscount, for and in consideration of
the Fatherly goodwill, favor and affection which the said Viscount bears
toward R. and W. the two Sons of the said Viscount, and for the advancement
and preferment of the Heirs males of the body of the said Viscount lawfully to
be begotten, and for other the considerations hereafter in these Presents
mentioned and expressed, has given, granted, enfeoffed and confirmed, and by
these presents does give, grant, enfeoff and confirm unto the said A. Lord
Gray, etc. all those his Manors, etc. with all and singular Liberties, Courts,
Views of Frank-pledge, Fairs, Commodities, Franchises, Privileges,
Jurisdictions, Preheminences, Emoluments and Appurtenances whatsoever to or
with the said Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments used or enjoyed, in or
out of the same, or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof, issuing,
renewing, happening, used or exercised, and all, etc.

To have and to hold, etc. to the said A. L. G. etc. and their Heirs for ever,
to the use and behoof of the said V. for term of his life, without impeachment
of waste, and after the decease of the said V. and during the time that the
said R. D. Son, and now Heir apparent of the said V. or any other, being the
heir of the said V. shall be under the age of 21 years, and until some Heir of
the said V. shall have accomplished the full age of 21 years, to the use of the
said A. L. G. and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and the Executors and
Administrators of the Surveyor of them upon trust; and to the intent and
purpose that the said A. L. G. etc. and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and
the Executors and Administrators of the Survivor of them, shall take, receive,
levy, possess, use, and enjoy the Rents, Issues, Profits, Revenues,
Commodities and Emoluments of all and singular the said Lordships, Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the Premises, with the
Appurtenances, and the same employ during such minority or minorities, as is
aforesaid, for and toward the performance, payment and satisfaction of all the
Legacies and Bequests of money, Annuities for years, and Debts of the said V.
to be mentioned in the Testament and last Will of the said V. according to the
tenor, purport and true meaning of the said V. in his said Testament and last
Will to be declared, and to the use and intent that the said Feoffees, and the
Survivor and Survivors of them and their Heirs, shall with the Profits,
Revenues, Commodities, Issues and Emoluments, coming, growing and arising of
and in all and singular the said Lordships, Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, bestow, disburse and expend from time to time the competent and
necessary Charges in the Law, and otherwise for the defense and maintenance of
the possession and title of all and singular the Premises, and every or any
part thereof, and for the Reparation and defense of the Buildings, Edifices,
Houses and Sea-walls in and upon the Premises, or any part thereof from time
to time necessary, meet and convenient to be disbursed and expended, until
such time as the said Legacies, debts and bequests of the said V. to be
mentioned in his Testament, shall be performed, and until some heir of the
said V. shall have accomplished the full age of 21 years, and after
satisfaction of the said Legacies, debts and Annuities, and for the surplusage
that shall surmount the same Debts, Legacies and Annuities, and other the
charges aforesaid satisfied, to the use and intent, that the said A. L G. etc.
shall employ and suffer the Premises and surplusage thereof, to go, remain and
come to the use, profit and benefit of the heirs of the said V. And after the
heirs of the said V. shall accomplish the full age of, etc. that then the said
A. L G. etc. and their heirs, shall stand and be seized of and in all and
singular the said Manors, etc. to the use of the said R. D. and the heirs
males of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of such heirs males of the
said R.D. lawfully begotten, to the use and behoof of the said W. D. second Son
of the said V. and the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten; and for
default of such heirs males of the body of the said W. D. lawfully begotten and
to be begotten, to the use and behoof of the heirs males of the said V.
lawfully begotten, and for default of such heir, to the use of the heirs of the
body of the said V. and for default of such issue, to the use of the right heir
of the said R. for ever.

Provided always, and it is the true meaning, use and intent of these
presents, That if the said V. at any time hereafter during his lifetime, shall
demise, grant or lease the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
aforesaid, and other the Premises by these presents granted or assured, or any
part or parcel thereof, by his deed indented under his seal, and with
subscription of his name with his own proper hand, for term of any year or
years life or lives, that then, and immediately from and after every such
lease, demise or grant, or such leases, demises or grants so to be made by the
said V. the said A. L. G. etc. and their heirs, shall stand and be seized of
and in the said Manor, etc. so to be leased or granted, To the use and behoof
of the same Lessees or Grantees, and every of them, and of their several
executors, administrators and Assigns, during the terms and space mentioned in
the said several leases, grants and demises, so to be made, according to the
tenor, form and effect of the same lease, grant or demise, leases, grants or
demises, so that the yearly Rent or Rents mentioned or reserved by the said V.
in such Lease, Demise or Grant, Leases, Demises or Grants, be yearly paid to
the said V. during his natural life, and after his decease to such person or
persons, as by the proper and true meaning of these presents, ought to have the
Reversion or Remainder, Reversions or Remainders of the Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments so to be leased or granted, within the space of Twenty days next
after reasonable request to be made, for the payment thereof: And so that the
same Lessees or Grantees, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, do well
and truly perform the conditions to be comprised in the Indenture or Indentures
of their said several Demises or Grants, according to the effect and true
meaning of the same Indenture or Indentures.

And that the said A. L. G. etc. shall stand and be seized of the Reversion and
Remainder, the Reversions and Remainders of the Manors. Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments so to be sealed or granted, and after the determination thereof,
Then also of the same Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, so to be
leased or granted, to such uses and intents as they the said L G. etc. should
have stood or been thereof seized, by the purport and true meaning of these
presents, if any such Lease or Grant had been thereof made; and that of and for
such estate and estates, in such order and degree, with the same Remainders and
in such manner and form, to all intents and purposes as they should have stood
or been thereof seized by the purport and true meaning of these presents, if no
such Lease or Grant had been thereof had or made, (here follows a Letter of
Attorney for Livery of Seizin to the Feoffees, etc.) and then a Proviso, That
if the said V. by his writing signed and sealed in the presence of 3 witnesses,
shall repeal, frustrate and determine, or declare to be determined, all or any
the uses aforesaid, of or from the premises, or any part thereof, that then
and from thenceforth the said uses so to be determined or declared to be
repealed, for all such Lands and the uses thereof, so to de declared,
determined, shall be void and of none effect, and that then the Feoffees shall
thereof stand seized to the use and behalf of the said V. and his Heirs: Then
follows a Covenant on the said V. S. part, That if the estate of the
premises be not effectually conveyed him by force of from this Grant to the
said Feoffees, to the uses before-specified, on this side the last day of, etc.
next coming, that then and from thenceforth the said V. and his heirs, and all
others to be seized of the premises, so not sufficiently conveyed, shall be
thereof seized to the uses above-specified, and to such uses, and with such
Remainder as the said Feoffees or the Survivor of them should have stood seized
thereof, by the purport of these presents, in case the estate thereof had been
perfectly assured unto them, or any of them, according to the true meaning of
these presents. In witness whereof, as well the said V. as the Feoffees have
put, etc.

Memorandum of the Seizin executed with the Tenants of one of the said Manors
Atturnment.
MEmorandum, That the sixteenth day of, etc. Livery of Seizin was delivered and
given by W. W. one of the Atturneys mentioned in the Indenture hereunto
annexed, of, in and upon the Lands of the Farm of O. parcel of the Manor of T,
mentioned in the said Indenture, and also of, in and upon the Mannor-house and
demesne-Lands of T. by the assent of J. P. Lessee for years of the same (saving
his term) and also of, in and upon the Coppicewoods called T. P. to R. B. one
of the Feoffees, contained in the said Indenture, according to the tenor,
purport and intent mentioned in the said Indenture, and for and in the name of
the said Manors of T. and all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
mentioned in the said Indenture, situate and being within the said C. and in
the name and behalf of all the Feoffees mentioned in the said Indenture; And
the Tenants of the said Manor, whose names are immediately underwritten, at
the same execution, hearing the Indenture read, did atturn and fully assent to
the same, according to the tenor, purport, intent and uses in the same
Indenture mentioned.

An Indenture for the equal division of Goods, where there are four
Administrators together, they bearing and allowing me with another equal parts
of Charges in Law, in getting in the same, and like parts of all recovered
against them.
THis Indenture Quadripartite, made between J. C. of, etc. on the first part,
W. C. of, etc. of the second part, etc. Whereas the said J. C. and A. his Wife,
W. C. and A. his wife, H. H. and H. his wife, and N. C. and E. his wife, in the
right of the same their wives, together with J. H. brother of their said wives,
have had and taken upon them the Administration of the Goods and Chattels of C.
W. widow, deceased, late the wife of J. W. late of L. Dyer, deceased; And
whereas also so much of the goods, chartels and debts which were of the said C.
as are already come to his hands, are divided into five several parts, whereof
every of the said J. C. W. C. H. H. and N. C. in the right of their said wives,
and also the said J. H. have severally had and taken their several parts of the
same, and now are thereof severally possessed.

Now this Indenture witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted and agreed
between the said Parties; and the said J. W. H. and N. for themselves and their
said wives, and for their Executors and Administrators, and for the Executors
and Administrators of every of them, do severally covenant, grant and agree
every of them with the other by these Indentures, in manner and form following,
(viz.) That all the residue of the goods, chattels and debts which were of the
said C. in possession or in right, which at any time or times hereafter shall
come to the hands of any of the said Parties, or of the Executors or
Administrators of any of them, shall be divided and parted into 5. equal parts,
as aforesaid, from time to time, as the same shall happen to come to the hand
of any of them, whereof the said J. H. to have one part of the said five parts,
and that then the other four parts thereof shall from time to time be equally
divided betwixt the said J. W. H. and N. and their several Executors and
Administrators, without benefit of Survivorship by any means to grow to such of
the said Parties or their wives as shall fortune to survive.

And it is further covenanted betwixt the said Parties in form aforesaid
severally, That if any Action or Suit be now depending, or hereafter shall be
commenced against the said Administrators of the said C. W. or any of them, for
any thing wherewith they shall be chargeable in the Law, by reason of the said
administration by them taken as aforesaid, That then in every such case, the
said J. W. H. and N. their Executors and Administrators, and every of them
severally for his own part, upon notice and request made and given by any one
of them to the other, or by any of their Executors or Administrators, shall
bear and pay one equal fourth part of all charges and expenses to be laid out
in the defense of any such Suit, and one like fourth part in execution, and to
the satisfaction of any Judgment and Recovery which shall happen to be given or
had against them, or any of them, in any such Sure or Action as aforesaid.

And that they the said J. W. H. and N. their said Wives, their Executors or
Administrators, and the Executors or Administrators of every of them severally
for their own part upon like reasonable request, shall and will do, knowledge
and suffer in the Law toward the other of them all and every thing and things
which from time to time shall be requisite or needful to accomplish and perform
their Accord, Covenant and Agreements made amongst them by these presents,
according to the purport and true meaning of the same.

And moreover, That they the said Parties, their Executors and Administrators,
and every of them, upon like request, as aforesaid, shall notify, express and
truly declare from time to time to the other, all such goods, chattels and
debts whatsoever which were of the said C. and which they shall know and
understand to be in any place or custody, and not parted, distributed, severed
and divided, according to the tenor and effect of these presents, to the intent
every of them may have his or their equal parts thereof, according to the
tenor of these presents, without fraud or coven.

And that for recovery of any debts, goods and chattels, which were of the said
O. to be had and recovered to and for the use of the said Parties, their
Executors and Administrators, and of the said J. H. and in manner and form
aforesaid, They and every of them shall for their equal four parts, bear and
sustain one equal fourth part of all costs and charges in and about all and
every the said Recovery and Recoveries, to be born and sustained from time to
time, as shall be needful and reasonable.

And it is further covenanted, granted and agreed betwixt the said Parties, the
said Parties and every of them do also for them, their Executors and
Administrators severally covenant and grant to and with the other by these
presents, That if it fortune the said J. H. do dye intestate, by reason whereof
any of the goods, chattels, money, plate or jewels of the said J. shall grow or
come by reason of Law unto the said Parties, or their wives, or any of them,
that then the Survivor or Survivors of the said Parties, or their said wives,
their Executors or Administrators, to whom any such the goods, chattels, money,
plate or jewels shall fortune to grow or come, shall divide the same into four
equal and several parts, and shall retain to his or their use one part thereof,
and the other three parts shall be severally delivered unto the other three
parties to these Indentures, to their several Executors or Administrators
equally, within two months after they shall fortune to have or come by the
possession of any such goods, chattels, plate, jewels, money, etc. In witness,
etc.

A Defeazance upon a Statute excellently well penned, it being for the payment
of Two thousand pounds, at the end of six months, and of 200 l. per annum
during life.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of etc. in the, etc. of our Lord God, etc.
between B. P. of London, Widow, of the one part, and W. P. of London aforesaid
Esquire, Son unto the said B. of the other part. Whereas the said W. P. has
lately sold and conveyed the Manor of L. in the County of W. and diverse Lands
thereunto belonging, unto Sir W. P. Knight, and the said B. P. has joined with
him the said W. L. in the Fine thereof levied, part of which said Manor and
Lands of the value of 200 l. per annum, were heretofore settled and assured upon
her the said B. for her life, for her Jointure, by W. P. Esquire deceased, her
late Husband; and whereas the said W. P. is indebted to the said B. the Sum of
Two thousand pounds of lawful money of England, which has remained in his
hands for some years last past, and by agreements between them, the said W. P.
has hitherto paid the Sum of 200 l. per annum, as interest or consideration
for forbearance of the said Money, and is still to pay the like Sum so long as
the 2000 l. shall remain in his hand.

And whereas also the said W. P. by one Recognizance or Writing Obligatory of
the nature of a Statute of the Staple, bearing date the first day of this
instant Month of April, taken and acknowledged before Sir J. B. Knight, Lord
Chief Justice of the Court of Kings Bench at Westminster, according to the form
of the Statute in that case made and provided for the recovery of debts,
stands bound unto the said B. P. in five thousand pounds of lawful money of
England, payable, as by the said recited recognizance or writing obligatory
more plainly may appear; Now this Indenture witnesses, that the said B. P. is
contented and pleased, and does for her self, her Executors and Administrators,
covenant, promise and grant, and agree to and with the said W. P. his heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, That if the said W. P. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, or any of them, do pay, or cause to be paid to the said B. P. or her
Assigns, the sum of 200 l. of lawful money of England yearly, for and during
the natural life of her the said B. at two usual Feasts or terms in the year,
that is to say, the Feasts of St. Michael the Archangel, and the Annunciation
of the blessed Virgin Mary, by even and equal portions, or within one and
twenty days next after either of the said Feasts, the first payment thereof to
begin at the Feast of, etc. now next ensuing, or within 21 days next after the
said Feast; And likewise if the said W. P. his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, or any of them, do and shall well and truly pay or cause to be
paid to the said B. P. her Executors, or Administrators, or Assigns, the sum of
two thousand pounds of lawful money of England within six months next after
notice or warning given to that purpose to the said W. P. his Heirs, Executors
or Administrators by any writing to be subscribed and sealed by the said B. P.
her Executors or Administrators in the presence of two credible witnesses, or
more, and shall in the mean time, until the payment of the said 200 l. pay or
cause to be paid unto the said B. her Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
after the rate of One hundred pounds per annum, according to the Agreement
aforesaid, the same to be paid by 50 l. every half-year, and the first payment
thereof to be made on the Feast Day of, etc. or within one and twenty days
next after the said Feast now next ensuing the date thereof; that then the said
recited recognizance or writing obligatory shall be void and of none effect, or
else the said W. P. for him, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
covenanteth, wills and grants by these presents, that the said recognizance
or writing obligatory shall stand and remain in full force and virtue.

An Assignment of a Statute, by an executor to two of the Creditors of the
Testator, in lieu and satisfaction of their Debts of the same value, singularly
well dra^n.
THis Indenture made, etc. between I C. of the Inner Temple London, Esquire,
Son and Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of W. C. late Citizen and
Scrivener of London Deceased, of the one part, and M. W. of London Widow, and
H. I. of London Gentleman, of the other part. Whereas the said W. C. at the
time of his death, stood indebted unto the said M. W. in the Sum of 100 l.
principal debt, and to the said H. I. in the sum of 200 l. principal debt,
besides interest of the said debts; And whereas Sir T. P. of N. in the C. of D.
Knight, in and by one recognizance or statute, in the nature of a
statute-staple, bearing date the 20 day of July, in the ninth year of the Reign
of the late King Charles, and made according to the Statute made and proceed
for recovery of debts, taken and knowledged before Sir R. H. Knight, then Lord
Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, is and
stands bound unto the said W. C in the sum of six hundred pounds of lawful
money of England, payable at the Feast of Saint James the Apostle, then next
ensuing, as by the said Statute more at large appears. Now this Indenture
witnesses, that the said J. C. for and toward the payment and satisfaction of
the said debts, due unto the said M. W. and H. I. has given, granted, assigned
and set over unto the said M. W. and H. I. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, the said Recognizance or Statute, and all his right and interest
therein, and all actions, extents and executions to be had and prosecuted upon
the same, in as large and ample manner and form as he the said J. C. has, or
at any time hereafter may or might have, by force of the said Statute. And
further the said J. C. does by these presents constiture, authorize and make
the said M. W. and H. I. his true and irrevocable, lawful Attorney and
Atturneys, jointly and severally to s^e and prosecute all manner of actions,
suits, demands and executions, in and upon the said Statute or Recognizance in
the name of the said J C. his Executors or Administrators, and to receive or
recover the said sum of 600 l. in the said Statute mentioned, and all other sum
and sums of money, benefit and advantage, which shall or may lawfully be had or
gotten upon the said Statute or Recognizance, authorizing them, and every of
them by these presents to retain all such Counselors and Atturneys, for the
executing of the said suits, extents and executions, as shall be required for
the following and furthering of the same, and to do and execute all and every
other lawful Act and Acts whatsoever, which shall be meet and expedient in and
about the premises; and the said J. C. does for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said M. W. and J.
H. that he the said J. C. his Executors and Administrators, shall and will
permit, suffer, allow, justify and maintain, all such lawful actions, suits,
extents and executions, as the said M. W. and H. I. or any of them, their
Executors or Assigns, shall and will sue or prosecute, for the levying, taking
and receiving of the said sum of 600 l. contained in the said Statute, in the
name of the said J. C. his Executors or Administrators, and that all sum and
sums of money, recoveries and executions to be had and obtained upon the same
by any Suit, Action or Execution or otherwise, shall be to the only use of the
said M. W. and H. I. to be divided betwixt them proportionably according to
their several debts, in as large and ample manner and form as the said J. C.
might have had the same, and that the said J. C. has not, nor he, his
Executors or Administrators, shall not at any time hereafter release or
discharge the said debt contained in the said Statute, nor any action, extent
or execution to be had upon the same, nor do any act or acts in prejudice of
the same: And further, that he the said J. C. his Executors and Administrators,
shall at any time during the space of two years next after such time as the
said Statute shall be executed by way of extent, make or cause to be made to
the said M. W. and H. I. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to the
only use and behoof of them the said M. W. and H. I. as aforesaid, upon
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of them the said M.
W. and H. I. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, all such reasonable
assurance and conveyance of the Land which shall be extended and put in
execution upon the said Statute, as shall be reasonably devised by the said M.
W. and H. I. or either of them, their Executors Administrators or Assigns, or
their, or any of their Counsel learned in the Law, discharged of all
encumbrances done by the said J. C. his Executors or Administrators, In
witness, etc.

PRESIDENTS FOR Bills, Answers, Replications, Demurrers, Rejoynders, etc. in
Chancery.
A Bill to be relieved against Bonds, being but a Surety, and for obtaining an
Injunction.
To the Right Honorable Sir Orlando Bridgeman Knight and Baron^ Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal of England.
IN all Humbleness Complaining, shows unto your good Lordship, your daily
Orator, J. S. etc. That whereas about a year now last past, your said Orator
having but lately before attained to his full Age of 21 years, and being in
possibility of good means from his Father, was inveigled and drawn in by one J.
H. of I. Goldsmith, and one G. B. whom the said H. used for his Instrument
therein, and did at their solicitations and persuasions, and upon their
promises to supply your Orator with Money for his then present occasions, enter
into, and became bound, together with the said B. and one I. I. then a stranger
to your Orator, unto the said I. H. in and by two several Bonds of Obligations,
the one^^ them bearing date in or about, etc. being of the penalty of 20 (...)
with condition for the payment of 100 l. or thereabouts, at S^^ Months then
following, or some other time in the said Condition mentioned, now long since
past, and the other of the said Bon^^ bearing date, etc. at the time of entering
into which said Bonds, yo^^ Orator was confidently told and promised, as well
by the said G. B. as by the said J. H. that he your said Orator should have for
(...) own use, all, or the greatest part of the Money mentioned in the several
conditions thereof, and that he should not be compelled (...) repay unto the
said J. H. any more Money, but only so much as he should receive upon the
Security of the said Bonds, and the interest thereof, after the rate allowable
by the Statute, and that he should not be troubled with any payment, until he
well were enabled by his Fathers means to discharge it which moved your Orator
the more willingly to enter into the said Bonds, he presuming that he should
have had his want of ready Money supplied thereby; but after your Orator had
entered into, sealed and delivered the said Bonds, he could not get, nor did
receive of, or from the said J. H. the Obligee, or any other, any Money at all,
or other thing whatsoever, nor was there any Money at all, or other thing of
any value disbursed, paid or delivered by the said J. H. upon, for or in
respect of the said Bonds so entered into, or either of them; but if any Money
or Commodities were disbursed or delivered for or upon the said Bonds, then was
it of small value, and that received only by the said G. B. who either
converted the same unto and for his own private use, or else paid it back and
restored it to the said J. H. or whatsoever it were, howsoever disposed of, yet
had not your Orator ever any penny, or part thereof, and thereof your Orator
presumed he should not have been any way troubled, sued or molested, upon or by
reason of the said Bonds, or either of them, he having not received the Money,
or any part thereof, for which the same were intended, nor any consideration at
all, for, or in respect of such intended, nor any consideration at all, for, or
in respect of such his entering into the said Bonds, but was greatly
disappointed for want thereof, to his no small hindrance, as was and is well
known both to the said J. H. and G. B. whom after the entering into the said
Bonds, your Orator often solicited for the Money thereupon promised unto him,
and they as often delayed him with promises thereof, but to this day your
Orator never had, nor could get from them, or either of them, any money,
commodities or other considerations whatsoever, and so was merely abused by
them therein. Yet now so it is, may it please your good Lordship, that the said
J. H. and G. B. intending to make a prey of your Orator, and having to that end
drawn him into the Bonds aforesaid, and being combined and confederated to lay
upon him the whole burden and penalty thereof, have, the better to effect, the
same so plotted, as that the said G. B. who was and is privy to the whole
passage of the business before mentioned, and whom the said H. used as his
Instrument to draw your Orator into the said Bonds, has lately, since the
money mentioned in the Conditions thereof, become thereby due, absented himself
with the privity, and by the procurement of the said H. and lives now in
remote and obscure places unknown to your Orator, but well known to the said
J.H. who while the said B. was here present, never demanded of your Orator any
money at all nor any way questioned him upon the said Bonds, or either of them;
but now the said G.B. (who could detect his dealing in the premises) being
absent, and kept out of the way, be the said J.H. upon advantage therein, and
in pursuance of their plot aforesaid, does now pretend and give out in
speeches, that the said Bonds were real Securities, and entered into for just
debts, and that your Orator, and the said B.B. and I.I. or some one of them,
had of the said H. Money or Commodities of the value of Money mentioned in the
Conditions of the said Bonds, which money he pretends to be still
unsatisfied, and the said Bonds thereby forfeited; and thereupon he the said
I.H. has of late arrested your Orator, and commenceth, or threatens to
commence and prosecute several Suits against him at the Common Law upon the
said several Bonds, and spareing the said G.B. (whom he has purposely
absented) bends all his force against your Orator; and albeit he the said
I.I. has received satisfaction of and from the said B.B. and I.I and of and
from some others in their use, or in their behalf, of and for all the money and
Commodities, if any other were lent and delivered by him upon the said Bond,
and knows well, that your Orator had never any part of such money or
Commodity, or any consideration at all, for or in respect of his entering into
the said Bonds, but was merely drawn thereunto upon the promises aforesaid,
which were never performed unto him; yet he the said I.H. continues still his
suit, and threatenings of suit against your Orator, at the Common Law upon the
said Bonds with intent to recover of him the whole penalties thereof: and the
said B. B. gives way and furtherance thereunto, and will take no course to
free and discharge your Orator thereof, nor will the said I.H. seek for
satisfaction as he ought (if any be due unto him at the hand of the said B.B.)
nor discover where the said B.B. is, but both of them by a joint confederacy
between them, intend to lay upon your Orator the whole burden and penalties of
both the said Bonds, and then to share and divide the same between them,
contrary to all rites and rules of Equity, and to your said Orators apparent
wrong and supportable hindrance, unless he may find redress for the same before
your Lordships in the justice and equity of this honorable Court. In tender
consideration whereof, and of all the aforesaid premises, and for that your
Orator is void of all remedy by the course of the Common Laws of this Land, to
relieve himself in the said premises, and cannot there plead the matter of
Equity before alleged, nor any other sufficient Plea in Bar, or be discharged
of the said Bonds, and of the Suits there commenced and threatened against him
thereupon, nor can thereby compel the said B.B. to take any course for your
Orators discharge of the said Bonds, and there enforce him and the said I.H. to
perform and make good unto your Orator their promises aforesaid, for that your
Orator has no such precise proof of the said premises by witnesses now living
and extant, as the Common Law in such cases requires; but your said Orator is
for all those matters before your Lordships in course of Equity properly to be
relieved, where he hops the said I H. and B. B. will upon their Oaths, if
they may be thereunto called, confess their said promises, and the premises
to be true in such sort, as aforesaid; or if they shall deny the same, that yet
your Orator shall be able to make such proof thereof by circumstances as may in
Equity move your Lordships to relieve him therein: Therefore and to the end the
said I.H. and B B. may upon their Oaths declare, and set down what, and how
much money or commodities, and what sorts, and value the said I.H. disbursed,
lent or delivered upon the security of the Bonds aforesaid, and when and to
whom, and whether he had the same, or any part, and what part thereof back
again, and what other satisfaction he the said I.H. has received for or
toward the said Bonds, or the money mentioned in the Conditions thereof and
for whom, and to the end that the said I. H. and G.B. may be ordered to
discharge your Orator of and from the said Bonds, and that all Suits at the
Common Law thereupon against your Orator may be stayed, that the matters
concerning the same may be here determined in and by this Honorable Court,
according to Equity: May it please your good Lordship, the premises
considered, as well to grant unto your said Orator Process of Injunction to be
directed to the said I.H. commanding and enjoining him, his Counselors,
Attorney or Agents and Solicitors, thereby to surcease and stay all Suits and
further proceedings at the Common Law, against your Crator upon the Bonds
aforesaid, or either of them, until the matters of Equity concerning the same
be heard and determined in and by this Honorable Court; As also to grant unto
your Orator his Majesty's most gracious writ of Subpoena, etc.

A Bill of Revivor.
HUmbly complaining, etc. R. W. of, etc. brother and heir of W.W. late of W.
etc. That whereas the said W. W. in his lifetime, viz. in Easter Term, in the
Fourth year, etc. exhibited his Bill of Complaint in this High and Honorable
Court of Chancery before your Lordship, the tenor whereof follows in these
words; To the Right Honorable, etc. (recite the whole Bill verbatim.) And the
said W.C. being accordingly served with Process of Subpoena, issuing out of
this Court, appeared in the said Term, etc. and upon his Corporal Oath, then
and there made his answer to the said Bill of Complaint, which answer remains
upon Record in the Honorable Court, whereunto your Orator, concerning the
particular matters and circumstances therein contained, prays, that he may
refer himself for more certainty (and then in brief show all the further
proceedings in particular) since which time, may it please your good Lordship,
that the said W.W. dyed, whereby the said Bill, Process and whole proceedings
thereupon are abated, and yet nevertheless the whole right, title and interest
of him the said W. W. in all the said Messuages and Lands, by his death, are
lawfully descended and come to your Orator, as brother and next heir unto the
said W. W. so that your Orator in equity ought to have such remedy, benefit and
advantage against him the said W. C. for all the said Lands, etc. as the said
W. W. might have had at any time in his lifetime: May it therefore please your
good Lordship, the Premises considered, That the said Bill, Answer,
Replication, Depositions, Orders and Certificates, and the whole Process and
proceedings upon all and every of them, may be revived and stand in such state
for your Orator against the said W. C. and his Heirs, to all intents and
purposes, as the same were for the said W. W. at the time of the death of him
the said W. W. and that your Orator may thereupon have such and as great
benefit and advantage against him the said W. C. as your Orators said Brother
W.W. might have had at the time of his death; and likewise that it may please
your good Lordship, to grant unto your Orator Process of Subpoena, etc.

The beginning and conclusion of a single Answer.
THe said Defendant saving and reserving to himself, now and at all times
hereafter all benefit of exception unto the incertainties, insufficiencies and
imperfections in the said Bill of Complaint contained, for a full, plain,
perfect and direct answer unto all and every the matters, allegations and
things which are in the said Bill of Complaint contained in any sort or wise,
material or effectual in the Law for this Defendant to answer unto, says, etc.

The Conclusion.
Without that, that any other matter or thing in the said Bill of Complaint
contained, material to charge this Defendant withal, or effectual by him to be
answered unto, and not hereby sufficiently answered unto, confessed or avoided,
traversed or denied, is true in such sort, manner and form, as herein before is
expressed: All which, this Defendant does and will be ready to aver, maintain
and prove, as this Honorable Court shall award; and humbly prays to be hence
dismissed with his reasonable costs and charges in this behalf wrongfully
sustained.

A Plea and Demurrer.
THe said Defendant by protestation, not confessing or acknowledging any matter
or thing in the said Bill of Complaint contained, laid to the charge of this
Defendant, to be true in such manner and form as is therein set forth: Says,
That the said Bill does contain therein against this Defendant (as he is by his
Council advised) many apparent imperfections, incertainties and
insufficiencies, such as do afford unto him just cause and matter of
exceptions, to plead in Bar, of the Plaintiffs further proceedings against him
in this Honorable Court, thereupon the benefit and advantage of exception,
whereof this Defendant apprehending, accordingly says, first for answer to so
much of the said Bill as is material to charge him withal; That he believes
it to be true, etc. (Answer what is necessary to be answered to the Plaintiff's
Bill.) And as unto the account which the Plaintiff by his said Bill demands
of this Defendant, and to all other the matters of the said Bill not before
hereby answered unto, he this Defendant, for and by way of Demurrer thereunto
says, etc. And for all these matters, causes and reasons before alleged, and
for diverse other apparent incertainties and insufficiencies in the said Bill,
does under favor of this Honorable Court demur in Law unto and upon all those
points of the said Bill not before answered unto, and demands judgment of
this Honorable Court, whether the premises standing in state, as is before
alleged, he this Defendant shall be compelled to make any other or further
answer thereunto; and whether the Plaintiff shall be admitted to any relief,
examination of Witnesses, or further proceedings against this Defendant in this
Honorable Court thereupon, whose judgment therein this Defendant humbly
expects, and most humbly prays to be dismissed, etc.

A Certificate for a Forma Pauperis in Chancery.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England.
MAy it please your Honor to be advertised by us, whose names are here
underwritten, That to our knowledge A.C. of, etc. is a very poor Woman, and
not worth 5 l. and there being a Suit in Chancery lately commenced against her
by one R.B. the same, besides, her trouble is like to bring upon her great
expense, and unless the same may be prevented by your Lordships favor, by
admitting of her in Forma Pauperis, the defense of such Suit otherwise is like
to tend to her undoing. The Consideration of all which, we humbly leave to your
Lordships further consideration, and do rest,

At your Honors or Lordships Command.

An Affidavit for the same.
I. S. of, etc. makes Oath, that be verily believes that A. C. of, etc. is
not worth 5 l. of her own proper goods (her debts being paid) and she is very
lame, and by reason of her infirmity, not well able to travel to London about
such Suit as is prosecuted against her by one R. B.

Jurat. 20. die M. I.M.

The Petition of the same.
To the Right Honorable, etc.
The humble Petition of A.C. of, etc. Widow, Defendant to the Bill of Complaint
of R.B. Complainant.
Shows, That your Petitioner is a very poor Woman, and not worth 5 l. as may
appear by the Certificate hereunto annexed of sundry Persons of Quality, to
whom her poverty is well known; and there being this last Term a long Bill
exhibited by the Plaintiff in Chancery against her for and concerning, etc. and
other things of like nature, she in respect of her poor estate shall not be
able to answer or defend that Suit, unless your Lordship be pleased to admit
her in Forma Pauperis, to be sued and sue concerning the same. Wherefore your
Petitioner does humbly desire, that your Lordship in consideration of her
poverty, (she being not able to travel) would be pleased in that behalf to
admit her in Forma Pauperis, and to assign Master G. and Master T. to be of her
Council, and Master M. to be her Attorney, and she shall ever pray, etc. Answ.
Upon the Certificate and Affidavit of Poverty annexed, let the Pertitioner be
admitted to sue, and be sued in Forma Pauperis, as is desired.

T. G. etc.

The Form of the Title of a second Answer to be made upon a Report, etc.
THe further answer of A.B. one of the Defendants to the Bill of Complainant of
C.D. Complainant, according to the report of E F. one of the Masters of this
Court, made the 17 day of J. and of an Order of this Court of the 8 day of this
instant month of April. 1664.

The said Defendant in obedience of the said order, and for further
satisfaction of this Honorable Court, says, etc.

All which matters and things, he this Defendant is, and will be ready to aver
and prove, as this Honorable Court shall award, and prays as in this former.

The Form of Rejoinder.
THe said Defendant saving to himself now and at all times hereafter, all and
every the advantages of exception to the incertainties and insufficiencies of
the said Replication, for Rejoinder says, That he will aver and prove, That
his said Answer by him put into this Honorable Court, to the Bill of the
Plaintiffs is very true, certain and sufficient in the Law, and that all and
every the matters, articles and things therein contained are true, in such
sort, manner and form, as in and by this Defendants said answer they are truly
set forth and declared; without that, that any other matter or thing material
or effectual in the Law to be rejoyned unto in the said Replication contained,
and herein not well and sufficiently confessed or avoided, traversed or denied,
is true; All which matters and things this Defendant does and will aver and
prove, as this Honorable Court shall award, and therefore prays, as in and
by the said Answer he has already prayed.

A Warrant up on a Reference to a Master.
20 Junii. 1663. Inter W. O. quer. and R. G. Defend.
BY virtue of an Order of the 30 of M. last past, I have appointed to consider
of the matter to me reserved on T. next, at four of the Clock in the Afternoon,
at my Chamber in, etc. whereof let the said Plaintiff, his Clerk or Solicitor
have notice, to the end they may then and there attend, and with Council if
they please.

L. G.

An Affidavit for serving a Subpoena. Inter J. G. Quer. and R. W. Defend.
I. G. of S. in the County of, etc. makes Oath, That on, etc. of this present
February, he personally served a Subpoena out of the Honorable Court of
Chancery under Seal on R. W. of, etc. by delivering that (or the Label or body)
etc. at his house unto the Wife of the said R. W. by which Subpoena he was to
appear at the Suit of J. L. of, etc. and was returnable the first of this
present month of, etc.

Jurat. 6. die Febr. 1633. J. P.

A Replication.
The Replication of T.E. Plaintiff to the Answer of G.C. Defendant.
THe said Repliant, saving unto himself now, and at all times hereafter, all
and every the advantages and exceptions, to the incertainty and insufficiency
of the said Answer, for Replication thereunto says, That he will aver and
prove, that his said Bill by him exhibited against the Defendant into this
Honorable Court, is true, certain and sufficient in the Law to be answered
unto, and that all and every the matters, articles and things therein contained
are true in such manner and form, as in and by the said Bill is set forth; and
that the Answer of the Defendant is uncertain and untrue, and insufficient to
be replied unto, without that, that any other matter or thing material or
effectual in the Law contained in the said Answer to be replied unto, and
herein not replied unto, confessed and avoided, traversed or denied is true;
all which matters and things, the said Plaintiff is, and will be ready to aver
and prove, as this Honorable Court shall award, and therefore he does pray, as
formerly by his said Bill he has already prayed.

An Affidavit that the Defendant cannot answer without sight of Writings in the
Country.
Inter R. G. Quer. and W. O. and al. Defendants.
THe said Defendant W.O. makes Oath, That upon perusal of the Plaintiffs Bill,
he finds he cannot make direct and perfect answer to the same, without the
fight of certain Writings, which are in the County of H. about Thirty miles
distant from this Court. And further deposes, That his wife is at this present
so sick and weak, that she is not able to make her personal appearance in the
Court without danger of her life.

Jurat. 27. die M. 1633. J. M.

The Form of an Administrators Accounts.
THe Account of L.S. etc. Administrator of all and singular the Goods and
Chattels of R.S. of, etc. his brother deceased, as well of and for such and so
much of the same Goods and Chattels as came to his hands, as of and for his
payment and disbursements out of the same, as follows, etc.

The said Accomptant charge himself with all and singular the Goods and
Chattels of the said deceased, specified in an Inventory thereof made and
exhibited into the Registry of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, amounting,
as by the same Inventory appears, to the sum of -- And petitions for
allowance, as follows,

Jmprimis, The said Accomptant desires allowance of the several charges of the
said deceased, as follows viz. etc. amounting one way and other, as this
Accomptant has them in particulars to the sum of --

Item, The said Accomptant desires allowance of certain debts due by the
deceased at his death which this Accomptant has since his death paid and
discharged, that is to pay and discharge, as follows;

viz. Imprimis, to such a one --

The leading of an Inventory.
A True Inventory of all and singular the goods, chattels and credits of R.S.
Gentleman, deceased, praized at L. the date of, etc. by I.T. etc. as follows.

Imprimis, his purse and apparel -- Item, his books -- Item, the annuity of A.
B. -- Item, the Reversions of N. Close -- Sum -- Item, one R. and E. -- Debts
-- Item, Debts owing him -- Item, desperate Debts -- Sum --
An Answer to a Bill to be relieved against 8 l. per centum, for money left in
the hands of a purchaser paid for after that rate.
The several Answers of J. L. one of the Defendants to the Bill of Complaint of
S. C. Esquire Complainant.
THe said Defendant, now and at all times hereafter, saving to himself all
advantage and benefit of exception to the uncertainties and insufficiencies of
the said Complainants Bill of Complaint, for answer thereunto he says, True it
is, that in November, etc. he this Defendant, together with his brothers, F.L.
and W.L. did bargain and sell unto W.C. in the Complainants Bill named, and to
his heirs, the site of the Capital Message or farm of C. with the
appurtenances, in the County of O. in the Bill mentioned, with other lands and
premises for which the said W. did covenant and agree to pay the sum of Six
thousnad pounds, as in the Complainants Bill is mentioned; One thousand pounds
whereof the said W.C. was by agreement to keep in his hands, being part of the
purchase money for the benefit and behoof of B. L. Widow, this Defendants
Mother, and for the Defendant F. L. this Defendants brother, and to such person
or persons, and to and for such use and uses as the said F. should nominate and
appoint, to the intent that the said B. in consideration of the said One
thousand pounds remaining in the hands of the said W. C. should receive
Fourscore ponds per annum, in respect of her releasing of her Jointure of and
in the premises, which was to be paid every half year unto the said B. for and
during her natural life, in case the said F.L. lived, who is Survivor, and
after her decease, the said Fourscore pounds per annum, to be paid to the said
Defendant F.L. for and during his natural life, and to such women as he should
take to wife, in case the said F. married and died before such a wife, for and
during her natural life, for and in lieu of her Jointure, with diverse other
covenants and conditions contained in an Indenture made the, etc. between the
said B.L. and F.L. on the one part, and the said W.C. on the other part, to
which this Defendant in all things refers himself, as therein more at large
the same does and may appear. And amongst the rest it is covenanted and agreed
between the parties to the said Indenture, that after the death of the said F.
and of his said wife, if he did marry, then the said One thousand pounds to
remain to the issue of their two bodies lawfully begotten; and if they have no
issue then living, then the said One thousand pounds is to go according to the
true intent and meaning of the said last recited Indenture, and if the other
Defendant R.L. this Defendants second Brother should happen to die, surviving
the said F. then the One thousand pounds is to remain in the hands of the said
F for ever; and for the better securing of the payment of the said Fourscore
pounds per annum, and of the said One thousand pounds, the said W.C. in and by
the said last recited Indenture, did grant, bargain, sell, enfeoff and confirm
unto the said B. this Defendants mother, and to the said F.L. his heirs and
assigns for ever, all that piece or parcel of pasture-ground lying in C.
aforesaid, commonly called or known by the name of, etc. then in the tenure or
occupation of this Defendant, to which said Indenture this Defendant refers
himself, as will more at large appear, And this Defendant says, that the said
W.C. well knowing that he was thereunto bound by this agreement, during his
lifetime did justly and truly pay the said Fourscore pounds per annum, unto
the said B. this Defendants mother, by half-yearly payments during her
lifetime, who dyed about, etc. since, etc. and by and after the decease of the
said F. L. this Defendants brother, by the advice and counsel of the
Complainant himself, by this Deed of Assignment with a Letter of Attorney
bearing date the, etc. did for and in consideration of the sum of Eight hundred
and threescore pounds part of the said purchase money which the said F.L. did
agree to pay unto this Defendant, in respect this Defendant joined in the sale
of the said Manor, Lands and Premises, and did enter into a Bond of Fourscore
pounds for payment thereof, and of other moneys to this Defendants brother
accordingly, did grant and assign unto this Defendant, and his heirs and
assigns, the said Fourscore pounds per annum, during the life of this
Defendants said brother F. as in and by the said Deed of Assignment (relation
being thereunto had) at large the same does and may appear. And this Defendant
says, that after the said Assignment so made unto this Defendant, the said
W.C. did by himself and his servant, and other on this behalf durinig all his
lifetime, pay the said Fourscore pounds per annum to this Defendant: and this
Defendant is persuaded, had not the said W. C. well known that the said
Fourscore pounds per annum was due to have been paid by him, that he would not
have paid the same to this Defendant* And this Defendant says, that after the
death of the said W. C. I.C. his son and heir, or some other on this behalf did
pay the same unto this Defendant, and this Defendant believes the Complainant,
has some conveyance of the said premises from the said I.C. but for what
consideration this Defendant knows not, and says, that the Complainant
himself sithence the said purchase has paid the same Defendant, and therefore
this Defendant conceives that he is unjustly troubled touching the premises.
And this Defendant says, that therefore (under favor) this Defendant
conceives, that the said Fourscore pounds per annum, and also the said one
thousand pounds, secured by part of the premises bargained and sold, as
aforesaid, it being so long before the Statute made for reducing interest money
from Eight to six in the hundred, and the same Fourscore pounds per annum,
being (as this Defendant conceives) due as parcel of the Contract for the said
Lands assigned over to this Defendant for great and valuable considerations,
the same shall not now be insringed, broken or repealed, for the causes in the
Bill mentioned, or for any causes whatsoever; the rather, for that this
Defendant and his brother, upon the confiderations and conditions aforesaid,
did bargain and sell the said Manors, Lands and premises at an undervalue:
without that, that any other matter or thing in the said Bill of Complaint
contained material or effectual in the Law, for this Defendant to make answer
unto, and not herein before sufficiently answered unto, confessed and avoided,
traversed or denied, is true in such manner and form as in the said Bill is
alleged; and this Defendant praveth to be dismissed out of this Honorable
Court, with his reasonable costs and charge in this behalf most wrongfully
sustained.

The beginning and conclusion of a Bill in Chancery, To the Right Honorable
Sir O.B. Knight and Baronet, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England.
Shows unto your Lordship, your Orator E.L. of the City N. in the County of
W. Gentleman, and M. his Wife, whereas, etc. The conclusion. May it therefore
please your Lordship to grant to your said Orator his Majesty's most gracious
Writ of Subpoena, to be directed unto the said W.C. thereby commanding him (or
them, and every of them) at a certain day, and under a certain pain therein to
be limited, personally to appear before your Lordship in this High and
Honorable Court of Chancery, to answer the premises, and further to stand
unto and abide such order, direction and award concerning the same, as unto
your Lordship shall seem meet: and your Orator shall daily pray for the long
continuance of your Lordships prosperous estate.

A Lease of a Mill.
THis Indenture made, etc. between Sir T C. of, etc. Knight, and L. his wife,
of the one part, and T.A. of, etc. of the other part, witnesses, That the said
Sir T.C. and L. for and in consideration of the rent and covenants hereafter in
these presents expressed, and also for diverse other reasonable considerations
them thereunto moving, have demised, granted, and to farm-letten, and by these
presents do for them, their, etc. demise, grant and to farm let unto the said
T.A. all that their Grist, Water-Mill and Mills, being two Grist Mills under
one Roof, commonly called or known by the name of S. Mill, with the
appurtenances, situate and being in the Parish of, etc. sometimes in the
tenure or occupation of one E.D. and now or late in the tenure or occupation of
N.C. or his Assigns, and the ground and soil whereupon the said Mill and Mills
do stand, containing by estimation one 4th part of an acre, be it more or less,
and also all the site of Mill as well customary as conventionary of all the
Tenants of that Manor of D. in the said County, and all the toll and custom
for grinding of all the Corn and grain whatsoever, as well of all the Tenants
and Under-tenants of the said Manor, now being, or which hereafter at any time
shall be, during the term by these presents demised, as of all the Inhabitants
now dwelling or abiding, or which hereafter shall dwell or abide within the
said Manor of D. aforesaid, and also all toll, benefit and custom for grinding
of corn and grain whatsoever, and also all the said Hed-wares, and Mill-ponds
do stand and are builded, and singular Hed-wares and Mill-ponds, and the Soil
whereof and all Hed-wares hereafter to be builded, and the Soil and Earth
thereof, and all Mill-pools, Mill-dams, Stanks, Banks, Ponds, Streams, Water,
Watercourse, Rivers, Fishing, Fishing-places, Ways, Paths, Passages,
Easements, Profits, Commodities, Advantages, Emoluments, and Appurtenances
whatsoever to the said Mill, and other the premises by these presents demised
and granted, or any of them, or to any part or parcel thereof incident,
belonging or appertaining, or with the same now or at any time heretofore let,
used, occupied, had, taken, reputed or enjoyed, To have and to hold the said
Mill and the ground and soil thereof, with the appurtenances, and the said
site or Mill of all the Tenants of the said Manor, and the said toll and
custom of grinding of all Corn and grain of the said Tenants and Inhabitants
aforesaid, and all toll and custom of grinding of all Corn and grain
whatsoever, and the said wares, Mill-dams, Mill-ponds, and the ground and soil
thereof, Mill-Pools, and stanks, Banks, Rivers, Streams, Ways, Passages,
Fishings, and of and singular other the permisses herein before mentioned, or
intended to be hereby demised and granted, and every part and parcel thereof
with the appurtenances, unto the said T.A. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the Feast Day of, etc. last past, before the date hereof, for and
during, and unto the full end and term of, etc. from thence next ensuing, and
fully to be compeat and ended; yielding and paying therefore yearly during the
said term, the yearly rent or sum of, etc. at two of the most usual Feasts or
terms or terms of payment in the year, that is to say, at the Feast, etc. by
even and equal portions, the first payment thereof to begin and to be made at
or on the Feast Day of, etc. next ensuing the date hereof: and if it shall
happen the said yearly rent of, etc. or any part thereof to be behind and
unpaid by the space of 14 days next over or after any of the said Feasts or
days of payment, wherein the same ought to be paid, as aforesaid, being
lawfully demanded, that then and from thenceforth, and at all times afterward,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T,C. and D. his wise, or either
of them, their or either of their Heirs, Executors, etc. into the said demised
premises, and every part and parcel thereof to re-enter, and the same to have
again, detain and possess, as in his, her or their first and former estate; and
the said T.A. his, etc. thereout and from thence utterly to expel, put out and
amove, these presents, or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding. And the said T.A. for himself, his, etc. and for
every of them does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said Sir T.C.
and D. etc. by these presents, in manner and form following: That is to say,
That he the said T.A. his, etc. shall and will from time to time, during the
said term of, etc. hereby granted, do and make his and their suit and service,
for and in respect of the premises, to the Court and Courts of the said Sir
T.C. and D. and their Heirs, to be kept and holden within the said Manor of D.
upon such reasonable warning as there is given or used, or else in default and
neglect thereof, shall and will yearly during the said term, pay, or cause to
be paid unto the said Sir T.B. and D. and their Heirs, the sum of, etc. if it
be demanded; and the said T.A. does for himself, his, etc. further covenant
promise and grant, to and with the said Sir T.C. and D. that he the said T.A.
his, etc. within the space of three years next ensuing the date thereof, shall
and will at his and their own proper costs and charges, lay out, disburse and
bestow upon, about and in repairing, bettering and amending the said Mill or
Mills before hereby demised, where most need shall be required, the sum of etc.
and also that he the said T.A. his, etc. at his and their like proper costs and
charges shall and will well any, etc. repair, amend, maintain, uphold, and keep
the said Mills to be repaired and amended, as aforesaid, and all other the
before demissed premises, with the appurtenances, in, by and with all and all
manner of needful and necessary reparations and amendments whatsoever, when
and as often as need shall require, during the said term, and the same Mills,
and other the premises, with the appurtenances, so being well and sufficiently
repaired, upholden and amended in the end or other determinations of this
present Lease, shall and will leave and yield up unto the said Sir T.C. and D.
or one of them, their or one of their Heirs or Assigns. And the said T.A. for
him, his, etc. does likewise covenant and grant to and with the said, etc. that
he the said T.A. his, etc. shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid to the said, etc. his, etc. the said yearly rent of, etc. in manner and
form as is before in these presents expressed limited and declated. And the
said Sir T.C. and D do for them and their Heirs and Assigns, covenant and grant
to and with the said T.A. his, etc. that in case any of the Tenants or
Inhabitants of the said Manor of, etc. shall and do at any time, during the
said term hereby granted, withdraw or surcease to do suit of Mill to the said
Mill, or to bring and carry, or cause to be brought and carried their Corn and
Grain whatsoever to the said Mill or Mills by these presents demised, there to
have the same ground, or shall carry the same to any other place or places, to
any Mill or Mills to be ground, then the Steward or Stewards of the said Manor
for the time being, shall and will upon all and every the presentment and
presentiments thereof, make, set and impose upon every such Tenant and Tenants
and Inhabitants, so withdrawing, and not doing his, or their suit or suits of
Mill to the said Mill or Mills, such lawful or reasonable Fine and Fines,
Amerciament and Amerciaments from time to time, as in such case is lawful and
usual, and the same fine or Amerciament so imposed, shall receive or levy, and
being so recited or levied, pay and deliver the same, or so much thereof, as
the said T. A. his, etc. shall be prejudiced or damnified by reason of such
withdrawing, as aforesaid, unto the said T.A. his, etc. And lastly, the said
Sir T.C. and D. for them, their etc. do covenant, promise and grant to and with
the said, etc. by these presents, that the said T.A. his, etc. and every of
them, for and under the payment of the said yearly rent of, etc. above by these
presents reserved in manner and form aforesaid, and performing fulfilling and
keeping singular the Covenants, grants, articles, clauses and agreements,
before in these presents contained, which on his and their parts are and ought
to be observed, performed, sufilled and kept, shall and may lawfully,
peaceably, and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy all and singular
the said demised premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and
every of their appurtenances, without lawful let suit, trouble, eviction,
ejection, molestation or interruption whatsoever of them the said T.C. and D or
either of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, or any of them, or
any other person or persons whatsoever claiming or to clam from, by or under
him, her, them, or any of them, or for or by reason of his, her, their or any
either of their acts, titles, means, assent, consent or procurement. In
witness, etc.

A singular Obligation from one to one.
KNow all men by these presents, That I.A. B. of the Parish of D. in the County
of E. Husbandman, do stand, and am firmly bounden and obliged to F.G. of H. in
the County of E. Yeoman, in the sum of fifty and one pounds and ten shillings
of good and lawful money of England, to be paid to the said F.G. or his true
and lawful Attorney, Executors or Administrators, to the which payment well,
faithfully and truly to be paid, I do bind me, my Heirs, Executors and
Administrators firmly by these presents, sealed with my seal. Dated the fifth
day of October, in the Year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred fifty and
one.

An Obligation from two to one.
KNow all men by these presents, That we A. B. of the Parish of C. in the
County E. Gentleman, and F.G. of the Parish of H. in the County aforesaid, Esquire
do stand and are firmly bounden and obliged unto Sir H. I. of the Parish of K.
in the said County of E. Knight, in the sum of One hundred and three pounds of
good and lawful money of England to be paid to the said Sir H.I. or his true or
lawful Attorney, Executors, and Administrators; to the which payment well and
truly to be made, we bind our selves, and either of us by himself jointly and
severally for the whole, and in the whole, our and either of our Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them firmly by these presents,
sealed with our seals Dated the tenth day of September, in the Year of our Lord
God, One thousand six hundred fifty and one.

An Obligation from three to one.
KNow all men by these presents, That we A.B. of C. in the County of D. Widow,
E.F. of G. in the said County single-woman, H. I. of G. aforesaid, in the said
County Mercer, do stand and are firmly bound and obliged unto K L. Citizen and
Merchant adventurer of London, in the sum of 400 l. of good and lawful money of
England, to be paid to the said K. L. or his true and lawful Attorney, Executors
and Administrators; to the which payment well and truly to be made, we do bind
us, and every and either of us jointly and severally; for and in the whole, our
and every and either of our Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of
them firmly by these presents, sealed with our seals. Dated the fifteenth day
of October, in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred fifty and one.

A Condition for Replevying Goods.
WHereas the abovenamed G.S. by virtue of his office, as Steward or Clerk of
the Manor, etc. upon several Complaints and Allegations of the above-bound
T.H. has granted forth several precepts for the replevying of diverse and
sundry of the Goods and Chattels, etc. detained by one, etc. Now therefore the
Condition, etc. that if the said etc. do with effect prosecute the action which
he has commenced against the said etc. concerning the said Goods, and shall
also make due return of the same, if return by Law shall be adjudged, and him
the said G. S. from time to time, and at all times hereafter, do and shall
save, defend and keep harmless and indempnified, against all men concerning the
said Goods and Chattels, and the several Replevies granted; That then, etc.

A Condition to pay the moity of the Debt when itshall be received.
WHereas E.B. of, etc. by one obligation bearing date the, etc. (reciting the
Bond) and whereas the moity or one half-part of the said sum of, etc. is due
and payable unto the within-named, etc. as money by him lent unto the said F.
and whereas the said, etc. before the ensealing of the same recited Obligation,
did consent and agree that the said Obligation should be made only in the name
of the said T.L. and the said T.L. to give his Obligation to the said R. G. for
the same moity or half-part of the said debt. Now if the said T.L. his, etc. or
any of them, do well and truly pay unto the said R. his, etc. the sum of, etc.
at or in, etc. being the moity of the said, etc. on the, etc. or with as much
convenient speed as he the said T. his, etc. can or may, next after he or they,
or any of them, shall have received the said sum of, etc. in the condition of,
etc. specified, with such interest as shall be due for the moity thereof. And
if the said sum of, etc. shall not be paid at one entire payment on the said,
etc. according to the condition of the Obligation, then if the said his, etc.
do and shall well and truly pay unto the said, etc. his, etc. without any delay
the moity of such part thereof, as he or they shall or may receive from time to
time, etc. that then, etc.

Articles of agreement intended, made, concluded, and fully agreed upon the 10
day of, etc. between E.M. of etc. and R.A. of London, Merchant, etc.
WHereas the said E.M. the day of the date hereof, has freely given and
delivered unto the said R.A. the sum of, etc. to the intent and purpose that he
the said R.A. shall accept and take into his service to be employed in
merchandising affairs, W.M. son of her the said E.M, in consideration whereof,
but more especially at her request, and of the affection that the said R.A.
bears to the said W.M. he the said R.A. is contented and agreed to accept and
take the said W.M. to be his servant in merchandising affairs, and other
businesses, and accordingly to employ him therein, not only in England, but in
the parts beyond the Seas, where the said R. A. now tradeth, or hereafter shall
trade, and that for the term or space of Seven years, to be accounted from,
etc. next ensuing the date of these presents, etc. and thereupon the said E.M.
for her self, her executors and administrators, does covenant and grant to and
with the said R.A. his, etc by these presents, that the aforesaid W.M. her son,
shall, during all the said term (if he so long live) well, diligently and
faithfully to the uttermost of his power and skill, serve him the said R.A. in
the Trade of merchanding, and other his affairs at such place or places, either
beyond the Seas, or on this side, where the said R.A. shall design and appoint
him, and with out absenting himself out of his said service or employment, or
neglecting the same: and that he the said W.M. at all times hereafter, during
the said term, shall from time to time, not only receive and take into his
charge and custody all and every such goods and merchandises whatsoever, as by
or for the use or account of the said R.A. shall be consigned or sent to him
the said W.M. but also sell, utter and dispose of the same goods or
merchandises to the most profit he can for the said R.A. his, etc. shall also
from time to time, and at all times, during the said term, follow and perform
all and every such advice, directions, orders, and Commissions, as the said
R.A. shall by Letter of advice, or otherwise give; send or make known to him
the said W.M. in, about or concerning the Factory or Merchandising aforesaid,
and also that he the said W.M. shall at the charges of the said R.A. his, etc.
provide and keep in due orderly manner, books of Account touching his said
employments in Merchandising, as aforesaid, according to the custom of
Merchants in such cases used, and shall deal justly, truly, plainly and
faithfully to and with the said R.A. his, etc. in all and every his accounts,
reckonings, bargains, buying, selling, doings and dealings in and about his
said employment in merchandising, as aforesaid, and shall from time to time,
once in every six months, or oftener, transmit and send unto the said R.A. his,
etc. true accounts and reckonings of all the businesses and dealings of the
said W M. in the premises, and shall also send Letters of advice of the said R
A. so often as conveniently he may or can, of all matters and occurrences that
shall necessarily arise concerning his service or employment, and shall also
return and come to England, and bring all his books of accounts with him
whenever he shall be thereunto advised and required by the said R.A. his,
etc. by Letters missive or otherwise: and that the said W.M. shall from time to
time upon every reasonable request, not only show forth all his books of
accounts concerning all his doings and dealings, as aforesaid, and make and
give unto the said R.A. his, etc. a just, true, plain and perfect account and
reckoning in writing, of, for and concerning all and every such goods, wares,
money, debts and Merchandises whatsoever, as well of the said R.A. for his own
proper use, or jointly with any others which shall hereafter come to the hands,
charge or factory of him the said W.M. or for which he the said W. M may or
ought to be accomptable unto the said R.A. his, etc. And moreover, that he the
said W M. shall within etc. next after the making and giving up every such
account, as aforesaid, well and truly satisfy, pay and deliver unto the said
R.A. his, etc. all and every such goods, wares, moneys, debts, merchandises,
specialties and other things whatsoever, as by or upon the foot of the same
account shall appear, of be found to be due, coming or belonging to him the
said R. A. his, etc. by or from the said W.M. in any manner of wise.

Item, the said E.M. for her self, etc. does covenant, promise and agree, to
and with the said R.A. his, etc. by these presents, that she the said E.M. her,
etc. at her and their own proper costs and charges shall and will find, provide
and allow unto and for her said Son, decent and fitting linen, woollen, and
all other apparel of all sorts fitting for him in his service and employment,
during the said term.

Item, the said R.A. does covenant, etc. to find and provide unto the said,
etc. competent and fitting meat, drink, washing and lodging, and all other
necessaries, (apparel only excepted) during all the said term. In witness, etc.

Bonds must be entered into, for performance of the Articles aforesaid.

The End of the Second Book.
PART III.
A Deed for the Revoking of a Bargain and Sale, if so much meney be paid.
THis Indenture made, etc. in the Fourteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Anno Dom. 1662. between Sir I. S.
of, etc. of the one part, and I. C. etc. of the other part; whereas the said I.
C. by his Deed indented under his hand and seal, bearing date, etc. for the
consideration therein mentioned, did alien, bargain, sell, enfeoff and confirm
unto the said Sir I. S. and his heirs, All that the Manor and Lordship of G.
in the County of, etc. with all the rights, members and appurtenances thereunto
belonging, together with all such other things as in the said Deed are
expressed and contained, as thereby does and may more fully appear: Now
witnesses, this present Indenture, and the said Sir I. for himself, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, does Covenant,
promise and grant to and with the said I. C. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these presents, that if the
said I. C. his Heirs, Executors, etc. shall pay etc. unto the said Sir I. S.
etc. the sum of, etc. that then the said Deed of Bargain and Sale, shall be
void, frustrate, and of none effect or force in the Law, to all intents and
purposes. And that then also the said Sir I. S. his Executors, etc. immediately
after the payment of the said sum of 2392 l. to the said Sir I. S. his, etc. at
the day and place aforesaid, upon request to them or any of them made, shall
and will re-deliver the said I. C. his Executors. Administrators or Assigns,
the said Indenture of of bargain and sale, and the counterpart of this
Indenture, and one Recognizance in the nature of a Satute-staple, of the sum
4000 l. wherein the said I C. stands bounden unto the said Sir I. S. and all
uch deeds, evidences and writing concerning the said manors and premises,
which the said Sir I. S. or any other to his use, or by his apointment, shall
have, then had and received of and from the said I. C. or of any other
whatsoever, safe, undefaced and uncancelled, and in as good plight as he or any
other to his use, or by his appointment, shall have received the same, and that
then also the said Sir I. S. his Heirs, etc. or some or one of them, shall and
will upon reasonable request made, and at the proper costs and charges in the
Law of the said I. C. his Heirs and Assigns, grant, release, and assign over
the said Deed or Indenture of bargain and sale; and all his, and their, and
every of their rights, estates and interests therein, unto the said I C. his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, freed and discharged of and from all, and all
manner of charges, encumbrances and demands whatsoever, had, made, committed,
done, or willingly suffered by the said Sir I. S. his Heirs, Executors, etc. or
any of them, in such manner and sort, as by the said I. C. his Heirs or
Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised or advised and required, so as he nor they be not compelled to travel
further than the places of their abode, for the effecting thereof: And further,
it is the true intent and meaning of these presents, and the parties hereunto,
and the true intent, meaning and agreement of the said former Indenture of
bargain and sale, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said I. C.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to have, hold and enjoy the
said manors and premises, with their appurtenances, and to perceive, receive,
and take the rents, issues, revenues and profits thereof, to his and their own
use and uses, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, until default be
made of payment of the said sum of 1392 l. before mentioned, or of any part
thereof, at the day and place before mentioned, limited and appointed for the
payment thereof, and during such time, and until such default be made, he the
said I. C. for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, does
covenant, grant and agree, to and with the said Sir I. S. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, that he the said I. C. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, will not do, commit, or willingly suffer any manner
of wast, spoil, or destruction of, and in the premsses, or any part thereof,
otherwise than for the necessary repair, building, or re-edifiing of any
message, house or building upon any the messuages, houses, or edifices before
specified: And the said I. C. etc. covenanteth, etc. that if he the said I. C.
his Heirs, etc. do not well and truly pay unto the said Sir I. S. his Heirs,
etc. the said sum of 2392 l. before mentioned, to be paid at the day and place
of payment aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, that then he the said I. C. his Heirs and Assigns shall and will
within twenty days next after desault of payment of the said sum of two
thousand three hundred ninty two pounds before mentioned, to be paid,
delivered, or cause to be delivered up unto the said Sir I. S. his Heirs, and
Assigns, the full quiet and and peaceable possessions of the said Manor or
Lordship of S. and premises, with the appurtenances, to the use and behoof of
the said Sir I.S. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

A Deed of Coven^nts to declare the trusts in a former Bargain and Sale; the
Lands being to be sold for payment of Debts.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between, etc. whereas the said I. C. by this
Indenture bearing date with these presents, made between him the said I. C. of
the one part, and the said A.B. C.D. E.F. and G.H. of the other part; for the
consideration therein mentioned, has granted, bargained and sold unto the said
A.B. C.D. E.F. and G.H. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, All that Capital
Message or Tenement, etc. as in the other book to the end of the Habend: As in
and by the said Indenture of Bargain and Sale more at large appears. Now this
Indenture witnesses, and it is hereby agreed and declared by and between all
the patties to these presents, that the said Grant, Bargain and Sale was and is
made, and the said A.B. C.D. E.F. and G H. and their Heirs, are and shall stand
trusted with the premises, to the intent and purpose, and upon trust and
confidence that the said Land and premises may be sold to the best value that
may be, and the money which shall be raised thereby, to be disposed of, for and
toward the payment and satisfaction of such debts of the said I.C. as are
mentioned in the schedules hereunto annexed, in such order as they are therein
set down.

And lastly, It is agreed by and between all the parties to these presents, and
by them declared to be their true intent and meaning. That if in case there be
any overplus remaining of the money which shall be raised by sale of the said
Lands and premises, after such time as the debts mentioned in the said
schedule be paid and discharged, That then such overplus shall be employed
and disposed of, for and toward the satisfaction of such other debts as the
said I.C. shall by any writing to be by him signed and sealed in in the
presence of two or more Witnesses, declare and appoint, and no otherwise.

A Release for money that was left in the han is of a purchaser on payment
thereof.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. L. of S. in the County of C. Gent. and J.
C. of the Inner Temple L. Esquire of the one part; and T. G. Esquire of the City of L.
of the other part. Whereas upon a purchase lately made by the said T. G. of and
from the said R.L. J.C. and S. his Wife, daughter of the said R.L. of certain
Lands in C. in the County of O. the sum of 628 l. part of the purchase-money
payable by the said T.G. to the said R.L. was by agreement between them to
remain in the hands of the said T. G. for such time, and upon such Conditions,
and to such intents and purposes, as E.H. of and in the County of D. should set
down and appoint, which sum of 628 l. was intended to remain as a security for
the said I.G. against all encumbrances whereby the said Lands are or may be
charged, and for saving him harmless from all damages whatsoever, which may, or
might at any time hereafter happen to fall upon the said T. G. his Heirs or
Assigns, or or upon any of the said lands and premises, of any other the Lands
of the said T.G. for or by reason of any the debts of the said I.C. and W. C.
his deceased father, or either of them; and whereas the said T.G. at the time
of the ensealing of the presents, at the request of the said R.I. has paid the
said sum of 628 l. to the said I.C. and R.I. or one of them, or to such as were
appointed by them; or one of them, to receive the same. Now that the said R.L.
and I.C. have received the said sum of 628 l. of and from the said T.G. the
receipt whereof they do hereby acknowledge, and that the same in the last
payment, and in full satisfaction of and for all the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments which the said I. C. had in the County of O. and which the said
T. G. purchased, and thereof and of every part and parcel thereof, they do
clearly and absolutely acquit and discharge the said T. G. his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, for ever by these presents; And in consideration
of the premises, the said R. I. and I. C. do for themselves jointly, and
either of them for himself severally does covenant, promise and grant to and
with the said T.G. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, that they the said R.I.
and I.C. shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter save,
defend and keep harmless the said T.G. his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, and
also all the said Lands and Premises in C. aforesaid, or elsewhere in the
County of O. so purchased by him the said T.G. and all others his Lands,
Tenements, Goods and Chattels, of and from all loss and damage whatsoever,
which shall happen, arise or befall for or in respect of any the debts of the
said W.C. and I.C. or of either of them: In witness, etc.

A Proviso to be inserted in a Lease or a power of Revocation reserved.
PRovided always, That if the said, etc. his Executors or Administrators, or
any of them, shall at any time hereafter pay or tender unto the said W.W. his
Executors, etc or to any other person or persons whatsoever, to and for the use
of the said W.W. his, etc. the sum of 12 l. of lawful money of England, to the
intent to make void this present Lease and Demise, and shall express and
declare such his, her, or their intention, either by word, or writing, that
then and from thenceforth this present Lease and Demise shall cease and be
void: In witness, etc.

A Presentation of a Minister to a Living, decording to the Form now used.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, we A.B. and
C.D. the true and undoubted Patrons of the Vicaridge or Parish Church of C. in
the County of S. send greeting; for as much as the said Vicaridge or
Parish Church is lately by the death of E.F. the late Incumbent, there become
void, and in our full right of Presentation, we do therefore hereby present you
G. H. Clerk, Mr. of Arts, unto the Church of C. aforesaid, and to the Vicaridge
thereof, to have, hold and enjoy the same, with all and every the rights,
members and appurtenances thereunto belonging, according to several former and
late Acts of Parliament in this case provided; doing and performing the duties
of a Pastor belonging to the said Church: In witness whereof we have hereunto
subscribed our names and set our seals this (...) day of (...) in the Year of
our Lord God, One thousand six hundred and fifty two.

A Lease of a Parsonage impropriate for three lives, upon surrender of a former
Lease with extraordinary Covenants, with a Letter of Attorney to deliver
possession, together with the Execution thereof endorsed.
THis Indenture made the 5th. day of March, in the Year of our Lord God 1651.
Between R.S. of the City of Oxford, Gent. of the one part, and W.P. of London
Esquire of the other part; Witnesses, that the said S. W. for diverse good causes
and considerations him hereunto moving, and especially in consideration of a
Surrender made to the said W.C. of a Lease now in being for three lives,
bearing date the 28. of March, in the Sixth year of the Reign of the late King
Charles, made by I.S. father of the said W.S. party to these presents,
deceased, to Sir H.M. deceased, of the parsonage of Bray, and other things
hereafter in these presents mentioned, has demised, granted, and to farmlet,
and set to the said W.P. the site of the parsonage of Bray in the County of B.
and all the houses upon the said site builded, arable Lands, Meadows, Leasows
and Pastures, Demesnes as well in several as in common to the said Parsonage
belonging, and all the Rents of all the Tenements of the said W. S. as well
Freeholders as Customary Tenants, and all the Tithings of Corn and Hay to the
said Parsonage belonging, with all other the profits and commodities to the
said Parsonage belonging or appertaining, except and to the said W.S. and his
Heirs and Assins, always reserved all Wards, Marriages, Reliefs, Escheats,
Fines, Heriots, Amerciaments, Woods and Underwoods, and the Advowson of the
Parish Church of Bray, when and as often as it shall be void. To have and to
hold, the said site of the Parsonage aforesaid, and all the said Houses,
Lands, Meadows, Leasows, Pastures, Tithes, and other the premises, with all
and singular the commodities and profits thereunto belonging, with their
appurtenances (except before excepted) to the said W. P. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, for and during the lives of the said W.P. and M.P.
his wife, and T.P. Son of the said W.P. and for and during the natural life of
the longer liver of them, or any of them, yielding and paying therefore yearly,
during the said Term, unto the said W.S. his Heirs and Assigns, Four pounds of
good and lawful money of England, at four Feasts or Terms of the year, That is
to say, at the Feast of Saint Thomas the Apostle, the annuntiation of the
blessed Lady Saint Mary the Virgin, the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, and
St. Michael the Archangel, by even and equal portions, and if it happen the
said yearly rent of Four pounds, or any part or parcel thereof, to be behind
and unpaid, after any of the said Feasts above limited for payment thereof,
during the said Term, by the space of one month, that then it shall be lawful
to and for the said W.S. his Heirs and Assigns into the the said site, and all
other the premises to enter and distrain, and the distresses there taken to
lead, drive and carry away, and do detain in the same till the said Rent, and
the Arrerages thereof (if any shall be) they shall be fully satisfied and
contented; and if the same Rent or any part or parcel thereof, be behind and
unpaid after any of the Feasts above limited, for payment thereof, by the space
of one quarter of a year, or if it happen the said W.P. or any of his Assigns,
to make any waste in the said site or other of the premises; or any part
thereof, except the same be re-edified and builded within one whole year next
after notice and warning thereof to them given, that then it shall be lawful
to and for the said W.S. his Heirs and Assigns into the said Site, Lands,
Meadows, Leasows, Pastures, Rents, Tythings, and all and singular other the
premises, to re-enter, and the same to have again, possess and enjoy, as in
his or their former estate, and the said W. P. his Executors and Assigns
thereof, and from thence utterly to expel and amove, this Indenture, or any
thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And the said W.P. for
himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does Covenant and grant, to
and with the said W.S. his Heirs and Assigns, that he the said W.P. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall find to the said W.S. and his
Heirs, and his and their Deputies and Officers, coming to the said Site or
Parsonage as well for the Courts and Law days there to be kept, as for the
survey of the Premises, Meat, Drink, House-room and beds convenient and
necessary for their Degrees; and for their horses, hay, litter, and provinder
sufficient, at the costs of the said W.P. his Executors and Assigns, from time
to time during the said term: And that the said W.P. and his Assigns, during
the said term, shall yearly find to the Suitors of the Court of Bray, such
Dinners or Repasts as I.P. and other Farmours there have used to do, taking of
the said W.S. 10 s. yearly during the said term, and that the said W.P. and his
Assigns, all the Dung upon the said Site and other the Premises, gathered and
hereafter during the said term to be gathered upon the Lands and Demeasnes of
the said Parsonage, and in none other place, shall lay or spread during the
said term, and also shall leave all the Meadows of the said Parsonage unmowed,
with their grass and vesture full growing as in the beginning of the said term
they shall be left to him; and that the said W.P. and his Assigns, the great
Barn of the said Parsonage, and all the Houses upon the said Site builded, and
all the Hedges, Walls, Ditches, Enclosures, and other the Premises during the
said term, shall sufficiently repair, maintain, scour and keep at their only
costs and expenses, and so in the end of the said term, shall leave them (the
said W.P. and his Assigns,) taking sufficient great Timber for the same in
Grounds of the said W.S. at Bray aforesaid, and the said W.P. Covenanteth and
Grants by these presents, for him, his Executors and Assigns, that he or one
of his Assigns, shall be continually dwelling upon the said Site with all
their household, or else shall appoint a convenient Tenant or Under-tenant, to
dwell and abide thereupon by themselves and all their household, during the said
term: And the said W.S. has constituted, ordained and appointed, and by these
presents, does constitute, ordain and appoint H. W. to be his true and lawful
Attorney, for him, and in his name and stead, to enter into the said Site,
Parsonage, and other the premises, or into some part thereof, in the name of
the whole, and possession of the same to take, and after to deliver seisin of
all the said premises, or of some part thereof in the name of the whole, unto
the said W.P. or to his Attorney, lawfully authorized to receive the same, To
have and to hold, to him the said W.P. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, for and during the lives of the above named W.P. M.P. and T.P. and the
life of the longer liver of them, according to the purport, effect and true
meaning of this Indenture. In witness whereof the said parties to these
presents, their hands and Seals enterchangeably have set, the day and year
first above written.

The Execution of the Letter of Attorney for possession, endorsed on the back
of the Lease aforesaid.
MEmorandum, That the (...) the day of (...) in the Year of our Lord God, etc.
the within named H.W. according to the power and authority to him given by the
within named W.S. did enter into the Parsonage House of Bray in the County of
B. in the Name of the whole Rectory and premises withinmentioned to be
demised, and did deliver possession and seisin thereof unto the within named
W.P. To have and to hold, according to the purport and effect of the Deed
within written, in the presence of, etc.

A Grant of an Annuity for three Lives, with the Inheritance of the Land
assured for the same by Recovery and Fine. Well penned.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between the Right Honorable H. Earl of H. and the
Right Honorable K. Countess of H. now his Wife, on the one part; and I.S. and
A. his Wife, on the other part; Witnesses, That the said E. for and in
consideration of the sum of 3000 l. of good, etc. has given and granted, and
by these presents, does give and grant for him, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, one Annuity of 500 l. of lawful, etc. by the said Earl, his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns from henceforth yearly to be paid
to the said I.S. and A. and their Assigns, and to the survivor of them, and the
Assigns of the survivor of them by and during all the term of the natural lives
of the said I. and A. and the natural life of the longer liver of them at the
Northgate of the new-building situate within the City of L. commonly called
the Royal Exchange, etc. at two equal payments in every year in manner and form
following, that is to say, on the twentyeth day of November, between the hours
of, etc. in the afternoon of the same day 250 l. and on the twentyeth of May
between (like hours) in the afternoon of the same day 250 l. the first payment
thereof to begin and to be made on the said twentieth day of November next
coming, and so from thenceforth to have continuance, and yearly to be paid to
the said I. and A. and to the longer liver of them and their Assigns, and to
the Assigns of the longer liver of them, every year upon the said days, and
within the said times, and at the said place, during the nature lives of the
said I. and A. and the natural life of the longest liver of them.

And for the said consideration, and for a good and certain surety and
assurance to be had and made to the said I.S. and A. his Wife of and for the
said annuity and yearly payment of 500 l. to them, Covenant for perfect
assurance to be made for the ^nuity.
and the survivor of them, and to their Assigns, and the Assigns of the
Survivor of them, well and truly to be made every year during their natural
lives, and during the natural life of the longer liver of them, according to
the tenor, effect, and true meaning of these presents: The said Earl for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, and for
the said Countess his Wife, does covenant, grant, and agree to and with the
said I. and A. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them
by these presents, The said Earl and Countess will permit, etc. to recover,
etc. by Writ of, etc.
That he the said Earl and the said Countess his Wife before the last day of
Nov. now next coming, shall and will permit and suffer the said I. and A. at
the cost and charges in the Law of the said I. lawfully to recover against the
said Earl and Countess by Writ of Entry Sur Disseisin with Voucher or Vouchers,
after the order and course of Common Recoveries, of all that the Manor of A.
with the appurtenances in the County of S. etc. and all and singular Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Rights, Patronages of Churches,
Franchises, Liberties, Jurisdictions, Privileges and Hereditaments whatsoever,
esteemed, reputed, used, demised, or taken as part, parcel or member of the
said Manor of A. and all and Singular Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments whatsoever, which the said Earl and
Countess have, or either of them has, or at any time had in, or within the
said, etc.

And also the said Earl and Countess shall likewise permit and suffer the said
I. and A. lawfully to recover against the said E. and C. by another Writ of
Entry sur disseisin with Voucher or Vouchers after the order, etc. of all that
the Manor, etc. and likewise to recover, etc. by another Writ of Entry.
And that all the said Recoveries shall be in due Form of Law lawfully Executed.

And moreover, that as well the said E. and C. now his Wife, at the costs and
charges of the said I.W. in the Law on or before the last day of November, now
next coming as aforesaid, shall and will by fine in due form of Law, to be
levied with proclamations, according to the statute in that behalf provided,
convey and assure unto the said I. and A. and to their Heirs, or to the Heirs
of one of them, all the said Manors, and all the premises, with all and
singular their appurtenances, with warranty of the said E. and the said C. his
Wife, and of the Heirs of the said E. of all the premises to the said I. S.
and A. his Wife, and to the Heirs of the said I. against all men, as also, that
after the said Fine had recovered and executed, Sir G.H. Knight. brother of the
said E. on this side (such a day) at the costs and charges in the Law only of
the said I. and A. or of their Assigns, shall and will by Fine with
Proclamations according to Statute in due form of Law, by him the said Sir G.
to be levied, grant and release unto the said E. and his Heits, all and
singular the premises with warranty of the same to the said E. and his Heirs
against him the said Sir G. and his Heirs, according to the usual manner of
Fines.

And it is condescended, concluded and agreed between the said parties, that as
well the said Fine of the said E. That the fine and recoveries shall be to the
use of, etc.
and C. and the said Recovery and Recoveries, so to be had and executed, as is
aforesaid, as also the said Fine of the said G. H. and all other Fine and
Fines, Recovery and Recoveries, Assurance and Assurances whatsoever specified
or mentioned in these presents, shall be to the uses, intents and purposes
hereafter expressed in these Indentures, and to none other use or uses, intent
or purpose that is to say, to the use and behoof of the said E. and his Heirs,
until default of payment shall be made of the said Annuity granted by these
presents, or of some part thereof contrary to the form, tenor and effect of
these presents, and after default of payment of the said Annuity, or any part
thereof, contrary to the form, tenor and effect of these presents, then to the
only use and behoof of the said I. and A. and for and during the term of their
natural lives, and the life of the longer liver of them, their Assignee and
Assignees; And the Assignee of the survivour of them. In witness whereof, the
said parties to these presents, their hands and seals interchangeably have set
the day and year first above-written.

A Lease for a year.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of, etc. in the Year of our Lord God,
according to the account used in England, 1658. between W. S. the elder of,
etc. in the County of, etc. Esquire and Doctor in Divinity, of the one part, and
S.M. and C.D. of, etc. in the County of, etc. Gent. of the other part,
Witnesses, that the said S.W. for, and in confideration of the Sum of five
shillings of lawful money of England to him in hand paid by the said S.M. and
C.D. whereof he does hereby acknowledge the receipt, has bargained and sold,
and does by these presents bargain and sell unto the said, S.M. and C.D. their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with their and every of their appurtenances, commonly called or
known by the Names of, etc. (containing by estimation six hundred and thity
acres, be the same more or less, situate, lying and being in the Towns,
Parishes, Villages and Hamlets of G. and S. in the said County of, etc. or one
of them; together with all other lands, tenements and hereditaments, heretofore
of Sir S.W. deceased, and now or late of the said S.W. that are situate, lying
and being in the Towns, Villages and Hamlets of M. and T. aforesaid, or either
of them) and also the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders
thereof, to have and to hold the said lands, tenements, hereditaments and
premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said S M. and C.D. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the day next before the date hereof, unto the
end and term, and for and during the term of one year from thence next ensuing,
to the intent, that by virtue thereof, and of the Statute for transferring uses
into possession, the said S.M. and C.D. may be in the actual possession of the
said lands, tenements and premises; and be enabled to take and accept of a
grant and release of the same premises to them, their Heirs and Assigns for
ever. In witness, etc.

A Release and confirmation of the precedent lands.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of, etc. in the year of our Lord God,
according the account used i^ England, 1658. Between W.S. of, etc. in the
County of, etc. Esquire and Dector in Divinity of the one part, and S.M. and
C.D. of, etc. in the County of, etc. Gentleman, of the other part. Whereas the
said W.S. by Indenture bearing date the, etc. day of this instant month of,
etc. for the consideration therein expressed, did bargain and sell unto the
said S M. and C.D. all those lands, tenements and hereditaments, with their and
every of their appurtenances, commonly called or known by the Name of, etc.
(containing by estimation six hundred and thirty acres, be the same more or
less, situate, lying and being in the Towns, Villages, and Hamlets of T. and
M. in the said County of, etc. or one of them, together with all other lands,
tenements and hereditaments hereofore of Sir S.W. deceased, and now or late of
the said S.W. that are situate, lying and being in the Towns, Villages and
Hamlets of G. and S. aforesaid, or either of them) and also the reversion and
reversions, remainder and remainders of the said lands, tenements and
premises, and every part thereof: To have and to hold the said lands,
tenements and premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said S.M. and C.D.
their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the day next before the date
of the said recited Indenture, unto the end and term of one year from thence
next following; To the intent, that by virtue thereof, and of the statute for
transferring uses into possession, the said S.M. and C. D. might be in the
actual possession of the said lands, tenements and premises, and be enabled to
accept of, and take a grant and release of the reversion and inheritance
thereof to them and their Heirs, to the use of them, their Heirs and Assigns
for ever, as by the said recited Indenture more at large appears. Now this
Indenture witnesses, that the said S.W. as well for and in consideration of
the sum of, etc. of lawful money of England paid, and secured to be paid by
the said S. M. and C. D. to several persons, by the direction and appointment
of the said S. W. and for some of his debts, wherewith the said lands and
premises stood charged and liable; That is to say, three thousand pounds, part
thereof to F.R. Esquire, and C. I. Citizen and Mercer of London, in
satisfaction and discharge of the money due to them, by and upon a grant and
conveyance thereof heretofore made of the said lands and premises by the said
W.S. and R.I. Esquire to the said F. R. and C.I. and their Heirs, and, etc.
residue of the said sum of, etc, to Sir C.C. and Sir P.E. in satisfaction and
discharge of their right and estate which they had, of, and in the premises by
a grant and conveyance of the said S.W. before this time made to them and their
Heirs. As also in consideration of a competent sum of money by the said S. M.
and C. D. to the said S. W. in hand paid, whereof he does hereby acknowledge
the receipt, has granted, remised, released and confirmed, and does by these
presents grant, remise, release and confirm unto the said S. M. and C. D. in
their actual possession now being (by virtue of the said recited Indenture of
bargain and sale made to them of a year, and of the said statute) and to their
Heirs and Assigns, the aforesaid lands, tenements, hereditaments and premises,
with the appurtenances; and all the estate, right, title, interest, claim and
demand whatsoever of the said S.W. of, in, and to the same and every part
thereof; and the reversion and reversions, remai^d^r and remainders thereof,
and of every part thereof; To have and to hold the said lands, tenements,
hereditaments and premises, with the appurtenances unto the said S.M. and C.D.
their Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use and behoof of the said S.M.
and C.D. their Heirs and Assigns for ever. And the said S.W. for himself, his,
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does covenant and grant, to and
with the said S. M. and C. D. their Heirs and Assigns by these presents in
manner and form following; that is to say, that the said S.M. and C.D. their
Heirs and Assigns, shall and may from time to time, and at all times for ever
hereafter peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the aforesaid lands,
tenements and premises, with the appurtenances before herein mentioned to be
granted, without any let, trouble, molestation or interruption of the said S.W.
or of his Heirs, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, having or
lawfully claiming to have any estate, right, title, interest, term, claim or
demand, of, in, and to the same, and every or any part thereof, and that freed,
acquitted and discharged, or well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless by
the said S.W. his Heirs, Exe^utors, Administrators and Assigns, of, and from
all former and other grants, bargains, sales, feoffements, mortgages,
joyntures, dowers, leases, estates, Statutes-Merchant, and of the staple
recognizances, judgments, executions, post-fines, issues, amerciaments,
rentcharge and seck, all arrerages of rents, and of, and from all other
titles, troubles, charges and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed,
suffered or done by the said S.W. or by any other person or persons whatsoever
(except one conditional grant of the premises heretofore made by the said W.S.
and B.I. Esquire to F.R. Esquire and C.I. Citizen and Grocer of London, their
Heirs and Assigns, by way of Mort-gage for security of payment of a sum of
money therein mentioned. And also that the said S.W. Sir C.C. and Dame E. his
wife, and S.W. Esquire and C. his wife, the said C. and E. being sisters and
coheirs of S.C. Esquire deceased, their Heirs and Assigns, and all and every
other person and persons, having or lawfully claiming to have any estate,
right, title, interest, clame or demand, of, in, or to the said Lands,
Tenements and Premises, hereby granted, or any part thereof, shall and will
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, at the reasonable request, and
at the Costs and Charges in the Law of the said S.M. and C.D. their Heirs and
Assigns, make, do, acknowledge, levy, suffer and execute, and cause and suffer
to be made, done, acknowledged, levied, suffered and executed all and every
such other and further acts, things, devices and assurances in the Law
whatsoever of the said Lands, Tenements, and Premises before herein mentioned
to be granted, with the appurtenances, unto the said S.M. and C.D. their Heirs
and Assigns, be it by fine, feoffment, deed or deeds, enrolled or not enrolled,
recovery with voucher or vouchers over release and confirmation, or by all or
any of them, or by any other reasonable assurance in the Law, as by the Council
learned in the Law of the said SM. and C.D their Heirs or Assigns, shall be
reasonably dey^sed or advised and required, the which said further assurance
and assurances so to be had and made, shall be and shall endure, to the only
use and behoof of the said S.M. and C.D. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, and
to no other use or uses, intents or purposes whatsoever. In witness whereof,
the said parties to these presents, their hands and seals interchangeably have
set the day and year first above-written.

Note, that this Conveyance of Lease and Release is much in use, and works
without the formal act of livery and seisin.

Note also, that if you leave out the Recital in the Release, and put in the
word Enfeoffe in the Grant, then the Release works alone without the Lease with
livery.

A Release from an Executor to two Creditors of the Testator of all Debts.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I C. E. Citizen and Mercer
of, etc. Executor of the last Will and Testament of E.G. late Citizen and
Haberdasher of, etc. deceased, have remised and released, and by these
presents, for me, my Heirs, Executors and Administrators, do remise, release,
and for ever quit-claim unto C.R. of, etc. in the Province of, etc. in the
parts beyond the Seas, Haberdasher, and C.I. of, etc. Gent, and unto either of
them, all and all manner of actions, suits, debts, debates, accounts,
reckonings, bills, bonds, writings obligatory, covenants, judgments, extents,
Executions, claims, duties, and all other demands whatsoever, which of or
against the said C.R. and C.I. or either of them, their or either of their
Heirs, Executors or Administrators. or any of them, ever I have had, now have,
or hereafter shall or may have by force and virtue of the execution of the last
Will and Testament aforesaid, or by reason, force, color or means of any other
act, matter, cause, deed or thing whatsoever it be, from the beginning of the
world until the day of the date of these presents. In witness whereof I have
hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.

A Release with an exception of some Bonds, etc.
KNow all men by these presents, That I W.H. Citizen and Merchant-taylor of,
etc. have remised, released and discharged, and by these presents do for me, my
Executors and Administrators, remife, release and discharge unto R C. of, etc.
Barber-chyrurgion, all and all manner of debts, sums of money and demands,
bills and bonds whatsoever, between me the said W. H. and the said R.C. for any
matter or thing whatsoever before the day of the date hereof, excepting two
bills, bearing date the, etc. day of, etc. the one for payment of five pounds
one the, etc. day of, etc. next coming; and the other for payments of five
pounds on the, etc. day of, etc. now next coming.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.
A Release from two Partners to two Debtors.
KNow all men by these presents, That we P. E. and L. T. Citizens and
Merchant-taylors of, etc. have remised, released and quit-claimed, and by these
presents for us, our heirs, executors and administrators, jointly and severally
do remise, release and quit-claim unto C.R. of, etc. in the Province of, etc.
in the parts beyond the Seas, Haberdasher, and unto C.H. brother of the said R.
and to either of them, all and all manner of actions, suits, debts, bills,
bonds, reckonings, accounts, and all other matters, causes, things and demands
whatsoever between us the said P.E. and L.T. or either of us, and the said C.R.
and C.H. or either of them, for any matter or thing whatsoever at any time or
times, before the day of the date of these presents.

In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals the, etc. day of,
etc. in the year of our Lord God, etc. Sealed and delivered in the presence of
(...)

A Grant of the Stewardship of a Manor during pleasure.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I P. I. of
the Middle Temple, London, Esquire send greeting in our Lord God everlasting.
Know ye, that I the said P.I. have given and granted, and by this my present
Writing do give and grant unto B.I. of, etc, in the County of, etc. Gent. the
office of Steward and Stewardship of all that the Manor of, etc. and of the
hundred of, etc. in the County of, etc. and also the custody and keeping of the
Courts, Leets and other Courts of, and within the said Manor and hundred,
together also with all sees and profits thereunto belonging, to have, hold and
enjoy the same to him the said B.I. by himself or his sufficient deputy, for
and during my will and pleasure. In witness whereof I the said P.I. have
hereunto set my hand and seal, dated the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of
An Agreement of Creditors to take their Debts by four several payments, and
abate all interest.
WE the Creditors of C.H. whose names are hereunder subscribed, are all
content, and do every one of us severally and respectively for himself agree
and promise to take and accept of such principal debts as are due unto us from
the said C.H. at such four days of payment as is aforesaid mentioned (the said
payments to be made by even and equal portions) That is to say, one fourth part
of our said several debts on or before the, etc. day of, etc. next coming; one
other fourth part thereof on the, etc. day of, etc. now next also ensuing; one
other fourth part thereof one the, etc. day of, etc. which shall be in the Year
of our Lord God, etc. and the residue of our said several debts being the last
and fourth part on the, etc. day of, etc. which shall be in the year of our
Lord God, etc. in full payment and satisfaction of our said debts: and upon the
said C. H. making the first payment, and giving us respectively his bonds or
bills for the three last payments, according to this agreement, we will deliver
up our old securities, and discharge him thereof. Witness our hands the, etc.
day of, etc.

A Lease of a side of a Shop and other conveniences, with a grant of goods and
wares, according to a schedule annexed.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of, etc. Between E.H. Citizen and Stationer
of, etc. on the one part, and H.T. of the same City Stationer on the other
part, Witnesses, that the said E.H. for and in consideration of the yearly
rent hereafter in and by these presents reserved to be paid, has demised,
granted, and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, grant, and to
farm-let unto the said H.T. all that part of the Shop now in the occupation of
the said E.H. being the West Side of the same Shop, and also the warehouse at
the end of the same Shop, which said warehouse abutteth upon the South-end of
that part of the said Shop which now is in the occupation of A.R. as the same
demised part of the said Shop, and also the said demised warehouse now are in
the occupation of him the said E.H. and parcel of his dwelling house, called or
known by the name or sign of the, etc. in, etc. situate in the Parish of, etc.
And the said E.H. for the consideration aforesaid, does further grant unto the
said H.T. free liberty and passage from and out of the said Shop into the yard
belonging to the said Message, in, by, and through the entry there at all
seasonable and convenient times to draw and use water at the Cistern standing
in the said yard, and for any other convenience, and also room in the Celler
belonging to the said Message, to set Ink in pots or tubs there, and to carry
and fetch away the same, as occasion shall be from time to time, doing as
little harm thereby as may be; To have and to hold the said West Side of the
said Shop, and also the said warehouse with free use of room, liberty and
passage, as aforesaid, unto the said H.T. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the day of the date of these presents, unto the full end and term
of seven years from thence next ensuing and fully to be complete and ended,
yielding and paying therefore yearly during the said term unto the said E.H.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the sum of twenty pounds of lawful
money of England at the Feasts of, etc. by even and equal portions; and if it
shall happen the said yearly rent of twenty pounds to be behind, or unpaid in
part or in all, by the space of fourteen days next after either of the said
Feasts, at which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid (being lawfully
demanded,) That then and from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said E. H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, into the said
demised premises to re-enter, and the same to have again, re-possess and
re-enjoy, as in his former estate, any thing therein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding: And the said E.H. does hereby covenant and grant to and with
the said H.T. That he the said E. or any other by his leave, sufferance or
title, shall not, neither will, during the said term, sell or cause, or procure
to be sold or vended in the said East Side, or part of the said shop now in the
said A.R. his occupation, any wares or commodities whatsoever belonging to the
Trade of a Stationer, or which the said E.H. usually sells or has sold in
the said now demised part of the same Shop (excepting all manner of printed
books) And the said E.H. for and in consideration of the sum of One hundred
thirty six pounds six shillings and eleven pence of lawful money of England to
him in hand paid by the said H.T. before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, whereof he the said E. does hereby acknowledge the receipt, has
bargained and sold, and by these presents does bargain, sell, assign, set over
and deliver unto the said H. T. all and singular the compters, shelves, boxes,
drawers, goods, chattels and wares of him the said E. H. being and remaining in
and about the said demised premises, and which are mentioned and expressed in
a Schedule or Inventory to these presents annexed, to have, hold, enjoy,
retain, keep and dispose of the said compters, shelves, boxes, drawers, goods,
chattels and wares, and every of them, and every part or parcel of the same
unto the said H. T. to the only proper use and behoof of him the said H. his
Executors and Administrators, without any let, denial, molestation or
interruption of the said E.H. or of any other by or through his means,
consent, title or procurement: And the said H.T, does hereby covenant and
grant, to and with the said E.H. that he the said H. his Executors or Assigns,
shall and will at the end of the said term, leave the said compters, shelves,
drawers and boxes, in the same places where they now stand, if the said E. will
then pay for the same unto the said H. the sum of eight pounds of good and
lawful English money. In witness whereof the parties first abovenamed, have to
these presents interchangeably set their hands and seals the day and year first
above-written.

A Declaration of one, whose name is used in trust in an Obligation.
WHereas in and by one Obligation bearing date with these presents, G.H.
Citizen and Girdler of London, stands bound to me I.K. Citizen and Girdler of
London, in the sum of one hundred pounds, conditioned for payment of one and
fifty pounds and ten shillings, on the, etc. day of, etc. now next ensuing, as
thereby appears. Now I the said I. K. do hereby acknowledge and declare, that
the moneys lent upon the said Obligation, was all the proper moneys of L.M. of
London Gent. and that my name is used in the said Obligation only in trust, and
for the benefit of him the said L. M.

Witness my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.
A Presentation to a Living by one who had the next donation granted to him by
the Patron, according to the latest form.
TO the Right Honorable the Commissioners etc. I A B. of C. in the County of
D. Gent. present to you E.F. Clerk to the Rectory of G. in the said County,
with all the profits thereunto belonging; By the resignation (or by the death)
of H. I. the last Incumbent there, being now void, and in my gift, by virtue of
a gift and grant thereof to me the said A.B. made by K.L. of M. in the said
County Esquire the true and undoubted Patron of the same Rectory, by a sufficient
writing under his hand and seal, bearing date the, etc. day of, etc. last past,
by which the said K.L. the first and next advowson, nomination, donation,
collation, presentation and free disposition of the aforesaid Rectory, with all
its rights, members and appurtenances whatsoever, did to me the said A. B. give
and grant, desiring you to admit the said E. F. to the said Church and Rectory,
and to institute him Rector there: And likewise to invest him with all the
rights, members, and appurtenances whatsoever thereunto belonging: and that you
fully accomplish and fulfill all other the feveral acts and things, which your
Office obliges you to perform herein.

Witness my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc. in the year of our Lord 1658.
A Presentation by a Patron, of the latest form.
TO the Right Honorable etc. I A.B. of C. in the County of D. Esquire, the
true and undoubted Patron of the Parish Church and Rectory of G. in the County
of H. present unto you I. K. Clerk to the said Rectory of G. with all the
profits thereunto belonging by the resignation or death (as the case is) of L.
M. the last incumbent there, being now void, and in my gift, desiring you to
admit the said I.K. to the said Church and Rectory, and to institute him Rector
there, and likewise to invest him with all the rights, members and
appurtenances whatsoever thereunto belonging: And that you fully accomplish and
fulfill all other the several acts and things which your office obliges you to
perform herein.

Witness my hand and seal the, etc.
A deed of feoffment, with a Letter of Attorney to give livery and seisin.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, S. W of etc. sends greeting. Know
ye, that the said S.W. for and in consideration of the sum of 5 s. of lawful
money of England to them in hand paid by S.M. and C.D. of etc. whereof the said
S.W. does hereby acknowledge the receipt, and of the sum of 5000 l. of lawful
money paid, and secured to be paid unto and for the use of the said S.W. his
Executors or Assigns, have granted, enfeoffed and confirmed, and do by these
presents grant, enfeoff and confirm unto the said S.M. and C D. their Heirs and
Assigns, all those Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their and every of
their appurtenances, commonly called or known by the names of R. and G.
containing by estimation 600 acres, be the same more or less, situate, lying
and being in the Towns, Parishes, Villages and Hamlets of T. and M. in the said
County of K. or one of them, together with all other lands, tenements and
hereditaments heretofore of S. W. deceased, and late of S. W. Dr. in Divinity,
tha^ are situate, lying and being in the Towns, Villages and Hamlets of T. and
M. aforesaid, or either of them: and also the reversion and reversions,
remainder and remainders of the said lands, tenements and premises, and every
part thereof: and also all the estate, right, title, interest, clame and demand
whatsoever of the said S. W. of, in, and to the same, and every part thereof,
to have and to hold the said Lands, tenements, hereditaments and premises,
with the appurtenances unto the said S.M. and C.D. their Heirs and Assigns for
ever, to the only use and behoof of them the said S.M. and C.D. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever: and the said S.W. does by these presents make, Constitute,
Ordain, Authorize and Appoint F. L. of, etc. in the said County of, etc. and
G.M. of, etc. in the said County of, etc. their true and lawful Atturneys for
them and in their names and stead jointly or severally to enter into the said
lands, tenements and premises, or into some part thereof in the name of the
whole, and possession thereof, for them and in their names and stead to take,
and after such possession so thereof had and taken for them and in their names
and stead, to deliver full and peaceable possession and seisin of the said
lands, tenements and premises, with the appurtenances, or of some part
thereof, in the name of the whole to the said S.M. and C.D. or one of them, or
to their lawful Attorney, according to the form of these presents, ratifying,
confirming and allowing all and whatsoever their said Attorneys, or either of
them, shall do in the premises by virtue of these presents. In Witness whereof
the said S.W. to these presents his hand and seal has set the, etc. day of,
etc. in the year, etc.

An Indenture to bar an Estate-tail.
THis Indenture made the seventh day of October in the 11th. year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES, by the grace of God, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Between T.B. of W. in the
County of B. Yeoman, on the one part, and T.M. of H. in the said County Yeoman,
and H.H. of H. aforesaid, in the said County Yeoman, on the other part. Whereas
T.B. deceased, Grandfather of the said T.B. party to these presents, Recital of
a Will.
by his last Will and Testament in writing (amongst other things therein
contained,) did give and devise unto J B. also deceased father of the said T.B.
party to these presents, and to the Heirs male of his body with remainders
over, all that his Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, situate and
being in W. in the said County of B. and all that his Close, adjoining to the
said message or tenement, and all that acre of Meadow-ground called the long
Hale, lying in W. Meade, and three yards of Meadow, called the Elboes, in the
said Parish of W. and half his arable Lands, Leyes and Meadow-ground, lying and
being in the Parish and Fields of W. aforesaid, and R. or one of them, with
their and every of their appurtenances in the said County of B. as by the said
last Will it does and may appear, and which premises do contain a Message
with the appurtenances, and one Yard-land by estimation, be it more or less:
And whereas the said T. B. the Grandfather, shortly after making the said Will
dyed, the said J. B. his Son, him surviving, after which time the said J.B.
having issue, the said T.B. party to these presents, his eldest Son and Heir
male, and the said J. B. being since also dead, by and after whose decease the
said T.B. party to these presents, now is in actual possession of the said
Message or Tenement, Closes, Lands, Meadows and Premises, with the
Remainders over, as aforesaid. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said T.
B. party to these presents, To cut off the estate tail.
intending as well to cut off the said estate tail, and to bar the Remainders
thereon depending, and to settle the said Message or Tenement, Close, Lands,
Meadows and Premises to him the said T.P. party to these presents and his
heirs, as also to bar all pretenses of right that futurely may or can be made
unto all and every, or any the said Messuages, Lands, Meadows and Premises so
given to the said J.B. his Father, and since come unto him the said T. B. party
to these presents, for that purpose, Covenant to levy a Fine.
Does hereby Covenant and Grant for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and for every of them, to and with the said T.M. his Heirs and
Assigns by these presents, That he the said T. B. shall and will on and before
the Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle, now next ensuing the date hereof, in due
form of Law, acknowledge and levy one or more Fine or Fines, Sur cognizance de
droit come ceo, etc. before his Majesty's Justices of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, unto the said T.M. of and for the said Message or
Tenement, Close, and all and every the said Meadows, Lands, and Premises, by
the name or names of one Message, one Garden, one Orchard, Forty Acres of
Land, six Acres of Meadow, six Acres of Pasture and Common of Pasture, for all
Cattle, with the Appurtenances in W. and R. or one of them in the said County
of B. or by such other name or names, quantity or number of Acres, as to the
said T. M. or his Council Learned, shall seem meet and expedient. To the intent
that he the said T. M. shall by force thereof, stand and be seized of the
Message or Tenement, Close, Lands, Meadows and Premises, To suffer a Recovery.
until a good and perfect common recovery with a double Voucher over may be
duly had and executed of and for the said Message or Tenement, Lands, Meadows
and Premises, according to the course of common Recoveries for assurance of
Lands and Tenements in such cases used. And it is hereby fully declared and
agreed by and between all the parties to these presents, That after the said
Fine or Fines so to be levied of the said Message, Lands and Premises, as
aforesaid, he the said T. M. shall and will permit and suffer him the said H.
H. to bring and pursue against him the said T.M. one or more Writ or Writs of
Entry sur Disseisin in le post returnable before his Majesty's Justices of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, by which he the said H.H. shall
demand against him the said T.M. all and every the said Message, Lands,
Meadows and Premises, by the name or names of one Message, one Garden, one
Orchard, Forty Acres of Land, six acres of Meadow, six acres of Pasture and
Common of Pasture for all Cattle, with the appurtenances in W. and R. or one of
them in the said County of B. or by whatsoever other name or names, quantity or
number of Acres, as to the said H. H. shall seem meet; To which Writ or Writs
the said T. T. shall appear gratis, and shall enter into the Warranty, and
shall vouch to warranty the said T.B. party to these presents, who also shall
appear and enter into the warranty, and shall vouch over the Common Vouchee,
who also shall appear and enter into the warranty for the said Premises, and
after make default, so that a good and perfect Common Recovery with a double
Voucher over, may be duly had and executed of and for the said Message or
Tenement, Close, Lands, Meadows and Premises according to the course of Common
Recoveries in such cases used. And it is hereby further declared, concluded,
The declaration of the use.
expressed and agreed by and between all the Parties to these presents, And the
true intent and meaning of all the parties to these presents, and of these
presents is, That after the said Recovery suffered and executed of and for the
said Premises, or any of them, as well the said Recovery, as also the said
Fine, and all Fines and Recoveries suffered and levied, or to be suffered,
levied or acknowledged by or between the said parties to these presents, or any
of them, of and for the premises, or any of them, shall be and enure, and
hereby, and by all the parties to these presents, are and shall be adjudged,
deemed and taken to be and enure, To the only proper use and behoof of the said
T. B. party to these presents, and of his heirs and assigns for ever; And to
none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. In witness whereof the parties
abovesaid, etc.

A Re-demise of Lands Mortgaged.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. L. of, etc. on the one part, and J. M.
of, etc. and G. M. of, etc. on the other part; Whereas the said J.M. and G. M.
by their Indenture of Lease, Recital of the Mortgage.
bearing date, etc. for the considerations therein expressed did demise, grant,
bargain, set, and to farm-let unto the said T. L. his Executors and assigns,
all that the Manor of L.G. and P. with the appurtenances in the said County of
M. and also all Messuages, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables,
Outhouses, Yards, Backsides, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Leasows, Pastures, Feedings, Ways, Wastes, Wast-grounds, Commons, Commodities,
Moors, Marshes, Woods, Wood-grounds, Underwoods, Waters, Watercourse, Ponds,
Pooles, Liberties, Fishings, Advowson, and Patronage of the Church of L.G. and
P. aforesaid, Rents, Reversions, Services, Escheats, Fines, Amerciaments,
Court-Leets, Views of Frankpledge and Profits of Courts, and all that to
Courts, and Leets belongs, Chattels, Wafes, Estrayes, Goods and Chattels of
Felons and Fugitives, Customs, Rights, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Profits,
Commodities, Advantages, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their
appurtenances of whatsoever kind, nature or quality soever, or by whatsoever
name or names they are called or known by, situate, lying and being, coming,
renewing, arising or growing in L. G. and P. aforesaid, H. Y. and Z. or within
any of them, or elsewhere in the said County of M. to the said M. Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures and other the Premises, or to
every or any of them in any wise belonging or appertaining, or incident, or
dependant thereunto, or as part, parcel or member thereof, or at any time
thentofore known, accepted, taken, used, demised or reputed as part, parcel or
member thereof, or of any part thereof, with their and every of their Rights,
Members and Appurtenances, To ha^^ and to hold the said Manors, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Advowsons, and all other the Premises,
with their and every of their Rights and Appurtenances unto the said T. L. his
Executors and Assigns, for the term of 99 years next ensuing the date of the
said recited Indenture of Lease, fully to be complete and ended, by and under
the yearly rent of a Pepper-corn at the Annunciation of our Lady St. Mary the
Virgin, if it were lawfully demanded, as by the said Indenture of Lease,
amongst other things therein contained, it does and may appear. Now this
Indenture witnesses, The re-demise.
That the said T. L. for diverse good causes and considerations him moving, has
demised, set and to Farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, set and to
Farm-let unto the said J.M. and G.M their Executors and Assigns, the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Advowsons, and all
other the Premises, with their and every of their Appurtenances in the said
recited Indenture of Lease mentioned, To have and to hold the said Manor, The
Habendum.
and all other the Premises, with their and every of their appurtenances unto
the said J. M. and G. M. their Executors and Assigns for the Term of 98 years
and 10 months next ensuing the date thereof. Yielding and paying therefore
yearly, during the said term unto the said T. L. his Executors and Assigns, one
Pepper-corn at the Feast of, Proviso to pay money.
etc. if it be demanded. Provided always, and upon Condition, That if the said
J. M. and G. M. their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some of
them, shall not well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said T. L. his
Executors or Assigns, the sum of xx. pounds of current money of England, on
and upon the Twenty fifth day of M. next ensuing the date hereof, and also the
sum of 500 pounds of current money of England, on and upon the twenty fifth day
of M. which shall be in the year of our Lord God, 1632. that then from and
after default of payment of the said several Sums, or either of them, or of any
part of them, or either of them, this Indenture of Lease, and all and every
matter and thing herein contained, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void
to all intents and purposes, this Indenture, or any thing therein contained to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding, the same several payments to
be made and paid at or in the now, etc. and that without any demand to be made
for the same. Covenant to re-deliver possession upon failing of payment.
And the said J.M. and G.M. for themselves, and either of them, jointly and
severally, and for their and either of their several Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and for every of them, do and does Covenant, Promise and grant
to and with the said T. I. his Executors and Assigns, and to and with every of
them, etc. that in case the said J. M. and G.M. their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, shall fail to pay the said several sums of money, or any of them,
or any part of them, or either of them, at the days and times herein before
mentioned and appointed for payment thereof, that then they the said I. M. and
G. M. their Heirs and Assigns, and every and either of them, shall and will
within, etc. next after default of payment of the said sums of money, or any or
either of them, or any part of them, or either of them, leave, yield up and
deliver unto the said T. L. his Executors and Assigns, the peaceable and quiet
possession of the said Manor, Messuages, Lands, and all other the premises,
with their and every of their rights, members and appurtenances. And to make
further assurance.
And also that the said I. M. and G. M. their heirs and assigns, shall and will
from time to time, and at all times, during the space of seven years, etc. as
in Covenants for further assurance. And the said T. L. for himself, That if the
said I. M. and G. M. their heirs and assigns, or any or either of them, do and
shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said T. L. his Executors
or Assigns, the said several Sums of money herein before mentioned and
expressed, at the days and times in the Proviso herein before expressed and
appointed for payment thereof, according to the true intent and meaning of the
said Proviso, Covenant upon payment to assign over all the Lessors interest.
That then the said T.L. his Executors and Assigns, from and after full payment
of the several Sums of money in form aforesaid, shall and will at the request
of the said I. M. and G.M. their Heirs and Assigns, deliver up the said recited
Indenture, and also that part of these presents, which is under the hand and
seal of the said I.M. and G.M. And also that he the said T.L. his Executors and
Assigns, shall and will permit and suffer them the said I.M. and G.M. their
Heirs and Assigns, to hold and enjoy the said Manor and premises, for and
until default of payment of the said several sums of money, or either or any
part of them, shall happen to be made by the said I.M. and G.M. their heirs or
Assigns, at either of the days or times herein before mentioned and appointed
for payment thereof. In witness, etc.

A Confirmation of a Mortgage.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, R. F. of
London, Son and Heir of W. F. late of L. in the Parish of P.R. in the County of
B. Yeoman deceased, sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas the
said W.F. by his Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc. made between the said W.
F. by the name of W. F. of L. in the parish of P. R. in the County of B.
Yeoman, on the one part, and T.F. then of W. A. in the parish of H. in the said
County of B. Husbandman, on the other part, for and in consideration of the Sum
of 50 l. of current money of England to him the said W. F. by the said T. F. in
hand paid, and for other considerations him moving, did demise, grant and to
farm-let unto the said T. F. his Executors and Assigns, all that Message or
Tenement, wherein he the said W. F. did then dwell with the appurtenances,
situate, lying and being in L. aforesaid, within the parish of P.R. in the C.
of B. and also all and singular the Cottages, Houses, Barns, Stables,
Buildings, Edifices, Yards, Back-sides, Orchards, Gardens and Easements to the
said Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining. And also all
those two Closes, etc. and also all Woods, Underwoods, Timber and Trees,
Quick-mounds, Hedges, Ditches, Fences, Hades and Blanks whatsoever, standing,
growing or being in or upon the premises, or any part or parcel thereof, or to
the same premises, or to any part or parcel thereof belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, together with all Commons, Common of pasture, Commodities,
Profits and Appurtenances whatsoever, and all other Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement, and other the
Premises, or to any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, and the
Reversion and Reversions, Rent and Rents of all and singular the premises, and
of every part and parcel thereof, To have and to hold the said Message or
Tenements, Houses, Closes, arable Lands, Woods, Under-woods, Commons,
Commodities, and all other the premises, and every part and parcel thereof,
with their appurtenances unto the said T.F. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. next coming after the date of the said recited
Indenture, unto the end and term, and for and during the term of 500 years from
thence next ensuing, fully to be complete and ended, and without impeachment
of, or for any manner of wast, by and under the yearly Rent of 1 l. at the
Feast of, etc. only if it were lawfully demanded; Nevertheless with Proviso in
the said recited Indenture contained, and hereafter belonging, (viz.) Provided
always, and it is covenanted, granted, concluded and fully agreed by and
between the parties to the said Indenture, That if the said W. F. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall well and
truly content, satisfy and pay, or cause to be paid unto the said T. F. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of 50 l. of lawful money of
E. on and upon the twenty sixth day of M. next coming after the date of the
said recited Indenture, at the then dwelling house of the said T. F. at, etc.
without fraud or deceit, That then at all times thenceforth, from and after
full payment made of the said sum of 50 l. as aforesaid, the said Indenture,
Lease, Demise and Grant, and all and every other Covenant, Grant and Articles
therein contained, should cease, determine, and be utterly void and of none
effect, to all intents and purposes; and that then, and at all times from
thenceforth, it should be lawful for the said W. F. his heirs and assigns into
the said premises to re-enter, and the same to have again as in and by the
said recited Indenture, etc. appears. And whereas the said W.F, did not pay
nor cause the said Sum of 50 l. to be paid, neither is the same yet paid unto
the said T. F. according to the Proviso or Condition in the said recited
Indenture of Lease mentioned, by reason whereof all the said Message and
Premises became absolutely forfeited unto the said T. F. for all the said term
of 500 years in the said recited Indenture mentioned. Now these presents
witness, That the said R. F. being Son and Heir of the said W.F. deceased, for
and in consideration of the Sum of 28 l. more of current money of E. to him in
hand paid, etc. and for other good causes and considerations him moving, has,
and hereby does absolutely grant, ratify and confirm the aforesaid Lease, and
all the Estate and term for years therein and thereby demised and granted, or
mentioned to be demised and granted; And also does hereby fully and absolutely
release the said Condition, and assure all and every Condition and Conditions
whatsoever in the said recited Indenture of Lease contained. And also the said
R.F. for the consideration aforesaid, does hereby grant, demise, confirm and
unto the said. T.F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the aforesaid
Messuages or Tenement, Cottage, Closes, Lands, and all other the premises, for
all the foresaid term and number of 500 years by the said recited Indenture of
Lease demised, or thereby mentioned to be demised; and does also hereby grant
and release unto the said T. F. his Executors and Assigns, the aforesaid
yearly. Rent of 1 l. by the said recited Indenture reserved, and all the
arrerages thereof, To have and to hold all the said Message or Tenement,
Cottages, Closes, Lands, and all other the premises, with their and every of
their appurtenances in the said recited Indenture mentioned, and the said
yearly rent unto the said T.F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for
and during all the rest and residue of the said term and number of 500 years in
the said recited Indenture of Lease mentioned, and now to come and unexpired,
freely and absolutely without any Proviso or Condition whatsoever. Cum
Covenantis proprecata fruitione, and ab Incumbram, and ulterior Assurand. In
witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture upon Marriage, and for settling Lands to uses; and a Declaration
of a Fine lovied to those uses.
THis Indenture made, etc. between J. S. Esquire second Son of the Right Honorable
H E. of W. on the one part, and A. Lady D. of, etc. and Sir T. W. of etc. on
the other part: Whereas the said E. and A. his wife, Recital of being seized.
in the County of W. are now seized for the term of their lives, and for the
life of the longer liver of them, of and in all that the Manor of G. and the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, called C. P. and of the Borough of C. and
of the Advowson and free gift of the Parsonage of the Church of C. with all and
singular the rights, members and appurtenances thereof in the C. of D. and of
diverse Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Woods, Wood grounds and
hereditaments to the said Manor and premises belonging or appertaining,
without Impeachment of wast, the Reversion or Remainder thereof to the said J.
S. and the heirs of the body of the said J. S. lawfully to be begotten. And for
want of such Issue, the Remainder to the right heirs of the body of the said E.
and C. And for want of Heirs issuing of the body of the said E. and C. the
Remainder then to the right and next heirs of the said C. for ever. Recital of
the Marriage.
And whereas there is a Mareiage by Gods Grace intended shortly to be had and
solemnized between E. Lord H. Son and heir apparent of the said E. and C. and
E.D. sole Daughter of the said A. Lady D. they the said E. and C. and the said
J. S. for settling of the Inheritance of the said M. and premises to the uses
hereafter expressed and declared, have this present time of the holy Trinity in
the year abovesaid acknowledged and levied one Fine in due form of Law before
his Majesty's Justices of his Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, Recital of
the Fine.
unto the said A. Lady D. and Sir T.W. and to the heirs of the said A. Lady D.
amongst other Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the said Fine
contained, of and for all that the said Manor of C, with the appurtenances;
And of all Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Commons, Woods,
Woodgrounds, Wastes, Moors, Heaths, Liberties, Franchises, Jurisdictions,
Advowsons, Presentations, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever to the said
Manor and premises, or any part or parcel thereof belonging or appertaining,
or accepted, reputed, taken, known or demised, letten, used, occupied or
enjoyed, as part, parcel or member thereof, or any part thereof. And whereas
the said E. and C. by Indenture tripartite under their Hands and Seals, dared
with these presents, have expressed and declared, that the said Fine so levied
of and for the said Manor of C. and premises herein contained, should be and
enure to the use and behoof of them the said E and C. for and during the term
of their two lives, and the life of the longer liver of them, without
Impeachment of or for any manner of wast, and from and after their decease, and
of the Survivor of them, the remainder thereof to the use of the said E. Lord
H. during the term of his natural life, and from and after hi^ decease, the
Remainder thereof to the Heirs males of the body of the said E. Lord H. to be
begotten on the body of the said E. the remainder thereof to the right heirs of
the said C. as by the said Fine and recited Indenture, purporting and declaring
the use aforesaid, it does and may appear. Now this Indenture witnesses,
Intention of Parties.
and it is hereby covenanted, concluded, declared and agreed by and between all
the parties to these presents, and the true intent and meaning of the said J S.
and of all the parties to these presents, and to the said Fine at the time of
levying thereof, for and concerning the said Manor of C. with the rights,
members and appurtenances thereof, was, and now is, that the said Fine should
be and enure, and hereby, and by all the parties to these presents, is declared
and expressed to be and enure, and the Cognizees of the said Fine, and their
heirs, shall stand and be seized of the said Manor of C. with the rights,
members and appurtenances thereof, To the uses, intents and purposes hereafter
expressed, limited and declared, that is to say, The Uses.
To the use and behoof of them the said E. and C. for and during their two
lives, and the life of the longer liver of them, without Impeachment of any
manner of wast. And from and after their decease, and of the Survivor of them,
the Remainder thereof to the use of the said E. Lord H. Son and Heir apparent
of the said E. for and during the term of his natural life; And from and after
his decease, the Remainder thereof to the heirs males of the body of the said
E. Lord H. to be begotten on the said E. D. his intended Wife; and in default
of such heirs males, then to the use of the heirs of the body of the said E.
Lord H. to be begotten on the body of the said E. D. the Remainder thereof to
the right heirs of the said C. and to none other use, intent or purpose.
Provided always, Provise to make Leases.
and the true intent and meaning of all the parties to these presents, is, and
was, at the time of levying the said Fine, That it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said E. and C. during their joint lives, and for the Survivor of
them at all times, and from time to time, to make any lease or leases of all or
any of the said Manor and Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, to any
person or persons for 21 years in possession, or under, or for three lives in
possession, or under, and not otherwise, or in other manner, so as upon every
such Lease so to be made, the usual and old accustomed Rent, or more be
reserved and appointed to be payable yearly, during the said term or terms, to
such person or persons, as by force of these presents, or of the said Fine, or
recited Indencure, or any of them, shall or ought after the decease of the said
E. and C. to have the immediate Reversion or Remainder thereof. In witness
whereof, etc.

A Declaration of the use of a Fine and Recovery.
THis Indenture made, etc. between the Right Honorable T. L. W. on the one
part, and the Right Honorable W. L. P. Sir N. F. and T. A. on the other part;
Whereas, The recital of the Fine and Recovery.
etc. reciting a Fine and Recovery suffered in the Term of, etc. of these
Manors, etc. by the name or names of, etc. Now this Indenture witnesses, That
the true intent and meaning of the said L. Lord W. and of the said Recoveror,
and of all the parties to the said Recovery, and every of them, and to these
presents before and at the several and respective times of the suffering of the
said Recovery, for touching and concerning the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and premises, and every of them, The intent of the Parties at
the execution of such Fine and Recovery.
whereof the said Recovery was suffered and had, always was, and now is: That
the said Recovery should, and shall be, and enure, and be construed, adjudged,
deemed and taken to be and enure, and that the said Recoverors and every of
them, and all the parties to the same, and the party-takers thereby and their
heirs, and all and every other person or persons, and his and their heirs who
then were, or now are, or hereafter shall be seized of the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, or of any part thereof, or any of them
should and shall stand and be seized of the same Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and premises, and every parcel thereof with the appurtenances,
to the uses, purposes and intents, and under the Provisions, Conditions and
Limitations hereafter in these presents expressed, specified, limited and
declared, and to no other use, intent or purpose. And the said T. Lord W. does
hereby limit, The Uses.
express, declare and appoint, that all the same Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and premises, shall be and remain to the several uses, purposes
and intents hereafter in these presents expressed (that is to say) to the use
and behoof of the said T. Lord W. and his Assigns, for and during the term of
his natural life without Impeachment of or for any manner of waste, and from
and afte^ the decease of the said T. Lord W. then to the use of the said W.
Lord P. Sir N. F. and T. V. their Heirs and Assigns for ever^ for and to this
intent and purpose, that they the said, etc. and the heirs, and the Survivor
and Survivors of them, a^ his and their heirs, For payment of Debts.
shall and will bargain, sell o^ otherwise dispose of the same, for and toward
t^ payment, satisfaction and discharge of such De^^ and Sums of money as the
said T. Lord W. does now owe, (...) which he shall owe at the time of his death
to any person or persons, and for the discharging of such person and persons as
do no^ stand, or which at the time of the death of the said T. Lord W. shall
stand bound or engaged for or with the said T. Lord W. for the sam^ debts, or
sums of money or any of them, and also for the satisfaction, payment and
discharge of all such sum or sums which the said T. Lord W. has, or hereafter
shall take up, borrow or receive, for (...) consideration of which he has
heretofore granted, or hereafter shall grant any Annuity or Annuities, Rent or
Rents-charge, issuing or to be issuing, or payable out of the same Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, or any of them, or out of any of
the Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the said T. Lord W. in the
Territories of England, whereby the same Rent or Rents-charge, shall and may be
determined. And also for and toward the payment and discharge of the Funeral
charges and expenses of the said T. Lord W. and of the Legacies and bequests
which the said T. And Legacies.
Lord W. by his last Will and Testament in writing, to be sealed, subscribed
and published by him before three sufficient witnesses, shall give and bequeath
to any person or persons, or to any use or uses, or so much of such sum and
sums of money, debts, Funeral expenses and Legacies, as the value of the said
Manors, Lands and Tenements (to be sold) as aforesaid shall amount unto. The
disposal of the overplus.
And that if any overplus shall be of the value of the same Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, more than shall be or will be
sufficient to satisfy and discharge all the same debts, sums of money, funeral
charges, Legacies and bequests, that then the said, etc. their Heirs, Executors
or Administrators, shall and will pay and deliver the same overplus, which
shall remain of the Sale, or value of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and premises, unto such person or persons to whom the said Lord
W. shall by his last Will in writing in presence of two witnesses at least,
appoint the said Lands and premises to come after his death. And further upon
this trust and confidence reposed in the said, etc. and their heirs, that if
the said person to whom the premises shall be limited or appointed to come
after the said Lord W. his death as aforesaid, then if such persons, Parties
trusted to give security to dispose of the Premises accordingly.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall within two years next
after the death of the said T. Lord W. well and truly satisfy, pay and
discharge all the aforesaid debts, sums of money, Funeral charges, Legacies and
Bequests which by the true intent and meaning of these presents, are limited,
expressed or intended to be paid for, out of, or in respect of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, or shall give or make
to the said, etc. or the Survivors or Survivor of them, or to the heirs,
executors or administrators of the Survivors or Survivor of them, good and
sufficient security for the payment of all the said debts, Security to be
allowed of by, etc.
sum and sums of money, funeral charges, gifts, Legacies and bequests, which by
the true intent and meaning of these presents, are before expressed to be paid,
the same security to be approved and allowed of by one of the Lords, etc. for
the time being, and any two of the Justices for the time being of the Courts of
King's Bench or Common Pleas, that then the said W. Lord P. etc. and their
heirs, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and his and their heirs and
assigns, shall and will at the costs and charges in the Law of such person or
persons to whom the said T. Lord W. shall as aforesaid appoint or limit the
premises to come after his death, his heirs or assigns, convey and assure the
said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, with
the appurtenances, to such person or persons, his and their heirs and assigns,
by such good and sufficient Conveyance and Assurance in the Law with several
and respective warranty, only by every of them the said W. Lord P. etc.
severally or respectively against themselves, and their several and respective
heirs, as by such person or persons, his or their heirs or assigns, or his or
their Council learned in the Laws of this Land, shall be reasonably devised and
required. Provided always, and the true intent and meaning of the said T. Lord
W. and of all the parties to the said Recovery and other Assurance, and of the
parties to these presents, and every of them, before and at the time of the
suffering of the said Recovery and other assurances, was and yet is, and is so
hereby expressed, published and declared (notwithstanding any thing herein
before contained.) That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T. Lord
W. from time to time, and at all times, etc.

A Mortgage.
THis Indenture made, etc. between I.F. and E.F. Widow, on the one part, and J
R. of, etc. on the other part, etc. witnesses, That the said J. F. and E. F.
for and in consideration of the Sum of. etc. to them in hand before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, well and truly paid, wherewith they
and every of them, do acknowledge themselves fully satisfied and paid, and
thereof, and of every part thereof, do clearly acquit and discharge the said J.
R. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them for ever by these
presents, Have bargained, sold, granted, aliened and confirmed; And by these
presents do, etc. unto the said J. R. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, All that
Message or Inn called or known by the name of the New-Inne, with the Back
sides, backyard, and Garden thereunto adjoining and belonging, situate, lying
and being in H. aforesaid, in the said County of O. on the West Side of a
certain Street there called the North-street, with all and singular the Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Cellers, Sollers, Gardens, Orchards, Profits, Commodities
and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement called the
New-Inne, belonging or in any wise appertaining, or now accepted, reputed,
letten, used or known as part, parcel or member of the same Message or Inn,
and now being in the holding or occupation of the said E. F. and her assigns,
And all the estate, right, title, interest, use, possession, remainder,
inheritance, claim and demand whatsoever of the said J. F. and E. F. of, in and
to the same Message or Inn, called the New-Inne, and every part and parcel
thereof; And also all and every the Deeds, Evidences, Charges, Writings,
Escripts and Minuments whatsoever, concerning only the said bargained
premises, or any part or parcel thereof, and true Copies of all other Deeds,
Writings, Evidences and Minuments that do concern the bargained premises, or
any part or parcel thereof jointly with any other Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, which they the said J. F. and E. F. now have, or knowing where
they are, may lawfully come by without Suit in Law, and all and every the
Copies aforesaid, to be Copied and written forth at the costs and charges of
the said J. R. his heirs or assigns: They the said J. F. and E. F. for them,
their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, do covenant, promise and grant by
these presents, to and with the said J R. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, well and truly to deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the
said J. R. his Heirs or assigns, at the now dwelling house of the said J. R.
situate, etc. within three years next ensuing the date of these presents,
whole, safe, uncancelled and undefaced: To have and to hold the said Message
or Inn, called the New-Inne, and all other the premises, with all and
singular their appurtenances, before by these presents bargained and sold, or
mentioned or intended to be hereby bargained or sold, and every part and parcel
thereof unto the said I. R. his heirs and assigns for ever, to the only proper
use and behoof of the said J. R. his heirs and assigns for ever: And the said
J. F. and E. F. for them, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for
every of them, do covenant and grant by these presents, to and with the said J.
R. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them in form ensuing;
That is to say, That they the said J. F. and E. F. or one of them, for and
notwithstanding any act or thing by them, or either of them done, caused or
procured, or by them or either of them to be done, caused or procured to the
contrary thereof, now are, or is, and at the execution of the first estate to
be had and made of and in the premises to the said J. R. and his heirs,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, shall then be
solely seized, and very true and lawful owner or owners of the said Message or
Inn, called the New-Inne, and all other the premises before by these presents
bargained and sold, or mentioned or intended to be bargained and sold, of a
good, lawful and indiffeazible estate in Fee-simple, without any manner of
Condition or Limitation of any use or uses, and have now, and at the execution
of the said estate, shall then have good right, full power, and lawful and
absolute authority to grant, bargain, sell, etc. Cum. Covenant. pro exonerat.
ab Incumbr. and fruition^. And that he the said J. F. and his heirs, and all
and every other person or persons lawfully having, or claiming to have any
manner of estate, right, title, or interest, of, in or to the premises before
by these presents bargained and sold, or mentioned or intended to be bargained
and sold with the appurtenances, or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof,
by, from or under the said J. F. and E. F. or either of them, shall from time
to time, and at all times for and during the space of five years next ensuing
the date hereof, when and as often as they or any of them shall be thereunto
reasonably required by the said J. R. his heirs or assigns, or any of them,
make, do, suffer, knowledge and execute, or cause to be made, done, suffered,
knowledged and executed at the costs and charges in the Law of the said J. R.
his heirs or assigns, or some or one of them, all and every such further lawful
and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device and devices, assurance
and assurances, in the Law whatsoever, for the further, better and more perfect
assurance, surety, sure-making and conveying of all and singular the premises,
and every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances to the said J. R. his
hein and assigns, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.
Be it by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery, Release, Confirmation with Warranty only
against the said I. F. and his heirs, or without Warranty, or by all or any of
the aforesaid ways or means, or by any other lawful or reasonable ways or
means in the Law whatsoever, without Warranty, or with the like Warranty as
aforesaid, as by the said I. R. his heirs or assigns, or any of them, or by
his, their, or any of their Council learned in the Laws, shall be lawfully and
reasonably devised, advised or required. Provided always, and it is
Covenanted, Concluded, Conditioned and agreed by and between the said parties
to these presents, That if they the said I. F. and E. F. or either of them,
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, do well and
truly content and pay, or cause to be contented and paid to the said I. R. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at the now dwelling house of, etc. the
Sum of, etc. of, etc. in form ensuing, etc. without fraud or guile, That then
this present bargain and safe, and all and every Covenant, Grant, Article and
thing herein contained, shall to all effects, purposes and constructions, be
utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect: But if default of payment in any
of the days of payment aforesaid, in part or in all, contrary to the form
above declared, that then this present bargain and sale, and all and every
Covenant, Grant, Article and thing herein contained, shall to all effects and
purposes stand, remain and abide in its full force and strength, any thing
herein before expressed to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In
witness whereof, etc.

A Conveyance of a Manor.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R. H. M. his wife, and I. H. on the one
part, and Sir R. D. on the other part, witnesses, That the said R. H. M. his
wife, and I. H. for and in consideration of the sum of, Grant of the Manor.
etc. Have granted, aliened, bargained, sold, enfeoffed and confirmed, and by
these presents, do jointly and severally grant, alien, bargain, sell, infeoff,
and confirm unto the said Sir R. D. his heirs and assigns for ever, All that
the Manor or Lordship of R. in the County of O. with the Rights, Members and
Appurtenances thereof: And also all and singular Messuages, Houses, Edifices,
Buildings, Barns, Stables, Dove-houses, Yards, Back-sides, Orchards, Gardens,
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods, Under-woods,
Wood-grounds, with the soil and ground of the same, Timber and Trees, Waters,
Watercourse, Ponds, Pools, Liberties, Fishings, Courts, Leets, Views of
Frank-pledge, Perquisites and Profits of Courts and Leets, Wayfes, Estrayes,
Heriots, Felons, Goods, and Goods of Fugitives, Rents, Services, Rents-seck,
and all other Rents and Services whatsoever reserved upon any Demise or Lease
heretofore made of the premises, or of any part thereof, Wastes, Wastegrounds,
Easements, Passages, Profits, Commons, Commodities, Jurisdictions, Emoluments,
Mills, Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Manor and
Premises, or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or reputed to
be belonging thereto, or used therewith: And also all that the Advowson, Of an
Advowson.
Presentation and right of Parsonage of the Rectory Church and Chantrey of R.
aforesaid. And all Tithes, oblations and obventions whatsoever, belonging to
the said Rectory Church or Chantreys of P. aforesaid. And all that Message,
Tenement or Farm, Of a Farm.
situate and being in R. aforesaid, now or late in the tenure or occupation of
W. C. or his Assigns, called or known by the name of S. or by whatsoever other
name or names the same is called or known, and all Houses, Edifices, Buildings,
Barns, Stables, Yards. Back-sides, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements,
Meadows, Pastures, Ways, Easements, Passages, Profits, Commons, Commodities,
Woods, Woodgrounds, Timber and Trees, Waters, Watercourse, Emoluments,
Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever to the said Message, Tenement or
Farm, and premises, or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or
reputed to be belonging thereto, or used therewith. And also all those
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances called
the Chantrey Lands in R. aforesaid. And also all and singular other the
Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods,
Wood-grounds, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments whatsoever of them
the said R. H. M. and J. H. or any or either of them, in or within the Towns,
Fields, Parishes, Hamlets, Territories or Precincts of R. and B. and L. or any
or either of them in the said County of O. And also all the estate, right,
title, interest, use, possession, and the Reversion and reversions, remainder
and remainders, rent and rents, claim and demand whatsoever of them the said R.
H M. and I. H. and every and either of them, of, in and to the said Manor and
Premises, and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof belonging, Of
Writings, with a Covenant to deliver them by such a time.
or in any wise appertaining. And all Writings, Evidences, Deeds, Charters,
Fines, Escripts, Court-rolls, Exemplifications and Minuments whatsoever
concerning the said M. and premises, or any part thereof, which the said R. H.
now has in his possession, or can conveniently come by without Suit in Law:
And true Copies of all such Writings and Evidences, as do concern the same, or
any part thereof, with any other Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, the same
Copies and every of them to be copied and written out, at the costs and charges
of the said Sir R. D. his heirs and assigns: All which said Writings and
Evidences the said R. H. does hereby covenant for him, his heirs and assigns,
to and with the said Sir R. D. his heirs and assigns, to deliver unto him the
said Sir R. D. his heirs or assigns, at or before the Feast of St. J. the
Apostle, next ensuing the date hereof, safe, whole, uncancelled and undefaced:
To have and to hold the said Manor or Lordship, Advowson, Rectory, Chantrey,
Messuages, Tenements, Farm, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Hereditaments, and all
other the premises, with their and every of their appurtenances unto the said
Sir R. D. his heirs and assigns, to the only, etc. And the said R. H. for
himself, etc. does Covenant, etc. That he the said R. H. now is, and at the
time of the first executing of an estate of the said Manor and premises, by
force of these presents unto the said Sir R. D. shall be lawfully and
absolutely seized in his Demesne, Seized in see-simple.
as of Feesimple to him and his heirs, of and in the said Manor, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Advowson, Hereditaments and Premises with their
appurtenances, without any manner of Condition or Limitation of any Use of
Uses, to alter, change, determine or make void the same, and without any
Reversion or Remainder thereof, or of any part thereof in his Kings Majesty,
his Heirs or Successors, being made or limited by the said R. H. or I. H. his
Uncle deceased, whose heir the said R. H. now is; And that he now has, and
then shall have good right, full power, and lawful, Power to Alien.
and lawful, and absolute authority to grant, bargain, sell and convey the said
Manor, Lands and all other the premises, with the appurtenances unto the said
Sir R. D. his heirs and assigns, according to the true intent and meaning of
these presents, notwithstanding any Act, had, made, done or suffered by the
said R. H. or the said I. H. his said Uncle, or either of them: And that the
said Manor, Messuages, Lands, Advowson, and all other the premises, with
their and every of their appurtenance, Freed from Encumbrances.
now are, and so shall and may for ever hereafter remain, continue, and be unto
the said Sir R. D. his heirs and assigns free and freely, and clear and clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged, of and from all and all manner of former
and other Gifts, Grants, Leases, Joyntures, Dowers, Uses, Wills, Intails,
Annuities, Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances, Bonds,
Judgments, Executions, Extents, Seizures, Condemnations, Rents, arrerages of
rents, Intrusions, Forfeitures, Mortgages, Fines for Alienation without
license, Debts of Record, Debts to his Majesty's Estate, Tithes, Troubles,
Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, done or suffered by
him the said R. H. or by his Assent, Consent, Act, means or procurement, or by
J. H. his said Uncle, or either of them, An Exception of Leases.
One Lease for the term of 20 years to be accounted from the Feast of the
Annuntiation of of our Lady St. Mary the Virgin in the year of our Lord God,
etc. of parcel of the premises made by the said R. H. to one I. D. wherein
the yearly rent of Nine pounds is reserved: One other Lease for the term of 22.
years, to be accounted from the Feast of St. M. in the Eighteenth year of the
Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King James over England, etc. of other parcel
of the premises made by the said R. H. to one C. O. and whereupon the yearly
Rent of 20 l. is reserved: One other Lease, etc. All which said several Rents,
shall from henceforth be due and payable to the said Sir R.D. his heirs and
assigns, during the several and respective terms aforesaid. And further, The
said R. H. and I.H. for themselves, Govenant for quiet enjoying.
etc. do Covenant, etc. with the said Sir R. D. etc. That he the said Sir R.D.
his heirs and assigns, and every of them, shall and may for ever hereafter
quietly and peaceably have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said M. Farm,
Advowson, Lands and Premises, with their and every of their appurtenances,
without the let, suit, trouble, disturbance, denial, molestation, interruption,
or eviction of them the said R. H. and I. H. o^ either of them, their or either
of their heirs or Assigns, or any (...) them, And without the lawful Let, Suit,
Trouble, Denial, Molestation, Interruption or Eviction of all and every other
person (...) persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under the^ the
said R. H. and I. H. or either of them, their or either of the estate, right or
title: or by, from or under I. H. deceased, Uncl^ of he said R. H. (except
before excepted;) And also that they the said R. H. and I. H. parties to these
presents and either of them, For further assurance.
their and either of the^ heirs and assigns, and M. now the wife o^ the said
R.H. and every of them shall and will from time to time and at all times
hereafter, etc. And it is hereby declared, concluded, etc. That all Fines,
Feoffments, Recoveries and all other assurances whatsoever, had, made, levied,
suffered or executed, to be had, made, levied, suffered or executed, by or
between the said parties to these presents, or any of them, of the said M. and
premises, or of any of them shall be and enure, and hereby and by all the
parties to these presents, are agreed to be and enure, To the only proper use
and behoof of the said Sir R. D. and of his, etc. and to none other use, intent
or purpose whatsoever. In witness, etc.

Sir Alex. D. being seized of the Manor of B. in Corn. O. for life, with
Remainder to his first Son and his heirs, with Remainder to his second Son, and
so to the tenth Son, sell the Mannor-House, and half the Lands to Sir T.R.
which to secure, settles the Manor of C. by the Collateral Deed and Bargain
and Sale, ut sequitur.
THis Indenture made the day of, etc. between Sir A.L. on the one part, and Sir
T.R. on the other part. Whereas the said Sir T.R. at the ensealing and delivery
of these presents, has paid unto the said Sir A.D. the Sum of 2000 l. of
current money of England, in Consideration whereof the said Sir A. D. Dame M.
his wife, and the heirs of the said Sir A. are to convey and assure unto the
said Sir T.R. his heirs and assigns, All that the Mansion House and Capital
Message of the said Sir A.D. with all Houses, Edifices, Barns, Stables,
Buildings, Yards, Orchards and Gardens, with their and every of their
appurtenances, situate, lying and being in G. B. in the County of O. And also
all Trees, Furzes, Woods and Under-woods, with their and every of their
appurtenances, st^nd^ng, growing, lying and being in all or any the Closes and
parcels of ground herein after particularly expressed, and also all Waters,
Fishings and Fish Ponds, being in or between the same, and the moity of all
other Waters adjoining and next to the same, now or late in the possession of
the said Sir A. D. situate, lying and being in G. B. aforesaid, in the said
County of O. And also all that Close, etc. reciting the particulars with the
buttalls and boundalls (...) And also all usual Ways, Easements, Profits and
Commodities to all and singular the premises, and to every part and parcel
thereof belonging, or in any wise appertaining: And all and singular the
Tithes, which at any time hereafter may arise or grow due, out of all or any
the premises aforesaid: All and singular which premises are situate, lying
and being in the Parish of G. B. aforesaid, in the said County of O. Together
also with all the Ways and Passages, now or at any time within the space of
three years last past, used or occupied, unto or with the premises, or any
part thereof, for the said Sir T.R. his heirs and assigns, and for his and
their Servants, Cattle and Carriages in and through any other the grounds of
the said Sir A. D. in G. B. aforesaid, unto the premises, and every of them
intended to be conveyed and assured as aforesaid: In which conveyances and
assurances to be made of the premises, in manner and form aforesaid, there are
to be excepted, to and for the said Sir A. D. his heirs and assigns, Lessees,
Farmors and Undertenants, and all his and their Servants, and all others by his
and their appointment, necessary and convenient ways and passages in and
through all or any the premises to be conveyed, as aforesaid, unto and from
all or any the Closes and Grounds of the said Sir A. D. situate in B.
aforesaid, not to be conveyed unto the said Sir T. R. aforesaid, Now this
Indenture witnesses, That for the quiet enjoying of all and singular the
before mentioned premises, with their and every of their appurtenances unto
the said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns, and for and in consideration of the
Sum of 5 s. of current money of England, in hand paid by the said Sir T. R.
unto the said Sir A. D. that the said Sir A. D. has granted, bargained, sold,
enfeoffed and confirmed, and by these presents does grant, bargain, sell,
enfeoffe and confirm unto the said Sir T. B. his heirs and assigns for ever,
All that his Manor of C. with the appurtenances in the Parish of P. or
elsewhere in the said County of B. And all Messuages, Closes, Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, and Hereditaments, with their and every of their appurtenances
of the said Sir A. D. situate, lying and being in the Town, Hamlets, Fields
and Precincts of C. and P. aforesaid, or in either of them in the said County
of B. And also the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of the
said Manor of C. and of all and singular the premises, with their
appurtenances hereby intended to be granted, bargained and sold: And also all
the estate, right, title, interest, claim and demand whatsoever of him the said
Sir A. D of, in and to the said M. of C. with the appurtenances, and all other
the premises, before by these presents mentioned to be granted, bargained or
sold, with the appurtenances, and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof;
And also all Deeds, Evidences and Writings, touching or concerning the
aforebargained premises only, or only any part or parcel thereof: To have and
to hold the said M. of C. with the appurtenances, and all and singular the
before by these presents bargained premises, with their appurtenances, and the
Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of the same, and all the
estate, right, title and interest of the said Sir A. D. of, in and to the same,
and all Writings only concerning the same, or only any part of the same unto
the said Sir T.R. his heirs and assigns: To the only, etc. And the said Sir A.
D. for himself, his, etc. does Covenant, etc. That for and notwithstanding any
act or thing by the said Sir A. D. or by Sir T.D. Knight, deceased, late Father
of the said Sir A.D. done or suffered to the contrary, he the said Sir A.D. now
at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is the true,
rightful and lawful Owner of the said M. of C. and of all and singular the
afore-bargained premises, with the appurtenances, and of the same, and of
every part of the same, is lawfully seized in his Demeasne, as of Fee-simple,
without any manner of Reversion or Remainder thereof, or of any part thereof in
his Kings Majesty that now is, his Heirs or Successors, or in any other person
or persons whatsoever: And also that he the said Sir T.R. his heirs and
assigns, for and notwithstanding any act or thing by the said Sir A.D. or by
Sir T.D. Knight, deceased, as aforesaid, done or suffered to the contrary,
shall and may from henceforth for ever hereafter, lawfully, quietly and
peaceably have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said M. of C. and all and
singular the aforebargained premises, with their appurtenances clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged of and from all and all manner of former
and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Mortgages, Leases, Feoffments,
Joyntures, Dowers, Statutes, Recognizances, Rents, Judgments, Condemnations,
Executions, Liveries, Ousterlemains, Issues, Amerciaments, Respites of Homage,
and of and from all other titles, troubles, charges, estates and encumbrances
whatsoever heretofore had, made, committed, caused or done, or hereafter to be
had, made, committed, caused or done by the said Sir A. D. and the said Sir T.
D. or by either of them, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully
having, or claiming to have any estate, right, title and interest, by, from or
under the said Sir T.D. and Sir A. D. or either of them, or the heirs or
assigns o^ them, or either of them: (The Jointure for the life of Dame M. D.
now wife of the said Sir A. and one Lease for about six years to come,
heretofore made to J. B. at the yearly Rent of 30 l. per annum: And one other
Lease, made to O. F. for about one year yet to come at the Rent of 100 l. per
annum: And one other Lease, etc. only excepted.) And further, That he the said
A D. his heirs and assigns, and all and every other person and persons lawfully
having, or claiming to have, by, from or under them, or any of them, any
estate, right, title or interest whatsoever, of, in or to the said Manor of C.
and other the before by these presents bargained premises, or of, in or to any
part or parcel of the same, shall and will at all times hereafter, at or upon
the reasonable request, and at the only and proper costs and charges of the
said Sir T.R. his heirs and assigns, a Covenant pro future. Ass. so that the
said assurance or assurances contain no further or other Warranty or Warranties
than only against Sir A D. and his heirs, and against all and every other
person and persons claiming, by, from or under them, or any of them: Provided
always, and upon Condition, That if the said Sir A. D. and such person and
persons to whom by any Conveyance or assurance heretofore made, the Reversion
or Remainder of the said Mannor-house and premises in B. aforesaid, and
intended to be conveyed unto the said Sir T. R. as aforesaid, should or might,
or shall remain or come immediately after the death of the said Sir A. D. and
Dame M. his Wife, shall within one year next after such person or persons shall
attain unto the age of 21 years at the only Costs and Charges, and at the
reasonable request of the said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns, or of some or
one of them, convey and assure unto the said Sir T.R. his heirs and assigns,
and only to their uses and behoofs, All that Capital Message and M. house
aforesaid, and all other the above recited premises, as aforesaid, with their
and every of their appurtenances, situate, lying and being in G. B. aforesaid,
free and clearly discharged of all and all manner of Estates, Titles, Troubles,
Charges and Encumbrances had, made or done by the said Sir A. D. or by Sir A.H.
Knight, lately deceased, or by, from or under them, or either of them, or the
heirs and assigns of them, or either of them, with the like Covenants for the
said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns, in such assurances to be made, as are
contained in an Indenture, bearing date the first day of this instant month of
M. made between Sir A D. of the one part, and Sir T. R. in such manner and
form, as by the said T. R his heirs or assigns, or by some or one of them, or
by his o^ their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, or
advised and required: So that the said assurance and conveyance, assurances and
conveyances, contain no further or other Covenant or Warranty, than only
against Sir R. D. and his heirs, and against Sir T.D. and his heirs, and
against all and every other person and persons claiming, by, from or under
them, or any of them: That then, from and immediately after such assurance is
made of the premises, with their appurtenances in G. B. aforesaid, unto the
said Sir T. R. in manner aforesaid. This present Indenture, and the Grant,
Bargain and Sale therein contained of the said M. of C. and other the premises
in P. aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be void and of none effect, any
thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And then the said Sir T. R. does by these presents, for
himself, his, etc. Covenant, grant and agree to and with the said Sir A. D. his
heirs and assigns, That he the said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns, shall and
will deliver up unto the said Sir A. D. his heirs or assigns, this Indenture to
be Cancelled, together with the Evidences hereby granted, and in a Schedule
expressed hereunto annexed, and then likewise shall and will at the costs and
charges of the said Sir A.D. make such reasonable Assurances and Conveyances,
for the better re-assuring and re-conveying of the said M. of C. and premises
by these presents bargained and sold unto the said Sir A. D. his heirs or
assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised, or advised and required: In witness whereof, etc.

A Declaration of the use of a Fine, where several parties join.
THis Indenture Tripartite, made, etc. between I.A. of, etc. and M. his wife,
sole Daughter and Heir of A.F. Gentleman, deceased, T. S. of, etc. and M. his
wife, of the first part; E. D. of, etc. on the second part; and G. D. of, etc.
and M. S. of, etc. on the third part. Whereas the said I. D. M. his wife, T.S.
and M. his wife, have in Michaelmas term in the year of our Lord God, One
thousand, etc. acknowledged and levied one Fine with Proclamation, according to
the Form of the Statute, in due form of Law before the Justices of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, unto the said G. D. and his
heirs, of and for all those eight Cottages, with the appurtenances, situate and
being in C. W. aforesaid, by the name or names of Eight Cottages, two Gardens,
and one Orchard, with the appurtenances in W. and C. W. aforesaid: As by the
said Fine remaining on Record in the said Court of Common Pleas at Westminster,
it does and may appear. These presents witness, and it is hereby testified,
expressed and declared, by and between all the said parties to these presents,
and the true intent and meaning of all the said parties to these presents, and
to the said Fine then at the time of levying the said Fine was and now is: That
the said Fine, and all other Fines levied, or to be levied of the premises, or
any part thereof, or of the same, or any of them, with any other Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, by or between the parties to these presents, or any
of them, and the Uses thereof shall be and enure, and hereby, and by all the
parties to these presents, are and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be
and enure, to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents
expressed, limited and declared, viz. Of, for and concerning all that one
Cottage or Tenement, wherein one D. A. Tailor, did lately inhabit, situate in
C. W. aforesaid, in a Street there called F. with the Orchard or Backside,
Garden and Appurtenances, To the use and behoof of the said G. D. his heirs and
assigns for ever: And of, for and concerning all that Cottage or Tenement,
wherein the said M.S. does now inhabit in C. W. aforesaid, in a place there
called N. with the Backside and Garden, and appurtenances thereunto belonging
or appertaining, To the use and behoof of him the said M.S. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And of, for and concerning one other Cottage, etc. to the
said J.A. his heirs and assigns for ever; And of, for and concerning all other
the Cottages and Premises in the said Fine contained, the use whereof is not
herein or hereby formerly limited and declared, To the use and behoof of the
said E. R. his heirs and assigns for ever, and to none other use, intent and
purpose whatsoever. In witness, etc.

A Condition for the sealing an Acquittance, or Release of Lands.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bounden B. C. do cause J. M. Sergeant at
the Law, and E. his Wife, before the Feast of E. next coming at the costs and
charges in the Law of the said B. C. by their sufficient deed in the Law, to
release, remit and quit-claim to the within named C.D. his, etc. all their
right, title, power and interest which the said L. M. and E. his wise, or
either of them, have, had, or may have, claim or pretend to have, of, in or to
all such Lands, Tenements, etc. That then etc.

A Bill to pay Money.
MEmorandum, That I R. S. do owe unto I. M the full sum of 10 l. of, etc. to be
paid unto the said J. M. his, etc. on the, etc. next coming, for payment
whereof I the said R. S. do bind me, my, etc. in the sum of, etc. firmly by
these presents. Sealed and dated the day and year abovesaid. Let it be dated as
a general acquittance.

A Release.
BE it known, etc. That I W.B. of, etc. have remised, released, and for me, my
heirs, etc. do by these presents remise, etc. unto I.R. of, etc. all and all
manner of Actions, Suits, Quarrels, Debts, Trespasses, Accounts, Covenants and
demands whatsoever, which I the said W. B. now have against the said J. R. or
my Executors Administrators or assigns, at any time might, ought or could have,
against the said J R. his, etc. as Executor of J. R. his Father, deceased, or
otherwise howsoever from the beginning of the world, until the day of the date
hereof. In witness, etc.

A License to let Lands, although prohibited by Lease.
WHereas my Tenant W.H. holds of me one Tenement in P. in, etc. with the
appurtenances for certain years yet to come, by an Indenture of Lease dated,
etc. wherein he has expressly Covenanted with me not to set or let out any part
or parcel of the said Tenement, without my special license and consent in
writing, in that behalf to be had, as by the said Indenture amongst etc.
appears. These presents witness, That I the said H.K. have licensed, allowed,
and do by these presents license and allow the said W.H. to let, set or demise
the said Tenement to one R.P. his, etc. for three years next ensuing. Provided,
That he the said W. H. shall at his peril see the Rent in the said Indenture
and other Covenants and payments therein mentioned to be paid on the part and
behalf of the said W.H. be duly kept and performed. Dated, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to two to receive possession.
TO all Christian people, to whom these presents shall come, Sir R. D. of, etc.
sends greeting: Whereas G.S. of, etc. did seal unto the said Sir R. D. and
deliver an Indenture bearing date the last day of May, now last past,
purporting a Conveyance unto him the said Sir R. D. and his heirs, of all that
Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, situate and being in B.
aforesaid, sometimes thentofore, etc. setting down the particulars; To have and
to hold the said, etc. to the said Sir R.D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, as
by the said Indenture, it does and may more fully appear: Now know ye, That the
said Sir R. D. has, and hereby does authorize, constitute, depute, and in his
stead and place, put his well-beloved Friends C. G. of, etc. and T. A. of, etc.
and either of them, his true and lawful Attorneys, jointly and severally to
receive and take for him, and in his name, and to his use, full and peaceable
possession and seisin of and in all, or any part of the premises, in the name
of the whole, of and from the said G. S. to hold to the said Sir R. D. and his
Heirs, according to the tenor, purport, form and effect of the said Indenture.
In witness, etc.

A Note of Indorsement of Livery of Seisin on the Indenture by virtue of the
Letter of Attorney.
MEmorandum, That full and peaceable possession and seisin was given and
delivered by the within-named G. S. of the Message or Tenement, Closes and
Land within-mentioned unto C. G. of, etc. by virtue of the Letter of Attorney
to this present Indenture annexed, for and in the name, and to the use of the
within-named Sir R. D. and his Heirs, according to the true intent and meaning
of the said Indenture and Letter of Attorney the day of, etc. in the presence
of us whose names are subscribed.

Note. That the Letter of Attorney must be pinned or filed to the Indenture.

An Assignment of a Lease in trust.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between W. P. of, etc. on the one part, and R. P.
of, etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That the said W. P. for diverse good
causes and considerations him hereunto moving, has demised, granted, assigned
and set over, And by these, etc. unto the said R.P. his Executors and Assigns,
All that, etc. (setting down the particulasr) with their and every of their
rights, members and appurtenances thereunto belonging; Together with all and
every the estate, right, title, interest, use, possession, term for years,
claim and demand whatsoever of him the said W. P. of, in and to the said, etc.
by virtue of a former Lease or Assignment thereof made to him by one W. R. of,
etc. and I. his wife, or either of them for the residue of a term of 1000
years, then unexpired, or otherwise howsoever; To have and to hold the said,
etc. with the appurtenances, during all the rest and residue of the said term
of 1000 years, which are yet to come and unexpired unto the said R. P. his
Executors and Assigns, Upon the trusts, and to the intents and purposes
hereafter mentioned and expressed. That is to say. That the said R.P. and his
assigns, shall permit and suffer the said W. P. to have and take to his own
proper use and benefit, all and every the Rents, Issues and Profits of the
premises, for and during his natural life, without Impeachment of or for any
manner of waste; And from and after his decease, the said R. P. or his assigns,
shall stand and be possessed, or dispose of the premises, during the residue
of the said term, which shall be then to come to such uses, intents and
purposes as the said W. P. shall by his last Will and Testament in Writing,
under his Hand and Seal, and subscribed in the presence of two or more credible
Witnesses, nominate and appoint the same; and for want of such Declaration or
Limitation to be made, That then the said R. P. shall stand possessed of the
premises in trust for the Executors or Administrators of the said W.P. and to
none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. In witness, etc.

E. R. having bought the Manor of B. and Copyhold Lands belonging to it,
takes a surrender of the Copyhold Lands in others names, who by Deed, after
recital of what Estate they had, make this acknowledgement.
WHereas E. R. of, etc. has with his own money purchased of I. G. of, etc.
amongst other Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments; the Customary, Message,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, viz. Then setting all
the particulars with the quantity and number of acres and closes names, and in
whose occupation. And also whereas W. P. of, etc. R. W. F. K. and D.G. of, etc.
being Customary Tenements of the said M. of B. did surrender into the hands of
I. G. being Lord of the said M. All and singular the Customary, Message,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments before mentioned, To the use and behoof of
us the said W.N. and R.F. to the intent and purpose that the said I. G. or
other the Lords of the said M. or their Stewards for the time being at the next
Court-Baton to be holden for the said Manor, should admit, or cause us the
said W.N. and R. F. to be admitted Tenants unto all and singular the said, etc.
As by the said Surrender bearing date, etc. relation being thereunto had, may
more fully and at large appear. Now know ye, That we the said W. N. and R. F.
for the manifesting of the truth of the said Surrender, and for the avoiding
and clearing of all questions and doubts which hereafter may arise or grow
touching or concerning the said Surrender, taken in our names, as aforesaid, do
hereby freely and voluntarily acknowledge, express and declare that the said
Surrender was made, taken and done by the special direction and appointment of
the said E.R. in trust, to and for the only use, benefit and behoof of him the
said E. R. his heirs and assigns for ever, and to and for no other use, intent
or purpose whatsoever; And therefore we the said W.N. and R.F. do by these
presents freely and absolutely disclaim any other estate, right, title or
interest, claim or demand, which we or either of us now have, or hereafter may
or can have, claim or demand in or to the said Customary, Messuages, Lands and
Premises, or any part thereof, but such as we have only by the trust reposed
in us by the Surrender before expressed. In witness whereof we the said W. N.
and R. F. have hereunto set our hands and seals, etc.

A Lease in trust.
THis Indenture made, etc. between Sir R.D. of, etc. on the one part, and W. D.
of, etc. R. H. of, etc. and T. S. of, etc. on the other part, witnesses, That
the said Sir R. D. for diverse good causes and considerations him moving, has
demised, granted, set and to farm-letten, and by these presents does, etc. unto
the said W.D. R. H. and T. S. their Executors and Assigns, All that the Manor
of A. with the rights, members and appurtenances thereof in the said County of
B. and all Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever of him the
said Sir R. D. situate, lying and being in A. aforesaid, in the said County of
B. And also all that Close of Land, in the Parish of N. in the said County of
B. called the Warren-Hill, with their and every of their appurtenances; And all
ways, easements, passages, profits, Commons and Commodities whatsoever
belonging to the said Manor and Premises, and to every or any of them (except
all Timber Trees growing on the premises) or any part thereof: To have and to
hold the said Manor, and all other the premises, with their and every of
their appurtenances unto the said W.D. R.H. and T. S. their Executors and
Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. last before, etc. for and during, and unto the
full end of 24 years, etc. Yielding a Pepper-Corn, etc. Nevertheless, upon this
special trust and confidence, and to the intent and purpose that they the said
W.D. R.H. and T.S. their Executors and Assigns, shall permit and suffer him the
said Sir R. D. and his assigns, during his life, to hold and enjoy the said
Manor and Premises, and to receive and take the Rents, Issues and Profits
thereof, to his and their own use, without Impeachment of any manner of waste.
And also that they the said W.D. R.H. and T.S. their Executors and Assigns,
from and after the decease of the said Sir R. D. shall permit and suffer J. D.
Esquire Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir R.D. and his heirs, to hold and
enjoy, and to receive and take the Rents, Issues and Profits of the said Manor
and Premises, for so long time as he the said J.D. and his heirs, shall permit
and suffer M. D. and K. D. Sons of the said Sir R. D. his heirs and assigns,
severally and respectively to hold and enjoy, according to their several and
respective Estates and Limitations, to them severally and respectively made,
appointed, or to be made and appointed in Trust for them, or either of them by
the said Sir R. D. their Father, of all that the Manors of E. and T. in T.
with their and either of their Rights, Members and appurtenances thereof, in
the said County of B. and all that the Rectory and Parsonage impropriate of T.
aforesaid, and of all that third part of the Manor of C. with the Rights,
Members and Appurtenances thereof in the said County of B. And also to the
intent and purpose, that if the said J. D. his heirs and assigns, shall at any
time during the term hereby demised, disturb, hinder or molest the said M. D.
and R. D. the son, or either of them, their, or either of their heirs or
assigns, in the quiet holding or enjoying of all or any the Manors, Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments to them, or in Trust for them, severally and
respectively limited and appointed by the said Sir R. D. their Father as
aforesaid, or shall cross, or hinder any the limitations or estates, made or
appointed by the said Sir R. D. to or for the said M. and R. D. as aforesaid,
whereby or by reason whereof they the said M. D. and R.D. the son, or either of
them, their heirs or assigns, shall not, or may not quietly hold and enjoy, and
take the profits of the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to or for
them, or either of them, severally and respectively limited and appointed by
their Father Sir R.D. as aforesaid; That then, and immediately from and after
such disturbance and hindrance used and done by the said J. D. his heirs or
assigns: They the said W.D. R.H. and T. S. their, etc. shall permit and suffer
them the said M. D. and R. D. their heirs and assigns, severally and
respectively to take and receive the Rents, Issues and Profits, of the Manor
of A. and all other the premises hereby demised, for all such time and terms
of years, as shall be to come and unexpired at the time of such Disturbance and
hinderance made or done by the said J.D. his, etc. Provided always, That if
the said Sir R. D. at any time during his life, shall be minded to make void
these presents, and the Estate hereby granted, and shall by any writing under
his Hand and Seal, subscribed in the presence of two credible persons, or more,
declare such his mind and intention, for the making void thereof: That then,
from and after such Declaration in writing made and subscribed by the said Sir
R.D. as aforesaid, This present Indenture, and the Estate hereby granted, shall
cease, determine, and be utterly void, to all intents and purposes, any thing
herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In
witness whereof, etc.

A Lease in trust.
THis Indenture made, etc. between Sir R. D. of, etc. on the one part, W.D. of,
etc. R. H. and T. S. etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That the said Sir R.
D. for, etc. setting down the Demise, ut supra, though of other Lands, with the
Habendum and Reddendum, ut supra. Nevertheless, upon this special trust and
confidence that they the said W.D. R.H. and T.S. their, etc. shall permit and
suffer him the said Sir R.D. and his assigns, during his life, to hold and
enjoy the said Manor and Premises, and to receive and take the rents, issues
and profits thereof to his and their own use. And also upon this further
special trust and confidence that they the said W. D. R. H. and T. S. their,
etc. from and after the decease of the said Sir R. D. shall employ yearly out
of the profits of the said M. and premises, the sum of 50 l. of, etc. for the
Education and bringing up of M. D. Gentleman, second Son of the said Sir R.D.
for, and until he the said M. shall attain unto the age of nineteen years; And
also that they the said W.D. R.H. and T. S. their, etc. from and after the said
M. D. shall attain his said age of nineteen years, during the residue of the
said term, shall raise out of the profits of the premises, the sum of 80 l.
per annum, for and toward the maintenance, and for the portion of him the said
M.D. And also at the end of the term hereby demised, shall and will yield and
deliver the rest and residue of all the profits of the premises by them
received or raised unto him the said M.D. or to his issue, if any issue of his
body be then living. And if the said M.D. before his said age shall die without
issue, that then they the said W.D. R.H. T.S. their, etc. from and after the
decease of the said M.D. without issue, as aforesaid, shall yield and deliver
unto J.D. Esquire, eldest son and heir apparent of the said Sir R. D. at his
age of nineteen years, or to such issue of his body as shall be living at such
time as the said J.D. shall have accomplished his said age of nineteen years if
he had lived, all such rents, sum and sums of money, as they, or any of them
shall have received or taken out of, or for the said Manor or Premises, and
every or any of them. And if the said J.D. before the said age of nineteen
years shall die without issue, that then they the said W.D.R. H. and T.S.
their, etc. from and after the decease of the said J. D. as aforesaid, shall
yield, pay and deliver unto R. D. Gent. youngest son of the said Sir R. D. at
his age of nineteen years, or to such issue of his body as shall be then
living, all such rents, sum and sums of money as they, or any of them shall
have received or taken out of, or for the said M. and premises, and every or
any of them. Cum eadem potentia revocat. pro ut ultim. specificat. In witness,
etc.

A Declaration of Trust, with a Declaration of uses by the Truster.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A. Lady D. of, etc. Widow on the one part,
and Sir I.D Sir I.C. Sir R.L. I.C. I.C. T.L. T.I. W.M. and W.G. of, etc.
seperatim on the other part. Whereas the said Sir I.D. I.C. and I C. do stand
jointly seized in Fee with the said A. Lady D. of, and in all that the Manor
of L. in the County of L. with the rights, members and appurtenances thereof,
and of all that the Capital Message or Mansion House of L. aforesaid, and of
all and singular Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Tofts, Cottages, Mills, Meadows,
Closes, Pastures, Leasows, Commons, Waste-grounds, Furze, Heaths, Woods,
Under-woods, Waters, Moors, Ways, Fishings, Court-Leets, Views of Frankpledge,
Waifs, Estrayes, Royalties, Franchises, Rents, Reversions, Services, Profits,
Commodities, Liberties, Privileges and Hereditaments whatsoever to the said
Manor, or any part thereof belonging or appertaining, or reputed, deemed,
occupied, or taken as part, parcel or member of the said Manor of L.
aforesaid, and of all that Message with the appurtenances in L. aforesaid, in
the possession of W. C. or his assigns; as by the conveyance thereof to them
made by G. A. Esquire it does and may more fully appear. And whereas the said T.L.
T.I. and W.G. do also stand jointly seized to them and their heirs, of and in
all and all manner of Tithes, of what nature, condition or quality whatsoever,
and of all Demises, Pensions, Portions, Oblations, Emoluments and Profits
whatsoever coming, growing, renewing, arising, increasing, issuing or going out
of any the Lands, Meadows, Pastures or Woods in L. in the said County of L. or
being parcel of the Demeasnes of the Manor of L. with their and every of their
rights, members and appurtenances, and of all and singular Glebe-Lands,
Tenements, Profits, Commodities, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, to
the Rectory and Parsonage of L. aforesaid belonging or appertaining, lying or
being amongst the Demesne-Lands of L. aforesaid; and also of all and all manner
of Tithes, coming, growing, renewing or increasing, in, or upon the said
Glebe-Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or any of them, and of all other the
Tithes, coming, renewing, or increasing in L. aforesaid, as by the conveyance
thereof to them made by W. C. and G. A. it does and may appear. And whereas the
said Sir I. C. Sir R. L. and W. M. do stand possessed and interessed for diverse
years yet enduring, of, and in all that Pasture-ground, containing by
estimation one hundred and twenty Acres, be it more or less, lying in L. in the
Parish of S. in the said County of B. called or known by the name of the Nether
ground, with the Tenement, and all other the Edifices and Buildings thereupon
standing, as by the Lease thereof to them the said Sir I. C. Sir R.L. and W.M.
by I.I. and A. his wife, dated the nineteenth day of, etc. it does and may
appear. Now these presents witness, and it is hereby declared, testified and
expressed, by all the said parties to these presents, that all and every the
several parties to these presents, do stand so seized and interessed of all and
every the premises respectively, only in trust for the said A. Lady D. and to
her use, and that they the said Sir J. D. Sir I. C. Sir R.L. I.B. I.L. T.L.
T.I. W.M. and W.G. and every of them, and the Heirs and Executors of the
Survivor and Survivors of them, shall at the requests and costs of the said A.
Lady D convey and dispose the premises, and every of them respectively, to
such person and persons as she the said A. Lady D. shall in her lifetime under
her hand, or by her last Will in writing, appoint or give consent unto. And the
said A. Lady D. does hereby also declare, that her intent is, in case she
should not in her life time, as aforesaid, or by her last Will make any
Declaration of her intent for the disposing of the premises; or in case she
the said A. Lady D. shall make such Declaration for part, and not for other
part, then the said parties trusted, and every of them, shall respectively
convey their several Estates in the premises, or of so much thereof, as she
the said A. Lady D. shall not so make a Declaration of to W. D. Esquire second Son
of the said A. Lady D. and to his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, according to
the intent of these presents; and shall always permit her and her assigns, as
aforesaid, to receive and enjoy all and every the Rents and Profits of the
same. In witness whereof, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to demand a Rent according to a Lease.
TO all Christian People to whom, etc. E.F. of, etc. and J. P. of, etc. send
greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas the said E. F. and J. B. by their
Indenture dated the fifth day of, etc. did demise and grant unto J. B. of C. in
the said County of B. Yeoman, and his Assigns, all that Wood-ground, with the
soil thereof, called by the name of W. Wood, containing by estimation 60 Acres,
were the same more or less, with the appurtenances thereunto belonging, lying
in the Parish of C. aforesaid, to hold the demised premises to the said I. B.
and his Assigns, from the Feast of the Birth of our Lord God then last past,
for the term of Twenty one years from thence next ensuing, by and under the
yearly Rent of Thirty pounds six shillings and four pence, payable to the said
Edmund F. and J. P. at the Feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist, and
the Birth of our Lord God, by equal portions, at the Font-stone in the
Temple-Church, London, with this special Proviso or Condition in the said
Indenture contained, That if the said yearly Rent, or any part thereof, should
be unpaid in part, or in all, at the place aforesaid, by the space of ten days
next after either of the said Feasts, or days of payment, the same being
lawfully demanded, that then, and at all times afterward, it should be lawful
for the said E. F. and J. P. and their assigns, to re-enter upon all the
premises, and the same to have again, retain, repossess and enjoy, as in their
former estate and right, as by the said Indenture, amongst other things herein
contained, appears. Now know ye, That the said Edmund F. and J. P. have, and
hereby do depute, constitute and appoint, and in their stead and place put
their well-beloved Friend J. H. of L. Esquire, their true and lawful Attorney,
for them, and in their names, to ask and demand, according to the Proviso in
the said Indenture contained, the half-years Rent that shall grow due upon the
said Demise, by the said J. B. or his Assigns, being the sum of Fifteen pound
three shillings and two pence, at the Feast Day of the Birth of our Lord God
now next ensuing; And also they the said Edmund F. and J. P. do hereby
authorize and appoint the said J. H. to demand the said Rent and Sum at the
time and place in the Proviso in the said reci^ed Indenture, mentioned for
payment thereof, according to the Proviso or the intent thereof. And the said
E. F. and I. P. do hereby further authorize and appoint the said J. H.
Authority to demand a Rent. Toties quoties.
from time to time, and at all times, during the continuance of the said Term
that shall be unexpited and to come, at or after the said Feast Day of the
Birth of our Lord God now next ensuing, for them, and in their names, to ask
and demand on the tenth day next after either of the said Feasts or days of
payment, according to the Proviso in the said Indenture contained, all such
Rent and Rents that shall grow due to be paid upon the said Demise, at either
of the said Feasts, by the said J. B. or his Assigns, at the time and place in
the Proviso of the said recited Indenture mentioned for payment thereof,
according to the purport and form of the same, ratifying and allowing all and
whatsoever the said I. H. shall do in the premises, as if they themselves were
personally present, and did demand the same. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to re-enter upon the former Letter of Attorney.
TO all Christian People, to whom, etc. E. F. of, etc. and I.P. of, etc. send
greeting. Whereas, etc. reciting the Indenture mentioned in the former Letter
of Attorney, and then reciting, That whereas the said E. F. and I. P. by their
Letter of Attorney dated, etc. did authorize and appoint J. H. of, etc. to ask
and demand in their names, and to their use, the half-years Rent, etc. viz. the
sum of 15 l. 3 s. 2 d. which was then to grow due and payable at the Feast
day of the Birth of our Lord God, then next ensuing, and for non-payment
whereof, the said E. F. and I.P. by a Proviso in the said recited Indenture,
might lawfully reenter, if the same should be behind by the space of ten days,
after the said Feast according to the form and effect of the said recited
Indenture and Proviso. And whereas the said J.H. did demand the said half-years
Rent of 15 l. 3 s. 2 d. due and payable by virtue of the said Proviso, and the
power to him given by the Letter of Attorney aforesaid; Yet notwithstanding the
said I. B. and his Assigns, nor either of them, have not paid the said
half-years Rent, according to the reservation and Proviso of the said recited
Indenture: Now know ye, That the said E. F. and I. P. have, and hereby do
depute, constitute, ordain and appoint their (...) Well-beloved Friend J. H.
their true and lawful Attorney for them, and in their names, and to their use,
into all and every the premises, demised by the said recited Indenture unto
the said I. B. and his assigns, to re-enter, and the same to have, detain and
keep for them, and to their use, according to the power and condition in the
said recited Indenture mentioned, ratifying, allowing, ut supra, in the former.
In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants, declaring that a man's name is but only used in
Trust, in the taking of an Assurance.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. B. of the one part, and A. B. of, etc. of
the other part, witnesses. Whereas T.H. by his Indenture of Bargain and Sale
bearing date, etc. See down the Consideration and Plaint.
made between, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned, did grant, bargain
and sell unto the said T. B. and A. B. their heirs and assigns, all that
Message, Farm or Tenement, with the appurtenances, and all those three
Yard-lands of Meadow, arable and pasture, with all and singular their
appurtenances in F. in the said County of L. now or late in the tenure of the
said T. H. or his assigns, to hold the said Message or Tenement, and three
Yard-lands, with the appurtenances to the said T. B. and A. B. their heirs and
assigns for ever, and did covenant by the said Indenture to levy one fine, Sur
Connizance de droit come ceo, etc. of the premises to them the said T. B. and
A. B. and their heirs, as by the said Indenture, (amongst, etc.) appears. Now
this Indenture witnesses, That the said A. B. was only named in trust by the
said T. B. to and for the use of the said T. B. his heirs and assigns, and that
the said Sum of five hundred pound mentioned in the said Indenture, to be the
consideration for the said purchase, was the proper money of the said T. B. And
the said A. B. does covenant, etc. that he the said A. B his heirs and assigns,
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, To Convey Lands according to the
Trust.
upon the request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said T. B.
his heirs or assigns, shall and will convey and assure the premises, and all
his estate, title and interest therein, unto the said T. B. and his heirs, to
the use of the said T. B. and his heirs, or to any other person and persons,
and their heirs, to the use of them and their heirs, as the said T. B. or his
heirs shall direct or appoint, acquitted and discharged of, and from all
Charges and Encumbrances, had, made or done by the said A. B. or by, from or
under any other person or persons whatsoever, claiming by, from or under him.
And the said T. B. does covenant, etc. That he the said T. B. his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators, To save harmless from any damage happening by reason
of the joint Estate.
or some, or one of them, shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, save and keep harmless the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, his and their Lands and Goods, of, and from all manner of
damage, loss and hinderance which shall or may hereafter happen to arise or
grow, for or by reason of the said joint estate, settled and raised by the said
A. B. and T. B. in Trust for the said A. B. as aforesaid.

An Acquittance for money paid in part of a Purchase.
Quinto die D. etc.
REceived by me T.H. the day and year above-written of T. B. the Sum of, etc.
as part of the money agreed to be paid for the purchase of certain Lands in F.
in Com. L. according to certain anicles of agreement indented, bearing date,
etc. made between, etc. In witness, etc.

The manner of indorsing an Attornment of Tenants.
MEmorandum, That R. C. of, etc. assignee of H. G. etc. and the rest of the
Tenants and Farmers of the premises within mentioned, by virtue of several
Leases thereof made unto them, by the within-named W. G. did severally Attorn
and become Tenants of, and of their several and respective interests in the
premises to the within-named C.G. this present tenth day of, etc. and the said
several Tenants, and every of them, have given unto the said C. G. one penny in
the name of Attornment, in the presence of, etc.

A Release of Interest in Lands.
TO all, etc. R. E. of, etc. sends greeting. Know ye, That the said R. E. for
and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him in hand paid by T.H. of, etc.
has given, granted, remised, released, and quit-claimed, and by these presents
does, etc. unto the said T. H. all his estate, right, title, interest, term of
years, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said R. E. now has, or may
claim to have, of, in, or to one Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances
commonly called or known by the name of, etc. situate, lying, and being in,
etc. and of, and in all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever to
the said Message or Tenement belonging, or appertaining, or to, or with the
same now used, occupied, or enjoyed. In witness, etc.

A Condition to save a Surety harmless from a Recognizance.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the said J. C. and A. G. together with the
above-bounden R. P. and for him by Recognizance acknowledged before Mr. T. G.
one of the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of, etc. the
said R. P. has acknowledged to our Sovereign Lord the King, twenty pound, and
the said A. G. twenty, and the said I. C. twenty pound. That he the said R. P.
shall from henceforth for ever keep his Majesty's Peace toward one W. B. etc.
as by the said Recognizance entered into, as aforesaid, at large appears: If
therefore the said R. P. his, etc. from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, do clearly acquit, discharge and save harmless the said I. C. his,
etc. and all his and their Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, and every of
them, as well against our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, as against all and every other person and persons, of, for, or
concerning the said Sum or penalty of, etc. and also of all other costs,
charges and troubles that may futurely come or arise for or concerning the
same; That then, etc.

A Disavowment of a Suit.
TO all, etc. I. L. of, etc. sends greeting, etc. Whereas a Suit has been of
late Commenced and Prosecuted for me, and in my name, in his Majesty's Court of
Kings Bench at Westminster, against M. L. for, etc. (setting down for what)
which said Suit as yet depends in the said Court. Now know ye, That the said
Sure was Commenced, and is prosecuted without any warrant or allowance of me,
and I therefore do hereby renounce and disavow the said Suit, and all and every
other suit or suits attempted or prosecuted against the said M. L. for me and
in my name, for or by reason of the said Bond, or any other cause or matter
whatsoever. In witness, etc.

Warrant for the keeping of a Court.
WHereas I have received direction from the Right Honorable R. E. of D. to
hold a Court Baron for his Lordships Manor of S. within, etc. These are to let
you understand, That I have appointed the 9th day of, etc. next, being Tuesday,
for the holding of the said Court, at or in the Hall of the said M. house, and
do therefore hereby request and require you to give notice of the said time and
place appointed for the holding of the said time and place appointed for the
holding of the said Court unto all and every the Suitors and Tenants of the said
Manor, and that you warn them, and every of them, to be then and there present
by eight of the clock in the fore-noon to give their attendance; And that also
at the time and place aforesaid, you return before me a Jury of the Suitors and
Tenants of the said M. to enquire of such matters as shall be by me given to
them in charge; and hereof, etc.

Given under my hand and seal, etc.
An Indenture of Covenants between Executors.
THis Indenture made, etc. between E. C. of, etc. on the one part, and W. A.
of, etc. on the other part. Whereas A.W. Widow, late deceased, Recital of the
Bond.
by her last Will and Testament in writing, named, ordained and constituted the
said E.C. and W.A. to be Executors of the same her last Will and Testament, as
by the same Will and Testament, amongst other things, appears; Now this
Indenture witnesses, That it is mutually covenanted and agreed by and between
the said patties to these presents in manner and form following. And first, the
said E. C. does covenant, etc. That he the said E. To renounce Executorship.
C. shall and will before the end of Michaelmas Term next ensuing the date
hereof, if he shall be thereunto required by the said W. A. his Executors or
Assigns in due form of Law, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said
W. A. his, etc. refuse and renounce his said Executorship. And the said E. C.
does further covenant, etc. That neither he the said E. nor his Executors, Not
to meddle with the goods.
nor Administrators, shall or will intermeddle with the Administration of any
part of the Money, Plate, Debts, Credits, and other the Goods and Chattels of
the said Testator, without the consent of the said W. A. his, etc. but shall
and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, permit and suffer the
said W. A. his, etc. to administer all such moneys, debts, credits, and other
the Goods and Chattels of the said Testator, without the let, trouble,
interruption or disturbance of the said E. C. his, etc. or of any other person
or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under the said E. C. or by
his means, privity or procurement. And also, that neither he the said E. C. nor
his, Not to release a Creditor.
etc. shall at any time hereafter make, or cause to be made any release,
acquittance or other discharge to any person, for or concerning any of the
debts, credits, goods or chattels of the said Testator, nor shall do or suffer,
or cause to be done or suffered, any Act or Acts, Thing or Things, in or about
the Execution of the said last Will and Testament, without the assent, consent
and agreement of the said W. A. his, etc. And the said W. A. in consideration
of all and singular the premises, does covenant, etc. That he the said W. To
save harmless.
A. his, etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
defend, discharge, and save harmless the said E. C. his, etc. against all and
every person and persons whatsoever, of, for and concerning all and all manner
of actions, suits and demands hereafter to be had, made, or brought against the
said E. C. his, etc. for or by reason of the said Executorship, or the said
last Will and Testament. And that the said W. A. his, etc. shall and will from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, pay and satisfy unto the said E. C.
his, etc. all such costs, charges and expenses as the said E. C. his, etc. To
pay all charges.
shall at time hereafter be put unto, for or by reason of any cause, matter or
thing, touching or concerning the said Executorship, or the said last Will and
Testament of the said A.W. And the said W.A. does covenant, etc. That he the
said W. A. his, etc. To perform the Will.
shall and will well and truly fulfill, accomplish and perform the said last
Will and Testament of the said A. W. and well and truly content and pay all and
every the Legacies, gifts and bequests contained and specified in the same last
Will and Testament, according to the Tenor, Purport, and true meaning of the
same. In witness, etc.

An Indenture in Consideration of a Marriage in lieu of Jointure.
THis Indenture made, etc. between M. F. of the one part, and I. I. and I. F.
of the other part, Witnesses, That the said M. F. for and in consideration of
a Marriage heretofore had and solemnized between the said M. F. and C. his now
wife, and for and in full satisfaction and recompense of such Jointure or Dower
as she the said C. shall have or challenge, out of, or in, or to all or any of
the Messuages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the said M. F. in case the
said C. shall survive and over-live the said M. F. And for the continuance,
settling and establishing of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, in the name, blood and kindred of the said
M. F. so long as it shall please Almighty God, and for diverse other good causes
and considerations him the said M. F. hereunto moving, does covenant, etc. That
he the said M.F. and his heirs, and all and every person and persons, and their
heirs now standing, or being seized, or which at any time hereafter shall stand
or be seized of, or in all that Capital Message, with the Appurtenances,
commonly called or known by the name of H. in B. aforesaid, in the said County
of S. in the tenure or occupation of the said M. F. or his Assigns, and of and
in all and singular the Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Commons,
Woods, Under-woods and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their and every of their
Appurtenances to the said Capital Message or Tenement, belonging or
appertaining, or to or with the same at any time heretofore used, occupied or
enjoyed, as part, parcel or member thereof, To stand seized.
shall and will from henceforth stand and be seized thereof, and of every part
and parcel thereof, to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter mentioned; That
is to say, to the use and behoof of the said M. F. and C. his wife, and their
Assigns, for and during their natural lives, The Uses.
and the life of the longer liver of them, without impeachment of, or for any
manner of wast, and from and after the decease of the Survivor of them the said
M. and C. then to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the body of the said M. F.
and C. lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue, then to the use and
behoof of the right heirs of the said M. for ever. And the said M.F. does
further covenant, etc. That he the said M.F. To have power to raise uses.
at the time of the sealing and delivery of these presents, is, and stands
seized of a good, perfect and indefeazible estate in Fee-simple, of and in the
said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and of and in every part
and parcel thereof, and that he has lawful power and authority by these
presents, to raise, limit and appoint the aforesaid several Uses and Estates,
and that all and singular the premises, with their and every of their
Appurtenances, now are, and so at all times, and from time to time hereafter
shall be, remain and continue unto the uses, intents and purposes before, in
and by these presents limited, expressed and declared, free and clear, and
freely and clearly acquitted and discharged of, Discharged of Encumbrances.
and from all and all manner of former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts,
Grants, Leases, Joyntures, Dowers, Wills, Entrails, etc. and of and from all
other Titles, Troubles, Charges and Incubrances whatsoever. In witness, etc.

Words to be used upon the Delivery of Possession.
I Do deliver you possession and seizin of this house, or of this parcel of
Land, in the name of all the rest contained in this Deed or Indenture; To hold
to you and your heirs and assigns for ever, according to the tenor, form and
effect of this present Writing or Indenture.

A Conveyance of Land by three Coheirs, and their Husbands, well penned.
THis Indenture made the Twentieth day of March, in the Tenth year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the grace of God, of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Between W. S. of B. in
the County of B. husbandman, and I. his wife, W. M. of L.R. in the Parish of
Princes Risborough, in the said County, husbandman, and A. his wife, and F.W.
of P.R. aforesaid, in the said County, husbandman, and A. his wife, and E.A. of
the Parish of P. R. aforesaid, and S. his wife, on the one part, and I. M. of
H. aforesaid, in the said County, husbandman, on the other part Witnesses,
That the said W. S. and I. his wife, W. M. and A. his wife, and F. W. and A.
his wife, The Consideration.
For and in Consideration of the sum of One hundred and ninety pounds of
current money of England, to them the said W. S. and I. his wife, W. M. and A.
his wife, F. W. and A. his wife, E. A. and S. his wife, by the said I. M. in
hand paid before the ensealing hereof, the receipt whereof the said W.S. etc.
do hereby acknowledge, and thereof do jovntly and severally exonerate and
discharge the said I. M. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of
them, for ever by these presents. And for other good causes and considerations
them moving, The Grant.
have granted, aliened, bargained, sold, enfeoffed and confirmed, and by these
presents for them and their heirs, do jointly and severally Grant, Alien,
Bargain, Sell, enfeoffe and confirm unto the said I. M. his heirs and assigns
for ever, All that Message, Tenement, or dwelling house, with the
appurtenances, situate, lying and being, at or near a place called W. A. in
the Parish of B alias B. in the said County of B. wherein the said W.S. now
dwells, and wherein one W. W. deceased, Father of them the said I. A. and A.
did lately dwell and inhabit, and all those five several Closes of Arable Land,
Meadow, Pasture and VVoodground belonging to, or used with the said Message,
Tenement and dwelling house, lying and being in the Parishes of B. aforesaid,
W. and H. or in some or one of them in the County of B. And also all and
singular Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barnes, Stables, Yards, Back-sides,
Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Commons,
Common of Pasture, Ways, Easements, Passages, Profits, Commodities,
Advantages, Emoluments, Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said
Message, Tenement and dwelling house and premises, or to any of them
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or accepted, reputed, taken, known or
demised, letten, used, occupied or enjoyed as part, parcel or member thereof.
And all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever of them the
said W. S. and I. his wife, W.M. F.W. E.A. and every or either of them,
situate, lying and being in the Parishes of B. W. and H. aforesaid, or in any
or either of them. And also all the estate, right, title, interest, use,
possession, reversion and reversions, Remainder and Remainders, Rent and Rents,
claim and demand whatsoever of them the said W.S. and I. his wife, W.M. F.W.
E.A. and every and either of them, of, in and to the said Message, Tenement or
dwellinghouse, Closes, Lands, and all other the premises, and of, in, and to
every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their Appurtenances: And
all Writings, Evidences, Deeds, Charters, Fines, Escripts and Minuments
whatsoever, concerning the premises, or any part thereof; And true Copies of
all such writings and Evidences as do concern the premises, or any part
thereof, with any other Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments which now be in the
hands, custody or possession of them the said W.S. W.M. F.W. E.A. or any, or
either of them, or which they, or any of them may lawfully get or come by
without suit in the Law, the same Copies, and every of them to be copied and
written out at the costs of the said I. The Habendum.
M. his heirs or assigns; To have and to hold the said Message, Tenement or
dwelling house, Closes, Lands, and all other the premises, with their
appurtenances, unto the said I. M. his heirs and Assigns, To the only proper
use and behoof of the said I. M. his heirs and assigns for ever. And the said
W.S. W.M. F.W. and E.A. for them and their heirs severally and not jointly, nor
one for the other, the said Message or Tenement, Closes, Lands, and all other
the premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said I.M. his heirs, against
them the said W.S. W.M. F.W. E. Warranty:
A. and every of them, their and every of their heirs and assigns, Shall and
will warrant, and hereby do jointly and severally grant to warrant, and for
ever defend by these presents: And further, the said W. S. etc. for themselves
severally, and not jointly, nor one for the other, and for their and every of
their several and respective Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every
of them, do and does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. M. his
heirs and assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, That they
the said W.S. etc. for and notwithstanding any act or thing by them, or any of
them, done or suffered to the contrary, now are, or some of them is, and at the
time of the first executing an estate of the premises, with the appurtenances,
unto the said I.M. shall be lawfully and absolutely seized in their, Seized in
Fee.
or some of their demeasne, as of Fee-simple to them and their heirs, or to
some of them and their heirs, of and in all and every the premises, with the
appurtenances; And that for and notwithstanding any such act or thing by them
the said W.S. etc. or by any other of them done or suffered to the contrary, as
aforesaid, they the said W.S. etc. now have, or some of them now have or has,
and shall have good right, full power, Power to alien.
and lawful authority togrant, bargain, sell and convey the Premises, with the
appurtenances, unto the said I. M. his Heirs and Assigns, according to the
intent and meaning of these presents, And that the said Message, Tenement or
dwellinghouse, closes, lands, Freed from Encumbrances.
and all other the premises with the appurtenances, now are, and so shall and
may for ever hereafter remain, continue and be unto the said I. M. his heirs
and assigns, free and freely, and clear and clearly acquitted, exonerated and
discharged of and from all and all manner of former and other bargains, sales,
gifts, grants, leases, Joyntures, Dowers, Uses, Wills, Intails, Annuities,
Statutes Merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances, Bonds, Judgments,
Executions, Extents, Condemnations, Rents, Arrerages of Rents, Intrusions,
Forfeitures, Issues, Amerciaments, and of and from all other Estates, Titles,
Troubles, Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever had, made, committed, done or
suffered by them the said W. S. etc. or by any or either of them, or by their
or any or either of their means, assent, consent or procurement, The Rents and
Services from henceforth to be due and payable, for the premises, to the chief
Lord and Lords of the Fee or Fees of the premises, for and in respect of their
Seigniorities of the same, only excepted and fore-prized. And that he the said
I. M. Quiet enjoying.
his heirs and assigns, and every of them, shall and may for ever hereafter,
quietly and peaceably have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message,
Tenement or dwelling house, Closes, Lands and all other the premises with the
appurtenances, without the let, suit, trouble, disturbance, denial,
molestation, interruption or eviction of them the said W. S. etc. and every and
either of them, their and every and either of their heirs and assigns; And with
out the let, suit, molestation, interruption or eviction of all and every other
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, by, from or under them, or any
or either of them, their or any or either of their estate, right or title, And
also that they the said W. S. etc. Further assurance.
their heirs and assigns, and every and either of them shall and will from time
to time and at all times hereafter, during the space of seven whole years next
ensuing the date hereof, at the requests and costs in Law of him the said I. M.
his heirs and assigns, do make, suffer, acknowledge and execute, and cause and
procure to be done, made, suffered, acknowledged and executed, all and every
such further and other lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things,
devise and devises, assurance and assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the
further, better and more perfect assurance, surety, sure-making and conveying
of the said Message, Tenement or dwelling house, closes, lands, and all other
the premises with the appurtenances unto the said I. M. his heirs and assigns;
Be it by Fine, Feoffment, Release, Confirmation with warranty of them the said
W.S. etc, their and every or any of their Heirs and Assigns, Recovery or
Recoveries, with single or double Voucher or Vouchers, Deed or Deeds, enrolled
or not enrolled, the enrollment of these presents or by all or any the said
ways means, or by any other lawful or reasonable ways (...) means in the Law
whatsoever without warranty, or with the like warranty as aforesaid, as by him
the said I. M. his Heirs and Assigns, or his, their or any of their Council
learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised, or advised and required; All
which further or other assurance, by fine or otherwise shall be and enure and
hereby are and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be a^ enure, To the only
proper use and behoof of the said I. M. his, etc.

An Indenture of Bargain and Sale of a Message and Lands, in consideration of
a Surrender of a Lease of other Lands, with good Covenants.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R. D. of T. in the County of, etc. Whereas
the said K. C. now holds by Lease for certain years yet to come, one Message
or Tenement, with the appurtenances thereunto belonging, wherein the said K. C.
does now inhabit and dwell, situate and being in F. aforesaid, and diverse
Closes, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Wood-grounds, and Hereditaments thereunto
belonging or appertaining, lying and being in F. aforesaid, the Reversion and
Inheritance in Fee-simple of which said Message, Lands and Premises now being
in, and belonging unto them the said R. D. and I. P. and their heirs; And
whereas the said K. C. has, and hereby does Surrender up, grant, bargain, and
sell all her right, title, estate, interest, term for years, claim and demand
whatsoever of her the said K. C. of, in and to the said Message or Tenement,
Closes, Lands, Wood-grounds and premises in the said Lease particularly
mentioned and expressed, and has delivered up the said Lease to be Cancelled
unto them the said R.D. and I.P. in consideration of which said Surrender and
Grant, made by the said K. C. as aforesaid, the said R. D. has upon the
ensealing hereof paid unto her the said K. C. the sum of 35 pound of current
money of England, the receipt whereof the said K. C. does hereby acknowledge,
and thereof does acquit him the said R. D. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them by these presents. And whereas, the said R.
D. in further consideration of the said Surrender of the said Lands and
Premises made, as aforesaid, has agreed to and with the said K. C. that the
said R. together with the said I.P. should and would pass and convey unto her
the said K. C. her heirs and assigns for ever, All that Tenement or Cottage,
with the appurtenances situate and being in F. wherein the said K. C. does now
inhabit, and all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Yards, Backfides,
Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever
thereunto belonging or appertaining, or now used therewith. Now this Indenture
witnesses, That the said R.D. and I.P. in consideration of the said Surrender
of the said Lands and Premises made by the said K. C. as aforesaid, and in
performance of the said agreement made with the said R.D. as aforesaid, have
bargained, sold, aliened, infeoffed and confirmed, and by these presents, do
jointly and severally grant, bargain, sell, alien, infeoffe and confirm unto
the said K. C. her heirs and assigns, All that the said Cottage or Tenement,
with the appurtenances, wherein the said K. C. does now inhabit, situate and
being in F. aforesaid; And all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables,
Yards, Backsides, Orchards, Gardens, Ways, Easements, Passages, Profits,
Commons, Commodities, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Appurtenances
whatsoever thereunto belonging or appertaining, and now used therewith, and
also all the estate, right, title, interest, claim and demand whatsoever of
them the said R.D. and I. P. and either of them, of, in and to the said Cottage
or Tenement, lands and premises hereby bargained and sold, or mentioned or
intended to be bargained and sold, and every of them; All which premises are
in the Occupation of the said K. C. or her Assigns: To have and to hold the
said Cottage or Tenement, and all other the premises with their appurtenances,
hereby bargained and sold, or mentioned to be bargained and sold unto the said
K. C. her heirs and assigns, To the only proper use and behoof of the said K.
C. her heirs and assigns for ever: And the said R. D. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and for every of them by these presents does
covenant and grant to and with the said K. C. her, etc. That they the said R.D.
and I. P. for and notwithstanding any act or thing by them or either of them
done or suffered to the contrary, now are seized in Feesimple to them and their
heirs of and in the said Cottage or Tenement and premises. And that
notwithstanding any such act or thing by them or either of them done or
suffered to the contrary as aforesaid, they now have, and at the time of
executing an estate of the premises by force of these presents, shall have
good right, and lawful authority to bargain, sell and convey the said Cottage,
and premises with the appurtenances unto the said K.C. her heirs and assigns,
according to the intent of these presents: And that the said Cottage, or
Tenement and premises, and every of them now are, and so shall for ever
hereafter remain, continue, and be unto the said K. C. her heirs and assigns,
freed and discharged from all charges and Encumbrances whatsoever had, made,
committed or done by them the said R. D. and I. P. or either of them, or by
their or either of their act, means, content or procurement: And that she the
said K. C. her Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, shall or may for ever
hereafter, quietly and peaceably, have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the
said Cottage or Tenement, and all other the premises with the Appurtenances,
without the let, suit, trouble, disturbance, denial, molestation, interruption
or eviction of them the said R. D. and I. P. and either of them, their and
either of their Heirs and Assigns, and of all and every other person and
persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under them or either of them,
their or either of their estate, right or title; And also that they the said R.
D. and I. P. their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, shall and will from
time to time and at all times during the space of three years next ensuing the
date hereof, at the request and costs of the said K. C. her Heirs and Assigns,
further do, make, suffer, acknowledge and execute all and every such further
and other lawful and reasonable act and thing, for the further, better and more
perfect assuring and conveying of the said Cottage or Tenement and Premises,
with the Appurtenances unto her the said K. C. her heirs and assigns; Be it by
Fine, Feoffment, Release, or otherwise with warranty of them the said R. D. and
I. P. and their Heirs, against them their Heirs and Assigns, or without
warranty, as by her the said K. C. her Heirs or Assigns, or her, their or any
of their Council learned in the Laws shall be reasonably devised, or advised
and required: All which further or other assurances, by fine or otherwise shall
be and enure, and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be and enure, to the
only proper use and behoof of her the said K. C. her heirs or assigns, subject
to the Proviso hereafter expressed, Viz. Provided always, and upon Condition,
That if the said Message or Tenement, Lands and Premises, or any of them
herein before mentioned to be Demised to them the said R. D. and I. D. their
heirs and assigns, shall at any time hereafter be evicted from them the said R
D. and I. P. their heirs or assigns, or any of them, for or by reason of the
said Lease made, as aforesaid, by the said A. or by any other claiming under
his estate, for or by reason of the said Lease or other, that then immediately
upon and after such eviction, this Indenture of Bargain and Sale, and all and
every matter and thing herein contained, shall cease and be utterly void to all
intents and purposes; This Indenture, or any thing herein contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise not withstanding. In witness whereof, etc.

A Lease of Lands, with exceptions of Woods, well penned.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. L. of, etc. of the one part, and R. L.
of, etc. on the other part, witnesses, That the said T. L. for and in
consideration of the yearly Rent and Covenants hereby reserved, and for other
good causes and considerations him moving: The Demise.
Has demised, set, and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, set,
and to farm-let unto the said R. L. his Executors and Assigns, All those Closes
and Grounds called or known by the name or names of M. and B. late in the
tenure of I. B. his Assignee or Assignees, lying and being in P. aforesaid
(except all Woods, Under-woods, Timber and Trees, growing or to be growing on
the premises, or any of them, with free liberty of ingress, egress, and
regress, to and for the said T. L. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every
of them, at all times to fell, sell, cut down and carry away all or any the
said woods, Timber and Trees, at his and their free-wills and pleasures) and
also except all that Coppice or wood-ground, lying and being in P. aforesaid,
now in the occupation of the said T. L. and all Woods and Under-woods, growing
or to be growing on the said Copice of wood-ground, with free liberty and power
to and for him the said R. L. his Executors and Assigns, from time to time,
during the term hereby demised to fell, sell, or otherwise dispose of the same
at his and their free-wills and pleasures, without impeachment of wast (except
and always reserved unto the said T. L. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, all
hedges, and all such trees as grow in any the hedges, about the said Copice, or
within one foot of any the hedges about the same) and all Ways, Easements,
Passages, Profits. Commons and Commodities, to the said Closes and Premises,
or any of them belonging or appertaining, (except before excepted) To have and
to hold the said Closes, Habendum.
Copice or grove, and all other the premises, with their and every of their
appurtenances (except before excepted) unto the said R. L. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel next
ensuing the date hereof, for the term of fifteen years from thence next
ensuing, fully to be complete and ended. Reddendum.
Yielding and paying therefore to the said T. L. his heirs, executors and
assigns, at the Feast of, etc. the Rent and sum of 13 pound of current money of
England, and one couple of good fat Capons. And also yielding and paying at the
Feast of St. etc. the ^ent or sum of 15 pounds and 9 shillings of current money
of England, and also from and after the Feast of St. etc. Yielding and paying
yearly, and every year during the said term, the sum of 30 pounds and 18
shillings of current money of England, at the Feasts of, etc. by even and equal
portions, and one couple of good fat Capons yearly, and every year, or five
shillings in lieu thereof at the Election of the said T. L. his Heirs,
Executors and Assigns at the Font-stone in the Inner- Temple Church, London.
And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent or sums of money, or any of them,
The Distress.
to be behind and unpaid, next after any or either of the said Feasts or days
of payment, whereon the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, that then at all
times it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T. L. his heirs, executors
and assigns, and every of them to enter into, and upon all and every, or any
the demised premises, and to distrain for the same, and the arrerages thereof,
if any happen to be, and the distress and distresses there had and taken, to
lead, drive, take, and carry away, and the same with him and them to detain and
keep until the said yearly Rents and every of them, and the arrerages thereof,
if any happen to be unto the said T. L. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns shall
be contented and paid. Provided always, and upon condition, Proviso to reenter
for nonpayment of rent.
That if the said yearly Rents hereby reserved, or any of them shall be behind
and unpaid by the space of thirty days next after any or either of the said
Feasts or days of payment, whereon the same ought to be paid as aforesaid;
That then and at all times from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said T. L. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of them into and
upon all and every the Demised premises to re-enter, and the same to have
again, retain, re-possess and enjoy as in his and their first and former estate
and right, this Indenture or any thing therein contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And the said R. L for himself, his heirs,
executors and administrators, and for every of them, does Covenant and Grant to
and with the said T. L. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of them by
these presents, that he said R. L. his Executors and Assigns at any time, or in
any year during the said term, shall not, Not to cross-crop.
not will Cross-crop the demised premises, or any part thereof; And also that
he the said R. L. shall and will yearly, during the said term in Husband-like
manner lay on and bestow upon the premises, or some part thereof, as much
Compost and Dung as the Stover and Fodder growing on the premises, will or may
make, To pay Duties.
and also shall and will, during the said term, bear, pay and discharge all
manner of payments and Duties whatsoever, that shall or may any ways grow due
or payable, for or by reason of the Demised Premises, or any of them to the
Kingdom or otherwise, and thereof, and therefrom shall and will acquit and
discharge the said T. L. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns; And also that he the
said R. L. his Executors and Assigns, from time to time, and at all times
during the said term, The Repair.
shall and will well and sufficiently make, amend, keep, cleanse and scour all
and every the hedges, ditches, pales, gates, styles, fences and mounds, upon
and about the Demised premises, and every of them, and the same being well and
sufficiently made, amended, kept, cleansed and scoured in the end, or other
sooner determination of the term hereby Demised, shall and will leave and yield
up unto the said T. L. his Executors and Assigns; Not to assign without License.
And also shall not, nor will Demise, grant, assign, or let the premises, or
any part or parcel thereof, or depart with his estate therein, to any person or
persons whatsoever, without the License and consent of the said T. L. his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, under his or their hands in writing, therefore
had and obtained: And also shall and will pay all and every the yearly Rents
and Sums of money hereby reserved, according to the Reservations aforesaid: And
the said T. L. for him, The Lessee to enjoy performing Covenants.
his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of them, does Covenant and grant
to and with the said R. L. his Executors and Assigns by these presents, That he
the said R. L. by and under the Rents, Covenants and Agreements herein
contained, and on his and their parts to be paid, done and performed, shall and
may during the said term, quietly and peaceably have, hold, occupy and enjoy
all and every the Demised premises (except before excepted) without the let,
suit, trouble, molestation, interruption or Eviction of him the said T. L. his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and of all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him the said T. L. his Estate
or Title. In witness whereof, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease, forfeited upon a Mortgage.
THis Indenture made, etc. between I. S. of P. and G. E. etc. on the one part,
and T. L. of, etc. on the other part. Whereas the said I. S. by his Indenture
of Lease, Reciting of the Lease.
bearing date the 24th of May, in the Twelfth year of the Reign of our said
Sovereign Lord that now is, for the Consideration therein expressed, did Demise
and grant unto the said G. E. all those parcels of Land, arable, Pasture and
wood-ground, lying and being in E. in the County of M. hereafter particularly
mentioned; (That is to say) one parcel of Arable, containing by estimation 4.
Acres, etc. together with free liberty of ingress, egress, and regress, way and
passage into, and from the same several Lands and Premises, and every of them;
And also all other the lands, tenements and hereditamants whatsoever of him the
said I. S. in E. aforesaid, and to him the said I. S. and his heirs, bargained
and sold by M. F. widow, by Indenture dated the, etc. and enrolled in his
Majesty's Court of Chancery, and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders of all and every the Demised premises, and every of them, and all
Pastures, Feedings, Commons, Woods, Under-woods, Ways, Watercourse,
Easements, Commodities, Advantages and appurtenances thereunto belonging or
appertaining, and all Writings, Deeds and Evidences concerning the said
premises, or any of them: To have and to hold the said several pieces and
parcels of Land, Arable, Pasture, and Wood-ground, and all other the premises,
with their and every of their appurtenances unto the said G. E. and his
assigns, from the day of the date of the said recited Indenture of Lease, unto
the full end and term of two hundred years from thence next ensuing, and fully
to be complete and ended, without Impeachment of any manner of waste, by and
under the yearly Rent of one Pepper-Corn if it were demanded, with Conditions
therein contained, that if the said I. S. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, should pay unto him the said G. E. his Executors or Assigns, the
Sum of 100 pound of current money of England, on, etc. according to the
Condition of a Surrender of certain Copy-hold-Lands, dated the day of, etc.
that then from thenceforth thesaid recited Lease to be ^oid, as by the said
recited Indenture of Lease it does and may appear. That the premises were
forfeited.
And whereas the said I. S. did not, nor has paid the said moneys according to
the said Proviso and Condition, by reason whereof the said Lands and Premises
are absolutely come unto and vested in him the said G. E. for all the rest and
residue of the said term of 200 years by the foresaid Lease, Demised and
granted as aforesaid. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said G. E. at the
request, and by the appointment of the said I. S. and for and in consideration
of the Sum of 100 pound of current money of England to him in hand paid by the
said T. L. and the said I. S. for and in consideration of the Sum of 100.
pound of current money to him by the said T. L. in hand paid by the said T. L.
the receipts of which several Sums of money they the said G. E. and I. S. do
hereby severally acknowledge, and thereof do severally acquit and discharge the
said T. L. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them
for ever by these presents, The Assignment.
Have Demised, granted, bargained, sold, assigned and confirmed, and by these
presents do jointly and severally Demise, grant, bargain, sell, assign and
confirm unto the said T. L. his Executors and Assigns, all those the foresaid
several parcels of Land, Pasture, and Wood-ground, lately stocked up, and
premises, with their appurtenances in the said recited Indenture of Lease
mentioned and expressed, and all their, and either of their estate, right,
title, interest, term for years, claim and demand whatsoever of them the said
G. E. and I. S. therein and thereunto, together with the said recited Indenture
of Lease: The Habendum.
To have and to hold all and every the said several pieces and parcels of Land,
Pasture, and Wood-ground, with their appurtenances unto the said T. L. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during all the rest and residue
of the said term, and now to come and unexpired, in as full and ample manner,
to all intents and purposes, as they the said G. E. and J. S. or either of
them, may or might hold or enjoy the same, by virtue of the said recited
Indenture of Lease, or otherwise howsoever; A Covenant to enjoy the remainder
of the term.
And the said G. E. for himself, his, etc. does Covenant and grant, etc. that
he the said T. L. his Executors and Assigns, shall and may at all times during
the said term or residue of the said term and number of years now to come and
unexpired, quietly and peaceably, have, hold, occupy and enjoy all and every
the said parcels of Land, Pasture and Wood-ground with their appurtenances,
without the let, suit, trouble, Expulsion or Eviction of him the said G. E. his
Executors and Assigns, and of all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him the said G. E. his estate
or title, and absolutely freed and discharged from all charges and encumbrances
whatsoever, done or suffered by him the said G. E. or by his means, act or
procurement. And the said J. S. for himself, his, etc. A Covenant if the number
of Acres be wanting, so much money to be repaid.
ut supra. That in case the said Lands, wood-grounds and premises hereby
mentioned to be assigned, together with other parcels of Copyhold Lands of the
said J. S. lying in E. aforesaid, and by him the said J. S. sold to him the
said T. L. and his heirs, shall fall out and appear to be under the quantity of
24 Acres, at which quantity the same is now sold, and estimated unto him the
said T. L. That then he the said J. S. his Executors and Assigns, shall pay and
allow unto him the said T. L. so much moneys, and after the rate of 12 pound
for every acre, and after that rate for a greater or lesser quantity, than one
acre that shall want of the said quantity and number of 24. acres. And also
that he the said T. L. his, etc. To enjoy against the Mortgagor.
shall and may quietly and peaceably have, hold, possess and enjoy all and
every the said Lands and premises, with their appurtenances, without the let,
suit, trouble, disturbance, molestation, interruption or eviction of him the
said J. S. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and of all and every other person
and persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him the said J. S.
his estate or title, and absolutely freed and discharged from all fines,
issues, amerciaments, forfeitures, and all and all manner of charges and
Encumbrances whatsoever made, done or suffered by him the said I. S. or by his
act, means, neglect or procurement, the foresaid recited Indenture of Lease
made to the said G. E. only excepted, etc.

A Lease for three Lives of a Message and Lands unto those that sold the same,
it being so agreed upon sale thereof. Well pe^^d.
THis Indenture made, etc. between J. B. of, etc. on the one part, and J L. of,
etc. and E. his wife, and J. L. his Son, on the other part. Whereas the said
J. L. and E. his wife, Recital of the Lessies sale, with agreement that the
Less^ should make a lease.
by their Indenture of bargain and sale, dated the second day of October last
past, for the Consideration therein expressed, and by other assurance in Law,
have sold and conveyed unto the said J. B. his heirs and assigns for ever, all
that Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, wherein the said J. L. then
did and now does inhabit, situate and being in L. M. aforesaid, and all those
the Lands hereafter particularly mentioned and expressed, as by the said
recited Indenture of bargain and sale amongst other things therein contained,
it does and may appear: And whereas it was agreed between the said J. B. and
the said J. L. at the time of executing the said Conveyance, as in part of the
bargain for the said Message and Lands, that the said I. B. shall make a Lease
of the said Messuages and Lands unto the said I. L. E. his wife, and the said
I. his son, for their lives successively, at the yearly Rent of 4. pounds per
annum. The Consideration.
Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said I. B. being about the age of 28.
years, as well in performance of the said agreement on his part made aforesaid,
and of the yearly Rent hereby reserved, and for other good causes and
considerations him moving, Has demised, The Demise.
set, and to farm-letten, and by these presents does Demise, set, and to
farm-let, unto the said J. L. E. his wise, and the said I. all that the
foresaid Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, wherein the said I. L.
does now inhabit and dwell, situate and being in L. M. aforesaid, and all
those the Lands hereafter particularly mentioned, (viz.) one half acre of Land,
etc. mentioning the particulars, etc. Together with all Houses, Edifices,
Buildings, Barnes, Stables, Yards, Back-side^, Orchards, Gardens, Commons,
Commodities, Ways, Easements, Emoluments, Hereditaments and Appurtenances
whatsoever to the said Message or Tenement, and Premises, or any of them
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, and now used therewith (except all
Woods, Timber and Trees, growing or to be growing on the premises: And also
except all those four Cottages or Tenements, heretofore built on part of the
Orchard, belonging to the said Message or Tenement hereby demised, now being
in the several tenures or occupations of R. E. T F. W. R. and L. D. their
Assignee or Assignees) To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, The
Habendum.
and all other the premises, with their appurtenances, (except before
excepted) unto the said I. L. E. his wife, and I. L. for and during the term of
their natural lives, and the life of the longer liver of them, The Reddendum.
successively one after another as they are herein named; Yielding and paying
therefore yearly, and every year during the said term hereby demised unto the
said I. B. his heirs and assigns, the yearly Rent or Sum of 4. pounds of
current money of England, at two Feasts or Terms in the year most usual, viz.
the Feast of, etc. to be paid at, etc. the first payment thereof at the Feast
of the Annuntiation of, etc. next ensuing: The Distress.
And if it happen the said yearly Rent, or any part thereof to be behind and
unpaid by the space of eight days next after any or either of the said Feasts
or days of payment, whereon the same ought to be paid as aforesaid; That then
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said I. B. his heirs and assigns, and
every of them to enter into and upon the said Message and Premises, and every
or any of them, and to distrain for the same, and the distress and distresses
there had and taken, to lead, drive, take and carry away, and the same with him
and them to detain and keep until the said yearly Rent and the arrerages
thereof, if any happen to be unto the said I. B. his heirs and assigns, shall
be contented and paid. And the said I. L. E. his wife, Covenant to repair.
and the said I. L. for themselves jointly, and severally, and for every and
either of them, their, every and either of their several and respective
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, do and does covenant
and grant to, etc. That they the said I. L. E. his wife, and I. L. their
several Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them at their own
proper costs and charges, in and by all things, shall and will well and
sufficiently repair, maintain, uphold, keep, cleanse and scour all and every
the Houses, Buildings and Edifices hereby demised, and now built upon the
premises, and belonging to the same, and which at any time hereafter, during
the term hereby demised, shall be erected and built upon the demised premises,
or any part thereof, and the hedges, ditches, fences, pales and mounds, upon
and about the demised premises, and every of them well and sufficiently, shall
make, keep, cleanse and scour, and the said Message or Tenement, Houses and
Buildings which are, or at any time hereafter during the term hereby demised,
shall be erected or built in or upon the same, or any part thereof, being so
well and sufficiently repaired, maintained, upholden, kept, cleansed and
scoured in the end, or other determination of the said term hereby demised,
shall and will leave and yield up unto the said I. B. To view the defaults of
reparations.
his heirs and assigns; And also that they the said I. L. and E. his wife, and
the said I. L. and every of them, and their and every of their assigns, shall
and will permit and suffer him the said I.B. his heirs and assigns, together
with three or four or fewer Workmen, or other persons at their or any of their
wills and pleasures, being at convenient times, twice every year quietly to
enter in or upon the said Message or Tenement, and all other the Demised
premises, to view and search whether the same be well and sufficiently
repaired or not; And of all and every the Default and Defaults for want of
Reparations then and there found, To repair upon notice.
to give or leave notice in Writing at the said Message or Tenement unto or
for the said I. L. and E. his wife, and the said I. L. to repair and amend the
same from time to time during the terms hereby demised, always within the
space of six months next after every such notice in Writing so given or left as
aforesaid. Not to demise without license.
And also that neither they the said I. L. and E. his wise, nor the said I. L.
nor any, nor either of them shall not at any time or times hereafter grant,
bargain, sell, assign or set over, demise, let, or depart with the said
Message and Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, or his, her, or their,
or any of their right, title, interest, or estate in or to the Premises or any
of them, without the special license and consent of the said I.B. his heirs
and assigns, under his or their hand in Writing therefore first had and
obtained. Proviso upon nonpayment or nonreparation, to reenter.
Provided always, and it is Conditioned by and between the Parties to these
presents, That if it shall happen the said yearly Rent, or any part thereof to
be behind and unpaid by the space of twenty eight days next after any or
either of the Feasts or days of payment before mentioned or set down for
payment thereof, contrary to the form aforesaid, the same being lawfully
demanded; or if all and every the said Default and Defaults for want of
Reparations, of or in the premises, or any of them, at the time of such view
or search as is aforesaid, shall be found, and whereof Notice in Writing shall
be given or left to repair and amend the same, in manner and form aforesaid,
shall not from time to time be well and sufficiently repaired and amended
always within the space of six months after every such Notice given or left in
Writing as aforesaid, That then, and at all times after in every the Cases as
aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said I.B. his heirs and
assigns, and every of them into and upon the said Message or Tenement, Lands
and Premises, and every of them to re-enter, and the same to have again,
retain, repossess and enjoy, as in his and their first and former estate; This
Indenture, or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And the said I. B. for him, his heirs and assigns, and for
every of them, does Covenant, etc. by these presents, The Lessee to enjoy
performing Covenants.
That they the said I. L. and E. his wife, and the said I.L. by and under the
yearly Rent, Covenants and Conditions in and by these presents reserved, and on
their parts severally to be paid, done and performed according to the intent of
these presents, shall or may peacably and quietly have, hold, possess and enjoy
the said Message or Tenement, Lands, and all other the premises, with their
appurtenances, without the let, suit, trouble, disturbance, denial,
molestation, interruption or eviction of him the said I. B. his heirs and
assigns, and of all and every other person and persons whatsoever, lawfully
claiming by, from or under him the said I. B. his heirs or assigns, or his,
their, or any of their estate, right or title. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture reciting a Bargain and Sale of the Moiety of a Manor, etc. in
trust for the use of another, the same is hereby re-conveyed to the person
trusting.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between Sir W. B. of, etc. on the one part, brother
and heir to H.B. Esquire deceased, and W. E. of H. etc. on the other part. Whereas
Sir I. W. of, etc. and I. F. of, etc. by their Indenture bearing date the
second day of, etc. in the Twelfth year of, etc. did alien, bargain and sell
unto the said H.B. and E. P. of, etc. all that Message or Tenement with the
appurtenances, situate and being in L. aforesaid, in the County of, etc. all
those, etc. And also Common of Pasture, and Feeding for such and so many
horses, beasts, sheep, and other Cattle to be had and taken in and upon the
Common Fields, Meadows, Pastures and Common places in L. aforesaid, at such
times and seasons of the year, and in such manner and form, as the Tenants and
Occupiers of the said premises have before this time used to have and take the
same, and also all and singular Houses, Edifices, etc. and also the Reversion
and Reversions of all and singular the said premises, and the yearly Rents
thereupon reserved; To have and to hold the one Moiety and half-part of all the
said Message or Tenement, and of the said four Yard-lands of Arable Land,
Meadow and Pasture, and of all and singular other the said premises
whatsoever, with the appurtenances in and by the said recited Indenture
bargained and sold, and of every part and parcel thereof to the said H. B. his
heirs and assigns, to the only use and behoof of him the said H.B. his heirs
and assigns for ever; Which said Grant, Bargain and Sale, for and concerning
the said Moiety, of all and singular the premises before mentioned to be by
the said recited Indenture, granted, bargained and sold unto the said H. B. as
aforesaid, was had and made to and in the name of the said H. B. by the
nomination and appointment of the said W. E. and in trust to the use of the
said W.E. his heirs and assigns. Now this Indenture further witnesses, That
the said Sir W. B. according to the said trust, and at the request and desire
of the said W.E. and for diverse other good causes and considerations, him
thereunto moving, Has aliened, bargained, sold, enfeoffed and confirmed, and
by these presents does alien, bargain, sell, enfeoffe and confirm unto the said
W. E. his Heirs and Assigns, All that the said moiety and half part of all the
said Messuages, and of the said Four Yard-lands of Arable Land, Meadow and
Pasture, with the Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof and all
other the premises whatsoever, in and by the said recited Indenture, bargained
and sold unto the said H. B. or to his use as aforesaid, and also the Reversion
and Reversions of all and singular the Moiety and half part o^ all and singular
the said premises, and every part thereof, and the yearly Rents thereupon
reserved due and payable; To have and to hold the said Moiety and half part of
all the said Message or Tenement, and of the said Four yard-Lands of arable
Land, Meadow and Pasture with their Appurtenances, and the Reversion and
Reversions, before specified in and by the said recited Indenture, bargained
and sold to or for the use of the said H. B. as aforesaid unto the said W. E.
his heirs and assigns to the only use and behalf of the said W. E. his heirs
and assigns for ever: And the said Sir H B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, and for every of them, does Covenant and grant to and with
the said W. E. his, etc. That he the said Sir H. B. for and notwithstanding any
act or thing whatsoever by him done or suffered to the contrary, now is, and at
the time of the ensealing hereof, and of the first executing an estate by force
of these presents, shall be lawfully seized in his Demeas^, as of Fee-sim: le
to him and his heirs, of and in the Moiety, and one half of the said Message
or Tenement and premises whatsoever, with the Appurtenances in and by the said
recited Indenture, bargained and sold unto the said H. B. to his use as
aforesaid, and that he the said Sir H.B. for and notwithstanding any act or
thing by him done or suffered to the contrary as aforesaid, now has, and then
shall have good right, full power, and lawful authority to bargain, sell and
convey the said Moiety of the said Message or Tenement and Premises, with the
Appurtenances in the said recited Indenture, bargained and sold unto him the
said H. B. as aforesaid, unto the said W. E. his heirs and assigns, according
to the intent of these presents: And that he the said W.E. his heirs and
assigns, shall or may for ever hereafter peaceably and quietly have, hold,
occupy, possess and enjoy the said moiety of the said Message or Tenement and
Premises, with the Appurtenances in the said recited Indenture mentioned to be
conveyed to the said H. B. or to his use as aforesaid, without the let, suit,
trouble, molestation, interruption or eviction of him the said Sir H. B. his
heirs or assigns, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully
claiming by, from or under him, his estate or title; L. Cum Coven. pro utter.
Assure. and Litterdel. Attorney, etc. In witness whereof, etc.

A Covenant to deliver Evidences by such a time.
ANd the said G. A. for him, etc. That he the said G. A. his Heirs, Executors
or Administrators, or some of them shall and will before the first day of
March, next ensuing the date hereof, deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the
said A. Lady D. and Sir J. D. or to one of them, all such Deeds, Charters,
Evidences, Court-Rolls, Exemplifications of Records, Transcripts of Fines,
Terriers, Escripts, Writings and Minuments, concerning only the premises, or
only any part or parcel thereof, as now be in the possession, custody or
keeping of the said G. A. or of any other person or persons by his delivery, or
to his use, or which he may obtain, get, or come by without suit in Law, whole,
uncancelled, safe, and undefaced, or in as good plight as the same now are and
be, and also true Copies of all such other Deeds, Charters, Evidences and
Writings, as the said G.A. has, touching and concerning the said Lands and
Premises, or any part thereof, jointly, or together with any other Lands, etc.
of the said G. A. the said A. Lady D. and Sir J.D. and their heirs, or some or
one of them, paying or bearing the charge of making and writing the same
Copies, etc.

A Declaration of a Fine and Recovery to variety of uses; well penned.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between the Right Honorable T. Lord W. of the one
part, and the Right Honorable W. Lord P. Sir M. F. of, etc. on the other part.
Whereas the said M. B. and W. D. in the term of E. in the eleventh year of the
Reign of our said Sovereign Lord King James, Recital of the Recovery.
of England, etc. by Writ of Entry, Sur Disseisin in le post, did recover
against the said T. Lord W. all those the Manors of M. alias M. A. L. A. R.
and N. with the appurtenances, and of 30. Messuages, 30. Tofts, 6. Water-mills,
6. Dove-houses, 30. Gardens, 1000 acres of Land, 200 acres of Meadow, 300 acres
of Pasture, 2000 acres of wood, 300 acres of Furze and Heath, 10 pounds Rent,
free warren and view of Frankpledge, with the appurtenances in M. alias M. A.
N. and S. and also the Advowson of the Churches of M. alias M and A. as in and
by the said Recovery remaining of Record in his Majesty's said Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, to which, Relation being had, more at large
appears. And whereas in the Term of the Holy Trnity last past before the date
hereof (that is to say) a Die sce. Of the Time.
Trinitatis in tres septimanas, in the said term in the Court of our Sovereign
Lord the Kings Majesty before his Justices at Westminster, a Fine, Sur
Cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. with Proclamations according to the form of
the Statute, in such case made and Provided, was levied between the said W. R.
and W. D. Plaintiffs, and the said T. Lord W. Deforceant of the Manors of T.
alias T. and B. alias B. with the appurtenances in the County of W. and W. and
of all that Grange or Capital Message, called H. house, and of all the
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments
whatsoever, to the said Manors and Grange, or any of them belonging or
appertaining; or reputed to belong or appertain, or as part or parcel, or
member of them or any of them, or accepted, reputed, taken, demised, used,
occupied or enjoyed as part thereof in the said Counties of W. and W. and of
all other the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rectories, Tithes and Hereditaments,
with the appurtenances of the said T. Lord W. in the said Counties of W. and W.
by the names of the Manors of T. alias T. and B. alias B. with the
appurtenances, and of 40. Messuages, 20 Tofts, 4. Water-Mills, 4. Dove-houses,
40. Gardens, 1000 acres of Land, 600. acres of Meadow, 1000. acres of Pasture,
400. acres of Wood, 400 acres of Furze and Heath, 20 acres of Marsh, and twenty
shillings Rent, with the appurtenances in T. alias T. Alne-Church, B alias B.
F. and Beoleyl, and also of the Rectories of T. alias T. and B. alias B. with
the appurtenances, and all and all manner of tithes of Corn and Hay, growing,
coming or renewing in T. alias T. and B. alias B. and of the Advowson of the
Vicaridge of the Church of T. alias T. in the County of W. and of the Manors
of T. alias T. and B. alias B. with the appurtenances, and 4 Messuages, and one
Dove-house, 4 Gardens, 300 acres of Land, 600 acres of Meadow, 300 acres of
Pasture, 200 acres of wood, and 30 acres of Marsh, with the appurtenances in T.
alias T. Aln-Church, and B. alias B. and also of the Rectory of T. alias T. and
B. alias B. with the appurtenances, and of all and all manner of tithes of
common Hay, growing, coming and renewing in T. alias T. and B. alias B. and of
the Advowson of the Vicaridge of the Church of T. alias T. in the County of W.
as by the said Fine remaining of Record, in his Majesty's said Court of Common
Pleas at W. to which Relation being had, more fully and at large appears. Now
this Indenture witnesses, The intent of the parties.
That the true intent and meaning of the said T. Lord W. and of the said
Recoverers, and parties to the said Recovery, and also of the said Cognizees of
the said Fine, and parties to the same Fine, and of all and every of the
parties to these presents, before and at the several and respective time and
times of the suffering of the said Recovery and Acknowledgments, and levying of
the said Fine, for touching or concerning the said Manors, Lordships, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, whereof the said Recovery and Fine were
severally and respectively suffered, levied and had as aforesaid, always was,
and yet is, that as well the said Recovery, as the said Fine, and all and every
Fine and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries, and other Acts and Assurances of the
said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Rectories, Tithes, Advowsons,
Hereditaments and Premises, or of any of them, with the appurtenances at any
time heretofore suffered, levied, executed or had, wherein or whereunto the
said T. Lord W. was or is any ways a party, and all and every the executions
of the same, and every of them, should and shall be and enure, and be
construed, adjudged, deemed and taken to be and enure; And were and hereby are
Covenanted, granted, concluded, agreed and declared to be and enure, to the
uses, purposes and intents, and under the Provisions, Conditions and
Limitations, hereafter in these presents expressed, limited and declared, and
that the said Recoverers, and either of them, and all the parties to the same
Recovery, and the Parties takers thereby, and their heirs, and all other person
and persons, and his and their heirs, who then were, and now are, or hereafter
shall be seized of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
Premises, with their Appurtenances comprised in the said Recovery, should, and
shall stand and be seized of the same Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments
and Premises comprised in the said Recovery, and every parcel thereof, with
the Appurtenances to the same uses, purposes and intents hereafter expressed;
And that the said Cognizees of the said Fine, and either of them, and all the
parties to the same Fine, and the takers thereby, and the heirs of them, and
every of them, and all and every other person and persons, and his and their
heirs, who at the time of the levying of the said Fine then were, or now are,
or hereafter shall be seized of the foresaid Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and premises, with the Appurtenances, Comprised in the said
Fine, and every of them, should, and shall stand and be seized of the same
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, Comprised in the said
Fine, and every parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances to the uses, purposes
and intents hereafter in these presents expressed and declared, (that is to
say,) for, touching and concerning all that the foresaid Capital Message or
House, called H. house, situate and being within the said Manor of T. in the
said Counties of W. and W. with the Orchards, Gardens, Barns, Stables,
Hop-yards thereunto belonging: And also as for touching or concerning the said
several Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments next hereafter mentioned, and in the
said several Recoveries comprised, (that is to say) two Meadows called H.
Meadows, containing by estimation 60 acres more or less, one Pasture called C.
containing by estimation 40 acres, one Wood called B. containing 16 acres, etc.
parcel of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises in
the said Counties of W. and W. To the only use and behoof of the said T. Lord
W. and his Assigns, The Uses.
for and during the term of his natural life without Impeachment of or for any
wast, and with full power to commit waste, and from and after the decease of
the said T. Lord W. then to the use and behoof of the Lady K. now wife of the
said T. Lord W. for and during the term of her natural life for her Jointure,
and in lieu, and full recompense of her Dower, out of all the Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof the said T. Lord W. now is, or hereafter
shall be seized: And for and touching all the residue of all the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, with their Appurtenances in the
said Counties of W. and W. And for touching and concerning all the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises in the said County of G.
to the only use and behoof of the said T. Lord W. and his Assigns, for and
during the term of his natural life, without Impeachment of or for any manner
of waste; and for touching and concerning the immediate Remainder of the said
Capital Message called H. house, and of all the said lands, tenements and
premises before particularly mentioned, or meant to be limited to the use of
the said Lady K. for her Jointure as aforesaid, immediately from and after the
decease of the said T. Lord W. and of the said Lady K. and of the longer liver
of them, and the immediate Remainder of all the residue of the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises in the said Counties of W. and W.
(whereof there is no use, before limited or declared to the said Lady K. for
her Jointure:) And for touching and concerning the immediate Remainder of all
the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises in the said
County of G. immediately from and after the decease of the said T. Lord W. to
such uses, purposes and intents, and under such Provisions, Conditions and
limitations, as hereafter in these presents are specified, expressed, limited
and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, that is to
say, To the use and behoof of the said Right Honorable W. Lord P. N. F. etc.
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during the term and space
of, etc. years to commence and begin, as hereafter follows, that is to say,
for touching and concerning the said Messuages Lands, Hereditaments and
premises before limited to the use of the said Lady K. for her Jointure,
(parcel of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments comprised in
the said Fine) to begin-immediately from and after the decease of the longest
liver of them the said T. Lord W. and of the said Lady K. and for touching and
concerning all the rest and residue of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and premises, as well in the said Counties of W. and W. as in
the said County of G. for and during the term and space of (...) years, to
commence immediately from and after the decease of the said T. Lord W. for and
to the intent and purpose that the said W. Lord P. N. E. etc. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall and may receive, For payment of debts and
other charges.
perceive, dispose and employ the Rents, Revenues, Issues and Profits of all
the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises respectively
for and during the said term or terms of (...) years, for and toward the
payment and satisfaction of all such Debts and Sums of money which the said T.
Lord W. does now owe, or hereafter shall borrow or owe; or for which any person
or persons does, or hereafter shall stand engaged for or with the said Lord W.
and for his proper debt, and for the payment of such Annuities, Rent or Rents,
and securing such Leases as the said T. Lord W. has granted, or hereafter
shall grant or mention, or limit to be issuing or going out of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or out of any of them,
or out of any parcel of them, or any of them to any person or persons which is,
or are, or have been, or hereafter shall be the servant or servants of the said
T. Lord W. for or in regard, or in respect of his or their service or services,
done or to be done to the said T. Lord W. or to any person or persons, for any
money heretofore received, borrowed or taken up, or hereafter to be received,
borrowed or taken up by the said T. Lord W. or to his or their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and also for and toward the payment of such Legacy
or Legacies, and Sums of money which the said T. Lord W. shall by his last Will
and Testament in writing, to be signed, sealed and published between three or
more sufficient Witnesses, give, limit, ordain or appoint. And from and after
the end, expiration, surrender or other determination of the said term, or
terms of (...) years, as they shall severally end and determine, then to the
use and behoof of such person and persons, and for such estate and estates, and
for such part and parcel as the said T. Lord W. shall by his last Will in
writing, in presence of two credible witnesses or more, appoint, limit or
declare. Provided always, and the true intent and meaning of the said T. Lord
W. and of all the parties to the said Recovery and Fine, and of the parties to
these presents, and every of them, before and at the several and respective
times of the suffering of the said Recovery, and the acknowledging and levying
of the said Fine, was, and yet is, and is hereby so expressed, published and
declared, that notwithstanding any thing herein before contained, it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said T. Lord W. from time to time, Power to make
Leases.
and at all times for and during his natural life at his will and pleasure,
either by act or acts in writing, under his hand and seal, to be sealed and
signed before two or more witnesses of credit, and executed in his lifetime,
or by his last Will and Testament in writing by him to be sealed, subscribed
and published before two or more such witnesses, to give, grant or make any
lease or leases for life, lives or years of all or any of the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or any of them, other than
during the life of the said Lady K. of the said chief Mansion House called H.
house, and so much of the Demesnes, Lands, Tenements and premises next
adjoining to the said Chief Mansion House, as shall amount to the clear yearly
value of one hundred and fifty pounds over and above all charges and Reprizes:
Or to charge the premises to secure moneys to be hereafter borrowed.
Upon which lease or leases, the accustomed or greatest yearly Rent or value
heretofore paid for the said premises, or more shall be reserved, or to charge
the same premises, or any parcel thereof, (except before excepted, and for the
time aforesaid) with any Rent or Rents, Annuity or Annuities, Recognizance or
Recognizances in the nature of the Statute-Staple or Merchant, or by or with
any other Recognizance or Recognizances, Judgment or Judgments of what nature
soever for the assurance of payment of any Sum or Sums of money which he the
said T. Lord W. either has taken up, or borrowed, or shall hereafter receive,
take, borrow or contract for, of or with any person or persons, for or to his
use or otherwise, or for the securing of any person or persons who now is, or
are, or stand, or that at any time hereafter shall stand or become bound for
him the said T. Lord W. or otherwise at his free will and pleasure, and that
the said Recovery, Fine and Fines, and other Acts and Assurances shall be and
enure, and the said Recoverors and parties to the foresaid Recovery, and the
Cognizees and parties to the said Fine, and the parties takers thereby and
their heirs, and all and every other person or persons, who now are or stand,
or hereafter shall be, or stand seized of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and premises, by force or under the said Recovery and Fine, or
either of them, and his an^ her heirs, shall stand and be seized of all, or so
much of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, and
every parcel thereof with the Appurtenances, which is or shall be so given,
granted, leased, charged or disposed of, from and after such gift, grant,
lease, charge, disposition, or other Act or Acts to such uses, intents and
purposes, and to the use of such person and persons to whom such gift, grant,
lease, charge, disposition, or other Act or Acts has been, or shall be made,
as aforesaid, and to the use, intent and purpose, that the party and parties to
whom any Rent or Rents, Annuity or Annuities, Recognizance or Recognizances,
Statutes, Judgments, or other charges already granted, or hereafter to be
granted, made or charged, of, upon, or out of the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, or any parcel thereof by the said T.
Lord W. shall and may duly have, levy, perceive, take and enjoy the fruit,
benefit and effect of the same lease and leases, Rent and Rents, and other
charge and charges, according to the purport, intent and true meaning of the
said grant and grants, lease and leases, Recognizance and Recognizances,
Judgment and Judgments, charge and charges, and every or any of them, any thing
in these presents before contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.
Provided, and it is further hereby Covenanted, To make void the said uses.
granted, condescended, agreed, published and declared by and between all and
every of the foresaid parties, That the true intent and meaning as well of the
foresaid Recovery, as of the said Fine, and of all and every of the respective
parties to the same, and to these presents always was, and is, that it should
and might, and shall and may be lawful to and for the said T. Lord W. from time
to time, at any time or times during his life, by his writing or writings, by
him to be signed or sealed in the presence of three witnesses of Credit or
more, or to be enrolled in any of the Courts of Record, of our Sovereign Lord
the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, to signify or declare, that his
Will and Pleasure is, That all or any of the use or uses, estate or estates in
Possession, Reversion or Remainder, limited, appointed, raised, created or
employed in or by these presents, shall cease, determine, be void or revoked of,
for, touching or concerning all or any of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, or any of them, or concerning any part
or parcel of them or any of them; And that then and from thenceforth all and
every of the said use and uses, estate and estates in possession, Reversion or
Remainder, so signified and declared to cease, determine, be void or revoked,
shall then and from thenceforth cease, determine and be utterly void and
revoked, according to the true intent and meaning of the said T. Lord W. so as
aforesaid to be signified and declared, other than such lease or leases, estate
or estates, or charges which he the said Lord W. has or shall make, ^ay, or
charge of or upon any of the premises, for satisfying debts, or for valuable
Consideration in money, or otherwise by force of the foresaid Proviso in these
presents before expressed: And also that then and from thenceforth, at all time
and times after such signification or significations, declaration or
declarations so to be made, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T.
Lord W. at any time or times during his life, To create n^w uses.
so often as he shall think good by any other his writing by him to be sealed,
acknowledged and enrolled, or sealed and subscribed as is aforesaid, to limit,
create, appoint and declare of, for and concerning the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, or any of them, any new, or any other
use or uses to the same, or any other person or persons whatsoever: And that
then, and after such new limitation, the said Recovery and Fine respectively
shall be and enure, and the said Recoverors and parties takers by the said
Recovery, and the said Cognizees of the said Fine, and the parties takers
thereby and their heirs, and all and every person and persons, who then shall
be and stand seized of and in the premises, or any part thereof, whereof such
new use shall be declared, created, raised, limited or appointed; and his and
their heirs shall respectively stand and be seized of the same premises, or
such part thereof, whereof such new use or uses shall be declared, limited or
appointed to such use and uses of such person and persons, to whom such other
or new estate or estates, use or uses shall be so newly declared, created,
raised, limited or appointed and of, and for such estate and estates, and in
such manner and form, and by or under such Limitations, Conditions and
Provisoes, as shall be so newly appointed, expressed or declared; and for want
of such declaration, or new limitation so to be made after any such Revocation;
Then the said Recovery and Fine touching such of the premises, whereof no such
Declaration, limitation or appointment of use shall be made, shall be and enure
to the only use and behoof of the said T. Lord W. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, any matter or thing whatsoever herein before contained to the contrary
thereof notwithstanding. But it is, and always was the intent of all the
parties to these presents, That no Revocation or new Limitation should or shall
any way frustrate or make void any Lease, No new Declaration to hinder an
Estate granted before Revocation.
Estate, Rent or Charge made, granted or charged, or to be made, granted or
charged of or upon the premises, or any parcel thereof, for valuable
Considerations of money borrowed or received of the said T. Lord W. by virtue
or force of any former Proviso in these presents expressed, but that the same
and every of them, shall stand good, according to the purport and meaning of
them, and every of them, notwithstanding any such Revocation or new Limitation
futurely to be made. In witness, etc.

A Covenant to settle Lands for natural affection.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R.D. of, etc. on the one part, and T. D. and
E. S. of etc. on the other part, witnesses, That the said R. D. as well for
the natural love and affection which he bears toward W. D. Gentleman, Son
and heir apparent of the said R. D. and to the intent that the Marshes, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, might be and remain to the
uses, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents expressed and declared,
and for diverse other, etc. for himself, his heirs and assigns, does Covenant
and grant to and with the said T. D. and E. S. their heirs and assigns by these
presents, That he the said R. D. and his Heirs, and all and every other person
and persons that now is or are, or that at any time hereafter shall be seized,
or estated of or in all, and every part of that the Manor of A. with the
Rights, Members and Appurtenances thereof in the said County of O. and of or in
all or any Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Commons, Ways,
Wastes, Wast-grounds, Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever belonging to
the said Manor, or reputed as part, parcel or member thereof in A. aforesaid,
and whereof or wherein the said R. D. ^ow has an Estate of Inheritance in
Fee-simple, shall thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, immediately,
from and after the ensealing hereof, stand and be seized thereof, and of every
part and parcel thereof, to the several uses, intents and purposes hereafter in
these presents expressed, limited and declared, (that is to say:) To the use
and behoof of the said R. D. for the term of his natural life, without
impeachment of any manner of wast, and after his death, to the use of the said
I. D. for the term of his natural life, without impeachment of any manner of
wast, and after his decease, to the use of the first Son of the body of the
said I. D. lawfully to be begotten, and of the heirs males of the body of the
said first Son lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the
use and behoof of the Second, Third, Fourth, Ffth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth,
Ninth and Tenth Sons of the body of the said I. D. lawfully to be begotten,
respectively as they shall be in Seniority and age, and of the heirs males of
such Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Sons
lawfully to be begotten of his body, the eldest son and his heirs, being always
prefer^ed before the younger Son and his heirs of his body; And for default of
such Issue, to the use of every other the Sons of the said I. D. as they shall
be in Seniority and age, and of the heirs males of the Bodies of every such
Sons lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such Issue, then to the use of
M.D. Gentleman, second Son of the said Sir R. D. for the term of his natural
life, without impeachment of any manner of wast, and after his death, to the
use of the first Son, pro^^e supra, in the first Son, then to the third Son in
manner prout al. primam. And for the default of such Issue, then to the use of
the right Heirs of the said R. D. for ever: And to none other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever, with the same clause of Revocation, as is mentioned in the
last president. In witness, etc.

A Condition of a Counter-Bond.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the abovenamed N.B. at the special instance
and request of the above-bounden C. D. for the proper debt of the said C. D.
and as his surety, by obligation bearing date with these presents, stands
jointly and severally bound, together with the said C.D. unto E.F. of, etc. in
the sum of, etc. with Condition thereupon endorsed for the payment of 100 pound
of, etc. to the said E.F. or to his certain Attorney, his Executors or Assigns,
at, etc. upon, etc. as in and by the said Obligation and Condition more at
large appears. If therefore the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them do pay, or cause to be paid unto the
said E. F. or his Assigns, the said Sum of, etc. at the day and place
aforesaid, and also from henceforth, save and keep harmless the above named A.
B. his heirs, etc. of and from the foresaid Obligation, and of and from all and
all manner of Costs, Charges, Suits, and Damages whatsoever, of, for and
concerning the said Obligation; That then, etc.

An Assignment of several Leases of diverse Messuages and Lands, with several
recitals and good Covenants. Well penned.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between J.S. of, etc. and J. G. of, etc. on the one
part, and R. G. of, etc. on the other part; Whereas J. S. of, etc. G. P. of,
etc. Executors of the last Will and Testament of M. S. Gent. deceased, and the
said J. G. by Indenture bearing date the 26. day of S. in the, etc. of his said
Majesty's Reign that now is over England, etc. made between the said J. S. and
G. P. and J. G. on the one part, and E. S. on the other part, by the name of E.
S. of, etc. Did grant, assign, and set over to the said E. S. and her Assigns,
as well an Indenture of Demise therein recited, dated the day of, etc. made
from R. E. late of, etc. unto J. G. late of B. in, etc. and I. his wise, Father
and Mother of the said I. G. party to these presents of all that Message or
Tenement, and half yard-Land, with the Appurtenances then or late in the Tenure
or Occupation of one E. A. or his Assigns in S. sometimes W. W. situate and
being of H. W. and P. and every or either of them in the said County of S. and
of all Houses, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Back-sides, and
grounds, with the Appurtenances whatsoever, to or with the said Message or
Tenement and premises belonging, with all and every other the Lands,
Tentments, Feedings, Hereditaments and Profits whatsoever, to the said Message
or Tenement belonging, or reputed as parcel or member of the same, or any of
them, (except therein excepted) for the Term of 3000. years, from the Feast of
the, etc. then last past, at the yearly Rent of 7. shillings of, etc. as also
all the estate, title, interest, term of years thereby granted, then to come
and unexpired, possession, claim and demand whatsoever of the said I.S. G.P.
and I. G. of and to the same, and every part thereof, on Condition therein
contained to this effect; That if the said I. G. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, did well and truly pay to the said E.S. her Executors or Assigns,
the Sum of, etc. of lawful English money upon the last day of M. then next
ensuing, That then from thenceforth the said Grant and Assignment, and every
thing therein contained, to be utterly void and of none effect, as by the said
Indenture more fully appears. Which said Sum of, etc. was not satisfied or
paid to the said E. S. neither on the day in the Condition of the said
Assignment mentioned, nor since, by reason whereof the premises became
absolutely forfeited to the said E.S. And whereas also the said I.G. by his
Indenture of Assignment, dated the, etc. of his Majesty's Reign that now is,
did bargain, assign and set over to the said E.S. and her Assigns, as well one
other Indenture of Lease dated the 21 day of M. in the one and fortieth year of
the said late Queen Elizabeth her Reign, also made from the said R. E. to the
said I. G. (Father of the said I. G. party to these presents) and his Assigns,
of all that his, etc. setting the particulars down here at large as they were
mentioned before, within the Parishes of H. P. or W. within the said Counties
of S. or some or one of them, with all Woods, Under-woods, Profits, Commodities
and Advantages, to the said Message or Tenement and half yard-land belonging
for the term of 3000. years from the Feast of, etc. then next ensuing, at the
yearly Rent of, etc. as also all the estate, right, title, interest,
possession, Reversion, Term of years, claim and demand whatsoever of the said
I. G. to the said, etc. and other the premises, with the appurtenances, by the
same Indenture of Lease, Demised, by virtue of the same Indenture or otherwise,
as by the same Indenture, etc. appears: And whereas the said E. S. by her
Indenture dated, etc. did Covenant with the said I. G. and his Assigns, That if
the said I. G. or his assigns, did well and truly pay to the said E.S. or her
assigns, the Sum of 325. pound, at the dwelling house of A. C. Scrivener,
situate in B. London, at one entire payment on the fifteenth day of October,
which then shall be in the year of our Lord God, 1630. That then she the said
E.S. and her Assigns, should upon request of the said I. G. re-assign and
convey unto him the said two several recited Indentures of Leases, and all her
estate and interest, claim and demand in and to the said several Messuages,
Lands and Premises, demised by the said several Indenture of Leases, as by the
said last recited Indenture more at large appears. And whereas the said I. G.
by his Release dated, etc. did in Consideration of a Competent Sum of Money,
Release all his Right, Title and Interest of and in the said Message, Lands
and Premises to the said E. S. and her Assigns, as by the said Release
appears. And whereas the said E. S. by her Indenture of Assignment dated,
etc. did for the Consideration therein mentioned, assign and set over all her
estate, right, title and interest of, in and to both the said recited
Indentures of Lease, as also in and to the said Messuages, Lands and Premises
to the said I. S. her Father (party to these presents;) To hold to him and his
assigns, during all the residue of the said Term of years, in the said several
recited Indentures of Lease then to come and unexpired, as by the said last
recited Indentute of Assignment more fully appears.

Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said I. S. and I. G. for and in
Consideration of the Sum of, etc. in hand paid, or secured by the said R. G.
unto the said I. S. as also for and in Consideration of the Sum of, etc. at
the ensealing and delivery of these presents in hand paid, or secured by the
said R. G. unto the said I.G. the said several receipts, of which said several
Sums of money they the said J. S. and J G. do hereby severally and respectively
acknowledge, and thereof, and of every part thereof, do severally and
respectively acquit and discharge the said R. G. his, etc. and for other good,
etc. Have demised, granted, set, and to Farm-let, released and confirmed, and
by these presents, do, etc. unto the said R. G. his, etc. all and every the
said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, with their and
every of their Rights, Members and Appurtenances in the said former recited
Indenture of Lease, or Assignments mentioned: To have and to hold all and every
the said Messuages or Tenements, Lands, and all other the Premises, with their
and every of their appurtenances unto the said R.G. his Executors and Assigns,
and every of them by these presents for and during, and unto the full end and
Term of 99. years from hence next ensuing, fully to be complete and ended;
Yielding and paying therefore yearly during the said term, to the said I. S.
his, etc. a Pepper-Corn at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel if it be
lawfully demanded.

And the said I. S. for himself, his, etc. does Covenant and grant to and with
the said R. G. his, etc. That he the said I. S. now has good right, full
power, and lawful and absolute authority to demise, grant and let the said
Message or Tenement, lands and premises, with their appurtenances unto the
said R.G. his, etc. for and during the said Term and Number of years aforesaid,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents; And also that the
said Message, etc. and every of them shall and may during the Term hereby
demised, remain and be unto the said R. G. his, etc. sufficiently saved and
kept harmless, of and from all and all manner of former and other Gifts,
Grants, Leases, Forfeitures, Surrenders, Extents, Rents and Arrerages of Rents,
and of and from all and all manner of Charges, Titles, Troubles and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, done or suffered by him the said
J. S. or by the said E. S. his said Daughter, o^ either of them, their, or
either of their Executors or Assigns; And also that he the said R. G. his, etc.
shall and may peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the
said, etc. for and during the Term hereby demised, without the Let, Suit,
Molestation, Interruption or Eviction of him the said J. S. or the said E. S.
and without the lawful let of all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming in, by, from, or under him, her, or either of
them, their or either of their estate, right or title.

And the said I. G. for himself, his, etc. does Covenant and Grant to and with
the said R. G. his, etc. That he the said I. G. at no time before the date
hereof, has done, or suffered to be done, any Act or Thing whatsoever, which
shall or may be hurtful, prejudicial, or a hinderance to the said R. G. his,
etc. or any of them, in his and their having, and quiet enjoying of the said,
etc. But that he the said R.G. his, etc. may have and enjoy the said Lands and
Premises, and every of them, for and during the Term hereby demised, without
the let or hinderance of him the said I. G. his, etc. or of any other person or
persons whatsoever, claiming by, from, or under him, them, or any of them. And
the said I. S. and I. G. and either of them, do for themselves jointly and
severally, and not one for the other, and for their several and respective
Executors, etc. and for every of them, Covenant and Grant to and with the said
R. G. his, etc. That they the said I. S. and I. G. and either of them, their
Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, shall and will from time to time, and at
all times for and during the space of five years next, etc. at the request and
costs of the said R. G. his, etc. further do, make, suffer, acknowledge and
execute all and every such further and other lawful and reasonables Act or
Thing whatsoever, for the further, better and more perfect assuring, surety,
and sure making of the said, etc. unto the said R. G. his, etc. or to such
other person and persons as he the said R.G. shall nominate and appoint, and
every or any of them, for and during the said Term hereby Demised, as also all
other the Interest and Term for years, which he the said I. S. now has in the
said, etc. yet to come and unexpired, at by him the said R. G. his, etc. or
his, their, or any of their Council learned in the Laws, shall be reason ^ably
devised, or advised and required. And the said I.S. for himself, etc. does
Covenant and grant to and with the said R. G. etc. That he the said I. S. his,
etc. or some of them, shall and will within six months now next ensuing the
date hereof, deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said R. G. or his
Assigns, or some of them, all the Original Leases of the Premises herein
before recited or mentioned, as also all and singular the several mean
Assignments made of the premises from time to time, and also all such Deeds,
Evidences, Court-Rolls, Writings, Escripts and Minuments whatsoever, concerning
the premises or any part or parcel thereof, which now be in the possession,
custody or keeping of the said I. S. or of E. S. or of any other person or
persons whatsoever, by their or either of their delivery, privity or
appointment, or which he the said I. S. may obtain or come by, whole,
uncancelled, safe, undefaced, and in as good plight as the same or any of them
now are, and also true Copies of all such other Deeds, Evidences and Writings
as the said I. S. or E S. or either of them, have or can come by touching the
said, etc. or any part thereof, jointly or together with any other Lands, the
said I. S. his, etc. or some of them, paying and bearing the charge of making,
and writing, and coming by the Deeds, Evidences or Copies, or any of them.

And the said R. G. for him, his, etc. does Covenant, promise and grant to and
with the said J. S. and J. G. and either of them, their and, etc. That he the
said R. G. his, etc. shall and will during the term hereby Demised, bear, pay
and discharge all and all manner of Quit-Rents, or other Rents and Services
whatsoever, which shall be due, or any ways payable, for or in respect of the
said, etc. or any of them, from the day of the date hereof, and thereof, and of
every part thereof, shall and will sufficiently during the term hereby Demised,
acquit and discharge the said I. S. and I. G. their Executors and Assigns, and
every of them by these presents. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Settlement. Well penned.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between the Right Honorable C. Lord S. Baron of H.
of the first part; W. N. of the Inner Temple, London, Esquire The Parties.
and A. T. of the said Inner Temple London, Esquire of the second part; And the
Right Honorable E. Lord G. Baron of D. in the County of A. within the Realm of
Ireland, and Dame J. his wife, D. L. Daughter of her the said Dame I. G. and I.
S. of M. in the C. of Y. Esquire of the third part: Whereas a Marriage shortly
hereafter by the grace of God, is intended to be had and solemnized between the
said C. L. S. and the said D. L. witnesses now this present Indenture, The
Consideration.
That the said C. Lord S. as well for and in consideration of the said
Marriage, and of the full Sum of 8000 pound, (that is to say) the Sum of
7000 pound of good and lawful money of England, in hand paid, and the Sum of
1000. pound more in Jewels, in hand delivered unto him the said L. S. by the
said E. Lord G. and Dame I. his wife, at and before the ensealing and delivery
of these presents, whereof the Sum of 2000. Marks in moneys, and the said 1000.
pounds in Jewels, were and was a portion given and left unto her the said D. by
the last Will and Testament of Sir I. L. her Father deceased, and the residue
of the said 8000 pound, was and has been increased for her, by the providence,
care, and great love of the said Dame I. G. her Mother, since her said Fathers
decease, of and with which said Sums of 7000 pound in Money, and 1000 pound in
Jewels, he the said C. Lord S. does hereby acknowledge the Receipt, and himself
to be fully satisfied; And thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does
for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them,
fully, absolutely and clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said E. Lord
G. and Dame I. his Wife, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every
of them for ever by these presents: And for and in consideration of a competent
Jointure to be had and made unto the said D. in case the said Marriage shall
take effect, and that she the said D. shall survive and overlive him the said
Lord S. and for the better preservation and continuance of all and every the
Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, hereafter
mentioned in the name and blood of the said Lord S. so long as shall please
Almighty God; also for diverse and sundry other good and valuable Considerations
him the said Lord S. hereunto especially moving; Has Covenanted, promised,
granted and agreed, and by these presents does for himself, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, covenant,
promise, grant and agree to and with the said E. Lord G. and I. S. their heirs
and assigns, A Covenant to levy a Fine.
and to and with every of them, That he the said C. Lord S. shall and will
before the end of Michaelmas Term, next ensuing the date of these presents,
before the Justices of our Sovereign L. the King, of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, or before some other competent and fit person and
persons thereunto lawfully and sufficiently authorized, acknowledge and levy
one or more Fine or Fines (Sur Conusance de droit come ceo, etc.) in due form
of Law, with Proclamations thereupon to be made, according to the Common course
of Fines in that case used, and the Statute in that behalf made and provided
unto them the said W.N. and A.T. and their heirs, or the heirs of one of them,
The Manors.
of all those his Manors, Lordships, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
called or known by the several names of S. etc. situate, lying and being in
the County of Es. with their and every of their Rights, Revenues, Members and
Appurtenances whatsoever, and of all that the Rectory and Church of H. with the
Appurtenances thereof whatsoever, General Words.
and of all and singular Messuages, Houses, Edifices, Barns, Stables,
Dove-houses, Back-sides, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Ways, Passages, Wastgrounds, Heaths, Furze,
Moors, Marshes, Woods, Under-woods, Rents, Reversions, Services, Tithes, as
well great as small, and of all other Hereditaments whatsoever, situate, lying
and being, growing, arising, renewing and increasing within any the Towns,
Parishes, Hamlers, Tithings or Fields of S. etc. in the said County of E. and
in every or any of them, or elsewhere to the said Manors, Rectory, or other
the Premises, or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or
therewith used and enjoyed, by such name and names, and under such number of
Manors, Messuages, Cottages, and Acres, and in such sort, manner and form, as
by the said E. Lord G. and J. S. their heirs or assigns, or by their or any of
their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably advised, devised or
required. The true intent and meaning of which said Fine and Fines, so to be
acknowledged and levied of the said premises, between the said parties as
aforesaid shall be, and so shall be construed, meant, intended and adjudged to
be, to and for the use and behoof of the said W. N. and A. T. their heirs and
assigns for ever; To the only intent and purpose that they the said W. N. and
A. T. shall and may stand and be full and perfect Tenements of the Freehold of
the said Manors, Lordships, and all and singular the premises, and of every
part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances, until one or more perfect
Common Recovery, or Common Recoveries, To suffer a Recovery.
may be had and executed of all and singular the same premises, against them
the said W.N. and A.T. and their heirs, according to the true intent and
meaning of the said Parties to these presents; And that they the said W. N. and
A. T. from and after the acknowledging and levying of the said Fine or Fines by
the said C. Lord S. to them the said W. N. and A. T. in manner and Form as
aforesaid, shall and will before the end of the said Michaelmas Term next
ensuing the date of these presents, permit and suffer the said E. Lord G. and
I. S. to sue and presecute several Writs of Entry (Sur disseisin en le post)
against them the said W. N. and A. T. of the said Manors, Lordships, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof,
with the Appurtenances, by such name and names, and under such number of
Manors, Messuages, Cottages, and Acres, and in such sort, manner and form as
by the said E. Lord G. and I.S. and their heirs, or by their or any of their
Council learned in the Law, shall be advised, devised or required, into and
upon every of which said several Writs of Entry (Sur disseisin en le post) so
to be brought, the said W. N. and A.T. shall personally appear^^ And then
immediately after their appearance and defense made, shall and will in the said
actions vouch to Warranty the said C. Lord S. and he the said Lord S. upon such
Vouchee of him to be made, shall and will in the said actions so to be brought
forthwith Gratis, and without Process appear thereunto, and enter into
Warranty, and vouch over to Warranty the Common Vouchee, to the end that the
Common Vouchee may also appear and enter into Warranty, and afterward make
default, or depart in despite of the Court, so that several perfect Common
Recoveries, with double vouchers may be had, prosecuted, and executed in and
upon the said several Writs of Entry (Sur disseisin en le post) in all things
according to the usual and common order and form of Common Recoveries, for the
assurance of Lands and Tenements in such cases used, of all and singular the
said several Manors, Lordships and Premises before mentioned, and of every
part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances; And that full Execution and
Seizin shall be had and taken thereof accordingly: And it is hereby covenanted,
granted, concluded, and fully and absolutely agreed on, by and between all and
every the aforesaid parties to these presents, for themselves, their heirs and
assigns, and it is the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of all
and every the aforesaid parties to the same, that the said several Recoveries,
and the execution thereupon to be had, shall be, and so shall be adjudged,
deemed, esteemed, and taken to be, and the Recoverors, their heirs and assigns,
and every of them, shall and will immediately from and after the execution of
the said Recoveries, stand and be seized, and be adjudged, deemed, and
esteemed, and taken to be seized of all and singular the said Manors,
Lordships, Lands, Hereditaments and premises before mentioned, and every part
and parcel thereof, with their and every of their Appurtenances to and for all
and every the several and respective uses, behoofs, intents and purposes
hereafter in these presents mentioned, expressed, limited and declared; And to
or for none other use, behoof, intent or purpose whatsoever, (that is to say)
to the use and behoof of the said C. Lord S. and his Assigns, for and during
the term of his natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner of wast;
and from and after his decease, then to the use and behoof of the said D. L.
and her assigns, for and during the term of her natural life, for and in the
name of a Jointure, of and for her the said D. And from and after her decease,
then to the use and behoof of the heirs of the body of the said C. Lord S. on
the body of the said D. lawfully to be begotten; and for default of such Issue,
then to the use and behoof of the right heirs of the said C. Lord S. for ever.

And the said Right Honorable C. Lord S. for himself, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, does further Covenant,
promise and grant to and with the Right Honorable E. Lord G. and I.S. their
Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, in manner
and Form following, (that is to say) That he the said C. Lord. S. at the time
of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is lawfully and rightfully
seized of and in all and singular the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rectory
and Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances of
a good, sure, perfect, lawful and indefeasible Estate in Fee-simple, or in
Fee-tail to himself, and the heirs of his body, without any Reversion or
Remainder of the Kings Majesty, and without any manner of Condition or
Conditions, Mortgage, Limitation of use or uses, or other thing or things
whatsoever, whereby to alter, change, charge, defeat, determine, or make void
the same: And that he the said Lord S. has full power, good right, and lawful
and absolute authority in his own proper right by these presents, to raise,
limit and appoint all and every the foresaid several Uses and Estates before
mentioned, and that all and singular the Premises, and every part and parcel
thereof, with their and every of their Rights, Members and Appurtenances now
are and be, and so from time to time, and at all times for ever hereafter,
shall and may continue, stand, remain, and be to all and every the several
uses, intents and purposes before in and by these presents limited, expressed,
appointed and declared, free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted,
exonerated and discharged, or otherwise well and sufficiently saved, defended
and kept harmless of and from all and all manner of former and other Gifts,
Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Estates, Joyntures, Dowers, and Titles of
Dowers, and of and from all Rents, and Arrerages of Rent-Annuities, and
Arrerages of Annuities, Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances,
Judgments, Executions, Extents, Fines, Forfeitures, Issues, Amerciaments,
Intentions, Principal Seizins, Liveries, Wills, Entails, Limitations of use or
uses, and of and from all other Titles, Troubles, Arrerages, Charges, Claims,
Demands and Encumbrances. And the said C. Lord S. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, does likewise
further Covenant, promise and grant to and with the said E. Lord G. etc. their
Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, That he the
said Lord S. and his Heirs, shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, within the space of seven years next ensuing the date of these
presents, at and upon every reasonable request, and at the only proper costs
and charges in the Law of the said Lord S. and his heirs, further do make,
acknowledge, execute and suffer, or cause, or procure to be done, made,
acknowledged, executed and suffered all and every such further and reasonable
act and acts, thing and things, device and devices, assurance and assurances in
the Law whatsoever, for the further, better, and more perfect assuring, surety,
and sure-making, settling and conveying of the said Manors, etc. premises, and
of every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances to continue, stand,
remain, and be to all and every such several uses, behoofs, intents,
limitations and purposes, as are thereof, in and by these presents limited,
expressed, appointed and declared, be it by Fine or Fines, Recovery or
Recoveries, with single, double, or more Voucher or Vouchers, Feoffment or
Feoffments, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, the enrollment of these
presents, or by any other ways or means whatsoever, as by the said E. Lord G.
and I. S. their Heirs and Assigns, or by any of them, or by their, or either or
any of their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably advised, devised
or required.

And finally, The said C. Lord S. for and in Consideration of the said Marriage
shortly hereafter, by the grace of God, to be had and solemnized between him
the said C. Lord S. and the said D.L. and for the great love and affection
which he the said Q. S. has and does bear unto the said D. L. does for
himself, his heirs and assigns, and for every of them, Covenant, promise, grant
and agree to and with the said E. Lord G. and I. S. their Heirs and Assigns,
and to and with every of them by these presents, That he the said C. Lord S.
and his Heirs, and all and every other person or persons that now be, or which
hereafter shall stand, or be seized of any Estate of Inheritance of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Premises, or any part thereof, shall and will
stand and be seized of so much, and such part and parcel of the said Lordships,
Manors and Premises, as either in respect of not making and naming the right
Tenant of the Freehold, in the several Writs of Entry aforesaid, or in
respect of any other legal defect shall not be by the several, and Recoveries
aforesaid, well and sufficiently assure, and settle to the several uses before
in and by these presents expressed, to the several and respective uses,
intents and purposes hereafter in and by these presents expressed, appointed
and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, (that is to
say;) to the use and behoof of the said C. Lord S. and his assigns, for and
during the Term of his natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner
of wast, and from and after the decease of the said C. Lord S. then to the use
and behoof of the said D. L. and her Assigns, for and during the term of his
natural life, and from and after her decease, then to the use and behoof of the
heirs of the body of the said C. Lord S. on the body of the said D. lawfully to
be begotten; and for default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of the
right heirs of the said C. Lord S. for ever. In witness whereof to one part of
these present Indentures, remaining with the said E. Lord G. Dame I. his wife,
D. L. and I. S. The said C. Lord S. W. N. and A. T. have interchangeably
subscribed, and set their several hands and seals, and to one other part of
these present Indenture, remaining with the said W.N. and A. T. the said C.
Lord S. E. L. G. Dame I. his wife, D. L. and I. S. have interchangeably
subscribed, and set their several hands and seals, and to one other part of
these Indentures remaining with the said C. Lord S. the said W.N. A.T. E.L. G.
Dame I. his wife, D. L. and I.S. have interchangeably subscribed, and set their
several hands and seals the Day and Year first above-written, Anno Dom.

A Condition to save harmless where one Attorns Tenant, with a Covenant to
grant a Lease when the premises are settled in the Obligee.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the within named I. S.
has attorned Tenant; and does and is contented to pay his Rent, being Eleven
pounds ten shillings per annum, unto the within bound T. S. his heirs or
assigns, for the Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances, wherein the said
J.S. now dwells, situate near W. London. If therefore the said T.S. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, clearly acquit, discharge, or sufficiently save harmless and
indemnified the said J. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, goods and
chattels, as well against one R. N. of the Parish of Saint G. in the Fields, in
the County of M. gent. and K. his wife, and against the Heirs and Assigns of
the same K. also against all and every other person and persons whatsoever of,
for, from, touching and concerning all such and so much Rent, as he the said J.
S. his Executors or Assigns, has already paid, or shall hereafter pay to the
said T. S. his heirs or assigns, for the Tenement aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances, and also of and from all Actions, Suits, Charges, Distresses,
Forfeitures, Judgments, Executions, and all other Damages, Troubles and
Encumbrances whatsoever, that shall or may arise, or grow or be had, commenced
or prosecuted against the said J. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
by reason of paying the said Rent, or any part thereof unto the said T. S. his
Heirs or Assigns, or by reason of occupying of the said Tenement, And further,
If in case the said T. S. his heirs or assigns, do or shall quietly hold and
enjoy the possession of the Tenement aforesaid, with the appurtenances (amongst
other things) as he the same T. now does for and during the space of two years
next coming, after the date within written, without any further new Suit; Then
if the said T. S. his heirs or assigns, do within one month next after the end
and expiration of the said term of two years, or after such time as the estate
of the premises shall be perfectly settled in the said T. or his heirs, at the
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said, J. S.
his Executors or Administrators, by good, lawful and sufficient Indenture of
Lease (in due form of Law to be had, made and executed) Demise, grant, and to
Farm-let unto the said J. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all the
said Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, wherein the said J. now
dwells as aforesaid, for so many years as will make up the remainder of the
term of years in his former Lease, granted full Twenty and one years, and under
the yearly Rent of Eleven pounds ten shillings, quarterly to be paid to the
said T. his heirs or assigns, or within one and twenty days next after every
Quarter-day by even portions, and with such other reasonable Covenants therein
to be contained, as are commonly used in such like Leases: That then this
present Obligation shall be void and of none effect; or else it shall stand,
and remain in full force, strength and virtue.

A Condition to save harmless an Executor, for payment of several Legacies to
Orphans, with a Covenant to see the same Legacies disposed to the best
advantage for the Legatees.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas M.D. late of St. J.
street, in the County of M. Widow deceased, by her last Will and Testament in
Writing, bearing date the Tenth day of M. in the Year of our Lord God, One
thousand six hundred and fourteen, did amongst other Legacies and Bequests,
give and bequ^ath unto M. T. and A. T. Daughters of the within-bound T. T. Five
shillings a piece of lawful money of E. as by the some Will more at large
appears. Which said Sums of five shillings a piece, the within named I. S.
Executor of the last Will and Testament of the said M. D. has at the Request
of the said T. T. at and before the ensealing and delivery hereof, paid and
disbursed to the said T.T. for the use and behoof of his said Daughters M. and
A. If therefore the said T. T. his Executors and Administrators, and every of
them, do from time to time, and at all times hereafter, freely and clearly
acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise well and sufficiently save,
defend, and keep harmless the said I. S. his Executors and administrators, and
every of them, and all and every of his and their Lands, Tenements, Goods and
Chattels, as well of, from and against the said M. and A. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, as also of, from and against all other persons
whatsoever, of, for and concerning the payment of the said Sums of five
shillings a piece to the said T. T. their Father, as aforesaid; And of and from
all Actions, Suits, Costs, Charges, Damages, Expenses and Demands whatsoever,
which he the said J. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall
hereafter happen to incur, sustain, or be put unto, for or by reason of the
payment of the said Sums of five shillings a piece, for the use of the said M.
and A. to the said T. their Father, as aforesaid; That then this Obligation
shall be void; or else it shall stand in full force and virtue.

A Condition to pay the Rent reserved in a Lease, according to the Covenant
therein expressed.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the within named I. C.
by his Indenture of Lease of the date within written, did Demise, grant and to
farm-let unto the within bound H. B. all that Message or Inn, called the
Sign of the White Horse, with all Cellers, Sollers, Chambers, Rooms, Yards,
Stables and Appurtenances thereunto belonging, as it is now in the Tenure or
occupation of the said I. C. set, and being in S. in the Parish of St. O. in S.
in the County of S. (except as in the same Lease is excepted;) To have and to
hold the same from the Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist next coming
after the date of the same Lease, unto the end and term of Ten years, and one
quarter of a year from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended,
yielding and paying therefore yearly, during ten years of the said term of ten
years, and one quarter of a year to the said I. his Executors or Assigns,
Twenty and four pounds of lawful money of England, at Four Terms of the year;
that is to say, at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, the Birth of our
Lord God, the Annuntiation of our Lady, and the Nativity of St. John Baptist,
or within fifteen days next after every of the said Feast Days by even
portions. And for the last quarter of a year, six pounds at the Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel next ensuing, the said term of ten years, or within
fifteen days then next following, as by the same Lease more at large
appears: If therefore the said H. B. his Executors or Assigns, do yearly, and
every year during the said Term of Ten years, well and truly yield and pay, or
cause to be yielded or paid to the said I. C. his Executors or Assigns, the
said yearly Rent of Twenty and four pounds at the said Four Feasts or Terms of
the year mentioned in the said Lease, or within Fifty days next after every of
the said Feast-dayes, by even portions, and the said Sum of Six pounds at the
said Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, next after the end of the said Ten
years, or within fifteen days then next following, according to the tenure and
true meaning of the same Lease; That then this Obligation to be void and of
none effect. Or else to be in full force and virtue.

A Defeazance on a Recognizance, or Statute-Staple.
THis Indenture made the one and twentieth day of August, Anno Dom. 1634. and
in the Tenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles by the grace of
God, King of England Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Between J.B. Citizen and Salter of London, of the one part, and G. B. Citizen
also, and Salter of L. of the other part; Witnesses, That whereas the said G.
B. by a certain Recognizance of the nature of a Statute of the Staple, made and
provided for the Recovery of debts, taken Recognized, and sealed before Sir J.
C. Knight, Mayor of the Staple of W. and E. L. Esquire Recorder of the City of L.
bearing date with these presents, stands and is bound unto the said I. B. in
the sum of Four hundred pounds of lawful money of England payable, as by the
same Recognizance more at large appears: Nevertheless, the said I. B. is
contented and agreed, and does covenant, promise and grant for himself, his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, to and with the foresaid G. B. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and to and with every of them by these presents,
That if the said G. B. his Heirs, Ezecutors, Administrator or Assigns, or any
of them do pay, or cause to be paid unto the said I. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, at or in the now dwelling house of
the said I. B. situate in the Parish of St. A. H. London, the Sum of Two
hundred and eight pounds of lawful money of E. on the Three and twentieth day
of F. next coming after the date of these presents, without fraud or coven;
That then the foresaid Recognizance shall be utterly void and of none effect,
or else to remain in full force, strength, and virtue. In witness whereof the
parties first above named to the present Indentures, interchangeably have set
their hands and seals, dated the day and year first above written.

A Grant of Lands in Fee, in consideration of money, and in further
consideration of exchange of other Lands.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That the said L. G. and
also for and in consideration of a certain competent Sum of lawful money of
England to him in hand before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, by
the said I. B. well and truly paid, and for and in consideration of other
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments by the said I. B. conveyed and assured to
the said L. G. and his heirs in exchange; Whereof and wherewith the said L. G.
acknowledges himself fully satisfied and contented, and thereof, and of every
part and parcel thereof, clearly acquitteth and discharges the said I. B. his
heirs and assigns, by these presents has bargained, sold, aliened, enseoffed
and confirmed, and by these presents does fully and clearly bargain, sell,
alien, enseoffe and confirm in exchange unto the said I. B. and his heirs, All
that Site, and Capital Message or Tenement with the appurtenances situate,
etc. now being in the tenure or occupation of the said L.G. or his assigns, and
all and every the Barns, Stables, Outhouses, Orchards, Gardens, and other
appurtenances to the said Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, and all and every other the Lands, Meadows, Pastures and Closes
therewith occupied by the said L. G. and being in E. aforesaid; And all that
Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances situate and being in E.
aforesaid, and 30 Acres of Land, Meadow and Pasture thereunto belonging, now or
late in the Tenure, etc. And all that Message, etc. and all that Cottage, etc.
and all and every the Commons, Wastes, Grounds, Leys, and other appurtenances
to the premises or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining; And all
and every other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments situate, lying and
being in E. aforesaid, with all and singular the appurtenances, whereof E. G.
Esquire Father of the said L. died seized of an Estate of Inheritance, and the
Reversion and Reversions of the premises, and of every part and parcel
thereof, and all and every the Rents and yearly profits whatsoever, reserved
upon whatsoever Lease, Demise or Grant, Leases, Demises or Grants made of the
premises, or of any part thereof, except and always reserved out of this
present grant, bargain and sale to the said L. G. his heirs and assigns, the
Parsonage of C. and the Parsonage house and grounds thereunto belonging,
within, etc. now in the occupation of R. B. Clerk, and also except, etc. And
also the said L. S. for the said Consideration has bargained and sold, and by
these presents does, etc. to the said I. B. and his heirs, and all and every
the Deeds, Evidences, Escripts and Minuments whatsoever, touching or concerning
only the premises, or only any part or parcel thereof, all and every which
Deeds, Evidences and Writings, or as many of them the said L. G. now has, or
any other to his use, or by his delivery has or have, which he may lawfully
come by without Suit in the Law: The said L. G. Covenanteth and Grants by
these presents, for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, to and
with the said I. B. his heirs and assigns, safely to deliver to the said I. B.
his heirs and assigns, before the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, next
ensuing the date hereof, whole and uncancelled, to have, hold and enjoy the
said Capital Message or Tenement, and all and every the said Messuages,
Tenements, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Commons, and all and every other the
premises, with the appurtenances to the said I. B. his heirs and assigns for
ever, to the only use and beho of of the said I. B. his heirs and assigns for
ever. And the said L. G. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and every of them, does Covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. B.
his heirs and assigns, That he the said L. G. is and stands at the ensealing
and delivery of these presents, and so shall be at the expiration of the first
Estate of Inheritance, of and in the premises to the said I. B. solely,
lawfully and rightfully seized of a good, lawful, perfect and rightful estate
in the Law in Fee-simple, of and in the said Capital Message or Tenement with
the Appurtenances, and of and in all and every the said Messuages, Tenements,
Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and all and every other the premises with the
appurtenances, and of and in every part and parcel thereof, to the proper use
of the said L. G. and his heirs for ever, without any manner of Condition, and
without any Reversion or Remainder thereof, or of any part thereof in the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or of any other person or persons whatsoever,
and that he has good right, just and true title, and lawful authority to
bargain, sell and assure the same to the said I. B. and his heirs, according to
the tenure and true meaning of these presents.

And also the said L. G. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and every of them, does Covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. B.
his heirs and assigns by these presents, That the said I. B. his heirs and
assigns, shall, and lawfully may from hence for ever peaceably and quietly
have, hold, occopy and enjoy the said Capital Message or Tenement, and all and
every other the premises with the appurtenances, without any manner of let,
trouble or interruption of the said L. G. his heirs or assigns, or of any
person or persons claiming, by, from or under any the Ancestors of the said L.
G. clearly discharged, or for ever hereafter sufficiently saved harmless by
the said L. G. his heirs and assigns, of and from all and every other bargains,
sales, estates, leasess. Statutes-Merchants, and of the Staple, Recognizances,
Judgments, Joyntures, Dowers, Annuities, Fines, etc. and of and from all and
every other charges and encumbrances whatsoever, by the said L. G. or any of
his Ancestors, had, made, committed or done, or willingly suffered before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, or before the execution of an Estate
and seizin of and in the premises to the said I. B. his, etc. except the Rents
and Services to be due and done to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees
of the premises in respect only of the Seigniory thereof, and also except one
Lease and Demise made by the said E. G. of the said Tenement now in the
occupation of the said I. R. for term of certain years, which shall expire
within 9. years now next coming, whereupon is reserved the yearly Rent of 30
shillings; And one Lease and Demise made to, etc. for certain years, not
exceeding the term of 17 years now to come, whereupon is reserved, etc. ut
praedict. or for certain years, whereof there are now to come above the number
of 17 years, and whereupon is reserved, etc. which said several yearly Rents,
and every of them, shall con^^^e and be payable to the said I. B. his heirs and
assigns* during the continuance of the said several Demises

And also the said I. G. Covenanteth and grants by these presents, for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, to and with the said I. B.
his heirs and assigns, That he the said L. G. and A. his Wife, and the heirs of
the said L. and all and every other person and persons, and their heirs,
having, or that shall have any right, estate or interest of or in the
premises, or any part thereof, by, from or under the said L. G. or by, from or
under any of his Ancestors, shall and will from time to time during five years
now next ensuing, at the reasonable request, costs and charges of the said I.
B. his heirs and assigns, do, make and execute, or cause, knowledge and suffer
to be done, all and every such further act and acts, thing and things, device
and devices in the Law whatsoever, be it by Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not
enrolled, Fine, Feoffment, Recovery, with double or single Voucher or Vouchers,
Release, Confirmation, or otherwise with Warranty against the said L. G. and
his heirs, and the Ancestors of the said L. G. or otherwise without warranty
for the further and more better and perfect assurance, surety and sure-making
of the said Capital Message or Tenement, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and all and
every other the premises with the Appurtedances to the said I. B. his heirs
and assigns, as by the said I. B. his heirs or assigns, or his or their Council
learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised or advised. In witness, etc.

Articles concerning Lands purchased until the Covenants could be made.
Articles of Agreement indented, made, concluded and agreed upon the day of
Sept. between H. D. of E. in the C. of H. Gent. of the one part, and F. R. of
the Parish of S. M. in the Fields in the C. of M. T. of the other part, viz.
IMprimis, The said H. D. (for the consideration hereafter is these presents
mentioned and expressed) for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and every of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said F. R.
his Heirs, Execotors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents, That he the said H. D. and (...) his Wife, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall and will at the proper costs and charges in
the Law of the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by
or before the Tenth day of October, now next coming after the day of the date
of these presents, make, seal, deliver, do, execute and acknowledge all and
every such Act and Acts, Deed and Deeds, Fine and Fines, Assurance or
Assurances, or other Conveyances in the Law whatsoever, as he the said F. R.
his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law
shall reasonably devise, advise or require for the sure conveying, settling,
assuring and sure-making unto the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns for ever, All that Message or Tenement, with all
the appurtenances thereunto belonging or appertaining, as the same now is in
the occupation of P. A. Pewterer, his Assignee or Assignees; And of all that
Message or Tenement, with all the Appurtenances thereunto belonging or
appertaining, as the same now is in the tenure or occupation of (...) S.
Chandler, his Assignee or Assignees: And of all that Room or Shop with the
appurtenances, now in the occupation of W. Cheese monger, all which premises
are situate, lying and being on the South Side of the Highstreet commonly
called Fleet Street London, over against the Conduit at or next the Corner
turning into Salisbury Court there.

In consideration whereof he the said F. R. for himself, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said H. D.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents, That he the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or some of them, shall and will well and truly satisfy, content and
pay, or cause to be satisfied, contented and paid unto the said H. D. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the full Sum of Five hundred and
ten pounds of lawful money of England in manner and form following; viz. Ten
pounds thereof at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, the Receipt of
which said Ten pounds, the said H. D. does hereby acknowledge and confess, and
thereof does clearly and absolutely exonerate, acquit and discharge the said F.
R. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators for ever by these presents; And the
other five hundred pounds refidue, and in full payment thereof forthwith and
immediately after that he the said H. D. and A. his Wife, their heirs,
executors or assigns, shall have levied and acknowledged to the sole and only
proper use and behoof of the said F. R. his heirs, executors, administrators
and assigns, (in due form of Law) such Conveyances and Fine or Fines, of all
the premises with their appurtenances before mentioned or intended to be sold
unto him the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, as the Council learned
in the Law of the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns
shall reasonably devise, advise or require, without covin or delay.

Item, It is agreed between all parties to these presents, That Assurances and
Conveyances, and all Fine or Fines hereafter to be had, levied and acknowledged
of all the premises before mentioned, shall be and enure, and shall be deemed,
construed and taken to be and enure, to the sole and only proper use, benefit
and behoof of him the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns for ever, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever.

Lastly, It is agreed, That if the said (...) D. does not travel up in person
to the Cities of London or Westminster, for to levy and acknowledge such a Fine
or Fines, or other Conveyances, as shall be requisite for the sure settling of
the premises unto the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns in form
aforementioned, then he the said H. D. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, shall
pay and allow unto the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, at the
acknowledging of such Fines, the Sum of Ten shillings sterling, for and toward
his charges, in procuring of a Writ called Dedimus potestatem to enable her the
said D. to acknowledge the same Fine in the Country. In witness, etc.

Bonds to perform Covenants.
A plain Bargain and Sale to be enrolled.
THis Indenture made the (...) day of (...) in the seventh year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Between J. B. Citizen and Gr^^^r
of London of the one part, and J. D. of H. in the County of E. Esquire J. S. of
Lincolns-Inne in the County of M. Esquire J. C. of D. in the County of H. Clerk,
and R.D. Gent. second Son of the said J. D. of the other part, witnesses, That
the said J. B. for and in consideration of the Sum of five hundred and thirty
pounds of good and lawful money of England, to him in hand paid by the said J.
D. the Receipt whereof he acknowledges by these presents, has granted,
bargained and sold, and by these presents does clearly and absolutely grant,
bargain and sell unto the said J. D. J.S. J.C. and R. D. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, all that Field or parcel of Land, lying and being in R. in
the County of E. commonly called or known by the name of Hilly Field; And all
that little Marsh or parcel of Marsh-ground, lying and being at or near the end
of the said Field or parcel of Land; And also all that great Marsh or parcel of
Marsh-ground, and the little Marsh or parcel of Marsh-ground adjoining to the
same great Marsh in R. aforesaid: All which premises do contain together by
estimation 35 Acres, be they more or less, and are set, lying and being in R.
aforesaid, and now or late in the tenure and occupation of T. L. of H. in the
said County of E. Esquire and the abovenamed I. D. or one of them, or of the
Assignee or Assignees of them, or one of them, and all buildings, woods and
under-woods standing and growing upon the premises, and all ways, easements,
profits, commodities and appurtenances whatsoever thereunto belonging, and all
the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders, estate and interest of
him the said J.B. of and in all and singular the premises, with all and every
their incidents, and all evidences, writings or minuments, of or concerning the
said Lands and premises, To have and to hold the said Field, Marshes,
Marsh-grounds and premises before mentioned, with all and every the
appurtenances unto the said J.D. J.S. J.C. and R.D. their heirs and assigns, to
the only use and behoof of them the said J.D. J.S. J C. and R. D. their heir,
heirs and assigns for ever. In witness, etc.

Articles for Building.
Articles of Covenant indented, made, concluded and agreed upon the, etc.
Between J. F. of, etc. of the one part, and T. B. of, etc. of the other part,
as follows, viz.
FIrst, The said T. B. and C. T. for themselves, their Executors and
Administrators, do jointly and severally Covenant, promise and grant to and
with the said I. F. his Executors, Admistrators and Assigns by these presents
in manner and form following, that is to say, That they the said T. B. and C.T.
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, for the
confideration hereafter mentioned, shall and will forthwith take down the now
dwelling house of the said I. F. situate and being in St. M. Lane in the
Parish of St. M. in the Fields abovesaid, and in the room thereof shall make,
erect, build and set up one new Tenement or dwelling house to contain 30 Feet
and a half in breadth, or near thereabouts, and in length thirty and six feet
or near thereabouts, and shall make one Celler of the same length and breadth,
and shall make two Rooms upon each floor, the one forward, and the other
backward, and shall make the Celler six Foot and a half deep, the Story over
the same Celler nine Feet deep, the Story over the same Story nine feet deep
likewise; the half Story over the same Story Seven feet and a half deep, and
the Garrets over the said half Story, three foot and a half to the top of the
raising piece, and shall make one tackof Chimnies to contain ten Fire-Rooms of
such largeness as the Room will conveniently afford, and shall make them
sufficient to carry away the smoke without any annoyance; And shall pave the
Celler with good and well burned Bricks, and shall lay all the foot paces with
green and yellow Tyles, saving the Cellers which is to be laid with brick, and
the Dining Room which is to be laid with Galley Tyles; and shall make the Walls
on the South Side, the Forefront; and the backside according to his Majesty's
Proclamation, and shall provide and set up all manner of Timber to be used
about the same Building of good and sufficient scantlings, and shall lay all
the Floors with good seasoned Norway Deal Boards well shot and plained, and
closely laid and well nailed, and shall make good and easy Staits of
Elme-boards, so large and spacious as the Room will afford, and shall well and
sufficiently tyle all the said Building with good Tyles, and lath the tyling
with heart laths; and shall lay all the Walls, Cielings and Partitions with Lime
and Hair, and shall make a good and sufficient batten Deal door toward the
Street, and Shop-Windows suitable to the same; and shall set one sufficient
Lock and Bolt to the Street Door, one Bolt to the Backdoor, and one Bolt to
the Celler door; and shall make one sufficient Door to every Room, and hang
them with sufficient Hooks and Hinges; and shall make sufficient Casements to
all the Windows, that is to say, four in the Dining Room, two in the next Room
over the Dining Room, two in the half Story, and one in the Garret; one in the
Room next over the Celler backward, and one in each Room over the same Room;
and shall make all the Windows as large and convenient for light as the Rooms
will afford, and shall make such lights for the Stairs in the side-walls as
shall be fitting and convenient; and shall make or do, or cause to be made and
done, all the Plumbers work and Glasiers work of and belonging to the said
Building well and sufficiently, and shall color all the outside of the
Windows, Doors, shutting Windows and the Posts at the Doors with Oil of a
stone-colour, and the Inner side of the Window of the lower Room backward, and
the Inner side of all the Windows of every Room above Stairs with size of the
same color; And shall make cresting boards to every window, and shall make a
Pent-house covered with Tyles over the Street-Door and Shop-windows the whole
breadth of the forefront, and shall set up two fair turned Posts at the
Street-door with two Benches to sit on, and also shall set up one Vise Board in
the shop of Oak, four inches thick, two foot broad, and eight feet long, make
one Brick-wall of seven foot high with the Coping, one brick in length thick,
and thirty foot long or thereabouts to sever the Yard of the said I. F. from
the Yard now in the occupation of L. S. L. and also shall remove the Cole-house
now standing in the Yard of the said I. F. from the place where now it stands
to the upper end of the Yard, and also shall make one Shop with a Room or
Chamber over it, which shall adjoyn up close to the said Cole-house; And the
said new Brick-wall which is to be built for the dividing of the said yard;
which said shop or shed and Room over it, is to contain in length thirteen
feet, in breadth nine feet, and in height up to the Eves seven feet, and shall
cover it with tyles, and lay all the Walls with Loam and Lime and Hair rendered
upon; And shall make one Forge Chimney and a Hearth to it, and a Frame to hang
a pair of Bellows on, and shall set up two Vise Boards, the one below, and the
other above, such, as the said I. F. shall provide, and shall make two shutting
Windows, the one below, and the other above, and hang them with Hinges, and
shall make the Floor of the Chamber or Room above of sufficient Joysts and
Boards, and shall make a Ladder to go up thereinto with flat steps, and shall
find and provide at their costs and charges all and all manner of Tyles,
Bricks, Laths, Nails, Lead, Iron, Sand, Lime, Loam, Hair, Scaffolding, Stuff,
and all other Materials whatsoever which shall be fit and needful to be used
in or about the said Buildings, and shall carry away all the Rubbish, Loam and
Earth whatsoever, which shall arise by reason of the said building; and also
shall make one good and sufficient Gutter to carry the Water out of the yard
into the street, and shall and will well and workman-like frame, erect, set up
and finish all the said Building in and by all things that belong to the Works
of a Carpenter, Bricklayer, Tyler, Plaisterer, Plumber, Smith and Glasier, at
or before the Four and twentieth day of August, now next coming after the date
hereof.

In Consideration of which said Building to be done and finished in manner and
form aforesaid, the said I. F. for himself, his Executors and Administrators,
does Covenant and grant to and with the said T. B. and C. T, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns by these presents in manner and form following; that
is to say, That the said I. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
some of them, shall and will truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said T. B.
and C. T. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at or in the now dwelling
house of A. T. Shooemakers, situate and being in St. M. Lane aforesaid, the
Sum of One hundred pounds of lawful money of England, at three several payments
in manner and form following; that is to say, Thirty three pounds six shillings
and eight pence thereof in hand, at and before the sealing and delivery hereof,
the receipt whereof the said T. B. and C. T. do hereby acknowledge and
confess, and thereof and of every part and parcel thereof do clearly acquit,
exonerate and discharge the said I. F. his Executors and Administrators, and
every of them, for ever by these presents; other Thirty three pounds six
shillings and eight pence thereof when the whole Building is framed, the
Chimneys set up, and the Roof tyled; and other Thirty three pounds six
shillings and eight pence thereof residue and in full payment of the said Sum
of One hundred pounds when the whole Building is fully set up and in every
respect finished. And further, That the said T. B. and C. T. their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall have and take to his and their own uses all
the Timber, Boards and other Materials whatsoever to be pulled down in or about
the said old house, and use so much thereof in the new Buildings as shall be
good, sound and serviceable; In witness, etc.

Articles between two Joynt-Purchasers for dividing the Rent, and avoiding
Survivorship.
Articles of Agreement indented, made, concluded, and agreed upon the day of
August, Between P. D. of S. P. C. within the Parish of S. M. in the Fields, in
the County of M. Victualler, of the one part, and L. D. of the Parish of S. M.
in the Fields aforesaid, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of L. of the other part,
viz.
IMprimis, Whereas G. G. of the Parish of St. M. in the Fields aforesaid, G. by
his Indenture of Lease bearing date the Eleventh day of M. in, etc. for the
consideration therein expressed, did Demise, grant, and to farm-let unto T. N.
then of the City of W. in the said County of M. Tailor, All that piece or
parcel of ground, parcel of the Earl of B. Pasture, called Covent Garden and
Long Acre, or one of them butted and bounded, and containing such length and
breadth, as in the said Indenture is expressed, together with all that Message
or Tenement thereon, or one part thereof, then lately erected and built by the
said G.G. containing a Kitchen, a Celler, a Shop, and Back-Room over the said
Kitchen and Celler, and six Chambers over the same Shop and Back-Room, with
Studies and other conveniences thereunto belonging; Together likewise with a
Well, a House of Office, and Cross Partition Wall then lately built on the
said ground, together also with all Lights, Easements, Watercourse, Profits
and Emoluments whatsoever to the said premises belonging, and all ways and
passages then used, or which then after shall be laid forth and used, to and
for the said new erected Building; all which premises are situate, lying and
being in the Parish of St. M. in the Fields aforesaid; To have and to hold unto
the said T. N. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast Day of
the Annuntiation of our blessed Lady, Saint Mary the Virgin, then next ensuing
the date of the said Indenture of Lease, unto the full end and term of Twenty
and one years from thence next ensuing, fully to be complete and ended, at and
for the yearly Rent of six and twenty pounds of lawful money of England
payable; as in and by the said recited Indenture of Lease, amongst diverse
Covenants, Grants, Clauses, Conditions and Agreements therein contained, more
at large does and may appear: And whereas the said T. M. by his Indenture of
Lease bearing date the sixteenth day of M. in the, etc. for the Consideration
therein expressed, did demise, grant, and to farm-let unto P. P. of London,
Gent. the several Rooms, Chambers, Easements and Commodities in the said
Indenture particularly mentioned and set down, being part and parcel of the
Messuages or Tenements wherein the said T. N. did then, or of late thentofore
inhabit and dwell together, with all Ways, Lights, Easements, Watercourse,
and amongst others, those that fell in the Common Sewer at that present,
through the Tenements that the said N. did then possess, and all Profits,
Commodities and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said several Rooms and
Premises belonging and appertaining, as the same were then severed, divided,
parted and allotted out for the use and occupation of the said P. P. To have
and to hold the said Rooms and Premises unto the said P. P. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the day of the date of the said last mentioned
Indenture of Lease, unto the full end and term of Fourteen years from thence
next and immediately ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended; At and for
the yearly Rent of four and twenty pounds payable, as in and by the said last
recited Indenture of Lease, amongst diverse Covenants, Clauses, Conditions and
Agreements therein contained, more at large also it does and may appear, the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest and Term of years to come of him the said T. N.
of, in, and to all the above-recited Premises, and every part thereof, is
lawfully come and vested in the abovenamed P. D. and L. D. by force and virtue
of one Indenture of Assignment bearing date the Six and twentieth day of May
last past, before the date of these presents, made and granted by the said T.
N. unto the said P. D. and L. D. as in and by the said Indenture of Assignment,
amongst other things therein also contained, more at large likewise appears.
And whereas also the said P. D. and L. D. by their Indenture of Lease bearing
date the Twentieth day of June last past, before the date of these presents
(for the Consideration therein expressed) did demise, grant, and to farm-let
unto G. D. of the Parish of St. C. D. in the said County of M. Citizen and
Painter-stainer of London, all that Message or Tenement, being part of the
Premises first above recited, containing the several Rooms particularly in the
said last mentioned Indenture expressed, with the yard, garden-plat and house
of office, and all Lights, Easements, Ways, Passages, Profits, Commodities and
Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said premises belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, (except out of the said last Demise as in the said Indenture is
excepted) to hold the said premises unto the said G. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist
next ensuing the date of the said last mentioned Indenture of Lease unto the
full end and term of Twelve years and half a year, two months and fourteen days
from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, at and for the
yearly Rent of Thirty pounds payable, as in and by the said last recited
Indenture of Lease amongst diverse other Covenants, Clauses and Agreements
therein also contained, more at large likewise appears. And whereas further
the said P. D. and L. D. by one other Indenture of Lease bearing date the
Twentieth day of July last past before the date of these presents (for the
consideration in the same Indenture expressed,) did demise, grant, and to
farm-let unto W. H. Citizen and Fish-monger of London, all that Message or
Tenement with the yard behind the same, and the house of Office in the same
yard standing, being parcel likewise of the said premises first above recited,
for the term of twelve years, one half year, two months, and fourteen days,
commencing from the Feast Day of the Nativity of St. John Baptist last past
before the date of the same Indenture of Lease, for and under the yearly rent
of Ten pounds and ten shillings, payable likewise, as in and by the said last
mentioned Indenture of Lease amongst diverse Covenants, Clauses and Agreements
in the same Indenture of Lease contained more at large also appears.

Now it is Covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between the said parties to
these presents, and the true intent and meaning of either of them is, That
forasmuch as either of the parties above named have disbursed and paid their
several equal shares and proportions of money for the purchase of the Premises
above recited, that the several Rents of Thirty pounds, Fourteen pounds, and
ten pounds ten shillings upon and by the said several mean Indentures of
Leases, above recited reserved, (the said yearly Rents of six and twenty
pounds, reserved upon the said first recited original Indenture of Lease
payable to the above named G. G. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for
all the before recited premises being first paid and discharged) shall be
equally divided and shared between the said parties, parties to these presents,
share and share like; and if it shall happen either of the said parties to die
before the end and expiration of the term and terms of years in the said
several Indentures of Leases before recited, or in any or either of them now to
come and unexpired, that then and from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful
to and for the Executors, Administrators and Assigns of the party deceasing, to
have, occupy, receive, take and enjoy the full and entire moiety or half-part
of all the Rents, Issues and Profits of all and singular the before recited
premises with the appurtenances, in as large and ample manner and form to all
intents and purposes, as the party so doing should or ought to have done, if he
had lived, and were then living, any grant, restraint, provision, statute or
ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, and that neither of the said
parties, nor the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them, or of either of
them, shall or will at any time or times hereafter take, demand or receive any
of the Rents above reserved, or make or give any discharge or acquittance of or
for the same, or any part or parcel thereof, without the knowledge, assent or
consent of the other party, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, first had
and obtained in Writing under his or their hand or hands.

Item, It is further Covenanted, concluded and agreed unto, by and between the
said parties to these presents, That neither of the said parties nor the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them, or of either of them, shall or
will at any time or times hereafter, grant, bargain, sell, assign, surrender or
set over his or their estate or estates, right, title, interest, term and terms
of years to come of, in or to all or any part of the before recited premises
with the appurtenances, to any person or persons whatsoever, without the
knowledge, consent or refusal of the other party first had, (he paying as much
as any other shall or will give and pay (bona fide) for the same) or shall or
will take or endeavor to take any new Lease for years, lives or otherwise, or
any other grant whatsoever of the before recited premises, or any part or
parcel thereof in reversion after the expiration of the term of years they now
have and enjoy in the said recited premises, by force and virtue of the said
first recited Indenture of Lease made from the said G. G. to the said T. N. as
aforesaid, either from the said G. G. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
from the Right Honorable the Earl of B. his Heirs or Assigns, or any other
immediate Tenant or Farmer, claiming from, by or under them or any of them,
without the knowledge, assent, consent or refusal likewise of the other party,
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in Writing under his or their hand or
hands, or before sufficient Witnesses first had and obtained.

Lastly, It is Covenanted, concluded and fully agreed upon, by and between the
said parties to these presents, That all and every the several Deeds and
Writings before recited, shall be reputed, deemed and taken to be and enure to
the joint use and uses, benefits and commodities of both the said parties,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever, and that the party, his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, so keeping the same Writings, shall and will upon the reasonable
request or requests of the other party, his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, at all times hereafter produce and bring forth, and be ready to show
all and every, or so many of the same Writings that shall be required at his or
their hands, either for the producing and getting of a further time or title,
of and in all or any part of the before recited premises, or for the
maintenance of the title of the premises, (if it should be questioned) as for
the sealing and conveying away of all his or their estate or interest, of and
in the moiety of all or any part of the said recited premises without covin or
delay. In witness, etc.

Articles to surrender Copyhold Lands, till the Surrender can be had.
Articles of Agreement indented, had, made, concluded and agreed upon the day
of January, Between P. C. of B. in the County of W. gent. of the one part, and
H. H. of M. T. L. gent. of the other part; as follows.
IMprimis, Whereas the above named P. C. now stands lawfully seized in his
demeasn, as of see according to the custom of the Manor of B. aforesaid,
after the decease of T. C. Widow, of and in one Copyhold or Customary
Message, together with a Garden, Backside, Out-house and other appurtenances
thereunto belonging, situate in the upper street in B. aforesaid, and parcel
of the aforesaid Manor. And whereas the said P. C. is now possessed of the
aforesaid Message and premises with the appurtenances, by demise from the
said T. C. for a certain term ending at the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, next ensuing the date above written, The said P. C. does for
himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, covenant, grant and agree to and
with the said H. H. his Executors and Assigns by these presents, That he the
said P. C. on this side, and before the first day of Easter Term next ensuing,
shall at the costs and charges of the said H. H. convey, assign and set over
unto the said H. H. and his assigns, all the present estate, title and interest
of the said P. of, in and to the said Message and Premises, and every part
and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, and shall and will put the said H.
H. or his assigns in peaceable possession thereof, and that the same shall be
then in as good plight and repair, as now they be.

Item, The said P. C. for and in consideration of the Sum of Ten pounds of
lawful money of England, by the said H. H. unto the said P. C. well and truly
paid, whereof the said P. does acquit and discharge the said H. by these
presents, as also for and in consideration of the Sum of One hundred pounds
of like money to be paid by the said H. to the said P. as hereafter in these
presents is limited, does for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and
every of them, Covenant, grant and agree to and with the said H. H. his
Executors and Assigns by these presents, That he the said P. C. and S. his
Wife, shall and will before and on this side the said first day of Easter Term
next ensuing, by usual names surrender according to the custom of the said
Manor, into the hands of the Lord of the said Manor, the aforesaid Message
and premises with the appurtenances, and all their estate, possession,
reversion, remainder, right, title and interest therein, to the use and behoof
of the said H. H. his heirs and assigns for ever, and that he the said P. has
now good right and title to the said Message and Premises, with the
appurtenances, and a good estate therein in Fee-simple, according to the custom
of the said Manor after the decease of the said T. C. and shall make and give
unto the said H. H. such assurance and security for the quiet enjoying of the
Premises, as the said P. has had, made or given unto him by W. W. of whom the
said P. lately purchased the same, and shall and will assign over to the said
H. by such ways or means, as by him or his Council learned in the Law, shall
be reasonably devised, advised and required, all Bonds, and other collateral
Security, which the said P. now has, for the safe and free enjoying of the
premises, or any part thereof.

Item, The said H.H. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns,
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said P.C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these presents, That he the
said H H. or his assigns, shall and will upon the aforesaid Surrender made by
the said P. and S. his wife, and the peaceable possession delivered of the
premises in such good plight and repair as they now be according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents, pay, content and satisfy unto the said
P.C. or his assigns, the whole and just Sum of one hundred pounds of lawful
money of England.

Item, It is agreed between the said parties to these presents, That the said
H. H. shall buy of the said P. C. such movables as now be in the said
Messuages and Premises, or that he shall be pleased to leave there at such
rates, as two men to be by the said P. and H. indifferently chosen shall
appraise the same, and that the said H. H. shall pay unto the said T. C. all
Rents that shall grow due unto her for the premises, from the day of the date
of these presents; In witness whereof the parties above named to these
presents, have interchangeably set their hands and seals the day and year first
above written.

An Indenture of Covenants to stand seized to uses, in consideration of
Marriage, etc.
THis Indenture made the (...) day of January, in the year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord Charles, by the grace of God of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. the Second, between J.F. of D. in the
County of D. Gent. of the one part, and N.G. of W.K. in the said County Yeoman,
J S. of S. in the said County Yeoman, and W.B. of S. oforesaid, Yeoman, of the
other part, witnesses, That for and in consideration that the said J.F. has
married A. the Daughter of the said N.G. and by her Issue has one Son, and to
the intent to provide and establish some certainty of living and livelihood to
be had and enjoyed by or unto the said A. after his decease, and for the
establishment of some part and portion of those inheritances as is descended
unto him the said J.F. from his Ancestors, unto his said son J. begotten on the
body of the said A. and unto such other Issues as it shall please God to send
him of the body of the said A. for the natural affection and Fatherly love he
bears unto the said J. and other Issues he may happen to have of the body of
the said A. and to the intent that she the said A. may be the better able to
bring up, educate and help the said J. his Son, and such other Child or
Children as he shall happen to have by the said A. when it shall please God to
call the said J. F. out of this mortal life, if it shall chance that she shall
over-live the said J. F. does by these presents, covenant, grant, agree to and
with the said N.G. J.S and W B and to and with every of them, that he the said
J.F. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, shall and will from henceforth
stand and be seized of and in one Message or Tenement, and Cottage, with all
and singular the appurtenances, set, lying and being in S. in the Parish of B.
R. now in the Tenure of J. L. under the yearly Rent of Ten shillings, one other
Cottage, parcel of the said Tenement, now in the tenure of one W. D. under the
yearly Rent of five shillings, and of and in one other Message or Cottage,
parcel also of the said Tenement, now in the Tenure of one C.B. and the yearly
Rent of Four shillings, and of and in all those several Messuages or Cottages,
adjoining to the Farm of D. that is to say, one Cottage and Mault-Mill garden,
and an acre and half of pasture, now in the tenure of A. F. Widow, under the
yearly Rent of Four shillings, and of and in one other Message or Cottage, and
Orchard, and an acre and a half of pasture now in the tenure of one J. D. under
the yearly Rent of five shillings and four pence, and of and in that other
Message or Cottage, and Garden thereunto, now in the tenure of B. B. Widow,
under the yearly Rent of Four shillings, and of and in all that other Cottage
called T. now in the tenure of (...) A. under the yearly Rent of Four
shillings, and of all that other Message or Cottage now in the occupation of
R. W. under the yearly Rent of Four shillings, and of and in all and singular
the Reversions and Reversion, Remainders and Remainder, Rent and Rents, of, in,
to, or out of all the Lands, Tenements, Messuages and Hereditaments aforesaid,
or any of them, and of and in any other his profits, commodities and advantages
whatsoever, to the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or any of them
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or had, used or occupied in or upon the
same, to the only proper use and behoof of the said J. F. for and during his
natural life, without Impeachment of any manner of wast, and from and after his
decease to the only use and behoof of the said A. during her natural life; and
from and after her decease to the only proper use and behoof of the said J. Son
of the said J. F. the Father, for and during his natural life, and after his
decease to the use and behoof of the said J. F. and the heirs of the body of
the said A. by the said J. F. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; and for
default of such Issue, to the use of the right heirs of the said J. F. the
Father for ever, and it is covenanted, granted and fully agreed by these
presents, by and between the said parties to these presents, and every of them,
their, and every of their heirs and assigns, That all and every grant,
Feoffment, Fine, Recovery and other conveyance, assurance, assurances and
conveyances whatsoever, to be had, made or executed by the said J. F. his heirs
and assigns, or any of them within the space of five years next ensuing, of or
concerning the said Lands, Tenements, and other the premises aforesaid; or of
or concerning any part or parcel thereof, at all times hereafter shall be
adjudged, deemed and taken to be only to the intents, uses and purposes in
these presents mentioned and expressed, and to no other uses, intents or
purposes: Provided always, and it is agreed between the said parties to these
presents, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said N. G. J. S. and
W. B. or the Survivors of them, whereof the said J. F. to be one, at all and
every time and times, and from time to time, during the life of the said J. F.
at the will and pleasure of such of them four, three or two of them which then
shall be living, whereof the said J. F. to be one by their Deed or Writing,
indented of all them which then shall be living, be it four, three or two of
them, so that the said J. F. be one of them, or such of them as shall be
parties to the same sealed and subscribed, to alter, determine, diminish,
change or enlarge any or all the aforesaid use and uses before declared of the
premises, or any part thereof, the use and estate before limited, declared or
appointed to the said A. wife of the said J. F. for the term of her life only
excepted, and by the same, or any other such writing indented, sealed and
subscribed, as is aforesaid, to limit and appoint, give or grant, the use or
uses of the premises, or any part thereof to the said persons, or any of them,
or to any other person or persons in Fee-simple, fee-tail, for life, lives or
years, or otherwise, and that after such alteration, determination, enlarging,
limitation or appointing of any the use or uses aforesaid, or of any parcel
thereof, the use only of such and so much of the premises, whereof any such
alteration, determination or enlarging of any use or uses aforesaid, shall be,
as is aforesaid, had or made, shall be, and shall be deemed and adjudged to be
to such, and those person and persons, and to such and those use and uses, and
in such and the same manner and form, as by such Writing subscribed and sealed,
as is aforesaid, shall be declared only, and to any other or others, person and
persons, use or uses, or in any other manner or form, any thing in these
presents contained to the contrary notwithstanding, always saving and
preserving the said use and estate before limited and declared to the said A.
for the term of her natural life, as is aforesaid, etc.

An Assignment of a Bond by way of a Collateral Security.
KNow all men by these presents, That whereas T. M. of the Parish of clendon in
the County of Wilts Gent. and W.M. of the Parish of Cheredon in the said C. of
Wilts, gent. by their Obligation dated the, etc. stand jointly and severally
bounden unto me H. T. Citizen and Salter of London, in the penal Sum of one
hundred pounds of good and lawful money of England, with condition thereupon
endorsed for payment of Fifty and two pounds of like good and lawful money on
the, etc. next ensuing the date of the said Obligation, as by the same it does
and may appear. Now I the said H. T. for the better security of the like debt,
for which I have given bond, and for other good causes and considerations me
hereunto moving, do by these presents make, constitute, ordain, and in my stead
and place put and authorize D. M. of the Inner Temple London, Gent. my true and
lawful Deputy and Attorney irrevocable for me and in my name, but to the sole
use and behoof of my said Attorney, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
to ask, demand, receive and take of them, the said T. M. and W. M. or either of
them, their or either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said
Sum of Fifty and two pounds; and for nonpayment thereof, giving, and by these
presents granting unto the said D. M. by the tenor hereof, my full, whole and
absolute power and authority in the execution of the premises, the said T. M.
and W. M. or either of them, their or either of their Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, in my name or the name of my Executors or Administrators to
arrest, sue, implead, imprison and condemn, and prosecute in any Court or
Courts whatsoever, and them or any, or either of them out of Prison to release
as precisely as the Law will it permit for recovery of the said debt and
penalty. And upon recovery and receipt thereof to deliver up the said
Obligation to be cancelled, and finally to do all and every other lawful act
whatsoever for recovery o^ the said debt and penalty or any part thereof,
without yielding any account thereof, or therefore, as to my said Attorney
shall seem meet and expedient, as fully and effectually as I my self might or
could do, or cause to be done in or about the premises. And moreover, I the
said H. T. do by these presents covenant and promise to and with the said D. M.
his Executors and Administrators, that at the day of the date of these presents
I have not done, or (...) or suffered to be done any act or thing whatsoever,
whereby the said recited Obligation is any manner of ways released or
discharged, and that neither my self, my Executors or Administrators shall or
will at any time hereafter release or discharge the same, or cause, or suffer
the same to be released or discharged without the privity and consent of him
the said D. M. his Executors or Administrators, in that behalf first had and
obtained; Provided nevertheless, That if T. W. of, etc. in the C. of, etc.
Yeoman, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall and do well and truly
satisfy, pay and discharge one Obligation of one hundred pounds, bearing date
the, etc. of, etc. last past, wherein and whereby the said T. W. stands
bounden unto A. W. of, etc. aforesaid, Spinster, with condition for payment of
Fifty one pounds and ten shillings of lawful money of England, on the first day
of, etc. next ensuing; that then these presents to be revocable, and shall be
utterly void and of none effect, any thing herein contained to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof I the above named H. T. have
hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc. in the, etc.

A grant of the moiety of an Annuity during life.
THis Indenture made the, etc. in the year of our Lord God, 1652. between A. B.
of the Parish of etc. in the County of K. Esquire the eldest Son of K. B Widow, the
late wife of Sir R. B. Knight, deceased, and S. the wife or the said A. of the
one part; and Sir G. H. of C. in the said C. Knight, of the other part,
witnesses, That the said A. B. and S. his wife, for and in consideration of
the Sum of 300 l. of lawful English money to them in hand paid by the said Sir
G H. at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, the receipt
whereof and themselves therewith fully satisfied and paid, they the said A. B.
and S. his wife do hereby acknowledge, and thereof do release, acquit, and for
ever discharge the said Sir G. H his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, by
these presents have granted, bargained, sold, aliened, released and confirmed,
and by these presents does fully and absolutely grant, bargain, sell, alien,
release and confirm unto the said Sir G. H. one annuity and annual Rent of 50
l. by the year, being the moiety or half part of one entire annuity or annual
Rent of 100 l. by the year, arising, due or payable to the said A. B. out of
the Rectory or Parsonage impropriate of E. in the said C. of K. with the
appurtenances, or out of any part or parcel thereof, or out of all or any of
the Messuages, Houses, Barns, Stables, Buildings, Yards, Courts and
Gleab-lands, Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, Emoluments, Rents, Corn-rents
reserved, or other Rents, Fruits, Commodities, Profits or Advantages whatsoever
to the said Parsonage and Rectory belonging; To have and to hold the said
Annuity or annual Rent of 50 l. herein before mentioned to be bargained and
sold unto the said Sir G.H. and his assigns from the, etc. of, etc. last past
before the date of these presents, for and during the natural life of the said
Sir G.H. or for the term of Fourscore years, if he the said Sir G.H. shall
happen so long to live, in as large, ample and beneficial manner to all intents
and purposes, as he the said A. B. and S. his wife, or either of them, now
has, ever had, or could, or might, or can, or may in any wise grant, bargain,
sell or release the same, and to the only use and behoof of the said Sir G.H.
and his assigns, and to no other use or purpose. And the said A. B. and S. his
wife, the said annual Rent of 50 l. herein before mentioned, to be bargained
and sold by the year, against themselves and all other persons lawfully
claiming, or to claim the same or any part thereof, by, from, or under them or
either of them unto the said Sir G.H. and his assigns shall and will warrant
and defend by these presents. And the said A. B. and S. his wife, do for their
said lives, and either of them, their, and either of their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, covenant, promise and grant, to and with the
said Sir G. H. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents, in manner following, that is to say, that they the said A. and S. or
one of them, for and notwithstanding any act or thing by them, or either of
them heretofore done or suffered to the contrary, have or has in themselves,
or any of them, at the time of the ensealing of these presents, good right, and
lawful authority to grant, bargain, sell and release unto the said Sir G. H.
and his assigns, the said annual Rent of 50 l. by the year, in such manner and
form as is herein before mentioned and expressed. And further, That the said
Sir G.H. and his assigns, shall or lawfully may during the natural life of the
said Sir G. H. or the term of, etc. if the said Sir G. H. shall so long live,
peaceably and quietly have, hold, enjoy and receive, attain and keep the said
annual Rent, or Sum of 50 l. by the year before granted, without the lawful
let, suit, trouble, denial or disturbance, of or by the said A. B. and S. his
wife, or either of them, or any other person or persons lawfully claiming by,
from or under them, or either of them, their or either of their estate, right
or title. And further, That the said bargained premises were, are, and be, and
so shall remain and continue to the said Sir G. H. and his assigns, during the
natural life of the said Sir G. H. or the term of Fourscore years, if the said
Sir G.H. shall so long live, free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted
and discharged, or else by the said A.B. and S. his wife, or one of them, their
or one of their Heirs, Executors or Administrators, sufficiently saved
harmless and indemnified of and from all manner and other gifts, grants,
bargains, sales, estates, leases, joyntures, dowers, statutes, judgments,
recognizances, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever at any time
heretofore had, made, committed or suffered, or hereafter to be had, made,
committed or suffered by them the said A. B. and S. his wife, or either of
them: And the said A.B. and S. his wife, do for themselves, their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, covenant and promise to and
with the said Sir G. H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them by these presents, That they the said A. B. and S. his wife, and all and
every other person and persons now having or lawfully claiming, or which shall
or may hereafter have or claim any lawful estate, right or title in or unto the
said bargained premises or any part thereof, by, from or under them the said
A. and S. or either of them shall and will at all times during the space of
five years next after the date of these presents, if the said Sir G. H. shall
so long live, at and upon the reasonable request, and at the proper costs and
charges in the Law of the said Sir G. H. and his assigns, make, acknowledge and
execute to the said Sir G. H. and his assigns, all and every such further and
other lawful and reasonable act and acts, device, conveyance and assurance in
the Law whatsoever, for the better holding and enjoying of the said 50 l. per
annum herein before granted, according to the true meaning of these presents,
as by the said Sir G. H. and his assigns, or any of them, his or their Council
learned in the Laws of this Nation shall be in that behalf advised or devised
and required, so that such person and persons who are to make such further
assurance as aforesaid, be not therein compelled to travel further than to the
City of London and Westminster. Which said other assurance so to be had and
made as aforesaid shall be and enure, and shall be adjudged and taken to be and
enure; and by the said parties is hereby so declared to the only use and behoof
of the said Sir G.H and of his assigns, and to none other use or purpose
whatsoever. In witness whereof, etc.

Articles of Agreement for the holding Copyhold Lands from year to year, from
the term of, etc. at a certain Rent, etc.
Articles of Covenants and Agreement, bad, made and agreed upon the, etc. day
of, etc. in the, etc. between R. C. of, etc. in the County of, etc. husbandman,
E. his wife, P.C. their son, and I. B. of, etc. in the said C. husbandman of
the one part, and T.P. of, etc. in the said C. Yeoman, of the other part, viz.
WHereas the said R.C. by certain Articles of Agreement indented bearing date
the, etc. in the, etc. year of, etc. made between the said R.C. and P.C. of the
one part, and the said I. B. of the other part, did for the Considerations
therein mentioned, covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. B. his
Executors and Assigns, That he the said I. B. his Executors and Assigns, and
every of them should have and enjoy from the date of the said Articles from
year to year, every year for and during the term of Twenty five years then next
and immediately following, according to the custom of the Manor of, etc. all
and singular the Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Commons and Appurtenances
belonging to a customary or Copyhold Tenement, with the Backside, Barns,
Stables, and Stalls thereunto belonging, and the West End of the
dwelling house, and the Room over-head, then in the possession of one S.S.
except and always reserved unto the said R. C. and P. C. and every of them,
their assignee or assigns, all the other part of the dwelling house, then in
the possession of the said R. C. and P.C. with the Garden and one Cow-Pasture,
and five acres of Arable Land, whereof one acre and hallyeth at a place called
the Quarre, one acre by the piece in the East-field, half an acre in Rudlands
in the same Field, one acre in the West-Rowden, and one acre called Cecelies,
with free ingress egress and regress thereunto at all times and seasons
convenient without the lawful let, disturbance or interruption of him the sai^
J. B. his assign or assigns, if they the said R.C. and P.C. or either of them
shall happen so long to live; and likewise should have and enjoy during the
said term limited as aforesaid, the u^ of the Eastern part of the Backside as
it was then divided and appointed; all which recited premises belongs unto
one customary or Copyhold Tenement with the appurtenances in, and^ aforesaid,
parcel of the Manor of, etc. abovesaid, which the said R. C. then had and
enjoyed during his natural life, according to the custom of the said Manor,
the Remainder whereof after the decease of the said R. being expectant unto the
said P. his Son by way of succession according to the said Custom, as in and by
the said Articles of Agreement amongst other Covenants and agreements therein
also contained at large it does and may appear; It is now concluded and agreed
by and between the said parties to these presents, touching and concerning the
premises in manner and form following; that is to say, First the said J. B.
for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, does
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said T.P. his Executors and Assigns
by these presents, That he the said T.P. his Executors and Assigns, and every
of them, for and in consideration of the Sum of 20 l. of lawful money of
England, (to be paid to the said I. B. by the said I. P. in manner and form
hereafter expressed) shall and lawfully may for and notwithstanding any act or
deed that the said I. B. has done to the contrary, have and enjoy from and
after the day of the date hereof from year to year every year, for and during
the term of ten years then next and immediately following, according to the
custom of the said Manor of, etc. all and singular the recited premises
mentioned in the said recited Articles of agreement (except as is therein
excepted) if they the said R. C. and P.C. or either of them so long shall
happen to live without the lawful let, disturbance or interruption of him the
said I.B. his assign or assigns.

And the said T. P. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and assigns does
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns by these presents; That he the said T. P. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said I. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns
for the Rent of the said premises for the said Ten years, the Sum of 20 l. of
lawful money of England, that is to say 10 l. thereof at the Feast day of the
Birth of our Lord Christ now next ensuing the date hereof; and the other 10 l.
residue of the said Sum of 20 l. on the Feast day of the Nativity of St. John
the Baptist now next also ensuing the date hereof; and that he the said T. P.
his Executors or Assigns, nor any of them shall sell, cut down, top, lop, or
shroud any the Trees or quit-sets growing upon the recited premises.

Item, The said R. C. and P. C. for themselves, and either of them for himself,
their Executors and Administrators, and every of them does covenant, promise
and grant to and with the said T.P. his Executors and Assigns by these
presents, That he the said T.P. his Executors and Assigns, and every of them
(for and in consideration that they the said R. C. and P.C. are indebted unto
the said T. P. by Obligation in the Sum of 10 l. with condition thereunto for
payment of 20 l. which Obligation is become forfeited, and which is now
delivered up to the said R. C. and P.C. at the ensealing and delivery hereof to
be cancelled) shall and may likewise have and enjoy, from and after the date
hereof from year to year every year, for and during the said term of Ten years
then next and immediately following, according to the custom of the said
Manor of, etc. the Milk-house parcel of the said customary or Copyhold
Tenement, the Chamber over the Kitchen, and also the Barn, Stable, and all
other the Outhouses whatsoever, to the said customary or Copyhold Tenement
belonging, together with the use of the Kitchen and Backside in common with
the said R. C. and P.C. And further, That the said T.P. his Executors and
Assigns, for the consideration aforesaid, shall and may likewise have and enjoy
during the said term, the said recited five acres of Arable Land so excepted
and reserved unto the said R. C. and P.C. their assign and assigns amongst
other things out of the said recited Articles of agreement as aforesaid (so as
the said R. C. and P. C. and their assigns, shall and may have two acres
thereof yearly, the one to be sown to Wheat, and the other to Barley: The said
R. C. and P. C. finding the Seed yearly, but to be dunged with the Fold, eared
and sown by the said T.P. his Executors and Assigns, in as good sort, manner
and form as the said T. P. drudge, ear and sow his own Land) and together also
with free ingress, egress and regress thereunto at all times and seasons
convenient, without the lawful let, disturbance or interruption of the said R.
C. and E. his wife, and P. C. or any or either of them, if they the said R. C.
and P. C. or either of them shall happen so long to live: And further also,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T. P. his Executors and
Assigns, to have and enjoy all other the premises herein mentioned according
to the Covenant herein made by the said J. B. without any let, contradiction or
denial of them the said R. C. and E. his wife, P. C. or any or either of them.

Item, It is further concluded and agreed, That if the said R. C. shall happen
to decease before the end of the said Ten years, and that the said E. his wife
shall be then living, whereby the said premises shall come unto her during her
Widowhood, according to the custom of the said Manor of, etc. that then she
the said E. shall and will permit and suffer the said T. P. to hold and enjoy
all the said premises, during the remainder of the said ten years that shall
be then to come next after the decease of the said R. if she shall so long live
and continue a Widow.

Item, It is also concluded and agreed, That the said R. C. and P. C. or one of
them or their Assigns, shall and will satisfy and pay or cause to be paid all
Rents, Duties and other payments whatsoever hereafter to be due, payable or
issuing out of the premises, and thereof discharge and acquit the said T. P.
his Executors and Assigns during the said term; and shall and will also during
the said term; repair and amend as well all the houses and Buildings in and
upon the premises, as also every the Hedges and Fences of the premises during
the said term.

And the said T.P. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said R.C. and
P. C. and either of them, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these
presents, That it shall and may be lawful notwithstanding these presents, to
and for the said R. C. and P.C. and their assigns, to have and enjoy the Corn
and Grain now growing and being in and upon the premises for this Summer
season at times convenient, with free ingresse, egresse and regresse, to cut,
mow, carry away, and house the same in the Barn of the customary Tenement, and,
to use the said Barn for the thrashing out of the said Corn and Grain until
the Feast of, etc. next ensuing.

Item, It is also agreed by and between the said parties to these presents,
That it shall be lawful to and for the said T.P. his Executors and Assigns in
the end of the said term, or determination of these presents, to have and enjoy
the corn and grain that shall be then growing and being in and upon the
premises or any part thereof, with free ingresse, egresse and regresse, to
cut, mow, carry away, and to house the same in the Barn of the said customary
Tenement, and to use the said Barn for the thrashing out of the said corn and
Grain until the Feast of, etc. then after ensuing.

Item, It is also agreed, That the said T. P. his Executors and Assigns, shall
and will in the end of the said term lay in, haine the Meadows and grounds of
the premises the first day of May, and so leave the same unto the said J. B.
without suffering the same to be eaten with Cattle or spoiled; and shall and
will spend all the Straw and Fodder in and upon the premises, that shall be
yearly made in and upon the premises, and not elsewhere; and shall and will
also allow unto the said R. C. and P. C. an hundred and half of Reed yearly to
be laid upon the houses of the said premises; And for performance of all and
singular the Covenants and Agreements aforesaid, on the part and behalf of the
said R. C. and P. C. or either of them to be performed, they the said R. P. and
P. C. do bind themselves, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators unto the
said T. P. his Executors and Administrators, in the Sum of 80 l. of lawful
money of England, firmly by these presents. In witness, etc.

An Obligation and a Condition from a Bailiff and his Sureties, to a
High Sheriff.
Know all men by these presents, That we A. B. C. D. E. F. of, etc. in the
County of, etc. G. H. of (...) in the County of, etc. and J. K. of, etc. in the
County aforesaid (...) do hold our selves to be firmly bound unto L. M.
High Sheriff of the County of, etc. aforesaid, in, etc. pounds of good and
lawful money of England, To be paid to the said High Sheriff, or to his
certain Attorney, Executors, Administrators or Assigns; To which payment well
and truly to be made we bind our selves, and every one of us by our selves for
the whole, and in the whole, our Heirs, and Administrators firmly by these
presents; sealed with our seals. Dated the, etc. in the year of our Lord, etc.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed, etc.
Esquire High Sheriff of the County of, etc. aforesaid, has made, assigned,
constituted, ordained and established the above-bounden, etc. Bailiff of the,
etc. for and during all such time as the said, etc. shall be and continue
High Sheriff of the said County: If therefore the said, etc. during all the
time aforesaid, do well and truly execute all warrants, precepts, process, and
commandments to him hereafter to be directed from the said, etc. and, etc.
Gent. his Undersheriff, his or their Deputy or Deputies, and due and
sufficient returns do well and truly make, and also do give notice of the
execution thereof unto the said High Sheriff, or Undersheriff in convenient
time, before the returns of the same, and the fees of them, and of and for
every other cause, matter or thing whatsoever happening within the said, etc.
due and payable within one month next after the receipt thereof, do pay or
cause to be paid to the said High Sheriff or Undersheriff, his or their Deputy
or Deputies; And that the said, etc. do not ask or levy any Fee or Fees due to
the said High Sheriff, or Undersheriff, for the executing or doing of any
warrant or precept whatsoever, but such as are warranted and justifiable by the
Laws, Statutes and Customs of this Nation; And do also well and truly execute,
and return all Warrants, Precepts, Distring. of Fieri facias, and process to
him directed from the Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery, Justices of Oyer
and Terminer, Justices of the Peace, Coroners, Commissioners of the Sewers,
Clerk of the County, and from all other Officers, Commissioners, and Ministers
of the Kingdom, having authority during all the time aforesaid, and further do
levy and gather all such Sums of money as the said High Sheriff shall be
charged with by reason of the said Office, and leviable within the said, etc.
being written or extracted to the said Bailiff from the said High Sheriff or
Undersheriff, and do pay or cause to be paid to the said High Sheriff or
Undersheriff, the Sums of money within one month after the receipt of the
said extract or writing; And also if the said Bailiff do well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid to the said High Sheriff or Undersheriff the Sum of, etc. of
lawful money of England, for the Fee-farm of his, etc. and all other Rents and
Fee-farms at the Feast of the Aununtiation of the blessed Virgin Mary, and St.
Michael the Archangel, by even and equal portions, due to the King within the
said, etc. And also if the said Bailiff do deliver, or cause to be delivered in
writing unto the said High Sheriff, or Undersheriff, before, etc. next coming,
the names of all such Freeholders within the said, etc. which have Four pounds
per annum Freehold, or more, together with the names of the Towns wherein they
dwell, and also the names of the Towns, Villages and Hamlets within the said,
etc. And the Towns and Villages which ought to have Return and Execution of
Writs: And also if the said Bailiff shall give his personal Attendance upon the
High Sheriff and Undersheriff, as well at the County Court, and such general
Quarter Sessions which the Bailiff of the said, etc. have usually in former
times attended; as also at all other times when the said High Sheriff or
Undersheriff shall require his attendance, and shall carefully and diligently
do and execute whatsoever he shall be lawfully required to do at Assizes,
Goal-Deliveries, County Court, Quarter Sessions, Coroners, Enquest, and all
other Services to be done for the Kingdom, and all and every person and persons
whatsoever, and at all and every time and times, upon every reasonable request
to him in that behalf to be made; And also shall be attendant upon the said
High Sheriff and Undersheriff, his or their Deputy or Deputies, and Officers
in and about conveying of prisoners to and from the Goal, etc. or to and from
any place or prison whatsoever, to be appointed by the said High Sheriff or
Undersheriff, And also at the Execution of prisoners aforesaid, and not to
depart before Execution of the prisoners fully be had and done, and shall well
and truly execute the Office of a Bailiff in all things during the said time.
And if the said Bailiff do take any distress upon every Alias or Plures
Distringas, which issue, and be directed to him out of the County Court, to be
holden for the said High Sheriff, and do make due and lawful Returns of the
same, and do safely keep such distress so taken, for the use of the said
High Sheriff, in case the same be forfeited: And also if the said, etc. his
Executors and Administrators, do at all and every time and times hereafter,
defend, save, keep harmless and indemnified the said High Sheriff, and his
Undersheriff, his and their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of
them, and his and their Lands, Goods and Chattels, as well from and against the
King and all and every person and persons whatsoever, concerning the premises,
or any part of them; and also for and concerning the escape or escapes of any
prisoner or prisoners, that shall be in the custody of him the said, etc.
within the said County, by him arrested, to him hereafter to be committed upon
any Warrant, Precept or Commandment from the said High Sheriff or
Undersheriff; And for and concerning every other matter, cause or thing
whatsoever appertaining to his said Office, and the Secrets of the said
High Sheriff shall keep undisclosed and unrevealed, in all things that are
lawful, and shall also within convenient time deliver, or cause to be
delivered, all Precepts, Warrants and Extracts to other Bailiffs of the said
County, according to the Directions he shall receive from the said
High Sheriff, or Undersheriff, or any other, by his or their commandment or
appointment; Then this present Obligation shall be void and of none effect, or
else shall stand, remain, and be in full force, power, effect and virtue.

A Condition to save harmless for payment of several Legacies.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas M. D. late of St. I. in
the County of M. Widow, deceased, by her last Will and Testament in Writing,
bearing date the, etc. of, etc. in the year of our Lord God, etc. did amongst
other Legacies and Bequests, give and bequeath unto J.S. the Son of the within
bounden W.S. etc. of lawful money of England, and to T. S. Daughter of the said
W.S. one Pewter-platter, one Pewter-Dish, three Pewter Saucers, and five
shillings of lawful money of England, and also to S.S. another of the said
Daughters of the said W.S. five shillings of like money, as by the same Will
more at large appears; which said Sums of five shillings a piece,
Pewter-platter, Pewter-Dish, and three Saucers, the within named J. S. Executor
of the last Will and Testament of the said M. D. has at the request of the
said W. S. at and before the sealing and delivery hereof, paid, delivered and
disbursed unto the said W.S. for the use and behoof of the said J.S. his Son,
T. and S. his Daughters: If therefore the said W. S. his Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, do from time to time, and at all times
hereafter freely and clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise well
and sufficiently save, defend and keep harmless the said J. S. his Executors
and Administrators, and every of them, and all and every of his and their
Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, as well of, from, and against the said
J.S. T. and S. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns: as also of, from,
and against all other persons whatsoever, of, for and concerning the payment,
delivery and disbursement of the said Sums of five shillings a piece,
Pewter-platter, Pewter-dish, and three Saucers* unto the said W.S. their
Father, as aforesaid: And of, and from all such actions, suits, costs, charges,
damages, expenses and demands whatsoever, which he the said J. S. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall hereafter happen to incur, sustain
or be put unto, for, or by reason of the payment, delivery and disbursement of
the said Sums of five shillings a piece, Pewter-Platter, Pewter-Dish, and three
Saucers, for the use of the said J.S. T. and S. unto the said W. S. their
Father, as aforesaid; That then this Obligation shall be void, or else it shall
stand in full force and virtue.

A Counter Condition to save harmless from a Bond; Well penned.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the within named R. C.
at the special instance and request, and for the only debt of the within-bound
J. S. by one Obligation of the date hereof, is, and stands jointly and
severally bounden with the said J. S. unto J. T. of London, Merchant, in the
sum or penalty of, etc. of lawful money of England, with conditions thereupon
indorsed for the payment of, etc. of like lawful money of England, on the last
day of February now next ensuing the day of the date within written, as by the
same Obligation and Condition may appear: If therefore the said J. S. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said J.T. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, or some of them, on the said last day of February above mentioned,
at the now dwelling house of H. C. London, Gent. fituate in, etc. in London,
the aforesaid sum of, etc. and do thereby clearly exonerate, acquit and
discharge the said R. C. his Executors and Administrators, as well from all
actions, suits, costs, charges, judgments, executions and demands whatsoever
concerning the same, That then this present Obligation to be void and of none
effect, or else to remain and abide in full force and virtue.

A Letter of Attorney to take possession according to the Contents of a Lease.
TO all People to whom this present Writing shall come, H.T. Citizen and
Girdler of London, sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting; Whereas I the
said H. T. have signed and sealed one Writing indented, bearing even date with
these presents, purporting a Lease to be made by me unto one, etc. of all that
Message, with the appurtenances near the Hospital, in, etc. In the County of,
etc. late in the tenure or occupation of R. F. deceased, and other Lands and
Hereditaments in the said Indenture mentioned, To hold from the first day of
this instant February, unto the full end and term of five years from thence
next ensuing, as by the said writing indented more plainly appears, which
Writing is not yet delivered by Deed. Now know ye, That I the said H. T. have
made, constituted, appointed, and in my place and stead put, and by these
presents do make, constitute, appoint, and in my place and stead put, etc. my
true and lawful Attorney, for me and in my name, place and stead to enter into
and upon the said Message, Lands and Hereditaments in and by the said Writing
indented, mentioned to be demised, or any part thereof; And after such entry
made for me, and in my name, place and stead there upon the premises to
deliver unto the said, etc. or to his lawful Attorney in that behalf, the said
writing indented so by me signed and sealed as aforesaid, as the very act and
deed of me the said H. T. And further to do whatsoever may be necessary in that
behalf; and whatsoever my said Attorney shall do or cause to be done in the
Premises, I the said H. T. do and shall ratify, confirm and maintain, as if I
had done the same in my own person. In witness whereof I the said H. T. have
hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc. day of February, in the year of our
Lord, etc.

A short Lease of a Message and Lands to be void, on paying of one shilling,
it being the precedent Deed.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of February, in the year of our Lord God,
etc. between H. T. Citizen and Girdler of London of the one part, and R. I. of
S. in the County of W. Yeoman, etc. of the other party, witnesses, That the
said H. T. for diverse good causes and Considerations him moving, has demised,
granted, and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, grant, and to
farm-let unto the said, etc. all that Message, with the appurtenances near
the, etc. in, etc. in the County of G. late in the tenure or occupation of R.
F. deceased, and all the Barns, Out houses, Orchard and Garden thereunto
belonging; And all that Close of Meadow or Pasture-ground thereunto adjoining,
containing by estimation five Acres, be it more or less; and one little ground,
called or known by the name of Redcraf, adjoining to certain Grounds there
called Flankers Closes; And one other Close of Arable Land, called the Wood
furlong, adjoining to the Lane there leading toward S. on the West; And all
those arable Lands to the said Message, belonging or reputed, or taken to
belong thereunto, or which were therewith used, occupied or enjoyed by the said
R. F. deceased, lying and being in the Fields of, etc. aforesaid, That is to
say, five and forty acres by estimation, be the same more or less, lying in the
North-field, and 22 acres by estimation, be the same more or less, lying in the
South of, etc. aforesaid, To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement,
Land and Premises, with the appurtenances unto the said, etc. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the first of this instant February, unto the
full end and term of five years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended, yielding and paying therefore yearly during the said term,
one Pepper-corn, at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, if it shall be
demanded. Provided always, that if the said H. T. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall at any time hereafter pay, or tender unto the
said, etc. his Executors or Administrators, or to any other person or persons,
to his or their or any of their use or uses, the sum of twelve pence in money,
for the making void of this present Indenture, and the Demise and Lease, herein
contained, that then and from thenceforth this present Indenture, and Demise
and Lease herein contained, shall cease and be void, any thing herein contained
to the contrary notwithstanding; In witness whereof the said parties to these
presents, their hands and seals interchangeably have set the day and year first
above-written.

An Award made between four Executors.
TO all Christian people, to whom this present writing quadripartite indented
of Award shall come, S. W. Ceazer Knight, Master of the Rools, sends greeting
in our Lord God everlasting, This Indenture quadripartite also made the second
day of A. in the fifth year of, etc. between Sir W. S. etc. one of the
Executors of the last Will and Testament of R. C. etc. of the first party, S.
T. Offley, etc. one other of the, etc. of the last Will and Testament
aforesaid; of the second Part, Sir T. L. etc. one other of the Executors of the
said last Will and Testament of the third part, and Sir H. C. etc. one other
Executor of the same last Will and Testament of the said R. of the fourth part
Witnesses; That whereas the said R. by his said Testament and last Will
bearing date, etc. amongst diverse and many gifts and legacies therein limited,
bequeathed and appointed to sundry persons therein named, as by the same it may
appear, has given and bequeathed all the residue of all and singular his
goods, chattels, leases and other things whatsoever (his debts, funerals and
legacies being paid and performed) unto the said W.S. T.O. and T.L. whom
together with the said H. C. his brother he made and ordained his said
Executors of his last Will and Testament aforesaid; and of the same he has
also made and ordained the said W. C. his Supervisor and Overseer, as by the
same his last Will also at large it does and may appear; And whereas for the
avoiding of all doubts, variances, controversies, suits and strifes, that may
and might ensue and grow between the foresaid parties, touching the said last
Will and Testament, and the true execution of the same: And for and concerning
the said residue, surplusage and remainder of the goods, chattels and other
things, (after the said Debts, Funerals and Legacies discharged) every of the
said parties, have compromitted and faithfully promised, and further do
severally covenant and grant, to and with others by these presents, to stand
to, obey, abide, perform and fulfill the Award and Judgment of the said W.C.
Knight, Arbitrator between them, indifferently named and chosen of and upon the
premises. Whereupon the same W. C. taking upon him the charge and business of
the said Award, and willing, and minding, as much as in him is, the true
execution of the said Testament, and that a final peace, unity and concord
shall be had and continued for ever between the said parties, for and
concerning the premises, has and does by these presents, by and with the full
assent and consent of all and every the aforesaid parties, make, publish and
declare this his present award, arbitrament and judgment between the same
parties, touching the premises in manner and form as follows, that is to
say, First, The said Sir W. C. by these presents does award, judge and deem,
and every of the parties before named, covenanteth and grants severally for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, to and with the other of
them, his and their Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these
presents, in manner and form following; That is to say, That the same
Executors, That any of the Executors shall not conceal any of the Testators
goods from the other. Executors.
or any of them shall not at any time or times hereafter, willingly or
wittingly conceal, withdraw, or keep close, or cause to be concealed, withdrawn
or kept close from the said other Executors or any of them, or the Survivors or
Survivor of them, and such Goods, Chattels, Leases, Debts, Credits or other
things whatsoever, as has come, or shall happen to come to his, or their, or
any of their hands, custody, possession or knowledge, that were, or did, or
ought to appertain or belong to the said R.C. the Testator, or his Executors,
to the intent the same or any part thereof should not be recovered, used,
ordered, enjoyed or disposed by the same Executors, to their and every of their
own proper use, most benefit, commodity and advantage, by equal portions in
manner and form aforesaid.

And it is further ordered and judged by the said Sir W. C. and also fully
condescended and agreed between the said parties, and every of them severally
does covenant and grant for him, To execute the Testators Will and Trust
reposed in them.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators to and with the others by these
presents, That all the same Executors and every of them shall from henceforth
both in name and deed, take upon him the full and due execution of the foresaid
last Will and Testament, so far as only to the duty, trust and office of
Executors appertains or ought to appertain. And furthermore it is ordered,
judged and awarded by the said Arbitrator, and also covenanted, granted and
fully agreed between the said parties, and the said Parties, That the Executors
shall bear all Costs and Charges of Suits in executing the Testators Will
equally.
and every of them, do severally covenant and grant to and with other of them
by these presents, That if at any time or times hereafter it shall be found and
approved, that the foresaid Testator is and ought be charged either by Law or
Conscience with any other debt or debts, sum or sums of money, or other duties
or things whatsoever, then at this present is well known and does appear unto
the said Executors; or if they or any of them, or the Executors of the Survivor
of them, shall at any time or times hereafter happen to be charged with any
manner of Suit or Suits, or other charge or charges whatsoever, for or by
reason of the said last Will and Testament, or the due execution thereof either
in Law or otherwise, That then all and every the said Executors, and the
Survivor and Survivors of them, and the Executors and Administrators of such of
them which then shall be dead, and that their equal and indifferent costs,
bear, support, pay and allow the same charges, and every of them, any thing
herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Another Form of an Award.
TO all Christian People, etc. I. S. Sergeant at Law send greeting, etc.
Whereas diverse variances, suits, controversies, debates and demands have been
heretofore had, moved, stirred and depending between A. B. etc. and C. D. etc.
of, for and concerning, reciting the matter in controversy. For the appeasing
and pacifying of all which suits, debates, variances, controversies and
demands, either of the said parties by their mutual assent and consent have
submitted themselves, and stand bounden each to other by their several
Obligations bearing date, etc. in the Sum of, etc. a piece, with several
conditions endorsed upon either of the same several Obligations, to stand to,
obey, observe, perform, fulfill and keep the Award, Arbitrament, Ordinance and
Judgment of me the said J. S. Arbitrator indifferently elected, named and
chosen between the said parties, as well, of, for, and upon all and all manner
of actions, as well real as personal, suits, quarrels, debts, debates,
trespasses and demands whatsoever, had, moved, stirred or depending in
controversy, between the said parties in any wise before the date of the said
Obligations: So that the same award, arbitrament, ordinance and judgment of the
said Arbitrator, of and upon the premises were made, declared and yielded up
in writing on this side the tenth day of, etc. as by the same several
obligations and endorsements thereupon made, more at large appears; Whereupon
I the said J.S. Arbitrator aforesaid, taking upon me the charge of the said
award, and willing to set the said parties at a final end, peace, unity and
concord, of, for, and concerning the premises; have called both the said
parties before me, and by good advice and deliberation, have seen, heard,
examined and perfectly understood, and perceived their both rights, titles,
estates, interests, demands, evidences and proofs in and to the premises, and
weighing, and pondering the effects and grounds of all the said matters and
controversy; do now make, publish, give up and declare this my present Award
indented between the said parties, by and with their both mutual consents and
agreement, of, for, and concerning the premises in manner and form following;
that is to say, First, I the said Arbitrator do by these presents award, order,
judge and deem, and the said A. B. for his part does covenant and grant for
him, his Executors and Administrators, to and with the said C. D. his Executors
and Administrators by these presents, That, etc. as in other Awards, reciting
the matter in variance.

A Lease of a Ferry.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. witnesses, That the said T. L. for
and in consideration of, etc. has demised, granted and to farm-letten, and by
these presents does, etc. unto the said J. H. his Executors and Assigns, the
moiety of the Passage, Ferry, Standage and Battalage of P. in the C. of, etc.
together with all Easements and Commodities thereunto belonging, in as large
and ample manner and form as T. H. or his Assigns has heretofore had or
enjoyed the same, or might, or ought to have had and enjoyed the same, To have
and to hold the said moiety of the said Passage and Ferry, and all other the
Premises by these presents mentioned to be demised, and every parcel thereof
with the appurtenances unto him the said J. H. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. unto the end and term of, etc. Yielding
and paying, etc. with a Clause to make the Lease void for non-payment of the
Rent. And the said J. H. does covenant, etc. That he the said J. H. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, at his and their own proper costs and
charges, shall from time to time during the said term, maintain and keep such
Boat or Boats, and all other things meet and convenient for the moiety, of the
aforesaid Passage and other the premises, as has been heretofore commonly
accustomed, and thereof shall from time to time during the said term, acquit,
discharge or sufficiently save harmless the said J. L. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns.

And that he the said J. H. his Executors or Assigns, shall from time to time
during the said term, carry over or cause to be carried over the Ferry-place
aforesaid from P. to F. the said J. L. and his wife and their heirs, servants,
children, horses, and stuff, when and so often as the said J. L. his wife and
their heirs, children, or any other of his family shall require to have
themselves, their servants, horses, or stuff to be carried over the said Ferry
from P. to E. aforesaid, without demanding, taking or asking any thing
therefore of the said J. L. his heirs, children or family.

And the said J. L. does covenant, etc. That he the said J. L. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall at all times hereafter, and from
time to time during the said term, acquit and discharge, Discharged of
quit-Rent.
or sufficiently save and keep harmless, as well the said moiety of the said
Passage or Ferry, and all and singular the before letten premises and every
part thereof, as also the said J. H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
of, for, and from all and all manner of quit-Rents whatsoever, which in respect
of the said demised premises during the said term, shall grow due and payable
to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs, Successors or Assigns, or to any other person
or persons whatsoever, excepting the said yearly Rent of 3 l. before by these
presents assigned; and that he the said I. L. and his heirs, the said moiety of
the said Passage and Ferry, and all other the before letten premises with the
appurtenances unto the said I. H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
for the Rent above recited to be paid in manner and form abovesaid, shall
warrant and defend, during all the said term of Twenty one years. In witness,
etc.

A Release of Land in Exchange.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. C. of, etc. and W. L, of, etc. and A. now
wife of the said W. L. and late wife of R. B. late of, etc. of the other party,
That whereas on or about the Seventeenth day of, etc. now last past, there was
certain Agreements had and made between the parties to this present Indenture,
for and concerning the exchange of diverse parts and parcels of their Lands,
Lays, Meadows, Pastures and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances lying and
being in S. and W. and in either or one of them in the said County of Y. as
hereafter is expressed, That is to say, First, that whereas the said W. L. had
and was seized in the right of the said A. his wife for and during the term of
the natural life of the same A. of diverse Arable Lands, Lays, Meadows,
Pastures, Haddes, Flats and Hereditaments lying and being dispersed in the Town
and Fields of S. and W. aforesaid, or in one of them, commonly accounted to be
and contain two hundred acres, be they more or less, now or late in the tenure
or occupation of the said W. L. or of his assigns; it was agreed between the
said parties by the agreements aforesaid, That the said T. C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall have and enjoy, for and during the term of
Sixty years, if the said W. L. and A. now wife of the said W. L. should so long
live together, all those and every the said Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Lays and
Hereditaments before mentioned of them the said W. L. and A. his wife, lying in
S. fields and W. aforesaid, or in either or any of them in the said County of
Y. (except as hereafter is excepted) and that in consideration thereof the said
W. L. and A. his wife, and their Heirs, Assigns, should have and enjoy, for and
during the term of sixty years, if the said W. L. and A. his wife, should so
long live together, all the arable Lands, Lays, Meadows, Pastures and
Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, containing by estimation two hundred
acres, be they more or less, lying and being in the Northfield of S.
aforesaid, in the said County of Y. as the same was then measured, dowled and
staked out by M. F. Gent. and I. B. then appointed by the said T. C. only
Surveyors of the said Manor. And also all those nine acres of Meadow, etc. by
estimation lying and being in S. aforesaid, etc. It is now therefore fully
concluded and agreed, by and between all the said parties to this present
Indenture, that the same premises shall be demised, and letten in exchange in
manner and form hereafter following; That is to say,

The said W. L. and A. now his wife have demised, granted, and to farm-let in
exchange, and by these presents do demise, grant and to Farm-let in exchange
unto the said T. C. all those, Exchange.
their and either of their arable Lands, Lays, Meadows, Pastures, Hadds,
Flats and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, set, lying and being within
the three several Fields of S. aforesaid, called, etc. or in any of them in the
said County of Y. containing by estimation Two hundred acres, be there more or
less, now or late in the tenure or occupation of the said W. L. or of his
assigns, which late were the inheritance of R. B. now deceased, and the
inheritance whereof after his death descended and came unto I. B. as Son and
Heir of the said R. B. Except and out of this present Demise and grant always
reserved unto the said W. L. and A. his wife, etc. as heretofore he or they
have usually had and enjoyed, for and in respect of all the premises, or as
appurtenant to the same; To have and to hold the said Arable Lands, Lays,
Meadows, Pastures, Hadds, Flats and Hereditaments, and all other the premises
before mentioned, to be Demised and granted by the said W. L. and A. now his
wife, as aforesaid, with their and every of their appurtenance (except before
excepted) unto the said T. C. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from
the Feast of M. next coming after the date hereof, for, during and until the
full end and term of sixty years, thence next, etc. if the said W. L. and A.
now wife of the said W. L. do or shall so long live together, yielding and
paying therefore yearly during the said term by these presents granted unto the
said W. L. and A. his wife, and their assigns, 1 d. of good, etc. at the Feast
of M. only if it be lawfully demanded. In consideration whereof the said T. C.
has Demised, granted and to farm-letten in exchange, and by these presents
does Demise, grant and to farm-let in exchange unto the said W. L. and A. his
wife, all and every the said Arable Lands, Lays, Meadows, Pastures and
Hereditaments, with their appurtenances of him the said T. C. containing by
estimation. Two hundred acres, be they more or less, lying and being in N.
field of S. aforesaid, as the same is now measured, dowled and staked out by
the said F. M. and I. B. and also all those nine acres, etc. in a place there
allotted and set out amongst other, for the Cottages there, as aforesaid, To
have and to hold all the said Arable Lands, Lays, Meadows, Pastures and
Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises before mentioned, to be
Demised and granted in exchange by the said T. C. aforesaid, with their and
every of their appurtenances unto the said W. L. and A. his wife, and their
assigns, etc. for, during and until the full end and term of sixty years, from
thence, etc. if the said W. L. and the said A. now wife of the said W. L. do or
shall so long live together, yielding and paying, etc. ut antea.

And the said W. L. does by these presents covenant, etc. in manner and form
following, that is to say, That they the said W. L. and A. now his wife,
Discharged of former Estates and Encumbrances.
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some of them shall or will
from time to time, and at all times from henceforth, for, and during the said
term of sixty years, if the said W. and A. now wife of the said W. L. do or
shall so long live together, clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge, or
otherwise save and keep harmless, and indemnified, as well the said T. C. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, as also the
said premises before mentioned, to be demised and leased in exchange by the
said W. L. and A. his wife, to the said T. C. and every part and parcel
thereof, of, and from all and all manner of former and other estates, charges,
encumbrances, chief Rents, troubles and demands whatsoever, had, made,
committed or done by him the said W.L. and A. his wife, or either of them, or
by any other person or persons, lawfully claiming by, from, or under them or
either of them, whereby or wherewith the same premises or any part thereof,
shall or may be charged or encumbered, or whereby the said T. C. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall or may be charged, encumbered or damnified, of,
or by reason of the same premises, or any part thereof, except before excepted.

And likewise that he the said T. C. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, shall and may at all times hereafter, and from time to time during the
said term of sixty years, For quiet enjoying.
if the said W. and A. now wife of the said W. L. do or shall so long live
together, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy all and every the
premises to him the said T. C. Demised and granted in exchange as aforesaid,
and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, except before
excepted, without any manner of lawful let, trouble, interruption or
disturbance of them the said W. L. and A. his wife, or either of them, or of
any other person or persons lawfully claiming, by, from, or under them, or any
of them.

And the said T. C. does covenant for himself ut W. L. antea mutat. mutand.

And whereas it was intended and meant, by, and between all the parties to
these presents, That the said I. B. to whom the right of Inheritance of the
premises mentioned to be Demised to the said T. C. as aforesaid does belong
and appertain, (being now in his minority) should have made and granted a Lease
in exchange unto the said T. C. of all the said Lands and Premises to him the
said T. Demised as aforesaid, (by the said W. L. and A. his Wife) for the term
of eighty nine years, and for the yearly Rent of, etc. And that likewise in
recompense, satisfaction and exchange thereof, the said T. C. should have
granted in exchange unto the said I. B. a like Lease of the like term for
eighty nine years, and for the yearly Rent of 1 d. of the said lands and
premises Demised and granted to the said W. L. and A. his wife in exchange as
aforesaid: And for that neither of the same Leases can be now perfectly made
and finished, Therefore it is now further covenanted, concluded and fully
agreed upon, by, and between all the said parties to these presents in form
following, viz.

And the said W. L. does by these presents covenant, etc. That he the said W.L.
shall do his best endeavor, that he may or can to procure and get the said J.
B. by his Deed indented to make, That an Infant shall seal a Lease at his full
age of 21 years.
seal and deliver as his Deed to the said T. C. his Heirs or Assigns; within
three months next after that he the said I. B. shall accomplish his full age
of Twenty one years, a sufficient Demise, Lease and Grant in exchange of all
and every the said Lands, Lays, Meadows, Pastures, Hereditaments and
Premises, with their Appurtenances to him the said T. C. as aforesaid Demised
for the term of Eighty nine years, and for the yearly Rent of 1 d. and with and
under such like and the same Covenants, Clauses and Agreements as before in
these presents are limited, expressed and set down on the part and behalf of
the said W.L. to be performed and done.

And in consideration thereof, the said T. C. does covenant, etc. That if the
said I. B. or his heirs, do or shall make, seal and deliver as his Deed unto
the said T. C. his heirs or assigns, the said Demise, Lease and grant in manner
and form as is aforesaid, by the said I. B. to be signed, sealed and delivered
to the use of the said T.C. his heirs or assigns in the presence of Three
credible persons, whose names shall be subscribed or endorsed upon the same,
that then he the said T. C. or his heirs, at, and upon the receiving of the
said Lease and Grant, shall and will (being thereunto required) make, seal and
deliver in exchange unto the said I.B. or his assigns alike Lease of all and
every the premises to the said W. L. and A. his wife granted as aforesaid for
such like term and number of years, and with and under such Rent and Covenants,
as shall be contained and specified in the said Lease so to be made by the said
I.B. to the said T. C. as aforesaid. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Lands mortgaged, made from the mortgagee and mortgagor,
before the day for redemption, to another.
THis Indenture made, etc. between H.B. R. H. of, etc. and M. C. of, etc. of
the one party, and R. S. of, etc. of the other party, witnesses, That whereas
Francis Beamont of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of
etc. by his Deed indented bearing date, etc. for the considerations therein
mentioned and expressed, has betaken, granted and to farm-letten unto the said
M. C. all that the Site and Capital Message or Manor house of Hardwitch,
with the rights, members and appurtenances whatsoever, situate, lying and
being within the Lordship of Chertsey, in the County of Berks, etc. and all,
etc. the words verbatim in the Original with the Habendum and Reddendum
recited, as by the same Indenture amongst diverse Covenants, Clauses and
Agreements therein contained more at large it does and may appear: And whereas
also the said M. C. by her Indenture of Assignment, bearing date, etc. For the
Consideration therein mentioned and expressed, Has granted, bargained, sold,
aliened, and set over unto the said H. B. and R. H. as well the said recited or
mentioned Indenture, to her the said M. C. granted as aforesaid, and the said
site and capital message of the said Manor of H. Lands, Meadows, Feeding,
Pastures, Demeasn lands, stock, and all and singular other the premises
thereby mentioned to be demised and granted, and every part and parcel thereof,
with the appurtenances; as also all the estate, right, title, interest, term of
years then to come, and unexpired reversion, possession, property, claim and
demand whatsoever which she the said M. C. has, or had, or may, might, should,
or ought to have, or can, or may claim, challenge or demand, of, in, or to the
said site and capital Messuages, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Demeasn lands,
stock, and all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances, and
of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof by force and virtue of the same
Indenture to her the said M. C. made and granted as aforesaid, or any thing
therein contained, or otherwise howsoever: To have and to hold the said Site
and capital Message, etc. ut in Indent de Mortgage, unto the said H. B. and R.
H. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to the only proper use and
behoof of them the said H. B. and R. H. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the ensealing and delivery of the same Indenture of Assignment,
for, during, and until the end and accomplishment of all the rest and residue
then to come, and unexpired of the said term of Twenty one years by the said
first recited Indenture to her the said M. C. granted as aforesaid, together
with the same Indenture; In which said Indenture of Assignment, there is a
certain Proviso or Condition contained in these words, or to this effect
following, That is to say:

Provided always, That if the said M. C. her Heirs, Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, or any of them do well and truly content and pay, or cause, etc.
verbatim, as in the Assignment, as by the same Indenture of Assignment amongst
diverse other covenants, grants, articles, clauses and agreements therein
contained, more at large also it does and may appear. Now this Indenture
further witnesses, That for, and in consideration of the Sum of 650 l. of
good, etc. to her the said M. C. in hand, at, and before the ensealing and
delivery of these presents by the said R. S. well and truly paid, whereof and
wherewith she the said M. C. and the said H. B. and R. H. acknowledge
themselves fully satisfied and paid, and thereof, etc. they the said H. B. and
R. H. have bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents do,
etc. unto the said R. S. the said first recited Indenture, and all the said
Site and capital Message of the said Manor of H. Lands, Meadows, Feedings,
Pastures, Demeasn Lands, Stock, and all and singular other the premises, with
the appurtenances thereby mentioned to be Demised and granted to the said M. C.
and every part and parcel thereof, as also all the estate, right, title,
interest, term of years yet to come and unexpired, reversion, possession,
property, claim and demand whatsoever, which they the said H.B. and R. H. or
either of them, have, or has, or may, might, should, or ought to have, of, in,
or to the said Site or capital Messuages, and other the premises, with the
appurtenances, and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof, by force and
virtue of the said Indenture of Assignment before mentioned, or any thing
therein contained, together with the same Indenture of Assignment, To have and
to hold, the said first recited, and the said Site and capital Message of the
said Manor of H. Lands, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Demeasn Lands, Stock, and
all and singular other the premises by the said Indenture Demised, and every
part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances except before excepted), and all
the said estate, right, title, interest, term of years yet to come and
unexpited, reversion, possession, property, claim and demand whatsoever of them
the said H. B. and R.H. and of either of them, of, in, and to the same
premises, and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances unto the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns in
such like, and in as large and ample manner and form to all intents and
purposes as they the said H.B. and R.H. or either of them have, or has, or
may, or ought to have and enjoy the same premises by force and virtue of the
same Indenture of assignment to them the said H.B. and R.H. made and granted as
aforesaid, or any thing therein contained, together with the same Indenture of
Assignment. And also the said M.C. for the consideration aforesaid has
granted, bargained, sold, aliened, assigned and set over, and by these presents
does fully, clearly and absolutely grant, etc. unto the said R. S. the said
first recited Indenture to her the said M. C. made and granted as aforesaid,
and the said Site and capital Message of the said Manor of H. Lands,
Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Demeasn Lands, Stock, and all and singular other
the premises by the same Indenture mentioned to be Demised and granted, and
every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances. And further, the said M.
C. for the Consideration aforesaid, Confirmation.
does by these presents for her, her Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
ratify and confirm the said bargain, sale and assignment hereby made of the
Premises by the said H.B. and R.H. to the said R. S. as aforesaid, and the
estate and interest of the said R. S. in, Release.
and to the same, and every parcel thereof: And also remise, release and quit
claim unto the said R. S. his Executors and Assigns, the said Proviso or
Condition before mentioned in the said Indenture of Assignment, contained
concerning the Redemption of the Premises from the said H. B. and R.H. as
aforesaid, and all and every Covenant, Clause, Article and Agreement touching
the same. And also all the estate, right, title, interest, term of years yet to
come and unexpired, reversion, possession, property, claim, condition, entry,
benefit and demand whatsoever which she the said M. C. has, or had, or may,
might, should, or of right ought to have, or can or may claim, of, in, or to
the said site and capital Message of the Manor of H. Lands, Meadows,
Feedings, Pastures, Demeasn Lands, Stock, and all and singular other the
premises by the said Indenture, mentioned to be Demised and granted, and in,
and to every or any part or parcel thereof, with their appurtenances
whatsoever, by force and virtue of the same Indenture, or of the said Indenture
of Assignment or the said Proviso or condition therein contained, or either or
any them, or by any other ways or means whatsoever or otherwise howsoever, To
have and to hold, the said Site and capital Message of the said Manor of H.
Lands, etc. and all and singular other the premises, in, and by the said
Indenture to her the said M. C. mentioned to be Demised and granted, and every
part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances (except before excepted), and
all the said estate, right, title, interest, term of years yet to come and
unexpired, reversion, possession, property, claim and demand whatsoever of her
the said M. C. of, in, and to the same premises, and every part and parcel
thereof, with the appurtenances unto the said R. S. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to the only use and behoof of him the said R. S.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the ensealing and delivery of
these presents, for, during, and until the full end or accomplishment of all
the rest and residue yet to come and unexpired of the said term of Twenty one
years by the said recited Indenture, granted absolutely without any manner of
condition, proviso or redemption, or other claim or demand whatsoever.

And the said H. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does
covenant, promise and grant, to, and with the said R. S etc. and to, and with
every of them by these presents, in manner and form following: For quiet
enjoying discharged of Encumbrances.
that is to say, That he the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them, for, and under the Rents, Covenants, Clauses and
Agreements in, and by the said first recited Lease of the premises reserved
and mentioned on the part and behalf of the said M.C. her Executors and
Assigns, to be paid, done and performed, shall or may at all times hereafter,
and from time to time, for, and during all the rest and residue yet to come and
unexpired of the said term of Twenty one years by the said Letters Patents
granted, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the
said Site and capital Messuages, etc. and all and singular other the premises
herein before mentioned, to be granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over,
and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, without the let,
interruption or disturbance of him the said H. B. or of any other person or
persons by his means or procurement: and that the same premises and every part
and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, now are, and be, and so at all times
hereafter, and from time to time shall be, remain, and continue unto the said
R. S. his Executors and Assigns, free and clearly acquitted, exonerated and
discharged, or otherwise upon lawful and reasonable request sufficiently saved
and kept harmless, of, and from, all and all manner of former bargains, etc.
had, made, committed or done by him the said H. B. or by any other person or
persons by his assent, means or procurement; the rent, covenant, clauses and
agreements, in, and by the said before recited Indenture, reserved or
mentioned, which on the part and behalf of the said M. C. her Executors and
Assigns from henceforth, for, or in respect of the premises, are, or ought to
be paid, done, and performed, and the covenants, clauses and agreements in the
said recited Indenture of Assignment expressed and contained, which on the part
and behalf of the said H.B. and R.H. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, or either or any of them, are, or ought to be observed, performed,
fulfilled and kept, only except and foreprized. The like for R.H.

And the said R.S. does covenant, etc. to and with the said H.B. and R. their
executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them, For discharging the
rent to the King of England.
at all times hereafter, and from time to time clearly to acquit, exonerate and
discharge, or otherwise sufficiently to save and keep harmless the said H. B.
and R. H. their executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them, as
well against the King, his heirs and successors, as against all and every other
person and persons whatsoever, of, for, and concerning the said rent,
covenants, causes and agreements before mentioned and excepted, and of, and
from all manner of suits, charges, troubles, encumbrances and demands
whatsoever, which, for, or by reason thereof, at any time or times hereafter,
can, o^ may come, grow, or be, to, or against the said H. B. and R H. their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them.

A Covenant for quiet enjoying, discharged of encumbrances from M. C. as from
H. B.
Another Covenant from R. S. to M. C. for discharging the Rent to the King, as
is last before to H. B. and R. H.
And lastly, the said M. C. does covenant, etc. For further assurance, etc.
to and with the said R. S. etc. that she the said M. C. her Executors and
administrators shall and will at all time and times hereafter, for, and during
the space of two years next ensuing the date hereof, at the reasonable request,
and at the costs and charges in the law of the said R. S. his Executors or
Assigns, do, make and execute, or cause to be done, made, and executed all and
every such further, lawful and reasonable acts, things and devices in the law
whatsoever, for the discharge of any covenant, clause or agreement in the said
recited Indenture of assignment mentioned and contained, wherewith the said R.
S. his Executors or Administrators as assignee or assigns, of, or to the said
H. B. and R. H. or either of them can or may be charged or chargeable, and for
the extinguishing of the said proviso or condition in the said Indenture of
Assignment contained, and of all such estate and interest as she the said M.C.
her Executors or Administrators now has or shall, can or may by any means
have, claim or pretend to have in or to the premises, or any parcel thereof.

And for the further, better and more perfect assurance, surety, sure making
and conveying of the said Site and capital Message, and other the premises,
and of every part and parcel thereof unto the said R. S. his Executors and
Assigns, for, and during all the rest and residue of the said term of twenty
one years, which at the time of the making of any such further assurance, or
doing any such act shall be to come and unexpired, as by the said R.S. his
Executors or Assigns, or his or their council learned shall be reasonably
devised, advised or required.

A Bargain and Sale upon Condition made to Feoffees in trust.
THis Indenture tripartite made, etc. between Sir H. H. etc. of the first part,
R.L. and G.L. of the second party, and E.T. and G.B. of the third party,
witnesses, That the said Sir H.H. R. L. and G. L. for the considerations
herein after mentioned, have granted, enfeoffed and confirmed, and by these
presents do fully, clearly, and absolutely grant, enfeoffe, confirm and deliver
unto the said E.T. and G.B. all that the Manor or Lordship of E. in the County
of L. with all and singular the rights, members and appurtenances of the same.
And also all and singular the Messuages, Co^tages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Pastures, Feedings, Rents, Reversions, Services, Heaths, Moors, Commons,
Closes, Woods, Under-woods, Wastes, Waifes, Straies, Escheats, Wards, Courts,
Leets, Perquisites, of Courts, Royalties, Profits and Hereditaments, with the
appurtenances to the same Manor or Lordship belonging or in any wise
appertaining, or which now be, or at any time heretofore within the space of
Thirty years now last past, have been used, reputed, accepted, known, occupied,
let or set as part, parcel, right or member of the said Manor or Lordship: and
also all and singular other the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services and Hereditaments, situate, lying and being in E. and E.
in the County of L. or in either of them, which at any time heretofore were the
possession or inheritance of Sir J. H. deceased, Father of the said Sir H. And
also all that the Advowson and Patronage of the Parish Church of E. aforesaid;
and all and singular the Rents and yearly Profits whatsoever reserved upon any
Demise or Grant heretofore made or granted of the premises or of any part or
parcel thereof: and the Reversion and Reversions whatsoever, of all and
singular the same premises, and of every parcel thereof: And also the said
H.H. R.L. and G. L. for the considerations herein after mentioned, have
granted, assigned and confirmed, and by these presents do, etc. unto the said
E.T. and G.B. all the estate, right, title, interest, use and possession
whatsoever, which they the said Sir H.R. and G. and every or any of them have
or has, or may, might, should, or of right ought to have, or claim, of, in, or
to the said Manor or Lordship, and all other the premises herein before
mentioned to be granted, enfeoffed, assigned or confirmed, and of, in, and to
every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances: together with all and
all manner of Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Writings, Escripts and minuments,
which they and every or any of them have or has, touching or concerning only
the premises, or only any part or parcel thereof: To have and to hold the
said Manor or Lordship of E. Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services, Hereditaments, and all and singular other the, premises
herein before mentioned, to be hereby granted or conveyed, and every parcel
thereof with the appurtenances unto the said E.T. and G. B. and their heirs, to
the only uses, intents, provisoes, conditions and limitations hereafter
specified and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose; that is to
say, to the only use and behoof of the said R L. and G.L. and of their Heirs
and Assigns for ever, with and upon the condition hereafter specified and
declared; that is to say,

Provided always, That if the said Sir H. H. etc. do well and truly satisfy,
content and pay, or cause to be contented, satisfied or paid unto the said R.
L. and G. L. etc. the full Sum of 4800 l. of good, etc. at or within, etc. at
or upon the second day of M. 1641. without fraud or covin: That then from and
after the said payment so had and made, the use and uses, in, or by these
present Indentures, had, made, or limited to the said R. L. and G. L. their and
either of their heirs and assigns: and also all and every estate which hereupon
or by reason hereof, or any thing herein mentioned, is or shall be limited,
vested or executed, in or to the said R.L. and G. L. their heirs or assigns, or
any of them, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void and of none effect:
any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding: and that then and immediately from and after the said payment
had or made to the said R.L. and G.L. their or either of their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, the said Sum of 4800 l.
of, etc. in manner and form as is before expressed, declared and appointed; the
said Grant, Feoffment, Conveyance and Assurance, and all and every other act or
thing which after the date of these presents, and before the said second day of
J. 1641. shall be had or made by or between any of the said parties, or by
their or any of their means or privity, or whereunto they or any of them shall
be party or parties, shall be and shall be deemed and taken to be: and the said
E. T. and G. B. and their heirs, and all and every other person and persons,
and their heirs, that then shall stand, and be seized of the said Manor and
other the Premises, or any of them, shall stand and be seized thereof, and of
every part and parcel thereof to the only proper use and behoof of the said Sir
H. H. and of his heirs and assigns for ever, and to none other use, behoof,
intent or purpose whatsoever.

And it is further agreed by and between the said parties to these presents,
and the said Sir H. H. does covenant, etc. to and with, etc. The Indenture and
use therein limited to be void for not payment of the money mentioned in the
Proviso.
That if the said Sir H. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators nor Assigns,
nor any of them do pay or cause to be paid to the said R. L. and G. L. their
nor either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, nor to any of them,
the said Sum of 4800 l. and every part thereof in manner and form abovesaid,
but shall make default in payment of the same, or of any part thereof: that
then and from thenceforth this present grant, feoffment and conveyance of the
premises, and the said use before herein and hereby limited to the said R.L.
and G.L. and their heirs, shall stand, remain and be, and that then also and at
all times from thenceforth all the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and all other the premises with all and singular their
appurtenances, shall be and remain for ever to them the said R.L. and G. L.
their heirs and assigns, absolutely without any condition or other limitation.

And the said R.L. and G.L. for themselves, their and either of their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and for every of them do covenant, promise and
grant by these presents to and with, etc. in manner and form following; that is
to say, That neither they the said R.L. and G.L. nor any of them, nor their nor
any of their heirs or any of them, Not to do any act to hinder the rising of
the use limited in the Covenants for quiet enjoying and making further
assurance upon payment of the money mentioned in the Proviso.
nor any other person or persons by their or any of their procurement, means or
assent, shall or will do, commit, or wittingly or wilfully suffer any act or
thing, whereby or by means whereof there shall or may ensue or happen any let
or hinderance to the rising or vesting of the said use herein limited to the
said Sir H. H. and his heirs, by the payment of the said 4800 l. according to
the intent, purport and true meaning of the said condition or proviso; and that
in case the said Sir H. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
any of them do well and truly satisfy, content and pay, or cause to be
satisfied, contented and paid unto the said R.L. and G. L. or either of them,
or the Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them or either of them,
the said sum of 4800 l. of, etc. at or upon the second day of J. etc. according
to the true intent and meaning of the said proviso or condition, that then the
said Sir H.H. his heirs and assigns, and every of them shall or may from
thenceforth for ever have, hold and enjoy all the said Manor or Lordship,
Lands and Tenements, with all and singular their appurtenances to his and their
own proper use and behoof without any let, trouble, encumbrance or
interruption, of or by the said R. L. and G. L. or either of them, their or
either of their heirs or assigns, or any of them, or of any other person or
persons, by, or with their or any of their means, act, assent or procurement.

And that then also they the said R.L. and G.L. their, and either of their
heirs and assigns, and all others which then, or at any time then after shall
have, or rightfully claim to have any lawful estate, For further assurance.
right, title or interest, of, in, or to the said Manor or Lordship, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, or any part or parcel thereof, by, from, or under
the said R.L. and G.L. or either of them, shall and will at all and every time
and times, from, and after such payment had and made to the said R. and G. or
either of them, or the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them, or of
either of them of the said Sum of 4800l. of, etc. in manner and form as
aforesaid. for and during the space of three years then next ensuing, at, and
upon reasonable request to them or either of them to be made, and at the only
costs and charges in the Law of the said Sir H. H. his heirs or assigns, or
some of them, make, do, acknowledge, suffer and execute, or cause to be made,
acknowledged, suffered, etc. unto the said Sir H. H. his heirs and assigns for
ever, all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and
things, assurance and assurances, conveyance and conveyances, in the Law
whatsoever, with warranty only against themselves and their heirs, or else
without warranty for the better, more perfect, sure and absolute making and
assuring of all and singular the said Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and other the premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said
Sir H.H. his heirs and assigns: be it by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery or
Recoveries, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, the enrollment of these
presents, Release, Confirmation, or by all, or any of them, or otherwise by any
other lawful and reasonable act or devise, as shall be reasonably devised or
advised by the Council learned of the said Sir H.H. his heirs or assigns. And
also that he the said Sir H.H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them, not doing, That the Mortgager shall enjoy the issues and profits
of the Lands until the day of payment.
nor committing any voluntary waste above the value of 10 l. of, etc. shall or
may at all times from henceforth, until the third day of J. etc. without the
let, trouble, interruption, or disturbance of, or by them the said R.L. and G.
L. or either of them, their or either of their heirs or assigns, or of either
of them, or of any other rightfully claiming, from, by or under them, or any of
them, peaceably and quietly have, take, receive, perceive and enjoy the Rents,
Issues and Profits of all and singular the said Manor or Lordships, Lands and
Tenements, and other the premises before herein mentioned to be hereby granted
and conveyed, and every part and parcel thereof, without any account to be made
or yielded unto the said R. L. and G. L. or either of them, their or either of
their Heirs, Executors or Assigns, of, or for the same, this Indenture or any
thing therein contained to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding;
and that neither the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs or assigns, nor any of
them, shall nor will take any of the Rents, Issues, Revenues or Profits of any
the Premises, or of any part thereof, which shall grow, arise, or come in or
out of the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof before the said third day
of J. etc.

And it is further covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents, and the true intent and meaning of the same parties
to these presents is; That the Mortgagee shall pay more for the clear purchase
of the Land so mortgaged, and being forfeited.
and the said R. L. and G. L. do by these presents further covenant, etc. to
and with, etc. That if neither the said Sir H. H. his heirs nor assigns, nor
any of them do pay or cause to be paid unto the said R. L. and G. L. their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, nor to any of them the said Sum of
4800 l. of, etc. in manner and form as is before limited and appointed for the
payment of the same, whereby the said estate of the said R. L. and G. L. shall
become absolute; that then they the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, shall and will well and
truly content and pay, or cause to be paid unto the said Sir H. H. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them at or in, etc. the Sum of
1000 l. of, etc. at or upon the third day of M. 1642. as the residue, and in
full satisfaction of the clear and absolute purchase of the said Manor or
Lordship, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises, without fraud, covin, or
further delay, unto them the said R.L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns, to
the only proper use and behoof of them the said R. and G. their heirs and
assigns for ever.

And the said Sir H. H. does covenant, etc. to and with the said E. L. and G.
L. etc. That if the said Sir H. H. To relinquish possession after default of
payment of the Sum contained in the Proviso.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators nor Assigns, nor any of them do well and
truly pay nor cause to be paid unto the said R.L. and G. L. nor to the heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns of them, nor any of them, the said Sum
of 4800 l. of, etc. before mentioned in manner and form as aforesaid, according
to the intent and true meaning of the said Proviso or Condition before herein
expressed: That then he the said Sir H. H. his Tenants, Farmours, and assigns,
and every of them (other than such as be hereafter excepted, shall and will
deliver, yield up and relinquish unto the said R.L. and G.L. their heirs or
assigns, or the Survivor or Survivors of them, the peaceable and quiet
possession of the said Manor or Lordship, and of all other the Premises with
the appurtenances, without any let, trouble, contradiction or interruption. And
that then also he the said Sir H. H. his heirs and assigns, and Dame R. his
wife, and all and every other person or persons now having or rightfully
claiming, Further assurance.
or which at any time or times hereafter shall or may lawfully have, claim or
pretend to have any manner of estate, right, title, use, interest, condition or
possession, of, in, or to the said Manor or Lordship, and other the premises,
or any part thereof, other than such person and persons, whose estates,
interests and terms are excepted in one former Indenture bearing date, etc.
made between the said Sir H. of the one party, and the said R. L. and G. L. of
the other party, for, and in respect only of their Leases and terms, by, and
in the said last mentioned Indenture excepted, shall and will at all and every
time and times, from, and after such default of payment, had, or made of the
said Sum of 4800 l. for and during the space of Seven years then next ensuing,
at and upon reasonable request to him, her or them to be made, and at the only
costs and charges in the Law of the said R. L. and G. L. or any of them, or the
heirs or assigns of them, or of one of them, make, do, etc. As in other like
Covenants, etc.

And that the said R. L. and G. L. their and either of their heirs and assigns,
For quiet enjoying.
and every of them, and all and every person and persons which at any time and
times after the said default of payment of the said Sum of 4800 l. of, etc.
had and made, as aforesaid, shall have any estate, right, title or interest,
of, in, or to the said Manor or Lordship, Manors, Lands, Tenements and other
the Premises, or any part thereof, by, from, or under the said R. L. and G. L.
their heirs or assigns, or any of them, shall or may at all times from, and
after the said default of payment of the said Sum of, etc. had or made, for
ever peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy all the said Manor and
Lordship, Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises, without any let,
trouble, vexation or interruption of, or by the said Sir H. H. his heirs or
assigns, or any of them, or of, or by any other person or persons whatsoever
(except as in and by the said Indenture of Bargain and Sale, bearing date the
said, etc. made between the said Sir H.H. of the one party, and the said R.L.
and G.L. of the other party, for and in respect only of the estates and
interests, in and by the same Indenture excepted.)

And lastly, The said R.L. and G. L. do by these presents further covenant,
etc. to and with the said Sir H. H. etc. To deliver up a Statute upon payment
of the Money mentioned in the Proviso.
That in case the said Sir H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
or any of them, do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said R. L.
and G. L. or one of them, or to the Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns
of them, or of one of them, the said Sum of 4800 l. of, etc. on the second day
of J. etc. at or, etc. according to the purport, intent and true meaning of the
said Proviso or Condition, without fraud or coven: that then they the said R.L.
and G. L. or one of them, their or either of their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or some or one of them, shall and will within
convenient time after the said payment so had and made, deliver or cause to be
delivered to the said Sir H.H. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at,
or, etc. one writing obligatory or Recognizance in the nature of a
Statute-Staple bearing date, etc. taken, sealed and acknowledged before, etc.
wherein the said Sir H. H. is and stands bound unto the said R. L. in the
Sum of, etc. to be cancelled and made void.

And further, The said H. H. R. L. and G. L. have made, ordained, constituted,
and in their stead and place by these-presents have put and authorized A. B.
etc. A Letter of Attorney to deliver possession.
their true and lawful Atturnies, jointly and severally for them, and in their
names, to enter into the said Manor or Lordship and other the premises, and
into every or any part thereof in the name of the whole, and possession and
seisin thereof, or of any part or parcel thereof in the name of the whole, in
their names, and to their use, to take: and after such possession and seisin
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof so had and taken, to deliver full
and peaceable possession and seisin thereof to the said R. T. and G. B. or to
their Attorney in that behalf appointed, To have and to hold to the said R. T.
and G. B. according to the limitations, uses, provisoes and conditions before
herein expressed, and according to the tenor, purport, effect and true meaning
of this present Indenture Tripartite, holding firm and stable all and what
soever their said Atturneys or either of them shall do or cause to be done in
or about the Premises by these presents. Forster.
In witness, etc.

Memorandum, That the fourth day of M. in the, etc. peaceable and quiet
possession and seisin of the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Delivery of possession.
Tenements and Hereditaments in E. and F. within specified, was taken had and
delivered by the Atturnies within named, to the within E.T. and G.B. according
to the tenor and true meaning of this present Indenture to the uses,
provisoes, conditions and limitations mentioned in the same Indenture, in the
presence of those whose names be subscribed.

Memorandum, likewise, That the day and year abovesaid A. B. C. D. E. F. etc.
did agree to this present grant within written, Attornment.
and did severally Atturn Tenants to the said E.T. and G. B. according to this
present grant, in the presence of those whose names are subscribed; Forster.
and in witness thereof the said A. B. C.D. E.F. etc. have hereunto set their
hands.

An Indenture of Bargain and Sale absolute.
THis Indenture made, etc. between Sir R. M. of, etc. of the one party, and
R.H. and G. H. etc. of the other party, Witnesses, That the said Sir R. M. for
and in consideration of the Sum of 600 l. etc. to him in hand, at, and before
the ensealing and delivery of these presents, by the said R. L. and G. L. well
and truly paid, whereof, and wherewith he acknowledges himself fully satisfied
and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof does clearly
acquit, exonerate and discharge the said R. L. and G. L. their and either of
their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, Forster concilium.
and every of them for ever by these presents, has given, granted, bargained,
sold and confirmed, and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely
give, grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto the said R. L. and G.L. their heirs
and assigns for ever, all that the Manor and Lordship of C. in the County of,
etc. with all and singular the Rights, Members, Liberties, Privileges,
Royalties and Appurtenances thereof whatsoever: and all that the Rectory and
Parsonage of C. aforesaid, with all Gleab-lands, Tithes of Corn, Grain and Hay,
Oblations, Obvention, Fruits, Profits and Commodities whatsoever, of what
nature, kind or quality soever they be, or by whatsoever name or names they are
called or known to the said Rectory and Parsonage incident, belonging or
appertaining, or reputed or known to be part, parcel or member thereof, or to
or with the same now, or at any time hereofore usually occupied or enjoyed,
coming, growing, renewing and increasing within C. and S. in the County of,
etc. and the advowson, gift, free disposition, right of Patronage of the
Vicaridge and Church of C. aforesaid, with the appurtenances in the said County
of, etc. And also all and singular messuages, mills, houses, edifices,
buildings, barns, stables, dove-houses, yards, orchards, gardens, lands,
tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, leasows, commons, wast-grounds, heaths,
furzes, mores, marshes, woods, under-woods, ways, waters, fishings,
fishing-places, streams, rivers, banks, ponds, rents, reversions, services,
courts, leets, view of frank-pledge, perquisits, and profits of courts and
leets, and all that to courts, leets and view of frank-pledge does belong or
appertain, goods and chartels wayved and estrayed, goods and chattels of Felons
and Fugitives, Felons of themselves, and of persons outlawed, sees, wards,
marriages, escheats, reliefs, heriots, fines, amerciaments, liberties,
privileges, and all other profits, commodities, advantages, emoluments and
hereditaments whatsoever to the said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, and other
the premises herein before mentioned, meant or intended to be hereby given,
granted, bargained and sold, and to every or any of them by any means belonging
or appertaining, or with the same, or any of them as part, parcel or member
thereof, now or at any time heretofore demised, let, used, occupied, reputed or
enjoyed with all and singular their appurtenances; and also all and singular
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments
whatsoever of him the said R. M. in C. and S. aforesaid, and in H. and S. in
the said County of, etc. and in every or any of them; and also all and singular
Rents and yearly profits whatsoever, reserved upon any demise, lease or grant,
demises, leases or grants heretofore made or granted of the premises, or of
any part or parcel thereof; and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders of all and singular the premises, and of every part and parcel
thereof: and also the said R.M. for the consideration aforesaid, has granted,
bargained and sold, and by these presents does fully and clearly grant, bargain
and sell unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever, all
the estate, right, title, interest, use, possession, reversion, property,
condition, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said R. M. has, or had,
or shall, should, may, might or of right ought to have or claim of, in, or to
the said Manor and Lordship of C. Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises, with the
appurtenances before, in, and by these presents granted, bargained and sold, or
of, in, or to any part or parcel thereof, Habendum.
To have and to hold all the said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Advowson,
Message, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Rents,
Reversions, Services, Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises
herein before mentioned, meant or intended to be hereby given, granted,
bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, with all and singular
the Rights, Members and Appurtenances unto the said R. L. and G.L. their heirs
and assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of them the said R. L. and G.
L. and of their heirs and assigns for ever. And the said R.M. and his heirs the
said Manor, etc. ut in all. Warranty.
Warran. etc. In cujus rei, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants to the former Indenture: Whereupon a Recovery is
passed.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between Sir R. M. of, etc. of the one party, and
R. L. etc. and G. L. of the other party; Whereas the said R. M. by an Indenture
of Bargain and Sale, bearing the date hereof, and sealed and delivered with
these presents for the Causes in the same Indenture mentioned and expressed,
does give, grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto the said R. L. and G. L. their
heirs and assigns for ever, all that the Manor and Lordship of C. etc. and
diverse other Lands and Tenements, as by the same Indenture of Bargain and Sale
amongst other Covenants, grants and agreements therein mentioned more at la^ge
it does and may appear. Now this Indenture witne^^ (...) That the said R.M. for
the consideration in the said Inden^^^^ (...) Bargain and Sale mentioned, has
bargained and sold, and by these presents does bargain and sell unto the said
R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever, All and all manner of Deeds,
Evidences, Charters, Writings, Escripts, For delivery of Evidences.
Court-Rolls. Books of Survey, Books of Account, Rentals, Counterparts of
Leases, Terrors, Boundaries and Minuments whatsoever, any way touching or
concerning the said Manor and Lordship, rectory, advowson, messuages, lands,
tenements and other the Premises, with the appurtenances, or any part or
parcel thereof: All which said deeds, evidences, writings, escripts,
Court-Rolls, books of Survey, books of account, Rentals, Counterparts of
Leases, Terrors, Boundaries and Minuments before mentioned, Forster.
or so many of them as now be in the hands, custody or possession of the said
R.M. or of any other person or persons to his use, or by his delivery, or which
he knowing where they are may lawfully get or come by without suit in the law,
together with true Copies of all Deeds, Evidences, Writings and Minuments as do
touch or concern the premises, or any part or parcel thereof, jointly with any
other lands or tenements, the same Copies to be written and copied out at the
costs and charges of the said R. L. and G L. their heirs and assigns: And the
said R.M. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators does covenant,
etc. to and with the said R. L. and G. L. their and either of their heirs and
assigns, and every of them by these presents to deliver, or cause to be
delivered unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns, or to some of
them, For being seized.
on this side and before the Feast of, etc. whole, safe, uncancelled and
undefaced.

And the said R. M. does covenant, etc. in manner and form following, viz. That
he the said R. M. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
is and stands, and so until a good and lawful estate shall be vested and
executed in the said R. L. and G.L. and their heirs, according to the intents
and true meaning of these presents, shall be, and stand, and be the very true,
sole, lawful and perfect owner, and rightfully and absolutely seized of the
said Manor and Lordship, and of all and singular other the Premises, with the
appurtenances in the said Indenture mentioned, meant or intended to be thereby
given, granted, bargained and sold in his Demeasn, as of Fee-simple or Fee-tail
general to his own proper, use and behoof, without any manner of condition or
limitation of any use or uses to alter, change or determine the same: And that
there is not, nor before the execution or vesting of the said estate, No
Reversion in the King.
there shall be any Reversion or Remainder thereof, or of any part or parcel
thereof etc. or in any other person or persons. And also that he the said R. M.
now has, and until he executing and vesting of the said estate, shall have
full power, lawful and rightful authority to convey and assure the sai^ Manor
and Lordship, Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
and all and singular other the above mentioned, bargained Premises, with the
appurtenances, unto the said R.L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever in
form aforesaid.

And the said R. M. does covenant, etc, That the said Manor and Lordship,
Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Discharge of encumbrances.
Tenements, and all and singular other the Premises before, by the said
Indenture given, granted, bargained and sold, or meant, mentioned or intended
to be thereby given, granted, bargained and sold, and every part and parcel
thereof with the appurtenances, at the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, are, and be, and so at all times hereafter for ever shall be, remain
and continue unto the said R.L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns, free and
clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise well and
sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of, and from all and all manner of
bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, joyntures, dowers, annuities,
statutes-merchant, and of the staple, recognizances, uses, wills, intails,
fines for alienation without license, post fines, rents, chargerents, seck,
arrerages of rents, amerciaments, intrusions, primerseisins, condemnations,
judgments, extents, executions, claims, duties, debts of Record, debts to the,
etc. and of, and from all other charges, estates, titles, troubles,
encumbrances and demands whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or done, or
hereafter to be had, made, committed, suffered or done by Sir J.M. deceased
great grandfather of the said R. M. his heirs and assigns, or by W. M.
Arbitrator deceased, grandfather of the said R. M. his heirs or assigns, or by
the said R. M. his heirs or assigns, or any of them, or by any other person or
persons whatsoever, having, or rightfully claiming or pretending to have, or
which at any time or times hereafter shall have or rightfully claim, or pretend
to have any lawful estate, right title, interest or demand, of in, and to the
said Manor and Lordship, and other the Premises, or of, in, or to any part or
parcel thereof, in, by, from, or under them or any of them, or by their or any
of their assent, means, consent, title, interest, act, sufferance or
procurement; the chief Rent and Services from henceforth to grow due to the
chief Lord or Lords of the sea or fees of the Premises, for, and in respect
only of his or their Seigniory and Seigniories, only except and foreprised, and
also except, etc. and also except one lease, etc. whereupon the yearly Rent of
10 l. is reserved, which shall or may be yearly, from and after the fifteenth
day of, etc. be due and payable unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and
assigns during the continuance of the same excepted lease. Provided always,
That if the said R. M. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any
of them do well and truly pay or cause to be contented and paid unto the said
R. L. and G. L. their or either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns
the full Sum of 800 l. of, etc. on the, etc. at or, etc. That then as well
this present Indenture, as the said recited Indenture of bargain and sale, and
every of them, and every of them, and every covenant, grant, articles, clause
and agreement in them and every of them contained, on the part and behalf of
the said R. M. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators to be performed and kept,
shall immediately from thenceforth cease, determine and be utterly void,
frustrate and of none effect; and that then also, and from thenceforth it shall
and may be lawful, to, and for the said R. M. his heirs and assigns into the
said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
and other the premises with the appurtenances, and into every or any part or
parcel thereof to re-enter, and the same to have again, enjoy and re-possess,
as in his and their first and former estate, any thing in these presents
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And furthermore the said R. M. does covenant, etc. That if default shall be
made of the payment of the said Sum of 800 l. upon the said fifteenth day of,
For quiet enjoying after default of payment.
etc. at the place of payment aforesaid; that then and from and after such
default of payment so thereof, or any part or parcel thereof had or made, they
the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, shall or
may from time to time, and at all times for ever, according to the tenor,
purport and true meaning of these presents, peaceably and quietly have, hold,
occupy, possess and enjoy the said Manor, Lordship, Rectory, Advowson,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all and singular other the
Premises with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, without
any manner of let, trouble, interrup on eviction, expulsion or disturbance of
him the said R. M. his heirs or assigns, or of any other person or persons
whatsoever lawfully claiming by, from, or under him the said R. M. or by, from,
or under the said J. M. great Grandfather of the said R. M. or by, from, or
under the said J. M. or by, from, or under the said R. M. Father of the said R.
M. except before excepted.

And the said R. L. and G. L. do covenant, etc. That he the said R. M. his
Heirs, Executors, That the Mortgager may receive the profits of his Lands
until the day of Redemption.
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them shall or may without the let,
trouble, molestation or interruption of the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs or
Assigns, or of any other rightfully claiming, from, by, or under them, either
or any of them, peaceably and quietly have, hold, perceive, receive, take and
enjoy the Rent, Issues and Profits of all and singular the said Manor and
Lordship, Rectory, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all and
singular other the Premises before mentioned to be given, granted, bargained
and sold by the said recited Indenture, and of every part and and parcel
thereof with the appurtenances, until the sixteenth day of, etc. without any
account to be made or yielded unto the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs,
Executors or Assigns, of, or for the same, the said recited Indenture or any
thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding: And that neither the
said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs or Assigns, nor any of them shall or will take
any of the Rents, Issues, Revenues or profits or any of the Premises, or of
any part thereof, or which shall grow, arise, or come in or out of the
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, before the said Fifteenth day of, etc.

And furthermore, the said R. M. does covenant, etc. That if he the said R. M.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, For further assurance after
default of payment.
or some or one of them do not well and truly pay or cause to be contented or
paid unto the said R. L. and G. L. their or either of their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the said Sum of 824. l. before mentioned,
according to the true intent and meaning of the Proviso or Condition before
herein expressed: That then he the said R. M. and Dame W. his wife and their
Heirs, and all and every other person and persons now having or claiming, or
which at any time or times hereafter shall or may lawfully have, claim or
pretend to have any estate, right, title, use, interest, condition or
possession, of, in, and to the said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Advowson,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the Premises, or any
part or parcel thereof, other than the persons before excepted, for, and in
respect only of the said Annuities, Leases and Terms before excepted, shall and
will from time to time and at all times, from, and after default of payment
made as aforesaid, for, and during the space of seven years next ensuing, at
and upon reasonable request, and at the only costs and charges in the Law of
the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns, or some of them, do make,
knowledge, execute and suffer, or cause to be done, made, knowledged, executed
and suffered unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns; And
further, and all and every such other act and acts, thing and things, assurance
and assurances, conveyance and conveyances in the Law whatsoever, for the
better, more perfect, sure and absolute conveying and assuring of all and
singular the said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and all other the premises with the appurtenances,
by the said recited Indenture mentioned, or intended to be granted, bargained
and sold unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever,
absolutely without any manner of Condition, Mortgage or Redemption, be it by
fine or fines, feoffment, Recovery or Recoveries with single or double voucher
or vouchers, deed or deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, the enrollment of these
presents release, confirmation, or by all or any of them, or otherwise by any
other lawful and reasonable act and devise, with wartanty of him the said R. M.
and his Heirs against all men, or otherwise without warranty, if it be so
required, as shall be reasonably devised or advised by the learned Council of
the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs or assigns, or some or one of them.

And it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, by, and between all the
said Parties to these presents, That T. and W. P. by Writ of Entry, For passing
of a Recovery.
Sur disseism en le post, to be by them sued forth, at the costs and charges of
the said R. L. and G. L. out of the High-Court of Chancery, and to be returned
into the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, before the Justices there,
against them the said R. L. and G. L. then in possession of the said Premises,
shall recover the said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Advowson, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the Premises mentioned, meant or
intended, in, or by the said recited Indenture, to be bargained and sold with
their rights, members and appurtenances, in due form of Law against the said R.
L. and G. L. then being Tenants of the said Premises, with the appurtenances,
by some name and names in the said Writ and Recovery to be contained, and upon
the said Writ and proceeding thereupon, the said R L. and G. L. after
appearance, shall vouch over to warrant the said R. M. and that the said R. M.
shall thereunto appear, and vouch over to warrant the Common vouchee, and that
each of them, the said R. L. and G. L. and the said R. M. shall do, and suffer
all, and whatsoever to them and either of them in that behalf shall belong and
appertain, for the suffering a good and perfect Recovery of all the said
Manors, Lordships, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises mentioned in the
said Indenture, to be thereby given, granted, bargained and sold unto the said
R. L. and G. L. according to the course of Common Recoveries and Assurances of
Lands, in such Cases used, and that the said Recovery shall in due form of law
be executed by the Writ of Habere facias seisin. accordingly.

And it is by these presents likewise fully concluded, agreed and declared by,
and between all the Parties unto these presents, To lead the use of the
Recovery.
That the said Recovery and all other Recoveries whatsoever had, made,
knowledged, levied, executed or suffered, or to be had, made, knowledged,
executed or suffered of the Premises, or of any parcel thereof, by, or betwixt
the said Parties or any of them, and the full force and execution of the same
and every of them, shall be and enure, and shall be had, taken, confirued,
esteemed and adjudged to be, and to enure to the only uses, provisoes,
conditions and limitations before herein mentioned, according to the true
intent and meaning of the said Indenture and of these presents, and to no other
use, behoof, intent or purpose whatsoever.

And it is further covenanted, conditioned, concluded and fully agreed, by and
between the said Parties to these presents, For payment of a further sum of
money for the absolute purchase of the land mortgaged.
and the true intent and meaning of the said Parties to these presents is, and
the said R. L. and G. L. do covenant, etc. That if the said R. M his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them do not pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said R. L. and G. L. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
nor to any of them, the said Sum of 800 l. etc. at the day, and places of
payment thereof above mentioned, but shall make default of payment thereof, or
of any part or parcel thereof, according to the true meaning of the said
Proviso or condition, whereby, or by reason whereof the premises, and every
parcel thereof, shall become absolute to the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs
and assigns, according to the true intent and plain meaning of these presents;
that then they the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs, Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, or some of them, shall and will pay, or cause to be paid unto the
said R. M. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at, or, etc. the
full sum of, etc. in manner and form following; that is to say, on the, etc.
day of, etc. the sum of 120 l. and within one whole year next ensuing the day
of the death of the said R. M. the Father, the sum of 100 l. at the end of one
other whole year then next following, one other 100 l. and at the end of one
other whole year also then next ensuing, one other 100 l. in full satisfaction
of, and for the clear and absolute purchase of the said Manor and Lordship,
Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and of all and
singular other the premises in the said Indenture mentioned, to be thereby
given, granted, bargained and sold, and of every part and parcel thereof with
the appurtenances. In witness, etc.

Covenants for surrendering of Copyhold Lands.
And the said D. S. for the consideration before in these presents expressed,
does further covenant, promise and grant, for her self, For making a Surrender.
her Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, to, and with
the said J. P. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents, That she the said Dame
S. S. or her Heirs, shall and will on this side and before the Feast of, etc.
at the charges in the Law of the said J. P. his Heirs or Assigns, make and
suffer, or cause to be made and suffered a good and sufficient Surrender in
Law, to the use of the said J. P. his heirs and assigns for ever, according to
the custom of the Manor of C. of one Field or Close of Pasture, etc. And so
recite the Land verbatim, and for every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, being parcels of the said Manor of C. and which late were the
Copyhold inheritance of T. C. deceased, according to the custom of the said
Manor.

And the said Dame S. does covenant, etc. That the said Copyhold Lands, at the
time of the making and perfecting of the said Surrender, Discharged of
Encumbrances.
shall be, and so at all times for ever hereafter, shall continue unto the said
J. P. his Heirs and Assigns clearly discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved
and kept harmless, of, and from all former charges, estates, titles, troubles,
surrenders, forfeitures and encumbrances whatsoever, made, committed, suffered
or done by the said T. C. deceased, his heirs or assigns, or by the said E. S.
his heirs or assigns, or by the said Dame S. S. or by any other person or
persons, by, or with their, every, or any of their means, assent, title,
interest, act, sufferance or procurements.

And the said Dame S. does covenant, etc. That the said Copyhold Lands and
Premises before mentioned, to be granted and assigned, as aforesaid, That the
Lands are of a certain value per annum.
now are of the clear yearly worth and value of 20 l. by the year, above all
rents, charges and reprises, and so are, and be now well worth to be let or
set, and that the same Close shall from time to time hereafter, so remain, be
and continue of the yearly value aforesaid, unto the said J. P. his, etc.
during the term and continuance of the said everal mentioned or recited Leases
and either of them.

A Bargain and Sale of Swans and Swan-mark.
TO all Christian People, to whom this present writing shall come, A. B. of,
etc. sends greeting, etc. Know ye, That I the said A. B. for diverse good
causes and considerations me in this behalf specially moving, have given and
granted, and by this my present writing, do give, grant and confirm unto C. D.
of, etc. all those my Swans and Signets, and game of Swans and Signets white
and gray, marked with the ragged-staffe, swimming, remaining and being, in,
upon, or about the River of W. in the County of, etc. or in, upon, or about any
other Rivers, Brooks, waters or places within the same County of, etc. or
elsewhere wheresoever. And all rights, royalties, privileges, preheminences,
profits and commodities whatsoever, to the same Swanners and Signets, and game
of Swanners and Signets, or any of them in any wise belonging, incident or
appertaining, together with the Swan-mark aforesaid: To have and to hold, the
said Swans and Signets, and game of Swans and Signets and Swan mark aforesaid,
with their rights and appurtenances whatsoever unto the said C. D. his heirs
and assigns for ever, in as large, ample and beneficial manner and form, as I
the said A. B. or any my Ancestors ever have held, held or enjoyed, or might or
ought to have had, held or enjoyed the same. In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of under-wood.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That the said A. B. for,
and in consideration of the Sum of, etc. whereof, etc. has bargained and sold,
and by these presents does bargain and sell unto the said C. D. and all and
singular Woods and Under-woods, growing and being within the Grove called W.
grove, and the hedge of the same, containing by estimation sixteen acres, be it
more or less, lying and being in the Parish of D. in the County of H. and also
all the lops and shreds, of all such Trees, being within the said grove called
W. as have been usually lopped at the selling of the Under-wood growing within
the said grove, except, and always out of this present Sale reserved unto the
said A. B. his heirs and assigns, all manner of Trees whatsoever, other than
under-wood now growing, or being in or upon the same grove or any parcel
thereof, To have and to hold the said underwoods, lops and shreds, before by
these presents bargained and sold (except before excepted) unto the said C. D.
his Executors and Assigns, to his and their only proper use and behoof. And the
said A. B. does covenant, etc. That he the said C. D. his Executors and
Assigns, at his and their liberty and pleasure shall or may peaceably and
quietly have, hold, take and enjoy the said Underwoods, and enter into the said
grove, and every part and parcel thereof, there to fell, hew and cut down all
and singular the said woods and under-woods, and hedge-rowes at all seasonable
times in the year, from the day of the date hereof, until the, etc. and the
same so felled, hewed and cut down, with his and their, or any of their horses,
carts and carriages, to bear, load, carry and convey from thence to any other
place or places, at his and their liberty and pleasure at all time and times,
during the space of three years, by all convenient ways thereunto now used and
accustomed, without any lawful let, contradiction, etc. And the said C. D. does
covenant, etc. That he the said C. D. his Executors and Assigns, shall and will
at every felling, which he or they shall make of the said woods, under-woods
and trees, leave standing and growing in, and upon the premises, so many
competent and sufficient standards, staddels and stories, as by the laws and
statutes in that case provided, is, or ought to be left; and also shall and
will, at his and their own proper costs and charges, make good all hedges and
fences about the young Springs of the said Wood, for the safe keeping thereof
from hurt and spoil of Beasts and Cattle, according to the Custom of the
County there. In witness, etc.

A sale of Billets and Wood or Timber.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. C. R. W. and G. M. of the one part, etc.
and J. B. and R. W. etc. on the otherparty, witnesses, That the said, etc. for
the considerations here under mentioned, have bargained and sold, and by these
presents do fully and clearly bargain and sell unto the said, etc. Ten thousand
loads of good merchantable and lawful Western Billets, at, and after the rate
and price of three shillings and six pence the load; and also five hundred
loads of good merchantable, sound and well squared Oken Timber, accompting
fifty foot to every load, at, and after the rate and price of ten shillings the
load, with such deductions and defalcations out of the same several prises, as
is here under expressed, and the same Billets and Timber to be delivered at
such places and times, and in such manner and form as here-under is mentioned,
and the said, etc. to and with, etc. That they the said T. W. and G. or some of
them, their, etc. shall and will and truly deliver or cause to be delivered to
the said, etc. all and every the said Ten thousand loads of Billets, and five
hundred loads of Timber of the kind and goodness aforesaid, to the proper use
of them the said, etc. free and discharged of all manner of charges and
encumbrances whatsoever, and allowances (water carriage only excepted) at, and
upon some Wharfe or Wharfes in Henly upon Thames, and Shiplack in the County of
O and at, and upon some Wharf or Wharfs in S. and R. and the Wharf nearest Rene
Wood in the County of Berks, in manner and form follow^ing; that is to say,
three hundred loads of the same Billets, and ^one hundred loads of the same
Timber, at or before, etc. and between that and the day of, etc. three thousand
more of the same Billets, and two hundred loads of the same wood or Timber, at
^or before, etc. between the same day of, etc. and the day, etc. four thousand
loads more of the same Billets, and two hundred loads more of the same Timber
residue, and in full delivery and satisfaction of the said ten thousand loads
of Billets, and five hundred loads of Timber, at or on, etc. and also that they
the said T. R. and G. their, etc. shall not only deliver or cause to be
delivered, all and every the said Billets and Timber at the Waterside, or some
Wharf, or Wharfs, in some, or any the Towns and places above mentioned, for,
and to the use of, etc. and in form aforesaid, clear of all charges and
encumbrances whatsoever, but shall also from time to time, and at all times
from henceforth save and keep harmless the said Billets and Timber, and every
parcel thereof to the said, etc. from and against the purveying to his
Majesty's use, and against all and every the Purveyors and Takers of, or for
his Majesty's Wood-yard, and of his Heirs and Successors, or else shall deliver
or cause to be delivered to the use aforesaid, to the said, etc. at the place
of delivery aforesaid, or at some of them, in recompense of, and for such of
the said Billets and Timber, as shall be so taken, so much more in stead
thereof, at the rates and prices aforesaid before the, etc. In part of payment
of, and for all which Billets and Timber to be delivered as aforesaid, the said
J. B. and R. W. have truly paid to the said T. C. R. W. and G. M. before the
ensealing hereof, the Sum of, etc. of which said Sum of, etc. the said T.
C. R. W. and G. M. acknowledge themselves fully satisfied and paid, and
thereof, etc. And as for the other part of the money for the said Billets and
Timber, amounting to the sum of, etc. the said, etc. convenanteth and
grants, to and with, etc. well and truly to pay or cause to be paid to the
said, etc. upon the day of, etc. next after reasonable request thereof to be
made, and given in writing to the said, etc. or at or within, etc. after the
delivery of so much of the said Billets and Timber, as after the rates
aforesaid, shall amount to the Sum of Seven hundred pounds or more, the said
700 l. to be paid at, or within, etc. and it is agreed between the said
parties, That whereas the rate of the said Billets and Timber, as aforesaid, to
be delivered, do amount to the Sum of, etc. over and above the said Sum of,
etc. already paid; and the said sum of, etc. in form aforesaid, covenanted to
be paid: It is agreed between the said Parties, in respect of the carriage by
water of the said Billets and Timber, in form following; that is to say, for so
many thereof as shall not be delivered at H. S. aforesaid, so much money as the
carriage by water of the same not delivered at H. S. aforesaid, shall amount
unto, from any other place appointed by these presents for delivery thereof,
unto any one of the said places of H. and S. aforesaid, or either of them, the
said, etc. shall have allowance and defalcations out of the said Sum of, etc.
for every load of Billets, as aforesaid, to be delivered at S. 8 d. and for
every load of Timber, etc. and for every load of Billets to be delivered at R.
4 d. and for every load of Timber 16 d. and for every load of Billets, to be
delivered at the Wharse nearest Kentistwood 12 d. and for every load of Timber
2s. And the said, etc. for them, etc. to and with, etc. to pay and satisfy to
the said, etc. upon reasonable request, so much of the said Sum of, etc. as
shall amount and remain over and above the allowance and desalcations, in
respect of the water-charges aforesaid: and in like manner the said T. C. R. W.
and G. M. for them, etc. to and with, etc. That if the said allowance of
carriage, as aforesaid, shall amount to more than 325 l. that then they said,
etc. shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the said J. B. and R.
their, etc. upon reasonable request so much money as the same allowance shall
surmount the said Sum of, etc. In witness, etc.

A Release of a Proviso or Condition for payment of money, reserved upon an
Indenture of Bargain and Sale.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, A. B.
greeting, etc. Know ye, That I the said A. B. have the day of the date of this
present Writing received and had of C. D. etc. at or in, etc. and the full
Sum of, etc. lawful money, etc. to me due and payable on this present, etc in
the, etc. by force and virtue of one Proviso or Condition contained in one
Indenture of Bargain and Sale bearing date, etc. made between me the said A.B.
of the one party, and the said C. D. of the other party, for, touching and
concerning certain Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, lying in,
etc. in the County of, etc. which said sum of, etc. so by me received, as
aforesaid, is in full discharge, satisfaction and payment of 500 l. of, etc.
and is for the full and absolute bargain and sale of all that Message, etc. by
me the said A. B. mentioned to be bargained and sold in and by the same
Indenture, as by the same Indenture more at large appears, of which said Sum
of 200 l. so by me the said A.B. received as aforesaid, I acknowledge my self
fully satisfied, contented and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof, do clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators, and every of them for ever by these presents.

And further know ye, That I the said A. B. have remised, released and for ever
quit-claimed, and by these presents do remise, Release of all his Estate.
release, and for ever quit-claim unto the said C.D. being in his full and
peaceable possession and seizin being, and to his heirs and assigns, to the
only proper use and behoof of the said C. D. his Heirs and and Assigns for
ever, all the estate, right, title, interest, claim, condition, entry, benefit
and demand whatsoever, which I the said A. B. have or had, or may, might or
ought to have or claim, of, in, or to the said Message, etc. reciting the
Land: and of, in, and to all and singular other the Piemisses, with all and
singular their appurtenances, in, and by the said recited Indenture mentioned
to be bargained and sold, and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof with
the appurtenances; so that neither I the said A.B. my heirs or assigns, nor any
of us, nor any other person or persons for us, or in our names, or in the name
of any of us, shall or will at any time or times hereafter ask, claim,
challenge or demand to have any manner of estate, right, title, interest or
demand, of, in, or to the said Premises, or any part or parcel thereof: but
that we and every of us shall be thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof,
from henceforth utterly barred and excluded for ever by these presents.

And I the said A. B. and my heirs, all and singular the said Premises with
the appurtenances, against me, my Heirs and Assigns, Warranty.
and every of us unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever shall and
will warrant, and for ever defend by these presents.

A Release, where three have a joint Estate of inheritance.
THis Indenture made, etc. between G.M. T.C. and H.L. of the one party, and Sir
G. M. of the other party, witnesses, That whereas the said G.M. T.C. and H.L.
are and stand jointly seized to them and their heirs, of an absolute estate of
inheritance in see-simple of the Manor and Lordship of E etc. reciting the
Land at large: which the said G.M. T.C. and H. L. have by virtue of a
conveyance or assurance, by, or from R. V. etc. as by the conveyance and
assurance thereof, made by the said R.V. unto the said G. M. T.C. and H. L.
more at large it does and may appear: And whereas the said T. C. and H. L. have
by sufficient conveyance and assurance in Law conveyed, assured and confirmed
all their and either of their estate, right, title and interest in and to the
same Manor and Premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said G. M. and his
Heirs for ever, whereby he the said G.M. is thereof now fully and absolutely
seized in his Demeasn as of fee, and whereas also the conveyance and estate of
the Premises, so as aforesaid, made unto the said G. M. T.C. and H.L. and
their heirs, was to them made by the direction and appointment of the said G.M.
and at his only charge and costs every kind of way, as well for the assurance
thereof; as otherwise; and was meant and intended for the good of the said G.
L. and his heirs, and to be at his and their only disposition.

Now therefore the said T. C. and H. L. as much as in them is or lies, have
remised, released, quit-claimed and confirmed, and by these presents, for, and
from them and either of them, their and either of their heirs, etc. do remise,
release, quit-claim and confirm unto the said G. M. now being in his full and
peaceable possession of the Premises, and to his heirs, all the estate, right,
title, interest, possession, joint, tenure, claim and demand, which they the
said T. C. and H. L. have by any manner of conveyance or assurance, of, in, or
to the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, and do by these presents
further deliver, and confirm the Premises with the appurtenances, and all
their and either of their said estate, right, title, interest, possession,
claim or demand, of, in, and to the same Premises with the appurtenances, and
every part and parcel thereof unto the said Sir G. M. his heirs and assigns, To
have and to hold the said Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
and all and singular the Premises with the appurtenances unto the said Sir G.
M. his heirs and assigns for ever, to the only use and behoof of the said G. M.
his heirs and assigns for ever, to hold of the chief Lords of the sea, Blunden.
by the rents and services for the same heretofore due and accustomed, etc.
with warranty as in others.

A Release of an Assignment made upon Condition.
TO all Christian People to whom, etc. IO. greeting, etc. Whereas M.C. by his
Indenture bearing date, etc. did for the consideration therein mentioned,
bargain, sell, assign and set over to me the said I. O. my Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, all his estate, right, title, interest, term of
years and demand of, and in all that capital Message, etc. and diverse other
Lands and Hereditaments in L. in the said County of E. in the said Indenture
mentioned; upon condition nevertheless, that if T. R. etc. his Executors or
Assigns, any of them, did well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to me the
said J. O. my Executors or Assigns, the sum of 2000 pound of, etc. at, or,
etc. on the Feast day of, etc. without fraud or coven, that then, and at all
times from thenceforth, the said Indenture of assignment made by the said M. C.
and every covenant, grant, article and thing therein contained, should
determine and be utterly void, and of none effect, and then also, etc. Reciting
the^ Covenant verbatim as in the Assignment, as in, and by the said Indenture
of Assignment to me made by the said M. C. amongst diverse other Covenants,
Clauses, Articles and Agreements therein contained, more at large it does and
may appear. Now know ye, That I the said J.O. have had and received, and by
these presents do testify, acknowledge and declare, to have received and had of
the said T.R. at and upon the said Feast Day of, etc. in the said Proviso or
Condition in the said recited Indenture of Assignment mentioned, the Sum of
2000 l. etc. according to the tenor and purport of the said proviso or
condition in the said recited Indenture contained, of which said Sum of 2000
l. so by me received, as is aforesaid, and of every part and parcel thereof, I
the said J. O. do acknowledge my self fully satisfied and paid, and thereof, and
of every part and parcel thereof, and of all and all manner of interest, title
and demand, in, or to the Premises, or any of them, do clearly exonerate,
acquit, and for ever discharge the said M. C. and T. R. and either of them,
their and either of their Heirs, Blunden.
Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these presents. In witness,
etc.

A Release of a Manor.
TO all Christian People to whom this present writing shall come, J. R.
greeting, etc. Know ye, That I the said J. R. for diverse good causes and
considerations me in this behalf specially moving, have remised, released and
quit-claimed, and by these presents do for me and my heirs remise, release, and
for ever quit-claim unto T.G. and M. his wife, in their full and peaceable
possession and seisin being and to the heirs and assigns of the said T. G. to
the only proper use and behoof of them the said T.G. and M. and of the heirs
and assigns of the said T.G. for ever, all the estate, right, title, interest,
use, possession, reversion, remainder, property, claim and demand whatsoever,
which I the said J. R. have or had, or that I, my heirs or assigns, or any of
us at any time or times hereafter shall have, or may, might, should or ought to
have or claim, of, in, and to all that the site of, etc. recite the Land as in
the Indenture of bargain and sale: and of, in, and to every part and parcel
thereof, and of, in, and to the Reversion and Reversions whatsoever, of all and
singular the premises herein before mentioned to be remised and released, and
of every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances: and of, in, and to all
and singular Woods, Under-woods and Trees growing or being, of, in, or upon the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof: and of, in, and to the ground and
soil of the same Woods, Under-woods and Trees: and of, in* and to all and
singular the Rents and profits whatsoever, reserved upon any demise, lease or
grant heretofore made or granted of the premises, or of any part or parcel
thereof, To have and to hold the said site, etc. and the said Message or
Tenement called the B. the said Tenement called the C. and all and every other
the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons,
Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises herein before
mentioned, to be remised and released, and every part and parcel thereof, with
the appurtenances, together with the said estate, right, title, interest, use,
possession, rever^on, remainder, property, claim and demand whatsoever of me
the said J. R. and my heirs, of, in, and to the same premises, and of, in, and
to every part and parcel thereof, with their appurtenances, unto the said T. C.
and M. his wife, and to the Heirs and Assigns of the said T. C. to the only
proper use and behoof of them the said T. C. and M. and of the heirs and
assigns of the said T. C. for ever: So that neither I the said J. R. nor my
heirs, not any of us, nor any other person or persons, for us, or any of us, or
in the name or names of us, or any of us, shall or will at any time or times
hereafter, ask, claim, challenge or demand to have any manner of estate, right,
title, interest or demand, of, in, or to the site, etc. lands, tenements,
meadows, feedings, pastures, hereditaments, and other the premises, or any
part or parcel thereof, with the appurtenances: but that we and every of us
shall be thereof, and of, and from every part and parcel thereof from
henceforth utterly barred and excluded for ever by these presents, with
warranty against J. R. and his heirs.

A Release of a Rent reserved in a pair of Articles of agreement.
TO all Christian People to whom, etc. W. F. greeting, etc. Whereas J. H. of,
etc. being possessed and interessed for diverse years yet to come, of, and in
diverse Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, mentioned and contained
in one pair of Indentures, dated, etc. had and made between him the said J. H.
of the one party, and H. A. of the other party, did by Indenture bearing date,
etc. assign and set over unto the said H. A. the said original Lease, and all
and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments therein contained, all
which the said H. A. has sithence by his several grants or assignments,
granted, assigned and set over unto G.R. of, etc. to have to him, his Executors
and Assigns, for and during all his estate, title, term, interest and number of
years which he had, of, in, or to the premises, as by his several Grants or
Assignments more at large appears, to this intent, meaning and purpose;
Nevertheless, and upon trust and confidence that the same shall be to the use,
benefit and behoof of D.N. W. F. and R. M. equally amongst them. And whereas by
a certain pair of Articles of Agreement indented, bearing date the, etc. made
between the aforesaid W. F. on the one party, and the said D.N. of the other
party, it was agreed between them the said D.N. and W. F. and the said W. F.
did for him, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenant, grant and
agree, to, and with the said D. N. his Executors and Assigns, That he the said
D. N. his Executors or Assigns, should or might, at all time and times from
thenceforth during the said term, have and enjoy to his only use and behoof,
all the estate, title, term, interest, number of years, use and commodity
whatsoever, which he the said W. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
had, should or might have, of, in, or to one full third part, in three parts to
be divided of all and singular the premises, and all the estate, title, term,
interest, use, benefits, number of years and commodity, which he the said W.F.
has, of, in, or to the premises, or any part thereof: In consideration
whereof, the said D.N. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, should yearly
pay, or cause to be paid unto the said W.F. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, 200 l. during the said term: the same to be paid, etc. as in the
Articles of Agreement: as by the same Articles of agreement may appear. Now
know ye, That the said W.F. for and in consideration of the Sum of 2000 l. etc.
to him in hand at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents by
the said D.N. well and truly paid, does by these presents for him, his, Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, freely, clearly and absolutely acquit, discharge,
grant, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto the said D. N. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, the said yearly Rent or Sum of 200 l. of, etc. so
as aforesaid mentioned, reserved or covenanted to be paid in and by the said
Articles of Agreement, as aforesaid, and all and every the covenants,
conditions and agreements touching the same Rent, and also all and all manner
of actions, suits, cause and causes of actions and suits, trespasses,
reckonings, rents, arrerages of rents, accounts, executions, sum and sums of
money and demands whatsoever, which at any time heretofore ever he the said W.
P. has or had, or that he, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or any of
them, at any time or times hereafter can or may have, claim or challenge to
have, to, for, or against the said D. N. his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, or any of them, for, or by reason of the said yearly Rent of
200 l. or any of the Articles or Agreements concerning the same, or any of
them, or any other the Covenants in the said several Writings contained, or
either of them. And further know ye, That the said W. F. does by these presents
rem^^e and release unto the said D. N. his Executors and Administrators, all
and all manner of other actions, suits and demands whatsoever, which at any
time heretofore he has had, or at any time hereafter shall or may have, to, or
against the said D. N. his Executors or Administrators, for, or by reason of
any other matter, cause or thing whatsoever, from the beginning of the World
until the, etc. day of, etc. In witness, etc.

A Release of a Condition in an Indenture of Bargain and Sale, with the Proviso
recited.
TO all Christian People to whom, etc. T. C. and R W. etc. greeting, etc.
Whereas the said T. C. and R. W. by their Indenture of Bargain and Sale bearing
date, as well for, and in consideration of the sum of 1000 l. etc. then in hand
paid to E.E. by M. P. as for 20 s. of, etc. paid unto the said T. C. and R. W.
and for diverse other good causes and considerations them thereunto especially
moving, did bargain, sell, enfeoffe and confirm unto the said M. B. his heirs
and assigns for ever, all that their Park of N. etc. verbatim, as in the
Indenture of Bargain and Sale, as by the same recited Indenture, amongst diverse
other grants, covenants, provisoes, clauses and agreements therein contained,
more plainly and at large it does and may appear: In, and by which said
Indenture before recited, there is a condition or proviso contained in these
words, or to this effect following, that is to say, Provided always, That if
the said M.B. etc. reciting the Proviso or Covenant truly. Now know ye, That we
the said T.C. and R. W. for diverse good and reasonable causes and
considerations, us in this behalf specially moving, have remised, released and
quit-claimed, and by these presents do for us and our heirs, remise, release,
and do for ever quit-claim unto the said M.B. being in his full and peaceable
possession and seisin of the premises, and to his heirs and assigns, to the
only use and behoof of him the said M.B. his heirs and assigns for ever, the
said proviso and condition, and all and every article, matter and clause
concerning the same, and all the estate, right, title, interest, claim,
condition, entry, benefit and demand, and every of them whatsoever, which we
the said T.C. and R.W. or either of us, have or has, or may or ought to have
or claim, of, in, or to the said Park called N. Lodges, lands, tenements,
meadows, feedings, pastures, woods, under-woods, waters, fishes, fishings,
waste-ground, hereditaments, and all and singular other liberties, profits and
commodities whatsoever mentioned or expressed, or intended to be granted,
bargained or sold, in, or by the said recited Indenture dated, etc. and of, in,
and to every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, so that neither
we, etc. as in other before with warranty as aforesaid.

A Release of an Annuity.
TO all Christian People to whom, etc. A.B. greeting, etc. whereas the said A.
B. by his Deed, etc. reciting the grant of Annuity. Now the said A. B. in
consideration, etc. has granted, remised, released and quit-claimed, and by
these presents does grant, remise, release and for ever quit-claim unto the
said R. O. being the true and lawful owner of the said Manor of R. and in
possession of the same at the ensealing and delivery hereof, the said Annuity
or yearly Rent of thirteen pounds, etc. and all the arrerages thereof if any
be, and all the estate, right, title, interest, benefit, claim and demand
whatsoever of him the said A. B. in and to the said Annuity or yearly Rent of
13 l. or any arrerages, distress or distresses, entry or forfeiture had or
taken, or which may or can be had, taken or claimed, for, concerning, or by
reason of the said Annuity or yearly Rent, or Arrerages thereof, if any be. In
witness, etc.

A Release of the Condition and other Covenants in an Indenture of mortgage,
with a confirmation from the Mortgager to the Mortgagee.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between Sir H. H. etc. of the one party, and R.
H. and G. L. of the other party. Whereas the said Sir H. H. by one Indenture
bearing date, etc. as well for, and in consideration of the Sum of 400 l.
then already paid unto the said H.H. before the ensealing and delivery of the
said Indenture, as also for, and in consideration of the Sum of 1000 l. etc.
to be paid unto the said H. his Executors or Assigns, at such a day, time and
place, and in such manner and form, as in the said recited Indenture dated,
etc. were set down and expressed, has given, granted, bargained, sold,
confirmed, and delivered unto the said R.L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns
forever, all that the Manor or Lordship of E. in the County of L. etc. as in
the Indenture. And sithence the said Sir H.H. and R. his wife, have ^^vied a
fine of the said Manor or Lordship, Messuages (...) Tenements, and of other
the Premises, or of the greatest part thereof, unto the said R. L and G. L.
and to the heirs of one (...) them: And sithence a Recovery in and by a Writ of
Entry, S^ disseisin en le post. has been had of the premises, or o^ the most
part thereof against the said R.L. and G. L. who vouched therein to warranty
the said H.H. who thereupon entered into the warranty, and vouched over to
warranty the common voucher, in, and by all things, according to the usual
order and form of Common Recoveries with double voucher for assurance of Lands
and Tenements, which Recovery has been executed by Writ of Habere facias
seisin; accordingly which said fine and recovery, and all other fines and
recoveries whatsoever, sithence the date of the said Indenture had, levied or
suffered, by, or between any of the said parties to the same Indenture, or any
of them of the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, were had, levied
and suffered, to the only use of the said R. L. and G. L. and their heirs, upon
the condition contained in the same Indenture, and according to the intent and
true meaning of the same Indenture, dated the said first day of, etc. and to no
other use, intent or purpose. In which said Indenture dated the said first of,
etc. there is a Proviso or condition contained in these words, or to this
effect following; that is to say, Provided always, etc. reciting the Proviso.
And in which said recited Indenture dated the said first day of, etc. there is
a Covenant contained in these words, or to this effect following; that is to
say, And the said R. L. and G. L. do covenant and grant, etc. reciting the
Covenant, That the Mortgager may have and receive the issues of the Lands
mortgaged till the day of payment, etc. And in which said recited Indenture
dated the said first day of, etc. there is also contained a Covenant in these
words, or to this effect following, viz. In consideration whereof the said R.
L. and G. L. for themselves, their Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of
them, do covenant and grant, to and with, etc. by the se presents, That if
neither the said H.H. his heirs or assigns, nor any of them, do pay the said
Sum of 4000 l. etc. to the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, nor to any of them, according to the intent and
true meaning of the said proviso or condition before herein mentioned; that
then they the said R. L. and G. L. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
or some of them, shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto
the said H. H. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them at the
said, etc. the Sum of 1000 l. etc. at or upon the second day of, etc. as the
residue, and in full satisfaction of the clear and absolute purchase of the
said Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements and other the premises, without
fraud, coven or further delay, as in and by the said recited Indenture, dated
the said first day of, etc. amongst diverse other Covenants, Grants, Articles
and Agreements therein contained, more plainly at large it does and may appear.
Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said H. H. for diverse good and
sufficient causes and considerations him the said H. H. especially moving, has
remised, released and quit-claimed, and by these presents does for him and his
heirs, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto the said R.L. and G. I. in
their full and peaceable possession and seisin being of the Premises, and to
their heirs and assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of them the said
R.L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever, the said proviso and
condition, and all and every article, matter and clause concerning the same,
and all and every the said covenants before herein recited, and every article,
sentence and clause concerning the same, and every or any of them, and all the
estate, right, title, interest, claim, condition, entry, benefit and demand
whatsoever, which he the said H.H. has, or may, might, should, or ought to
have claim, of, in, or to the said Manor or Lordship of E. Manors, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, etc. and all other profits,
liberties, commodities, hereditaments, and other the Premises, with their and
every of their rights, members and appurtenances whatsoever, mentioned, or
expressed or intended to be given, granted, bargained and sold, in, or by the
said recited Indenture dated the said first day of, etc. and of, in, and to
every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, and all manner of
conditions, covenants, articles for conditions broken and demands whatsoever,
of, touching, or in any wise concerning the said Manor or Lordship, Lands,
Tenements, and other the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof; so that
neither he the said H. H. nor his heirs, or any of them, nor any other person
or persons for him, them, or any of them, or in his or any of their name or
names, or in the name or names of them or any of them, shall or will at any
time or times hereafter ask, claim, challenge or demand, to have any manner of
estate, right, title, interest or demand, of, in, or to the said Manor or
Lordship, and other the premises, or any part or parcel thereof, other than
such estates, terms and interests, as are in the former recited Indenture
excepted. But that he, they and every of them (except before excepted) shall be
thereof, and of, and from every part and parcel thereof, from henceforth
utterly barted and excluded for ever by these presents.

And further, the said H. H. does for him and his heirs confirm the estate of
the said R. L. and G. L. of, and in the said Manor or Lordship, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises, To have and to hold all the said
Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises, to the said R.
L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever, absolutely without any manner of
condition whatsoever, to the only proper use and behoof of them the said R. L.
and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever. And the said H.H. and his heirs,
the said Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all and
singular the Premises, with their and every of their appurtenances, unto the
said R.L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns, to the only proper use and behoof
of them the said R. and L. their heirs and assigns for ever, against all men,
shall and will warrant and for ever defend by these presents: And the said H.H.
does also by these presents, remise, release, and quit-claim unto the said R.L.
and G.L. their heirs and assigns, all manner of Errors, Foster.
Writs of Error, and personal demands whatsoever. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture of allotment of several parts of Lands.
THis Indenture sextipartite made, etc. between W. C. on the one part, E. D.
and D. his wife on the second part, P. H. and F. his wife on the third part,
R.P. and M. his wife on the fourth part, W.C. and E. his wife on the fifth
part, and T. L. and F. his wife on the sixth part, Witnesses, That whereas
diverse and sundry Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and
Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, late the inheritance of the late Lady J.
B. deceased, sometimes wife of the Right Honorable Sir E. B. Knight, likewise
deceased, set, lying and being in diverse and sundry Countries, Shires and
places within the Territories of England, by, and after the death of the said
Lady J. B. did lawfully descend and come, and of right ought to descend and
come unto the said W.C. E.D. and D. his wife, P. H. and F. his wife, R.P. and
M. his wife, W.C. and E. his wife, T.L. and F. his wife; that is to say, to the
said W.C. as Cousin, and one of the coheirs of the said Lady J. B. that is to
say, Son of the Lady A. C. deceased, daughter of the said Lady J. B. by G. C.
Knight, Lord C. late husband of the said Lady A. now likewise deceased,
lawfully begotten, to the said D. C. and D. his wife, in the right of the said
D. one other of the Daughters and Coheirs of the said Lady J. B. To the said
P.H. and F. his wife in the right of the said F. one other of the Daughters and
Coheirs of the said Lady J.C. To the said R.P. and M. his wife, etc. one other
of the Daughters and Coheirs of the said Lady J. B. to the said W. C. and E.
his wife, as in the right of the said E. one other of the daughters and
coheirs of the said Lady J. B. and to the said T. L. and F. his wife, as in
the right of the said F. one other of the Daughters and coheirs of the said
Lady J. B. by reason whereof the said W. C. E. C. etc. into the said Manor,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances entered,
and were thereof seized in Coparcionari: That is to say, the said W. C. in his
own right, and the said E. C. and R. P. etc. and their said wives, in the right
of their said wives, and they being thereof so seized of their wills, and
mutual assent and agreement the seventh day of, etc. last past, before the day
of the date hereof, did make partition thereof in manner and form following;
that is to say, they did grant, and indifferently divide and sever all the
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their
appurtenances to them descended and come, as is aforesaid, and which he
hereafter expressed into six several parts or shares, and agreed that every of
the said six several parts should be severally written and mentioned in a
scroul of paper by it self, and that afterward every of the said six several
scrouls of paper, should be by an indifferent man thereunto appointed by their
mutual assents, severally enclosed and covered, in, and with wax made like
little balls of like bigness and weight, so as no man may see any of the
scrouls, and that then the said little balls of wax should be put in a bonner,
to be kept in the hands of an indifferent man thereunto appointed by their
mutual assents, and that the said W. C. being heir unto the eldest Daughter of
the said Lady J. B. or his Deputy thereunto sufficiently authorized, should
first put in his hand into the said bonnet, and should first take and choose
out of the same bonnet one of the said balls, and that he should have and hold
to him and to his heirs for ever, for his part, portion and purport of the
Premises, only those of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
that should be mentioned and written in the scroul enclosed and covered in and
with the ball of wax, that he or his said Deputy for him shall take and choose:
and that the said W. C. having married the said E. being the second Daughter of
the said Lady J. C. or his Deputy thereto sufficiently authorized, should for
him the said W. and the said E. his wife, being the second Daughter of the said
Lady B. secondly put in his hand, etc. and should secondly take and choose,
etc. one other of the said balls. And that the said W. C. and E. his wife,
should have, hold and enjoy to them and to the Heirs of the same E. for ever,
as in the right of the said E. of the premises only those, etc. and that the
said P. H. etc. as Mr. C. mutat. mutand. and so the other, all which was done
accordingly. And the said W. C. putting in his hand first into the said bonnet,
and taking and choosing out of the said bonnet one of the six balls, wherein
was one of the said six scroules, in which was written and mentioned the Manor
of W. with the appurtenances late of the said Lady J. B. and all the Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services and
Hereditaments with their appurtenances, which were of the said Lady B. in W. M.
and W. H. in the County of, etc. the the Manor of T. etc. And the said W. C.
putting in his hand second in the said, etc. the said P. H. etc. the said R. P.
etc. the said E. C. by his Deputy, etc. the said T. L. etc. Know ye, That the
said parties and every of them do and does by these presents, for him, her, and
them, and his and their heirs assent to the said partition of the Premises, so
between them hereof made and had as aforesaid; And that every of them does and
do for him, her and them, and his and their heirs accept and take the part,
portion and purpart to him, her and them happened and allotted as is aforesaid,
in full recompense of his, her and their part, portion and purpart of all the
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to him, her and them, and any of
them descended or come from the said Lady B. And that every of the said parties
does and do for him, her and them, and his and their heirs, ratify and confirm
the said portion, and also that every of the said parties does and do for him,
her and them, and for his, her and their heirs ratify and confirm to the other
of them and their heits, the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, to
the other of them allotted and happened, by virtue of the partition as is
aforesaid, as also all the estates and interests which the other of them has
therein; and to the intent that no dissension or variance should hereafter
happen or arise betwixt the said parties to these presents, their heirs or
assigns or any of them, for, touching or concerning the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances, or any part or parcel
thereof: it is covenanted, granted, condescended, concluded and fully agreed
between the said parties to these presents, their Heirs and Assigns in manner
and form following, That is to say, first the said W. C. covenanteth and
grants for him, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators by these presents,
to, and with the said C. D. and D. his wife, and the heirs and assigns of the
said D, and to and with the said P. H. and F. his wife, and to the heirs and
assigns of the said F. and to, and with the said R. P. etc. and the heirs and
assigns of the said, etc. and to, and with the said W. C. and the said, etc.
and to, and with the said T. L. and the said, etc. severally for their parts,
portions and purparts of the Premises: that he the said W. C. his heirs and
assigns, and every of them at all times hereafter, and from time to time
whenever he the said W. C. his heis or assigns, or any of them, shall be
thereunto reasonably required by the said E. D. or D. his wife, or either of
them, or the heirs or assigns of the said D. for the said part, portion and
purpart of the said D. of, and in the premises, and by the said P. H. etc. and
by the said R. P. etc. and by the said W.C. etc. and by the said T. L. etc. To
make, do, acknowledge and suffer, or cause to be made, done, acknowledged and
suffered all and every act and acts, thing and things, for the further and more
better assurance and sure making in the Law unto the said E. D. and D. his
wife, and to the heirs and assigns of the said D. the said part, portion and
purpart of the Premises allotted and fallen unto the said E. D. and D. his
wife as is aforesaid; and unto the said P. H. etc. and unto the said R. P. etc.
and unto the said W. C. etc. and unto the said T. L. as by the said E. C. and
D. his wife, and the heirs and assigns of the said D. or by their or any of
their Council learned in the Law, and at their or any of their costs and
charges in the Law, for their said part, portion and purpart of the Premises,
and by the said P. H. etc. and by the said R.P. etc. and by the said W. C. etc.
and by the said T. L. etc. shall be reasonably advised, devised and required;
be it by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery, with Voucher or Vouchers, Deed or Deeds
enrolled, the inrollment of these presents, release, confirmation, and by all
these ways and means, or by any of them, or otherwise with warranty or
warranties against the said W. C. his Heirs and Assigns only or without
warranty, at the election and pleasure of such as shall require the same as is
aforesaid. And that the said W. C. his heirs and assigns, shall at all times
hereafter from time to time exonerate, acquit, discharge or otherwise save
harmless as well the said E. C. and D. his wife, and the heirs and assigns of
the said D. The said P.H. etc. the said R.P. etc. the said W.C. etc. and the
said J.L. etc. as also their said parts, portions and purparts of the
premises, of, and from all and all manner of former bargains, sales,
joyntures, dowers, uses, wills, statutes Merchant, and of the staple,
recognizances, judgments, executions, issues, fines, amerciaments, intrusions,
alienations without license, rents, charges, rents seck, arrerages of rents,
and of, and from all other charges, encumbrances and demands whatsoever they
be, had, made, or done by the said W. C. the like several Covenants for all the
rest, one after another, Mutat. mutand. And the said W. C. and E. his wife, P.
H. and D. his wife, T. L. and F. his wife, covenant and grant for them, their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents, to and with the
said W. L. C. his heirs and assigns; That if the said Manor of W. M. shall
happen at any time hereafter to be charged, chargeable or extendable, by reason
of any Statute, Recognizance, or otherwise for any sum or sums of money
before the said seventh day of, etc. last past, due or payable by any act done,
or acknowledged by any other than the said W. L. C. That then the said E. L. C.
and D. his wife, etc. P. H. etc. R. P. and, etc. W. C. and, etc. T. L. and,
etc. their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, shall equally at their
indifferent charges bear and pay five parts in six parts to be divided of such
sum and sums of money, for which the said Manor of W. M. shall be so
charged, chargeable or extendable. In witness, etc.

An Indenture to avoid the title of Survivorship; where Lands are granted to
two by Lease.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. Whereas the said A. B. and C. D. in
and by one Indenture of Lease made, etc. do stand and are jointly interessed
and possessed, of, and in all that the Manor, Lands, etc. for and during, etc.
as by the said Indenture at large appears. And for as much as both the said
parties are willing and desirous, that the Survivor or (...) of them, shall not
at any time hereafter take any commodity or advantage of the Premises or any
parcel of them by way of survivor or overliver, according to the course and
order of the Common Laws of this Kingdom, by reason of the joint title, estate
and interest, which they have in, and to the Premises, by virtue of the
Indenture of Lease aforesaid: Therefore it is fully covenanted, concluded,
condescended and agreed upon, between the said parties in manner and form
following; viz. first, the said A. B. does, etc. to and with, etc. that if it
do fortune or happen the said A. B. to survive and overlive the said C. D. for
avoiding the said title of survivor in and to the Premises, That he the said
A. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will peaceably and
quietly permit and suffer the Executors, Administrators and Assigns of the said
C. D. being then deceased, to have, occupy and enjoy to their own proper use
and uses, and to the proper use of any of them in common or in severalty,
immediately after the death of the said C. at his or their will and pleasure,
all that the moiety, part and purpart of the said C. in and to the premises,
and every of them into two equal parts to be divided, during the residue and
remainder of years of the term of years above mentioned, which then at the
death of the said C. shall be to come and unexpired, without the let or
disturbance of the said A. his Executors or Assigns; the title of Survivor, of,
and in the Premises, in any wise notwithstanding: And also the said C. D. does
covenant, etc. to, and with A. B. etc. for avoiding of the said title of
Survivor in the Premises, That if it do fortune or happen the said C. to
survive and over-live the said A. B. that he the said C. D. ut supra mutat
mutand. And the said A. B. does covenant, etc. to and with, etc. in manner and
form following, viz. That he the said A. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or one of them shall pay the moiety and one half of the said yearly
Rent of, etc. unto the said T. B. his Heirs and Assigns in the Indenture of
Lease forementioned, and also shall bear and discharge half of all the
covenants, reparations and charges therein contained, which on the part of the
said A.B. and C. D. are to be observed and done in the said Indenture of Lease
comprised. And further, That the said A. B. his Executors or Assigns, shall
well, truly and safely keep the said Indenture of Lease unsurrendred,
uncancelled, undefaced and whole to the defense, saving and preservation as
well of the interest, title and term of the said C. B. as also of the title,
interest and term of the said C. D. in and to the Premises, during the term
aforesaid; the like Covenant for C. D. mutat. mutand.

An Indenture where two have a joint Estate upon Covenant, That either of them
may have an equal part in the Land or money lent, taking no benefit by
Survivorship.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A. B. on the one part, and C. D. on the
other part, witnesses, That whereas E. F. by a certain Indenture dated, etc.
for the consideration therein expressed, did fully and clearly bargain, fell,
give and grant unto the said A.B. and C. D. their heirs and assigns for ever,
All that Manor, etc. as it is recited in the Sale unto the Habendum (then say,
with diverse other covenants, grants and articles therein contained, amongst
which there is a certain Proviso contained, and by the same proviso it is
provided and agreed, That if the said E F. (recite the Proviso) as by the same
Indenture it does and may appear. And for as much as by the order of the Common
Laws of this Nation, if either of the said A.B. or C.D. should fortune to
decease before payment of the said Sum; or if default be made in payment of
the said Sum of, etc. Then as well the said sum of, etc. should wholly
remain to the Survivor, etc. and for default of payment thereof, the Survivor
and his Heirs, should wholly possess the said Manor, etc. according to the
tenure of the faid Indenture, to the only use of the said Survivor and his
Heirs, contrary to the true meaning of the said parties; for avoiding of which
inconveniences, and to the intent that either of the said parties, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, shall be duly answered of the premises
accordingly, it is therefore covenanted and agreed between the said parties to
these presents, and the said A.B. does covenant and grant for him, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators by these presents, to, and with the said C. D. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators in form following, that is to say, That if
the said E. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns do pay, or cause to be
paid to the said A.B. or his heirs the said Sum of 200 l. at the day and place
limited for payment thereof in the said Indenture: That then the said A.B. his
Executors or Assigns, shall not only pay or cause to be paid to the said C. D.
his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, within one month next after the day of payment
of the said Sum, the sum of one hundred pound, being the moiety of the said
two hundred pound, but also shall deliver or cause to be delivered unto the
said E. F. his heirs or assigns all such evidences, as he or his assigns, shall
have received by force of the said former Indenture, and thereof shall acquit
and discharge the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns. And further, That
the same A. B. his Executors or Assigns, shall not at any time hereafter, do,
knowledge, cause, procure or suffer to be done any act or acts, deed or thing
whatsoever, which shall or may in any wise debar, avoid, delay or hinder the
tenor, strength, form or effect of the same Indenture, or any covenant, grant
or article contained in the said Indenture, or of any assurance, estate or
conveyance to be made of the Premises or any parcel thereof to the said A.B.
and C.D. or either of them, their heirs or assigns, or of any Bond made or to
be made for the performance of any of them, without the consent and agreement
of the faid C. his heirs or assigns, first obtained in writing for the same.
And further, the said A. B. covenanteth and grants, etc. That if the default
be made in payment of the said Sum of two hundred pound by the same E. F. his
Executors and Assigns, in part or in all contrary to the form aforesaid: That
then the said A. B. and C. D. and their heirs shall stand and be seized of, and
in the moiety and one half of the Premises to the use of the said C. D. and of
his Heirs and Assigns for ever; and that he the same A. B. and his heirs, and
all other claiming by him at all times after, shall do and suffer to be done
all such act and acts, thing and things in the Law, as shall be advised,
devised and required by the said C. D. his heirs or assigns, or the learned
Council, etc. for the better assurance of the same, etc. to the said C. D. etc.
with warranty against A. B. and his heirs, discharged of encumbrances done by
him or any claiming by him, etc. And the said C. D. does covenant and grant ut
supra mutat. mutand. and tunc. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Partition.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That whereas the said R.
B. and T. B. hold jointly for term of certain years yet during the Parsonage of
F. in the County of Y. and all houses, stables, etc. Take the words of the
Lease, thereto in any wise belonging or appertaining of the Demise and grant of
one W. C. etc. yielding therefore yearly unto R. W. etc. or his assigns fifty
five pound of, etc. at two Terms of the year equally during the said Tenure, as
by the Indenture thereof bears date, etc. more plainly may appear. Now the
said parties by the advice of honest Friends, and with their full and whole
consent and agreement, have made devision and partition between them of the
said Parsonage, Tithes, and other the Premises in manner and form following,
viz. That the said R.P. shall have the one equal moiety or half part of all the
said Parsonage house, Glebe-lands, Tithes and other the Premises in full
recompense of his due part and portion of and in the same. And that the said T.
B. shall likewise have the other moiety or half part of the said Parsonage, and
of all and singular the premises in full recompense of his due part and
portion of and in the same, To have and to hold, to either of the said parties,
their Executors and Assigns severally, as is above said from the day of the
date hereof, unto the end of the said term of years yet to come. And also it is
agreed, covenanted and granted between the said parties, That the said yearly
Rent of fifty five pound, to be due to the said R. W. or his assigns, and other
charges shall be equally paid and born between the said R.P. and T.B. their
Executors or Assigns, Tenants of the said Parsonage, and other the Premises
from time to time during the said term, viz. either of them their part and
portion allotted as is aforesaid: And for the true meaning, performance, and
keeping of all and singular the said portions, covenants, conditions, payments,
agreements and articles, either party binds himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, to the other in these presents, in the Sum of 20 l. of, etc. In
witness, etc.

An Indenture where three have purchased Land jointly, that upon sale thereof
all sums of money shall be equally divided between them.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. B. of the first part, and A.K. of London
on the second part, and E.D. of London Gent. on the third part: Whereas the
said parties before the date hereof, jointly together at their equal costs and
charges have paid, disbursed and laid out diverse Sums of money for the full,
clear and absolute purchase of, etc. Recite the Land, the estate whereof
remains in the said E. and one M. D. Gent. at the day of the date hereof, to
be assured to such person or persons as the said, etc. shall name or appoint.

Now this Indenture witnesses, That it is fully covenanted, granted,
condescended and agreed between the said, etc. and every of them covenanteth
and grants for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, to, and with
the other his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, That the whole benefit, commodity
and profit, and the sum and sums of money, which at any time hereafter
shall be had or received, arising, coming, growing and renewing, of, for or
concerning the said Lands before expressed and specified, and every part and
parcel thereof by the said, etc. or any of them, or any of their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, or any other person or
persons, by their or any of their means or procurement, shall be equally and
indifferently distributed between every of them the said, etc. in such sort, as
every of them, their and every of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, shall have their equal part and portion, without any manner of fraud
or covin.

And also it is further agreed between the same parties, that in case any of
them happen to decease at any time hereafter, that then the benefit and profit
of the Premises, shall be to the use of the Heirs, Executors, and Assigns of
him or them so deceased, in such and the like manner, as if he or they had been
alive, and that no advantage or benefit shall be received or taken by any of
the parties, for or by reason of any Survivorship. And moreover, it is fully
agreed between the said, etc. that they nor any of them, shall at any time
hereafter bargain, sell, grant, convey, assure or alien, nor suffer to be
conveyed or aliened, by, or from them or any of them the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, or his
or their estate, right, title or interest, of, in, or to the same or any of
them, to any person or persons whatsoever, unless it be, by, and with the
consent, privity, knowledge or agreement, of such of the said other parties to
these presents, as then shall be living, under his or their hands and seals in
writing first had and obtained. In witness, etc.

An Indenture, where a Lease is granted to three joynt-Leases, that every of
them is to pay his part of the Rent, and equal parts in the charges of
repairing, and other charges.
THis Indenture Tripartite made, etc. Witnesses, That whereas the said parties
are and stand possessed of, and in the Message, Tenement or Inn called the
Ship, set, lying and being in the Parish of, etc. and of one Field, etc. and
of, in, and all and singular houses, buildings, Barns, stables, Shops, Cellers,
Sollers, wastegrounds, entries, issues, ways and all other commodities, Rents
and profits to the same belonging or appertaining, that is to say, every of
them a full third part of all and singular the Premises into three equal and
even parts to be divided, for, and during the several terms hereafter
mentioned, that is to say, for and during the term of fourteen years mentioned
and granted, in, and by a certain Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc. made by
one M.N. etc. to the said A. B. of, and touching the Premises, which term did
commence at the Feast of, etc. then last past, before the date of the same
Indenture: And for, and during the term of Thirty years mentioned and granted,
in, and by the Letters Patents of our, etc. under the great Seal of England
bearing date, etc. granted by our said, etc. unto, etc. of and in the
Premises; as by the said Indenture of Lease and Letters Patents aforesaid more
at large appears. It is now covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, by and
between the said parties to these presents, and every of them ^ and every of
them does severally covenant and grant, to and with the other of them severally
by these presents, that they and every of them, and the Executors,
Administrators and Assigns of every of them, for his, her and their, and every
of their parts, shall not only well and truly content and pay, or cause to be
contented or paid, the full third part and portion of all and singular such
yearly Rents as are reserved, in, and by the said Indenture of Lease and
Letters Patents aforesaid, and either of them at the days, times and place
limited and appointed for the payment thereof, and that from time to time, for,
and during the said several estates and terms of years before mentioned; but
also shall at all times hereafter, and from time to time, for, and during the
terms aforesaid, pay, bear, allow and disburse the full third part and portion
of all such sum and sums of money, and other charges whatsoever as shall
grow due or payable, or be convenient or necessary to be born or paid for the
reparations of the Premises, or for the recovery or defense of the title
thereof, or of any parcel thereof: and shall also condescend and agree to all
and every such account, suit, and other act and acts, which shall be necessary
or convenient to be attempted, prosecuted or done for, touching and concerning
the premises, or any parcel thereof tending to the profit or benefit of the
said parties, and shall not do, procure, or cause to be done, any act or acts,
thing or things, whereby or by reason whereof the estate, interest or title of
the said parties, or any of them, shall, or in any wise may be impaired,
hindered, determined or avoided, except it be by, and with the assent, consent
and agreement of the other of them in that behalf first had and obtained.

And further, the said A. B. does covenant, etc. That the said C. D. his
Executors and Assigns, and every of them shall have, occupy, use and enjoy all
such Easements, ways, liberties and passages, and shall quietly have free
egress, ingress and regress into and from the said Inn, Tenement, Field and
other the Premises, for the using and occupying a full third part of the
Premises, without let or disturbance of the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, in such manner and form as the said M. N. has
heretofore had, occupied, used and enjoyed the same Premises: The like
covenant to E. F. and the like from C.D. to A. B. and E.F. and the like from
E.F. to A.B. and C.D. mutat. mutand. and tunc. In witness, etc.

The Grant of a Keepership of a Park.
TO all Christian People to whom this present writing shall come, I A. B. send
greeting, etc. Know ye, That I the said A. B. for, and in consideration of the
good and faithful service by my Servant E. R. to me heretofore done and
hereafter to be done, have given and granted, and by these presents do give and
grant unto the said E.R. the Office of Keeper of my Park at Y. called B. Park,
in the County of C. and also his habitation and dwelling in the Lodge belonging
to the same Park, with the going and pasturing of one Gelding, and six Kine
yearly within the same Park.

And further know ye, That I the said A.B. have given and granted, and by these
presents do give and grant to the said E. R. allowance of meat and drink for
himself within my house at Y. aforesaid daily and yearly at all times, and by
so long space as any hospitality or household shall be kept there: To have and
to hold, occupy, exercise and enjoy the said Office of Keeper, and other the
Premises unto the said E. R. for term, and during the life natural of the same
E.R. together with all manner of fees, rewards, vails and advantages, to the
same Office belonging, incident or appertaining.

And furthermore, know ye, That I the said A. B. have given and granted, and by
these presents do give and grant unto the said E. R. for the exercising of the
said Office of Keeper, so long as he shall truly and faithfully exercise the
same, one Annuity or annual Rent of Four pounds of, etc. To have, hold,
perceive, and enjoy the said Annuity or yearly Rent to the said E. R. and his
assigns, from the, etc. during the life natural of the said E. R. at the two
Terms of the year, etc. viz. etc. by even portions yearly to be paid by the
Receiver of my Rents and Revenues, the Steward of my house, or such other
Officer for the time being, as I shall appoint for the payment of the rest of
my Servants their wages yearly. In witness, etc.

A Deputation of a Bailiff or Receiver.
TO all Christian People, etc. A. B. Bailiff and Collector of the Rents, Farms
and Revenues of, etc. Manors of G. and E. and of all and singular Lands,
Tenements, Court-Leets, Liberties, Fiues, Issues, Amerciaments, Reliefs,
Herriots, Waifes, Estrayes, and other Possessions and Hereditaments whatsoever
to the said Manors belonging, with their members and appurtenances in the
County of, etc. parcel of the Lands and possessions of W. late of M. of, etc.
sends greeting, etc.

Know ye, That I the said A. B. have constituted, deputed and appointed, and by
these presents do, etc. C. D. of, etc. to be my lawful and sufficient Deputy,
for me, and in my behalf to occupy and exercise the said Office of Bailiff and
Collector, and to exercise, execute, accomplish, receive and do, and cause to
be exercised, executed, accomplished, received and done all and every such act
and acts, thing and things, as in, about, touching or concerning the said
Office, shall be necessary or requisite to be done, To have, hold, exercise and
enjoy the said Office unto the said C. D. as Deputy of me the said A. B. for,
and during the will and pleasure of me the said A. B. in as ample manner and
form as I the said A. B. ought or might exercise, execute, receive, accomplish,
and do in the same if I the said A. B. were, might or should be present at the
exercising, executing, accomplishment, receiving or doing thereof. In witness,
etc.

The grant of a Stewardship, or keeping of Courts.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. A. S. of S. in the County of S. Gent.
of the one party, and R. K. of L. in the County of B. Gent. of the other party,
Witnesses, That whereas our said, etc. that now is, by, etc. Letters Patents
under the Seal of, etc. Court of Exchequer, bearing date at Westminster the,
etc. day of, etc. in the, etc, year of, etc. has amongst diverse other things
therein contained, assigned and appointed the said A. S. to the Office and
Offices of Steward and Keeper of Courts and Leets of the Manor of L. and also
of the Manor of B. in the County of S. during, etc. pleasure, as by the same
Letters Patents, amongst diverse other things therein contained, more plainly
appears.

Now the said A. S. for diverse good causes and considerations him in this
behalf specially moving, has made, ordained, constituted and appointed, and by
these presents does make, ordain, constitute and appoint the said R. K. to be
his Deputy, to exercise and execute the said Office and Offices of Stewardship
and Keeper of Courts and Leets of the said Manors, and to seize and take all
Heriots, and to take and receive all profits of Courts and Leets which are or
shall grow due within the said Manors or any of them, to have, enjoy, hold,
exercise and occupy the same Office and Offices, to the foresaid R. K. during
the will and pleasure of the said A. S. and to receive, perceive and take the
wages, fees, allowances, profits and commodities heretofore of right, due,
accustomed, belonging and appertaining.

And the said R. K. does covenant, promise and grant for himself, his Executors
and Administrators by these presents, to and with the said A. S. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, in manner and form following,
viz. That he the said R. K. his Executors and Assigns, shall and will from time
to time, well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said A. S. his
Executors or Assigns, all such Wages, Fees, Allowances, Sum and Sums of
Money, Heriots, Profits of Courts and Leets, and other profits and commodities,
as for or in respect, or by reason of the said Office and Offices of
Stewardship or keeping of Courts and Leets within the said Manor, as every or
any of them shall grow due or payable, or as he the said R. K. by reason or in
respect of the exercising or executing thereof, shall from time to time
receive, perceive, take or make; and also that he the said R. K. shall not nor
will not at any time or times hereafter, do, commit or suffer to be done any
manner of act or thing whatsoever, which shall or may be in any wise
prejudicial or hurtful to the said Letters Patents before mentioned, or the
said A. S. his Deputy or Deputies, in exercising or executing the said Patent,
or any the Office or Offices of Stewardship, or keeping of Courts or Leets, or
any power or authority thereby given or granted, or any thing therein
contained. In witness, etc.

A License for a Buck and Do, during the life of the Grantee.
WE E. D. etc. for diverse good causes and respects us moving, have given and
granted, and by these presents for us and our heirs, do give and grant unto our
well-beloved Servant C. D. our Secretary, during his life one Buck of season in
Summer, and one Do of season in Winter, to be had, taken, hunted and killed
at, and within our Park of B. in the County of W. either with Dog or Bows by
the same C. D. or his Assigns, at his or their free liberty, choice and
pleasure, during his said life: Wherefore we will and command you and every of
you, our Keeper or Keepers there, or your Deputy or Deputies for the time
being, upon the sight hereof, or of the true Copy hereof signed by the proper
hand of the said C.D. That you and every of you, do peaceably and quietly
permit and suffer the same C.D. and his Assigns during his said life yearly,
from henceforth to have, kill, and take at, or within our said Park, the said
Buck in Summer, and the said Do in Winter, according to the tenor of this our
gift and warrant dormant, any restraint or commandment heretofore had, made or
given to the contrary hereof notwithstanding: And this our Warrant, signed and
sealed with our proper hand, shall be unto you and every of you a sufficient
warrant and discharge against us and our heirs at all times in this behalf.

Given under our seal and sign manual, etc.
A Condition to cure a Disease, or to repay the money.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the within named A.B.
the day of the date within written, have delivered and given the within bounden
C. D. the Sum of eight pound in consideration, that the said C. D. should on
this side, and before the third day of, etc. next coming after the date within
written, cure and make whole the said A. B. of the disease or diseases
wherewith the said A. B. is now grieved. If therefore the said C. D. do before
the said third day of, etc. next, well and sufficiently, and safely cure and
make whole the said A. B. of the said Diseases; and also in case the said A. at
any time after, and before the Fourth day of, etc. next following, be grieved
or vexed with the said Diseases or any part thereof, or that the said Disease
or any part thereof, do before the said Fourth day of, etc. issue or grieve
upon any part of the body of the said A.B. then if the said C. D. his Executors
or Assigns within twenty days next after the said Fourth day of, etc. do well
and truly repay or cause to be repaid unto the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the said Sum of eight pound without fraud or
covin, Then, etc.

Not to sell Lands had by Marriage.
THe Condition, etc. That if neither the within-bounden A.B. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators nor Assigns, nor any of them, do at any time or times
hereafter, give, grant, bargain, sell, demise, let, set, or otherwise do away
all or any of the Lands, Tenements, Woods, Under-woods, Possessions or
Hereditaments, or any part or parcel thereof, which he the said A. B. now has
and enjoys, and is possessed of at this present day, by reason of a marriage
late had and solemnized between him the said A. B. and I. now his wife, etc.
lying and being in the Towns, Parishes, Hamlets and Fields of S. and H. in the
County of C. or elsewhere within the Kingdom of England, to any manner of
person or persons, without the special license, will, consent and agreement of
the within named C.D. his Executors or Assigns first had and obtained in
writing for the same. That then, etc.

To assure a Sum of Money in consideration of a Marriage.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within bounden A. B. intends by Gods
grace shortly to marry, and take to his wife one C. D. sister of the within
named E. F. of the said A. B. do by his last Will and Testament, or otherwise
without any fraud or covin, in case the said C. D. shall after marriage had
between them survive the said A. B. lawfully give and assure to the said C.D.
the Sum of five hundred pound, etc. or else goods and chattels to the value
or worth of, etc. over and besides such chains, bracelets, jewels and apparel,
which the said C. D. shall fortune to have at the day of the death of the said
A. B. which said Sum of five hundred pound, or else the said goods and
chattels, which then shall be worth the said Sum of five hundred pound, and
the said chains, bracelets, jewels and apparel, the said C. D. her Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall and may at all times from the day of the
death of the said A.B. peaceably, quietly and lawfully have, use, give, set and
enjoy, at her and their pleasure, without any let or interruption of the said
C.B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or of any other person or
persons by his or their means, assent or procurement: That then, etc.

To assure an Estate.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden A.B. and C. D. his wife, and
either of them and their heirs (at the proper costs and charges in the Law of
the said E.F. his Heirs and Assigns, at all times within the space of two whole
years next ensuing the date hereof, do make, assure and convey, or cause to be
made and conveyed unto the said E. F. and his heirs, or to such other person or
persons, and their heirs, as the said E.F. and his heirs shall name and appoint
to his and their proper uses and behoofs, such a good, lawful, sufficient and
perfect estate or estates, assurance or assurances in the Law, of, and in all
the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, with the appurtenances both
free and copy, which late were G.F. deceased Father of the said E. F. set,
lying and being in B. in the County of C. be it by Deed or Deeds enrolled,
fine, feoffment, recovery, surrender or surrenders, release with warranty
against the said A.B. and C. his wife, and either of them, and their heirs, as
by the learned Council of the said E. F. his heirs or assigns, shall be
reasonably advised or devised, the same Premises then to be clearly
discharged, of, and from all former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, and all
other charges, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever they be, had made
or done by the said A.B. and G. his wife, or either of them in the mean time.
That then, etc.

That the Lessee shall not carry away any Wainscot or Windows at the end of his
Lease.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named A.B. by his Indenture of
Lease bearing date, etc. has demised and to farm letten unto the within
bounden C. D. all that Tenement with the appurtenances, etc. now in the
occupation of the said C. D. for the term of certain years yet enduring, as by
the same Indenture more plainly may appear. If therefore the said C.D. etc. do
not at the end of the term of years mentioned in the said Indenture of Lease
before recited, carry away any of the Wainscor, Settles and Cupboards standing
and being in the, etc. or the Keys and Locks being upon the Doors and Cupboards
of Wainscor aforesaid of and within the said Tenement, nor take away any of the
Windows now standing, appending or appertaining to the said Tenement, but do
permit and suffer them there to remain at his departure in as good case as now
they are, reasonable wearing only excepted. That then, etc.

The Obligee to pay money for Wares delivered in trust, to another that shall
make default of payment.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named A.B. has delivered upon
trust to one C.D. certain Wines amounting to the Sum of, etc. and given him
day of payment for the same, etc. until the Feast of, etc. if in case the said
A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do not before or at the said
Feast of, etc. pay or cause to be paid unto the said A. B. his Executors, etc.
the said Sum of, etc. but shall make default of payment thereof, or of any part
thereof: Then if the within bounden E.F. and G.H. or either of them, or the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them or of either of them, do well and
truly content and pay, or cause to be paid to the said A.B. his Executors, etc.
the said Sum of, etc. or so much thereof, as at the said Feast of, etc. shall
happen to be behind and unpaid; That then, etc.

To deliver Writings to be cancelled at a day certain and place.
THe Condition of this, etc. That if the within bounden A. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, do before the second day of, etc. next coming after
the date within written, deliver or cause to be delivered to the within named
C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at or within, etc. all such
Indentures, Leases, Counter-parts of Indentures and Writings, as he the said A.
B. or any other by his delivery has or have, touching the Manors of, etc.
which were made and written before the Eleventh day of, etc. last past without
Fraud or Collusion: That then, etc.

To save one harmless for delivery of an Indenture.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named A.B. has the day of the
date within written delivered unto the within-bound C. D. one Deed indented
bearing date, etc. made from E.F. to G.H. of, etc. of certain Lands in, etc. If
therefore the said C.D. his Heirs, etc. do at all times hereafter, and from
time to time discharge, save and keep harmless the said A. B. his Heirs, etc.
against G. S. of, etc. and all and every other person and persons whatsoever,
of, for, or concerning the delivery of the said Deed, and of, for, and
concerning all manner of matters and indemnities, which may by any means accrue
and be, unto or against the said A. B. etc. for, or by reason of the same: That
then, etc.

A Letter of Attorney irrecoverable to receive a debt on a Bond with Covenant
not to release, etc.
TO all Christian People to whom these presents shall come, E. A. of, etc. in
the County of, etc. Shoemaker, sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting.
Whereas J.D. of, etc. in the County of, etc. Widow, and N.D. Son of the said J.
of, etc in the said County Shoemaker, by their Bill Obligatory bearing date
the, etc. day of, etc. do stand bounden to me the said E. in the Sum of, etc.
for the payment of the Sum of, etc. upon the, etc. day of, etc. next ensuing
the date of the said Bill Obligatory, at, or in the then dwelling house of the
said E. A. situate in, etc. aforesaid, which said Bill Obligatory is become
forfeited: Know ye therefore, That I the said E. do by these presents
authorize, constitute and appoint my well-beloved Friend J.E. of, etc.
aforesaid Butcher, my lawful Attorney irrevocable for me, and in my name to
sue, arrest, attach, prosecute, condemn and imprison the said J.D. and N.D. or
either of them, and her, his or their bodies, goods and chattels in execution
to take, and out of execution to deliver, either upon satisfaction by
composition or otherwise, at the will and pleasure of my said Attorney,
acquittances or any other discharges to seal and deliver, Attorney or Atturneys
to make, Councellor or Counselors to retain, and the same again to revoke, and
generally and particularly all and every other matter and thing requisite,
necessary or behoofefull to execute, prosecute, do and perform, or cause to be
so done and performed as fully and largely, as I my self might or could do,
being personally present without any account thereof to be yielded unto me, my
Executors or Assigns; and whatsoever my said Attorney shall do or cause to be
done in, about or concerning the premises, I do by these presents ratify,
confirm and allow the same; and also do covenant with and by my self to my said
Attorney not to revoke, disallow, discontinue, deny or be nonsuited, in, or
otherwise to do any thing that may be hurtful, prejudicial, or any bar or let
therein or thereunto by any means whatsoever. In witness whereof I the said E.
A. have hereunto set my hand and seal, the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of
A Letter of Attorney from two Executors of a Bond, sued to a Judgment to a
Creditor of the Testator.
ALL men shall know by these presents, That we T. D. Gent. and R. M. Gent.
Executors of the last Will and Testament of T. H. late of, etc. in the County
of, etc. Esquire deceased, have made, constituted, ordained, and in our place and
steads have put, and by these presents do make, constitute, ordain, and in our
places and steads, do put our trusty and well-beloved in Christ, M. F. Widow,
late the Wife of T. F. late of, etc. Gent. deceased, our true and lawful
Attorney, for us and in our names and steads, but to her own use to ask,
demand, receive and take of Sir H. J. late of, etc. in the County of, etc. the
debt due and payable unto the said T.H. in his lifetime, by virtue, force, or
reason of one Obligation or Writing Obligatory, bearing date the, etc. day of,
etc. of the penal Sum of Two hundred pounds conditioned for the payment of
One hundred seven pounds ten shillings upon the Feast of, etc. then next
following, as in and by the said Obligation and Condition thereof may appear.
And whereas the said T.H. obtained a Judgment against the said Sir H. for two
hundred pounds debt upon the said Bond, besides damages or costs of Suit: Know
ye further, That we the said T. D. and R. M. have authorized and given power,
and by these presents do authorize and give power unto the said M. for and in
our names, but to her own use to take execution or any other Process upon or by
reason of the said Judgment against the said Sir H. his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, or any of them, or against his, their or any of their Lands,
Tenements, Goods, Cartels and Chattels or any of them, and with him, them, or
any of them to compound or agree at her will and pleasure for the same, and the
benefit and profit thereof to her own use, to receive and take; and him the
said Sir H. to sue, arrest implead and imprison, and out of prison to set at
large, discharge and release at her will and pleasure, and all and every other
thing and things, which in or about the obtaining or getting of the said debt
and damages, or any part or parcel thereof shall be needful or necessary to be
done, to execute and do in as large ample and beneficial manner and form to all
intents and purposes, as we the said T.D. and R.M. may, can, might, could,
should or ought to do by virtue, force and reason of the said recited
Obligation o^ Writing Obligatory or the Condition thereof, or by virtue, force
or reason of the said Judgment thereupon had. In witness whereof we have
hereunto set our hands and seals the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of, etc.
A Letter of Attorney of a man's estate in general, in consideration of several
Debts and Engagements.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, I F. G. of, etc. in the County of,
etc. in Ireland, Merchant, send greeting. Whereas I am indebted unto R.G. my
Brother in the Sum of five and fifty, pounds, and he and B. G. one other of
my Brothers shall stand engaged for several Sums of money, the proper Debts
of me the said F. G. and have already paid for me the Sum of thirty pounds.
Now know ye, That I the said F. G. for and toward the payment and satisfaction
of the said moneys, and for diverse other good considerations me thereunto
moving, have granted, assigned, bargained and sold, and by these presents do
freely and absolutely grant, assign, bargain and sell unto the said R. G. and
B.G. all and all manner my goods and chattels, debts, moneys and all other
things of mine whatsoever, as well real as personal, of what kind, nature or
quality the same are, be, or shall be found, or otherwise wheresoever within
the Kingdom of Ireland or Territories, To have and to hold the same and every
part and parcel thereof, unto the said B.G. and F.G. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns for ever, to the only proper use of them, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns for ever In witness whereof I have
hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of
A Letter of Attorney of several Sums of money due from one person.
KNow all men by these presents, That I F. G. of, etc. in the County of, etc.
Merchant, for diverse good and valuable considerations me thereunto especially
moving, have made, assigned, constituted and ordained, and by these presents do
make, assign, constitute and ordain W. L. of London, Tailor, my true and lawful
Attorney, in my name, but to the only proper use of him the said W. L. his
Executors and Administrators, to demand and receive all such Sum and Sums of
money as are due or owing to me from E.K. of, etc. in the County of, etc.
Clothier, any manner of ways howsoever, and for default of payment, to sue,
arrest, attach, implead, condemn and imprison the said E. K. and his body,
goods and chattels in execution to take, and out of execution to deliver either
upon satisfaction, composition or otherwise at the will and pleasure of my said
Attorney, acquittances or any other discharges in my name to seal and deliver;
Attorney or Atturneys one or more under him the said W. L. to make, and
substitute and revoke: and generally to do, and execute, prosecute and
determine all and every other act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, which
in or about the premises shall be needful or expedient, as fully and
effectually and in as large and ample manner, to all intents and purposes, as I
the said F.G. might or could do personally, without any account thereof to be
yielded to me, my Executors or Assigns; and whatsoever my said Attorney shall
do or cause to be done, in, about or concerning the premises, I do by these
presents ratify, confirm and allow the same. In witness whereof I have
hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of
A short Bill of Debt from One to One.
KNow all men by these presents, That I B. G. of, etc. Barber-Chirurgeon, do
owe unto M. R. of, etc. Gent. the Sum of Four and twenty pounds of lawful
money of England to be paid to the said M. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, on the, etc. day of, etc. now next ensuing the date hereof; To the
which payment well and truly to be made at the time aforesaid, I bind me, my
Heirs, Executors and Administrators unto the said M. R. his Executors and
Administrators in the Sum of Forty pounds of lawful money of England firmly
by these presents. In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seal,
the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of
An Assignment of certain Debts, with a Letter of Attorney to receive them.
KNow all men by these presents, That I F. G. of, etc. in the County of, etc.
in Ireland, Merchant, for diverse good and valuable considerations me thereunto
especially moving, have granted, assigned and set over unto my Brothers B.G.
and R.G. all such Debts and Sums of Money, Bills, Bonds and Specialties which
are owing from, or remain in the hands of L.T. of, etc. aforesaid, Yeoman, and
all such other Debts and Sums of money which are due and owing to me from any
person or persons, inhabiting within the Kingdom of Ireland or elsewhere: and I
the said F. G. have likewise assigned, constituted and ordained, and by these
presents do assign, constitute and ordain the said R.G. and B. G. and either of
them, jointly and severally my true and lawful Attorney and Atturneys in my
name, but to the only proper use of them the said R. and B. G. their Executors
and Administrators, to demand and receive the said Debts and Sums of money; and
for default of payment, to sue, arrest, attach, condemn and imprison the said
Debtors, and their bodies, goods and chattels in execution to take, and out of
execution to deliver, either upon satisfaction by a composition or otherwise at
the will and pleasure of my said Atturneys, acquittances, or any other
discharges in my name to seal and deliver; Attorney or Atturneys one or more
under them the said R. and B. G. to make, substitute and revoke; and to do and
execute whatsoever act or thing shall be needful or expedient in or about the
Premises as fully and in as large manner to all intents and purposes, as I the
said F. G. might or could do personally, without any account thereof to be
yielded to me, my Executors or Assigns: and whatsoever my said Atturneys shall
do or cause to be done, in, about, or concerning the premises, I do by these
presents ratify, confirm and allow the same. In witness whereof, I have
hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of
A Grant of the next Donation of a Benefice.
TO all to whom this present Writing shall come, I A.B. of C. in the County of
D. Gent. send Greeting. Know ye, That I the said A.B. the undoubted Patron of
the Parish Church of E. in the County of F. for good considerations me
thereunto moving, have given and granted, and by these presents do give and
grant unto C. F. of J. in the County of K. Gent. the first and next Advowson^.
Nomination, Donation, Collation, Presentation and free Disposition of the
aforesaid Rectory of E. in the said County of F. with (...) ^is rights, members
and appurtenances whatsoever, when it (...) void either by death, resignation,
or otherwise. In witness whereof, etc.

THE Fourth Part OF THE CLERKS GUIDE.

BEING An Addition of FINES and RECOVERIES, with the manner how to levy or
suffer them to limit the Uses thereof; And how they shall operate.

AS ALSO, Of Mortgages, Judgments, and the like, how to extend them, With Forms
of every matter therein of Use.

By Tho. Manley of the Middle Temple, London, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, H. Twyford, and E. Flesher, Assigns of
Richard Atkyns, and Edward Atkyns, Esquires, M.DC.LXXII.

Cum Gratia and Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

The Premonition.
THe former Three Parts have (it is true) been heretofore Printed, but not in
the Method they are now presented, being purged from many Errors and needless
Repetitions; however, we will not take from the Authors their deserved praise:
but upon this Review finding somewhat wanting, this Fourth Part intends to
supply that defect, for there is scarce any thing therein set forth which is
not the ordinary practice of a well skilled Plebeian; but in this we shall give
you the particulars of Deeds and Assurances of Record, not only the Forms and
Presidents, but the nature and manner how to proceed therein, which is not
common but to well practiced Clerks. And although it may not be absolutely
perfect upon the first Essay, yet it may answer beyond expectation, there never
having been any promise of Additions.

PART IV.
Of a Fine.
A Fine being of all kinds of Settlements of the greatest Force and Antiquity,
is sometimes called Compositio amicabilis, but more usually finalis Concordia,
and is so termed as the Lord Coke holds, Quia finem litibus imponit: And so
indeed it did anciently; for after some contention had been about a thing by
Suit, the Parties agreeing who should have it, a Fine was levied, and so there
was an end of the matter: but is now of more common use; because a man thereby
may convey his Lands to another in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, for life or years, and
that with a Reservation of Rent also, Co. Inst. 2. Part, 511, 514. And any
person that has a Capacity to take by the Grant of a Deed, and may be a good
Grantee in a Deed, such person may be a good Conusee in a Fine, and may thereby
have and take the thing granted: And may be levied of all things whereof either
a Praecipe quod Reddat; a Praecipe quod faciat; a Praecipe quod Permittat; or a
Praecipe quod Teneat lies. And the order of proceeding in suing it out, is
thus:

First an Original is sued forth, which may be either a Quid juris clamat; Per
quae Servitia; De Rationabilibus divisis; Writ of Right Patent or Close;
Warrantia Chartae, De Consuetudinibus, or any Writ of Right: But the usual Writ
at this day is a Writ of Covenant. And although by the common course they use
to take out a Dedimus Potestatem, and to have the Conusance of a Fine before
any Original sued forth, yet the Original is always supposed i^ Law to precede
the Dedimus; and therefore does and must bear Test before it, or it will be
erroneous. Then there is a Praecipe drawn, and the Concord and Agreement of the
Parties, both which are to be fairly written in Parchment. After this, the
Conusor or Conusors of the Fine are to come in person before the Judge or
Judges authorized to take the Conusance of Fines, who are to take notice of the
persons, that there be no Infants, Idiots or Madmen among them; nor any Feme
Covert, for if there be such a Woman, the Judges or Commissioners are to
examine her privately and apart, Whether she be free and willing to do it
without any constraint of her Husband? Then she with the rest of the Conusors
declare publicly their consent, and to subscribe their Names or Marks to the
Concord: And if it be by Dedimus Potestatem, it must be returned and certified
under the hands and seals of the Commissioners into the Common Pleas, that it
may there be recorded and finished. Which done, the Conusee must compound with
the King for his License, and the money paid thereupon is called the Kings
Silver; and of this an Entry must be made on the back of the Writ of Covenant.
Then it must be enrolled by the Custos Brevium, and upon that Roll the
Proclamations are to be indorsed; And thence carried to the Chirographers who
make a Note thereof commonly called, The Note of the Fine: And then enter it
upon Record, ingross it, and make and deliver the Indentures thereof to the
Conusee: And if it be a Fine with Proclamations, it must be proclaimed openly
in the Common Pleas, once every fourth Term then next following. And the next
Term after the engrossing, the contents thereof are to be recorded in a Table
made for that purpose to be set up in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster
in an open place all the Term time; and so at every Assizes.

The Fine also (if the Parties please) may be enrolled and exemplified.

Presidents of Concords; And first of the Praecipe.
Surr. ss. Praec. A. B. Mil. Quod just, etc. ten. C. D. Conven. etc. de
Manerio de S. cum pertin. in H. J. K. et nisi etc. ac de viginti Messitagits;
duabus Salinis, sex cottagiis (here mention the true particular of the
Parcells, according to their several Natures and Qualities, with the numbers
of Acres, etc.) And thus you must vary them according to your best Judgments.

The Concords themselves are either Single or Double, some Presidents of single
Concords follow.

ET^est Concordia talis, sc. quod praedict. A. recognovit tenementa praedicta
cum pertin esse jus ipsius B. ut illa quae idem B. habet de dono praedict. A.
et illa remisit et quiet. clam. de se et haeredibus suis praedic^. B. et
haeredibus suis in perpetuum. Et praeterea idem A. concessit pro se et
haeredibus suis, quod ipse warrant. praedict. B. et haeredibus suis praedicta
tenementa cum pertin, contra praedict. A. et haeredes suos in perpetuum. Et pro
hac, etc. Of a Reversion after the death of Tenant for life.
ET est Concordia talis, sc. quod praed. R. recognovit tenementa praedict. cum
pertin. esse jus ipsius F. et concessit pro se et haeredibus suis, quod
praedicta tenementa quae F. M. et A. uxor ejus tenent ad terminum vitae ipsius
A. de haereditate ipsius R, die quo haec Concordia facta fuit et quae post
decess, ipsius R. ad praed. R. et haeredes suos debuer' revertere; post decess.
ipsius A. remanebunt praed. E. et haered. suis in perpetuum. Tenend. etc. Et
praed. R. concessit pro se et haered. suis, quod ipsi warrant. praed. ten. cum
pertin. (sicut dictum est) contra omnes homines in perpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

To the Heirs of the Body of the Conusor by J.C. her Husband deceased, the
Remainder to the right Heirs of J. C.
ET est concordia talis, sc. Quod praed. J. concessit praed. M. tenementa
praedict. cum pertinentiis et illa ei reddidit in eadem Curia: Habend. et
tenend. eid. M. et haeredibus de corpore ipsius M. de corpore J. C. nuper viri
sui defuncti legitime procreatis de capital. domin. etc. Et si contingat quod
eadem M. obierit sine haeredibus de corpore suo de corpore ipsius J. C.
legitime procreat. tunc post decess. ipsius M praedicta ten. cum pertin.
integre remaneant rectis haered. ipsius J. C. defuncti Tenend. etc. Et praed.
J. et haered. sui warrant. praedict. M. et haered. de corpore suo de de corpore
praed. J. C. defuncti, ac etiam rectis haeredibus ipsius J. C. si eadem M.
obierit sine haered. de corpore suo de corpore ipsius J. C. defuncti legitime
procreat. praed. tenementa cum pertin. (sicut dictum est) contra praed. J. et
haered. suos in perpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

A Concord with a Render for life, and after Entail.
ET est Concordia talis, sc. Quod praed. T. et F. recogn. manner. tenementa et
reddit. praed. cum pertin. esse jus ipsius E. ut illa qu^aidem E. et R. habent
de dono praedict. T. et F. et illa remiser. et quiet. clam. de ipsis T. et F.
et haered. ipsius F. praefat. E. et R. et haered. ipsius E. in perpetuum. Et
praeterea iidem T. et F. concesser. pro se and haered apsius F. quod ipsi
warrant. Maner', tenementa et redd. cum pertin. praefat. E. et R. e^ haered.
ipsius E. contra ipsos T et F. et hered. ipsius F. in perpetuum. Et pro hac
Recogn. etc. iidem et R. concesser. praed. T et F. Manner. de S. praed. cumpert.
ac 10 Messuag. 8 Cottag. 20 Acr. terr', 20 acr. Prati, 160 acr. Pastur. 300
acr. Morae, et 6 solid. redd. cum pertin. etc. Habend. and Tenend. praefat. T.
et F. pro termino vitae ipsorum T. et F. et alterius eorum diutius vivent.
absque. impetitione alicujus vasti, Et quod post decessum praedict. E. et F. et
eorum altorius diutius vivent. praedict. parcel. Manner. Tenementor. et redd.
praed. cum pertin. reman. Primogenito filio de corporibus praed T. et F. inter
eos legitime procreat. and haered. mascul. de corpore praed. primogeniti filii
legitime procreat. Tenend. etc, Et si nullus haeres de corpore ipsius
primogeniti filis fuer. legitime procreat', praed. parcel. manner. tenementor.
et redd. praed. cum pertin. reman. secundo genito filio de corpore praed. T. et
F. inter eos legitime procreat. Et haered. mascul. de corpore dicti secundi
geniti filii legitime procreat. Tenend. etc. Et si nullus hares de corpore
ipsius fecundi geniti filii fuer. legitime procreat. ^unc praedict. parcel.
manner. tenementor. et redd. praed. cum pertin. reman. haered. de corporibus
praed. T. et F. inter eos legitime procreat. Tenend. etc. Et si nullus haeres
de corporibus eorum T. et F. inter eos fuer. legitime procreat', tunc praedict.
parcel. manner. tenementorum et redd. praed' cum pertin. reman. inde rectis
haeredibus ipsorum T. et F. in perpetuum. Tenend. etc. Et ulterius iidem E. et
R. concess. praef. T. et F. december Mess etc. cum pertin. B. et C. praed.
residuum praedict. manner. tenementorum et redd. praedict. et illa eis redd. in
eadem Curia.

An Exemplification of a Fine.
CArolus Secundus Dei gratia, etc. Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervener'
Salutem; Sciatis quod inter irrotulamenta Brevium et aliorum depend. pro
finibus secundum formam statuti de Termino Paschae apud W. anno Regnt. quondam
praecharissime sororis nostrae Eliz. Reginae etc. Rot. 7. continetur sic. ss.
Essex ss. Elizabeth dei gratia Angl', Franciae et Hiberniae Regina, Fidei
Defensor. etc. Vic' Essexiae Salutem, Praecipe E. W. Arm. et J. uxor ejus quod
just et sine dilatione teneant J. W. et J. S. conventionem inter eos factam de
duobus Mess', duobus Gardin', duobus Pomariis, viginti acris terrae, viginti
acris prati, quadraginta acris Pasture et centum acris ^amtnorum et bruerae cum
pertin' in B. et W. et nisi fecerint et praedict' E. and I. fecerint te securum
de clamore suo pros. tunc sum. per honos sum. predict' E. et I. quod sint
coram Just. nostris apud Westminster. in Octab. Sancti Michaelis ostensuri quam non
fecerint et habeas ibi sum. et hoc Breve. T. Meipsa apud Westminster. 17. die
Septembr. anno Regni Reginae nunc. quadragesimo.

Pleg. de Pros. Johann. Do, Richard. Roo, Summon. Johannes Den, Richardus Feg.
Georgius T. Arm' Vic. ss. J. W. dat. domino Regi sex solidos et octo denarios
pro licenc' concord. cum E. W. Armig. et I. uxore ejus de placito conventionis
de duobus mess', duobus Gardinis, duobus Pomariis, viginti acris terrae,
viginti acris prati, quadraginta acr' Pasturae, et centum acr. Jampnorum et
Bruerae cum pertin. in B. et W. Et habet Cir: per pacem admiss. coram R. H. uno
Just. Dom. Regin. de Banco Justic. in Patria.

ss. Elizabeth. Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae et Hiberniae Regina, Fidei
Defensor. etc. Dilecto et fideli suo R. H. uni Justic' suor. de Banco, salutem.
Cum Breve nostrum de Convent. pendeat coram vobis et sociis vestris Justic'
nostris de Banco. Inter I. W. and I. S. E. W. Arm' et I. uxori ejus de duobus
Mess. duobus Gardinis, duobus Pomariis, viginti acris terrae, viginti acris
prati, in B. et W. in Com. Essex ad finem inde inter eos coram vobis et sociis
vestris praed' in Banco praed' secundum Legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri
Angl' levand', ac iidem E. and I. udeo impotentes existunt quod absque maximo
corporum suorum periculo usque Westminster. ad diem in brevi praed' content ad
Cognitiones quae in hac part requirunt. faciend', laborare non sufficient, ut
accepimus: Nos statui eorundem, E. and I. compatientes in hac part, Dedimus
vobis Potestatem recipiendi cognitiones quas praed' E. and I. coram vobis
facere voluerint de praemissis, et ideo vobis mandamus quod ad praef. E. et I.
personaliter accedentes cognitiones suas praed. recipiatis. Et cum eas
receperitis, praefatos socios vestros inde sub sigillis vestris distinct and
aperte reddatis Certiores, et tunc finis all inter parts pr d' de premiss.
coram vobis et sociis vestris praedict' in Banco praed' levari possit secundum
Legem and consuetud' praedict'. Et habeatis ibi tunc hoc Breve. T. Meipsa apud
West. 18. die Sept. anno Regni nostri 4o.

Respons. infranominat. R. H. ad hoc breve. Executio istius brevis patet in
quadam schedula huic brevi annex.

Et est Concordia talis, sc. Quod E. et J. in brevi nominat', huic schedulae
annex. recogn. ten. in dict' brevi specificat' cum pertinent' esse jus' J. W.
in eodem brevi nominat', ut illa quae iidem J. W. et J. S. in dict. brevi
nominat' habeant de dono praedict' E. W. et J. et illa remiser. et quiet' clam'
de se et haeredibus suis praed. E. et J. et haeredibus ipsius J. W. in
perpetuum. Et praeterea iidem E. et J. concess. pro se et haeredibus ipsius J.
quod ipsi warrant' tenementa praed' cum pertinentiis praefat. J. et J. et
haered' ipsius J. W. in perpetuum. Et pro hac etc. iidem J.W. et J. S. concess.
tenementa praed' cum pertin' praef. E. etc. J. et ill. eis reddider' in eadem
Cur. Habend' et tenend' eisd' E. et J. et baered. de corpore ipsius E. per
praed. J. legitime procreat' et pro defectu talis exitus, tenementa praed. cum
pertin' integre reman' praef. J. et haeredibus de corpore ipsius J. legitime
procreatis et pro defectu talis exitus, tenementa praed' cum pertin' integre
reman' rectis haeredibus ipsius E. in perpetuum, Tenend' etc.

R. H. ss. H^c est finalis concordia facta in Curia Dominae Regine apud Westminster
in Octab. Sancti Michaelis anno Regni Eliz. Dei gratia Angl', Franciae et
Hibern' Regine fidei Defensor. etc. a Conquestu decimo coram I.D. R.W. I.W. et
R.H. Justic' et al' Dom. Regin. fidelibus tunc ibi praesentibus inter I.W. et
I.S. Quer et E.W. Arm et J. uxor' ejus deforc', de 2. Mess. 2 Gardin. 2 Pomar',
20 acr' Prati, 40 acr' Pasturae et 100 acr' jampnorum et bruerae cum partin' in
B. et W. unde placitum conven' summon' fuit inter eos in ead Curia. scil.
Praed' E. et I. recogn. praed' ten' cum pertin' osse jus ipstus I.W. ut illa
quae iidem I. et I. S. habent de dono praed' E. et I. et illa remis. et quiet'
clam. de ipsis E. et I. et haeredibus suis praed' I. et I. et haeredibus ipsius
I.W. in perpetuum. Et praeterea iidem E. et I. concesser' pro se et haeredibus
ipsius I. quod ipsi warr' praed' I. et I. haeredibus ipsius I. W. praed.
tenementa cum pertin' contra omnes homines in perpetuum. Et pro hac
recognitione remissione, quiet' clam', warrant', fine et Concordia iidem I. et
I. concesser' praed' E. et I. praedicta tenementa cum pertin' et illa eis
reddider in eadem Curia. Habend' and tenend' eisdem E. et I. et haeredibus de
corpore ipsius E. per praed' I. legitime procreat' de Capitalibus dominis feodi
illa per servitia quae ad praed' tenement' pertinent' in perpetuum. Et si
contingat quod iidem E. et I. obier' sine haered' de corpore ipsius E. per
praed' I. legitime procreat', tunc post decessum ipsorum E. and I. praedicta
tenementa cum pertinentiis integre remanebunt haeredibus de corpore ipsius E.
Tenend' de capitalibus dominis feodi illius per servitia quae ad praed.
tenement' pertinent' in perpetuum secundum formam statuti.

Prima Proclamatio facta fuit 22 die November. term. sancti Michaelis anno
undecimo Reg. infr s^r. Secunda Proclamatio facta fuit 24 die November. eod.
termino. Tertia Proclamatio 26 die November. eodem Termino. Quarta Proclam' 29
die November. eod. Termino. Quinta Proclamatio facta fuit septimo die Feb.
termino sancti Hillarii Anno 11 dict Reg. infr. scr. Sexta Proclamatio 9 die
Feb eodem Termino. Septima Proclamatio die Feb. eod. Termino. Octavo
Proclamatio 12 die Feb e^d. Termino. Nona Proclamatio facta fuit 14 die Maii
Termino Paschae anno 12 Reg. infr. scr. Decima Proclamatio 17 die Maii eodem
Termino. undecima Proclamatio 23 die Maii eodem Termino. Duodecima Proclamatio
28 die Maii eodem Termino. Tertia Decima Proclamatio facta fuit 22 die Junii
Termino Sanctae Trinitatis anno undecimo Reg. infr. Scr. Quartadecima
Proclamatio 25 die Junii eodem Termino. Quintadecima Proclamatio 27 die Junii
eodem Termino. Quae omnia and singula ad requisitionem W. W. gen' tenore
praesentium duximus exemplificand. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum nostrum ad
brevia in Banco Sigilland' deputat' praesentibus apponi fecimus T.F.W.W. et F.
R. Just. de Banco praed' apud Westminster. die etc. Anno Reg. nunc 20. etc.

The Foot of a Fine.
HAEc est finalis Concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud Westminster. a die
Sancti Michaelis in 15 dies Anno Regni Regis Edwardi filii Regis Henrici
Tricessimo tertio coram Radulpho de Hengham, Willielmo de Bereford, Elia de
Beckingham, Petro Malore, Willielmo Howard, et Lamberto de Trykingham, Justic'
et al' domini Regis fidelibus tunc ibi praesentibus, Inter Rogerum de Gamages
et Ciciliam uxor' ejus Queren. et Johannem filium Johannis de Ballingham
deforc', de Duabus mess. 52 acris terr' et una acra bosci et dimid' unius acrae
Pasturae et medietate unius acrae Prati cum pertin' in B^llingham unde Placitum
conventionis summonitum fuit inter eos in ead' Cur. sc. Quod praedict' R.
recogn' praed' tenementa cum pertinentiis esse jus ipsius Johannis. Et pro hac
recognitione, fine et Concordia idem Johannes concessit praedict' Rogero et
Ceciliae praedict' tenementa cum pertin. et illa eis reddid' in ead' Cur'.
Habend. et tenend. eisdem Rogero et Ceciliae de Capitalibus Dominis feodi
illius per servitia quae ad tenementa pertinent. in perpetuum. Et praeterea
idem Johannes concessit pro se et haeredibus suis, quod ipsi warrant. eisdem
Rogero et Ceciliae et haeredibus ipsius Caeciliae praedicta tenementa cum
pertin. contra omnes homines in perpetuum. Et pro hac recognitione, redditione,
warrant', fine et concordia, iidem Rogerus and Caecilia dederunt praed' Johanni
viginti libras sterlingorum.

If there be either a precedent or subsequent agreement either before or after
the levying of a Fine; the Fine shall operate to those uses only which were so
agreed upon or declared as aforesaid; and those are done in this Form:

Au Indenture to lead the use of a Fine.
THis Indenture Tripartite made, etc. between A. B. of C. and D. his wife of
the first part; E.F. of G. and H. his wife of the second part, and J. K. and L.
M. of the third part. Whereas the said A.B. and D. his wife, having in the Term
of St. Hill. etc. last past knowledged a Fine in due form of Law, of all those
Six Messuages or Tenements called, etc. with the appurtenances, and of Seven
Cottages and one Curtilage with the appurtenances, in the Parish of, etc. to
the said I.K. and L.M. and the heirs of the said L. M. for ever. Now this
Indenture witnesses, That the true intent and meaning of the said Fine, and of
all the Parties thereunto and of these presents was and is, and It is by these
presents, and by all the Parties thereunto declared, That the said Fine and all
effects thereof shall be and enure, and shall be construed and taken to be and
enure to the only uses, behoofs, intents and purposes hereafter mentioned;
that is to say, to the use and behoof of them the said, etc. their and either
of their assigns, for and during the natural life of the said, etc. and from
and after the decease of the said, etc. then to the use and behoof of the said
A. B. and D. his wife, their heirs and assigns for ever, and to no other use or
uses, intents or purposes whatsoever, any matter or thing in the said Fine
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In witness
whereof, etc.

Another with grant of an Annuity.
THis Indenture, etc. Between A. etc. and E. of the one part, and B. etc. of
the other part. Whereas the said A. has etc. as by, etc. ( prout antea, and
here make your necessary recitals,) Now his Indenture witnesses, and it is
hereby declared, etc. That the use and uses, intent and purpose of the said
Fine is, and is by these presents declared, limited and appointed to be to the
use and uses, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents limited and
appointed, and to no other use or uses, intents or purposes whatsoever; that is
to say, (here recite and declare the uses) And the true intent and meaning of
the said Fine farther is, and by these presents is declared to be, to the
intent that he the said E. Brother of the said A. and S. his wife, shall and
may have and perceive for and during the term of their natural lives and the
longer liver of them, one annual Rent or Sum of, etc. to be issuing out of
the Premises yearly at the four usual Feasts or Terms in the Year, and to
begin at the first of the said Feasts which shall be next after the death of
the said A. And if the said Rent or any part thereof be behind or unpaid, etc.
that then the said E. shall distrain in the Premises or any part thereof as
for a Rentcharge: and also that he the said E. shall have and enjoy one
Message, etc. for his natural life, etc. In witness, etc.

This I take to be sufficient as to Presidents, I will now show what is most
necessary to be known in this particular, wherein I will give you several
Observations.

And in the first place, take notice that Uses may be thus declared on a Fine,
Feoffment or Recovery of Land: but upon a Bargain and Sale no declaration can
be of any other use than what the Law does make upon it. So upon a Covenant of
Uses no declaration may be of other uses than what are in the Deed.

2. That whoever may dispose of Land, may dispose of the use thereof, for the
declaration of the use does follow the Land.

3. That although such declaration may be made by words, yet it is not safe to
do it otherwise than by Deed Indented.

4. This may be made before, at or after the time of the making the assurance.
As for Example, One may Covenant or agree that A. shall recover his Land
against him, or that he will levy a Fine or make a Feoffment of it to him, and
that the same shall be to the use of himself or others. And if one make a
Feoffment, he may declare the uses of it at the same time, and that within the
same or another Deed at his pleasure. And if the assurance be past, and no
declaration had before or at the time of passing it, a declaration may be
subsequent, and such declaration or Indenture may declare and direct the Uses
of a Fine and Recovery, but with this difference, viz. Where precedent
Indentures are made to direct the uses of a subsequent assurance; and after the
assurance is made accordingly, there no averment shall be received by word,
that the same Assurance was to other uses than are declared by the Indenture.
But against an Indenture subsequent declaring the uses of the assurance
precedent, an Averment may be taken that there were other Uses limited before
or at the time of the assurance, than are contained in the Indenture.

5. The declaration of Uses by Indenture must be certain in the persons to
whom; in the Lands, etc. of which; and in the estates and time for which the
uses are declared: and it must be complete and certain, without reference to
any other; for incertainty destroys all.

6. When an Indenture Precedent is to limit the uses of a subsequent Fine or
Recovery, and it is not pursued in some circumstances of time, Person, Quantity
or the like; yet if no other new mean agreement be proved to intervene, the
assurance shall be to the uses in the same Indenture: But if the Variance be in
these particulars, and the form of the Indenture be not pursued, there an
Averment may be received that it was to other uses than what are contained in
the Indenture; and if none such can be made, then is it left to construction of
Law.

7. And for the Parties to the Indentures to lead such uses, take this, That a
Deed to lead the use of a fine, may be either by an Instrument Poll or
Indented; and the Indented may be either single, of two parts, of three parts
called Tripartite, or four parts called Quadripartite, or of more parts, as the
case is, thus; This Indenture, etc. between A. of the one part, and B. of the
second part. Or Tripartite, as, This Indenture, etc. between A. of the first
part, B. of the second, and D. of the third part. Or Quadripartite, between A.
of the first part, C. of the second part, E. of the third part, and G. of the
fourth part, and so to name all the persons (except the common Vouchee) that
bear any part in the Deed, Fine or Recovery. And so in all other matters as the
case is, the Indentures are to be drawn up.

In the last place, I will cite Six or Seven Cases in this Point, and so go on
to the next head.

1.
In 31 H. 8. Nota, That a Fine being enrolled in London, does bind as a Fine at
Common Law, but not as a fine with Proclamations, and there needs no Livery of
Seisin upon the Deed: and this is a Discontinuance without Livery, for that by
the custom there, this binds as a fine; and the Customs are confirmed by
diverse Acts of Parliament, Litt. Broo. Case 155.

2.
In Pasche 2 Jac. B. R. in the Case of the Countess of Rutland against the Earl
of Rutland, It was held upon Evidence to a Jury, and to them delivered by the
Court for Law, That if there be an Indenture for levying of a Fine to such
persons before such a time, to such uses, and the fine be levied to the same
persons, within the same time; it shall be to the same uses: And no Averment
can be to the contrary, unless it be by other matter in writing. But if a fine
be levied to other persons, or at another time, it may be well averred by
Paroll to be to other uses: For in the first case the Indenture is directory to
the fine; and in the other case it is but Evidence, Cro. 2.29.

3.
If a Woman who is an inheritrix, covenants by Indenture without the knowledge
or consent of the husband to levy a Fine to certain Conusees and Uses in the
Indenture mentioned; and afterward the Husband covenants by another Indenture,
without the knowledge and consent of his wife to levy a fine to other Conusees
and Uses in that Indenture mentioned: and afterward the husband and wife join
in a fine to the Conusees in the Indenture of the wife mentioned: In this case
the Limitations and Declarations of both the Uses in both the Indentures are
void; and the Fine shall be by construction of Law to the use of the woman and
her heirs, as if no use had been declared: for the wife alone, though she be
Owner of the Land, yet being sub Potestate Viri, cannot limit the use on the
one side; And the husband who has not any thing in his own right, cannot,
without the good liking of the wise, limit the use of the Wives Land. So the
one is not sui Juris, and has an Estate; The other is sui Juris, and has not
the Estate: and therefore when they differ in the limitation of the Uses, all
which they do must be void.

4.
Tenant for life by Fine granted totum statum to A. and his heirs, the Grantee
dies; the heir being impleaded in a Praecipe prayed aid, and could not have it,
because it is but an Occupance. Co. 10.95. Dyer 321.

5.
In the Case of Iseham and Morris, Pasch. 4 Car. 1. It was Resolved among other
things, That where one is Lessee for years, and assigns over his Lease in trust
for himself, and afterward purchases the Inheritance, and occupies the Land,
and then levies a a Fine with Proclamations, and the Lessee does not claim the
Lease within the five years, this Fine and Non-claim shall bar the interest
of the Lessee, though he who levied the Fine has the possession by reason of
the Trust: But this Trust is included in the fine; and the Trustee not making
claim, his Interest is barred thereby. Cro. 1.78.

6.
Nota. It was agreed by all the Justices, and by the Prothonotaries, That if
the Disseisor levy a Fine, and the Disseisee in the preservation of his right
against the said fine enter his Claim in the Record of the foot of the fine,
that the same is not any such claim as shall avoid the Stat. of 4 H. 7. See for
this, the Lord Zouches Case in Plowd. Com. Mich. 29 Eliz. in C. B.

7.
In Hill. 45 Eliz. B. R. Fitz-Williams Case in Ejectione Firm^, it was found,
That Fitzwilliams did suffer a Recovery to the use of himself and his wife,
with a Remainder to John Fitz-Williams, and with a Proviso in these words,
Provided, That it shall be lawful for him and his wife by their Joint Deed
sealed before three Credible witnesses, to alter, change, revoke, determine and
make void any use or uses, Estate or Estates limited in the said Deed, and to
limit new uses, and that from thenceforth the Recovery shall be to the new
uses. And it was found moreover, that Fitz Williams made a Deed, and by it
declared, That it was their intent to alter, change, determine, revoke or avoid
all the former uses to J. F. and thereupon without more words limit new Uses.
In this Case it was doubted, If the old Uses were well revoked, and the new
uses in being. And after many Arguments it was adjudged a good Revocation of
the old Uses, and a good limitation of new uses. Moors Rep. 683. And it seems
the like Law is of the Uses of a Fine.

8.
A Fine was levied to A. to the use of A. for life, the Remainder to E. in
tail, the Remainder in fee to B; Provided, That if B. pay 100 l. that he shall
have Tail in fee expectant: In this case, upon the payment the use shall arise
accordingly. Dyer 314.

9.
If there be Tenant for life, the Remainder in see to an Infant, and they both
levy a Fine, and after the fine is reversed as to the Infant; yet the Conusee
shall have the Land for the life of the Tenant for life, because that each of
them gave that which he might lawfully give. Englishes Case, Co. 1. Part, 76.
in Bredons Case.

I will in the last place give you the Statutes concerning Fines; The first of
which is,

27 H. 1. Stat. 1. cap. 1. De finibus levatis; Exception against a Fine, that
the Plaintiffs or Defendants or their Ancestors were always seized of the
Lands contained in the fine, shall not from henceforth be admitted in the
Parties to the fine or their heirs. The Fines shall two days in the Week be
publicly and solemnly read, and all Pleas cease in the mean time.

34 Ed. 3. cap. 18. The Plea of Non-claym of Fines from henceforth to be levied
shall not be any bar.

Marlb. 1. cap. 7. All Fines whereupon Proclamations be not or shall not be
duly made (by reason of the adjournment of any term by Writ) shall be as good
as if any Term had been holden from the beginning to the end, and Proclamations
therein made according to the Statute.

5 H. 4. cap. 14. All Writs of Covenant and other whereupon Fines be levied,
the Dedimus Potestatem and all Conusances and Notes of the same before that
they be drawn out of the Common Bench by the Chirographer, shall be enrolled in
a Roll, to be of Record for ever; out of the which execution shall be had if
the notes or fines shall be imbezelled.

34 H. 7. cap. 24. Every Fine after the engrossing shall be proclaimed in the
Court the same Term, and the three next, four several days in every Term, all
Pleas ceasing the whilst: which Proclamations so made, the fine shall conclude
all Privies and Strangers, except women covert, persons, within 21 years of
age, in prison, out of the Realm or of nonsane memory, (being no parties to the
fine; so they or their heirs take their action or lawful entry within five
years after those imperfections removed. Saving to all persons and their heirs
(other than parties) the right claim and interest which they have at the time
of the fine; so that they pursue it by Action or lawful Entry within five years
next after the Proclamations. And saving to all other persons such right,
title, claym and interest, as first shall grow, remain or come to them after
the Proclamations by force of any matter before the fine; so they take their
right according to the Law within five years after it grows, etc. And those
that be Covert Baron, etc. at the time when it grows, etc. that they or their
heirs take their actions or lawful entry within five years after those
imperfections removed; Saving also to all not parties nor privies, the
exception that none of the parties nor any to their use had any thing in the
Lands at the time of the fine.

31 H. 8. cap. 36. All Fines levied by any person of 21 years of age, of Lands
entailed before the same fine to himself or his Ancestors in Possession,
Reversion, Remainder or Use, shall immediately after Proclamation made, be a
sufficient Bar against him and his heirs, clayming only by such entayle, and
against all other, clayming only to his use or the use of any Heir of his Body.

23 Eliz. cap. 3. Every Writ of Covenant or other Writ whereupon any Fine is
levied, the Return thereof, the Dedimus Potestatem and return thereof, the
Concord, Note and Foot of the Fine, the Proclamations and Queens silver, Also
every Writ of Entry in the Post or other Writ whereupon any Common Recovery is
suffered; the Writs or Summons ad Warrantizandum, and the returns of all these
Writs and every Warrant of Attorney may at any man's request be enrolled; which
enrollment shall be of as great force to all purposes in Law as the things
themselves if they were extant.

No Fine, Proclamation or Common Recovery shall be reversed by Writ of Error by
reason of false Latin, rasure, interlining, mis-entring the Warrant of
Attorney or of any Proclamation, mis-entring or non-return of the Sheriff, or
by reason of any other defect of Form in words, and not in matter of substance.

31 Eliz. cap. 2. Proclamations of Fines shall be only four times, viz. once
in the Term wherein the fine is engrossed, and once every of the three Terms
next after.

Of a Recovery.
A Common Recovery is only Fi^lio Juris, being a certain form used for the
better assuring of Lands or Tenements upon any man. And this Recovery by assent
is now by common usage a kind of conveyance upon which a use may be limited and
averred. And there is a great difference between a Recovery by assent, and a
Recovery without assent, though without title. Co. 1. Sir William Pelhams Case
14.

In the formalities whereof three things or parties are required, viz. a
Demandant, a Tenant, and a Vouchee, as efficient causes thereof, and the Land
demanded as the matter thereof.

1. The Demandant is he that brings the Writ of Entry, and may be termed
properly enough the Recoveror.

2. The Tenant is he against whom the Writ is brought, and may be styled the
Recoverce.

3. The Vouchee is he whom the Tenant voucheth or calls to warranty for the
Land in demand: And it is either with a single Voucher, which is where the Writ
is brought against him that is to pass the Land immediately, and he does vouch
over the common Vouchee: And sometimes with a double Voucher, which is when the
writ is brought against another to whom he that is to pass the Land has
aliened it, and he does vouch him that is to make the assurance, and he does
vouch over the common Vouchee; and this is the surest and safest kind of
Recovery: And this may be also with a treble Vouchee.

And here observe, That a Common Recovery is much of the nature of a Fine, and
has much favor from the Law at this day, and is in some respects better than
a Fine; for a fine will bar the Heir in tail, but not him in Remainder or
Reversion; but a Recovery bars them all. Co. 1.22.62.

The method of suffering a Recovery, and the manner and order of proceeding
therein is as follows.

First, There must be a Writ of Entry, and therein a Demandant, a Tenant and a
Vouchee, for if either of these be wanting, it is not a complete Recovery; and
such persons and by such names may be Demandants, Tenants and Vouchees in
Recoveries as may be Cognisors and Cognisees in Fines. Co. upon Litt. 372. But
the persons and parties must be competent and capable, and there must be a
lawful Tenant to the Praecipe.

2. In the Writ of Entry there must be Land contained, or some other thing
demanded, and that such as is demandable, and therefore we are to take notice,
That of such things and by such names as a Writ of Covenant for the levying of
a fine may be had, a Writ of Entry for suffering a Recovery may be had. See
Doctor and Student, 52. Mores Rep. 953.

3. It must not contain the same thing twice, as to name a Message and a House
parcel of the same Message, nor a Town and a Hamlet within the same Town.

4. If the Writ of Entry be returnable Crastino Martini, the Writ of Summons ad
Warrant. thereupon must bear Test from the return of Crast. Mart. and be
returnable nine returns after the return of the Writ of Entry inclusive, that
is, accounting Crast. Mart. for one of the nine returns, and Tres Paschae which
is the ninth return after Crast. Mart. for another. And the Test of the Writ
of Seisin must be the day of that ninth return, and be returnable fifteen days
after. If a single Recovery and a Fine be against the Tenant, the Writ of Entry
must bear date and Test before the Writ of Covenant, and be returned before it.

5. If a Writ of Covenant be brought against the Tenant, and a Writ of Entry
against the Demandant, then the Writ of Covenant must bear date and be returned
before the Writ of Entry; and this is called the double Voucher.

6. That all Writs of Entry must be signed by the Kings Attorney before they be
sealed, and Fines to the King are to be paid upon them as upon Writs of
Covenant. The Warrant of Attorney by the Clerk of the Warrants, and the Writ of
Entry, Summons and Seisin are to be returned and filed with the Custos Brevium,
and the Judgment to be entered by the Prothonorary.

7. That in a Recovery with a double Voucher, the fine must be sued first to
make him Tenant to the Writ of Entry, brought either by right or wrong: for
every Writ of Entry must be brought always against him that is Tenant of the
Freehold of the Land demanded at the time of the Writ brought, he must be at
least Tenant for life, or a Disseisor of the Land whereof the Recovery is had,
for the Estate of the Tenant in tail which is vouched is barted in respect of
the Assets only, which are or may be recovered in value end of execution sued
by the Tenant against him. Plow. 11. Dyer 252. And if the Tenant have but an
Estate for life or in Dower, or by Courtesy, in these cases to have a good
Recovery, such Tenant is ^o make a conditional Surrender of his Estate to him
in Reversion or ^^mainder, that he may be a perfect Tenant to the Inheritance,
and then to bring a Writ of Entry against him; and after the Recovery is
executed, the particular Tenant for breach of the Condition may enter and enjoy
his Estate notwithstanding such Surrender.

A President for a Lease to make a Tenant to the Praecipe.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between, A. B. of, etc. of the one part, and C. D.
of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That whereas the said A. B. does hold
one Message, etc. in D. in the County of M. the immediate Reversion or
Remainder whereof does belong to the said C. D. and his heirs, or to the heirs
of his body lawfully begotten for ever. Now the said A. B. for the making and
perfecting of some assurance shortly to be made of the same Message, etc. by
way of common Recovery, Has Granted and Surrendered, and by these presents Does
Grant and Surrender unto the said C. D. and his heirs, upon the condition
herein after mentioned all that the said Message, etc. and all the estate,
right, title and interest of the said A. B. therein. To have and to hold to the
said C.D. and his heirs, upon condition, That if the said C.D. do not pay or
cause to be paid to the said A. B. the Sum of 1000 l. of lawful English money
upon the first day of December next comeing after the date hereof, That then
and from thenceforth this Grant and Surrender shall be utterly void; and it
shall be lawful for the said A. B. into the same Message, etc. to re-enter,
and the same to repossess and enjoy as in his former Estate. In witness, etc.

As to the Warrant of Attorney and Dedimus Po^estatem, take this;

First, That in the suffering of Recoveries the Tenants and Vouchees do most
commonly appear in person; But if they cannot or will not, then they may make
an Attorney: And in that case there must be a Conusance for a Warrant of
Attorney taken to authorize the Atturneys, and a Dedimus Potestatem to some to
take it in this manner:

Land. ss. Praec. A. B. et C. uxor ejus quod just etc. redd. D. E. Manerium de
M. cum pertin. etc. quae clam^ee ^us et haered. suam et in quae tidem A. and B.
non habent ingress. nisi post disse^^nam quam H. H. injuste et sine judicio
secit praefat. D infra 30 ann^s jam ultim. clapsos etc. ^t dic. etc.

Land. ss. A. B. et C. po. lo. suo W. W. et R. R. Attornat. suos conjunctim and
divisim versus D.E. de placito terrae.

Land. ss. M. M. Genesis quem A.B. et C. vocant. ad warrant. po. lo. suo. I. I. et
L. L. Attornat suos conjunctim et divisim versus D. E. de placito terrae.

Land. ss. G. W. Genesis Quem M. M. voc. inde ad warrant. po. lo. suo R. G. and R.
S. Attornat. suos conjunctim and divisim versus D. E. de placieo terrae.

Secondly, That in these cases there must be two Atturneys at the least, and to
give them an authority jointly and severally, that if one of them dye before
the Recovery be suffered, the other may have power to do it. And in the
Counties Palatine it is usual to put one Attorney, and one of the Justices
Clerks.

Thirdly, When this is done, the Recoveries may be suffered by the Atturneys
without the personal appearance of the parties, and such Recovery is good, only
it will require a longer time to perfect it: for in this case there must go
forth a Summoneas ad warran. which must have Nine Returns ere it can be
perfected.

Fourthly, The Recovery thus suffered by the parties in person or by their
Attorneys, the same must be entered by one of the Clerks of the Court of Common
Pleas upon the Rolls of the same Court, there to remain upon Record.

The Forms of Recoveries suffered in the Common Pleas Court or elsewhere, are
well known to Clerks there Practicing. However, I will give you one excellent
President of a Recovery suffered in the Court of the Hustings at London, and
likewise the forms of Indentures to limit and declare the Uses of Recoveries.

A President of a Recovery suffered in the Hustings Court, London, with double
Voucher.
PLacita terrae tent. in Hustingo in Guyhald' Lond' die Lunae proxime post
festum sancti Johannis ante Portam Latinam, Anno Regni nostri Jacobi dei gratia
Angl' Scot' Franc' and Hibern' Regis, Pidei Defensor, etc. viz. Angl', Franc'
and Hibern' 18. et Scotiae 53. Ad hunc Hustingum ven. hic in propria persona
sua D.W. et protulit hic in Cur. brev. dicti domini Regis nunc de Recto Paten.
Majori and Vicecomiti London direct^ in haec verba scilicet.

Jacobus Dei gratia Angl', Scot', Franc' et Hibern' Rex, Fidei Defensor, etc.
Majori et Vice-Com. Land. salutem. Praecipimus vobis quod sine dilatione plenum
rectum teneatis D. W. de 12 Mess. 2 Gardinis, et 5 Curtilagiis cum pertin. in
London quae clamat tenere de Nobis per liberum servitium unius denarii per
annum pro omni servitio. Quae R. V. ei deforc. ne amplius inde clam. audiamus
pro defe^n Recti Test Meipso apud Westminster. 4 die Maii Anno regni nostri Angl',
Fran. and Hibern' 18. and Scot. 53. Et tunc et ibidem idem D. W. invenit pleg.
de pros. breve illud, viz. Johannem Do, et Richardum Roe, et tunc et ibid. et
tunc and ibid. id. D.W. po. lo. suo H. C. Attornat. suum verse. praefat. R. V.
in placito terrae etc. Et per eund. Attorn. suum tunc and ibid. petit. process.
ei superinde fieri versus praefat. R. V. secundum cons. Civitatis Land. Et ei
conced. etc. super quo praecept. est tunc et ibid. per eand. Cur. Vicecom.
Land. secundum cons. Civit. praedict. quod ipsi summon. per bon. summon. praed.
R. V. quod sit hic in Cur. ad prox. Hustingum London de placitis tearae in
Guihald. Civit. praed secundum Cons. e^usdem Civit. tenend', ad Respondend.
praefat. D. W. in placito pr^d. etc. Et idem dies dat. est tunc and ibid. per
eand. Cur. prafat. D. W. in eodem placito hic etc.

Ad quem diem scilicet ad Hustingum London de placitis terrae tent. in Guihald.
Civit. praed' die Lunae prox. ante festum Nativitatis sancti Johannis Baptistae
Anno regni dicti domini nostri Jacobi nunc Regis Angl' Fran' et Hibern' 18.
praed' and Scotiae 53. praed. dictus D.W. per dict. H. C. Atturnatum suum ven.
et comperuit hic etc. Et Vicecom' London viz. R.D. and J.C. modo mandaver. et
retorn' hic super praeceptum praed' eis direct' quod ipsi virtute praecepti
illius summon. praed. R.V. ven. hic ad hunc Hustingum ad respondend. D. W.
praefat. in placito praed. etc. prout etc. per Johannem Do and Richardum Roe
summon. etc. Qui quidem R. V. ad hunc Hustingum exact. in propria persona sua
comperuit, et modo hic ad Hustingum ult. praed. D.W. per H.C. Attornat. suum
petit versus praed. R. V. 12 Mess', 2 Gardina and 5 Curtilagia cum pertin.
scituat', jacen. et existen. in Paroch. sancti B. extra B. in Warda de B. Land.
ut ius suum etc. per breve dicti domini Regis nunc de Recto Paten. etc. quae
clamat tenere de dicto domino Rege per liberum servitium unius denarii per ann.
pro omni servitio etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit seisic', de Mess.
Gardin. and Curtilag. praed' cum pertin. etc. in dominico suo ut de feodo et
jure etc. tempore pacis t^npore dicti Domini Regis nunc etc. Capiend. inde
expless. ad valenc. etc. Et quod tale sit (...) suum offert etc. Et praed. R.
V. in propria persona sua ven. and defend. ^us praed. D. W. qui etc. Et
seisinam ejusdem D.W. de qua seisina etc. et tot. etc. Et quicquid etc. ut de
seodo et jure, et maxim de Mess. Gardin. et Curtilag. praed' cum pertin. etc.
et vocat inde ad warrantizand. E. H. qui modo praesens est hic in Cur' in
propria persona sua et gratis Mess', Gardin' et Curtilag: praed' cum pertin.
etc. praefat. R.V. warrantizat. etc.

Et super hoc ad eund. Hustingum praedict' D. W. per Attornat. suum praedict'
petit versus praed' E.H. tenen. per warran. suam praed' tunc et ibid. in
propria p^rsona sua existen. Messuag', Gardin. et Curtilag. praed' cum
pertinen. etc. ut jus suum etc. per breve praed. etc. in forma praed' etc. Et
unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit seisit. de Messuag', Gardin. et Curtilag.
praedict' cum pertin. etc. in dominico suo ut de feodo et jure etc. tempore
pacis tempore domini Regis nunc etc. capiend. inde expless. ad valenc' etc. Et
quod tale sit jus suum offert etc. Et praed' E. H. in propria persona sua ven'
et defendit jus praed. D. W. qui etc. et seisinam ejusd. D. W. de qua seisina
etc. et totum etc. et quicquid ex ut de feodo et jure etc. et maxim de
Messuag', Gardin. et Curtilag. praedict. cum pertinen. etc. et vocat inde ad
warrantizand. praed. E. H. Messuag'. Gardin. et Curtilag. praed. cum pertinen.
versus praed. D.W. etc. Et praed. D.W. per Attornat suum praed. gratis conced.
quod praed. E. H. habeat vocare suum praed etc. Ideo stet vocare etc. Et super
hoc ad ill. eund. Hustingum ad pecitionem dicti D. W. praecept. est per Cur'
hic Vicecom' Land. quod ipsi summon. per ^on. summon. praed. R. M. quod sit hic
ad prox. Husting. London' de placitis terrae in Guihald' Civitat' praed'
tenend. ad Warrantizand. E. H. praefat. praedic^. Messuag', Gardin et Curtilag.
cum pertinen. etc. versus praed. D. W. Et idem dies dat. est tunc et ibidem per
eand. Cur' t^m praefat. D. W. quam praefat. R. V. et E. H. in placito praedict'
etc.

Ad quem diem scilicet ad Hustingum Lendon de placitis terrae tent. in Guihald.
Land. die Lunae prox' post Festum Apostolerum Petri et Pauli, Anno r^gni di^it
Domini nostri Jacobi nunc Regis Angl' Fran' et Hihern' 18. praed' et Scotiae
53. praed. ven hic tam praed' D.W. per praed. H. C. Atturnatum suum quam praed.
R. V. et E.H. in propri^s personis suis et Vicecom' Lond' viz praed. R. D. et
J. C. modo mandaver' et returnaver' hic super praecep^um pr^ed. eis direct.
quod ipsi virtute praecepti illius summon. praedict' R. M. Eund' hic ad hunc
Hustingum ad u^^rrantizand. praesat. E. H. Messuag', Gardin. et Curtilag.
praed. cum pertinen. pr^ut eis etc. per J. G. et R. G. summon. etc, Et super
hoc tunc et ibidem ad eund. Hustingum dictus R. M. quem praed. E. H. vocavit ad
warrantizand. etc. po. lo. suo R. S. et J. G. Attornat. suos conjunctim et
divisim versus praefat. D. W. in placito pr^^d. etc. per R. H. Armigerum
Recordator. Civitat. praed' etc. Et modo hic^nd himc Hustingum praed. R. M. per
praed. R. S. Attornat. suum vonit et gratis Messuag', Gardin. et Curtilag.
praed. cum pertin. etc. praefat. E. H. versus dict. D. W. warrantizat. etc. Et
super hoc ad eund. Hustingum praed. D.W. per Attorn. suum praed' petit versus
praefat. R. M. tenend. per warran. suam praed. Messuag', Gardin. et Curtilag.
praed. cum pertin. ut jus suum etc. per breve praed. etc. in forma praed. etc.
et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de Messuag. Gardin. et Curtila^.
praed. cumpertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo et jure etc. tempore pacis
tempore dicti Domini Regis nunc etc. Capiend. inde expless. ad valenc. etc. Et
quod tale sit jus suum offert etc. Et praed. R. M. per dict' R.S. Attorn. suum
ven. and defend. jus praed. D. W. qui etc. et seisinam ejusd. D. W. de qua
seisina etc et totum etc. et quicquid etc. ut de feodo et jure etc. et maxim
de Mess. Gardin. and Curtilag. praed' cum pertin. etc. et vocat inde ad
Warrantizand. A. W. civem et aurisabrum London, qui modo praesens est hic in
Cur' in propria persona sua et gratis Messuag. Gardin. et Curtilag. praed. cum
pertin. etc. praefat. R. M. versus praed. D. W. warrantizat. etc. Et super hoc
ad Hus^ingum ultim' praed' dictus, D. W. per Attornat. suum praed. petit versus
praed' A.W. tenen. per warran suam praed' tunc et ibidem in propria persona sua
existen', Messuag', Gardin. et Curtilag. praed. cum pertin. ut jus suum etc.
per breve praed. etc. in forma praed. etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit
seisitus de Messuag', Gardin. et Curtilag. praed. cum pertinen. in dominico suo
ut de seodo et jure etc. tempore pacis tempore dicti Domini Regis nunc etc.
Capiend' inde expless. ad Valenc' etc. Et quod tale sit jus suum offert etc. Et
pr^d. A.W. tenens per Warrant' suam praed. in propria persona sua ven. et
desend. jus praed. D. W. qui etc. et seisinam ejusdem D. W. de qua seisina etc.
Et totum etc. et quicquid etc. ut de feodo et jure etc. et maxim de Mess.
Gardin. et Curtilag praed' cum pertin etc. et dicit quod ipse ma^us jus habet
tenend. Mes^uag', Gardin', et Curtilag' pr^d. cum pertin. etc. ut tenens inde
per warrant. suam praed. sibi et haeredibus suis ut il' nunc tenet quam praed.
D. W. habet, petend' Mess. Gardin. et Curtilag^ praed' cum pertin prout il'
superius pet. etc. Et de hoc ponit se super magnam assisam dicti Domini Regis
nunc etc. et petit recognitionem ei superinde sieri secundum cons. Civit.
praed. etc. Et super hoc praed. D. W. per Attorn. suum praed. pet. licentiam
inde interloquendi etc. Et habet etc. Et postea idem D. W. per Attornat. suum
praed. revenit ad i^' eand' Cur' Hustingal' parat ad placitum ejusd' A W ^enen
per Warrant suam pr^^^. in forma praed placitat' replicand' etc. Et praed. A.
W. tenens per warran^ suam praed' licet solemniter exact' non reven. sed in
contemptu praed. Cur^ reces^i^ et desaltam fecit.

Ideo confideratum est tune and ibidem per eand. Cur' quod praed' D.W.
recuperet seisinam suam versus praefat. R.V. de Messuag', Gardin. and Curtilag.
praed cum pertin. etc. Tenend. eidem D. W. et haered. suis quiele de praed' R.
V. et haered. suis ac de praed' E. H. et haered. suis ac etiam de praed. R. M.
et haered. suis necnon de praef. A. W. et haered. suis in perpetuum. Et quod
praed. R.V. habeat de terris and tenementis praed. E.H. ad Valenc' etc. Et quod
praed. E.H. habeat de terris et tenementis praed. R.M. ad valenc' etc. Et quod
praed. R.M. habeat de terris et tenementis praed. A. W. ad valenc' etc. Et quod
idem A. W. sit in misericor. etc. Et super hoc ad il' eund. Hustingum ad
Petitionem dicti D, W. praecept. est per Cur' hic Vice-com. Land. quod ipsi
eidem D. W. de Mess. Gardin. et Curtilag. praed. cum pertin. etc. hab ere
facer. plenam et pacificam seisinam et qualiter boc praecept. fuer. execut.
scire facer. Cur' hic ad prox. Hustingum London de placitis terrae in Guihald.
Civitat. praed. tenend. etc. Ad quem diem, scilicet ad Hustingum Land. de
placitis terrae tent. in Guihald. Land. die Lunae proxime post Festum Sanctae
Mildredae Virginis anno regni dicti Domini nostri Jacobi nunc Regis Angl',
Franciae et Hibern' 18. praed. et Scotiae 53. praed. Vicecom' London. viz.
praed. R.D. et J.D. returnaver' et certificaver' Cur' hic etc. quod ipsi
virtute praecepti praed. eis direct' plenam et pacificam seisinam praefat. D.
W. de Messuag' Gardin' et Curtilag' praed' cum pertin' etc. babere facer. juxta
exigent. praecepti praed' prout eis superius praecept' fuit etc.

An Indenture of Covenant for a Recovery to be suffered.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A.B. of, etc. of the one part, and B.C. of,
etc. on the other part, witnesses, That it is covenanted, etc. That the said
B. C. shall in Easter Term next recover to him and his Heirs for ever by a Writ
of Entry sur disseisin in le Post to be had and prosecuted against the said
A.B. before the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Common Pleas at Westminster,
according to the usual course of Common Recoveries heretofore had, the Manor
of S. with the appurtenances in D. in the County of M. being now the
Inheritance of the said A.B. and that the said Recovery so to be had, and the
full force and execution thereof shall be and enure, and shall be deemed,
constiued and taken to be and enure to the use of the said A. B. his heirs and
assigns for ever; And the said B. C. and his heirs and assigns, shall and will,
from and after the time the said Recovery shall be had and perfected, stand and
be seized of all the said Manor with the appurtenances, to the only use and
behoof of the said A.B. his heirs and assigns for ever, and to none other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture declaring the uses of a Recovery already suffered.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. M. of, etc. of the one part, and A. T.
of, etc. on the other part, etc. Whereas the said A. T. has this present Term
of St. Michael recovered to him and his heirs for ever by a Writ of Entry sur
Disseisin in le Post, and prosecuted against the said T. M. before Sir John
Vaughan Knight, etc. the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Court of Common Pleas
at Westminstor, according to the usual order and form of Recoveries heretofore
used, the Manor of L. with the appurtenances, and diverse other Lands, etc.
lying in the Parishes, etc. in the County, etc. at the time of the said
Recovery had, being the inheritance of the said T. M. (other than such
Messuages and Lands as the said T. lately purchased of one P.S. by the names
of, etc.)

Now this Indenture witnesses, That it is covenanred, condescended to,
concluded and agreed between the said parties to these presents in manner and
form following, That the intent and true meaning of all the said parties now
is, and at the time of the said Recovery so had and suffered was, that the said
Recovery should and shall be and enure, and construed to be and enure; And that
the said A. T. and his heirs immediately from and after the said Recovery so
had and executed, should and shall stand and be seized of the said Manor, and
all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances in the
said Recovery meant and intended to be comprised to the only uses and intents
hereafter by these presents set forth and declared, and to none other uses,
intents or purposes whatsoever; That is to say, to the use of the said T.M. for
the term of his natural life; and after his decease, then to the use and behoof
of the eldest Son of the said T.M. begotten or to be begotten on the Body of M.
the intended Wife of the said T. M. and the heirs males of the Body of the said
eldest Son; and for default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of the said T.M.
for ever.

A Proviso for Revocation of uses.
PRovided always, That if the said T. M. party to these presents, shall at any
time during his natural life intend or be willing to alter, change, revoke or
make void the said Estates, Remainders, Uses and Limitations before in these
presents mentioned, or any of them, etc. and shall by any writing or writings
under his hand and seal in the presence of two credible witnesses at the least,
signify and declare, That his mind and intent is to alter, change, revoke or
make void the Uses, etc. That then and at all times after such writing and
writings shall be so signed and sealed, all the said Estates, Uses, etc. before
in these presents specified and declared; and in the said writing or writings
mentioned, shall from thenceforth cease, determine, be revoked and utterly for
ever void.

And that then and at all times after he the said A. T. his Heirs and Assigns,
and all and every other person and persons whatsoever, which shall be then
seifed of the said Premises, with their Appurtenances, or any part or parcel
thereof, shall stand and be seized thereof, or of so much thereof as shall be
mentioned and contained in the said Writing or Writings of Revocation, to the
only use and behoof of the said T. M. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, or to
such other uses, intents or purposes as in the said Writing or Writings of
Revocation shall be limited, appointed and declared, and to none other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever; any thing before specified to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture to lead the uses of a Fine and Recovery had and suffered.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. M. of, etc. and J.B and G. B. of, etc. of
the one part, and R. C. of, etc. on the other part. Whereas the said A. M.
being seifed in his Demesne as of Fee, of and in certain Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances situate, lying and being
in W. in the County of C. and it having been agreed between the said A. M. and
the said R. C. that for a valuable Consideration of money to the said A. to be
paid by the said R. the said A. should convey the same to the said R. and his
Heirs, in such manner as the Council Learned of the said R. should advise or
req^^^. And whereas by advice of the said Council Learned of the said ^. he in
Easter-Term last past before the date hereof in the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, did commence, prosecute and bring one Writ of Entry Sur Disseisin
in le Post against the said R. C. demanding thereby one Message, two Gardens,
etc. with the appurtenances in W. aforesaid, unto which the said R. did appear,
and did vouch to Warranty the said A. M. who being then present in Court, the
said Vouchee in proper person vouched over one L. M. whereby a good and perfect
Common Recovery of the said Premises with double Voucher, according to the
form of Common Recoveries in such cases used, was due in form of Law suffered
and executed. And whereas the said R. in Easter-Term aforesaid, by advice of
the Council of the said R C. did levy and knowledge in due form of Law before
his Majesty's Justices of his Highness said Court of Common Pleas, unto the
said R. C. and his Heirs, one Fine Sur Conusance de droit come ceo, etc. with
Proclamation thereupon had according to the Form of the Statute in that behalf
made and Provided, as in and by the said Fine and Recovery, relation being
thereunto had, more sully and at large may appear.

Now This Indenture Witnesses, That the said J. B. G. B. and A. M. and every
of them for themselves, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
for every of them, do covenant, grant, declare and agree to and with the said
R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents,
That the said recited Fine and Recovery, and the Recoveror and Recoverors
therein named, and their Heirs and Assigns, and the Heirs of the Survivor of
them, and all other person and persons which now are or shall be seized of the
said recited Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, shall thereof stand
and be seized to and for the only use and behoof of the said R. C. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, and to and for no other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever. In witness whereof, etc.

Revocations of Uses in former Indentures mentioned according to the power
thereby given.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between E.S. of S. in the County of M. Esquire of the
one part, and R.H. T.T. J.B. and H.H. of the other part, Witnesses, That
whereas the said E.S. did heretofore by his Indenture bearing date, etc. made
between him the said E.S. of the one part, and J.O. of P. in the said County of
L. Esquire on the other part, Covenant, grant and agree to and with the said J.O.
his Executors and Administrators, That he the said E. and his Heirs in such
manner and form as by the said recited Indenture is covenanted and agreed,
should and would convey and assure, or cause to be conveyed and assured unto
the Right Honorable H. Earl of D. since deceased, and to the said R. H. T. T.
J. B. and H. H. and their heirs, and to the Survivor of them and his heirs, all
and singular the Manors of S. B. and S. in the said County of L. and also all
and singular Suits, Seigniories, Services, Franchises, Privileges,
Court-Leets, Perquisites of Courts and Leets, View of Frank-pledge, and all
appurtenances, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever unto the said Manors
and Lordships, or unto any of them belonging and appertaining; and also all and
singular his Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever
within the several Towns, Townships, Fields, Hamlets, Precincts and Territories
of S. H. A. and O. and elsewhere in the County of L. to the several uses,
intents and purposes; in the said recited Indenture mentioned, expressed and
declared, and to no other use, intent or purpose in any wise. The particulars
of which said Uses do more plainly appear in and by the said recited Indenture,
relation being thereunto had. In which said recited Indenture of the 35 year of
her Highness Reign, there is nevertheless contained one Proviso or Clause to
the tenor or effect hereafter following, that is to say, Provided nevertheless,
etc. (here recite the Proviso of Revocation verbatim) Now therefore it is
agreed by and between the parties to these presents, and the said E. S.
according to the tenor, power or liberty of the said Proviso being fully minded
and determined to alter the Estate and Estates limited in use in or by the said
mentioned Indenture of the 35 year of her Highness Reign unto T. S. of B. and
the Heirs males of his body, and also the Estate and Estates limited in use in
or by the said recired Indentures unto J.S. for term of his life, without
impeachment of wast, and after his decease, then to E. S. son of the said J.
and the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, does by these presents and
by force, and according to the said Proviso or the power or liberty thereof,
revoke, repeal and derermine all and every the said estate and estates in any
wise limited in use in or by the said recited Indentures unto the said T. S. of
B. and the Heirs males of his body lwfully begotten; and also all and every the
estate and estates in or by the said Indentures limited in use unto the said
J.S. for term of his life, and all and every the estate or estates in or by the
said Indentures limited in use unto the said E. S. son of the said J. and the
heirs males of his body lawfully begotten of, in, for or concerning all and
every the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their and every of
their appurtenances in any wise comprised or specified in or by the said
Indentures. And likewise the said E.S. does hereby limit, publish and declare
according to the tenor of the said recited Proviso, that all and every the
Estates in any wise, manner or form, limited in use in or by the said recited
Indenture unto the said T. S. and the Heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, as also all and every the estate and estates in any manner or form
limited in use in or by the said Indenture unto the said J. S. for term of his
life without impeachment of wast, and all and every the estate and estates in
any wise, manner or form limited in use in or by the said Indenture unto the
said E. S. son of the said J. and the Heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, shall from thenceforth of, in, for and concerning all and every the
Manor, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances in any
wise comprised in the said recited Indenture, shall cease, determine, be
frustrate, void and of no farther effect or continuance in Law, any the
limitations of use or uses in the said mentioned Indenture, or any other matter
or thing whatsoever to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. And
that all and singular the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
aforesaid, with their and every of their appurtenances and the only use thereof
shall from henceforth remain, continue and be unto the said E.S. party to these
presents and his Heirs for ever; and not in any sort, manner or form unto the
said T. S. and the heirs males of his body, nor to the said J.S. for term of
his life, nor to the said E.S. Son of the said J. and the Heirs males of his
body lawfully begotten, nor to their or any of their Assign or Assigns. In
witness whereof, etc.

A Declaration of Uses upon the Revocation above-written.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, E.S. of S. in the County of L. Esquire
sends greeting. Know ye, That I the said E. S. having before the making
hereof, revoked, reduced and revested the Estate of Inheritance of all and
singular my Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever,
with the appurtenances situate, etc. in and to me the said E.S. and my heirs
for diverse causes and considerations me thereunto moving, Have Given, Granted
and Confirmed, and by these presents do Give, Grant and Confirm unto A. B. of,
etc. and R.L. of, etc. all and singular my Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their appurtenances; To have and to hold the
said Manors, etc. unto the said A. B. and R. L. their heirs and assigns, to
the several uses, behoofs, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents
specified, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever; that is to say,
to the only sole and proper use of me the said E.S. and my heirs and assigns
for ever. In witness, etc.

We will now Illustrate the matter with some few Cases. And first,

1.
In Trin. 25 H. 8. Barloe and those who were seized in Fee of the Land gave it
to Jo Aprice and Joan his wife, and the heirs of their two bodies engendered;
and after Jo. Aprice did discontinue the tail to the use of Richard his Son and
Anne his Wife, and to the heirs of the body of the said Richard; and after the
said John dyed, and Joan survived him: And after Richard enfeoffed one Thomas a
Bastard son in Fee; After Anne dies, and one Robert Pattershall and others
recover the same Lands against the said Thomas in a Writ of Entry in le Post,
wherein Thomas vouched the said Richard, which voucheth over the common
Vouchee; and thereupon Judgment and Execution was had: After this Joan dyed,
after whose death Richard dyed without lawful Issue of his Body; and after one
Thomas Aprice, younger Brother to the said Richard, and Son of the said John
and Joan, brought a Formedon in Descender against Thomas the Bastard son, and
recovered the Land, for that Joane was living at the time of the Recovery had,
and therefore the first entail was not bound, and by the death of Joane a new
right or title in the tail descends to the said Richard, and after his death
to the said Thomas his Brother the Demandant. Benloes Rep. 30, 31.

2.
In 29 H. 8. A Recovery was had against Tenant in tail, and he dyed before
execution: And by the better Opinion, the Issue is not remitted, neither shall
he falsify, because of the Recovery in value upon the Voucher. Dyer 35.

3.
In the Case of Hunt and Gateley, Pasch. 23 Eliz. in C.B. the case was, That he
in Remainder granted a Rent out of the Land, after the Tenant in tail suffered
a Common Recovery and dyed without Issue. And it was Resolved by all the Judges
of England, That Leases for years, Conusance of a Statute, Grant of a Rent and
all other Encumbrances by him in remainder are avoided by the common Recovery
that the Tenant in tail shall suffer of the Land, Moors Rep. Case 298.
Capell's Case, 23 Eliz. Co. 1. fo. 62.

4.
In Trin. 12 Eliz. 290. A Recovery was suffered by Husband and Wife, of
Tenements in London, (which by the Custom of London binds as a Fine at Common
Law,) which was to the use of the Recoverors, etc. until they made a Lease for
40 years, and then to the use of the husband and wife, and the heirs of the
wife: The Lease was made, and then the husband dyed. In this case the Court
held that the wife should be concluded, and should not avoid this Lease, but
shall hold under the Recovery, so as the Lease precedes her Estate. But Quaere
what remady she shall have for the Rent which was reserved before her Estate by
the use was created. Dyer 290. See Co. 2. Part, 57. Beckwiths Case.

5.
Replevin for the taking of three Cowes apud Rowdham, the Defendant justifies
for damage Feasant as in Freehold; the P^aintiff traverses the Freehold, and
thereupon being at Issue a specia Verdict was found. Where the Case appeared to
be; One William Brown, Father to the Defendant, being seized of this Land in
Fee, having Issue the Defendant his Son and Heir; Thomas Brown his second son,
and Richard a third, by his Will in writing devised this Land to Thomas his son
and his Heirs for ever, paying to his brother Richard 20 l. at his age of 21
years: And if Thomas dyed without Issue, living William his Brother, That then
William his Brother should have those Lands to him and his heirs and assigns
for ever, paying the said Sum as Thomas should have paid: Thomas enters and
suffers a common Recovery with a single voucher to the use of himself and his
heirs, and afterward devises it to the wise of Edward Pells the Plaintiff and
her heirs, and dies with out Issue, living the said William Brown, who entered
upon Edw. Pells and took the Distress. Et si, etc. This Case was twice argued
at the Bar, and afterward at the Bench, and the matter was divided into
three Points, 1. Whether Thomas had an Estate in Fee or in Fee tail only? 2.
Admitting he had a Fee, Whether this limitation of the Fee to William be good
to limit a Fee upon a Fee? 3. If Thomas has a Fee, and William only a
possibility to have a Fee, Whether this Recovery shall bar William, or that it
be such an Estate as cannot be extirpated by Recovery or otherwise?

To the third Point, Dodderidge held, That this Recovery should bar William,
for he had but a possibility to have a Fee, and as it were a contingent Estate,
which is destroyed by this Recovery before it came in esse: for otherwise it
would be a mischievous kind of Perpetuity which could not by any means be
destroyed. And although it was Objected, That a Recovery shall not bar, but
where a Recovery in value extends thereto, as appears, Co. lib. 1. Capell's
Case, That a Rentcharge granted by him in remainder was bound; Yet he held,
That this Recovery destroying the immediate estate, all Contingencies and
dependencies thereupon are bound, and a Recovery shall bind every one who
cannot falsify it: And he who has this possibility cannot falsify it,
therefore he shall be bound thereby. But all the other Justices were herein
against him, That this Recovery shall not bind, for he who suffered the
Recovery had a Fee, and William Brown had but a Possibility if he survived
Thomas; and Thomas dying without issue in his life, no Recovery in value shall
extend in value thereto, unless he had been party by way of Vouchee; (And then
it should, for by entering into the Warranty he gave all his possibility)
Therefore they agreed to the case which Davenport at the Bar cited to be
adjudged 34 Eliz. where a Mortgagee suffers a Recovery that shall no bind the
Mortgagor; but if he had been party by way of Voucher, it had been otherwise:
and here is not any Estate depending upon the Estate of Thomas Bray, but a
Collateral and mere Possibility which shall not be touched by a Recovery: And
if such a Recovery should be allowed, then if a man should devise that his Heir
should make such a payment to his younger sons, or to his Executors, otherwise
the Land should be unto them: if the Heir by Recovery might avoid it, it would
be very mischievous, and might frustrate all devices: and there is no such
mischief, that it should maintain Perpetuities; for it is but in a Particular
case, and upon a mere contingency, which perchance never may happen and be
avoided by joining him in the Recovery who has such a contingency: And on the
other part, it would be far more and a greater mischief that all Executors
devises should by such means be destroyed: And Hutton in his Argument put this
Case; If a man gives or devises Land to one and his heirs, as long as J. S.
has Issue of his body, he by Recovery shall not bind him, who made this Gift
without making him a party by way of Vouchee; for a Recovery against Tenant in
Fee-simple never shall bind a collateral interest, title or possibility, as a
Condition or Covenant, or the like. Wherefore they all, besides Dodderidge,
held, that this Recovery was no bar. But it was adjudged for the Defendant.
Pells and Brown, Hill. 17 Jac. B.R. Cro. 2 Part, 590.

6.
In Pasch. 24 Eliz. C. B. A Feme Sole was seized of a Manor to which were
three Copyholds; one of the Copyholders did intermarry with the woman, and
afterward he and his wife did suffer a Common Recovery of the Manor to the
use of themselves for their lives, and afterward to the use of the Heirs of
the wife: In this case it was agreed by the whole Court, That the Copyhold was
extinct: And said by the Court, That if a Copyholder will join with the Lord in
a Feoffment of the Manor, thereby the Copyhold is extinct; and so if he accept
a Lease of his Copyhold, Godb, 11. Mich. 29 Eliz. C.B. Godb. 101. accord.

7.
Husband and wife are Joynt-Tenants for life, the remainder to the husband in
tail, Remainder to another in Fee, and the husband does suffer a Common
Recovery: In this case it was held, That this was no bar to the Issue in tail
for any part; for there are no moieties between them: And there where the
husband alone suffers the Recovery, there is no lawful Tenant to the Praecipe,
and so the Recovery is no bar. Co. 3.5. Marquess of Winchester's Case.

8.
In 25 H. 8. it was held, That if my Tenant for life vouch a stranger, who does
enter into the Warranty, and cannot bar the Demandant, and the Demandant does
recover, and the Tenant over in value: That the Land recovered in Value shall
not go to me in Reversion after the death of Tenant for life; nor shall the
Reversion of the Land recovered in Value be in me in the life of the Tenant for
life. Broo. Cases Sect. 70.

9.
In 30 H. 8. it was held, That where there was Tenant for life, a remainder in
tail or for life, and the Tenant for life is impleaded and does vouch him in
remainder, who does vouch one that has a title of Formedon, and so the
Recovery pass by Voucher, then the issue of him that has a title of Formedon,
may bring his Formedon and recover against the Tenant for life; for the
recompense shall not go to the Tenant for life, and therefore he may recover:
for his Ancestor war ranted the remainder only, and not the Estate of the
Tenant for life; and therefore the Tenant for life may not bind him by the
Recovery; for he did not warrant to him: and therefore in this case the sure
way is to make the Tenant for life to pray in aid of him in remainder, and they
to join and vouch him that has the title of Formedon, and so to pass the
Recovery, for the recompense shall go to them both. Broo. Case 143.

In the last place we come to the Statutes concerning this Point, an abstract
whereof follows.

Stat. 7 H. 8. chap. 4. That Recoverors of Lands, Tenements and Advowsons,
their Heirs and Assigns, may distrain for Rents, Services and Customs due and
unpaid, and make avowry and justify the same, and have like remedy for
recovering them as the Recoverors might have done or had, albeit the Recoverors
were never seized thereof, and shall have also a Quare Impedit for an Advowson,
if upon avoidance any disturbance be made by a stranger, as the Recoverors
might have had, albeit the Recoverors were never seized thereof by
Presentation. And here Avery Avowant or Bailiff in any Replegiari or Second
Deliverance, if their Avowry, Conusance or Justification be found for them, or
the Plaintiff be otherwise barred shall recover his damages and costs.

Stat. 21 H. 8. chap. 15. That a Termor for years may falsify a feigned
Recovery had against him in the Reversion, and shall retain and enjoy his term
against the Recoveror, his heirs and assigns, according to his Lease: Also that
the Recoveror shall have like remedy against the Termor his Executors or
Assigns by Avowry, or Action of Debt for the Rents and Services reserved upon
such Lease, and due after such Recovery; and also like Action for wast done
after such Recovery, as the Lessor might have had if such Recovery had never
been: and no Stature-Merchant, Staple or Execution by. Elegit shall be avoided
by such feigned Recovery, but such Tenant shall also have like remedy to
falsify such Recoveries as is here Provided for the Lessee for years.

Stat. 34 and 35 H. 8. chap. 20. That no feigned Recovery hereafter to be had
by assent of parties against any Tenant or Tenants in tail of any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, whereof the reversion or remainder at the time of
such Recovery had, shall be in the King, shall bind or conclude the Heirs in
tail, whether any condition or Voucher be had in any such fained recovery or
not, but that after the death of every such Tenant in tail against whom such
recovery shall be bad, the Heirs in tail may enter, hold and enjoy the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments so recovered according to the form of the gift in
tail, the said recovery notwithstanding: And here the Heirs of every such
Tenant in tail, against whom any such recovery shall be had shall take no
advantage for any recompense in value against the Voucher or his Heirs; But
this Act shall not extend to prejudice the Lessee or Lessces of any such Tenant
in tail made in writing indented of any Manors, Lands, etc. for 21 years or 3
lives or under, whereupon the accustomed Rent or Rents is or shall be yearly
reserved during the same Term or Terms, but the same Lessee or Lessees shall
enjoy his or their Term or Terms according to the Stat. of 32 H. 8. chap. 28.
This Act nowtithstanding.

Stat. 14 Eliz. chap. 4. That all Recoveries had or prosecuted by agreement of
the Parties or by Covin against Tenants by the courtesy, Tenants in tail after
possibility of issue extinct. Tenant for Life or Lives or of estates
determinable upon Life or Lives, or of any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments,
whereof such particular Tenant is so seized or against any other with Voucher
over of any such particular Tenant, or of any having right or title to any such
particular Estate shall from henceforth as against the revertioners of them in
Remainder and against their Heirs and Successors be clearly void; But this Act
is not to prejudice any persons that shall by good title recover any Lands,
etc. without fraud by reason of any former right or title; Also every such
Recovery had by the assent and agreement of the person in revertion or
remainder, appearing of record in any of the Queens Courts, shall be good
against the party so assenting,

But this assent must appear upon the same record, either upon a Voucher aid
prier, receipt or the like, and not by any extrajudicial entry or memorandum.
Co. upon Lit. 362.

Stat. 14 Eliz. chap. 8. Every fraudulent Recovery against any Tenant for Life
or whereupon any Tenant for life, or be that has right to Estate for life, is
vouched shall be void against him in the revertion or in the remainder, unless
it be by his own assent appearing by record.

Recoveries in a writ of right bind all strangers not clayming within the
years, as being suffered by a Disseisor, it binds the Disseisor by his own
Non-claym 5 E. 3.50. Tenant for Life suffering a wrongful Recovery it shall
prejudice his right that has the inheritance though he prayed in aid and make
default: 34 H. 6.2. For no aid prayer is there necessary, in as much as the
other being Tenant of the Freehold a Recovery is good against him. 4 H. 7.3.
But that after the death of Tenant for Life, he may falsify it by action of ad
terminum qui praeteriit, or writ of Right; which we call falsifying of
Recoveries. 24 H. 8. Br. fan. rec. 41. But he cannot enter, neither can Lessee
for years at the common Law falfifie (26 H. 8.2.) for having but a Chattel
derived out of a freehold, there is no reason he should falfifie a Recovery
which draws the Fees simple out of the Lessor: Also the present Estate upon
which the Lease depends being destroyed, the Lease must needs be extinct.

Of Bargain and Sale by Deed.
A Bargain and Sale is a real contract upon valuable considerations for the
passing of Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments by Deed indented and enrolled
within six months after the date of it without Livery of seisin or Atturnment
of Tenants, so as be by Deed indented sealed and enrolled, either in the County
where the Land lies, or within one of the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster.
within six months after the date as we said before. Plowd. 307. Co. 2 part.
Inst. 672. Concerning which I will give only a few Generals.

1. That if one for money grant a Rent without any word of Bargain and Sale
and the Deed be enrolled, the Rent will pass without atturnment. Cro. 3. part.
166.

2. That Lands in London bargained and sold by Tenant in tail and the Deed
delivered after the same year he made Livery to him, the Lands pass by the
bargain and Sale. Yelverton. 123, 124.

3. That as the very words Bargain and Sale are not needful to make some Land
pass by way of Bargain and Sale, where there is an inrolment: So inrolment is
not necessary in all cases: As where a reversion is granted for years only
there neither inrolment not atturnment are necessary. Cook. 8.93. Foxes Case.

4. That the makers of the Act 27 H. 8. chap. 10. did not expect that any Land
after that Act should pass by way of Limitation of use, save only uses upon
Bargain and Sale, which they did in the same Parliament allow after inrolment;
And they did presume that little Land would pass that way, for that the
Bargain being in the Post might not vouch by force of any warranty annexed to
the Estate of the Land. Co. 1.120. in Chudleighs Case.

5. That to make a good Estate for years by way of Bargain and Sale for Land to
pass, this may be without inrolment of the Deed: But to make a good Estate of
the Freehold or Inheritance of Land by way of Bargain and Sale it must have the
Requisites of a Deed. viz.

6. It must be by Writing and not by Print or Stamp: in Parchment not in Paper
nor upon Lead, Wood or the like. Co. 5.20. 2 part. Inst. 672.

7. That by the Common Law Land might have passed by word for the use only
past; but now it must be by Deed, save only in some Cities, Villages and
ancient Buroughs, where it passes by Custom. Dyer 229.

8. That if a Father in consideration of 10 l. paid to him by his Son does
covenant to stand seized to his use, no use will arise without Inrollment. Coo.
7.40.

9. That the Inrollment upon such a Deed, so as to make the Estate to pass,
must be in Parchment. Co. 2. Part Inst. 673.

10. The enrolled Deed must be indented, for if it be by Deed-Poll the Estate
will not pass. Dyer 229.

The Six months given for Inrollment are to be accounted.

1. From the date and not from the time of the delivery of the Deed; and from
the date, and from the day of the date is all one.

2. After the account of 28 days to the month and no more.

3. The day of the date to be taken exclusive. Moors Rep. 40. Case 128. and yet
if it be enrolled the same day it bears date, it is good. If it chance (which
is very seldom) that it have no date, then the day of the delivery shall be
taken for the date, and the six months to be cast from thence. Mich. 37, 38
Eliz. Franklin and Garter's Gase. Co. 2. part. Inst. 674. And if the Deed be
not thus enrolled, it is of no force at all. Co. 5.1. Dyer 218. Co. 11.48.
Moors Rep. 41. Case 148.

This kind of assurance by Bargain and Sale thus perfected by Inrollment, will
as effectually transfer the Land as any other Conveyance, and therefore the
Bargainee of a Reversion, albeit he may not have benefit of a Condition upon
demands of Rent, without giving notice of the bargain and sale to the Lessee;
and albeit that A. the Conusee by a Fine of a Reversion before Attornment of
the Tenant, bargain and sell the Reversion to B, and that in this case B.
cannot distrain for his Rent, until he can get Attornment of the Tenant; yet
the Bargainee shall have benefit of a Condition of an Assignee within 32. H. 8.

And it seems he may vouch by force of a warranty annexed to the estate of the
Land, for he is in partly in the Per, and partly in the Post. Co. 8.94. 3.62.
5.113.

I will Illustrate this Point only with three or four Cases, and then give you
Presidents.

Case 1.
Winchcombe having Issue two Sons, conveyed a Manor unto his eldest son, and
to the daughter of Dunce for life, for the Jointure of the wife, the Remainder
to the son in Fee; the son having no Issue, his Father in Law Dunce procured
him by Deed indented to Bargain and sell to him the Manor; the Bargainor being
sick, who dyed before Inrollment of the Deed within the six months, the Deed
not being acknowledged: and afterward the Deed coming to be enrolled, the
Clerk who enrolled it procured a Warrant from the Master of the Rolls who writ
upon the Deed; Let the Deed be enrolled upon Affidavit made of the delivery of
the Deed by one of the witnesses to the same: and afterward (...) was enrolled
within the six months. And the Opinion of the Court was, That the Conveyance
was a good Conveyance in Law: And therefore the younger Brother exhibited his
Bill in Chancery, pretending the Conveyance to be made by practice, without any
consideration, Winchcombe and Dunce, Hill. 13 Jac. in Canc' Godb. Case 376.

2.
Popham's Case, 5 Eliz. If a man bargain and sell to one, and after to another,
the first Deed is enrolled, and after the second, and that the last day of the
six months accounting the day of the date for none; yet it was held by the
Court, That the first Bargainee should have it; sic vide from the Date which
are the words of the Statute, are of the same sense as from the day of the
date, and that twenty eight days make a month. Dyer 218. Moors Rep. 40. Case
128.

3.
Chibbornes Case; Lands in London may be bargained and sold by words without
Indenture or Inrollment. Dyer 228.

4.
In Trin. 41 Eliz. Fisher against Smith, it was held by the Court. That a
bargain and sale of Lands by Deed indented and enrolled, for diverse good
considerations, is not good to pass the Land, without proof of money paid,
which must be averred: But if the Deed say, for a competent sum of money,
neither party may urge there was none paid, albeit it be uncertain. Moor. Rep.
569. Case 777.

5.
In the Case of Mallory and Jennings, Trin. 43 Eliz. C. B. it was held by the
whole Court, That upon a bargain and fale by Deed indented and enrolled; after
inrollment if it be within the six months, the Bargainee shall be said to be
in from the date of the deed; so that if the Bargainor in the mean time between
that and inrollment enter into a Statute, this shall not bind the Land; a
Release to the Bargainee in that time shall be good: also a Recovery against
the Bargainee within that time shall be good. And if the Bargainee after the
bargain and sale, and before inrollment, do bargain and sell the Land by deed
indented and enrolled to another, and after the first deed is enrolled within
the six months, the bargain and sale by the bargainee is good. So agreed also
in Trin. 3 Jac. C.B. between Lellingham and Alsop.

Presidents of Bargain and Sale.
THis Indenture made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. of the one part, and C. D.
of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That the said A.B. in consideration of
1000 l. of lawful money of England to him in hand paid by the said C. D. has
bargained, sold, given and granted, and by these presents does bargain, sell,
give and grant unto the said C.D. all that, etc. (Here recite the particular of
all the Houses, Lands, and other things) To have and to hold the same, etc. and
premises unto the said C. D. his Heirs and assigns, to the only use and
behoof of the said C.D. his heirs and assigns for ever.

The usual Covenants for Warranty, That the Bargainor has a good Estate, etc.
as also for quiet enjoying, freedom from encumbrances, and the making of
further assurance, are to be added.

Or it may be by way of Covenant thus:

This Indenture made, etc. witnesses, That the said A.B. does for him and his
heirs, covenant, grant and agree to and with the said C. D. and his heirs, That
he the said A.B. and his heirs, in consideration of 1000 l. of lawful money of
England to him in hand paid by the said C.D. shall and will from henceforth
stand and be seized of and in all that, etc. (here recite the Lands etc.) to
the only use and behoof of the said C.D. his heirs and assigns for ever.

Or else to this purpose;

The said A. B. does for him and his Heirs covenant with C. D. and his heirs,
in consideration of 1000 l. of lawful money of England to him the said A.B. in
hand paid, That the said C.D. shall have to him and his heirs, and to his and
their own use, all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of him the said A. B.
lying and being in D. in the County of L. and as they are particularly
mentioned and expressed in the Schedule hereunto annexed. (And these if they
are to pass any Freehold, are to be enrolled as is before set forth.)

Sometimes they are with a Defeasance after this manner:

This Indenture made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, That whereas the said A.B.
has by his Deed Indented, bearing date, etc. for the sum of, etc. bargained
and sold to the said C.D. all that etc. (Here recite the particulars) To have
and to hold to the said C.D. his heirs and assigns for ever, as by the same,
relation being thereunto had, may and will appear. Nevertheless, it is now
fully concluded and agreed between the said parties, and the said C.D. does for
him and his heirs hereby covenant and agree to and with the said A.B. and his
heirs, That if the said A.B. or his heirs shall well and truly pay or cause to
be paid to the said C. D. his Executors, etc. the said sum of, etc. at or
before the Feast of, etc. now next coming after the date hereof; That then it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. and his heirs into the said,
etc. to reenter, and the said C.D. from thence to expel and put out, and the
same to have as in his or their former estate: And that from the time of the
repayment of the said money, and from thenceforth the said C. D. and his heirs
shall stand and be seized of and in the said, etc. to the use of the said A. B.
and his heirs for ever. And also that all Conveyances and Assurances thereof
then had and made to the said C.D. and his heirs, or to any other person or
persons, shall after the repayment of the said sum of, etc. be to the use of
the said A.B. and his heirs for ever, any thing in the said Indenture, or in
this present Indenture to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding,

Or thus;

Provided, That if the said C. D. or his heirs shall not pay or cause to be
paid to the said A. B. his Executors, etc. at or in, etc. the sum of, etc.
at, etc. that then and so often as default of payment of any of the said sums
or of any part thereof shall be made contrary to the true meaning hereof, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. his heirs, etc. into the
said bargained premises with the appurtenances to re-enter and the same to
have again, hold and retain without any wast doing, and the profits thereof
coming to his or their own use to receive until the said sum or sums of
money, whereof such default shall be made contrary to the true meaning hereof,
shall be paid to the said A. B. his, etc. And that so often as such default shall
be made as aforesaid, the said C. D. and his Heirs shall stand and be seized of
all and singular the premises with the appurtenances, to the use of the said
A.B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for the several times aforesaid:
And after any sum of twenty pounds, whereof default of payment shall be made to
the said A. B. his Executors, etc. respectively shall be paid, that then and so
often the said A. B. and his heirs shall stand and be seized of the premises
with the appurtenances to the use of him and his heirs under the condition
aforesaid, until the said sum of, etc. be paid according to the true meaning
hereof: And that then and from thenceforth the said C.D. and his heirs shall
stand and be seized of all the said premises with the appurtenances, to the
only use of the said C. D. his heirs and assigns for ever absolutely, and
without any manner of condition or other limitation of use or uses whatsoever.
In witness, etc.

Of a Judgment, and the Execution thereof.
A Judgment is the end of a Suit or rather the Sentence or Decree that a Judge
does make at the end of a Suit, which is no more but the pronouncing of what
the Law does set down and determine in that case Secundum allegata and probata;
and this so long as it stands in force, or be reversed by attaint or Writ of
Error, is final, and makes an end of the Suit. And here observe,

1. That all Judgments are either by Award, by Confession, by Default or by
Trial. Cro. 2.468.

2. That a Judgment cannot be depheasanced before it be obtained. Cro, 1.837.

3. That Judgments are much favored in Law, for Judicia in Curia Regis reddita
pro veritate accipiuntur, et Judicia sunt cantum Juris dicta. Judicia in Curia
Regis reddita non adnihilentur, sed stent in suo robore, quousque per errorem
aut attinctam adnullentur; for Interest reipublicae res judicatas non rescindi;
et nihil est tam conveniens naturali aequitati quam unum quodque dissolvi, eo
ligamine quo ligatum est. Co. Inst. 2. part, 360.

4. That if the Plaintiff upon a Judgment dye, his Executors or Administrators
may not proceed to take advantage thereof, or have Execution thereupon till
they have first sued out a Scire facias. Co. Inst. 2. part. 288, 394.

The Method of proceeding in a Judgment is as follows, viz. The Judgment
being past, the Plaintiff may choose his Execution, and to pursue it; But he is
first to take care that this Judgment be entered in due and legal form, which
you may see in the Book of Entries. Then he must be careful in the choice of
his Execution: As for Example, If he make choice of an Elegit, it is to be
directed to the Sheriff in the form by Law prescribed; for which see F.N.B. and
the Old N. B.

Then the Sheriff having received the Writ must summon a Jury, and this Jury is
to inquire and return what Fee-simple, Fee-tail or for life, Lands, Goods or
Chattels the Defendant had at the time of the Judgment, or at any time after.
And this must be very carefully done, the finding must have certainty in it by
the quality of the Land, as the Manor of H. a Message and 20 Acres of Land,
Meadow and Pasture in D. in the occupation of J. S. of the value of, etc. 5.
pound Rent, etc. Then the Sheriff is either at the same time or some time
afterward to deliver the one moiety thereof; and this last he alone does
without the Jury. And herein care must be had that they do it by meets and
bounds: and that he do certainly describe that which he does so deliver, and
that he deliver what is divideable; and therefore that he do not divide a
Manor and deliver the moiety thereof, for by this means he may destroy the
Manor. And if the Sheriff shall deliver too much, the Court at the return of
the Writ may quash it, and order a new Inquiry.

When the Plaintiff is satisfied, by incursion of time, the Defendant may
re-enter upon his Land without more ado; but if he has received satisfaction
by some accidental improvement of the Land, there he is to call the party into
Court out of which the Writ issued, and there to do it by Scire facias. Co.
5.38, 39. But all Executions are to be taken out within a year after the
Judgment, else no Execution can be made out without first suing forth a Scire
facias. Westminster. 2.45. 13 Edw. 1.

The Execution upon a Judgment shall relate to the day of the Writs date, and
the award of the Writ of Execution shall bind all the Goods of him against whom
Judgment is, which he had at the day of the Execution awarded.

The Entry of a Judgment may be stayed and arrested, if the Court shall see
cause.

That a Judgment may be for a part of the thing only in demand, or for the
whole.

That a Judgment may be erroneous and avoidable by a Writ of Error for many
causes. Cro. 2.303.

That after Judgment no Issue shall be taken. Cro. 2.126.

That when a Judgment is reversed for Error, the Party is restored to his first
remedy. Co. 8.141.

The Forms and Presidents of these things vary according as the case requires,
and being only practicable by Attorneys who are or ought to be well versed
therein, we will trouble the Reader with them, but in the next place show the
several Statutes that speak of the same.

Stat. Westminster. 2.18. 13 E. 1: That he that recovereth debt or damage in the
Kings Court, may at his choice have a Fieri facias of the Lands and Chattels of
the Debtor, or a Writ for the Sheriff to deliver him all the Chattels of the
debtor, (except Oxen and Plough-Beasts) and the moiety of his Land by a
reasonable extent, till the debt be levied. And if he be Ejected out of the
Land, he shall have an Assise, and afterward a Writ of Redisseisin if need be:
And this last Writ is called an Elegit, which is given upon a Statute also.

Stat. 32 H. 8. cap. 5. That for all things recorded before the Kings Justices,
or contained in Fines, (whether Contracts, Covenants, Obligations, Services or
Customs acknowledged, or any other things enrolled) the Execution shall be
within the year: but after the year a Scire facias, whereupon if satisfaction
be not made, or good cause showed, the Sheriff shall be commanded to Execution.

That if Lands delivered in Execution upon just cause be recovered without
Fraud from the Tenant in, Execution before he shall have levied and received
his whole debt and damages, he may have a Scire facias out of the Court from
whence he had the Execution, returnable in the same Court at a day, Forty days
(at the least) after the date of such Scire facias: at which day, if the
Defendant being lawfully warned make default or do appear, and do not plead a
sufficient cause (other than the former acceptance of the Lands) to avoid the
said Suit for the residue of the said debt and damages, the said Court shall
issue forth a new Writ of Execution for the levying thereof.

Stat. 1 Jac. cap. 13. If any taken in Execution be delivered by Privilege of
Parliament, as soon as the Privilege ceases, the Plaintiff his Executors or
Administrators may sue out a new Execution against him, and the Sheriff or
other Officer shall not be chargeable for the first Arrest.

Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 8. That no Execution is to be stayed upon any Writ of Error
or Supersedeas upon it, for reversing of a Judgment for debt or upon a
Contract, till the Plaintiff be bound in Recognizance with two Sureties in that
Court in double the Sum of the Judgment, to prosecute it with effect, and pay
the debt, costs and damages, if the Judgment be affirmed.

Stat. 21 Jac. cap. 24. That the party at whose Suit any one is in Execution
for debt or damages recovered, their Executors or Administrators may after the
death of the person so charged and dying in Execution, lawfully sue forth new
Execution against the Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels of the person so
deceased, in like manner as if the person so deceased had never been taken in
Execution. Howbeit this Act shall not extend to Lands sold bona fide (after the
Judgment given) when the money raised thereupon is paid or secured to be paid
to Creditors in discharge of due debts.

But to return to Execution, wherein we are to consider,

That the Writs whereby this Execution is made, are some of them against the
person, some of them against the goods, some of them against the Lands, and
some of them against the Body, Lands and Goods together. Co. 6.87. and 8.141.

For the doing of Execution in a Suit for debt or damages, the Writs are, the
Levari facias, the Fieri facias, and the Capias ad Satisfaciendum; and
sometimes the Exigent, the Capias Utlagatum, and the Capias pro fine.

The Levari facias is a Judicial Writ directed to the Sheriff for the levying
of a sum of money upon the Lands and Tenements of him against whom the
Judgment is. Reg. Orig. fol. 298.

The Fieri facias is a Judicial Writ lying for him that has recovered in an
Action on Debt or Damage, directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to levy the
same of the Defendants goods. Old Not. Bre. 152.

The Capias ad Satisfaciendum is a Judicial Writ (grounded upon a Statute)
lying where a man has recovered in an Action personal any debt or damages in
the Kings Court, directed to the Sheriff to command him to take the body of him
against whom the debt is recovered, and to put him in prison till Satisfaction
be made to him that recovered. And all these three last named Writs are to be
sued out within a year and day after the Judgment obtained, and not after
without Scire facias: And if they be sued out within the year, they may be
continued after the year till Execution. Co. on Litt. 290.

The Exigent is a Writ, that lies where the Defendant in an Action personal
cannot be found, nor any thing within the County to be attached or distrained,
and is directed to the Sheriff to proclaim and call him five County days one
after another, charging him to appear under pain of Outlawry: And if he be
Outlawed, then all his Goods and Chattels are forfeited. And this mostly goes
forth before Judgment, and in some cases after Judgment. If it be before
Judgment, there must go before it three Writs of Capias ad Respondendum, with a
Non est inventus upon each of them returned. But if it be after Judgment, as it
may on a Capias ad Computandum, or Capias ad Satisfaciendum, there it may issue
out after the first Capias. Terms del Ley.

The Capias Utlagatum is a Writ of Execution or after Judgment, which lies
against him that is Outlawed upon any Suit, directed to the Sheriff, commanding
him upon receipt thereof to apprehend the party Outlawed for his contempt in not
appearing upon the Exigent, and to keep him in safe custody until, etc. and to
bring him into the Court at the day of the return of the Writ, where he is to
remain without bail or mainprise. Co. 12.103.

There is also a special Writ in this case called a Capias Utlagatum and
inquiras de bonis et Catallis, which is a Writ in a manner the same with the
former, but that it gives a farther power to the Sheriff over and besides the
apprehension of his body to inquire of and seize upon his Goods and Chattels to
the Kings use. Old N. B. 154.

The Capias pro fine is where a Judgment is given in a Case for a Plaintiff,
and it is in such a case where the Defendant is also to pay a Fine to the King;
the which being not paid, to command the Sheriff to take and imprison him till
he pay his Fine to the King, Co. 3.1, 2, 3.

The Extendi facias is that which is called the Writ of Extent, whereby the
value of Lands, etc. is commanded to be made and levied: For to extend does
signify in Law to value the Lands or Tenements of one bound by Statute, etc.
who has forfeited his Bond to such an indifferent rate as by the yearly Rent
the Obligor may in time be paid his debt, F.N.B. 131.

And Extent does sometimes signify a Writ to the Sheriff for the valuing of
Lands or Tenements; and sometimes the Act of the Sheriff upon this Writ. And if
the Sheriff delay to execute the Writ of Extendi facias in the delivery of
Lands, Goods and Chattels of the Conusor to the Conusee, that are apprised and
taken into his hands upon the Extent, he may be be forced to it by a Writ
called a Liberate.

The Elegit is a Judicial Writ grounded upon the Statute, and lies for him
that has recovered debt or damages in the Kings Court against one not able in
his Goods to satisfy, directed to the Sheriff to command him to make delivery
of half the parties Lands and Tenements, and all his Goods, (Oxen and Beasts
for the Plough excepted) Old Not. Bre. 152. Reg. Orig. 129, 299.

The Scire Facias is a Judicial Writ, most commonly to call a man to show cause
to the Court whence it is sent, why Execution of a Judgment passed should not
be made. And this commonly is not granted before a year and a day be passed
after the Judgment given. In which cases (for the most part) Execution is not
grantable, until this Writ and the return thereof be had and past. Vet. N. B.
151. And where a man shall be put to this, To have Execution or not, see 21 E.
3.22. Execution, 53, 55, 69, 89, 97, 143. Scire Facias 126. Execution 102, 164,
243. And here observe, That Executions may be arrested and stayed by the Court,
wherein the Judgment is given.

By the Common Law for a debt for which a man had Judgment, he could have had
neither Body nor Lands in Execution in case of a common person, but the Goods
and Chattels and Profits of the Lands, except in case of an heir chargeable by
the deed of his Ancestor: but the Law is now otherwise, for at this day upon a
Judgment given for debt or damages in the Courts of Record at Westminster,
generally the moiety of all the Land that the Defendant has tempore
redditionis judicii, or at any time after, and all the Goods and Chattels he
has tempore Executionis, or the day of the Writ awarded, shall be subject and
liable to the Execution^ and all these may be taken in Execution by the
Sheriff, into whose hands soever they be come. Dyer 306.34. Co. 3.12. 34 H.
6.45.

The Ca. sa. did not lie at the Common Law against any man for debt, but in
case of the King, until 25 E. 3.17. Vide Co. 3. in Sir William Herberts Case.

How the Sheriff and his Officers are to perform their Office in doing
execution, the following Observations will show.

1. If the Sheriff have a Writ of Execution delivered to him, and a Writ of
discharge or Supersedeas come to the Sheriff, but he has not notice of it. In
this case he may serve the Execution and justify it. Cro. 1.440.

2. After half the Land of a man is taken in Execution upon one Judgment, then
if there come another Judgment against the same person, a moiety of the moiety
only left and not of the whole is to be extended. Cro. 1.482, 483.

3. The Sheriff upon a Fieri facias may not deliver the Defendants Goods to the
Plaintiff in satisfaction of his debt, Cro. 1. part, 504.

4. If the Sheriff open or break any House to do Execution at the Suit of a
common person, the Execution is good, but the party whose House is broken, may
have an Action of Trespass against him for the breaking of the House. Co. 5.93.
Co. 4.91. Semaines Case. Co. 11.82.

5. If the Sheriff have a Fieri facias or a Ca. sa. against a man, and before
Execution executed, he pay him the money; in this case the Sheriff cannot do
execution after; if he do, an Action of Trespass or False Imprisonment lies
against, per Justice Jones, and Justice Berkley, B.R. Pasch. 12 Car.

6. If Execution be by Fi. Fa. and the Sheriff seize Goods, and before the sale
the Record is removed by Error, and a Supersedeas awarded, and a seizure
returned; in this case a Venditioni Exponas may be awarded upon the return of
the Fieri facias which is filed, Cro. 1.597, 598.

7. If Execution be for the Plaintiff, if the Defendant be taken by Capias
Utlagatum, and if Judgment be affirmed in Error, a Capias or other Execution
lies without Scire facias, although in another Court. Cro. 1.706, 851.

8. The ancient Sheriff being out of his Office, cannot sell the Goods he took
upon a Fieri facias. Yelverton 44.

How Execution is to be done in the Cinque Ports, see Bendloes 15.

Observe here further, That if the Defendant dye, his body being in Execution,
the Plaintiff may have a new Execution against the Lands or Goods of the
Defendant as he pleases; but the Plaintiff while he has the body of the
Defendant in Execution, can have no other Execution against his Lands or Goods.
Co. 5.65, 66.86, 87. A new Execution may be sued against any man who by
Privilege of Parliament shall be set at liberty. Stat. 5 Jac. cap. 13.

If the Sheriff has a man in his custody by process of Law, and after this a
Writ of Capias ad Satisfaciendum is delivered to him; in this case in Judgment
of Law, he shall be in Execution presently upon that Writ, though he never make
any actual arrest thereupon. Co. 5.89.

I will now cite some few Cases to illustrate this Point.

1.
If two be in Execution for one debt, and one of them dye under Execution, this
will not discharge the other. But death under Execution in case where there is
but one Defendant is in satisfaction. Cro. 1.851. F.N.B. 146. Cro. 2.136, 143.
But this by the Common Law. For now by the Stat. of 21 Jac. cap. 24. If a man
be in Execution for a debt, and dye in Execution for it, the debt unpaid; the
Plaintiff shall now have as much remedy against his Lands and Goods, as if he
had never been or dyed in Execution. Co. 5.86. Cro. 2.136, 142. 33 H. 6.47. 3
H. 6.7. N.B. 246.

2.
If the Defendant pay the money, by this he shall be discharged of the
Execution. So a Release of all Executions will bar in this case, although it
be in the Kings case. But a Release of all Suits will not discharge from
Execution in the case of the King or Subject, Co. 8.153. But a Release of the
Judgment, and of all debts and duties will discharge the Body out of Execution,
Co. 1. part. Inst. 291. But if he make any Depheasance, Release or other such
like act to the Defendant being in Execution, amounting to a discharge of the
Execution; this will not be in it self ipso facto a discharge of the Execution:
but this will make way for his discharge by Audita Querela or some other means.
And therefore in case, where the Plaintiff consented that the Defendant his
Prisoner in the Kings Bench should come to him out of Prison to the Horseshooe*
Tavern, which was out of the Rules, without a Keeper or any Order of the Court,
thinking to have some agreement with him, and he does come to him, and was
taken again upon the same Execution, and put into the King's Bench; he was
relieved and discharged by Audita Querela. And a discharge by word in this case
is good enough: For if I say to the Sheriff, and bid him discharge such a one
he has in Execution at my Suit, or suffer him to go at large; this is a good
discharge both to the Sheriff and to the party. Popham 206, 207. Trin. 24 Car.
B.R. Walker and Alder.

3.
If A. and B. Joynt-Tenants for life, the Remainder in Fee, and Judgment is
given against A. in debt, and afterward before Execution he release to his
Companion, this shall not avoid the Execution upon the Land; But if A. had dyed
before Execution, the Survivor would have held the Land discharged. Co. 6.79.
Abergavenyes Case.

4.
If a Judgment be against one Obligor in the Common Pleas, and another Judgment
in the King's Bench against the other Obligor, and a Capias ad Satisfaciendum in
the King's Bench against that Defendant, and then the Body and Lands of the
other is taken in the Common Pleas, and he is delivered by Audita Querela, as
he may be: although the Land taken in Execution be evicted, yet his body shall
never be re-taken in Execution. Hob. Rep. 2.

5.
If a Sheriff, Jailer or other Officer, that has a man in Execution at my Suit
for debt or damages, do after suffer him wilfully or negligently to escape, and
do not re-take him before I commence my Action against him; In this case I may
in an Action of Debt, or Action of the Case (which I will) recover against him,
by whose means this is done, (but not against his Executors or Administrators)
so much as I am damnified thereby. Plowd. 45. Co. 3.52. Dyer 278. Cro. 3.767.
F.N.B. 93.

6.
If the Sheriff take one in Execution at my Suit, be the process by which he is
taken, erroneous or not, if the Sheriff suffer him to escape, he shall be
charged with this escape. Cro. 3.188, 576. Cro. 2.1.

7.
If the Chief Justice of the Court by which the Prisoner is committed, the
Sheriff and the Plaintiff in the Suit all of them agree together to let a
prisoner in Execution out for a time, this will be no escape, especially there
where the Prisoner does return at his time. Dyer 275.

8.
If the King or any great Man (out of the ordinary way of Law) shall command or
require the Sheriff or other Officer that has the keeping of such a prisoner
to set him at liberty altogether or for time, and he does so; although he
return to prison again, yet this will be an escape in the Sheriff to make him
liable to action. Dyer 278, 279.

9.
If a Prisoner be removed out of the Fleet, that was there in Execution out of
the Common Pleas, and he be removed by a Habeas Corpus cum causa, and then sent
to the Marshalsey for another debt and escape from thence; In this case the
Keeper of the Marshalsey and not the Warden of the Fleet shall be chargeable
for both the first and the second debt. Co. 4.98. Dyer 278.

10.
If a Woman be Warden of the Fleet, and she has Prisoner one in Execution at
my Suit, and they marry together, this shall be adjudged an escape in Law in
the Woman; for the prisoner is now by Law discharged: So if a man have a Prison
in Fee, and his son and heir be his prisoner, and he dye and the prison descend
to his son, this will be an escape in Law in the Guardian, for which I may have
an Action of Escape. Plowd. 37.

The Statutes concerning this Point are,

Westminster. 2. cap. 18. He that recovereth debt or damages in the Kings Court, may
at his choice have a Scire facias of the Lands and Chattels of the debtor, or a
Writ for the Sheriff to deliver him all the Chattels of the debtor, (except
Oxen and Plough Beasts) and the moiety of his Land by a reasonable Extent, till
the debt be levied. And if he be ejected out of the Land, he shall have an
Assise, and afterward a Writ of Redisseisin if need be.

Stat. 32 H. 8. cap. 5. Lands lawfully delivered in Execution upon a Judgment
or Recognisance, being evicted without any fraud or default in the Tenant
before he have levied the whole debt and damages, the Recoverer and the
Recognisee shall have a Scire facias out of the same Court where Execution was
awarded, returnable there full Forty days after the date. And thereupon a new
Writ of Execution of the nature of the former to levy the rest of his debt and
damages, if the Defendant make default, or show no good matter in bar.

Westminster. 2. cap. 46. For all things recorded before the Kings Justices or
contained in Fines (whether Contracts, Covenants, Obligations, Services or
Customs acknowledged, or any other things enrolled) A Writ of Execution shall
be within the year, so as the parties shall not need to plead: After the year a
Scire facias.

Of a Statute.
A Statute (as it is taken for a legal assurance) is an Obligation of Record;
and it is so called, because it is made in pursuance of and according to the
Form particularly provided for the same, and is of three sorts, viz.

1. A Statute Merchant. 2. A Statute-Staple. 3. A Recognisance.

1. The Statute-Merchant is a Bond acknowledged before one of the Clerks of the
Statutes Merchant, and Mayor, etc. of the City of London, or two Merchants of
the said City for that purpose assigned, or before the Mayor of York, etc.
chief Warden, Master or Mayor of other Cities or Towns, or before the Bailiffs
of any Borough or other sufficient men for that purpose appointed, sealed with
the Seal of the Debtor or Recognisor, and of the King, which is of two pieces,
the greater is kept by the Mayor, etc. and the lesser by the said Clerks. This
is upon 13 E. 1. Stat. 4. Acton Burnell, 11 E. 1. Co. upon Lit. 289.

And is after this Form.
NOverint universi per praesentes me A. B. de etc. Teneri C. D. de etc. in
mill libris legalis monetae Angliae solvendis eidem C.D. ad Festum Sancti
Michaelis Archangeli anno Regni Regis etc. Et nisi fecero, concedo quod currat
super me et haeredes meos districtio et Poena provis. in Statut. Domini Regis
edit. apud Westminster. Dat. apud Land. die etc. anno etc.

Or otherwise thus:
NOverint Universi per praesentes me. R. D. de M. in Parochia de B. in Com. W.
Genesis Teneri et per hoc praesens scriptum de Statut. Mercator. firmiter Obligari
H. M. de C. in Comitatu Civitatis L. Generos. in quingentis libris bonae et
legalis monetae Angliae solvend. eid. H. M. aut suo certo Attornato,
Executoribus et Assignatis suis in festo etc. Et si non fecero, volo et concedo
quod current super me, haeredes, Executores et Administratores meo^,
Districtiones et poenae praemissae in statut, ^dit, in Parliament. Domini
Edwardi primi, quondam Regis Angliae apud Acton Burnell, pro debitis mercatorum
Recuperand' Dat.

In English thus:
MEmorandum, That R. T. of H. in the County of K. Esquire (such a day and year)
came before our Lord the King in his Chancery at Westminster personally
constituted, and then and there acknowledged, That he did owe etc. to E. F. of
C. in the County of L. Gent. and S. H. of D. in the said County of L. Gent.
etc. five hundred pounds of lawful money of England, to be paid to the said E
F. and S. H. or to their certain Attorney, Executors or Assigns, on the Feast
of St. etc. next coming after the date of these presents. And if he shall fail
in the payment of the aforesaid sum of Money at the Feast aforesaid, that
then the said R.T. for himself, his Executors and Assigns, wills and
grants, That the said sum of money shall be levied of his Lands and
Tenements, Goods and Chattels to the use of the said E.F. and S. H. their
Executors and Assigns. Witness our said Lord the King at Westminster the day
and year above mentioned.

And these kinds of Statutes, although at first ordained and used for Merchants
only, yet at this day it is and may be used by any others, and it is become
one of the most frequent and usual assurances in the Kingdom.

2. The Staple does signify this or that Town whither the Merchants by common
order and command do carry their Commodities, as Wool, and the like, to vent
and utter by the great or wholesale.

The Statute-Staple is either properly or improperly so called.

That which is properly so called is a Bond of Record, acknowledged before the
Mayor of the Staple in the presence of one of the two Constables of the same
Staple, and sealed with the Seal of the Staple, and sometimes also with the
Seal of the party, which it seems is not absolutely necessary: This was devised
and used only for Merchants and Merchandises of the same Staple, and is founded
upon 27 E. 3. Stat. 2. Co. super Litt. 289. But this now may be used by
Merchants or any other for the payment of debts, or assurance of Lands or other
things, and is of the same nature with the Statute-Merchant.

A Statute-Staple improperly so called, is an Obligation of Record founded upon
the Statute of 23 H. 8.6. and is in the nature of a Statute-staple, and of the
same force: This is and may be acknowledged before one of the Chief Justices,
and in their absence before the Mayor of the Staple at Westminster, and the
Recorder of London. It is sealed with three Seals, viz. the Seals of the
Conusors, the King and one of the Justices; or else the Mayor and Recorder.

The Form of it is thus:

Noveritis, etc. me A.B. teneri C.D. in mill libris, solvend. eidem ad Festum
sancti etc. Et si defecero in solutione debiti^ praedicti, Volo and Concedo
quod tunc currat super me, Haeredes et Executores meos meos Poena in Statuto
Stapulae debit. pro Mercandisis in eadem emptis recuperand. ordinat. et provis.
Dat. etc.

Or thus;

Noverint Universi per praesentes nos A.B. C.D. teneri et firmiter Obligari,
J.S. in mill libris sterlingor', solvend. eid. J.S. aut suo certo Attornato,
hoc script. ostend', Haeredibus vel Executoribus suis in festo etc. proxime
futur. post. dat. praesentium; et si defecerimus in solutione debiti praedicti,
Volumus et concedimus quod tunc super nos et quemlibet nostrum Haeredes et
Executores nostros poena in Statuto stapulae de debit' pro Mercandisis in e^d.
emptis recuperand. ordinat. et provis. Dat. etc. Anno Regni etc. Vide Stat. 23
H. 8.6. Cro. 1.326. Co. 2. Inst. 678.

There are diverse other Recognizances taken and acknowledged before the Lord
Chancellor, Master of the Rolls and others, as the Justices of the one and the
other Bench, Barons of the Exchequer, Judges of the Circuits, Justices of the
Peace and Sheriffs: some whereof are by the Common Law, and some by certain
Statutes. And amongst these some are without Seal and recorded only; and some
are sealed and recorded also. Some of them are in the nature of Bayl, and some
of them are given to the King, and both these are of the nature of the former
kind of Recognisances; which we will not meddle with, but only those made to
subjects and for the payment of money, or the doing of some other thing by one
subject to another, wherein he that does enter into the Statute or Recognisance
is called the Conusor or Debtor; and he to whom it is made, is termed the
Conusee.

For the better understanding of matters relating to those things, we are to
observe, That the forementioned Statutes are much of the nature of a Judgment
had upon a Suit in the King's Bench or Common Pleas, and therefore are called
Pocket-Judgements.

2. That if the Writing be not as good as a Statute, it will not be good to any
purpose: for if void as a Statute, it will be void as an Obligation. Cro.
3.319.494.

3. That a Statute first acknowledged shall be preferred before a Judgment
after had: So that if a man acknowledge a Statute, and after confess a Judgment,
and the Land be extended on the Judgment, the Conusee shall have a Scire
facias to avoid the Extent upon the Judgment: And yet a Judgment had in a Court
of Record shall be preferred in case of an Executor before a Statute, and the
Executor is to satisfy the Judgment before the Statute. And it is held per
totam Curiam, That be the Judgment first or last, it must be first satisfied.
Co. 6.45. in Higgons Case. Plowd. 32. Pemberton and Bartons Case. Co. 4. in
Sadlers Case. Dyer 80.

4. If one owe me a Debt upon a Statute and dye, his Executor or Administrator
must see me paid this debt, before ^e pay any debt to a Subject upon a Bond or
for Rent, or upon a single or simple contract: it must be paid next after Debts
upon Judgment.

5. All Statutes Merchant and of the Staple are to be brought to the Clerk of
the Recognizances within four months, and to be enrolled within six months,
otherwise they will be void as to purchasors, 27 Eliz. cap. 4.

6. That a Statute or Recognisance if it be obtained upon an Usurious contract,
or of purpose to deceive men in the purchase of their Lands, or for the
obtaining of their just debts, they will be void or voidable by this. Cro.
2.67, 425.

7. That if two do acknowledge a Recognisance or Statute of 1000 l. quilibet
eorum in solido, this will be joint and several, and the Conusee may have
several Scire Facias's upon it. And it is said that a special Recognisance may
by express words bind the Lands of the Conusor in one County only. Co. 2. part,
Inst. 395.

8. If a Statute Staple be not sealed with the Seal of the party that does
acknowledge it, yet it seems to be good enough, for the Statute does not require
it: But a Recognisance within the Stat. of 23 H. 8. cannot be good, except the
Seal of the party be to it; for so are the words of the Statute: by three
Justices of the Common Pleas, Trin. 22 Jac.

9. If a Statute be made to two, and one of them come with it, he shall have
Execution in both their names. And it is the common course, that any stranger
that comes with a Statute may have Execution of it in the dame of the
Recognisee: And if after the death of the Recognisee a stranger come in his own
name and show the Statute, he shall have Execution of it, though (as we said)
the Conusee himself come not in person.

10. If the Conusor of a Statute Merchant or Staple, etc. be taken and he dye
in Execution; yet the Conusee shall have Execution of his Lands and Goods: Or
if the Conusor in Execution escape, his Goods and Lands shall be taken and
executed upon the Statute; For the action given to the Conusee against the
Sheriff for the Escape, is not a satisfaction. Co. 5.86, 87. Fitz. 246.

11. A Writ of Extent was awarded in the time of Queen Mary, returnable
Quindena Martini, the Writ executed by Inquisition in the life of the Queen;
but before the return the Queen dyed, and yet it was returned, and a Liberate
granted in the time of the next Queen. In this case, it was doubted by the
Court, That the Extent was not well returned. Dyer 205.

12. In a Scire facias upon a Recognisance, Joynt-Tenancy is a good plea to
abate the Writ; and if it be upon a Judgment to have Execution, it is a good
bar that the Plaintiff has assigned his damages to the King, although the
King have not levied: So also it is a good bar to say that the Sheriff has
levied the money by Fieri facias, albeit he has not returned the Writ. Moors
Rep. 671, 693.

13. If an Extent be sued by an Executrix upon a Statute made to her Testator,
and she dye before the Inquisition taken; this Inquisition may as it seems be
taken after her death: and an Administrator de bonis non administratis, of the
Testator, upon this Extent sued by the Executrix, may have a Liberate, and
shall not need to begin again and have a new Certificate, and a new Extent and
Liberate, Cro. 1.326.

But this shall suffice as to those Particulars. I will now show you what is
liable to Execution upon a Statute or Recognisance, and when and how. Wherein
take notice,

1. That when a man does enter into a Statute or Recognisance, the Land of the
Conusor is not the debtor, but the Body: And the Land is liable only in
respect that it is in the hands of the Conu^or at the time of the acknowledging
of the Statute or afterward: and the Land is not charged with the debt, but
chargeable only, at the election of the Conusee: but the person is chargeable,
and the Land in respect of the person. And therefore although the Conusor alien
his Land to another, yet he remains debtor still, and his body and goods shall
be taken in Execution. Plow. 72.

2. That the body of the Conusor himself, (but not the body of his Heir,
Executor or Administrator) is liable to Execution, and may be taken, although
there be Lands, Goods and Chattels to satisfy the debt.

3. That all the Demesne Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments corporeal and
incorporeal of the Conusor that are grantable over, as his Manors, Messuages,
Lands, meadows, Pastures, Woods, Rents, Commons, Tithes, Advowsons and the
like; also his Goods and Chattels, as Leases for years, and all his Emblements,
Cattle, Housholdstuff and the like, and Wardships when they were in being, are
liable to Execution upon a Statute. But Annuities, Offices in Trust,
Seigniories in Frank-almoigne, Homage, Fealty, Right to Land, things in action
and such like are not liable to such Execution. Co. 3.12. Plow. 72. Co. 2.59.
Litt. Sect. 318. Dyer 7.205. Co. on Litt. 174. Doct. and Stud. 53. Co. 2. Part.
Inst. 397.

4. All the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments which the Conusor had at the
time of the Recognisance entered into or at any time after, in whose hands
soever, or by what means soever the same are come at the time of the Execution,
shall be subject and liable to the Execution. But the Lands which the Conusor
had and did put away before the time of the Statute or Recognisance entered into
are not liable: And all the Goods and Chattels the Conusor has or are found in
his hands at the time when the Execution is to be made by Extendi facias are
liable: But the Goods and Chattels he had and did bona fide do away before the
time of Execution done, are not liable to the Execution. Co. 3.12.

5. The Conusee upon other Recognizances shall have the same things in
execution as a man shall have after a Judgment in a Suit in the King's Bench or
Common Pleas, by Fieri facias or Levari facias, all his Goods and Chattels, and
by Elegit the moiety of his Lands and all his Chattels, besides the Cattle of
his Plow and Implements of Husbandry: But in these cases he cannot take the
body of the Conusor in Execution, unless it be upon a new Suit, or in case of
Bayl in the Kings Bench. Plow. 72. Co. 3.12. Dyer 306.

In the next place I will show you the Method how a Statute or Recognizance is
to be executed, and all the proceedings thereupon. Wherein observe,

That Recognisances are of two sorts: 1. Such as are usually taken in the Kings
Courts of Record at Westminster. 2. Such as are in the nature of a Statute
staple by the Statute of 23 H. 8.

The proceedings upon the Statute Staple and the Recognisance founded on the 23
H. 8. aforesaid, in the execution thereof are in the same manner as the
proceedings in the Statute Merchant, which I mention hereafter; but with these
differences:

1. Upon the execution of the Statute-Merchant there issues forth a Capias
against the Body before any execution be made of the Lands or Goods and
Chattels; and the Lands and goods cannot be extended till a quarter of a year
be past after the Body is taken, or the Sheriff have teturned a Non est
Inventus. But upon the execution of the Statute-Staple and the Recognisance,
the Body, goods and Lands may be taken altogether at once.

Then secondly, Upon a Statute-Merchant one may have an Action of debt, but
otherwise it is of a Statute-staple.

And thirdly, The Capias upon the Statute-Merchant may be returnable in the
King's Bench or Common Pleas; but the Writ of Execution upon the other is to be
returnable in Chancery. F.N.B. 130, 131. Co. on Litt 290.

Fourthly, That in a Statute-Staple, presently after the Certificate into the
Chancery, the Conusee shall have a Writ to take his body and extend his Lands
and Goods returnable in Chancery, which is a Commission directed to the Sheriff
of the County where the Goods and Lands lie, for the valuing thereof, whereby
they shall be apprised at a reasonable rate by a Jury of sworn men impanelled
by the Sheriff for that purpose; which Inquisition returned by the Sheriff, he
may take and deliver the Lands and Goods to the Conusee; To hold the same till
he be satisfied of his debt and damages: or if he refuse, the Conusee may force
him to it by a Liberate. Dyer 180. Co. 4.67.

The proceedings upon a Statute Merchant are, That the Conusee may if he please
bring his Statute to the Mayor, Clerk, or other Officer before whom it was
acknowledged, and there if they find the record of it, and the day to be past
for the payment of the money, they are to apprehend and imprison the body of
the Conusor if he be a Lay-person, and can be found within their Jurisdiction.
And if he cannot be found then, they are to certify the Record into Chancery.
And this they may be compelled to by Certiorari, if otherwise they refuse to do
it. And upon a Nihil returned upon a Testatum est, he may have process into
another County; but otherwise it is of goods: And if that Certificate be
faulty, or Execution be not done upon it by reason of the Conusees death or
otherwise, the Conusee or his Executor or Administrator may have another
Certificate, and thereupon he shall have a Writ of Capias out of the Chancery
directed to the Sheriff of the County where the Conusor lives to apprehend and
imprison him (if he be not a Clergyman) and this to be returned into the Kings
Bench or Common Pleas. And when the Conusor is taken he shall have time for a
quarter of a year to make his agreement with the Conusee, and to sell his Lands
or Goods to satisfy him. And to that purpose he himself may sell his Lands and
Goods, although he be in prison, and the sale thereof will be good and lawful.
But if in that time he do not satisfy the Conusor, or if upon the Capias the
Sheriff return a Non est inventus, then by another or diverse Writs (if the
Lands and Goods lie in diverse Counties) called, Extendi facias to all the
Sheriffs of the Counties where he has Lands, whereby they shall be commanded
to extend his Lands and goods, and to deliver the goods to him, and the Lands
To hold to him and his heirs till the debt be levied or paid. And this Act of
the Sheriff and Jury upon this Writ is called an Extent. And if the Sheriff or
Apprisors upon the Extendi facias overvalue the Lands or Goods in favor to
the debtor, the Conusee has no remedy but by motion in that Court where the
Writ is returnable at the Return day, or at least the same Term, to desire that
the Apprisors may take the Lands or Goods at the rate they have valued them, in
the same manner as the Corusee is to have them. And a Sale made of Goods in
this case by the Sheriff is as strong as if it were in Market-overt. And when
the Conusee is in possession of Lands by such an Extent as before, then is he
Tenant by Statute; And after the Conusee is once settled in peace in the Lands
extended, he shall hold them till he be satisfied his debt, and his reasonable
costs and damages for travel, suit, delay and expense. See for this, Dyer 299.
Co. 5.87. F.N.B. 130. Co. on Litt. 290. Co. 2. Part, Inst. 395, 396.

The proceedings upon the other kinds of Recognisances are after another
manner. For upon Recognizances at the Common Law, if the money be not paid at
the day, the Conusee, his Executor or Administrator is to bring a Scire facias
against the Conusor; or if he be dead, against his heir when he is of full age;
or if the Lands the Conusor had at the time of entering into the Recognisance be
sold against the Purchasors of them, which the Conusor had at any time after
the Recognisance entered into, to warn them to come into the Court, whence the
Scire facias issued, to show cause why Execution should not be made upon the
said Recognisance: and if the party or parties cannot be sound to be warned, or
being warned do not appear at the time; or appearing do not show cause why the
debt should not be levied: In this case the Conusee shall have Execution of his
moiety by Elegit, or if the Conusor be living, of all his Goods by Levari or
Fieri facias at his Election; but he may not have Execution of his Body, unless
he bring an Action of Debt upon the Recognisance (as in this case he may do) or
it be by the course of the Court, as it is in the Kings Bench on a Bayl,
wherein a Capias does lie. Dyer 315, 360, 366.

The proceedings against the Sureties upon Statutes are to be in the same
manner as the proceeding against the Principal: And yet where the Principal
has movables to satisfy the debt, the Surety (as it seems) is not to be
charged.

I will Illustrate this matter in the next place with some few Cases. And first,

1.
Tenant by Elegit upon Judgments and Recognisances, is to hold the Land until
he be answered his debt without his costs and Mises, etc. But Tenant by Statute
Merchant, Statute-Staple, or by Recognisance in nature of a Statute-Staple, is
to hold the Land, etc. until he be paid his debt together with his Mises and
Costs. Co. 2. part, Inst. 678.

2.
In case where Extenders upon Elegit, or other Writ of Execution or upon a
Recognisance in Court, do extend the Land too high, they shall not be forced to
take it at the rate as the Extenders of Land for Execution upon a
Statute-Merchant, Staple or Recognisance in nature of a Statute-Staple shall
be. Bendloes Rep. 15. Co. on Litt. 290. Yelverton 55.

3.
If one seized of White-acre, Black-acre and Green-acre enter into a Statute or
Judgment against him, and then he enfeoffeth A. of White-acre, and B. of
Black-acre, and keep Green-acre to himself; in this case the Conusee or
Plaintiff may have his Execution upon the moiety of Green-acre, and not meddle
with the other two Acres if he please; but he may not in such case extend a
moiety only in the hands of both the purchasors, but he must extend a moiety in
the hands of both the purchasors, and of all the rest of the Land subject to
the Execution, for if he leave out any (...) it, the party grieved thereby will
have his remedy, and avoid the Execution by Audita Querela: for where the Books
say each purchaser shall have contribution in that case, it is intended, that
such extent shall be avoided of that part and all the Land shall be extended
and equally charged. And so it is in this case, where Green-acre shall descend
to an heir, there the Conusee may extend only the moiety of this Acre in the
hand of the heir, and not meddle with the two Acres in the hands of the
purchasors, if he please. But where there be two or more Conusors in a Statute,
etc. there the Lands of them all, and not of one of them, are to be extended.
Co. 2. part, Inst. 396.

4.
If two persons recover against one in debt severally, and he that has the
first Judgment sues an Elegit, and has the moiety of the Land in Execution,
and then the other sues an Elegit, In this case, he that last sueth shall have
but a moiety of the moiety that is left, Cro. 3.482.

5.
If the Conusee on a Statute or Recognisance in nature of a Statute, receive
his whole debt by the Land, yet may not the Counsor enter; but where upon an
Elegit he is satisfied, there the Conusor may enter on his Land. Co. 2. Part.
Inst. 600.

In the last place, I will give you the Statutes concerning this matter.

Westminster. 2. cap. 46. For all things recorded before the Kings Justices, or
contained in Fines, (whether Contracts, Covenants, Obligations, Services or
Customs acknowledged, or any other things enrolled) a Writ of Execution shall
be within the year, so as the parties shall not need to plead, etc.

Stat. de Acton Burnell, 11 E. 1. A Debt acknowledged to a Merchant before the
Mayor of London, York or Bristol or before a Mayor or Clerk, (appointed by the
King thereunto) shall be enrolled. And if the Debtor fail of his payment at the
day, the Debtee or his Executors may call for Execution, and upon notice
thereof to the Mayor and Clerk, they shall cause his Chattels and Movables to
be sold as far as the debt does amount by Apprisement of honest men, and the
money without delay shall be paid to the Creditor; and in case they cannot sell
them, they shall cause so much of the movables to be delivered to him as
amounts to the debt, and the Kings Seal shall be put to the sale and
deliverance; and if the Debtor have no movables within the Mayors
Jurisdiction, then shall the Mayor send the Recognisance unto the Chancellor
under the Kings Seal, and the Chancellor shall thereupon direct a Writ to the
Sheriff in whose Bayliffwick the Movables of the Debtor be, who shall proceed
therein as the Mayor might have done if the Movables had been in his power. If
the Apprizors set too high a value on the things that are to be sold, they
shall be compellable to take them at the same prices, and shall forthwith be
answerable to the Creditor for his debt. And albeit the moveable Goods are sold
for less than they are worth, yet is the Debtor without Remedy, and it shall be
imputed to his own folly, that he would not sell them himself while he might.
And if the Debtor have no movables whereon the debt may be levied, he shall be
imprisoned and there remain, till he agree with his Creditor; and if he be in
want, the Creditor shall find him bread and water, which the prisoner shall
also satisfy before he be enlarged. And if it be a Merchant Stranger that is
Creditor, he shall be satisfied for his stay about the business: And if the
Debtor have Sureties, they shall be proceeded against in like form as is before
declared against the Debtor: howbeit so long as the Debt may be levied of the
goods moveable of the Debtor, his Pledges or Mainpernors shall be without
damage.

Stat. de Mercatoribus, 13 E. 1. A Debt acknowledged to a Merchant before the
Mayor of London, or Chief Warden of a Town which the King shall appoint, or
other sufficient Men, when they cannot attend, and before a Clerk which the
King shall assign, shall be enrolled; and if it be not paid at the day, the
Debtor ^f he be a Layman shall be imprisoned by the Mayor till, etc. if he be
within their power, else by Writ out of the Chancery upon Certificate of a
Recognisance thither. And if he agree with the Creditor within a quarter of a
year after, then all the Lands which were the Debtors the day of the
Recognisance made, and also his Goods shall be delivered to the Creditors upon
a reasonable extent: And of these Lands so delivered, the Conusee being ousted,
shall have an Assise or Redisseisin.

The Writs out of the Chancery shall be returnable before the Justices of
either Bench, and upon a Non est inventus returned, or that he is a Clerk,
Writs to all the Sheriffs where he has Lands or Goods shall go forth to
deliver the same upon reasonable extent, and to what Sheriff he will to take
his Body.

The like process shall be against the pledges, if the money be not paid at the
day.

If the debtor or pledges dye, the creditor shall have Execution upon the Lands
of the heir at his full age.

Magna Charta, cap. 8. The King shall not take the Lands or Rents of the
debtors, if he have sufficient Chattels.

Magna Charta, cap. 18. The goods of the Debtor may be attached after his death
by the view of lawful men, that nothing shall be meddled with till the Kings
debt be paid.

Stat. 27 E. 3. cap. 9. The Mayor of the Staple shall take Recognisance of debt
before himself, and the Constables of the Staple, whereupon default of payment
being made, the debtors Body shall be imprisoned, and his goods sold in
satisfaction, (if they be within the Staple) else upon a Certificate into the
Chancery, a Writ shall go out from thence to imprison their Bodies and seize
their Lands and goods, which shall be returned into the Chancery, and Execution
thereupon in all respects as in the Statute-Merchant (...) save that the debtor
shall have no advantage of the quarter of a year.

Stat. 5 H. 4. cap. 12. A Statute being once showed in the Common Pleas, and
the process afterward discontinued, yet Execution may be afterward awarded
without showing it again.

11 H. 6. cap. 10. He that is in prison upon a Recognisance shall not be
delivered out of prison upon a Scire facias against the party and surety
thereupon found to the King alone, but shall find Sureties severally as well to
the King as to the other party.

Stat. 23 H. 8. cap. 6. Either of the Chief Justices, or in their absence out
of the same Term, the Mayor of the Staple of Westminster with the Recorder of
London may take Recognisances; And they shall be executed in all respects as a
Statute-Staple.

Stat. 27 Eliz. cap. 4. Every Statute-staple or Merchant not brought to the
Clerk of the Recognisances within four months next after the acknowledging, to
enter a true copy thereof, shall be against all persons, their heirs,
successors, executors, administrators and assigns only, which for good
consideration shall after the acknowledging of the same statute purchase the
Land or any part liable thereunto, or any Rent, Lease or profit of it.

Stat. 33. H. 8. cap. 39. All Obligations to the King shall be of the force of
a Statute-staple.

If the Owner of goods sell his goods after the Test of the Extent, and before
the Inquisition taken, yet the Sheriff may seize and extend them. Mores Rep.
Case 72.

Of a Dephesance.
A Defeasance, which does infectum reddere quod factum est, signifies in our
Law nothing but a Condition annexed to an Act, as to an Obligation,
Recognisance, Statute or Judgment, which being performed by him that is bound
and chargeable by the Act, the Act it self is disabled and made void, as if it
had never been made or done: And this is more peculiarly and properly applied
to such conditional Instruments as are made in avoidance of Statutes and
Recognisances at or after the time of entering into the same: It differs from a
Condition in this, That a Condition is always made at the same time with the
Deed, and commonly either annexed to it, or inserted in it: But a Defeasance is
always made in a Deed by it self, and for the most part after the Original
Deed is made, or Act done to which it has relation. Wherein observe.

That all such things as are executory being created, may by consent of all the
parties to the creation of it, be defeated; so amongst others, Bargain and
Sales, Statutes, Recognisances and Judgments: For it is a rule. That in all
Executory things that are made or created by Deed or Record, the same thing by
the consent of all the parties may in the like way be defeated and avoided.
Nihil est tam conveniens naturali aequitati quam quod unumquodque dissolvatur
eo ligamine quo ligatur. Co. upon Lit. 236. Plow. 193.237. Co. 1.112, 113.

To make a good Defeasance, these things are necessarily required:

1. That if it be eodem mode, it must be avoided by some act or instrument in
Writing, as it was created: and therefore a Parol agreement to avoid a Statute
will not be good. It must therefore be by Deed, but whether it be indented or
Poll is not material, Co. 1.14. Broo. Defeasance 13. Plowd. 393.

2. That if it recite the Judgment or Statute, (which is very fit, though not
absolutely necessary) care must be taken to reci^^^ very exactly: for if a
Defeasance be made of a Statute or Recognisance made 1. Maii, and it be recited
to be made 10. of Maii it will be void; so if it recite a Judgment, as of
Hillary Term, and in truth it was in Easter Term. Plowd. 393. Co. 1.113.

3. It must be made between the same persons that were partie^ to the Original
Deed. 14 H. 8.10. Broo. Estrange al fait 10. And ye^ if a Statute be made to
the Husband and Wife, and the Husband alone join in making the Defeasance. This
shall be a good Defeasance. Broo. Defeasance 3.

4. That it be made of a thing defeasible, and so is a Judgment, Statute or
Recognisance; and so it may be agreed to be upon payment of a less sum than
that mentioned in the Statute or judgment, or by the not disturbance of the
execution of the Will of S or by the making of a good Estate in Land, or the
quiet enjoyment of Land bought or the like. Fitz. bar. 71.20 H. 7.24. 21 H.
7.32.

5. And it is best done before the execution of the Statute, etc. yet if the
Defeasance of a Statute come after the Execution and be thus, [That if the
Conusor pay so much money, then the Statute shall be void] It is best to add
these words in the Defeasance, [ That then tho said Statute and the execution
thereof shall be void. Broo. Defeasance 7.]

And thus it seems, a Defeasance may be after a Defeasance, or one Defeasance
after another: and regularly in that case the last will stand. Pasch. 8 Jac. C.
B. agreed.

Of an Audita Querela.
Audita Querela is a Writ lying where one is bound in a Statute Merchant,
Staple or Recognisance, or where a Judgment is given only for debt or damages,
and the party in Execution for any debt or duty in any such case, and he has a
release or some other sufficient discharge of all or part of the duty, or some
other matter to say in avoidance of the Statute or Judgment, but has no day in
Court to plead it, nor means to make use of it; In this case he may have this
Writ, which is in the nature of a Commission to examine the equity of the case,
and give relief to the party in danger by the extremity like to befall him from
the rigor of the Law in it. Co. upon Lit. 290. Cro. 2.646.

The proceedings herein are most properly in Chancery; And there first by
Venire facias, with an Alias, and as some say by Pluries upon a Nihil returned:
And if the Defendant do not then appear, by a Distringas ad audiendum Judioium;
and upon default herein, a Judgment is given: And upon Bayl given to prosecute
and stand to the Judgment, he may have a Supersedeas to stay Execution: But
after Execution there goes a Scire facias, and no Supersedeas may be had: And
this is not returned into the Chancery, but where it is grounded upon a Record
in Chancery as a Statute and the like. And no man by this may get himself to be
Bayled in case of a Habeas Corpus upon a bare surmise only, but by proof of
witnesses in writing. Dyer 339. F. N. B. 104. Cro. 3. part, 308. Broo. And.
Quer. 41.

Upon the Statute Staple the course is to have the Audita Querela to the
Chancellor: But upon the Statute Merchant it is to be directed to the Justices
de Banco, Dyer 332.

In this Suit, the Nonsuit or Default of any one of the Plaintiffs shall not
hurt another. Co. 6.25.

This Writ will not lie upon a bare surmise only, Dyer 232. Cro. 2. 579, 694.
But it lies for the party himself against whom the Judgment is given, and
against whom the Statute is made, or for his Heir, Executor or Admioistrator,
or either of them upon whom the charge is come or coming.

If my Ancestor to whom I am heir has entered into a Recognisance, and the
Sheriff after his death extend my Land, or a Rent out of it, I being within
age; by this Writ I may avoid the Extent: so that by this the Infant may avoid
not only his own statute, but also the extent of the Statute of his Ancestor.
Mores Rep. Case 121.

If a Statute be taken by one that has no power to take it, and after the
Conusor does enfeoff a stranger of the Land, and the Conusee sueth Execution on
the Statute, the Feoffee may have this Writ to avoid Execution. Dyer 35.

If an Obligee have a Judgment against the heir of the Obligor and his Land in
extent, and the Obligee assign away his Estate in it to a stranger, and after
the heir get a Release of this Judgment from the Obligee, he may have this Writ
against the Assignee. Adjudged Pasch. 7 Jac. B. R. Flowers Case.

Note: An Audita Querela is not returnable in Chancery, but in (...) it is
grounded upon a Record in Chancery as a Statute, etc. And it seems none are to
be baffled upon a Habeas corpus by Audita Querela upon a Surmise, but it must
be proved by writing. In Trinity Term 14 Jac. B. R. One Pierce was brought in
upon a Habeas Corpus and Surmise, That Mosten had recovered in B. R. against
Morris in debt upon a Bond, had Judgment against Morris the principal, and a
Capias ad Satisfaciendum against him, and after that another Capias against
Pierce the Surety, which came in upon Habeas corpus, and brought an Audita
Querela and surmised payment by the principal: And Bayl was denied him by the
Chief Justice, nullo contradicente.

This Remedy is given most properly where the Statute is not good, as where it
wants a Seal or the like: for in cases where the Statute is good, and the
proceed in the execution of it is erroneous only, there the relief is properly
by Writ of Error. Cro. 3.319, 494. In all cases therefore where this remedy is
given, it is requisite that these three things be in the case.

1. There must a charge or burden come or coming upon him that is to have it.

2. It must be such a charge or burden as that whereof by Law he ought to be
discharged and disburthened in all or in part.

3. It must be in such a case as wherein he has no other way to relieve
himself. And therefore it is used and had sometimes to avoid a Judgment and the
execution thereof, or to avoid a Statute or Recognisance: As if a Judgment, or
Judgment and Execution be had against me, and the Plaintiff in facto release me
of the debt; or I be released of it, or of part of it by Law, and yet he sueth
Execution out against me for the whole; I may have may relief by this way. So
if a Judgment be had against me and another for one debt, and one of us is
taken in Execution, and after either of us get a discharge in fact or in Law of
the debt, both or either of us must have relief by this way. Pasch. 40 Eliz. C.
B. Monk and Brown. Co. 8.152. Plow. 72. Dyer 50.

If the Conusee of a later Statute extend Lands of the Conusor in one County
(having Lands in two Counties) and after this the Conusee of a former Statute
does extend the moiety of the Lands in the other County only: the Conusee of
the later Statute may have this action against him, for he ought to have sued
out his Execution upon the Lands in both Counties. Cro. 3 part, 797.

If a Statute be delivered to a stranger to keep, till certain conditions be
performed, and he deliver it to the Conusee, or he get it by fraud from him
before the conditions be performed; In this case he may be relieved by this
Writ. Fitz. 15.16.

If one be Bayl for another for a debt in the King's Bench according to the
course there, and the principal dies, not paying the debt, nor rendering his
Body, and upon a Scire facias and two Nihils against the Bail, he is taken in
Execution, he may be relieved by this Writ: for the Bayl is not to be charged
till some default be in the Principal to yield himself, etc. but now he being
dead, the Bayl is discharged. Goldsb. 174. Cro. 2.645.

In case where one man is chargeable alone toward a Judgment or Statute, and
others are to be contributory: as where the Conusor has sold his Land to
diverse Purchasors, or a Judgment is had against one, who does leave his Land to
diverse heirs, if one of the Purchasors or one of the Heirs alone be or be like
to be charged, he may by this force the rest to be contributory to the charge:
and if any one of them have a Release or other good discharge, this as it seems
will discharge all the rest. But if one after he has entered into a Statute or
Recognizance do convey part of the Lands away and keep the rest, and Execution
is sued of the Lands in his hand only against him or his heir, they shall have
no contribution from the purchasors. And yet if any of the purchasors be sued,
he shall have contribution against the Conusor, his heir and the rest of the
purchasors. Co. 2.92. Dyer 322. Moors Rep Case 607, 700.

A being in Execution was suffered to go at large, and afterward (...) was
taken again in Execution, whereupon he brought his Audita Querela. and while he
was at large he paid the money, as he proved by witnesses sworn; whereupon it
was adjudged, That the Audita Querela did well lie. Mich. 27 Eliz. C. B. Cro.
3. part, Reynells Case.

We might here say something in like manner of Mortgages, Leases and the like,
but the proceedings therein have so near a resemblance, when they are to be
extended, that I will pass them over in this place; and the rather, because the
former parts contain many Presidents of them. I will therefore only give one
short Discourse of Distresses, and so finally conclude this Work.

Of Distresses and Replevins.
DIstress, is the taking away of one man's Chattels for a Trespass done, Rent
accrued or in arrear, and the like: Of which some things are levyable; Others
cannot be distrained. For which observe;

That a Cart full of Corn, 2 H. 4.15. a Fold of Sheep, etc. 20 E. 4.3. a
Millstone, 14 H. 8.25. etc. if it be not part of the Mill, though it be fixed
to a piece of Timber with nails; Windows and Doors when they are removed off
of the books: But a Millstone though it be lifted up to be picked and beaten,
yet so long as it lies upon the other stone remains parcel of the Mill and
cannot be distrained. No more can Windows and Doors hanging upon the hooks,
though they be removeable; but this must be found upon the same Land a man
holds: but in other Lands not holden of him, he cannot distrain, except it be
by the Tenants grant. If Dismes be let reserving a Rent, they cannot be
distrained for the Rent, no not when they are severed from the nine parts, in
as much as there is no distress but upon Land in demesne.

The King may distrain in another Land of the same man's for his Seigniory or
Rentcharge, but so shall not the Grantee, 9 H 6.9. is, That a common person
cannot distrain for his Seigniory but in the Land holden of him, except it be
by his Tenants grant: But the King may in any place.

13 E. 4.6. That the King for his Services or for a Rentcharge may distrain in
all his Tenants Lands; but so shall not the Kings grantee.

Stat. Marlb. cap. 15. Distresses shall not be taken in the Kings Highway or
common-street, but by the King or his Officers, having special authority.

Stat. Artic. Cler. cap. 9. Nor in the ancient Fees of Churches.

The Distress being put in pound overt, or open pound, that is some place where
the owner may lawfully come at them, as if they be things that have life to
give them meat, etc. he that distraineth shall not be charged, what hurt soever
they receive; for quick Cattle must be put in pound overt, that the Owner may
give them sustenance; but dead need not: But if they be marred in his default
that distraineth, he shall answer for them.

Stat. Marlb. cap. 4. None shall lead distress out of the County where they
were taken. The Neighbor that does it to his Neighbor shall be fined. The
Lord that does it to his Tenant shall be amerced.

1 and 2 P. and M. cap. 12. No distress of Cattle shall be driven out of that
Hundred, Rape, Wapentake or Lath, where it was taken, except to a pound overt
within the Shire, not above three miles from the place where it was taken. No
Distress taken at one time shall be impounded at several places, whereby the
Owners shall be constrained to sue several Replevins; the penalty of both these
five pounds and treble damages. No person shall take above four pence for the
poundage of any whole distress impounded: and where less has been used, there
to take less upon pain of 5. pounds, and loss of the money he has taken above
four pence, any Prescription notwithstanding to the contrary.

Bare Hereditaments that may be distrained for, are a Seigniory and Rentcharge.

Seigniories are Services whereby Lands are holden: and Services are common to
all certain Estates, or proper to Inheritances.

Replevins are of two sorts.

1. Homine Replegiando, for one imprisoned, or in Prison detained where he
should not; as being Baylable or claimed as a Villain, F.N.B. 66. or inward,
F.N.B. 67. where indeed he is Frank out of Ward.

2. A Replevin for Goods or Chattels distrained, which according to the nature
of the Plea ministered by the parties grows to be either a real or personal
Plea; as upon property claimed, then it is personal; if the Defendant avow the
taking for Services or Rent behind, etc. then it becomes real, etc. and as
strong as a Praecipe quod reddat, in as much he is to have a return. And
therefore he shall in that case have aid before any Plea pleaded as in a
Praecipe quod reddat; and this may be both by Writ and Plaint in any Court
Baron, F. N. B. 70. as well as in the County Court. And being by Plaint, though
in the County Court, it shall not proceed if any touching the Freehold come in
question; as if the Defendant avowing for damage Feasant, the Plaintiff
justifies by reason of Common of Pasture.

Stat. Marlb. cap. 21. The Sheriff may replevin Beasts not only without, but
within a Liberty also, if the Bailiff of the Liberty will not.

Stat. Westminster. 2. cap. 2. The Sheriff or Bailiff shall take Pledges of the
Plaintiff not only de prosequendo before they make deliverance of the Beasts,
but of returning the Beasts if a return be adjudged; he that takes pledge
otherwise shall answer the price of the Beasts.

Upon a Return awarded to the Defendant, the Writ de Returno habendo shall have
this Clause, (That the Sheriff shall not deliver them without Writ, wherein
mention shall be made of the Judgment). And thereupon the Plaintiff (if he
will) may have a judicial Writ to the Sheriff to deliver him the Beasts.

Upon a Return awarded, after which if a Return another time be awarded, there
shall be no more Replevins. And if upon his default a second time, or otherwise
the Defendant be adjudged to have a New Return, the Distress shall remain
irreplegiable.

Stat. 1 and 2 Phil. and Ma. cap. 12. Every Sheriff of a Shire, (being no City)
shall at his first County day, or within two months after the receipt of his
Patent, proclaim in the Shire Town four Deputies at the least, dwelling not
past Twelve miles one from another, which in his name shall make Replevins as
the Sheriff might do himself.

This is all thought fit at the present to be Added to make this Book Complete;
wherein you not only find the Choycest Presidents in their kinds, but the
Nature and Use of them according to the Common Law, or as bounded by Statutes;
And withal, given a short Touch upon Distresses and Replevins, with the
Statutes relating thereto.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
INdenture of Annuity, 1 118 159 450 571 Assignment of a Lease in trust, 10,
138, 176 Attorney; Letter of Attorney, 33, 144, 147.199, 200 Another, 34, 146,
148, 149, 201, 203, 204, 319, 341 Award, the form thereof, 34, 172, 584, 587
Assignment of two several Obligations, 52 Assignment of two Apprentices, etc.
53 Assignment of a Lease of Partition, etc. 57 Assignment of a wharf-stocke,
etc. with a general Release, etc. 61 Assignment of a Lease, etc. with an
Execution, 62, 67, 134 491 Assignment with a Proviso, 96 Assignment of Lands
taken upon extent, 98 Apprentiship, Indenture thereof, 119 Assignment of a
moiety of a house and goods, etc. 136 Assignment of an Annuity, 140, 175
Apprentice, discharge of him, 144 Arbitrament, condition of a bond thereof,
153, 160 Apprentice, covenant for his truth, 153 Annuity, released. 330.
Attorney, Letters of Attorney several kinds thereof, 342 343, 344, 345, 346,
347, 369, 386 Assignment and letter of Attorney of several bonds, 381 Answer in
Chancery beginning and end thereof, 425 Title of a Second answer, etc. 427
Affidavit that a Defendant cannot answer without sight of writings, 429
Administrators account, the form thereof, 430 Answer in Chancery to a bill
there-exhibit 431 Articles of agreement, form thereof, 439, 454, 561
Acquittance for purchase money, 501 Attornment of tenants, indorsing thereof,
ibid. Assignments of several Leases with good Covenants, 536 Articles for
buildings, 557 Articles to Surrender Copyhold lands, etc. 565 Assignment of a
bond for collateral Security, 570 Articles to hold Coyhold lands from year to
years etc. 574 Allotment of several parcels of Land, an Indenture to that
purpose. 632 Attorney. Letter of attorney Irrevocable with covenant, etc. 650
Another of another kind, 651 Of a man's Estate in general, 652 Of several Sums
of money, 653 Assignment of certain debts, 654
B
BIll of Sale, 17, 170 Bond assignment thereof, 41 Bargayne and Sale of a
Manor with necessary Covenants, 102 120 Bargayn and Sale of a house in London,
130 Bill of Debt, 163, 489, 654 Bill obligatory, 164 Bargain and Sale of
household stuff, and others 170, 171 Bargain and Sale of trees. 208 Bargain
and Sale absolute of a house and Land, 214, 607, 609 Brewers Clarke a condition
for him, 225 Bargain and Sale of woods, 320, 618, 619 Burgess to serve in
Parl. Indenture 357 Bills in Chancery, Several forms thereof 420, 433 Bill of
Revivor 424 Bargain and Sale deed to revoke it, 442 Bargain and Sale for
collateral Security, 483 Bargain and Sale upon Surrender of a Lease, 511
Bargain and Sale in trust 523 A plain Bargain and Sale to be enrolled, 556
Bargain and Sale from the mortgages and mortgager to another before time of
redemption, 593 Bargain and Sale conditional to Feoffees in trust, 599
Bargain and Sale of Swan and Swan-mark 617
C
Condition to pay a Sum of Money at two payments, etc. 32, 179 Condition to
make Free an Apprentice, 33 Condition to pay Money in 14 days, etc. 56, 160
Condition to yay Money to Children at their several Ages according to a Will,
etc. 59, 60 Condition to pay Rent quarterly, etc. 87, 158, 188, 192 332, 549
Covenant to deliver possession or a deed 95, 185, 300 Contract of matrimony
revoked, 97 Charter-party for a ships voyage, 100, 395 Conveyance in Fee of a
house and land, etc. 125 Copyhold Covenant to Surrender it, 151, 156, 199, 332
Covenant for further assurance, 151, 154, 158 Covenant that he is lawfully
seized etc. 152, Covenant not to cut down or Sell trees etc. 152 Condition of a
Bond of Arbitrament, 153, 160 Condition to find one diet by the year, 155
Condition to save a tenant harmless for payment of rent, the title being in
controversy, 155, 547 Condition to discharge Churchwardens of a child etc. 156
Condition for quiet enjoyment etc. 157, 187, 188, 327 Condition to Save
harmless etc. 161, 183, 190, 193, 196 197, 198 Condition to pay money upon a
nonsuit, 162 Condition to perform Covenants, 162 180 298 Condition to deliver
Hay or Oats at a day, 179 Condition to stand to an Award, etc. 180 Condition
not to demise or alien without consent, 181 Condition to justify actions, etc.
182 Condition to pay money yearly, etc. 183 185 Condition to seal an Indenture
by a day. 184 Condition to assign a Lease, etc. by a day. 186 302 Condition not
to do any act to prejudice the estate of the Obligee in a Lease, etc. 187
Condition from a husband to secure childrens estates, 189 Condition for an
hired Servants truth. 191 Condition to pay money at the end of an Apprentiship,
194 Condition to repay money upon dislike, etc. 195 Condition to build a house
or Farm. ibid. 299 Conveyance of Land upon marriage. 218 Condition, that Land
is free from encumbrances. 224 Condition for a Brewers Clerk. 225 Covenant to
seal a new Lease, and the Lessee in the interim to enjoy. 236 Covenant to pay
the Sheriff for an Arrest. 238 Covenants between Partners at the dissolution of
their Partnership, 238 Conveyance from tenant in tail to Baron and Feme and
the heirs of the Baron for ever, 245 Condition to pay money weekly, 297
Condition to pay money in 3 years, 298 Condition collateral, 299 Condition to
pay money at ones return from Sea, 301 Condition to deliver wool, 302
Condition to renew a Lease when the Lessor comes to full age, 303 Condition to
gather Rents and give account thereof. 304, 305 Condition to bring an Inventory
into the Prerogative Court by a day. 307 Condition to assure mortgaged lands
upon defect of redemption, 308 Condition to acknowledge a Statute by a day. 309
Condition not to meddle with an Executorship, etc. 310 Condition to procure a
release and save harmless. 311, 312, 337 Condition to release Dower, 313
Condition that a man will suffer his wife to make a Will, 313, 385 Condition to
marry one by a day, etc. 314 Condition to be a true Prisoner, ibid. Condition
to save harmless, etc. 315 333 338 502 Condition of a Factor to serve his
Merchant, etc. ibid. Condition to pay use for Orphanage or Legacy-money 316
Condition for executing a Gaolership 317 339 Condition to reassure lands 318
Condition to find an Apprentice clothes. 323 Condition, not to be bound for any
one 324 Condition to surrender land or pay money. 325 Condition to keep the
Peace ibid. Condition to pay money, etc. 326 327 Condition to recover a debt,
etc. ibid. Condition to enjoy lands for non-payment of money 329 Condition upon
an Attachment 331 Condition about payment of purchase-money, 334 Copyhold
lands, demise thereof 358 Conditions of several kinds 383 384 647 648 649
Constables, Articles to be observed by them, 391 Condition to Replevy goods 438
Conveyance of land by 3. Coheirs and their husbands. 507 Covenant to deliver
Evidences by such a time 525 Covenant to settle lands for natural affection.
534 Condition of a Counter-bond. 535 Condition to save harmless. 581, 582
D.
DEed to justify Actions upon setting over a Statute, 30 Dower, release
thereof, 45 Demise of diverse lands, etc. paying a pepper corn yearly 108
Defeasance upon a Bond sued to Judgment, 115 167 Defeasance to make void
Statutes, etc. 123 Debt, bill thereof 163 Defeasance upon a Statute 167 416 550
Defeasance upon a Mortgage 168 Deed of Settlement to several uses, and in
default etc. as by Will or other writing shall be appointed, 293 Debts,
assignment thereof, etc. 370 Declaration by a wife of the disposal of a sum of
money according to a power reserved, etc. 375 Discharge to the Sheriff 388
Debts, Conveyance for payment of debts, 410 Demurrer and Plea, form thereof 425
Deputation to a Bailiff or Receiver 644 Disease, condition to cure it or repay
the money 646
E.
EXtent, a grant thereof, 40 Executor, discharged from an Orphans portion in
London etc. 190 Executors, covenant to discharge them from payment of Legacies
to Nonage 192 Executors, bound to diligence in executing a Will, and to account
194 Extent, assignment thereof 322 Executors, Covenants between them 503
Executor, condition to save him harmless. 548
F.
FIne, Covenant to levy it, 150 162 185 276 Fine, uses thereof declared by Deed
269 Forma Pauperis, certificate, affidavit and Petition or the same. 426 427
Feoffment with a Letter of Attorney 462 Fine, uses thereof well declared, 526
G.
GRant of the reversion of certain Lands 22 Gift, Deed of Gift 44 234 235 Goods
in a Ship, transport thereof 232 Observations upon a Deed of Gift 236 Grant of
Lands in Fee, in consideration of money and other Lands in exchange 551 Grant
of the next Donation of a Benefice 655
H.
DEed to save Harmless. 6
I.
JUdgment, assignment thereof, with a Letter of Attorney therein 12 139 173
Jointure, an assurance thereof to a wife with remainder in tail. 47 A Jointure
with diverse limitations, and a Proviso for Revocation 76 Indenture to lead the
use of a Fine 107 Indenture of redemise etc. with Proviso etc. 110 Jointure to
the wife before marriage 128 220 Judgment, condition to acknowledge satisfaction
thereon, 154 Jointure, a deed thereof with uses 227 Inheritance, conveyed by
Deed, etc. 265 Indenture for equal division of goods etc. 414 640 Indenture in
lieu of Jointure. 505 Indenture of Settlement, well penned 541
L.
LEase with extraordinary Covenants 4 Lease of a house and lands made in
consideration of a sum, the Fee-simple being in the Lessor, 8 Letter of
Attorney to receive one single debt 33 144 Lease in consideration of the
surrender of a former, with good Covenants 35 Lease of Tithes 43 Lease of a
Fee-Farm etc. with necessary Covenants 49 Letter of Attorney to enter upon
lands and deliver a lease, 55 56 145 202 Lease of diverse lands etc. with
covenant to pay Heriots etc. 71 Lease of lands by way of mortgage 92 Lease of a
house in London 112 Lease to try a Title 129 387 Lease of a house and lands in
the Country 209 Lease of a Warren of Conies 354 License to Hawk, Hunt and Fish
ibid. Lease of Cole-Mines 355 Letters of License 356 371 373 458 Lease of goods
levied by the Sheriff 360 Lease of lands in Barbados 361 Lease from a Company
363 Lease from a Parson and Churchwardens, with a Covenant for building etc.
364 Lease from a Town or Corporation 365 Lease for 3. lives, with Letter of
Attorney etc. 367 519 Livery of Seisin; Memorandum thereof 413 490 Lease of a
Mill 434 Lease for a year 452 Lease of a side of a Shop etc. 459 Lease in trust
493 495 Lease of Lands with Exception of Woods 514 Lease forfeited upon a
Mortgage, assignment thereof 517 Lease to be void on payment of etc. 583 Lease
of a Ferry 588 Lease to three, whereby every one is to pay, bear and receive
equally 641
M.
MOrtgage, assignment thereof 14 Mortgage for indemnity of Sureties 15
Ma^^mony, pretended contract thereof revoked 97 Mortgage of Lands upon money
etc. 101 Marriage, condition concerning it 163 Mortgage, confirmation thereof
469 Marriage, Lands settled to uses thereon, and a fine levied to those uses
471, 473 Mortgage, deed thereof 476 Manor, Conveyance thereof 479 Marriage,
Indenture to stand seized to uses in consideration thereof 567
N
NOnsuit, condition to pay money thereon 162
O
OBligations, Assignment of two Several ones 52 Obligation, covenant to
deliver it 185 Covenant to discharge it by a day 328 Obligation single from one
to one 437 From two to one ibid. From three to one 438 Obligation and Condition
from a bailiff and his Suretyes to a High Sheriff 578
P
PRoviso to make a demise void, and a Covenant to grant a a new Lease 54
Partition, Indentures thereof 116 389 639 Protection in Parliament time 172
Protection revoked 208 Partition of debts between partners 24^ Partnership,
deed thereof between four Merchants 398 Plea and Demurrer 425 Forma pauperis,
Certificate and affidavit thereof 426 Presentation of a Minister to a Living
446 Parsonage, a Lease thereof 447 461 462 Park, Keepership thereof granted 643
R
RElease of Lands mortgaged 18 Revocation, Deed to revoke uses 30. 166
Recognizance, assignment thereof 24 Release general 27 143 164 457 489 Release
from one that has lost a deed 27 46 Release of fines and Forfeitures to the
King 28 Release or resignation of a trust 29 Release of an annuity 42 628
Release of Dower 45 Revocation of a pretended contract of matrimony 97 Rent
reserved, grant thereof 117 Release of Lands upon performance of Articles 124
165 502 Recovery, Covenants to pass a Recovery etc. 133 207 266 Release by one
used in trust 141 Revocation of a Suit 142 Release of Errors 144 Release upon
receipt of a legacy 164 351 Recovery, deeds of Settlement thereupon 250 254 260
Release of a Proviso 319 320 321 Release of a Recognisance 340 Release of an
extent Bond etc. 350 Release between Purchasors 359 Rejoinder, the form thereof
428 Replication, the form thereof 429 Release to a purchaser 445 Release and
confirmation 453 Release from an Executor 456 Redemise of Lands, mortgaged 466
Release of Land in exchange 589 Release where 3 have Estate of inheritance 622
Release of a conditional assignment 623 Release of a Manor 624 Release of
rent reserved 626 Release of a condition etc. 627 629
S
SAle, A bill of Sale 17 Scavenger and Raker, Indenture between them for
cleansing the streets 31 Sale of the moiety of a Rent reserved by Lease 88
Surrender of a Lease for lives etc. 142 Suit, revocation thereof 142 503
Surrender of Copyhold lands by way of Mortgage 173 Settlement by fine and
Recovery of lands to raise money to pay debts and childrens portions 280 Sale
of goods by the Sheriff, bailiff 359 Sheriff, discharge to him 388 Statute,
assignment thereof 418 Sub-poena, affidavit of Serving thereof 428 Stewardship
of a Manor, grant thereof 458 644 Surrender, acknowledgment of what estate was
granted and how 492 Settlement, Indenture thereof well penned 541 Swans and
Swan-marke, Bargain and S^le of it 617 Survivorship, Indenture to avoid it 636
637
T
Tithes, a Lease thereof 43 Transport of Goods in a ship 232 Tripartite deed of
Lands etc. in trust, till a jointure made 273 Testimonial of a house and good
burnt 358 Trust, declaration thereof 375 444 461 496 500 Tenant, points of law
between Lord and tenant etc. 393 Trust, acknowledgment thereof 408 409 Tail,
estate tail barred by Indenture 463
V
USe; deed to lead the use of a fine 107 Uses declared by deed, with good
covenants 278 378 487 Uses revoked by deeds etc. 397
W
WIll, the form thereof 46 The preamble of the same 179 Warrant of Attorney to
confess a judgment 206 349 Warrants to acknowledge Satisfaction 206 352
Warrants of Attorney in general 349, 352 Warrant of a Master in Chancery upon a
Reference 428 Warrant to keep a Court 503 Warrant for a Buck and Do. 646
The Table to the Fourth Part.
A.
Audita Querela, the Nature of it; where it lies, and for what, 723, 724, 725
Where returnable, 725
B.
BArgain and Sale, definition thereof, 694 Rules concerning the same. 695 Time
for Inrollment. 696 Presidents thereof, 698
C.
COncords of Fines; Presidents thereof, 662, 663 Cases concerning Fines, 670
Cases concerning Recoveries, 688 Cases concerning Bargain and Sale, 696 Cases
concerning Execution in its several kinds, etc. 705 Cases concerning Statutes
and Recognisances, 718
D.
DEpheasance, the Nature of it, 722 Rules concerning the same, ibid. Distresses
and Replevin, what they are, where they lie, for whom, and what, 726, 727
E.
EXemplification of a Fine, 664, 665 Executions, the several sorts thereof, 703
What is liable thereto, et e contra, 714 Escape, what shall be so judged, 726
F.
FIne; definition thereof, 661 Proceedings therein, 661, 662 Foot of a Fine,
667
I.
INdenture of Covenant for a Recovery to be suffered, 682 Another, declaring
the Uses of a Recovery already suffered, 683 Judgment, and the Execution
thereof. 700 How a Judgment shall be executed, 701
P.
PResident of a Lease to make a Tenant to the Praecipe, 677 Proviso for
Revocation of Uses, 684 Presidents of Bargain and Sale, 698
R.
REcovery; definition thereof, with the Formalities and Efficient causes, 675
Proceedings therein, ibid. President thereof in the Hustings, London, with
double Voucher, 678 Revocations of Uses according to former Indentures, etc.
686 Replevin, the nature of it, and for what it lies, 728 Statutes concerning
it, 728, 729
S.
STatutes relating to Fines, etc. 673 Statutes relating to Recoveries, etc. 692
Statutes concerning Judgments, and their execution, 702 Sheriff his Duty in
doing Execution, 705 Statutes concerning the same, 709 Statute or Recognisance,
the nature thereof, 710, 711 Forms thereof, ibid. et 712 Where a person shall
be contributory thereto, 726 Rules concerning the same, 713 Proceedings
thereon, 715 Sureties, how to be proceeded against, 718 Statutes relating to
Recognisances, etc. 719, 720 Statutes concerning Distresses and Replevins, 727
V.
USe of a Fine, Indenture to ^ead it, in several Forms and Cases, 668, 684 Uses
how they may be declared, and when, and by whom, 669, 670 Uses declared upon
Revocation, 688
W.
WArrant of Attorney, and Ded. Pot. the form thereof, 677, 678 What requisite
thereto, 678
FINIS.

