Praeparatio Evangelica: OR, A Plain and Practical DISCOURSE CONCERNING The
SOUL'S Preparation FOR A Blessed Eternity.

Being the Substance of several SERMONS Preached at LEEDS.

By TIMOTHY MANLOVE, Minister of the Gospel.

Heb. 12.14. Follow Peace with all Men, and HOLINESS, without which no Man
shall see the LORD.

1 John 4.16. God is LOVE; and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and
God in him.

Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?

LONDON; Printed for Nevill Simmons, Bookseller in Sheffield, Yorkshire: And
sold by George Coniers, at the Ring in Little Britain, School.

To the Diligent and Serious READER.
CVstom obliges me to say something by way of Preface, and the weight of the
Subject before us is such, as requires the utmost Diligence to press the
serious Consideration of it upon all to whom it is presented.

That the Soul of Man is in its own Nature fitted for Immortality, being
capable of subsisting and acting in a state of separation from the Body, and
therefore designed thereto, is a Truth commonly acknowledged amongst
Christians, yea, and amongst Pagans too; as I have proved at large in a former
Treatise.

Now if this be a Truth, it is certainly a very important one, how little soever
considered by the unthinking World. Must we live for ever? Surely it highly
concerns us to examin^ whither we are going? what State w^ are like to enter
upon when the uncertain Term of our present Life shall be at an end? Shall it
be well or il^ with us to all Eternity?

The Resolution of this great Question depends upon our Behavior while we are
in the Body, for accoraing to that we must be judged whether it b^ good or bad,
2 Cor. 5.10.

The Goodness or Wickedness of ou^ Actions is to be measured by their
agreeableness or disagreeableness to the Divine Law; which is norma offici^ and
judicii, a Rule to live by, and by which we must be judged.

The Duties which God has enjoin^ are such, as in their own Nature do
manifestly tend to qualify and f^^ us for that eternal Blessedness, which he
has prepared for his holy ones.

It is therefore of great consequence to understand in some competent measure
the Nature of the Heavenly Felicity; because the more clear and distinct our
Apprehensions are in this Matter, the more will our Hearts be raised to desire
it, and our Endeavors quickened in the pursuit of it, and the better we shall
understand the way that leads to it.

The absolute necessity of Holiness, in order to our everlasting Happiness, is
rather confessed, than well understood by the generality of those that bear the
Christian Name; and this not for want of suitable Means and Helps in order to
such Knowledge, but for want of Hearts to use them, Prove. 17.16. Men's thoughts
are otherwise taken up, and their carnal Minds are averse from Considerations
of this nature.

That Holiness is necessary, because God has commanded it, is a very great
Truth, and nothing but the Truth, but yet it is not the whole Truth neither:
For besides this legal Necessity of it, there is also a natural Necessity in
the case, it being as impossible in the nature of the thing that we should be
happy without being holy, as that a blind Man should be delighted with Colors,
or one that is deaf with Sounds and Harmony.

And this will appear if we consider what it is that must make a rational
immortal Spirit completely blessed; namely, the enjoyment of the most holy,
glorious, blessed God, whereunto an unholy Soul is utterly indisposed, and
disaffected; and therefore cannot be happy till its Temper be altered, and made
suitable to the Object; that is, holy.

The Saints in Glory are taken up with God, admiring, loving, praising, and
delighting in him as their chief Good, their only Soul-satisfying Portion, yea,
and as infinitely and amiably good in himself; and withal enjoying the most
sweet and refreshing sense of his Love to them, without any Clouds, Darkness,
or Interruptions. Now, this kind of Happiness is no way suitable to the Genius
and Disposition of an unsanctified Heart, and how should a Man be happy while
his very Soul is averse to, and at Enmity against that which alone can make him
so?

This is the woeful case of the far greater part of the World, which loudly
calls for our deepest Lamentations over it, and our utmost Endeavors to
redress it.

To this purpose I have thought meet to publish the following Discourse,
wherein I have labored to lay open our Way, and our End, beginning with the
latter, according to the order of intention.

I have therefore first laid down a short, plain, scriptural Account of that
blessed State reserved in Heaven for true Believers, and then proceeded to open
the Nature of that great Work of Grace, whereby we must be prepared, wrought,
or made meet for that State. Each of these gives Light to the other, the End
and Way are so near akin that they differ rather in degree than in kind, Grace
is Glory begun, Glory is Grace perfected.

If these things were well weighed, and compared together, the advantage would
be very great every way. Give me leave to mention some few Particulars.

1. This would effectually put to silence the ignorant Cavils of foolish Men,
who complain that the ways of Holiness are too strict and precise for them. Did
they but better know what the Blessed Above are doing, and what they are
enjoying, they would quickly see reason to conclude, that the greatest
Diligence and Care we can use is all little enough to ripen us for so holy, so
glorious, so perfect a State. 2. It would certainly pull down the groundless
Presumptions of Self-deceiving Hypocrites, who promise to themselves Heaven at
last, tho they be utter Strangers to that vital Power of Religion, without
which there is no coming thither. No wonder that Men who hope for they know not
what hereafter, live they know not, or care not how while they are here: But,
whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he also reap. Gal. 6.7. 3. This would also
show us what way and manner of religious Worship is like to be most acceptable
to God, and advantageous to our selves, viz. That which tends most to refine
and spiritualize our Hearts, and so to fit them for Heaven. 4. And consequently
what ends we ought to propose to our selves in every religious Duty: Namely,
that we may get as near unto God, and be as inward with him, as possibly we
can, till we come to the State of full and perfect Communion with him. 5. And
what need there is of Divine Grace to elevate and raise our Hearts to such high
and holy things as these. Alas, what poor work shall we make with spiritual
things if we be left to our selves! 6. This will greatly support the People of
God under the difficulties of their present State and Work: Their spiritual
Conflicts will soon be over, and Heaven will make amends for all. The end to
which the despised ways of Holiness lead, is unspeakably glorious.
Lastly; if the best of us did more clearly apprehend and frequently consider
the Blessedness of a future State, and the necessary Connection or near Alliance
between Holiness and Happiness, this would put Life into all our Motions and
Tendencies Heavenward, and would give a most refreshing relish and savor to
all our Duties.

These and many more such advantages would accrue to us from a right
understanding of our way, and our end compared with each other. But I must not
make too large a Preface to so small a Book.

Nor will I stay to apologize (as the manner of some is) for the Weakness and
Imperfections of the ensuing Treatise. Only I tell thee, I have studied that
both as to the Matter, Method, and Style, it might be plain, practical, and
profitable for the use of vulgar Readers, not to gratify the capricious wanton
humors of those who have itching Ears; but to edify honest upright Hearts. I
hope I can truly say in some measure, that as to the applause of Men, desii
curare, I have done regarding it. With me it is a very small Matter to be
judged of Man's Judgment, 1 Cor. 4.3.

Therefore to conclude; if thou will read deliberatly what I have written, and
consider it impartially, and carry it home to thine own Heart and Conscience,
by that prudent Self-application which the nature of thy Case shall require, I
hope thou will get real advantage by it; and when thou have so done, forget not
to pray for him,

Who is a very unworthy Servant of the best and greatest Master. Timothy
Manlove.
Leeds, Sept. 8. School.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Dependence of the Words upon what goes before. Their Literal and
Real Importance. The Point of Doctrine to be insisted upon. The Method wherein
it is to be handled. Page 1. CHAP. II. Some general Account of the Heavenly
Felicity; to which are subjoyned some short Hints, how unfit we are by Nature
for that blessed State, and how we came to be so. 9. CHAP. III. A further
Enquiry into the Nature of that great Change, whereby the Souls of Believers
are wrought and prepared for Heaven. 22. CHAP. IV. Of the several Steps whereby
this blessed Work is begun, carried on, and perfected in the Soul. 38. CHAP. V.
Plain Proof from Scripture, and the nature of the thing, that none can come to
Heaven, till they be wrought or prepared for it by Divine Grace. 48. CHAP. VI.
Several Inferences of Truth drawn from the foregoing Discourse. 61. CHAP. VII.
Reproof to those Persons who wrong their own Souls by presumptuous hopes of
Heaven, while they are utter Strangers to this great work of Grace, whereby
they should be prepared for it. Showing how vain, sinful, dangerous and
unnatural it is for them thus to deceive themselves. 72. CHAP. VIII. How much
it concerns us to examine our selves, whether we be wrought for Heaven or no.
Sundry Motives to excite us to this necessary Duty. 82. CHAP. IX. Directions
for the more successful management of this great Duty of Self-Examination. 90.
CHAP. X. Sundry Questions proposed by which to examine the State of our Souls.
98. CHAP. XI. The Exhortation in several Branches. 1. To those who are not yet
wrought for Heaven, directing them what Methods to take in order to their
Conversion. 117. CHAP. XII. Directions to those who have attained to greater
degrees of Assurance and Comfort. 158.
2 COR. 5.5. Now he that has wrought us for the self-same thing is GOD.


CHAP. I.
The Dependence of the Words upon what goes before. Their Literal and Real
Importance. The Point of Doctrine to be insisted upon. The Method wherein it is
to be handled.

IN the foregoing Chapter we have an account of the many sufferings, and
dangers to which the Apostle himself, and his Fellow Laborers in the Work of
the Gospel were exposed. Verse. 8, 9. etc. Troubled on every side, -- perplexed,
-- persecuted, -- cast down, -- Always bearing about in the Body the dying of
the Lord Jesus, i. e. by suffering for his sake, and in conformity to him: As
it follows verse. 11. Always delivered unto Death for Jesus sake.

Moreover, he tells us what it was that bore up their Spirits, and kept them
from fainting under all these Pressures, namely, a believing prospect of future
Glory, whereof Christ's Resurrection was a certain Argument and Pledge, verse.
13, 14. We also believe, and therefore speak: Knowing that he which raised up
the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, verse. 16. For which cause we
faint not, etc.

He then proceeds to make a Comparison between their present Troubles, and the
Joy that was set before them. As for the former, he speaks as tho he accounted
them scarce worth naming: but of the latter, as if no words could be found
great enough to express it. verse. 17. For our light affliction which is but for
a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal w^ight of Glory.
[(...)] one Hyperbole upon another, and yet all little enough to signify the
deep sense which he had of the transcendent worth, and excellency of that
weighty Glory concerning which he speaks. Thus Romans 8.18. For ^^eckon that the
Sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory
which shall be revealed is us. This he did upon due deli^eration, well weighing
the Point, [(...), expendo] as Grotius observes some of the Ancients render it.

Thus ye see whence it was that they fetched their Supports amidst all the
conflicts and difficulties they met with in this World. What they looked or
aimed at [(...),] viz. The things not seen, which are eternal, verse. 18. This
was the Prize they ran for; and which they expected at length to obtain.

And now, that none might think that their hopes were wavering, uncertain or
ill-grounded, he goes on in this Chapter, wherein the Text is, to declare how
full and satisfying their Assurance was, in this matter, and why it was so.

Verse. 1. For we know that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, etc. Note ^ere, that Faith is a certain
infallible sort of Knowledge [we know.] So Joh. 6.69. We believe, and ar^ sure.
Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good to them that love
God. 1 Cor. 15.58. Y^^ know that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.

Nor were their Desires after this blessed State less earnest, than their
Belief and Hopes were firm and steady. verse. 2.3, 4. We groan earnestly,
desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven, -- that
Mortality might be swallowed up of Life.

And thus we are brought to the Text, in which the Apostle lays down some
further grounds of this their Confidence, viz. They were wrought for the
Heavenly Glory, and that by God himself: Who also had given unto them the
earnest of the Spirit, as it immediately follows; and therefore, (says he) we
are always confident, verse. 6. Again verse. 8. We are confident, I say* and
willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord.
q.d. We do not run as at uncertainties, nor fight as Men that beat the Air, but
know whom we have trusted, and that he will not fail our trust. This is the
Faith we walk by at present, till we come to the World of immediate sight and
fruition. Verse. 7.

And now let us return to the words of the Text, and consider more distinctly,
both the literal and real importance of them.

Now he that has wrought us] i. e. made, formed, or fitted us. The word
signifies to fashion or. polish a thing which was rude or unshapen before; and
so it is used by the Septuagint, Exodus 35.33. 1 Kings 6.36.

For the self-same thing] viz. That blessed State in which Mortality shall be
swallowed up of Life, whereof he had been speaking just before, verse. 4. or if
you understand it of those desires and groanings Heavenward which are wrought
in the Souls of Believers, it comes all to a sense; for none, but those who are
prepared for Heaven, do rightly and judiciously desire it, as shall be shown
more at large hereafter.

Is God] even he that has provided that Glory for us, verse. 1. has also
fitted us for it. The Order and Tenor of the words is very remarkable; God is
not the Subject, but the Predicate of this Proposition. It is not thus
expressed [now God has wrought us for this] tho that had been true, but the
same Truth is spoken with a more piercing Emphasis and Majesty, as the words
are here placed. He that has wrought us, -- is God, q. d. Would you know the
reason of our Confidence, Hope, and earnest Desires after Heaven? Why, we are
wrought for it. Do you ask how we came to be so, or who has thus wrought us?
It Is God that has done it, who always acts like himself; therefore this work
is divine, beseeming its great Author, such as none but he could effect, the
Finger of God is plain in it, and for that reason we doubt not but the Issue
will be answerably glorious and excellent. The same way of expression ye have,
Chap. 1.21. Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed
us, is GOD.

As for the real importance of the words, the only remaining difficulty (if
that be any) is what divine work the Apostle here speaks of. In answer to this,
I shall only take notice of the three following particulars, which are most
full and comprehensive in the case.

(1.) God as he is our Creator, and the God of Nature, has given us immortal
Souls; furnished with faculties to prepare for a better Life. He has made them
pure, spiritual, noble, intellectual Substances, no^ consisting of any contrary
Principles, which by acting upon, or against each other, might infer the
dissolution of the whole. Now, in that he has given the Soul such a Nature,
it is manifest that he designs it for an eternal State, because he does nothing
in vain, but always fits his Creatures for the respective ends whereunto he
has appointed them: And since both Grace and Glory presuppose Nature, that is,
the Fundamental Capacity of the Subject, therefore this particular may well
enough be taken in, tho it cannot reasonably he imagined, that this is the main
(much less the only) thing intended in the Text. The Souls of the vil^^ Men
(yea even the Devils themselves) are thus fa^ wrought for an Everlasting State.
But it is not m^^^ Immortality, but a glorious and blessed Immortality that is
here spoken of: So that to be wrought for this self-same thing, must needs
signify something peculiar unto true Believers, for they only have a right to
the Heavenly Glory: and besides the Greek word [(...)] seems not so naturally
to signify the creating of a Soul, as some subsequent work upon it already
created; to which it is natural essence is presupposed, not produced by it.

(2.) As our Redeemer, and the God of governing reconciling Grace, he has
opened the way to Heaven for us, and so deals with us upon Terms of Mercy and
Compassion, in order to our recovery from that sinful and miserable state, into
which we had brought our selves. To this end the Eternal Son of God, in the
fullness of time sanctified a Portion of Humane Nature, and took it into union
with the Divine, and in it fulfilled all Righteousness, perfectly obeyed the
Law, offered up himself a Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice, conquered Satan,
Death, and Hell; died, arose, ascended, and was glorified, that we might
cheerfully and believingly follow him. Thus Human Nature in the Person of our
great Mediator was wrought through ^ariety of Labors and Sufferings, till it
arrived to the highest Advancement; that from hence we might be assured how
great things are intended for us, if we do not reject the Counsel of God
against our selves. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Romans 8.32. He is
gone before to prepare a place for us, and to take possession, etc. his Arms
are ever open to receive returning Sinners; the more weary and heavy laden with
the Burden of Sin, the fitter for him to exercise his Office upon. He will cast
out none that sincerely come to him. None are excluded who do not by wilful and
final Impenitency exclude themselves. On his part all things are ready: what
then remains but that we thankfully lay hold on this Tree of Life, and by Faith
feed thereon, that we may live for ever?

(3.) As he is our Sanctifier, and the Applyer and Perfecter of all to fit us
for Glory, he works in the Souls of his People those holy Qualifications,
Tendencies, and Affections, whereby the Heavenly State becomes con-natural and
agreeable to them, or rather they to it. To live, and have a being in a furture
State is o^^ thing, to be happy therein another. Mere Immortality fits you for
the former immediately, but only in a more remote sense for the latter. O Sirs,
it is but cold comfort to know that your Souls are immortal, if in the mean
time ye be utterly in the dark, whether it shall be well or ill with them
hereafter. Live they must to all Eternity; but if a great deal of care be not
taken in time, that Life is like to prove worse than Death Therefore (ye know)
that Eternal Life is usually taken in the best sense: Mat. 25.46. The Righteous
into Lis^ Eternal. Romans 6.23. The Gist of God is Eternal Lis^. Those in Hell
live too, because they cannot, not because they would not die: Know then, that
you Souls are no less capable of exquisite Torment and Misery, than of Joy and
Blessedness in another World; their everlasting Weal or Woe depends mo^^
directly and nearly upon Moral Qualities, than upon their Natural Essence. As
wicked Men are silling up the measure of their Sins, and so making themselves
rip^ for Ruin, Treasuring up Wrath against the Day of VVrat^^ Romans 25. So God
by his Grace qualifies and prepare^ his People for Heaven, enabling and
habitnating the^^ to those spiritual Desires and Endeavors which ar^^^ suited
thereto. Verse. 9. Wherefore we labor, th^^ whether present, or absent, we may
be accepted of him Phil. 2.13. He works in them, both to will and to (...) of
his good Pleasure. A Work so great that it emula^^ even Creation it self,
insomuch that the Persons th^^ wrought upon are new Creatures, as verse. 17. of
th^^ Chapter. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creatur^^ not in point of
Essence or Faculties, but of new Qual^ties and Dispositions wherewith they are
endued. An^ thus we must be wrought for this self same thing Hence Believers,
as such, are called God's Workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good Works.
Ephesians. 2.10. His Building, raised and framed by him, for an habitation of God
through the Spirit. Verse. 22. His Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9. Being cultivated by
him, to bring forth that Fruit unto Holiness, the end whereof is Everlasting
Life. Romans 6.22. Thus they are the work of his Hands, Trees of Righteousness,
the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. Isa. 60.21. Chapter 61.3. So
these Vessels of Mercy, are prepared for Glory. Romans 8.23. Made meet to be
Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Col. 1.12. Well set, or
rightly dispos^d for the Kingdom of God. As the word signifies, Luke 9.62.
[(...).]

And this it is which the Text principally aims at, wherein you may observe
several things.

1. That great work whereof the Apostle here speaks as a thing already done. He
that has wrought, etc. 2. The Author of this Work, viz. The Blessed God
himself. 3. The Subjects, or Persons upon whom it was wrought. Namely the
Apostle himself, and other Gospel Ministers, [Vs] yet not so as to exclude any
other Persons, who had obtained like precious Faith with them, 2 Pet. 1.1. Or
that had believed through their Word. Joh. 17.20. See the foregoing Chapter,
verse. 14. as also Chap. 1.21. [us with you.] 4. The end and design of this
great Work; namely to fit them for Heaven, giving them a Temper suited thereto,
and causing them to long after it. 5. The necessity of this great Work, as may
be gathered from the Relation which these words bear to the Context. And more
especially by the word [now, or bur, (...)] which connects this Verse with the
foregoing, q. d. we know that the Heavenly Inheritance shall be ours. And we
earnestly desire to be there, verse. 1, 2. etc. But then it must be remembered
that we are wrought for this self-same thing, otherwise our Hopes were
presumptuous, our Confidence mere self-deceit. According to which plain
Exposition this little Particle [(...)] is big enough to exclude all from
Heaven, who are not in some measure thus wrought for it.
And now it is obvious, that many points of Doctrine might easily be drawn from
these words, thus opened and divided: But I will mention no more than one,
which I design to insist upon, and to it all the rest may be reduced.

Doct. There Is no coming to Heaven, till we be wrought or prepared for it, by
the Power of Divine Grace.

In handling this Point, three things must be distinctly spoken to.

I. The Explication of it, or what it means. II. The Proof of it, or how it
appears. III. The Use and Improvement of it, or what may be deduced from it,
either to inform our Judgments, or to direct and regulate our Practice.
As to the first of these I shall proceed as follows.

1. To give you some general Account of the Heavenly Felicity for which we must
be prepared. 2. Set before you a more distinct and large Explication, of that
great Work of Grace whereby the Souls of Believers are fitted for Glory.
Without some competent Knowledge of the End, we are not like to understand the
Means: And except we enquire into (yea and choose) the Way, we shall, never come
to enjoy the blessed End.

CHAP. II.
Some general Account of the Heavenly Felicity; to which are subjoyned some
short Hints, how unfit we are by Nature for that blessed State, and how we came
to be so.

IT IS not to be thought strange, that our Conceptions fall exceeding short, and
our Expressions yet shorter, when we come to discourse concerning that Glory,
which is within the Vail: Who can, at this distance, give any other than a very
imperfect Account of that fullness of Joy, which is in the Presence of God, and
those everlasting Pleasures which are at his Right Hand. Psalm. 16.11.

Yet are we not left wholly in the dark neither, somewhat of Heaven may be
known (and therefore should diligently be enquired after) while we are here on
Earth; all cannot till we come thither.

At present we have some Revelation of it, both objective and subjective, viz.
so far as is suitable to our present State. It Is revealed to us, Life and
Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. It Is revealed in
us: true Believers, have the foretasts of it, in those Exercises of Grace which
lead to it.

Tho it does not yet (fully) appear what we shall be, yet in part it does. For,
we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him
as he is, 1 John 3.2. Tho out Life is hid with Christ in God: Col. 3.3. Yet nor
so, as if nothing of it could be known, but rather that it might be more
earnestly searched after. Even as in him are bid all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge. Chap. 2.3. compared with Prove. 2.2, 3, 4. See also 1 Cor. 2.9,
10. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, etc. but God has revealed them unto us
by his Spirit, -- verse. 12. that we might know the things that are freely given
to us of God.

Well then, it is a great advantage that we have ^ Map of the Holy Land; a
Description of the New J^rusalem set before us in the Sacred Records: And ye^
greater, if we taste the Sweetness, and feel the Power of those Gospel
Discoveries in our own Spirits. But then those that do so, can hardly make
others understand these grateful Relishes: The Joys of Believen are such as
Strangers intermeddle not with, cannot be rightly apprehended but by inward
vital Sense and Experience, known only to them that have them: Word^ can but
saintly exp^ess them, for they are unspeak able 1 Pet. 1.8. How much more
inexpressible must those Pleasures be, which, in Heaven, are grown up to fui^
perfection?

Therefore as to what is unrevealed let us wait^^ while, it cannot be long,
time runs fast on, Eternity is almost upon us. The Concerns of our Souls are in
safe Hands: "Our Eyes (as one observes) are in our "glorified Head Jesu Christ.
He knows for us, what "we are not yet admitted to the Knowledge of. Le^ this
quiet us notwithstanding our remaining Darkness We are going to the World of
Light.

However, in the mean time let us take care that we be not guilty of any
willful affected Ignorance in this Matter. Let not Sloth prevent, nor
presumptuous Curiosity pervert our Enquiries about it. Labor after as distinct
and clear a Knowledge of Heaven as you can, but be sure to keep close to the
Rule.

It seems plain from Scripture, (as also from the Nature of the thing) that the
Heavenly Felicity consists mainly in, or results from two things.

1. A perfect fitness for the enjoyment of the glorious blessed God. 2. The
actual enjoyment of him.
These are most intimately essential to that blessed State, and therefore to be
principally considered: Tho there are also certain adjuncts and circumstances
of this Blessedness, which must not be wholly passed by; but of these
afterward. We will begin with the other.

1. A perfect fitness for the enjoyment of God. The faculties of the Soul shall
be refined, strengthened, enlarged, replenished to the utmost of their
Capacities, with fullness of Divine Grace, and therein confirmed, and settled
past all danger of revolt or decay; and therefore completely fitted
(subjectively) for Everlasting Communion with the blessed God, their objective
Happiness, Portion, ALL. As Action and Fruition presuppose Being and Nature, so
the perfection of the former is necessary to that of the latter. The best of
Men, while here below, have great remainders of sinful Weakness, all their
Graces are enfeebled by a contrary principle of Corruption dwelling in them.
Hence it is, that the workings of their Souls toward God are so weak and
languid, and the Joys of Communion with him so often interrupted and obscured:
But in Heaven it will not be so. There we shall have Strength without Weakness,
Light without Darkness, Love without any remaining Aversion. And then it is no
wonder that we shall have Joy without Sorrow.

I know that some are ignorant and vain enough to talk of a sinless Perfection
here on Earth: And once I met with one who had the Face to tell me, that (were
it not for a little Passion) for ought he knew, he was perfect. I presently
asked him, whether he thought he loved God, as well as he ought to love him?
This put him to a stand, or rather made him go back from his former Assertion.
Alas, how little do such Men know of their own Hearts, or of the Latitude and
Extent of the Divine Law! Psalm. 119.96. Thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

It Is very observable that the Scripture has recorded the imperfections of the
People of God, even as to those particulars wherein they were most eminent.
Thus Numb. 12.3. The Man Moses was very meek, above all the Men which were upon
the Face of the Earth. Yet we read, Psalm. 106.33. That his Spirit was so
provoked, that he spoke unadvisedly with his Lips. Insomuch that for this
reason he was not permitted to go into the promised Land, Deuteronomy. 32.51, 52. I
mention not, how that when his anger was hot, he broke the Tables of Stone,
written with the Finger of God, Exodus 32.19. because it is likely that was done
by peculiar Divine Instinct, to show that rebellious People how unworthy they
were of so great a Blessing: And how well they themselves deserved to be broken
in pieces, and utterly cast off.

Of Job it is said in general, Chap. 2.3. That there was none like him in the
Earth, a perfect and upright Man, etc. and particularly Jam. 5.11. Ye have
heard of the Patience of Job. And have we not heard of his Impatience too?
Chap. 3. when he cursed his Day, etc.

How renowned was Solomon for Wisdom! Who yet committed great Folly in Israel,
even in his Old Age, 1 Kings 11.4, etc.

How remarkably forward and Zealous for Christ do we find Peter to have been
upon many occasions! yet pitifully baffled by two silly Maids one after
another, to the denial of his Master, Mat. 26.69, 71.

Thus you see how many strong Ones have fallen, and been wounded, even in those
parts where their greatest Strength lay. Is it not then the height of Madness
(or Fanaticism) to talk of universal Sinless perfection on this side Heaven?

Surely the most able experienced Christians speak at another rate. Phil. 3.12.
Not as tho I had already attained, either were already perfect. So 1 John 1.8.
If we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

But if once we get safe to Heaven, we shall sin no more: Grace will then be
grown up to its full maturity; and shall never be weakened by any contrary
Principle more. There are the Spirits of just Men made perfect indeed. Heb.
12.23. There are no complaints of dull Inactivity, and listlessness to
spiritual work. Paul is not there crying out (as he does in that sorrowful, yet
comfortable Chapter. Romans 7.) Me miser^m! O wretched Man that I am! etc. The
good that I would, I do not, -- I am carnal, sold under Sin, -- Sin dwells in
me, -- Evil is present with me, -- etc. No, no, there is no room for any of this
there.

All those Clouds of Darkness and Confusion wherewith our Minds are so
over-shadowed in this present State, will then be quite dissipated and gone.

The remnants of our Disaffection and Enmity against God, which are now the
matter or occasion of our most grievous and piercing Complaints, will then be
perfectly mastered, and wrought out.

All these Distempers will be cured, which must needs cause so great a
Pleasure, as none can have a full notion of but they who feel and possess it.

Then shall we find in our selves a fullness of Spiritual Life, Strength, and
Vigor; then shall we be surrounded with the glorious Light of a perfect Day;
then shall we be perfectly reconciled to the Love of the only Soul-satisfying
Object. No wonder that Sorrow and Sighing are over, when Sin and all the cursed
Effects of it, which occasioned them, are done away.

How great things are spoken of the first rudiments, and imperfect beginnings
of this blessed State, in that work of Grace which leads to it. The truly Godly
even in this Life are all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. Changed from Glory to
Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Thus true Grace
is Glory begun in the Soul: And the Relation which it bears to the Heavenly
Perfection, to which it is tending, puts an high value upon it. How much more
valuable then must that Perfection it self be! If the new Creature in its
present Infant-State be so aimable, what will it be when we come to perfect
Manhood, when we shall arrive to the highest pitch of Excellency whereof our
Natures are capable; even so high as to be completely qualified for the more
immediate enjoyment o^ God himself!

I had almost forgot to mention that our Bodies shall be raised, spiritualized,
and made like unto Christ's glorious Body. As to which I shall only say, that
suiable Object will not be wanting to the Organs or Power wherewith they shall
be endued.

Finally, tho it will remain true to all Eternity, th^^ we were once Sinners,
yet 'twill be as true, that w^ are pardoned and reconciled through Christ, and
therefore that the Guilt of our Sins shall never separate between us and our
God, or make us unfit for Comm^nion with him any more.

2. The actual Enjoyment of God. This it is which must complete the Happiness
of the Soul; for this en^ it was prepared by Grace, and advanced to that high
Perfection in Glory, whereof we have been speaking viz. that it might perfectly
enjoy the most glorio^^ perfect God.

Under this Head there are two things which must b^ distinctly considered, tho
they cannot be really divided.

1. The lively actings of the Soul toward God. 2. Its constant reception of
Communications from him.
1. All the Faculties and Powers of the perfected Soul shall be taken up with
God, acting toward him terminating upon him, resting in him.

The Understanding shall be employed in contemplating the gloriou^ Excellencies
of the Divine Nature: His Power, Wisdom, Goodness, his Truth and Faithfulness,
his glorious Holiness, that Attribute of Attributes (as one calls it) which
runs as it were through all the rest, and casts a Glory upon every one, Exodus
15.11. Glorious in Holiness; his awful Majestic Sovereignty, etc. all these
will then appear to open view. 'Twere easy to enlarge upon each of these, and
it is sit you should do so; let me help you a little.

His Power] by which he made the World, stretched out the Heavens, laid the
Foundations of the Earth, or hanged it upon nothing, poised by its own weight,
set bounds to the proud waves of the Sea, and restrained the madder Rage of the
tumultuous People. Yea, that Power whereby he first drew them unto Christ, and
made them willing in the Day of their Espousals with him: Even that exceeding
greatness of his Power, according to the working of the might of his Power.
Ephesians. 1.19. and by which they have been kept through Faith unto Salvation.

His Wisdom] that appears so eminently in the Order and Harmony of all his
Works: And particularly which framed and contrived the wonderful Design of our
Redemption by Jesus Christ* This manifold Wisdom of God which the Angels desire
to look into, will then shine forth conspicuously to the ravishing of all the
Beholders, especially those who have shared most deeply in the blessed Effects
of it.

His Goodness] an Attribute which he delights to honor. Thus when Moses prays,
Exodus 33.18. I beseech thee show me thy Glory: verse. 19. He said, I will make
all my Goodness pass before thee, etc. Thus we read of the Riches of his
Goodness, Romans 2.4. And that none is good save one, that is God, Luke 18.19. O
how lovely and attractive will the Divine Goodness appear to us in all the
various Aspects, and Manifestations of it, when we come to Heaven! Verily, if
there could be any room for Grief in those Regions of Blessedness, it must
certainly arise from the remembrance of the many Affronts and Indignities which
we had formerly put upon this blessed Attribute, by slighting, undervaluing, or
entertaining mean, low, narrow thoughts of it, etc. But here, as Goodness will
triumph in overlooking the Contempts which have been put upon it, so it will
not suffer us to disquiet our selves about them.

The Glory of his Truth and Faithfulness will appear, in the fulfilling of
those exceeding great and precious Promises which he made, The True and
Faithful God: And particularly in this, that he never suffered us to be tempted
above what we were able, 1 Cor. 10.13. How will this be admired, when we are
got safe out of the reach of all Temptations?

The Excellency of Holiness will then be known i^ that Holy Place: and the
Divine Majesty for ever adored by his holy Ones. But I must not stay to enlarge
upon these. I have showed you the way, exercise your own Thoughts, and you
cannot want Matter Only see that your Hearts be sutably affected as y^^ go on.

Thus the Eyes of our Understandings being opened strengthened, enlarged, shall
for ever feed upon the Divine Glory. Faith will be turned into Vision, we shall
wa^k by sight.

Stop here a little, and consider what you have been reading, -- How pleasant a
thing is knowledge to the Soul, tho it be but that of inferior Objects? But how
much more del^^^^ful will it be to know him, who i^ the Fountain of B^m^, the
Cause of Causes, the Spri^^ of Action, the Source and Original of all
Perfection the everl^sting I AM? What is all other Knowledge compared to this?
Then shall the Eye be satisfied with seeing; and our Joy (not Sorrow) increased
by o^^ Knowledge.

What we know of God in our present-state, is nex^ to nothing in comparison of
what we shall then know We now see but darkly, as in a Glass; our Thoughts o^
God are weak, confused, and childish, as the Apostl^ speaks, 1 Cor. 13.11, 12.
But when that which i^ perfect is come, these childish things must be put away
and a more noble manly Knowledge succeed in their room. A sight of his
Back-parts is now no small Privilege, but his Face shall then be seen. Exodus
33.23.

Moreover, our Knowledge shall be transforming, ou^ Eye shall affect our Hearts,
or (as a Learned Man expresses it) we shall look our selves into his Likeness
Psalm. 17.15. I will behold thy Face -- I shall be satisful with thy Likeness. 1 John 3.2. We shall be like him for we shall see him as he is.

If after all this, you desire to know whether we shall immediately behold the
pure Essence of God: I answer, stay till you come thither: it is certain that we
shall see him in his wonderful Works, we shall see him in our glorified Head.
Who is the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person. Heb.
1.3. But as for the very Essence of God, whether we shall behold that, I cannot
tell; but for many Reasons strongly incline to the Negative.

Our Wills shall for ever cleave unto God as the most amiable perfect Good in
himself, and the most suitable Good for us: And, as such, we shall love him, and
rest in him with the highest Delight and Complacency. Our Hearts will be
entirely and unchangably fixed and determined for God: There will be no
idolatrous* dividing of them between Him and the Creature. We shall love him
with a full and perfect Freedom of Spirit, and yet be sweetly constrained
thereto by an happy Necessity. It will then be as easy (and infinitely more
pleasant) to love him, as now it is to love our selves, our own Felicity, or
our dearest Friends. To live with him, and in him, will be our very Element. To
breath is not more natural here on Earth, than to love God will be in Heaven.
Indeed nothing else will there be valued (no not our own selves) but in him,
and for him. Then will the rich and mighty Sense of those glorious words be
felt, and therefore understood, 1 John 4.16. God is LOVE; and he that dwells
in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. Then shall we be filled with all the
Fullness of God. Ephesians. 3.19. The more we love him, the more we shall enjoy him.
This holy Love is the end of Vision, and therefore rather to be called
Beatifick than it. The Acts of the Understanding are in order to those of the
Will, and the Divine Glory in the complete Blessedness of his Holy Ones the End
of both.

It Is the Saying of a great Divine [Mr. Baxter] You are deceived, if you think
that any one Notion speaks more to you of Heaven, and of your ultimate End,
than the LOVE of GOD.

Then will the weary Soul be at rest, and never more disturbed with fruitless
Desires and Endeavors after things which cannot profit: It has now found its
Center; no more of broken Cisterns, it is got to the Fountain of living Waters:
It can now say, I am at ease, I have enough, I have all.

If all Love have (or rather is) Complacency and Delight in the very nature of
it, as St. Augustine, and many others after him observe. O how pleasant will it
be, perfectly to love, so perfect, so glorious an Object! The God of Love fit
us for it: The more we love him, the nearer are we to Heaven: Be sure you
remember that, or else I lose my labor, ye your Souls.

As for the vital Power of the Soul, that acte^^ both in the workings of the
Understanding and Wi^^ and makes them lively and vigorous; and will be eve^
ready to yield obedience to the Divine Pleasure, ever^ thing of Duty will be
con-natural to it.

2. The perfected Soul shall receive everlasting Influences and Communications
from God: Its most enla^ged Capacities shall be completely filled. As in the
first formation of the new Creature, we are first act^^ by the Grace and Power
of God, and then act toward him, and by so acting, are fitted to receive more
from him: so will it be when we come to Heaven. The glorious perfected Soul is
a Creature still; and therefore holds its ALL, in full dependence upon its God
it offers nothing to him but what it has first receive from him. He is the
Alpha and Omega, the Beginni^^ and the End, the First and the Last; the
Fountain (...) that Blessed LIFE by which it lives: In his LIGH^ it sees Light,
and by the continual effusions of h^^ LOVE shed abroad upon it, it is
constrained to lo^^ him; His mighty Hand enables it to bear this weigh^ of
Glory; the Light wherein it rejoices is that of h^^ Countenance, and his
attractive Love determines it (...) himself: It owns him in all, and is ever
wrapped up (...) the highest admiration of condescending Goodness. It Is more
sensible than ever of its own nothingness, as it is that God is All in All. As
Heaven is a State of the highest Advancement, so it is of the deepest Humility.
The nearer they are to God (says one) the more apprehensive of their distance.
For (as the same Reverend Person [Mr. Howe] observes elsewhere) the distance
even of a glorified Creature, from the Glorious God, is still infinitely
greater than between it, and the silliest Worm, the minutest Atom of Dust.
Hence we find that even the Seraphims veil their Faces before the infinite
Majesty. Isa. 6.2. The Four and Twenty Elders fall down before him, and cast
their Crowns before his Throne, worshipping him that lives for ever and ever.
Rev. 4.10, 11. Chap. 5.14. Thus run the Triumphant Praises of the New
Jerusalem, No^ unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory.

Such are the Exercises, such the Fruitions of those blessed Souls, who have
washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb. Rev. 7.14,
15. etc. Such is the Glory to which they are advanced, tho they were sometimes
afar off, as well as we: Now they are near indeed, they stand in his Presence,
and he that sits upon the Throne dwells among them; they know him, love him,
and live to him, and feel by inward, sweet, vital Experience, that they are
known of him, beloved by him, and that he lives in them.

As for the Adjuncts, and concurrent Circumstances, etc. of this blessed State,
I shall only say,

The Place is glorious. The Throne of the Eternal God. ^sa. 66.1. Thus says
the Lord, The Heaven is my Throne. Thus the Great Mediator, Rev. 3.21. To him
that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as (...) also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. The light of the Sun or
Moon will be needless ^here, for the Glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb
(...) the Light thereof. Chap. 21.23.

The Society will be suitable, even Angels and glorified Saints, all whose
Happiness will be ours, and ours theirs; for narrow Selfishness has no place
there.

But that which crowns all the rest is, this Blessedness shall be Eternal; Rev.
3.12. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and HE
SHALL GO NO MORE OVT. O blessed Words! and thrice blessed State! Happy they
that are safe landed; all dangers are over with them for ever. I cannot name it
without fear of missing it, yet I have Hope. The Lord forgive the Remnants of
Unbelief, Faintness, and Impatience, that are in us: We would needs have the
Crown without overcoming: God help us patiently to wait, and quietly to trust
our Almighty, All-wise, and most gracious Guide. Thou shall guide me with thy
Counsel, and afterward receive me (...) Glory. Psalm. 73.24. If any Man serve
me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my Servant be; if any
Man serve me, him will my Father honor. John 12.26. Therefore let us not be
slothful, but Following of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises, Heb. 6.12.

Thus I have given you a poor, weak, imperfect Account of the Heavenly
Felicity: Nevertheless from what has been said, it is easy to inser, how
utterly unfit the best of us were (and all unregenerate Person still are) by
Nature for this blessen State; nor will it be amiss to make some enquiry, how
the Nature of Man came to be so corrupted, and ill-disposed to its Supreme
Happiness, and Ultimate End? Of both these briefly, because it will prepare you
to understand wha^ is to come after.

1. It Is manifest that unregenerate Persons, as such and therefore all of them
are utterly unfit for Heaven This is a most evident Truth; he that runs may
real it: Even they themselves might easily discern it, were they not blinded,
and befooled by their Lusts. On^ would think it should not (I am sure it ought
not) (...) escape their Notice, how averse their Hearts are from God, Christ,
Holiness, and by consequence from Heaven, tho something there is (but they know
not well what) which they pretend to desire under that Name: Carnal they are,
and therefore savor not the things of the Spirit. The Spirit ^f their Minds is
inwardly and deeply disaffected toward God, Enmity (even in the Abstract)
against him; alienated from him; no Pulse, no Breathing, no Tendency toward
him; they care not for coming near him, but gladly would (if they knew how)
secure themselves from him. Their Thoughts and Affections are taken up with
other Objects; their Time and Strength are laid out in pampering, and caring
for that Flesh which they carry to and fro with them; and therefore they love
the World as affording suitable Provision for it: But the love of the Father is
not in them. This their Way is their Folly; yet their Posterity approve their
Sayings. Psalm. 49.13.

And now, judge ye, whether such Persons be fit for the Heavenly State or no,
review the Description which has been given of it. What! Shall Men imagine
themselves meet for the Enjoyment of God, so long as they hate him,
industriously exclude him from their Thought; avoid all Acquaintance with him,
prefer the most empty Trifles before him, persist in wilful Rebellion against
him? How should this be? At how vast a distance are such Men from Happiness!
Certainly (as one says) the Notion and Nature of Blessedness must be changed,
or else the Temper of their Spirits; either they must have new Hearts created,
or a new Heaven if ever they be happy.

2. Let us enquire a little how the Nature of Man came to be so depraved and
unfit for its Happiness and End. Certain we are that from the beginning it was
not so. God made Man upright: but he quickly lost his Integrity, by
withdrawing himself from his dear Dependence upon, and Subjection to his
Maker; he would needs have his Concerns in his own Hands, and be at his own
disposal: Thus he sought out many Inventions, changed his ultimate End, fell
from God to himself, and so ^^came unholy and unhappy both at once; and was
upon the very brink of the extremest Misery, and past all hope of recovery, if
Infinite Wisdom and Goodness had not stepped in to his Relief.

Thus by one Man Sin entered into the World: by this woeful Apostasy human
Nature became so corrupted; this it was that introduced those wretched
Distempers of Spirit, which make Men so unfit for Heaven, as ye have heard.
Hence it is that by Nature we are Children of Wrath. Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? Our first Parents could not transmit to their
Posterity, that Holiness and Purity of Nature, even that Holy Image of God
which they had lost themselves. Therefore we are estranged from God even from
the Womb, shapen in Iniquity, and conceived in Sin: And for that reason not fit
for the Heavenly Glory, till we have received a new Nature, i. e. till we be
wrought for this self-same thing.

So necessary it is that a mighty Change pass upon us, to prepare us for a
blessed Eternity: And indeed the very Nature of that change is not obscurely
intimated, and pointed at in what has been spoken: Which now we come more
largely and distinctly to treat of.

CHAP. III.
A further Enquiry into the Nature of that great Change, whereby the Souls of
Believers are wrought and prepared for Heaven.

I Know not who thou art that read these Lines, but if this kind of Doctrine
seem strange or uncouth to thee, (as most things do that are not after the
common Mode) I counsel thee to shut the Book, stop^ little; and before thou
proceedest any further, consider well what thou have read already, particularly
what has been delivered concerning the Blessedness of Holy Souls in Heaven;
namely, that it consists in a perfect fitness for the Enjoyment of God, and in
the actual Enjoyment of him; in knowing him, loving him, delighting and resting
in him, admiring, adoring, serving and praising him to all Eternity, and in
receiving the most sweet and refreshing Influences and Communications from him.

Digest this well, form as distinct a conception of it as thou can. And then
put the Question to thy own Reason: What kind of preparation seems necessary to
fit a Man for such an Happiness as this? And especially ask thy self, how
should a Man's Heart be disposed and affected toward God in this World, that
he may be qualified for perfect Happiness, and rest in the Enjoyment of God in
a better World? Think well how thou would answer this Question, as if it were
for thy Life; yea know that the Life of thy Soul is concerned in it.

This (by God's Blessing) will prepare thee to understand, and believe, what I
am about to offer to thee. But if thou will not exercise thy Reason as a Man, I
expect not thou should become a sincere Christian: For let me tell thee,
serious Godliness, or true Christianity, is the most rational manly thing in
the World.

And now I proceed to the Point, in the following method.

I. I will set before you some general Account of the Nature of this great
Change. II. I will endeavor to show you more distinctly the several steps
whereby this blessed Work is begun, carried on, and perfected in the Soul.
As for the first of these, in general, you may observe as follows.

I. This great change consists in turning unto the LORD, from whom we have so
deeply revolted. We fell from God in the Loins of our first Parents (as Levi
paid Tithes in Abraham, Heb. 7.9, 10.) We brought not original Righteousness
(but Natures exceedingly corrupted) into the World with us; and many actual
Transgressions have proceeded from that Corruption, so that our Iniquity is
become exceeding sinful; therefore we must be deeply humbled for the Wickedness
of our Hearts and Lives, and so return unto the Lord from whom we are fallen.
Isa. 55.7. Let the Wicked forsake his way, and the Unrighteous Man his
Thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, etc. Chap. 1. 16, 17, 18. Wash ye,
make you clean, put away the Evil of your doings: -- cease to do Evil, learn to
do well: -- Come now, and let us reason together, says the LORD. Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the death of the Wicked;
-- turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die. O Sirs, ye must turn, or die. All your
Idols must be renounced, especially carnal SELF, to which the rest are
subservient. Whatever stands in Competition or Contrariety to God, so far as it
does so, must be rejected with the greatest Abhorrence and Detestation, that
you may cleave entirely to him.

They that are far from God, shall perish, Psalm. 73.27. You must be brought
near to him, or else you cannot possibly escape: none but he can satisfy the
vast Desires of your Souls; how then should ye be happy while ye affect a
distance from him: It Is a perfect Contradiction, as shall be shown in its
proper place.

All our Faculties and Powers must be wrought upon, or influenced by this great
Change.

1. The Soul is naturally a vital active Substance, as appears by the Vigor
and Sprightliness of its Motions: yea the best Philosophy supposes that it is
never out of action. But what then? Toward God it is unactive, stupid, dead.
And therefore it must be quickened by the same Power, which raised up Jesus
Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1.10, 20. Chapter 2.1, 4, 5, 6. Its vital Power must
be further enlivened, by a new Principle of Divine Spiritual Life, that it may
be enabled and inclined to move readily, strongly, constantly toward God, from
whom this Spiritual Life is derived, through Christ, and therefore it acts
toward him, and terminates in him, the same way: Thus the active Power must be
sanctified, that we may be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might,
Ephesians. 6.10.

Observe therefore, that this vital Faculty of the Soul is no less capable of
being improved, corroborated, or strengthened by holy Habits, than either of
the other two, viz. The Understanding and Will; tho these are commonly most
taken notice of; it is an essential Power or Virtue of the Soul, as well as
they. It suscitates them to action, and communicates Life and Vigor to them
(ad intra;) as it executes the Commands of the Will, directed by the
Understanding (ad extra:) The former sort of these Acts lying deep and inward
are less observed, (and by many scarce at all) the latter (viz. the Executive
Acts) are more open and discernable.

Therefore this vital active Power must be wrought to an holy Vivacity or
Liveliness for God, that we may move toward him, and for him, readily, with
Promptitude and Quickness of Spirit: And not be Lazy or Listless to Duty;
strongly, with holy Fortitude and Vigor, and not be formal, lifeless, or
indifferent in Duty. What a Shame is it that Men should pretend to have Heaven
in their Eye, and yet stand still, or move so slowly, as if they cared not
whether ever they got thither or no? constantly, with an holy Steadfastness,
not discouraged by difficulties that arise in the way, not fainting, nor weary
of well doing.

2. The Soul is naturally an Intelligent Being, capable of enquiring after
Truth, yea, and strongly inclined so to do. All Men are desirous of Knowledge,
in one kind or other; some vehemently set upon it, and very industrious and
eager in their Pursuits after it; they compass Sea and Land to attain it, and
highly value themselves upon it.

But then, as to the things of God, Matters of Spiritual and Eternal
Consequence, we are by. Nature not only ignorant of them, but strangely
blockish and undisposed to a right Acquaintance with them. We not only want the
actual Knowledge of them, but also a due aptitude and fitness to know them:
Hence you shall find many Persons, who as to other Matters are very quick and
apprehensive, but in a perfect Mist as to those Truths wherein the Welfare of
their Souls is more immediately concerned; yea, Multitudes there are, who have
sat so long under the Means of Knowledge, that it might justly be expected they
should be able to teach others but yet are themselves so dull, that they have
need to be taught again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God.
Heb. 5.11, 12. Others there are, who have, indeed, a Form of Knowledge. Romans
2.20. (and it may be a Form of Godliness too) but not the Power of it: Many
superficial Notions floating in their Imaginations, and not a little puffed up
with them Tho still they know nothing as they ought to know Some Acquaintance
they have with Words or Signs, but are Strangers to the Things signified by
them. They know not the truth as it is in Jesus, to the putting o^ of the Old
Man. Ephesians. 4.21, 22. They may seem to have learned a great deal extensively,
but intensively they have learned nothing. The Articles of their professed
Creed, are not in their Faith, unless dreaming might pass for believing. Isa.
53.1. Who has believed on Report? 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural Man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, etc. In seeing they see not; neither do they
understand. Mat. 13.13.

Thus the State of Unregeneracy is a State of Darkness; even such as might be
felt, were they not past feeling too: They are not only in the Dark, but they
are Darkness. Ephesians. 5.8. An impure Mass of conglobated Darkness; as one
expresses it.

But when it pleases God by the Power of his Grace to work savingly upon a
Soul, he causes his Light to shine out of Darkness, irradiates the
Understanding, and enables it to discern spiritual things in a spiritual
manner. This is done by the special Illumination or powerful Demonstration of
the Spirit: This produces new Apprehensions of things. The Man sees with other
Eyes, and knows to purpose what he only thought he knew before. The Lord has
given him an Heart to perceive, Deuteronomy. 29.4. he is now convinced that Jesus
Christ is the chitfest among ten Thousand, -- altogether lovely, Cant. 5.10,
16. Tho formerly he could see no Form nor Comeliness in him. Isa. 53.2. Now the
Beauty of Holiness appears, and he is even amazed at himself to think that he
saw it no sooner.

Thus Divine Light breaks in upon the Understanding, the Dayspring from an
high visits it, The new Man is renewed in Knowledge. Col. 3.10. Turning unto God
is a rational intelligent Act, sincere Religion moves not blindly. But that
brings me to another Head.

3. The main point in this great Change is yet behind, I mean the
Sanctification of the Will: This is the Faculty which stands it out the longest
against God; being most wickedly averse from him, and therefore hardliest
brought to yield to the Importunities of his Grace. Ye will not come to me,
that ye might have Life. How often would I have gathered thy Children together,
even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not! Mat.
23.37. My People would not hearken to my Voice: And Israel would none of me.

It Is in this unwillingness that their Impotency does mainly consist, they
cannot find in their Hearts to comply. O what deep Convictions, what Fears and
Terrors, what Pangs and Throws, what vehement Struglings do some undergo
before they yield! And some who never yield at all! Their faint Inclinations to
that which is good, are overpowered by a more strong Aversion; thus the
rebellious Will of Man stands it out against the Law and Grace of God. It Is a
far easier matter to convince Men's Understandings, of the reasonableness and
necessity of turning to God, than to cure that Disaffection and Enmity which is
rooted in their Wills and Hearts against him. Therefore, I say, the main Work
lies here, viz. In turning the bent of the Will, and putting it in a right
posture Godward; determining our Resolutions for him; powerfully and sweetly
enclining us to close with him; drawing, and even constraining us with the
Cords of a Man, the Bands of Love: working our Hearts to that temper whereof
the Psalmist's Words are very expressive, Psalm. 73.25. WHOM HAVE I IN HEAVEN
but Thee? etc. When this is done, then is the Heart of the Old Man broken, then
the Soul stands no longer at such an unkind distance from God as it did before.
But being begotten of him, has an ingenious Child-like Affection toward him.
O my God, I can resist no longer; thou art stronger than I, and have prevailed;
thy Love has overcome me, victorious Grace has got the day, Other Lords,
besides thee, have had Dominion over me: But by Thee only will I make mention
of thy Name. Isa. 26.13. Thus they cry, Abba, Father, and feel at length how
good it is to draw near to God. Psalm. 73.28.

In this it is that true Grace, Holiness, or real Godliness does principally
consist: Namely in such an inclination of the Will toward God; it is the
giving our Hearts to him which before were most unreasonably and wickedly
alienated from him. It Is this which he does especially call for, insist upon,
and expect from us; this he sets most by, and without it will not accept of any
thing else that we can offer. Prove. 23.26. My Son, give me thine Heart. This is
more than all whole Barnt-offerings and Sacrifices, Mark. 12.33. Thus the
wandering Soul is brought back to its proper Center and Best.

It Is an honest Friendly good-natured Disposition of Heart God-wards, always
tempered with dutiful Reverence to so adorable a Majesty; who needs not such
poor silly Worms as we, but will be gracious to whom be will be gracious, and
will show Mercy on whom he will show Mercy. Exodus 33.19. Thus the design of the
Gospel is to bring us into Fellowship with God. 1 John 1.3. That henceforth we
may converse with him as our best and dearest Friend. And confidently expect
from him all that Kindness and Faithfulness which belongs to such a Relation;
and what may we not hope for from such a Friend, such a Father? Nothing shall
be wanting that is fit for him to give, or for us to receive. Luke 19.31. Son,
thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. The Love of God to his
People (as one observes) cannot be overset, it knows no difficulties. The
greater the Performance or Vouchsafement, the more suitable to Divine Love.

Again, this great Change is an opening of our Hearts toward God, which before
were shy, reserved, estranged, shut up against him. Tho they were always his by
Title, yet not till now by Consent; before, he had (jus ad rem) a right to
them; now, he has (jus in re) an actual Interest in them, and Possession of
them. The Everlasting Doors are now opened, and the King of Glory is entered
in. Psalm. 24. Thus we give unto God the things that are God's.

How shall I make it plainer? It Is a sincere, deep, inward, hearty, prevailing
Love to him, who is Love and Goodness it self. This is the Life and Substance
of all true Religion, the fulfilling of the Law in one Word, LOVE. Without this
thou have only the shadow of Holiness, but really art nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2.

The Truth is, the Will is the first Subject of moral Good and Evil: It Is
turned from God by Sin, yea and set against him. Grace reduces and reconciles
it to him again; so that the tendencies of the renewed Soul are toward God,
that it may know him more, love and serve him better, be brought yet nearer to
him; and more fully conformed to his Will. It detests all thoughts of Happiness
in which the Enjoyment of God is not included; or rather which is not wholly
included in that Enjoyment. He says unto the Lord, Thou art my God, I cannot
take up with any thing else for my Portion and Supreme Good; my Soul pants
after thee, longs for thee, and is even weary of it self to find any Remnants
of its old Aversion from thee. These are my daily Groans, O that I could ascend
more! Send forth, O Lord, thy powerful attractive Love, let that holy Flame
consume my Dross, that the nobler part may know in home, its rest, its all. How
precious are thy Thoughts unto me, O God, how great is the sum of them* I knew
in some measure long since that none but God could make me completely happy, I
have often heard of this by the hearing of the Ear, but now I know it better,
mine Eye sees it, I find and feel that my Soul is otherwise affected toward
thee than i^ was before.

Thus the Passage betwixt the Head and Heart is opened, thus the Will is
determined for God: And those Truths which before only hovered in the Brain, or
Imagination, sink down, work into the very Soul, and attemper it to themselves.

I have been somewhat large upon this Head, but all is little enough to make
unregenerate Persons understand these things, tho still they pretend to love
God. But I proceed:

4. The sensitive Passions or Affections must also be sanctified, so as to fall
in with the superior Faculties (especially the Will) and be subservient to
them, in order to the great Ends of Holiness or Religion. That is, they must be
devoted unto God, exercised upon him and for him. The rational and sensitive
Appetite are so nearly connexed, at least in this Life, that the Acts of the
former (so far as we perceive them) always take in somewhat of the latter, and
are commonly described accordingly.

Moreover, the Passions of Affections are oft-times an occasion, or means, to
awaken and excite our Reason and Will to do their duty; and therefore of
exceeding great use, if rightly managed and improved.

And tho the great Work of Grace lies principally in the higher Faculties of
the Soul, as intellectual: Namely in the vital active Power, Understanding and
WILL: And must there be mainly sought and enquired after. viz. Whether we have
an high Estimation of God, and do resolvedly and rationally cleave to him,
endeavoring to act sutably in our Lives and Conversations, etc.

Again, tho it must be granted that our Passions are not so apt to be moved by
spiritual and invisible Objects as by sensible things that are near us, etc.
and withal, that they are many times strongest, where Judgment is weakest, and
very uncertain too, as depending much upon the Constitution of the Body, etc.

Yet, I must needs say, that those Persons whose Affections move sensibly and
freely toward other things, but scarce stir at all as to the best and highest
Objects, are certainly in a weak and languid State of Soul, if not quite dead.

If we be indeed risen with Christ; then, as we ought, so we shall, in some
measure, set our Affections on things above, Col. 3.1, 2. If the Will be
predominantly for God, it is not to be supposed but that the Affections will in
some degree go along with it, and if they move but slowly, it will be matter of
Grief, and will put us upon earnest Strivings to raise them to a better Frame.

It Is past doubt that true Grace tends in its own Nature to heal all the
Diseases of the Soul, to rectify all its Faculties and Powers, and so the
Passions and Affections amongst the rest: That is, to take them off from wrong
Objects, to moderate their Excesses, to turn them into a right Channel; nor are
these tendencies fruitless, the Effect is, in part accomplished. So far as this
great Change takes place and prevails in the Soul, the Affections of Love,
Desire, Joy, Delight, Hatred, Sorrow, Fear, and the rest, will be moving
toward their proper Objects and Ends. We shall hate and abhor what is
displeasing to God; mourn that we have so often offended; earnestly desire to
be accepted with him; and to enjoy more of him, hunger and thirst after
Righteousness. And therefore, we shall strive to love God more seelingly, and
so to rejoice and delight in him; and tho many Impediments and Difficulties
arise in our way, yet still Grace will be tending to these things. And we are
greatly wanting to our selves, if we do not daily endeavor to stir up the
Grace of God that is in us, that all the Powers of our Souls may be quickened
more and more in their Motions by it: If we stay till our Affections stir of
themselves, we may wait long enough. It Is our part actively to concur with and
by that gracious Help which is afforded us, in order to the qu^ckening and
spiritualizing of them, and bringing them more under the command of the Will,
till at length they be accustomed and inured to move more naturally, freely and
strongly Heavenward.

Nor must we faint or be discouraged tho we find our Hearts sluggish and averse
to such work as this: We must persist in duty notwithstanding this
Indisposition. And wait for God's Help in his own way: Yea we must cast our
selves into his Arms, tho he may seem, as it were, to shut up himself from our
Prayers, and to withhold the sweet Influences of his Grace. It may be he
withdraws to see how we will take it; shall we not lament (and follow so much
the harder) after him? what tho we have not sensible Comfort, let us stay our
selves on him; and against Hope believe in Hope. Romans 4.18. Duties are sweet
when recovered out of the Hand of Temptations and Difficulties; we are bound,
but God is free: What you want as to the seeling of Affection, make out in deep
and rational Resolutions for God, and ye will get ground even while ye think ye
lose it.

5. Even the Body it self must be sanctified, that is, presented or devoted
unto God, and used for him. This is the Will of God, that every one of us
possess his Vessel in Sanctification. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4. That Sin reign not in
our Mortal Body, but that we yield our Members as Instruments of Righteousness
unto God. Romans 6.12, 13. Our Bodies are for the Lord, -- they are Members of
Christ, etc. 1 Cor. 6.13, 15. Temples of the Holy Ghost, verse. 19. The Body
must be used as a Servant to the Soul, and both employed in the Service of God.
1 Cor. 6.20. Glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit which are God's. It Is
true indeed that bodily Exercise profits little, without or in comparison of
that which is spiritual. 1 Timothy 4.8. To bow the Knee, while our Spirits remain
stubborn and unbroken. To lift up our Eyes Heavenward, if our Souls be not
also lifted up. To draw nigh to God with our Lips when our Hearts are far from
him, is an Addition of Hypocrisy to all the rest of our Iniquity. But on the
other hand, it is as true that if our Souls be for God, our Bodies will be
subservient to them, and their Members accordingly used by them. The Eyes will
be opened to behold the wonderful Discoveries which he has made of himself in
his Works, and in his Word: The Ears to hear the Instructions of Wisdom: The
Lips to praise and magnify Him, and by spiritual Discourse to edify others,
feed many, and minister Grace to the Hearers.

Therefore, tho our Hearts must be first looked at in the Service of God. Yet
care must also be taken that our Words and Deportment be also suitable and
becoming; because outward Worship is expressive of that which is inward, and
reflects back again upon the Heart it self: As Habits are strengthened and
increased by the Acts which flow from them; so are internal Affections by
correspondent Expressions and Behavior in Duty. Tho we must not so cry up and
magnify the Externals of Worship, as to overlook the inward Life and Soul of
it, as Hypocrites who love to be seen of Men are wont to do. So on the other
Hand, we ought not to pretend our good Meanings or Spirituality in Divine
Worship, to excuse us from befitting Gestures or outward Demeanor therein: Nor
must we be forward to judge and censure others, as if they were mere Ceremonious
Hypocrires, because they seem to put Religion into a more fine or formal dress,
than we our selves have been used to. In short, let us neither be rude nor
antic in Matters of this Nature; but let the Frame of our Spirits, as also our
Words and Gestures be reverent, grave and serious, lest we be found guilty of
profaning holy things. God is to be worshipped by the whole Man.

Thus ye see that our intellectual and sensitive Faculties, yea and our Bodies
too must according to their several Capacities be all sanctified and devoted
unto God. Which is fully comprehended in those Words of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23. And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly: And I pray God your whole
SPIRIT, and SOUL, and BODY be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Thus much for the first Head, viz. That this great Change consists in turning
unto the Lord from whom we have so deeply revolted.

II. Since it is only in and through Jesus Christ that God is reconcilable to
fallen Man, it is highly necessary that we have a due regard to him in this
Matter.

Joh. 14.6. No Man comes unto the Father but by me. So verse. 19. of this
Chapter, God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself. Neither is there
Salvation in any other. Acts 4.12. As God himself is our ultimate End, so Jesus
Christ is the principal means and way to bring us to that End. The Will of God
is so fully declared in this Point, viz. That we can have no access to the
Father but by the Son, that it would be insolent daring Presum^ption for us to
attempt it any other way. Never think of approaching the Presence of God,
transacting with him, presenting your selves or services to him, or of
expecting any Favor from him, but in and through Christ. Joh. 5.23. He that
honors not the Son, honors not the Father which has sent him. It Is
therefore requisite that we set an high value upon this great Mediator, that
we dearly love him, and sincerely commit our selves to his Conduct, that he may
bring us to God. As all the Divine Favors and Blessings are communicated to us
through Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. 2 Pet. 1.3. So we our selves, and all our
Sacrifices must be offered unto God the same way: That is, we must ascend unto
him by the same Medium through which he descends to us: or else no acceptance
is to be looked for. 1 Pet. 2.5. How should guilty Rebels adventure into the
Presence of the Holy, Righteous, Sin hating God, but by him who has made
Atonement for our Sins? Take ^eed therefore that you leave not him out.
Remember, it is upon Terms of Grace that we are received into Covenant with
God, and of that Covenant Christ ^s the Mediator; who therefore has taught us
to distinguish between Faith in God, as God, and in himself, ^s Mediator. Joh.
14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. It Is well for us that we have him
to stand betwixt us and all Danger, lest the consuming Fire should break forth
upon us, and our Blood be mingled with our Sacrifices.

Hence we find Repentance toward God, and Faith ^oward our Lord Jesus Christ
joined together, as the Sum and Substance of the Apostle's Preaching, Act^
20.21. The former of these is the changing of the Mind, or the turning of the
Soul [(...)] from Sin and Vanity to God, as our End: The latter is an ^pplying
of our selves to Jesus Christ, as the way to that End. That is, we must return
unto God as our God, by alively Faith in his Son as our Prince and Savior,
without whom neither Pardon nor Peace can be expected.

Not as if the Father was of himself averse to Mercy or Compassion, but only
prevailed upon, and as it were over-perswaded thereto by the Death-Merits and
Intercession of his Son. Have a care of such Blasphemous Conceits as these,
than which nothing is more directly contrary to the design of the Gospel. But
still remember, it was not becoming the Majesty and Holiness of God, nor
agreeable to the ends of Government, to receive such as we are into favor
immediately but through a Mediator, whom of his own free Love (...) has
provided for us. John 3.16. For God so lo^^^ the World, etc. So here verse 18.
All things are of God (...) who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus. It Is a
gre^^ Duty indeed, to admire the love of the Son: But O^^^ not forget to admire
also the Father's love.

III. And because it is the Office of the Holy Spirit to apply and communicate
the Grace of Christ, therefore it concerns us to own, eye, and acknowledge h^^
accordingly in this whole business. As Jesus Christ (...) the Way to the
Father: So the Holy Ghost is the Wa^ness of the Son, his Agent upon Earth, his
Advoca^^ with the Sons of Men, to plead his Cause, and to di^pense his Grace.
Who is therefore called by Tertula^^ [Christi Agens and Vicarius] and by a
Learned Man (...) our own, the Supreme Minister of Christ's Kingdom.

Therefore though all the Persons [or Subsistences in the blessed Trinity do
concur to the production (...) the new Creature, yet this great work of
Sanctification is by a certain peculiar eminency of Attribution ascribed to the
Holy Spirit. It Is called the Sanctification of the Spirit. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. 1
Pet. 1.2. It is the Spirit that quickens, enlighteneth, and draws or Souls
to Christ, and to the Father by him. Therefore in all our Motions, and
Tendencies God ward, we m^^^ look unto this Spirit for help; and act Faith upon
him for the Assistances and Influences of his Grace: If w^^ attempt any thing
of this nature in our own strength we shall certainly be baffled in our
endeavors, and make nothing of it. We ought to cry hard after the Spirit, and
carefully to observe all his Accesses to us, and the impressions of his Grace
upon us; and always to strike in with his Motions; to do most when he helps
most: and thus our work will be like to succeed, and prosper in our Hand.

Great care is to be taken how we carry it toward him, that we may not quench,
resist, grieve, or vex the Spirit, either by stifling Convictions, or running
coun^er to the dictates of Conscience, or by foolish Delays, and Slothfulness.
The help of the Spirit is to be ex^ected in a diligent, humble, conscientious
attendance upon him in his own way, viz. The use of his ap^ointed Means. O
remember that your Duties, Gra^s, and Comforts, will all be dead things, or
nothing, (...) the Spirit of God be not the Life of them all. His ^race must be
thankfully acknowledged in all the ^rength we get, in all the progress we make,
and we ^ust still depend upon him for more: Yea, we ought (...) be more
distinct, and explicit, in the workings of ^aith toward him, than commonly we
are? We were ^ptized in the Name of the Holy Ghost, as well as of ^e Father,
and the Son: The three Persons are one ^od, equal in Power and Glory; in this
Trinity none is ^^ore or after other; none is greater or less than ano^^er.
Whence then comes it to pass, that we are (...) defective in that part of the
Life of Faith, which ^^specteth the third Person? This is a great dishonor
(...) him, and an injury to our selves. But I must not ^^y to enlarge upon that
here.

I only add. It Is the Office of the Spirit to help our ^^firmities: Romans 8.26.
Through him we must mortify the ^^eds of the Body, that we may live. Ver. 13.
By him (...) Love of God is shed abroad in the Hearts of Believers. (...) 5.5.
He seals them to the day of Redemption. ^^itnesseth with their Spirits that
they are the Children of God. Is the earnest of our Inheritance: But (...) any
Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none (...) his.

Thus I have showed you the nature of this great work, (...). That it is the
turning of a Person to God in Christ, ^^en to know, love, and live to him, and
all this by the ^^ace and Help of the Holy Spirit.

Thus, I say, we must be qualified and prepared for ^^e Heavenly Glory.

CHAP. IV.
Of the several Steps whereby this blesse^ Work is begun, carried on, and
perfected in the Soul.

HAving thus far opened the Nature of that gr^^^ Work, whereby we must be
prepared for H^ven, if ever we come thither: I come now to cons^^^ more
distinctly the order wherein it is carried on, (...) how it is begun, advanced,
and perfected.

And here I design not to trouble you with over ^^^rious Enquiries about the
way and manner of (...) Spirit's working on the Souls of Men, or how the
^^ficacy of Grace is reconcilable with the natural li^^ty of the rational
Creature: But shall content my^^^ to wave Controversies, and insist upon some
few pl^^^ necessary, acknowledged Truths, as being most s^^^ to the intent of
this Discourse. And they are (...) that follow:

First. There are certain previous workings of a (...) common sort of Grace,
whereby God is wont to ^^^pare Men for special saving Grace.

It Is his usual Method to bring his Works (wh^^^ of Nature or Grace) to their
intended Perfection (...) degrees. He delights to glorify his Power, (...) and
Goodness, by advancing things to an observable be ^^^ty and excellency from
very small, or seemingly (...) considerable beginnings. Not to speak of the
(...) Creation of the World, or of the fashioning of (...) Child in the Womb,
and the production of other ^^^nimals, and also Vegetables, etc. It is easy to
take ^^^tice of the various Dispensations of the Law (or (...) venant) of
Grace, and the gradual increase of Scripture Light and Discoveries, till at
length the Sun of Righteousness himself appeared, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3.

But to come to the point: it is certain, the new Creature is wrought by
degrees; and as God has appointed a course of Means to be used, Duties to be
performed in order to our Conversion, and Salvation: So he affords the help of
his Grace in various Measures, as seems meet ^o his Infinite Wisdom.

Thus there are some commoner Operations of the Holy Spirit, which usually go
along with the Gospel, and put Men into a nearer preparation, for special Grace
than they were in before. Though God may sometimes, even in an instant, convert
the most unprepared obdurate Persons; yet it is not his ordinary Metho^ so to
do, nor have any such Persons reason to expect to be thus dealt with.

As the Word is the Instrument by which God works upon Souls, so he first
enables them in some measure to understand it, and then to believe it, and so
by it he awakes them from their stupid Security; convinces them of the
Sinfulness, and Danger of an unregenerate State: Makes them solicitous about
their eternal Welfare. What shall I do to be saved? How shall I escape the
Damnation of Hell? Thus they are brought to see their need of Christ, as Men
that are lost and undone without him: As also to perceive the necessity of
Holiness in order to Happiness: Hereupon they make some Resolutions and fair
Promises of amendment, and put forth some seemingly hopeful endeavors to
become new Men: Insomuch that they are almost persuaded to be Christians
indeed; and are not far from the Kingdom of God: Though they must be brought yet
nearer, or else they are lost for ever.

Now though all this fall short of a through Change, yet it has a preparatory
tendency thereto. Somewhat of this kind ordinarily goes before the work of
Conversion. Therefore such Impressions are not to be slighted, it is dangerous
to smother Convictions, by suffering the noise, and hurry of the worldly
Business, or sensual Delights, to divert our Thoughts from these things.

Secondly. Special saving Grace determines the Soul to a sincere and hearty
closure with God in Christ. Here is the turning point; this it is to which the
forementioned preparations tend: And in which they must issue, and terminate to
make us Christians indeed: 'Till this be done, the Person is in a carnal
unregenerate State. We turn not unto God as God, if we turn not to him as the
chief Good; and we turn not to him as the chief Good, so long as we prefer any
other Object or Interest before him. I know indeed, that the best of Men may
sometimes have hankering Desires after their former Idols, and for this they
lament, and mourn in secret: But still the stated, predeminant, habitual bent
of their Hearts is for God; and there is nothing which they more loath
themselves for, than because they love God no more. Hinc illae l^chrimae. --

Mark 12.30. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all
thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, and with all thy Strength. How many Alls are
here? Yet (says one) if we had ten thousand times more Powers and Principles,
we ought to love God with them all too. It is an emphatical Translation of that
Elegant Text of the Apostle Romans 5.5. The Love of God is shed abroad in our
Hearts, -- a covering of the Soul, as the Waters cover the Sea. -- O that God
would fill up all my Capacities, and make me yet more capacious! O that he
would take up all the room in me, and O that he would make for himself more
room in my Soul! Mr. Shaw's Meditations, page 30, 31.

Can you imagine that you love God at all in a saving sense, if ye love him not
above all? Why, this holy Love is the grand significant vital Motion of the
Soul; it is the Root from whence all acceptable Service springs, and upon which
it grows; or the Principle into which it is resolved: It Is for want of this,
that carnal Minds are not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.
Romans 8.7. Our Eye must be singly fixed upon God, as our Supreme End and chief
Good; and so it will be full of Light; and our Hearts must be accordingly
affected toward him. A double Mind, a Heart and a Heart, (as it is in the
Hebrew, Psalm. 12.2.) is hateful in the sight of God. A divided Heart is a
faulty Heart, Hos. 10.2. Hence turning unto God with the whole Heart, is
opposed to Treachery, Falsehood, and an hypocritical show of Conversion. Jer.
3.10. Her treacherous Sister Judah has not turned unto me with her whole
Heart, but feignedly, says the Lord.

As for the Interest of the great Mediator in this matter, himself has
plainly showed us that if we love Father, or Mother, Wife, or Children, etc.
yea, or our own Lives, more than him, we are not worthy of him, cannot be his
Disciples. Mar. 10.37. Luke 14.26. Ye see here how he insists upon the
prevailing degree of our love to him.

And indeed the serious contemplation of the love of God in Christ, is a most
powerful Means to raise up our Souls to suitable returns of love to God again.
He that has known the Son, has also known the Father, Joh. 14.7.

Behold here, and admire the wonderful Wisdom that appears in the contrivance
of our Redemption: Our Sin had brought us under the just Wrath and Displeasure
of the Almighty: And also had corrupted our very Vitals, and turned our Hearts
against God. And now let us see how aptly things were laid for the removal of
both these, that so the Reconciliation might be mutual, and complete. He to us,
and we to him, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20.

God has provided a ransom for us, to make way for his being reconciled to us,
without any reflection upon himself, or his Government. To this end he has
sent his Son into the World, to reveal his Love, and Grace, and to do, and
suffer so much for us.

And that we might be capable of a saving Intere^^ in the benefits of this
great Redemption, we are obliged to believe in the Redeemer, and by him in God
2 Cor. 3.4. 1 Pet. 1.21. Now it is plain that such (...) Faith tends in its own
Nature, to produce holy Lo^^ to God, (who has thus first loved us) and so to
effect the Reconciliation on our part. Study this well, the substance of
Christianity is contained in it.

As Christ as Mediator, is the summary mean and way to the Father, to bring
Man home to his Creator: So Faith in Christ is a mediating Grace, to work in
us the Love of God. As Mr. Baxter ha^ it.

No other Grace or Duty is accepted of God nor will prove our Salvation, any
further than i^ participateth of predominant Love to God: But thi^ predominant
Love is always an evidence of Life ibid.

Thirdly. The same Power which has brought the work thus far, does maintain,
and keep alive the Principle of Grace implanted in the Soul. Our Spiritua^ Life
(no less than the Natural) depends upon the continual influx of its Almighty
Author. In him we live, and move, and have our Being; not only as Men, but as
Christians, or new Men. The Strength of that habitual Grace subjected in us,
would never hold our, without daily Influences of efficient Grace still working
upon us. Thus we are kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation, 1
Pet. 1.5. And preserved unto his Heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18.

We know what woeful work our first Parents made, when their Concerns were left
in their own Hands; how shamefully they betrayed their Trust, and ruined at
once themselves, and their Posterity; and this through the mere mutability of
their Nature, though upright, and innocent, as it came out of God's Hand. What
then might be expected from us, who have not only mutable Natures, but great
Remnants of Sin and Corruption, even in the very best of us. Surely if our
stock of Grace were left only to our own management, we should soon turn
Bankrupts.

Let it be considered, that Grace is not a natural, but supernatural Principle;
not essential, but an additional to our Beings; not born with us, but as it
were a stranger, or new comer in us: And that our Hearts are not wholly
dispossessed of those Objects which are against its work, nor delivered from
those Principles which have an enmity to it: Yea, that we often lose some
degrees of it, and therefore should quickly lose the rest, if the divine Power
were not engaged in our Preservation, and that Faithfulness which will not
suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. This holy Seed
would soon come to nothing in so unkindly a Soil as our Hearts are, were it not
cherished and watered by the same Hand that placed it there. This Spark of
Divine Light would quickly be extinguished, if not kept in, and refreshed, by
continual Emanations from the Father of Lights.

It Is true we are commanded to keep our Hearts with all diligence, [or above
all keeping] Prove. 4.23. To stand upon our guard, to be steadfast and
unmovable. That is, we must put forth our utmost Endeavors, (for God works by
means) but if we trust to our Hearts, we are Fools, Prove. 28.26. I may allude
to that Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in
vain.

Well then, we must do our utmost to keep that good thing that is committed to
us; but how? By the assistance of the Holy Ghost, which dwells in us. 2 Timothy
1.14. So Jude 21. Keep your selves in the Love of God. But then verse. 24, 25.
He teaches them to look higher than their own Endeavors in this matter. Now
unto him that is able to keep you from falling; -- To the only wise God our
Savior, be Glory, and Majesty, Dominion, and Power, both now, and ever. Amen.

Fourthly. By the same Almighty Power, the new Creature is carried on gradually
toward its designed Perfection. Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing,
that he which has begun a good work in you, will perform [or finish] it, until
the Day of Jesus Christ. The Life of Grace is not only kept whole in the Soul,
but more abundant Life given it: According to the design of its merciful
Savior. Joh. 10.10. I am come that they might have Life, and that they might
have it more abundantly. That Heavenly Light which has shined in upon it,
increases more and more unto a perfect Day. Prove. 4.18. The principle of holy
LOVE is cherished, and blown up, till at length it come to a pure and perfect
Flame.

That which has been already wrought is good, so far as it goes; but the
blessed Author of it will not leave his work imperfect; it shall be all very
good, before he has done with it. As at the first Creation, Genesis 1.31. God
intends for his Children not only a Perfection of parts, but of degrees: And in
so doing, he deals with them according to the manifest Tendency of that divine
Nature, whereof he has made them Partakers.

Can any thing be more agreeable, than for those who have tasted that the Lord
is gracious, to desire more full, and satisfying relishes of his Grace? And has
he given them those Desires to abuse, and torment them? It cannot be. Surely
those that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, shall be filled. Mat. 5.6.
Yea by how much the greater their Longings are, so much the fitter for large
Communications. Psalm. 81.10. Open thy Mouth wide, and I will fill it. Ask great
things, and with earnest Desires, and ye shall receive, that your Joy may be
full.

This leaves a black Note upon those who are at a stand in Matters of Religion;
make no progress, but seem well enough content with the measures to which they
have attained. I tell you, such Persons have great reason to suspect their own
Sincerity; nay, if this be their stated, constant, habitual Temper, they may
justly be pronounced Hypocrites. He that thinks he has Grace enough, has
certainly no true saving Grace at all. Living Natures, as Plants, Children,
etc. thrive till they come to Perfection. Pieces of Art, or dead Things, as the
Image of a Child, a withered Plant, are at a stand, or grow worse. Phil. 3.14.
I press toward the Mark. Sincerae sanctitatis inse parabile signum est.
desiderium sincerum perfectionis. Method. Theol. part 3. page 216. A sincere
Desire of Perfection, is an inseparable Sign of sincere Holiness.

Is it to be thought that that Man has any saving Knowledge of God, or sincere
hearty Love to him, who does not desire to know him better, and to love him
more? Ye that have experienced what these things mean, consider of it, take
advice, and speak your Minds. But as for empty lifeless Hypocrites, I except
against them, they are not competent Judges in the Case: Because they savor
not the things of the Spirit, but have their Judgments bribed, and over-swayed,
by the Fleshly Interest.

We are expressly commanded to grow in Grace, to be always abounding in the
work of the Lord. And it must needs be of ill Signification, as to our State,
if such commands weigh nothing with us.

But with the truly Godly it is not so; the Grace which they have already
received, inclines them to labor after more, though still it is God that works
in them. Heb. 13.20, 21.

Fifthly, and Lastly. The Souls of Believers are at their death made perfect in
Holiness. Somewhat has been spoken of this already, which is now to be further
illustrated and proved. The Scripture assures us, that the Souls of the Godly,
being separated from their Bodies, do pass into Glory, or into the Presence of
Christ, Abraham's Bosom. Thus our Lord tells the Penitent Thief, Luke 23.43. To
Day shall thou be with me in Paradise. So the Apostle in this Context, We are
willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord.
verse. 8. We are also told, that the Angels shall be our Convoys to bring us
thither. Luke 16.22. Now it is certain, that no unclean thing, nothing that
defiles can enter into the heavenly state. From whence it follows, that the
Souls of the Faithful shall then be perfectly freed from all sinful Weaknesses;
and therefore must need: be perfectly holy: For it is Nonsense to suppose a
middle state in this case, viz. in a rational Creature, obliged by the Law of
its Nature, to a perfect conformity to the Will of its Creaton. But what needs
further reasoning, when we are plainly told of the Spirits of just Men-made
perfect?

Thus it is evident, that when Death has opened the Womb of Time, or drawn
aside the Vail, and let us into Eternity; all our sinful Imperfections will be
lest behind us; and never trouble us more. How weak soever our present
Insant-sta^e on Earth is; there is nothing above but perfect Holiness, and
Love. Thus the Day of Death is the Birthday of the gracious Soul's Perfection.
This is our third Birth (as one speaks) and therefore no wonder if there be
some Pangs, and Difficulties in it: As there was in the Birth of Nature, and in
that of Grace, so in this of Glory. Should not the thoughts of this make Death
welcome? It may be you will say, Death is an Enemy to Nature. But is it not a
conquered Enemy? Has not our Lord Jesus Christ, even in our Nature overcome it?
Has he not taken away the sting of it? And in so doing, gained us the victory.
1 Cor. 15.55. etc. Yea, by the Power and Wisdom of our mighty Redeemer, this
Enemy, Death, is turned to our advantage; To die is gain. Is in terrible to
Nature? What is Faith for, but to conquer such Fears? Must we not die in Faith,
as well as live by is?

But to return to the Point.

It Is no wonder if such sinful imperfect Creatures as we, be much at a loss in
our apprehensions concerning a State of Sin less Perfection, both as to the
nature of it, and the manner how it is brought about: But for all this, it is
not hard to conceive, that there are several things which may greatly
contribute thereto. I will just name three Particulars,

1. These Bodies will then be laid aside, and who knows not what heavy Weights,
what Prisons, what Snares they have been to our Souls? Bodies of Sin, and
Death, God knows, Romans 7.23, 24. 2. And therefore, those holy Habits which had
the commanding Influence upon the Hearts and Lives of true Believers; but were
miserably obscured, and kept at an under by the Mists and Darkness of the
ani^nal State, shall then display themselves, and appear in their own likeness:
Which is not unintelligible, especially if the nature of an habit, consist in a
secret, deep, ^mperceptible constant act of the Soul; and who can say it does
not so? 3 The admission of the Soul into the sight of the glorious God; this is
much to be considered in this matter.
It Is easy to enlarge upon all these, but to what purpose? Tu ratiocinare, ego
credam. The Physician of ^our Souls knows how to perfect their Cure, in ways to
^us incomprehensible.

Thus we have considered the several Steps, whereby the work of Grace is begun,
and carried on till it come to Perfection.

I would only add, that in this whole Business no violence is done to our
natural Faculties: Grace presupposes Nature, which it heals, and rectifies,
but does not destroy; though the workings of the Spirit in this matter be
powerful, and efficacious, yet they are also sweet and agreeable. They will act
most freely, when made free by Grace; it is so determined, that it also
determines it self; that is, it moves spontaneously toward God, or, having
received the influx of his Grace, actively concurs therewith, viz. Being first
animated, and quickened thereby. And thus much for the explication of the
Doctrine.

CHAP. V.
Plain Proof from Scripture, and the nature of the thing, that none ca^^ come
to Heaven, till they be wrought, or prepared for it by Divine Grace.

THOUGH what has been already said, in order (...) the opening of the Doctrine,
has at the sai^^ time carried the Proof thereof along with it; th^^ great
Truth having so much Self-evidence in it, th^^ one would think, being once
understood, it could no^ but be assented to; yet because it is exceeding common
for Men to bear up themselves with the hopes of Heaven, though they be utter
Strangers to this great work of Grace; and withal, because it is very dangerous
s^^ to do: Therefore let me give you the Proof of wh^^ has been thus far
explained, and set before you.

Men are slower of belief, as to this great Article (...) the Christian
Doctrine, than to most (I might say a^^y) other, as a Learned Man observes,
[Mr. How Is Blessedness of the Righteous, page 242.]

But, Let God be true, but every Man a Liar, Romans 3.4. Therefore,

1. None are chosen to Salvation, but through Sanctification of the Spirit.
God's eternal decree of Election connecteth the End and the Means, Holiness and
Happiness, Grace and Glory, together. The Scripture is most full and plain in
this case. Romans 8.29. Whom he did foreknow, them, he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the Image of his Son. And what follows? Them he also called,
justified, glorified. Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before
the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy, and without blame before
him in LOVE, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy Calling,
not according to our works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus, before the World began. See more 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. 1
Pet. 1, 2. Is it not plain from these Scriptures, that there is such a thing as
Election of particular Persons to eternal Life: And that as God does decree to
give eternal Life upon certain conditions, so he does also decree to give those
conditions to certain Persons: And the execution of the Decree is ever
answerable to the Decree it self? Ephesians. 1.11. Being predestined according to
the purpose of him, who works all things after the counsel of his own Will.
Deny this, and you may deny any thing. Will you reverse the Decrees of Heaven,
or deny them, because they sure not with your own carnal Temper? Or will you
try to put asunder what God has joined together? Or expect to be saved without
being first sanctified? The Counsel of the Lord that shall stand, Prove. 19.21.
If ever ye come to to Heaven, ye must first be conformed to the holy Image of
Jesus Christ, or sanctified by his Spirit.

Is not eternal Life the Gift of God, and has he not told us the way in which
he has determined to give it, and is it not downright madness to expect it out
of God's way?

If therefore you be sollicitous concerning your everlasting Welfare, do not
take the preposterous course of those Persons, who beginning at the wrong end
first, amuse themselves about the eternal Decrees of God; remember secret
things belong to him, revealed to you; therefore turn your Thoughts inward,
examine whether you have been effectually called, so as to consent to the holy
Covenant, and if so, ye may comsortably conclude concerning your Election. 2
Pet. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.5.

But because there are some Persons, who affect to cavil against this sort of
Doctrine; I have thought meet to transcribe part of the 17th Article of the
Church of England. Valeat quantum valere potest.

Predestination to Life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
Foundations of the World were laid) he has constantly decreed by his Counsel,
secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation, those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to Everlasting Salvation, as
Vessels made to honor Wherefore, they which be endued with so excellent a
Benefit of God, be called according to God's purpose by his Spirit, working in
due Season: They through Grace obey the Calling: They be justified freely: They
be made Sons of God by Adoption. They be made like the Image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ: They walk religiously in good Works, and at length
by God's Mercy they attain to Everlasting Felicity, etc.

To conclude; you must either acknowledge the Decree of Election, or say that
all Men shall be saved, (...) that none shall be so. For nothing can be more
evident than that God decrees whatsoever he effects.

2. Redeeming Love has joined Sanctification and Salvation together. It was no
part of our Blessed Savior's design, to procure the admission of unholy Souls
(while such) to Heaven: That would have been to have laid Heaven and Hell
common. But he has made way for the Communication of that Grace which must fit
us for Glory, and then for our entrance thereinto. 1 John 3.8. He that
commits Sin, is o^ the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning. For
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that ^e might destroy the works of
the Devil. Matthew. 1.21. He shall save his People from (not in) their Sins. Ti^^
2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purity unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works. Ephesians. 5.25, 26.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify, and
cleanse it.

The Grace of the Redeemer was never intended to exempt us from the Obligation
of Obedience to our Creator, but to bring us back thereto.

The promisory part of the Law of Innocence, is indeed ceased by reason of our
Incapacity. A guilty Creature can lay no claim to Life and Happiness, by virtue
of a Covenant which required perfect and perpetual Obedience as the Condition
thereof. But then the preceptive part of that Law is still so far in force,
that the least violation of the Divine Law is Sin: And the least Sin makes
perpetual Punishment our due; except pardoning Mercy interpose for our
deliverance.

And here it is that the Grace of the Redeemer takes place: Though perfect
Obedience be still commanded us; yet it is not insisted upon as a condition,
whereupon our Eternal Happiness is suspended.

Sincerity shall be accepted through the Maths and Mediation of Jesus Christ,
who has in his own Person fulfilled all Righteousness, and withal offered up
himself a Sacrifice, to satisfy Divine Justice for our Disobedience. Pray be
clear in these things.

Do not expect that Christ will save you, unless you ^ay down your Arms, and
submit to the Divine Sovereignty. How can there be Peace between God and your
Souls, so long as ye resolve to persist in your Rebellion? Is Christ the
Minister of Sin? Or shall we continue in Sin that Grace may abound? God forbid.
Jesus Christ is exalted by the Father to be a Prince and a Savior: To give
first Repentance, and then Forgiveness: To turn Men's Hearts from Sin, and then
to pardon it.

If ye expect to be saved any other way than through the Merits and
Satisfaction of Christ, say so; and then we shall know that ye are Infidels:
But if not; then know ye that Sanctification is an essential part of that
Salvation which Christ has designed for his Peopel.

3. It is a manifest affront to the holy Spirit of God, to imagine that Men can
be saved without being wrought for it by his renewing Grace. It Is in effect to
nullify or deny the Office of the Holy Ghost; as if his gracious Operations
upon the Souls of Men were needless, or superfluous things. Or at least that
Men may attain to Happiness without them. Is this to believe in the Holy Ghost,
or is it not rather to blasphe^^ him? Do ye not tremble to approach so near to
the^ pardonable Sin?

If Men may be saved without being sanctified, (...) what purpose are all the
Influences of the Spirit (...) God upon his People? If Holiness be so needless
(...) thing, that a Man may come to Heaven well enou^^ without it, why does the
Spirit strive so long w^^ poor Creatures to make them holy? Why does (...)
still follow them with the earnest Sollici^ations of (...) Grace
(notwithstanding their unkind Resistance) from one Ordinance and Providence to
another? H^^ great a work is it to quicken, Illuminate, and draw (...) God, a
dead, blind, disaffected Soul! and to upho^^ and carry on the work, as has been
already opene^* What mighty Power does the Spirit put forth in^^^ this! and
dare ye say it is more than needs? Or prom^^^ to your selves Salvation without
it? This would (...) not only to tread under Foot the Son of God, (as have
heard under the former head) but to do desp^^^ unto the Spirit of Grace.

I wonder not that such Men make a scoff at the Spiritual Worship of God: the
Lord convert, and p^^don them for they know not what they say, nor wh^^ they
affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7. But measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing
themselves amongst themselves, (...) not wise, or [understand it not] 2 Cor.
10.12.

Surely in God's account none are looked upon as (...) Worshippers, but they
who worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to
wo^^ him. Joh. 4.23. But that brings me to,

4. The Institution of the Gospel Ministry and Ordinances, is a further Proof
of this great Truth. (...) works by his appointed Means; Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. The Gospel is called the Ministration
of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. As also the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.2. And well may it be so called by way of eminency, because
greater measures of Grace are given under the Gospel Dispensation, than were
usual before.

Now, the sacred Office of the Ministry is institured in subserviency to the
Influences and Operations of the holy Spirit. It Is he that qualifies Ministers
for their work, assists them in it, and makes it successful to the attainment
of its end. Moreover, the Sum and Substance of that Errand, upon which we are
sent, ye have in the latter end of this Chapter. Verse. 18, 19, 20. Namely to
tell you, that God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, -- has
committed unto us the word of Reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God.

Our business therefore is to treat with Sinners in the Name of God, and the
Redeemer: That we may persuade them to comply with the offers of Free Grace.
And to edify, strengthen, and help the Joys of those who have heartily
complied. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

And O how strict a charge is laid upon us! That we be instant in Season, and
out of Season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all Long-suffering and Doctrine.
For the time will come when, etc. (we may now say it is already come) 2 Timothy
4.2, 3, 4. And that we watch for your Souls, as they that must give an account,
Heb. 13.17. and warn you of your danger, that your Blood may not he required at
our Hand. Ezekiel. 3.18. And who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16.

Well then; if Men may be saved without being wrought for it, etc. of what use
is the ministerial Office? Or why are we so strictly charged?

Moreover, the whole Course of Rellgious Duty that is appointed us, with that
Seriousness and Spirituality therein required, does fully prove the Point we
have in hand: The holy reverent Worship of God in his Ordinances, does
powerfully tend to raise our Souls nearer to him, and to make them more like
him; to heal our spiritual Distempers, and to refine and purify all our
Faculties and Powers, and so to prepare and sit us for the State of Heavenly
Perfection. Therefore we must not look upon such appointments, as if they were
only mere arbitrary Injunctions, to exact homage from us: But (though Sovereign
Authority is to be acknowledged in them) we must also consider how infinite
Wisdom and Goodness has sured out Work to our End, our present Duty to our
future Happiness; that by the one we might be prepared for the other. From
whence it is evident, that Holiness is necessary to the Work and Business of our
present Life, as also to our future Blessedness. We can neither serve nor enjoy
God here or hereafter, without being wrought thereto by his Grace. I mention
nor the heartless Service of Hypocrites, as not being worth taking notice of.
Hence also ye may learn what ends to propose to your selves in every part of
Divine Worship. But I proceed,

5. None but those who are thus wrought upon, have any right to the Heavenly
Felicity according to the Tenor of the Gospel Covenant. Unregenerate Persons,
as such, are peremptorily excluded, even by the Law of Grace it self. Ye cannot
produce the least Syllable in Scripture, whereupon to ground those hopes of
Heaven, wherewith such Men are wont to flatter themselves. But I can show you
enough to confound, and overthrow their wicked Presumptions for ever. The
Sentence of their Condemnation is legible in almost every Leaf of the Bible;
yet will they not consider it, nor lay it to Heart. He that believes not, is
condemned already; he shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on him.
Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Joh. 3.3, 18, 36.
If ye live after the Flesh, shall die: without HOLINESS no Man shall see the
Lord. These are the true and faithful Sayings of God. All this was settled long
before thou were born; if thou have any exceptions against it, thou come too
late with them, (as one says.)

Assure your selves that these sacred Constitutions cannot be disanulled: Your
Unbelief shall not make the Truth of God of none effect; ye will quickly fa^d
whose word shall stand, his or yours.

(...) true indeed, Pardon and Life are freely offered by the Gospel-grant, if
thou will repent and turn to God throu^^ Christ. Otherwise it brings upon thee
an heavier Co^demn^tion, than thou were under before. John 3.10. a sorer
Punishment, Heb 10.29.

The c^^^ speaks it self: Thou can plead no Interest in the saving Benefits
of the Covenant of Grace, unless thou come up to the Terms thereof: Abused
Mercy turns to greater Indignation. Therefore it much concerns you to inquire
what those Terms are, and not to venture your Souls upon Uncertainties. Behold,
the Judge stands before the Door, Jam. 5.9. What is the Chaff to the Wheat,
says the Lord? Jer. 23.28. Mat. 3.12.

6. None but those who are thus wrought upon, have the earnest and first
Principles of the Heavenly Felicity: How then should they have the thing it
self?

Do ye expect the Fruit without the Seed? the Perfection of Holiness and
Happiness without the Beginnings thereof? the Inheritance without the Earnest?
How can these things be? How absurd are such Hopes as these? Would ye be
perfect Men in Christ, without first going through the Infant-State of
Christianity? That is, being converted and becoming as little Children?

As for the truly Godly, they have Eternal Life abiding in them; even that
saving, transforming, practical Knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, whom he has
sent, which is the Inchoation thereof: But the Ungodly are not so, being dead
in Trespasses and Sins: To be carnally minded is Death: They sow to the Flesh,
what then can they expect (reasonably) to reap but Corruption? Would ye sow one
sort of Grain, and reap another?

Know therefore, that the holy Spirit of God working in the Souls of Believers,
suitable Inclinations Heavenward, and Desires after it, (that is, rational,
judicious, holy Desires) does thereby give them an earnest of it; but still
remember, If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8,
9.

7. The Guilt of Sin, which all unregenerate Persons are under, stands between
them and Heaven. I hope ye know that ye are Sinners, and that ye must be
justified before you can be glorified. The weight of Guilt must needs press you
down into everlasting Darkness, if it be not taken off by pardoning Mercy and
Grace. And do ye not also know that there is no Pardon without true Repentance?
And withal that true Repentance is nothing less than the turning of the Soul
from Sin to God, a change of the Temper and Disposition of the Heart; the very
work whereof we have all this while been speaking. Repentance toward God.

Hence the Gospel was ushered in with the preaching of Repentance, Repent, for
the Kingdom of Heaven is at band. That so all Men might know upon what terms
they were like to enjoy the blessed Priveledges of this glorious Gospel
Constitution.

And here I must tell you, it is not enough to say that you are sorry for your
past Sins, now the Pleasure of them is over, and Conscience (it may be) uneasy
about them. No, no; the bent of your Hearts must either be turned against Sin,
to hate, abhor it, and mourn for it, as it is displeasing and hateful in the
sight of God, etc. or else Iniquity will be your rain.

Moreover, the Sincerity of your Repentance, or of this change of Heart, from
the Love of Sin, to the Love of God and Holiness, must appear, by bringing
forth Fruits meet for Repentance.

8. All that ever have entered into that blessed State, were first prepared for
it, and effectually wrought upon by Divine Grace.

The case of Infants need not stop us, such as have been saved from the Womb,
have also been sanctified from thence.

But it is the case of the Adult, or grown Persons, which falls more directly
under our Consideration. Search the Scriptures, and you may find there how
those Persons are uncharacterized and described who are gone to Heaven before us.
It Is true they all had their failings, which they groaned under, and longed to
be delivered from: But as to the main, they were Men that walked with God:
Ordered their Conversations, as seeing him that is invisible: Men that lived
humble, mortified, self-denying Lives, choosing rather to suffer Affliction with
the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a season: That
mourned for the Abominations of the Times and Places wherein they lived; whose
righteous Souls were vexed with the filthy Conversation of the Wicked; in a
word, Men that confessed themselves Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth; sought
and Heavenly Country, and waited for the Salvation of the Lord. See Heb. 11.

Thus ye have heard how the Saints now in Glory got thither; and will ye dream
of coming to Heaven any other way? They were all wrought for that blessed
State, and so must ye; or else fall short of it, and perish.

As it is matter of great Encouragement and Comfort to the Godly, to think how
many Thousands are got to Heaven, the same way by which they themselves
(through Grace) are going: So one would think it should damp the hopes of
graceless Hypocrites, to find themselves in a quite different, yea contrary way.

9. The Scripture assures us, that the Righteous themselves are scarcely saved,
1 ^et 4.18. (...) vix, egre; i. e. tho they are certainly saved, yet not
without a great deal of difficulty. The same word ye have Acts 14.18 S^ved they
are, but not without much striving, by reason of the straitness of the Gate,
and the narrowness of the Way which leads to Life; many Enemies to conflict
with; many Temptations, Doubts and Fears, to overcome; many Storms and Tempest^
to get through, before they come safe to the Haven. What say ye to all this? Do
these things offen^ ye? They are true for all that.

And now consider what the Apostle infers from this in the words immediately
following: Where shall the Ungodly, and the Sinner appear? What shall become of
them? Why the Psalmist gives you an answer to this, Psalm. 1.4, 5. They are like
the Chaff which the Wind drives away: therefore the Ungodly shall not stand in
the Judgment, nor Sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous; they shall be
driven away in their own wickedness.

Well Sirs, Do ye think much to be told of the Difficulties that lie in the way
to Heaven? Are ye for a cheap, formal, customary, easy way of Religion? Do ye
think that the greatest Earnestness, Care and Seriousness, which we can
possibly use to secure our Everlasting Interest, is making more ado than
needs* Look ye to it, go on and prosper; but remember, that the Righteous
themselves are scarcely saved.

10. Lastly, It Is impossible, in the very nature of the thing, that an unholy
Soul should enjoy the Heavenly Felicity. This is evident, if ye will but
compare the Temper and Spirit of unregenerate Persons, with the Account that
has been given concerning the State of future Glory. The nature of Things must
be quite overthrown, and the grossest Contradictions reconciled, before an
unrenewed Person, as such, can be happy.

I know that all Men have some general injudicious Tendencies (even by Nature)
toward Happiness: But as for those upon whom this great Change has not past,
they neither know, nor truly desire that which alone can make them blessed.
They are most miserably confounded in their own Wishes, and cannot tell what
they would be at. They say indeed that they desire, and hope for Heaven; but in
the mean time they know not what they talk of. Were it possible they should be
admitted thither; why, so long as their corrupt depraved temper of Spirit
remains upon them, they would be quite out of their Element, and unhappy even
in Heaven it self.

The reason is plain; there must be a sutableness between the Faculties and the
Objects, or else what Frution, what Pleasure can there be? Would the most
pompous magnificient Shows signify any thing to a blind Man, or a Confort of
the most Harmonious Music to the Deaf? Why, just so it is here: The Hearts of
the Sons of Men, till sanctified by Divine Grace, are utterly unfit for the
Society, the Work, the Enjoyments of Heaven.

As for the Society, it is holy, there is a Communion of Saints in Perfection:
But the Hearts of carnal Men are impure, and unholy: There are none like them
to converse with in Heaven.

Those above are employed in admiring, loving, prais^ng, and glorifying the
blessed God: And it is the en^oyment of him that makes them happy in that State.
But certain it is, that the Souls of Ungodly Men are ^eeply averse from God,
and at Enmity against him; ^^ow then should they be blessed in the enjoyment of
^^ne whom they never loved, when to enjoy him is ^o love and delight in him? O
Sirs, ye must either ^e made holy, that is, conformed unto God, in the ^^ame
and disposition of your Spirits, or else Heaven cannot be Heaven to you.

Therefore I beseech you deal truly with your selves ^n this Matter, let me put
it to your Consciences; ^ea, do ye put it to them your selves, and then tell
^^e, How do ye relish that sort of Life on Earth, which is most like to the
Heavenly Life? How are ye ^ffected to those things which have a nearer Tendency
to lead you Godward? Is his holy Day the Joy of your Hearts? Are ye delighted
in his Worship? Do ye strive in every Duty to get as near to him, through
Christ, as you can? What Pleasure do ye take is discoursing concerning the
things of God? In speaking of the Glory of His Majesty, and the Wonders of his
Grace, the Holiness and Perfection of his Law, etc. What say ye? Do such things
as these are agree with you? Or are they not a weariness to you? Are ye nor
ready to think that Lords-Days return too o^. And that strict and serious
Religion is intolerable Prociseness? Do not your Hearts rise against it? Are ^e
not glad when the Service of God is over? Tho sour thing ye would do to secure
Heaven for a reserve, who ye can enjoy the World no longer? Is not this the
very Temper of your Spirits? And is it not very deplorable? Alas! what should
ye do in Heaven with sod Hearts as these? Would ye not be eternally. weary o^
an Eternal Sabbath? Would not your ungracious Spirits be ever recoiling and
uneasy? Do ye not yet see that there is no coming to the new Jerusalem without
new Hearts? If not, it is because ye shut your Eyes.

Certainly if unregenerate Men might have ^n Haven of their own choosing, it
would be vastly different (even quite another thing) from that which Go^ has
prepared for them that LOVE him. But he should Men be happy against their own
Wills? Or it State to which the Temper of their Spirits is not su^ed So true is
that great Saying of a Worthy Divine When God has so determined, that without
^^^ness none shall see him; he lays no other Law upon unholy Souls, than what
their own impure Nature lay upon themselves. [ Bl^ssedness of the Righteou^^
page 46]

By this time ye see, or may see if ye will, th^^ except the Decrees of God can
be reverst, the design of Redemption perverted, the Office of the h^^ Spirit
nullified, the Institution of the Ministry a^^ Ordinances run down, the
Threarnings of the Gosp^^ made of none Effect, the Inheritance be attained
without the earnest, a new way found to Heaven which none ever discovered
before; and all this while the Righteous themselves are scarcely saved; in a
word (unless the nature of things be quite overturned, and palpable
Contradictions made to agree) none can come to Heaven till they be prepared,
and wrought for it by Divine Grace. Lo this, we have searched it, so it is;
hear it, and know thou it, for thy good, [Heb. for thy self] Job 5.27.

CHAP. VI.
Several Inferences of Truth drawn from the foregoing Discourse.

THus we have fully proved, that except ye will be holy, ye cannot be happy: If
this therefore be so clear and certain a Truth, it must needs be also a very
weighty and important one: a thing much to be considered, and closely applied;
because our Spiritual and Eternal Welfare, and (what is infinitely more than
either) the Glory of the Great God is so nearly concerned in it.

Now since there are many other Truths, which have an intimate connection with,
and dependence upon this great Doctrine; let us begin with the Consideration of
these, for the informing of our Judgments.

Inser. 1. We may learn from hence the great Worth and Excellency of real
Holiness. Real (I say) in opposition to that vain, empty show of Religion,
wherewith Multitudes make a shift to deceive themselves; even because they know
no better, and that because they will not know. Satan has taken advantage by
their own Corruption to blind their Minds, and close their Eyes; and thus, they
choose Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are Evil. Hence it is
that they see no Beauty in Holiness; no more than they do the Form and
Comeliness of the great Pattern and Procurer of it. Isa. 53.2.

They do not approve things that are excellent. If they meddle with Matters of
Religion, they do but debase them: First by forming low and unworthy Notions of
them, suitable to their own degenerate Tempers and Spirits; then they act
accordingly; and after all highly value themselves upon what they have done.

Nevertheless the high Excellency of Holiness, manifestly appears from the
three following Particulars which may easily be drawn from what has been
already delivered.

1. Its Original. It Is from Heaven, the blessed God is himself the Author of
it, as in the Text. He that has wrought us for the self-same thing is God.
It Is a Divine Work, and that not a common Work neither, but wrought in a way of
special Grace; and therefore it has a peculiar Excellency in it. Insomuch that
the Subjects of this great Change are denominated, born of God, Joh. 1.13. born
from above, chap. 33. as the word [(...)] may be rendered. Hereupon they are
advanced to the Name and Relation of Children: 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner
of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of
God. So called, and not miscalled, for so they are, as verse. 2. Now are we the
Sons of God.

2. The Nature of true Holiness speaks the Excellency of it. It Is the Soul's
Conformity to the blessed God; his Image drawn upon it, a Participiation of the
Divine Nature: which sweetly and effectually inclines all the Faculties and
Powers of our Souls Godward; and so far as it prevails upon us, it takes away
our unkind Aversion and Estrangedness from him, and teaches us to center upon
him, as our Portion, Happiness, and chief Good. In short it is our devotedness
unto God, which implies a Separation from whatsoever; stands in opposition
against him, as such.

So that had the Apostle been silent as to the Author of this great Work, the
very Nature of it might have told us whence it is, for it bears the Image and
Superscription of God upon it.

Little do the proud Despisers of Holiness consider what they say, or against
whom it is that they sprit themselves, make a wide Mouth, and draw out the
(...) Isa. 57.4. To vilify this work is a dishonor to its Author. To cast Dirt
upon the Image, is an affront to its great Original, who scorneth their
Scorners, sits in the Heavens, and laughs at them, for he sees that their Day
is coming, Psalm. 37 13.

3. The blessed End and Issue of Holiness shows you the worth of it; it comes
from above, and thither it leads; and is at last completed in the Heavenly
Perfection. Judge then of the Way and Means by the End; here is the Faith and
Patience of the Saints. They are highborn, and a suitable Inheritance is
designed them. To think or speak slightly of Holiness, is to contemn Heaven it
self; which is a State of Perfection therein.

Woe unto them that draw Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and Sin as it were with
a Cart-Rope. That put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness. Isa 5.18, 20.
It may be at last they will say (as one of their Predecessors did) let me die the
Death of the Righteous: Not from any love to Righteousness, but from a slavish
Fear of the just Punishment of their Impiety; and therefore those forced Cries
will avail them nothing.

Inser. 2. Learn from hence the Reasonableness and Equity, yea, the wonderful
Grace and Benignity of the Divine Government over fallen Man! See what a
Connection there is between our Duty and Interest. All the Precepts which God
has given us, may justly he esteemed as so many Directions which have a
natural Tendency to our own Welfare. It Is true they have the nature of Laws,
being enforced by the Divine Command. But is that any Injury to us, that the
mo^^ blessed glorious God has, by his Sovereign Righ^^^ Authority over us,
obliged us to be happy? Put us under such a Law, that we cannot be innocently
miserable if we perish it shall be our own fault that we do so^^^ Well may it
be called a Paternal Government, God i^ pleased to deal with us in a way
suitable to that Tid^ which he has condescended to take unto himself, vi^^ The
Father of Spirits. Behold how tenderly and ge^^ly he deals with his Offspring:
even the rational Sou^^ that issued from him. His Love invites them; h^^
Authority enjoys them to be happy; he reasons the Case with them, why will ye
die? Yea, he beseeched them in the most earnest moving manner, as tho G^^ did
beseech you by us, 2 Cor 5.20. They are impo^cuned from time to time, in his
Name, to lay aside the^^^ Frowardness and Enmity against him, who alone (...)
make them completely blessed: And thus he waits (...) be gracious to them. How
little do we deserve to (...) thus treated; methinks this should make us even
to (...) ashamed and blush, to consider our unworthy (...) disingenuous
Carriage toward him; and convio^us at length, how much better it is to be
under (...) Government, than to be left to our own Conduct.

His Commandments are not grievous; The first a^^ principal of them is this,
Thou shall love the Lord (...) God with all thine Heart, etc. What but the
despert^^^ Wickedness of our depraved sinful Natures can ma^^ this seem an hard
Saying? Whom should we love, not him who is infinitely Good in himself, and the
most suitable Good for us? The Author of all the Ble^sings that we ever enjoyed;
upon whom both (...) Beings, and Well-beings, do entirely depend: Ye (...) he
does not put us off with Trifles, but offers him^^^ (...) to be the Object of
our Love: And promises all tho^^^ Returns of Kindness and Benignity, which can
ra^^onally be desired to make us happy: And can ye y^^ refuse to love? O what
is the cause of your so might an Aversion from him? What Iniquity have ye ever
found in him? Jer. 2.5. Lord, into how great Confusion and Distraction are we
fallen, by forsaking him, and sinking into our own wretched selves! Alas, that
our Hearts should be so averse from closing with the infinite, universal, all
comprehending Good! He has made our Capacities such as none but himself can
fill and satisfy: Therefore we must needs be uneasy or restless, while we keep
at a distance from him: Surely then no Precept can tend more directly to our
own Felicity, than this of loving God with all our Hearts: And to this all the
rest are reduced; for it is the fulfilling of the Law: and surely the Obedience
of Love will be pleasant; if thy Mind be once brought up to this holy Love the
work is done; thy Cavils against any other Commands will then be at an end.
Thou will ever justify the Divine Law, and humble thy self, that in so many
things thou fallest short. Thou will then see reason to convince thee, that
even those things which thou wast wont to look upon as over great Severities in
Religion, were nothing but what the nature of thy Case made necessary in order
to thy Cure. That no needless Restraints are laid upon thee: that the most
exact Watchfulness, the greatest Mortification and Self-denial, are all little
enough to keep so froward a Nature within its due Bounds. In a word, thou will
see, that God has restrained thee from nothing which was truly good for thee,
but only denied thee the liberty of Self undoing; and therefore that his ways
are equal, how unequal soever thine own ways have been.

Infer. 3. Learn from hence what woeful work Sin has made in human Nature;
forasmuch as so great a Power of Divine Grace is necessary to refit and qualify
^it for its proper Use and End. All our Faculties and Powers are exceedingly
depraved and enfeebled by the Fall. In us (that is, in our Flesh) there dwells
no good ^^ing. When we would do good, evil is present with us, Romans 7.18, 21.
They that are in the Flesh (that is, all unregenerate Persons) cannot please
God. Chap. 8.8.

Some indeed there are, who deny Original Sin, and would persuade us that it is
only by imitation that we become wicked: But the Scripture is full and clear in
the Case. Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother couceive me. Even the best of Men were by nature Children of Wrath, as
well as others. Ephesians. 2.3. Hence our Savior shows us the necessity of
Regeneration, Joh. ^.5, 6. -- That which is bore of the Flesh is Flesh, and
that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. Verse. 7. Marvel not that I said
into thee, (...) must ^e born again. Is not Death the wages of Sin? Do not
Infants die, even before they are capable of actual Sin? therefore they have
original Sin. And why are they washed with Water in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, if they have no sinful Defilement upon them? and whence is
it that Corruption does so early discover it self in them, but because they
brought it into the World with them?

True it is that our first Parents were created in a holy and happy State,
endued with the Knowledge and Love of God, fitted for Communion with him, and
perfect Obedience to him, etc. This Man once was; lad to say was, and is not.
Our Gold is become Dress the Crown is fallen from our Head. Woe unto us, for w^
have sinned. How are the Mighty fallen!

The Distempers of our Souls are now past numbering: The Understanding and
Will, which were made to govern the inferior Faoulties, (the one by guidance
the other by command) are themselves enslaved to Lust and Appetite. So that Man
is born like a wild As^s Colt: Folly and Vanity it bound up in his Heart from
h^ very Childhood.

Being departed from God (the Center in which a^ our Faculties should unite,
and for whom they ought to be improved and employed) we are become at variance
with one another, and each Man with himself* Not to mention the bitter Strifes
and Envyings, the bloody Wars and Contentions, whereby Nations and Kingdoms,
yea and lesser Societies too, rise up one against another, it may not be amiss
to consider how strangely inconsistent even with themselves ungodly Men are:
One would think they were made up of Contradictions, and Absurdities. The
sensitive part is against the rational: The Will against the Judgment, their
Practice gives the Lie to their Profession: They say and do not, or they say
one thing, and do the quite contrary* They are like the troubled Sea, when it
cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dire, Isa. 57.20. The Body which was
made to be a Servant, is become their Ruler; and this is one of those things
which the Earth cannot bear, Prove. 30.21, 22. A thing greatly to be lamented.
Lam. 5.8. From hence it is that these Convulsions and Disorders do proceed:
Professing to be Wise, they are become Fools, and that more especially as to
those things wherein they are most concerned to have their Wits about them.
Wise to do Evil, but to do Good they have no Knowledge. Tit. 1.16. They profess
that they know God, but in Works they deny him, being abominable, disobedient,
and unto every good work reprobate. With their Mouths they show much Love, but
their Hearts go out after their Idols. They would be happy, but cannot endure
the thoughts of that which alone. can make them so. They enquire the way to
Zion, but set their Faces quite contrary. They pretend to believe the Evil and
Danger of Sin, but will not be persuaded to leave it. They often complain of the
Vanity of this World, and of the Crosses and Disappointments they met with in
it; but will not be prevailed with to set their Hearts upon a better: Yea, many
of them are sondest of these present Enjoyments, when they grow old, and cannot
but know that they must quickly leave them. Yea some of thein hate and revile
others for living in some measure up to the Rules of that Religion which they
themselves profess. The time would fail me to mention the thousandth part of
that Nonsense whereof they are continually guilty. So besotted a thing is a
carnal Heart! As if their Lusts had not only bereaved them of all due Sense of
Religion, but of their Wits too both together.

Thus the Case stands with unregenerate Persons, till the Grace of God rectify
these disorders, and bring their Souls into a better Frame: And O how great a
work is this! See what the Apostle speaks of it, Ephesians. 1.19. And what is the
exceeding [(...), transcendant, Hyperbolical] greatness of his Power to us ward
who believe according to the working [Energy] of his Mighty Power. [(...)] the
Might of his Power, etc.

Therefore, Sirs, lay the Ax to the Root of the Tree, consider thoroughly, and
bewail deeply your original Corruption. Pray hard for renewing Grace, it will
signify little for you to empty some of the Streams, while the Fountain is
disregarded, which will fill up all again. Corruption lies deep in you, and
will take a great deal of pains to master it, and root it out; nor can ye
expect that God will do it, without the concurrence of your own Endeavors
with, and under his Grace. Phil. 2.12, 13.

Infer. 4. Learn also from hence the Weakness, Wickedness, or both, of those
Persons who go about to deny or obscure the Doctrine of special Grace. Their
Weakness, I say, in disowning a thing so manifest both by Scripture, and
Experience. Their Wickedness in attempting to rob God of the Glory which is due
to him on this account. They cry up the natural Freedom of Man's Will, but
consider not its moral Impotency or Indisposition to that which is God; it is
cursed Aversion from God and Holiness, which will never be overcome but by the
Power of Free Grace. I know indeed that if Men were truly willing, then the
work were done, and therefore the Obstinacy of their Wills makes them
inexcusable. John 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye might have Life. But I
also know, that if ever they be made willing, it must be in the Day of God's
Power. Psalm. 110.3. No Man can come to me, except the Father, which has sent
me, draw him. That is, their Wills are so corrupt, that they cannot find in
their Hearts to renounce their Lusts, and give up themselves to the obedience
of the Gospel. They affect a distance from God, care not for coming near him:
They are dead in Trespasses and Sins.

Tho still they have natural Faculties, intellective and elective Powers, (else
we might as well preach to Walls as Men) yet when all is done, it is Grace that
must sanctify and heal these Faculties, and determine them Godward, or else
they are lost for ever. That some are thus wrought upon is plain Matter of
Fact, ye need go no further then the Text for Proof thereof. And it is as plain
that others are left under the Power of their own willful Enmity, and
Alienation from God. In short, that any are sanctified and saved is to be
ascribed to special Grace, that the rest perish is their own doing, not
strictly and properly because they could not, but because they would not do
otherwise. The Destruction which falls upon them is of their own choosing in
that they will not be persuaded to forsake the way that leads to it. Prove.
8.36. He that sins against me, wrongeth his own Soul: All they that hate me,
love Death.

The Law of Grace is established, ordered in all things, and sure. The Terms of
Salvation are unalterably settled, and God will judge Men accordingly, without
respect of Persons; and so shall the Sentence of Judgment be executed too.

Moreover, God gives unto all Men such degrees of Grace and Help, as is meet
for him to give; and more by far than they duly improve. And if they would
rightly use what they have (so far as they are able) they have great
encouragement to expect more; therefore his proceedings with them, for their
willful Neglects, are beyond all just exception.

Again; if over and above all this, he give to some Persons (as it is certain he
does) yet greater Proportions of Grace, even so much as shall effectually work
upon them, and fit them for Heaven, who can say unto him what do thou? May he
not do what he will with his own? Is there any Injustice in all this?

What say ye? Are not some Persons saved? Are they not saved by Grace? Is not
this Grace the Gift of God? Does God give it in time, and did he not decree to
give it from Eternity? Where then are your Cavils against Election and special
Grace? Surely you will not deny but that Multitudes perish by their own wilful
final Impenitency, through the Righteous Judgment of God, because they hated
him, and would not that he should reign over them.

Infer. 5. Lastly, Ye may learn from hence how exceeding dangerous it is to
resist and quench the Spirit of Grace.

Ye have heard it fully proved, that there is a great work which must be done
upon your Souls, or ye are undone for ever: And dare ye neglect the offered
Help of the Spirit? Do ye not yet know that by a commoner sort of Grace, he
usually prepares Men for special Grace? And can ye expect the latter, while ye
despise or improve not the former? Do ye not consider that such neglects are
like to leave you under greater Guilt and Hardness than ye were before? Why
then do ye delay to strike in, and comply with the inward Motions of the
Spirit? Why do ye not pray earnestly for more of his help? Do ye not sometimes
feel some awakening Convictions, some Desires, some Purposes which have
atendency toward your Conversion? Whence are these but from the blessed Spirit
of God? And when he calls, will ye behave your selves as if ye heard nor, or
were not at leisure to regard him? How will ye be able to answer this at last?
How comes it to pass, that ye put off things of this nature with some slight
and short Endeavors, and then return to your wonted Coldness, and Formality,
or Indifferency again? Have ye no where thus to trifle but upon the brink of
Everlasting Ruin? Know ye not that the Flames of Hell are every Moment ready to
catch hold upon you? Surely it becomes you to stir as for your Lives: Do ye not
tremble to think how dreadful your Case would be, if the blessed God should
swear in his Wrath that his holy Spirit (whom ye have so often affronted and
grieved) should strive no more with you? How can you read without Terror such
Passages as these in Scripture, Prove. 1.24, etc. Because I have called, and ye
refused, etc. I also will laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear
comes. -- They shall call upon me, but I will not answer. Ezekiel. 24.13. Because
I haave purged thee, (that is used Means in order to thy Reformation) and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy Filthiness any more, till I
have caused my Fury, to rest upon thee. Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust, let him
be unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still, etc. See also
Heb. 10.26, 27, 28, 29. etc.

Therefore I say again, it is no time to trifle, unless ye be prepared to
undergo the Fury of the Almighty, who will certainly revenge the Injuries which
have been done to his Patience and Long-suffering.

CHAP. VII.
Reproof to those Persons who wrong their own Souls by presumptuous Hopes of
Heaven, while they are utter Strangers to this great work of Grace, whereby
they should be prepared for it. Showing how vain, sinful, dangerous and
unnatural it is for them thus to deceive themselves.

THus we have considered several Inferences of Truth arising from the Doctrine.
Let us now proceed to observe what further use may be made of it.

And here it is obvious, at first sight, that this Doctrine is also profitable
for Reproof and Correction, (...) ye have already seen it is for Instruction,
or the Information of your Judgments.

Well then, is it so that none can come to Heaven till they be prepared, and
wrought for it by the Power of divine Grace? Certainly those Persons are
greatly to be reproved who flatter themselves with the Hope of Eternal
Happiness, tho they be utter Strangers (...) this renewing Change, this great
preparing work: And O how great is the number of such Persons! Shou^^ ye
converse with all ye meet in the Streets, Marke^ places, or in more Solemn
Assemblies, and enquire (...) them concerning this Matter, would they not all
(...) a Man tell you, that they hope to be saved; excep^ perhaps some few poor
trembling Christians, who scar^ know how to think any thing well and
comfortably concerning themselves: But as for the loose Generality, and formal
empty Professors, which make up far the greater Number, it is likely some of
them might take it as an Affront to have their Hopes of Heaven called in
question: How common an Asseveration is it [as I hope to be saved!] O Sirs, if
Salvation was as common as the hopes of it are, we would no more say that the
Gate is strait, or the Way narrow, but rather that they are wide indeed: Nor
would we say few find it, but few miss it.

It Is the saying of a great Divine, -- For my own part if I had but one Sermon
to preach while I lived, I think this should be it, to persuade down all your
ungrounded hopes of Heaven; not to leave you there in Despair, but that ye may
hope upon better Grounds, which will never deceive you. [Mr. Baxt. Saints Rest.]

I have showed you already how common it is for Men thus to abuse themselves
with presumptuous hopes of Heaven: Give me leave also to tell you how vain,
sinful, dangerous, and how unnatural it is so to do: And by consequence how
justly such Persons deserve to be reproved.

First, It Is a vain thing for Men thus to deceive, and befool themselves. Their
hopes of Salvation are lying Vanities, if we consider,

Either the Nature or Duration of them.

1. As to their Nature. They are mere Creatures of their own Imagination (and
yet deserve not to be called entia rationis neither, for they are most highly
irrational) empty Appearances, having no solid Consistency in them, no firm
Foundation to stand upon, Sparks of their own kindling. How fitly are such
hopes compared to a Spiders Web, Job 8.13, 14. The Men are asleep in Sin, and
lo, these are their Dreams! Or if ye will, they are distracted, not yet come to
themselves, Luke 15.17. And these are the ravings of their distempered
Imaginations: And all that Comfort which they get by them is no better than
Delusion, and Imposture: They put a Cheat upon themselves, and hate to be told
of it.

2. These hopes are vain as to their Duration, Job 20.5. The Triumphing of the
Wicked is short, and the Joy of the Hypocrite but for a Moment. His Hope shall
perish. And as it is compared to the Spider's house [for so it is in the
Hebrew, (...):] So it is said in the next words, he shall lean upon his House,
but it shall not stand; he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure, Job
8.14, 15. The hopes of the Ungodly meet with frequent Interruptions in this
Life; Fears, Doubts; and misgiving Thoughts do often disturb them in despite
of their carnal Security: The Approaches of Death shake them yet more. But
however, the first Moment of their entrance into Eternity puts an end to their
foolish Presumptions for ever. Job 27.8. What is the hope of the Hypocrite when
God takes away his Soul? Chap. 11.20. The Eyes of the Wicked shall fail, and
they shall not escape, and their Hopes shall be as the giving up of the Ghost.
Chap. 18.5. The Light of the Wicked shall ^e put out, and the Spark of his Fire
shall not shine. Thus ye see they trust in Vanity, feed upon Wind, and lie down
in Sorrow at last.

Secondly, Their hopes are sinful. There is a great deal of Impiety and
Wickedness in them. All the Attributes of God are affronted, and in some sort
denied by such groundless Presumptions.

1. These impious hopes are utterly inconsistent with those Apprehensions which
we ought to have concerning the Holiness and Purity of the Divine Nature. He is
glorious in HOLINESS; the Foolish shall not stand in his sight, he is of purer
Eyes than to behold Iniquity: He hates the workers thereof.

To imagine therefore that impure unrenewed Souls, should be admitted into the
blessed Presence of God, and partake of the heavenly Joys, without being first
wrought and prepared for it by sanctifying Grace: To suppose this, I say, would
be to deny the Divine Holiness, or to obscure the Luster and Glory of it: Yea,
and to think that God is altogether such an one as themselves, Psalm. 50.21. O
Sirs, were ye but duly sensible of his infinite Purity in whose sight the
Heavens are not clean, Job 15.15. it would make you cry out, Who can stand
before this HOLY Lord God! Or to abhor your selves, and repent in Dust and
Ashes, as a far better Man did, Job 42.6. Or with the Evangelical Prophet to
cry our, Woe is me, for I am undone; because I am a Man of unclean Lips, -- for
mine Eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 6.5. This would quickly
drive you unto Christ, that under the shadow of his Wings ye might be safe.

2. The Truth of God is disowned and contradicted by these daring Presumptions.
How great a matter does God make of his Veracity: Psalm. 138.2. I will praise
thy Name for -- thy Truth, for thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name.
But, O what light account do these Self-deceivers make thereof! tho nothing is
more earnestly, frequently and plainly inculcated in Scripture, than the
necessity of Holiness to fit Men for Heaven: Tho they are told that the Flock
of Christ is but a little Flock; and that few find the way that leads to Life:
And that the Workers of Iniquity shall be doomed to depart from the blessed
Presence of God for ever: Yet they go on in carnal Security, and hope still, as
if all these Warnings were but idle Tales: Thus they impute Falsehood to the God
of Truth, He that believes not God, has made him a Liar, 1 John 5.10. Can
there be more horrid Blasphemy then this?

3. The inflexible Justice and Righteousness of God are contemned and slighted
by such Persons. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Will he justify
the Wicked? No, no; they that do so, are an A^omination to him, Prove. 17.15.
Tho he be merciful and gracious, long-suffering, etc. yet he will by no means
clean the guilty, Exodus 34.6, 7. It is a Righteous thing with him to recompense
Vengeance to the Ungodly, and in so doing, he vindicates his own Holiness,
Truth, and Government. God that is holy, shall be sanctified in Righteousness,
Isa. 5.16. Has he made Laws so just and good, and will he not keep up the
honor of them, and see that they be duly executed? He needs not rule the World
by Deceit, his Threatenings, as well as his Promises, are true; and the final
Judgment will quickly convince the World that so it is. The Law which he has
given us, is a Rule to live by, and to be judged by. Therefore as it is just, so
it is certain, that the impious Hopes of wicked Men will be baffled and
disappointed at last.

I might add, that the Patience, Goodness and Long-suffering of God are
despised by such Persons, who wilfully continue in Sin, and yet think to escape
his righteous Judgment, Romans 2.3, 4.

Thirdly, Such groundless Hopes are exceeding dangerous to themselves and
others.

1. To themselves, as might easily be proved by many Particulars; I will
mention only two.

(1.) Hereby they are hardened in their impenitent unregenerate State. These
blind Presumptions are so many strong holds of Satan in their Souls, whereby he
keeps Possession of them. As I may, at least allude to that, Luke 11.21. When a
strong Man armed keeps his palace, his Goods are in peace. A false Peace
indeed, maintained and cherished by the Father of Lies, who is all the while
carrying on his Design against them is the Dark, and when the Vail is drawn
aside, will readily let them know that they have lost, and he has got the Game.
Thus he blinds their Minds, and makes sport with them, (as the Philistines did
with Samso^ when they had put out his Eyes) leads them Captive at his will.
These vain Hopes hinder the due Efficacy of the Means of Grace upon them: Tho
we tell them of their Danger over and over, with never so much plainness, yet
they foolishly conceit that their Case is safe enough: And this puts a stop to
their further Endeavors; and so we are forced to leave them where we found
them, or worse; flattering themselves, either that they are regenerate already,
or else that they may be saved without so much ado. Those Convictions of the
Sinfulness and Misery of their present State, which should help to prepare them
for Christ, are by this Means prevented. Mat. 9.12. They that be whole, need
not a Physician, etc. Thus it was with the Scribes and Pharisees; Are we blind
also? Hence our Lord assures us that Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom
of God before such, Mat. 21.31, 32. viz. as being more likely to be brought to
Conviction and Humiliation than those Self-conceited Pretenders were. Isa.
44.20. Hefeedeth on Ashes; a deceived Heart has turned him aside, that he
cannot deliver his Soul, nor say, is there not a Lie in my Right Hand?

(2.) This unhappy Presumption makes their final Ruin more dreadful and amazing
when it comes, Mat. 7.26, 27. He that hears these Sayings of mine, and does
them not, shall be likened unto a Foolish Man, which built his House upon the
Sand: And the Rain descended, etc. and it fell, and great was the fall of it. A
great fall indeed, when a Man who in his expectations was as high as Heaven,
shall in reality find himself as low as Hell. This must needs be an astonishing
Disappointment: And so much the more, because the Matter will then be past
redress: O with what Anguish and Bitterness will they then cry out! Alas, are
all our hopes of Heaven come to this! how will Conscience wrack and torment
them for having slighted all the Warnings which were given them? How will the
great Deceiver triumph and insult over them, when they are past hope and help
for ever?
Tho the Destruction of all wicked Men will be terrible; yet that of
Self-deceiving Hypocrites will be most surprising, because least expected. Isa.
33.14. The Sinners in Zion are afraid; Fearfulness has surprised the
Hypocrites: Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who a^onest us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings, or with the Burnings of Eternity,
[(...)] 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. For when they shall say, Peace and Safety; then sudden
Destruction comes upon them.

Then will they find to their endless Confusion, that there is no Peace to the
wicked; tho before they would never be persuaded to believe it; they could not
endure sound Doctrine, it was too strict for them, they had itching Ears, Isa.
30.10. Speak unto us smooth things. But their Righteous Judge will not flatter
them. The Flames of Hell will confute their Folly. Lo this is the Portion of
them who forget God; thus shall their hopes fall and rise no more. So dangerous
are their Presumptions to themselves.

2. They are also dangerous to others, who from hence take encouragement to
cherish the like groundless Hopes. Thus they mutually harden one another
against God, as if they had made a Covenant with Death, and an Agreement with
Hell. For they have made Lies their Refuge, and under Falsehood have they hid
themselves, Isa. 28.15. As Noise and Company puts greater Boldness into Armies,
than there is in single Person alone; so is it here. As if God would spare them
because of their Multitudes, tho his Holiness. Truth, and Justice are engaged
to the contrary. How should such Men prosper? Job. 9.4. Why, say they, we take
no greater liberty, nor hope better for our selves, that our Neighbors do:
What, shall none be saved but; a few strict precise Persons, who pretend to
greater Holiness and Diligence than all about them? God forbid. Thus they go on.

But stay a little, and consider the matter as you go* If ye be in the wrong,
it is not your following a Multitude therein that will serve to excuse you.
Have ye never read that Christ expects his Disciples should do more than
others? Mat. 5.47. And that he has chosen them out of the World, and therefore
they are not of it, nor must be conformed to it? Know therefore that those very
Persons, who are most earnest and diligent in the way to Heaven, are withal
most sensible in how many things they fall short of their Duty; and least prone
to flatter themselves with presumptuous Hopes. And are ye they that shall
escape in your ^gross Negligence, and vain Confidence? No such matter.

(...) Fourthly, and Lastly. It is very unnatural thus to sooth up your selves
with vain Hopes. The Principle of Self preservation is most deeply implanted in
human Nature, and accordingly is wont to take place in all other Cases but
this, where yet there is most need of it. If your Lives, Liberties, Estates,
Reputations, etc. were in danger, how thankful would ye be to any that would
warn you of that Danger, and help you to avoid it? But while your Souls are
exposed to the utmost hazard, ye cannot endure to be told the truth of the
case. They hate him that reproves in the Gate! And thus they play about the
sides of the Pit, and so drop in one after another, without so much as thinking
seriously whither they are going, (as Flies about the Flame of a Candle, till
it catch hold upon them) O more than brutish Stupidity! Is it not enough that
Satan will do his worst to deceive you, but must ye also favor the Deceit, and
take part with your Enemy against your selves? While your Friends stand by and
pity you, but cannot help you, because ye are resolved to have your own way.

Were not your Understandings made to enquire after Truth? Is it not natural to
them so to do? Why then do ye keep them in an affected Ignorance of those
things for which they were principally given you? And all this, while the Light
shines round about you, tho ye close your Eyes against it; and that in a matter
of everlasting consequence, even the One thing needful. It is not necessary
that you be richer or greater in the World, more honored or respected by
others; or that ye fare more deliciously than your Neighbors: But it is highly
necessary that your Peace be made with God through Christ, and the Diseases of
your Souls healed by the Grace of the Spirit, or else you are ruined for ever
to all Intents and Purposes. How unnatural a thing is it to lay out your selves
so earnestly in providing for the Flesh, while the better part, even the
immortal Soul, is betrayed, starved and undone.

Have ye not been told already, that your foolish Presumptions cannot be
supported, except the very nature of things be overturned? Because Holiness is
essentially included in the true Happiness of the rational Creature: And
therefore to expect the one, without the other, is to separate a thing from it
self: As if a Man should put out his own Eyes that he might see more clearly:
Would not this be very natural think ye?

Ye see then how vain, sinful, dangerous and unn^tural it is, thus to abuse
your selves. I have considered these Particulars distinctly, tho indeed they
cannot really be divided, being most intimately connected together, and
involved one in the Nature of another; for Vanity in a reasonable Creature is
sinful: If idle Words must be accounted for, to be sure idle Hopes will not
pass free. Again, that which is sinful must needs be dangerous, nor does any
thing else deserve to be called dangerous but Sin; for it is this that puts a
Sting into all Dangers whatsoever: But he that walks uprightly, walks surely.
And then again, to run wilfully upon so much Vanity, Sin, and Danger, is
certainly unnatural, if Self-Destruction deserve to be so called. And so it
appears, how greatly those Persons are to be reproved, who thus cheat and
impose upon themselves.

Object. But some will be ready enough to say, That this is strange kind of
Doctrine, and that it is like, 1. To drive Men to Despair. And so, 2. to
distract them. And then at last, 3. to break their Hearts. To which I answer.

Answ. It may perhaps be strange to you, (and so much the more is the pity,
that ye should be no better acquainted with your Bibles:) But it is not the less
true for all that. As for the rest of the Objection,

1. Ye ought not to despair of finding Mercy with God through Christ upon
Gospel-Terms: The infinite Goodness of God, and the sufficiency of Christ's
Satisfaction are not to be doubted of; as great Sinners as you have been
pardoned: And many also have perished who never sinned at the rate that ye have
done. Take that along with you; as the former Consideration may keep you from
sinful Despair, let the latter keep you from Presumption.

Let me therefore tell you withal, that you ought to despair of being saved in
any other way, but what God had appointed. He is merciful indeed, but he is
also just and true; Except ye repent ye shall perish. The wicked shall be
turned into Hell. If ye live after the Flesh ye shall die, etc. Do not think
that God will falsify his Word, to justify your Presumptions: Will ye slight
his Mercy, and then complain of him as unmerciful?

As to the 2d. Have not such Persons the plain Symptoms of Distraction upon
them already? Are they not laying violent Hands upon themselves? How can they
be madder than they are, and yet they must not be told of it for fear of
distracting or disturbing them! That is, we must not use our Endeavors to
bring them to their Wits again.

As for the Third. The Sacrifice of God is a broken Spirit, Psalm. 51. Your
Hearts must be broken, that is, thoroughly humbled for your past Folly, in order
to your future Reformation. You must be weary and heavy laden under a Sense of
your Sins, that Christ may give you rest; broken, that he may heal you. The
whole need not a Physician.

CHAP. VIII.
How much it concerns us to examine our selves, whether we be wrought for Heaven
or no. Sundry Motives to excite us to this necessary Duty.

WE now proceed to an use of Examination. Is it so, that none can come to
Heaven till they be wrought and prepared for it by special Grace? Surely it is
high time to turn your Thoughts inward, and to stir up Conscience to do its
Office, methinks ye should in this have been beforehand with me: I would be
loath to suppose that ye should have heard all this, which has been said under
the foregoing Heads, concerning the Nature and Necessity of this great Work,
with so little Self-Application, as not to have put the Question to your own
Hearts before now.

Am I thus wrought upon? Have I experienced such a Change in the temper of my
Spirit Godward as may encourage me to hope that I am past from Death to Life,
disposed and inclined to be happy in the ^^joymen^ of God? etc. A weighty
Question indeed! it is all one as if you enquited whether ye were Heirs of
Heaven, or within a step of Hell; Children of God or of the Devil. Or, as if a
Line should be drawn to separate between the living and the dead in this
Congregation: On the one side, lo, here are so many Persons wrought upon and
quickened by the Spirit of God, who have the Principles and Seed of Eternal
Life abiding in them.

On the other, lo, here are so many stupid, carnal wretched Souls, under the
just Wrath and Indignation of the Almighty, dead in Trespasses and Si^s; liable
every Moment to the severe Strokes of avenging Justice.

It Is not to be wondered at, if secret misgivings of Heart, and consciousness
of Guilt, cause an exceeding Averseness in unregenerate Men to this work of
Self-examination, and make them even afraid of conversing with themselves: As
desperate Bankrupts who dread to look into their Books of Account, being
sensible that Matters are ill with them.

And it is also sad, that there should be room for such a Question as this, or
at least any great difficulty in resolving it. What! ye that have so long sat
under the Means of Grace, and had these things so often and so earnestly
pressed upon you, and not yet wrought upon, not yet turned to God? This is a
sad Case: yet (I fear) no sadder than true. O happy Congregation if all, yea or
most in it, were thus prepared and fitted for Heaven! however, be your case
what it will, it is necessary ye know it.

Therefore in handling this Use, I shall,

I. Lay down some Motives briefly to excite you to this Duty of
Self-Examination. II. Give some Directions for the more successful Management
thereof. III. Offer some Questions which ye may propose to your selves, in
order to the trial of your State.
I begin with the first of these.

Motive 1. Some competent Knowledge of your Spi^itual Estate and Condition is
attainable. I might have spoken higher, but chose to proceed by Steps. Ye may
indeed meet with some, who, to excuse their ^^n Ignorance or Sloth in this
Matter, will tell you ^^at ^o Man can know whether he be in a State of Grace,
or no; but that we must trust God with our Souls, and hope the best: And true
it is that we must trust God with our Souls; but it is also as true, that he
has so far entrusted us with them, as to command our utmost Care and Diligence
about them: And he will quickly call us to an account, how we have discharged
our Trust; what we have done with his Creature? And if we be found to have
betrayed our Souls by negligence and carnal Security, it will not serve our
turn to say that we trusted him with them, unless ye can suppose that our
Presumption should justify our Carelessness; that is, one Sin excuse another.

I tell* you therefore, ye are not left under a necessitated unavoidable
Ignorance in this Point. Your unacquaintance with your own Souls, as to their
State Godward, is wilful and affected. I am not putting you upon
Impossibilities. Others have attained not (...) to some competent Knowledge, but
even to a certainty (...) the case; and that both ways. Thus Sinners are
us^ally prepared for converting Grace, viz. by a tho^o^ conviction of the
Sinfulness and Misery of their unregenerate State: And on the other hand, many
good Christians have arrived to a comfortable, quie^^^^ (and some even to a
transporting) assurance of the^ saving special Interest in the Love of God
through Christ, and consequently of their Right to Heav^^ and that by the same
Means and Helps which are vouchsafed, or offered to you.

Motive 2. To this end God has given us the Fac^ty or Power of Self-Reflexion,
that we might exami^^ our Hearts and Lives, and so pass a right Judgme^^
concerning our spiritual Estate. Prove. 20.27. The Sp^^rit of Man is the Candle
of the Lord, searching all (...) inward parts of the Belly. Conscience is set
up as Light in the Soul, not to be extinguished or put under (...) Bushel, but
to observe and try our selves by (...) What Man ^^^weth the things of, a Man,
(...) Spirit of Man which is ^n him* Were it not for^^ Self reflective Power,
we should not be capable of moral Government in a rational way; how should we
rectify what is amiss, or enjoy the Comforts of sincere Obedience, but by
examining both our hearts and Lives?

Therefore I say, Conscience is a Witness, a J^dg, ye^ and a Executioner too:
It not only bears Testimony, but passes Sentence, and inflicts Punishment, or
y^e^^^^ Refreshment and Peace, and so gives Men the fore lasts, of Heaven or
Hell while they are on En^th. Praemium ante praemium is or praejudic^^m s^t^ri
judicii. 1 John 3.20, 21. If our Heart condemn us, God is greater than our
Heart, and knows all things! Beloved, if our Heart condemn us not, then have
we confidence toward God. Must ye not own such a Faculty? Verily Conscience
would fly in your Faces, if ye should deny its Power.

Motive 3. Consider that God has given you a sure Rule to try your selves by,
even his holy Word, by which he himself will try you at last.

It Is the nature of a Law to constitute what shall be due from us, and what to
us; a Rule to live by, and by which we must be judged.

Heb. 4.12. The Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper^ than any two* edged
Sword, -- and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart. (Here we
may behold the Comeliness or Deformiries of (...) own Souls; as a man does his
natural Face in a Glass. We need not say, who shall ascend into Heaven? The
Word is high u^, whereby we must search our selves: And whether we will attend
to it or no, we must stand or fall by it at last. Joh. 12.48. The Word that I
have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last Day. 'This is one of those
Books that shall be opened, and the small Sentence will pass according to what
is written therein; Rev. 20, 12. They shall be judged according to their Works;
the Matter of Fact being recorded in their Book [Conscience]; the Matter of
Right in God's Law; and the Conclusion in his Decree. [As Mr. Baxter upon the
place.]

Motive 4. We are expressly commanded, thus to examine and try our selves; yea it
is mentioned as a great Absurdity that a Christian should be ignorant of
himself. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove
your own selves: Know ye not your own selves? etc. As if he had said, Is there
any thing nearer to you than your selves? any thing that ye are more concerned
to know than your spiritual Estate? that is, whether Christ be in you or no.
Are the ways to Heaven and Hell so much alike, that a Man cannot know whither
he is going if he would? If the Ends be so vastly different, surely there must
be a proportionable difference in the Ways that lead to them.

Motive 5. Ye have comfortable Encouragement to expect the help of the holy
Spirit in this work of Self-Examination.

Suppose ye be yet in an unregenerate State; it is true ye have then no full
proper Covenant-Right to the Influences of the Spirit, yet ye have great reason
to hope, that (since he has been often striving with you, to bring you to a
sight and sense of your spiritual Concerns) he will not deny the help of his
Grace, if ye set your selves in good earnest to the Work, by the assistance
already received. Prove. 1.23. T^ru you at my Reproof; behold, I will pour out
my Spirit unto you, etc. Now it is the work of the Spirit to lead Men into their
own Hearts, to convince them of Sin, and to quicken, illuminate, and draw,
dead, dark, disaffected Souls to the love of God and Holiness.

But if ye be already converted; ye have then a Covenant-Right to the help of
the Spirit; ye have f^ll and prop^^ Promises to plead in this Matter; he is the
Spirit of Christ your Head; and therefore all the living Members, by virtue of
their Relation unto Christ, are also nearly related to, and interested in, that
Holy Spirit, whole Office it is to refresh and comfort those Souls whom he has
first renewed by his Grace, to discover to them the Grace which he has given
them, to witness with their Spirits that they are the Children of God; and so
to enable them to rejoice therein.

Motive 6. Think well, how sad and wretched a case it is to be utterly in the
dark as to your spiritual State. Ye cannot tell what a Day may bring forth,
Prove. 27.1. For ought ye know ye may be in Hell the next hour; because ye are
uncertain whether God be your Friend or your Enemy; whether ye have any saving
Interest in Christ; whether ye be sanctified by the Spirit, or not. Is not this
a woeful Case, when thou lie down, when thou risest up, when thou go out or
come in, thou know not but that the very next Moment the divine Fury may
rest upon thee! Can thou think of Death, and not tremble, and of Judgment,
and not be astonished? When thou art invited to a Funeral, how can thou
forbear thinking, that it will quickly be thine ^wn Case? and yet thou art
ignorant what will become of thy immortal Soul at that Day: Methinks this
should make thee a Terror to thy self, and to all that are about thee.

Motive 7. Consider how impatient thou art of being in suspense, or at
uncertainty in Matters of far less consequence. If thou have but a Lawsuit in
Hand, how uneasy till thou know the Issue; if a Purchase to make, how careful
to see that the Title be good, and the Conveyances firm and sure: If thou be
taken with any threatening Distemper, how earnest and sollicitous art thou to
know what the Physician thinks of thy Distemper. Pray Sir, What think you? Did
you ever see any in such a Case before? Did they recover? Do you hope the
Distemper may go off? But O, how few are there that express any such Care about
their Souls! how few that will come to a Minister and enquire of him, O Sir!
What shall I do to be saved? I fear I am not yet wrought for Heaven, I find my
Heart dead to spiritual Things, but vigorous and sprightly in its Pursuits
after worldly Vanities; I find I am out of my Element, when engaged in
Religious Duties: What think you? Is there any Hope? O help me speedily; lest
Death overtake me unprepared for it! O how seldom do we meet with any that show
such a concern for their Souls as this?

It were easy to heap up many more such Considerations as these, to excite you
to this necessary work of Self-Reflection: I shall only add as follows, without
the Formality of making distinct Heads.

Think with your selves, how common a thing it is for men to be mistaken about
their spiritual Estate; and withal how dangerous it is; remember, God himself
will quickly judge you, and the way to escape the Severity of his Judgment is to
enter into Judgment with your selves. 1 Cor. 11.31. If we would judge ourselves,
we should not be judged.

Moreover, either ye are thus wrought for Heaven by renewing Grace, or not. If
ye be, the closest t^^al will greatly refresh and comfort you, by discovering
that the work is already done: Then may ye comfortably go on with the remaining
part of Duty, which is yet before you; ye may come with boldness to the Throne
of Grace, as Children to a Father: Ye may read or hear the Word of God with
Joy, when the great Promises of the Gospel are all your own: Ye may come with
Confidence to the Lord's Table, when ye know that Christ himself, and all his
saving Benefits are yours: Ye may meditate delightfully upon the heavenly
Inheritance, when ye know that ye have a right to it. This will support you
under all the Sufferings of the present Life, and will make them appear light
Afflictions indeed: And besides all this, it will much conduce to the credit of
your Profession, by enabling you to go on cheerfully in the ways of Religion;
as Men that do not repent of their Choice, not despair of their Cause or of
their God.

But on the other hand, if ye be unregenerate; Self-Reflection is one of the
first Steps in order to your Recovery. Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my Ways, and
turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies. So did the Prodigal when he came to
himself, Luke 15.17. When once Men begin to be sollicitous about the Concerns
of their Souls, and to enquire, What have we done? What are we doing? Whither
are we going? How shall we escape the Wrath to come? This looks hopefully
indeed; tho ye must not stop here neither, nor take up with Convictions instead
of Conversion. However, think not that your Wounds are like to be cured,
without being searched.

But if through a stupid unconcernedness as to the Affairs of your Souls, ye
think it not worth the while to give your selves all this trouble, tho in the
mean time, ye are eagerly set upon this present World, (as the common Case is)
I can then tell you what your Case is, without any further enquiry; ye may
spare the Labor of searching whether ye be regenerate or no; for to deal
plainly with you, it is certain ye are not. Your brutish ^cupidity is evidence
enough to prove that ye are asleep, yea dead in Sin, condemned already, and
that the Wrath of God abides on you: In a word, as the Lord lives, there is
but a step between you and Hell.

But yet a step there is; your case is not quite desperate, tho it be very
dangerous: I must say of you, as of those Patients whose Condition seems very
hazardous, the Event is uncertain; but while their's Life their's Hope. Some
have recovered* who seemed to be in as ill Circumstances as you; but let me
tell you many to one have perished.

Even so is here; some have been converted and saved, who were once as dead and
stupid about the Concerns of their Souls as ye are: But many to one have been
lost for ever. Therefore to flatter you in such a condition, might contribute
much to your ruin, which I am not willing to do.

Therefore I tell you, there is just so much hope of your Salvation, as there
is of your awakening from this carnal Security, and so repenting and turning to
God, and no more.

CHAP. IX.
Directions for the more successful management of this great Duty of
Self-Examination.

HAving laid down the foregoing Motives, to excite you to this necessary Duty
of Self-Reflection, and showed you of how ill signification it is for Men to be
unconcerned and indifferent about the State of their Souls: I now come to give
some Directions, for the help of such as are sollicitous to know whether they
be wrought for Heaven or no?

Direction 1. Take care that ye be impartial in your search, that your
Judgments be not perverted or biased either way, by fear or favor; but that
ye may go according to evidence. The greatest Danger indeed is on the one side,
viz. Lest Pride or Self-Love make you judge too favorably concerning your
selves. But here remember, that such a mistake may prove your ruin: It Is
necessary ye know the worst of your case while there is yet hope of redress. Ye
have already heard what Multitudes there are that perish by Presumption: To
think falsely that ye are in the way to Heaven will never bring you thither; nor
will it cure the Diseases of your Souls, to suppose that ye are well enough
already; such Ravings are a sad Symptom that your noblest Faculties are
impaired and distracted, and therefore that your Distempers are so much the
more dangerous. But I need not enlarge upon this, only remember, that God will
quickly try all over again; and whatever your present Judgment be of your
selves, his final Judgment will be according to Righteous^ess.

On the other Hand, some are so timorous and dejected in spirit, that they know
not how to believe any thing that is good and comfortable concerning
themselves: So far are they from presumptious Self-Conceit, that they run into
a quite contrary extreme; and standing in their own Light, cannot discern the
Evidences of their Sincerity. Fain they would be assured that their Hearts are
right with God, but have not strength of Spirit enough to conclude that it is
so, through mere Fear, lest it should prove otherwise: They vehemently wish it,
but cannot persuade themselves to believe it; still thinking it is too good News
to be true. Like Old Jacob, when they told him that Joseph was alive, his Heart
fainted, for he believed them not, Genesis 45.26. or as the poor Jews, when the
Lord turned again the Captivity of Zion, they were like them that dream, Psalm.
126.1. They could scarce believe their own Senses and Understandings in the
Matter. Even so it is with many poor, melancholy, doubting Christians; they
desire to be sincere, but fear that they are not so: And those Evidences of
true Grace which to another would be discernable, to them are not so. Now, I
say, tho such Persons be safe in the Hands of Christ, notwithstanding all their
Doubts and Jealousies concerning themselves, and so their mistake cannot prove
destructive, as in the former Case: Yet it is of consequence ill enough, both
in point of Duty, and Comfort. Prudence will reach us to be wary and cautious
in so great an Enquiry, to suspect our own Deceitful Hearts, and to watch them
narrowly lest they should betray us to vain Hopes; and Humility will teach us
to entertain low Thoughts of our selves: But still it is unnatural to shut our
Eyes against that Light which should refresh and comfort us; and unthankful to
overlook or deny the Richos of Grace which have been laid out upon us. Rear as
well as Favor, is an Enemy to right and impartial Judgment.

Direct. 2. This Enquiry must be managed with a great deal of Care* and
Seriousness. It Is a Matter of Life and Death that is before you, and therefore
ye had need have your Wits about you. A mistake on the one Hand may destroy
your Souls forever: On the other, it may greatly obstruct your spiritual
Comfort and growth in Grace. Therefore the most sober judicious Consideration
is here necessary. Call in your wandering Thoughts, keep them close to the
work, let them not give you the slip, lest they grow masterless and unruly:
Commu^e with your Hearts, and let you Spirit make diligent search, Psalm. 77.6.
There Is no trifling in Matters of this Nature; it is not a few slighty transient
thoughts that will serve the turn, the Principles of Grace lie deep in the
Soul, ye must search for them as for hid Treasure, if you would discover them:
And there are depths of Wickedness too, which, must in like manner be searched
after with great Care and Strictness (...) if ye would pass a right Judgment of
your own Case, ye must excite your sluggish. Hearts to the work; and if your
Thoughts fly off from the Business, let Reason interpose its Authority,
otherwise a thousand Impertinences will intrude upon you, and so ye will be
left in as great darkness and uncertainty, in reference to your spiritual
Estate, as ye were in before.

In a word, intensness of thought is needful in this work, that so nothing may
escape your observation, which might any way conduce to clear up the Point in
Hand.

Direct. 3. See that ye proceed with due order and method in this Business;
otherwise ye w^^ confound, perplex and entangle your selves to no purpose.
Difficult Cases are not to be resolved without an orderly Proceedure of
Thoughts about them. Confusion is the great Enemy to all true Knowledge of what
kind soever. Take care that ye do not begin at the wrong end first; let
Preliminaries be well adjusted, before ye come to the Point it self. Under this
Head, take your work in the following order.

1. Understand aright what you are to enquire after, lest ye mistake the
Question. The thing to be known, is, whether ye be so far wrought for Heaven,
that if it should please God immediately to require your Souls of you, it would
go well with them in another State: That is, whether the condition of your
Souls be such, that come Life, come Death, they are safe? Now here ^^ls plain
that ye may easily deceive your selves, by stating the Question too high, or
too low.

If ye only enquire, whether there be any good in you which has a tendency
toward this great work of Regeneration, ye then fall short in the Point; for I
have told you before, that there may be very deep Convictions of the necessity
of this renewing Change, yea and some saint Essays, Resolutions, or Endeavors
toward it, which are only the Effects of common Grace, and if they be rested
in, do as certainly end in Destruction, as down right Profaneness does.

Again, there are various Degrees and Measures of Grace among the People of God
themselves: All that are sincere are not of the same stature or standing; some
have received more Talents, a greater stock of Grace than others. If therefore
ye enquire immediately whether ye have attained to such or such Measures, to
which some others (who perhaps are above you) have arrived, ye then lay a Snare
for your own Comfort and Peace by carrying the Question too high at first. Your
present Business is to examine whether your Graces be sincire; as for the degres
of them, let that be enquired into afterward. It Is likely ye are not so good as
the best, nor so bad as the worst; the Question is whether of the two ye are
more like to in the main. Do not ^h^^cy your selves Saints, because ye are not
so vile (...) the vilest: For among unregenerate Persons themselves all are not
alike scandalous and hardened in Sin: No^ yet must ye conclude that ye are
Graceless, because some others our-st^ip you in Holiness. There is a^ infant as
well as a more strong and confirmed State of Grace.

2. Study well the Rule by which ye are to try your selves. Search the
Scriptures, to the Law and to the Testimony; by this ye must try the Spirits
and the Doctrines of other Men: How much more nearly does it concern you to
examine your own Hearts and Lives thereby? Acquaint your selves well with the
Tenor of the Covenant of Grace; upon what Terms Pardon and Life are offered to
poor Sinners; what is essentia^^ necessary to the Being of a sincere Christian,
as such; and what is further requisite to his Establishment, Comfort and
Well-being. In the sacred Records ye may find the Nature of those Graces, which
qualify and fit Men for Eternal Life; and also the Examples of many, who are
gone to Heaven before us, what their Hearts were set upon; how they lived, and
how they died: here ye may learn what ye ought to be; where to place your
Affections; how to regulate your Lives, that ye may be happy. Ye may see the
Characters by which the Heirs of Heaven must be known; and also the opposite
Description of those who shall be excluded from that Felicity. He is unfit to
be a Judge, who is ignorant of the Law or Rule of Judgment. It therefore much
concerns you, to converse much with the Holy Scriptures, and to understand the
true spiritual sense and meaning of them, which are able to make you wise to
Salvation. From hence ye must take your Measures, in judging of the Sincerity
of your Faith, Repentance, Love, Obedience, etc. that so ye may not take up
with the empty Name of Grace, instead of the thing it self, as too many through
Sloth and affected Ignorance do.

And here ye must remember, that the Commandment of God is exceeding broad,
extending not only to the Government of our outward Actions and Behaviors, h^^
also to the inward Principles from whence those Actions flow, viz. all the
Faculties and Powers of our Souls, Understanding, Will, Imagination, Affection,
Sense, Appetite, Habits, Dispositions, etc. must be minded and governed by the
Rule, and that in all circumstances, at all times, and in all places, without
exception. The Tree must be made good that the Fruit may be so. God has
imprinted his holy Image upon his Word, and makes use of it as an Instrument to
work a suitable Impression upon us.

3. Ye are next to examine strictly your own Hearts and Lives, and compare them
with the Rule, or try them by it; remember I am now speaking only in general,
to prepare you for those particular Questions which are designed as a further
help for the Discovery of your Case.

Only at present let me tell you, ye are not to judge of the State of your Souls
by what is unusual and extraordinary with you, but by the habitual bent of your
Hearts, and the stated ordinary course and tenor of your Lives. An Hypocrite
may have some transient Affections and Emotions of Soul toward spiritual
Things, and some seeming Fits of Religion for a while; and yet afterward
return with the Dog to his vomit again. Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and
did many things. Those on the Rock heard the Word and anon with Joy received
it, but had not root in themselves. Mat. 13. Observe here, a living Principle
of Grace is a rooted, Principle, fixed in the Heart, and there kept alive, by
the same Power which implanted it. It Is said of him that is born of God, that
his Seed remains in ^^in, Joh. 3 9. In short, the Will is the Man, and the
Sincerity of its Resolutions must be known by suitable Endeavors, and the
sincerity of those Endeavors by their Success: Of which more hereafter. Or if
ye take ^t the other way, by the main drift and course of your lives, ye may
know what are the prevailing habits and ^^spositions of your Souls, (for Men
will act according to their predominant Habits) and by these ye may know your
State, that is, by reducing all to the Scripture-Rule, as has been said
already: Thus must ye try and judge your selves.

4. Ye are then to proceed to Sentence, which i^ nothing else but the
Conclusion that must be drawn from the foregoing Premises, viz. the Law and
Fact compared together: Here again keep your hearts close to the Work, and
bring it to an issue. Sooner or later this must be done, and the sooner the
better: If upon a through Enquiry thou find thy self to be yet in (...)
unregenerate State, pass sentence accordingly; it will signify nothing to put
it off. Be thy Case better o^ worse, labor to know it, and come to a
Conclusion, what it is.

5. Lastly, see that thy Soul be affected with the discovery thou have made.
Take it to heart, that tho^ may be prepared for what further work is before
thee. Thus proceed orderly.

Direct. 4. Remember that a great deal of patience and constancy is,
ordinarily, requisite for the right carrying on this great Work of
Self-Examination: Do not think that so weighty a Point is like to be resolved
all on a sudden. Ye must search and search again; (...) a Work that must be
done, and therefore do not (...) down in Discouragement. What tho ye long
contin^^ in Doubt, the case is not singular; many good Christians are kept a
great while in suspense betwixt Hope and Fears as to their Sincerity, and that
many time for want of Constancy and Judgment in the management of this Duty of
Self-Reflection; and even those who have arrived to a more comfortable
assurance i^ this Matter do yet see reason to be often renewing the Trial, and
to look over their Evidences again, as we^^ knowing what need there is to go
upon solid Ground and what a treacherous thing the Heart of Man is.

The truth is, it should be accounted part of our da^ly Business, as
Christians, to commune with our ow^ Hearts by way of Self-Examination; not that
we should be always calling in question our State as to the main; yet even that
should sometimes be done, so far as to review the Discoveries which we have
formerly made, and to try the Grounds upon which we have proceeded, especially
upon some particular occasions; as when Temptations arise, or when we are
called to any extraordinary Duty or Office; yea, or after some unusual falls
into Sin, or when Distempers threaten our Dissolution; as also before we
approach the Lord's Table, it is but fit that we examine the Evidences of our
Sincerity; not so as to give way to unjust Doubts and Jealousies, but to quiet,
compose, and support our Souls in Peace.

Direct. 5. Lastly, see that this Work be rightly circumstantiated both as to
Time and Place.

As for the latter of these. Withdraw your selves from the noise and hurry of
worldly Business, that ye may attend upon this Work without Distraction: Enter
into your Closets, shut the Door upon you, set your selves as in the Presence
of the great God; remember that he is the most reverend Witness of all your
Proceedings, who stands by and judges you while you are judging your selves: A
due Sense of this or nothing will overawe your Minds, and make you impartial
and serious in the Business.

As for the circumstance of Time. Have a care of needless delays in this
Matter; yet do not rush precipitantly upon it, when you are unfit for such an
undertaking. Take such a season for it (as soon as possible) when your Spirits
are lively, your Heads clear, your Affections calm and composed: Otherwise, if
ye set about it when your Heads are confused, your Spirits dejected or
oppressed with Melancholy, etc. and so your Passions tumultuous and afloat, ye
will make nothing of it. And therefore ye shall sometimes find that Satan
himself (tho the greatest Enemy to this Work of Self-Examination) will
transform himself into an Angel of Light, and put a poor-trembling Soul upon
this work, when he knows it is unfit for it; and as ready will he be to triumph
over such Persons, and contempt them to despair, when he sees they are baffled,
and confounded in their search.

Thus I have endeavored to direct you in this Point.

I hope I need not tell you, that in all this it is necessary to implore the
Divine Assistance, humbly begging of him who is the Searcher of Hearts, that he
would lead you into your own Souls, and not suffer you to be mistaken in a
Matter of such consequence. Tell him, ye cannot be satisfied to hang in
suspense, but do sincerely desire to know the truth of your Case, be it better
or worse, and that he himself his commanded you to search and try your selves;
that the work is difficult, and ye dare not undertake it in your own strength:
In short, that ye are resolved to rely upon him, who is not wont to fail them
that seek him and put their trust in him, according to his own appointed way.
Say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my Heart:
Try me, and know my Thoughts. And see if there be any wicked way in me, and
lead me in the way everlasting.

CHAP. X.
Sundry Questions proposed by which to examine the State of our Souls.

THese general Directions being premised, we now come to offer you some fu^ther
help, or to lead you by the Hand through the Duty it self; that so ye may at
length discover how the case stands with you in reference to Eternity.

And here let me first tell you, that the main Point to be enquired into, is,
how your Souls are affected towar^s the glorious blessed God himself. This is
the grand comprehensive Question, the Rule and Measure of all ^he rest, which
are entirely subordinate to it. Observe it will, stop a little and consider it:
It Is this which must help you to understand, remember, and truly to resolve
what further Enquiries shall be offered to you, as being the Center wherein
they all meet, the End whereunto they are all designed: If, as to the main, ye
be right here, viz If your Souls be duly affected toward God, all is your own,
you may then conclude that you are wrought for Heaven indeed; ye shall not miss
of Happiness, if there be enough in the infinite A^l-sufficient God to m^ke you
happy. Luke 15.31. Son, thou are ever with me, and all that I have is thine.

Well then, i^ in your most serious ^eliberate Judgment ye do highly esteem
him, as infinitely good in himself, and the most suitable good for you.

Again, if your Wills and Hearts do sincerely cleave to him, love him, rest in
him, resolve for him, as such.

And then, if the stated Course of your Lives be in the main agreeable to such
Appr^hensions, and Resolutions. Ye may then go your w^y, eat your Bread with
Joy, and drink your Wine with a merry Heart, because God accepts you, Eccles.
9 7.

Yet let me fu^ther add, there is a great deal goes to prove that this is re^lly
and truly your case. Most Men will be ready to say, that they esteem and love
God above all. With their Mouth they show much Love, Ezekiel. 33.31. Nor would any
have been more forward in so professing, than those very Persons to whom our
Lord speaks, John 5 42. I know you, that ye have not the Love of God in you.

Let me therefore help you to find out the Truth of your Case, by the following
Questions.

Question 1. How do ye relish the notion of an Happiness which consists in the
enjoyment of God? I beseech you deal truly and faithfully with your Souls in
this; put it close and home to your own Consciences: Consider it well before ye
answer it: It Is likely, by this time, ye may have learned to say that there is
no other Happiness comparable to this; and that it is the enjoyment of God which
makes Heaven to be Heaven! and it may be your Understandings are in some
measure convinced of the Truth of what ye say, (or else I am sure a great deal
of pains has been taken with you to little purpose.) But for all that, I must
tell you, the Question is not yet half answered, the main Point is yet behind;
the great work of Regeneration lies principally in the WILL. Search therefore a
little further, ye may chance to find that your Hearts are more deceitful in
this matter than ye thought of; examine narrowly how they stand affected. Right
Notions are far more common in the World (as dark as it is) than answerable
Affections and Tendencies of Soul are.

Come then, let us go a little deeper into the Case. Ye say ye believe there is
no Happiness to be compared with the enjoyment of God: But do ye feel what ye
say? Are your Hearts moving toward this Happiness? Lord, I have heard, and
believe that thou have purposed to make thy People blessed in the enjoyment of
thy self; it is this that my panting Soul breaths after: I plainly feel that
nothing else will content me; grant me this, and I have all; I can have no
greater, I desire no other Blessedness: Lord, may I but know thee better, and
love thee more, even as much as my Nature is capable of, and enjoy the
everlasting Sense of thy Love in a state of perfect Holiness and Purity, I have
then enough, I desire no more; whatever else goes under the name of Happiness
in the World, is but an empty Notion; thou, O Lord, are my Portion, my All. If
these or such like Requests be really expressive of the inward, deep, habitual
workings of your Souls, ye may then boldly conclude that God will not frustrate
nor disappoint such Desires as these which his holy Spirit has kindled in you.
Those, who thus esteem and long for the Heavenly Felicity, shall have it: Hold
on therefore to the end, he is faithful that has promised: If it be thus with
you, I tell you, ye are safe.

But on the other Hand; if when ye hear mention made of such a Happiness, ye
do, upon deep and impartial search, find no sutableness in the Temper and
Tendencies of your Souls, no Desires after it, but ^ather a secret recoiling
and drawing back from it; if, I say, the case be so with you, methinks, I need
not tell you ye are not like to be happy in that to which your Hearts are so
disaffected. Is not this plain enough? How shall I make it plainer? The Lord
help you to understand and consider it: I know carnal Minds are very stupid and
blockish as to the apprehension of such things as these. Let me try a-little
further if I can drive it into you.

Suppose God should say to you, as once he did to Solomon, 1 Kings 3.5 Ask what
I shall give thee. What shall I do for thee to make thee happy? Ask freely,
speak thy Mind, let me hear what thou would choose for thy self.

Why, here I say, if thou can form to thy self any other notion of Happiness
that thou would rather choose than that whereof we have been speaking, viz.
which consists in the enjoyment of God: I tell thee thou art in a woeful case.
Acts 8.22.23. Repent therefore of this thy Wickedn^ss; and pray God, if perhaps
the thought of thy Heart may be forgiven thee. For I perceive that thou art in
the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity

Suppose thou might enjoy perfect bodily Health, and fullness of worldly
Prosperity and Ease, and this for ever: If, I say, thou could be content with
this for thy Portion; to deal plainly with thee, thou are a graceless wicked
Wretch.

Quest. 2. What feeling Apprehensions have ye concerning the woeful Corruption
of human Nature, especially in respect of its Aversion from God, and Enmi^y
against him? Were you ever made deep^y sensible of this, and thoroughly humbled
for it, so ^s to ^ament and bewail it before the Lord? If not, ye may conc^ude
your ^e^ves to be yet under the power of it; and therefore Strangers to this
great work of Grace, which we are searching after. Quare vitia sua nemo confit
tur? quia etiam nunc in illis est. Somnium narrare vigelantis est, and vitia
suae confiteri sanitatis indicium est. Sense.

But if indeed the e^se be better with you, and the bent of your hearts be
turned toward God through Christ; having first ^een made sensible of your
sin^ul and unhappy estrangedness from him by Nature: Yet ye cannot but know
that there are still some Remainders of your old Distemper; Do ye not feel
them? Is it possible they should escape your observation? Can ye feel them, and
not groan ^itterly under them, and long to be delivered from them, that ye may
be perfectly reconciled unto him, who is infinite amiable Goodness it self? Are
ye not sensibly ^ffected, even the best of you, to find that your Apprehensions
concerning God are yet so d^rk and confused? And that the workings of your
Hearts toward him are so dull and languid, so slow and heavy, after all that
he has done to draw you by his loving K^noness? Can ye think of your unkind
disingenuou^ Ca^riage to so good a God, and not be ashamed and ^l^sh^^^r? Does
it not make you even a Burden to your selves? Can ye ^orbear crying out in the
angu^sh of your Sou^s, and pleading earnestly with God on this account; Lord,
if it be so, why am I thus? Must I still be complaining, and yet get no nearer
thee? O my God, how long! how long! Can thou behold this Soul that ^ssued
from thee the Father of Spirits; Lord can ^hou see it lie grovelling in the
Dust, and looking tow^rds thee for help, and will thou not pity it? Where are
thy wonted Compassions, and the sounding of thy B^we^s? Surely they are not
restrained? Must m^ne E^es still fail with looking upwards? O Lord, I must not,
I d^re not, I cannot entertain hard Thoughts of thee: no, no; it is I that have
so often grieved thy Holy Spirit, and therefore have no more of his help
vouchafed me.

I tell you, Sirs* the holiest Persons are most sensible of the weight of
indwelling Corrup^ion, they strive, they pray, they watch, and war against it;
the nearer they are to God, the more sensible of their yet remaining distance
from him: Nor is there any thing for which they more loath themselves, than for
the Remnants of their Aversion from him.

Quest. 3. How stand ye affected to the Lord Jesus Christ, as he is the Way to
the Father, the principal Means to bring us to the Knowledge and Love of God; to
Reconciliation and Communion with him, and to the everlasting enjoyment of him?
Do ye highly value him as such? Do ye study to acquaint your selves with him,
to live by Faith upon him, and in holy Obedience and Conformity to him; that so
the ends of h^s Office may take place with you, viz. that ye may be brought
nearer to God by him? Are ye willing to look unto his Scepter, and acknowledge
his Sovereignty, as well as to rely upon his Satisfaction? What form, what
comeliness do ye behold in him? Is he the chiefest among ^en thousand to you?
Have ye well considered, who, or what he is? Even the brightness of his Fathers
Glory, and the express Image of his Person: God manifested in the Flesh: The
great Imman^el, God with us: That the Eternal Word and Wisdom of the Father was
cloathe I with human Nature, pr^ched his Tent among the Sons of Men: (...);
Joh. 1.14 Conversed familiarly even with the meanest Persons, breathing out
Love, Compassion, Tenderness, and Benignity toward all, even toward his
bi^terest Enemies; weeping over Self-destroying Sinners, and at last offering
up himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice for us, etc.

O think, and think again, who it was that did all this, even the God of Heaven
himself, appearing in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3. O let those words
sink deep into your Hearts, John 14.9. He that has seen me, has seen the
Father. All this was the Lord's doing; lo, this was the wonderful condescending
way which God was pleased to make choice of, therein to show us his amiable
Goodness; that hereby our aversion from him might be healed. Could Men or
Angels have thought of such a Contrivance as this; or if they had, durst they
have mentioned it? But God's thoughts are not as ours. O the depths of his
Wisdom! How will these things transport us when we come to Heaven!

What say ye to all this? Unto them that believe, Christ is precious; Is he so
to you? Are ye willing to take up your Cross and follow him? to give up your
selves sincerely to him? Is there any thing which you think too dear to part
with if he call for it, nay, tho it were Life it self? Know ye not that every
true Christian is in disposition a Martyr? Does not our Lord tell us, that if
we love our own Lives more than him, we cannot be his Disciples? Does this
Saying offend you? Or do ye think it hard? What if I should tell you, how
earnestly desirous many of the primitive Christians were to lay down their
Lives for the Testimony of Jesus? How they triumphed in the midst of their
sharpest Sufferings, while the Sense of the dying Love of Jesus Christ was warm
and fresh upon their Spirits, Insomuch that Cyprian was fain to write for the
comfort of such who were troubled, that they mist of their Hopes of Martyrdom.

O how is the case altered now! what would those Christians say if they saw us
at this day? How much we mind our own things, and how little the things of
Christ. Would they not think, either that Christianity is altered, or rather
that we scarce deserve to be called Christians?

Quest. 4. How are ye disposed to spiritual Exercises? What delight do ye take
in drawing nigh to God? All Creatures act according to their several Natures,
it is pleasant and agreeable to them so to do: If therefore ye have a new Nature
in you, a Principle of divine spiritual Life, ye will thereby be inclined to
holy Exercises; ye will move as it were Naturally toward them; ye will be
serious and servent in them; and that for holy Purposes and Ends.

That empty show of Religion, whereby Hypocrites profane holy things, and
deceive their own Souls, is a vain lifeless formal thing, a mere piece of
Pageantry; they neither well know what they are doing, nor why they do it: It Is
rather forced than natural, customary than conscientious. No wonder if such be
soon weary of Duty, as being Strangers to the sweetness of it! Job. 27.10. Will
he (namely the Hypocrite) delight himself in the Almighty? Will he always call
upon God?

But now, a truly Religious Person acts in these Matters at another rate. He
believes that God is, and that he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek
him: Yea, that he himself will be their exceeding great Reward: And this it is
that such a Soul longs after; having chosen God for his Portion; therefore he
reckons that a day employed in the Service of God is better than a thousand
elsewhere.

Holy Souls experience that their spiritual Strength is renewed by waiting upon
God; that their Graces are increased by exercise; that their Souls are cleansed
and purified, their Corruptions mortified and subdued; and in a word, that the
holy Worship of the most holy God helps to make them more like him: And in all
this they find those inward relishes of Delight and Pleasure, whereby they are
fully convinced, that it is no less their privilege and advantage that they
may, than their Duty that they must attend upon God. They had rather he cut
short as to their daily Bread, than denied the liberty of approaching the
Throne of Grace. In short, they have Meat to eat which the World knows not of.
Thus their Principles incline them to suitable Operations, their Habits to Acts.

If therefore ye find no inclination to Religious Duties, but can without any
regret let such Opportunities over slip you, having no Delight nor Pleasure in
them: But think, if ye durst, ye could live well enough without them. I can
then tell you, that ye have no Principle of spiritual Life in you. Holy Work
and carnal Hearts do not agree well together: It Is a plain case.

Quest. 5 When the Interest of the World and Flesh stands in competition with
the Interest of God and the Duty ye owe to nim, which of these both ordinarily
the casting Vote with you? Does the Will and Authority of God weigh more with
you, as to the ordinary stated Course of your Lives and Actions, that and other
Interests or Inclinations whatsoever? If your He^^s be for God, it is ce^tain
your Lives wi^^^e so too* for the Issues of Life are from the Heart The Tree is
known by its Fruit. Dare ye allow your selves in the wilful ordinary neglect of
known Dut^? Dare ye in ulge and gratify your Lusts which ye are commanded to
crucify? Al eye for taking up only with the cheap and easy part of Religion,
and leaving the more difficult, self-denying part behind? Dare ye upon a
prospect of worldly Pleasure, Profit or Honor wi^^u^ly offend the Divine
^o^jesty? Do ye ventu^e upon that which is forbidden, or do ye not abhor the
very thoughts or mention of it? How shall I do this Wickedness, and sin against
God? Some Persons abstain from Sin for want of a convenient opportunity to
commit it, others for fear of Reproach or Punishment: But a gracious Soul is
acted by a Principle of sincere Love to God, and Holiness, and therefore he
hates every false way. Psa. 119.104. So verse. 106. I have sworn and I will
perform it, that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments. Psalm. 17 5. Hold up my
Goings in thy Paths, that my Foot steps slio not.

Your prevailing Habits, and consequently your State, must be known by your
Behavior in a time of trial; then it must appear whether the Interest of God,
or your own Corruptions be predominant in you; whether his Commands, or the
Inclinations of the F^esh, bear the greater sway with you: That is, whether ye
be sincere Christians, or Self-deceiving Hypocrites.

It Is true in leed, the best of Men, through surprise or the violence of a
Temptation, may be overtaken even with gross Sin; but if they fall into it,
they do not lie in it, but renew their Repentance, and double their wa^er:
Their Wills are habitually more against Sin th^n for it; they endeavor to be
rid of it, and therefore are not to be denominated Workers of Iniquity. But
with the unregenerate the case is otherwise, they love their Sins, and are loath
to leave them.

Quest. 6 Do ye love to be plainly dealt with as to the great Concerns of your
Souls? Are ye for awakening, convincing, searching Light? or had he rather
sleep on and take your rest? Are ye earnestly desirous to know your Duty better
in order to practice? Have ye no Sin which ye are not willing to find out? Have
ye discovered none which ye are not resolved to leave? Do ye take it well to be
prudently and faithfully reproved? He that hates Reproof is brutish, shall
die, suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy Faithful are the Wounds of
a Friend. Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a Kindness; and let him
reprove me, it shall be an excellent O^le, etc. Psalm. 141.5. It is a woeful Sign
when Men desire to be foothed up and flattered in their evil ways. And woe be
to those who humor them therein, and daub with untempered Mortar. Ezekiel. 13.10.
Joh. 3.19, 20. This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World,
etc. For every one that does Evil hates the Light, neither comes to the
Light, l^st his Deeds should be reproved. But a gracious Soul is for an home
and close application of the most searching, powerful, convincing Truths, and
for judging himself impartially by them. Hyp^crites indeed are forward to judge
others; they can espy Motes in their Brother's Eye; bu^ O how favorable are
they to themselves, how ready to cloak and extenuate their own Sins? It Is a
sign your Cause is naught, when ye would have it shuffled over without
searching.

Quest. 7. Do ye earnestly desire and endeavor after greater degrees of
Holiness both in Heart and Life? Were it put to your choice, whether had ye
rather be as holy as Abraham, David, Daniel, etc. or any other of the most
eminent Saints ye have heard or read of, or as great and successful in the
World as Caesar, Alexander, Scipio, or any the like? etc.

This is a plain Question, but it is worth your while to put it close to your
own Conscience^. Sensible things are apt to make very strong Impressions upon
us, while spiritual Objects, tho infinitely more excellent, are but coldly or
indifferently regarded. If ye be truly gracious, ye will certainly desire to be
more (yea to be perfectly) so: And your Desires will be seconded with
answerable Endeavors.

As for inward habitual Holiness. Ye will still be taking pains with your own
Souls, to bring them to a more full conformity to the blessed God: This ye will
aim at in all your Religious Exercises, viz. That ye may get more Knowledge of
God, more intimate Acquaintance and Communion with him through Christ: That
your Hearts may be carried out more earnestly, purtly, and strongly toward
him; in short, that ye may be more inward with him, and near to him: And that
whatever ye find in your selves contrary to him, may be more and more rooted
out, mort^fied, and destroyed: Ye will even hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, Mat. 5.6. All the Afflictions ye meet with in the World, will be
as nothing to you, if compared with the Burden of remaining Corruption;
especially Averseness from God.

As for Holiness of Life. Ye will lay out your selves for God, your Time, your
Strength, your All will be at his Service: As accounting that there is nothing
else worth living for; but the promoting of his Glory, and the pleasing of his
Will. Ye will therefore endeavor to abound in the Work of the Lord: And
joyfully embrace Opportunities put into your Hand, to testify your Love by
Obedience; tho the Flesh should be a loser or a sufferer by it: Yea you will
seek for such opportunities, and contrive with your selves, how ye may be most
serviceable to the Honor and Interest of your God.

But if as to these Matters ye be cold and careless, ye may well suspect your
selves to be false and unsound at the bottom.

Quest. 8. Do ye heartily love and value all that are truly Godly, as such? Is
your delight in the Excellent Ones of the Earth? Do ye love the Soci^ty and
Converse of such Persons? Are ye heartily concerned for their Welfare? And
ready to relieve their Wants and Necessities. How dwells the Love of God in
that Man who shatteth up his bowels of Compassion from his Brother? 1 John 3.17.

The Hearts of wicked Men rise against those who are more strict and serious
than themselves. They can hardly afford them a good Word or Look; but put
Nicknames upon them, and could wish they were rooted out of the Earth. Others
there are, who, tho not so desperately malignant, do yet think that less Care
and Strictness might serve the turn, and are offended to see them make so much
ado about Religion. But all those who truly love God, love his holy Image
wherever they can discern it, love those that are begotten of him, love those
that love him, as such. So that Love to the People of God, is principally and
ultimately referred unto God himself, who is loved in them, and they for his
sake.

1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from Death unto Life, because we love
the Brethren. But then, ye must observe it is not every lower degree of Love to
the Godly, even as such, that will prove your Sincerity, but it must be such a
prevailing degree of Love to them, as will argue the predominancy of your Love
to God himself, upon whose account they are loved. Take these together, and
they will help to prove and illustrate each other. Thus, chap. 5.2. By this we
know that we love the Children of God, when we love God and keep his
Commandments. So then, love to the Brethren is a more remote mark of Sincerity,
and must it self be tried by this more immediate one, viz. Love to God himself.

Quest. 9. What way do your Thoughts most naturally turn for support in an hour
of Trouble? Whence do y^ fetch your greatest Relief at such a time, when sharp
Afflictions press hard upon you?

It must indeed be acknowledged, that even Nature it self seems to promp Men to
look up toward God when they are under extreme Difficulties, and some (for
Fashion) will do it sooner: But in the mean time, the greatest Supports and
Comforts of Ungodly Men are usually taken from the Creature: They hope the Tide
will turn, and Matters go better with them in the World, and this it is that
keeps them from sinking; sometimes they trust in their Riches, sometimes in
their Friends, sometimes to their own Conduct and Management; in short, they
will turn their Eyes every way for Satisfaction and Ease, rather than toward
God.

The Reason is plain, they are estranged from him, and have not learned to take
up with him for their only Soul-satisfying Portion and Happiness: They like not
the thoughts of this, but shun it as a thing unsuitable to them: They will
rather weary themselves with a thousand fruitless Attempts to sind rest in the
Creature, than seek it in him who alone can give it. Perhaps when they are
forced, and even fired out of all other Refuges, they will then come crying to
God; but what can such a constrained show of Devotion signify? Vtumur Deo,
fruun^ur creaturis. They would, as it were, make use of God, to serve a turn,
but their Hearts, their Love and Delight is upon the Creatures.

As for the truly Godly, the Case is otherwise with them, their Hopes and
Comforts are of a more divine Original. Lord, what wa^^ I for? My hope is in
thee? Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, etc. yet will I rejoice in the
Lord, Hab. 3.17, 18. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses: But we will
remember the Name of the Lord our God, Psalm. 20.7. There be many that say, who
will show us any good? Lord list thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon us.
^sal. 4 6 In the Multitude of my Thoughts ( Heb. troublesome perplexed
Thoughts) within me try Comforts delig^t my Soul.

Thus the Spirit of Adoption te^ch^th Believers to lay open their Complaints to
their Heavenly Father; to cast their C^re upon him to place their H^ppiness in
him, to fetch their Comforts from him: And this as Matter of choice, not merely
out o^ constraint: The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower: The Righteous
^^^neth into it and is safe, Prove. 19.10. Psalm. 94.32. The Lord is my Defense,
and my God is the R^ck of my Refuge. They know them elves to be Stranger in
this World, and therefore expect no great Matters from it. Heaven is their
home: Their Treasure, their Hopes, their Joys, their Hearts are there. Of this
we have full Proof in the Context* as has been already observed.

By these and such like Questions ye may try your State.

I know there are different degrees of Grace; all that are truly Godly will not
be alike able to answer what has been proposed: Nor would I make sad the Heart
of the weakest sincere Christian. There may be great Failures and
Imperfections, but that which I would advise you to, is strictly to observe,
what is the prevailing bent of your Hearts in all this.

But I have one Question more, fit for the strongest to try themselves by; tho
the weakest are not unconcerned in it neither.

Quest. 10. Do ye love God, as God, for himself, above your selves, or any
other Object whatsoever?

That in point of Duty we ought thus to love God is past dispute, unless we
will renounce at once both Reason and Religion. Mark. 12.30. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with ALL thy Heart, and with ALL thy Soul, etc. this is the
first and the great Commandment. Mat. 22.38. And the second is like unto it,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Here it is plain that we ought to
love God totally, without any Limitations or Restrictions, with all our Power,
Mind, and Will; with a Love transcending either that of our selves, or our
Neighbors. I suppose ye will readily grant that God must be loved better than
your Neighbors, and yet they must be loved as your selves; therefore God must
be loved better than your selves too. Thus the necessita^ praecepti is plain.

But since there is more in the Precepts of the Divine Law than in the
Condition of Salvation; otherwise none could be saved without perfect
Obedience: Therefore here arises a great Question before us, viz. Whether such
a Love to God, as God, above our selves, o^ our own Happiness, etc. be so
necessary, necessitate medii, that no Man is to be accounted in a State of
Salvation, who does not thus love God better than himself?

What I have to say in answer to this, shall be digested into the following
Particulars, with submission to better Judgments.

1. It Is very odd and dangerous to say, that that Man is in a State of Grace,
who loves not God as God; does not this sound very absurdly and strangely? We
will leave it to the Ear, which, as Elihu says, tri^^ Words, Job 34.3.

2. It Is clearer by far than the Sun at Noonday, that God, as God, is
infinitely better than our selves, and the whole Creation besides. I would not
so much undervalue your Judgments as to think, that ye stand in need of having
this pro^ed to you: Nor would I so far overv^ue your Piety, as to think that
there is no need of pressing it upon you, that your Hearts may be sutably
affected with it.

3. Therefore we love not God, as God, if we love him not better than our
selves, or our own Interest and Happiness, as such: Because, as God, he is
infinitely better than we are, or can be. God is the universal Self originated,
independent, unchangeable GOOD; but the goodness of the Creatures is
particular, limited, derived, and entirely dependant upon him: And therefore by
no means to be set in competition with him, Isa. 40.25.

4. It Is certain that God has deeply implanted in our Natures a Principle of
Self-Love: And that he makes use of it, both in order to our Preservation and
Government. This it is which engages us in the use of Means in order to our
own Welfare, and is supposed in all the Precepts, Promises and Threatenings that
are set before us. This Principle neither can, nor ought to be extirpated, but
it must be regulated, and kept within its due Bounds, or in its proper Place,
in order to the best and highest Ends.

5. It Is also evident that by the Apostasy our Self-Love is become inordinate,
perverse, and therefore exceeding sinful: So that Self-denial is one of the
first steps toward our Recovery, Mat. 16.24.

We are fallen from God to our selves, and are for setting up our own little,
carnal, supported Self-Interest, in opposition to that full and proper Interest
that he has in us: that is, we would be Gods to our selves; this is the grand
fundamental disorder of human Nature, the Heart of the Old Man. This has
disjointed us, and rendered us offensive to God, and uneasy to our selves, and
to all about us, till we be reduced and set right again.

So then this sensual corrupt Self-Love must be mortified; but lawful and just
Self-Love must be improved, as was said before.

6. In assigning the Notion of our chief or ultimate End, God's Glory and our
own Salvation must not be separated: For our intention must take in both; but
then the latter must be considered as in full Subordination to the former. We
may and ought to desire our own Eternal Happiness, that God may be glorified
therein, who is well pleased and delighted in the Welfare and Perfection of his
holy ones. Our supreme End must fall in with his, who made all things for
himself, that he alone may have the Glory.

7. Therefore to love God only or chiefly for our selves, as a means to our own
Happiness, is greatly to affront and dishonor him, by preferring our selves
before him, the Creature before the Creator, the silly Interest of a crawling
Worm, before the glorious all-comprehending Interest of the supreme infinite
Majesty. It Is to invert the order of things, while we make our selves the end,
and consider him but as a means in order thereto: As if we were better, or more
amiable than he; or our Happiness more valuable than his Glory. Such
Profaneness is not to be endured, but abhorred. Know ye not that the whole
Creation has no worth in it but what is derived from God, and to be measured by
its Relation to him.

8. To love God with a pure, raised, transcendent, superlative Love for
himself, as the most amiable and perfect Good, from, by, and to whom we and all
things else are: And then to love our selves and all other Objects for him, as
the supreme ultimate End of all; this is the true Method of holy Love, toward
greater Measures whereof the best of us should be ever aspiring. Is it not
highly reasonable that he who is best should be most loved? That he who is the
Author of our Beings should be our End? That we should aim at and intend him in
all; in a word that the love of our selves should be subjected to the highest
and purest Love of God? Urge these things upon your selves, take pains with
your own Hearts to bring them to such a Frame; plead the Cause of God with your
Souls, till the Fire kindle, and ye be carried up above Self, to Him, and all
by the help of the Holy Spirit.

It Is true indeed, he needs not you, nor your Love, neither can ye be
profitable to him thereby, Job 22.2, 3. Your Goodness extends not to him.
Psalm. 16.2. The advantage is like to be your own, and should not the Glory be
his? As carnal inordinate self-seeking is no better than self-destroying: So,
to go our of our selves, and to be as it were estrange I from, and lost to our
selves, that we may seek God, live in him and enjoy Communion with him; this I
say is the true way to advance our own Interest, while we seem to overlook it;
because by this Means we shall find our selves, and our All in God with
infin^te advantage. How much some of the People of God have been carried out in
holy Zeal for his Honor, ^bove their own particular Self-Interest, ye may see
Exodus 32.32. Numb. 14.12. Romans 9.3. Which places I must not now stay to enlarge
upon.

9 But here it must be remembered, that God being immaterial and invisible, is
not an Object of Sense, nor directly of sensitive passi^nate Love. Therefore
the Heart may be inwardly, deeply, predominantly, and therefore sincerely for
God, tho as to the passionate part, we may find our selves more sensibly
carried out toward other Objects. Because the nearness and sensibleness of the
Creature promoteth such sensible workings in the lower sensitive Faculties, and
corporeal Spirits. As for example:

A sincere Christian may be more feelingly affected toward a dear Friend or
Relation, or some other Creature-enjoyment, than toward God himself; yet does
it not therefore follow that his Heart is more for these things than for God,
because were he put to trial, he would forsake all these Enjoyments, rather
than forsake God or quit his Interest in him, whereby it appears that his Mind
and Will are more for God, tho the lower sensitive Appetite work most feelingly
toward sensible Objects.

10. Therefore tho it be essential to Holiness to love God for himself, as our
absolutely ultimate End, and therefore better than our selves; yet there may be
some secret conception or beginning of this Love in a Soul long before the
Person in whom it is perceives it. Because we are apt to judge of our selves by
what appears most sensibly in us, and to overlook what lies more deep and
inward. Now, as was said before, love to self, and to the Creatures, operates
in a more sensible, passionate feeling manner, than holy intellectual Love
does. Because God, being a Spirit, is not so near to our Senses and Passions as
the Creature is.

Therefore, because I would not make sad the Hearts of any whom God would not
have made sad, Ezekiel. 13.22. nor give an advantage to Satan, to disquiet the
Soul of the weakest sincere Christian: Let me say to such, as follows;

Supposing that ye are satisfied that God, as God, is infinitely more amiable
than your selves, and that he is your absolutely supreme, chief or ultimate
End; and therefore that ye ought to love him, as such, above your selves.

Again, if ye do earnestly desire that Happiness which consists in so loving
him above any other Happiness whatsoever: Tho in the mean time ye dare not say
that ye love God for himself, above your selves; but are, it may be, more
sensibly and feelingly concerned for your own Welfare, that ye may escape the
Wrath to come, than for his Glory. Yet ye he wail this, and desire an Heart to
love God more for himself: And to refer your own Interest and all to him.

Why, if the Case be thus with you, I would not have ye be discouraged, or cast
down: For it seems to me, that ye have the seeds and beginnings of this holy
Love to God for himself, whereof we have been speaking: And our Lord will not
break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax.

Let me therefore earnestly beseech you to pray hard for further Influences of
the Spirit of Love; and take pains with your own Hearts to raise them more
above self unto God, that your Spark may become a Flame, and that ye may be
even swallowed up of holy Love: So will ye find that Comfort, Peace, and
Assurance which ye are so pensively seeking and enquiring after. O learn at
length to pore less upon your own poor, dark, drooping Souls, and look more at
him who is LIGHT, and in whom there is no Darkness at all.

As for the common sort of the ignorant Pretenders to the Love of God and
Holiness, all this will seem to them more ado than needs. Nor is it difficult
to confound their Pretenses without going thus high.

To these I would say: If (as ye profess) ye truly love God, whence is that ye
think no more of him? And that ye speak no more of him? And delight no more in
converse with him? Are no more concerned when he is dishonored? Nor grieved
for your own Sins, and the Sins of others against him? How comes it to pass
that so many Religious Duties are wholly neglected by you? And others so
miserably trifled in, and slubber'd over? Whence is it that your Lusts are so
much indulged, and that ye keep in league with his Enemies, etc.? Is this the
Love ye speak of? It might well become you to know your selves better.

Thus much for the Use of Examination.

CHAP. XI.
The Exhortation in several Branches. 1. To those who are not yet wrought for
Heaven, directing them what Methods to take in order to their Conversion.

IT may justly be expected that the Issue of the foregoing Examination will be
various, according to the different State or Circumstances of the Persons who
shall think it worth their while to concern them selves seriously therein.

1. It Is not uncharitable to suppose, that some may find great reason to
conclude that this renewing Change has not yet passed upon them; a sad
Conclusion, God knows, but necessary to be made where it is true. O happy
Congregation indeed, if this were an unreasonable Supposition! happy, I say, if
all among you were thus wrought for Heaven! 2. It Is likely there may be others
not altogether without hopes, that this great Change is wrought upon them* nor
yet without Fears of the contrary, but full of Doubt and Hesitations about it.
3. And surely there are some among you, who, through Grace, are able
comfortably to conclude, that they are indeed passed from Death to Life; whose
Hopes do qui^e overrop their Fears in his Matter.
Now that which I would endeavor, through God's Assistance, is, to speak a
word in season to all these in order.

To the first sort, with deep concern for them, trembling over them, traveling
in bi^th with them till Christ be formed in them. Help Lord!

To the second, with a due Mixture of Tenderness and Judgment, Compassion and
Discretion.

To the third, with humble Thankfulness and an Heart enlarged in Love to God
and our Redeemer, that our Joy may be full.

All this, I say, I would do, but of my self can do nothing. O for more Faith
in the blessed Spirit of our glorified Head.

And now I proceed to the Exhortation.

1. To those who are yet in an unregenerate State.

Come, come, bestir your selves; what have ye been doing all this while? what
are ye dreaming of? It is high time to awake out of sleep, and to hasten your
escape from the Wrath to come, while there is yet Hope. Little know ye but your
Glass may be almost run, and yet alas your great Work is undone. Let me say to
you, as Genesis 19.17. Escape for your Lives, look not behind you, lest ye be
consumed.

If therefore, ye would be converted and saved, let me also press upon you the
following Directions.

O Lord my God, I beseech thee send me good speed this day; and grant that the
strong holds of Satan may be broken; and the Interest of thy Son, my Lord, be
advanced, and that the Kingdom of Glory may be hastened: Lord remember the
Requests (tho too few, and cold) that have been put up to Heaven both in
public and in secret on this behalf, and give a gracious Answer. Even so. Amen.

Direct. 1. Set your selves in good earnest to the serious Consideration of
your Spiritual Concerns. Exercise your most sober deliberate Thoughts about
them. Ye will find one Day that it would have been better for you not to have
had Reason, than not to use it about the Interests of your Souls. Better I say
that ye had filled up the room of the meanest Gu^t, Worm, or Mole in the
Creation, than of Men, if ye do not improve and use your noblest Faculties ^o
their proper Ends. Ye can think naturally and easily, early and late, with much
earnestness and constancy about other Mat^ers, how to buy and sell and get
Gain, and other such important Trifles, ^pardon the Contradiction for it is of
your own making.) But let me ask you, have ye no thoughts to spare about your
Eternal Concerns, where ye must dwell for ever, what shall become of your
immortal Souls, when they must abide in Flesh no longer? Do not these things
deserve to be thought of? What do ye think your Reason was given you for? Can
ye expect to be san^tified and saved without any Endeavors of your own in
order thereto? Or is it likely your Endeavors should be to any purpose, unless
your Minds be first awakened, to proceed rationally in the Matter? To ask your
selves what ye are? Whence ye came? Where ye are placed? Whither ye are going?
What ye have to ^o? Try to answer these things to your selves. I must not stay
to enlarge upon them: Do not expect to become Religious by chance, it must be
by choice (through Grace) or not at all. And is it likely that the Will should
act blindly in the Case, or choose the Ways of God, before the Understanding be
convinced of the Worth and Excellency of them? And what Conviction without
Consideration?

I thought I had told you before, that God works upon Men as rational
Creatures, upon the Will by the Mediation of the Understanding: But it is the
design of Satan to keep you asleep in carnal Security, to find your Thoughts
other employment, that he may divert you from considering these things, for
which your Reason was principally given you: And are ye willing thus to be led
blindfold to Hell? (Lord, open their Eves that they may see): O think how ye
will ever be able to answer it to God or your own Consciences, that ye have
been so stupidly inconsiderate, as to the things of your everlasting Peace? All
Wickedness may be resolved into Inconsiderateness. Isa. 1.3, 4. My People does
not consider. Ah sinful Nation! a People laden with Iniquity.

Well then, Sirs, if ye think your Souls worth so much Labor, I would offer to
you some Particulars to be considered in the following order.

1. Consider well how sinful and miserable an unregenerate State is.

As for the sinfulness of it. It is a State of Hostility against Heaven. In
Scripture account all unregenerate Men are Enemies to God, yea Enmity it self.
Romans 8.7. Col. 1.21. They are said to contemn him, despise him, and to cast him
behind their back: They kick against him, they hate and abhor him, Ze^h. 11.8.
My Soul loathed them, and their Soul also abhorred me. Is not this, think you,
a sinful State indeed? And is it not in some respect so much the worse, in that
they profess or pretend to the contrary? With their Mouth they show much Love:
but in reality, they do alienate themselves from him who has the most full and
absolute propriety in them. They rebel against their most Righteous Governor;
and ungratefully abuse the Riches of his Mercy and Goodness. They tread
under-foot the Son of God, and will not that he should reign over them, and
therefore are justly accounted Enemies; and must expect to be treated
accordingly, Luke 19.27. But those mine Enemies which would not that I should
reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. They do despite unto
the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. And in all this they prefidiously break their
baptismal Covenant, wherein they were solemnly devoted to God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. And withal they wilfully destroy themselves, and wrong their
own Souls. But that brings me to the other Consideration.

An unregenerate State is a miserable State. How should it he otherwise? Can a
Man harden himself against God and prosper? No, no: Such Persons are under the
Wrath and Indignation of the Almighty, an Abomination to him; he is of purer
Eyes than to behold them. His holy Law is armed with most dreadful Curses, and
Threatenings against them. God shall wound the Head of his Enemies; and the
hairy Scalp of such a one as goes on still in his Trespasses, Psalm. 68.21.
They are Slaves of Satan, led Captive by him at his Will, who employs them in
treasuring up unto themselves Wrath against the Day of Wrath: Even the Offers
of Gospel Grace which are daily made to them, as they aggravate their Sin, will
also make their Condemnation heavier. Thus that which was designed for their
Good, becomes the savor of Death unto Death unto them. What shall I say? They
are Heirs of Hell, condemned already in Point of Law; tho Judgment has not yet
passed the final Sentence: They are not sure of being spared an hour longer.
One would think this should make them ill at ease, till the Affairs of their
Souls be in a better posture.

It Is wonderful to think what shift they make to avoid the Anticipations of
Hell in their own Breasts. Put all this together, and then tell me whether it
be not a miserable State. Psalm. 50.22. Now consider this, ye that forget God,
lest I tare you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

2. Think next what great things God himself has done in order to your
deliverance from this sinful, miserable State: Tho your Trans^ressions be many
and heinous, he has provided a Ransom for you, the Blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses from all Sin. Tho your Natures be exceedingly corrupted, his Holy
Spirit is able and ready to help and heal you, if ye do not wilfully resist
and grieve him. Prove. 1.23. Turn ye ^t my Reproof: behold I will pou^ out my
Spirit unto you. Tho your spiritual Enemies ^e strong* ^ub^^^, and ma^^gnant,
they cannot destroy you, unless ye o^stinately side with them. The Standing
Office of the Minis^^y is appointed to treat with you in order to your
Reconciliation and Peace with G^d, 2 Cor. 5.20. Notwithstanding all the
Affronts ye have done to the ^ivi^e Patienc^, God still waits to be gracious to
you: Tho ye little deserve ^o be thus treated, it is yet put to your choice that
ye may be happy if ^e will be holy. A Throne of Grace is ere^^ed for your
encou^^^^ment: God has swo^n by himself that he del^g^^s no^ ^n your Ruin and
Destruction, bu^ ^^^her that ye should repent and live: He condescends in a way
of ^^^cre^ and Forgiveness to reason the Case with you: Turn (...), turn ye,
why will ye die? Cease to d^ evil ^^^^n to (...) well. Come now, and let (...)
reason together, says the Lord: tho your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as
white as S^^w; tho they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. Isa* 1.16,
17, 18. In a word, Matters are brought so far in order to your Recovery, that
nothing but your own Wilfulness and final Impenitency can be your ruin

3. And now consider what it is that God, expects from you in compliance with
the Methods of his Grace viz. That from a deep sense of your past Folly, and a
belleving Apprehension of his Mercy and Goodness in Christ, ye do sincerely
turn unto him through this great Mediator, and then all is your own. Are not
these Terms highly reasonable? Are they not full of rich Grace and Benignity?
Can ye imagine that Divine Mercy should stoop lower? Would ye be saved from
Wrath, while ye resolve to persist in your Enmity against God? What then would
become of his Holiness and Purity, of his Truth, his Government, his inflexi^le
Justice and Righteousness? Would ye have an Interest in Christ while ye
wilfully reject him? Would ye be saved by his Blood, without being sanctified
by his Spirit, and governed by his Law? Or would ye have the Graces and
Comforts of the Holy Ghost while ye are still quenching and resisting his
Influences? In short, can ye tell what ye would have? Think well of it, and ye
will find either that you Desires are utterly immodest and unreasonable, or
e^se that he is ready to grant them.

4. Consider also how many Millions are got safe to Heaven, who were once at as
great a distance from it as you. The Saints now in Glory were by nature
Children of Wrath as well as others, besides the Guilt of many actual
Transgressions: How long did many of them stand it out against the Calls of
Divine Grace as ye have done? but at last they yielded, and so escaped.
Methinks this Consideration should animate and encourage you, yea and even
inflame you with a generous Ambition o^ attaining the same Happiness. Have so
many poor Sinner: found Mercy! why then stand ye looking one upon another, as
if ye could not find your hands? Are ye content to pine away in your
Iniquities? O^! up and be doing, and the Lord in great Mercy be with you.

5. Consider how little the World or Flesh signify to counter balance the ruin
of your immortal Souls. What would it profit a Man if he should gain the whole
World? etc. Ye are grossly ignorant of the nature and capacities of your own
Souls, if ye think that terrene or sensual Delights and Enjoyments will satisfy
them. Isa. 55.2, etc. What tho the Flesh should be abundantly provided for, and
fair deliciously every day, ye will still find something within you that is not
filled: And so in the fullness of your sufficiency ye will be in straits, Job
20.22. And besides Creature-enjoyments are uncertain as well as insufficient:
They may be taken from you, ye must be taken from them. Will it be any Relief
to your miserable Souls in another World to remember the fleshly Prosperity and
Ease ye had in this? Will your Possessions, Sp^rt, and Jollity follow you into
Eternity? Or will not the remembrance of them rather cut you to the very Heart?
When being doomed to everlasting disconsolate Darkness, ye shall not be able to
forget how foolishly ye destroyed your selves for mere Trifles.

O consider this, and do not hazard your Souls for a thing of naught.

How fast are ye posting continually toward Eternity! Your continuance on
Earth is like to be but short at longest: And by reason of its uncertainty may
prove much shorter than ye are willing to imagine or hear of. Do ye not see
others daily dropping into the Grave before your Eyes, even such as were as
likely for Life as your selves? And how little do ye know how soon your turn
may come! and what if your Glass should be run before your Work be done? where
are ye then? It may be when the Fears of Death and Judgment are upon you, ye
will then cry out for more time: But how little reason have ye to expect that
such Cries should be regarded, from Persons who have trifled away so much time
already to no purpose? O labor so to number your Days as to apply your Hearts
to Wisdom.

6. Consider how easy the Yoke of Christ is, how light his Burden. Mat. 11.30.
I know indeed that the Hear^ of unregenerate Men are deeply prejudiced against
the ways of serious Godliness; partly through their own Corruption, and partly
through the Malice and Subtilty of the Devil: And therefore such Prejudices
must needs be most unworthy and unreasonable. How should there be any Reason or
Truth against the God of Truth and Reason? His Service is perfect Freedom; his
Commandments are not grievous. Here let me reason the Case a little with you;
bring forth your strong Arguments. What is there that offends you in the holy
Ways of God? Do ye fear they will tend to your loss or disadvantage in the
World? Why, are ye yet to learn that a Man's Life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses? Luke 12.15. Our heavenly Father
knows how far we have need of these things, and is able to furnish a Table in
the Wilderness. If we crust him not with our Souls, we are undone; but if we
do, i^ it not very absurd to distrust him as to our outward Concerns? What a
preposterous kind of Solicitude is this! If I have told ye earthly Things and
ye believe not; how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly Things? Job.
1.12. I only allude to it.

Nor are there wanting promises to rest upon this Matter. Seek first the
Kingdom of God, -- and all these things shall be added, Mat. 6.33. 1 Timothy 4.8.
-- Godliness is prof^table unto all things, having the promise of the Life that
now is, etc. Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord, and do good; so shall thou dwell in
the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. Besides the promise of a^^ Hundred Fold
to those who forsake their worldly Enjoyments for his Name's sake, Mat. 19.29.

Do ye apprehend that it will tend to your dishonor to engage strictly in the
holy Ways of God? Answ. It Is a very small matter to be judged of Man's Judgment.
Those that honor God, he will honor: But they that despise him, shall be
lightly esteemed.

Do ye think that a Life of Holiness is irksome or unpleasant? Answ. If ye
consider the Duties enjoined, the Promises annexed, the Supports and
Assistances vouchsafed to the Godly, the Experience and Testimonies of those
who have tried the Pleasures of both Kinds, yea or the true Notion of Pleasure
it self; you will find abundant reason to conclude that there are no Joys
comparable to those of the Godly: But that Wisdom excels Folly as much as
Light does Darkness. The ways of Holiness are ways of Pleasantness, Prove. 3.17.

Thus ye must by serious Consideration endeavor to dispossess those Prejudices
which are rooted in the Hearts of unregenerate Men against Religion: There is
enough to be said to show how vain and frivolous their Objections are.
Therefore let your Reason be fully satisfied in the case; do not stand in your
own Light, plead not for your Disease, nor argue in the Dark against things
which ye know not: First try, and then judge: It is not cavilling against your
Duty which will serve to excuse you from it.

7. Consider what great encouragement ye have humbly to expect the assistance
of special Grace, if ye carefully improve the Abilities and Helps that are
already granted you. It Is likely that Satan and your own corrupt Hearts may
suggest to you, that it is to no purpose to trouble your Thoughts about these
things, because special Grace is the Gift of God, who di^^ with his own as he
pleases. But to this I answer; Tho it is true that Grace is a free Gift, else
it were not Grace: Yet it does not therefore follow that ye must sit still in a
sluggish Stupidity, and expect to be saved without any care or concern of your
own about i^. Are not the Mercies of common Providence, as Food, Raiment,
Friends, Health, etc. the Gifts of God? Will ye therefore argue that no care is
to be taken about these things? How then comes it to pass that your Thoughts
and Endeavors are employed early and late in the World, and for it? It seems
ye are most willing to be imposed upon, and to have a Cloak for your Sloth in
spiritual Matters; tho ye would laugh at him who should argue at the same rate
as to temporal Concerns.

Therefore, to be plain with you, I must tell you; ye have no reason to expect
the help of special Grace, while through mere Sloth and Perverseness ye will
not excite your natural Faculties, nor strike in with Convictions and other
Helps of common Grace which are vouchsafed-you. But rather ye may justly fear,
lest ye should be given up to a reprobate Sense, to blindness of Mind, and
hardness of Heart. For the turning away of the Simple shall slay them, Prove.
1.32.

But on the other Hand; ye are not destitute of Encouragement, if in good
earnest ye fall to the work: It may be ye will say that y^ have no full proper
Promise to depend upon for special Grace, tho ye should improve the common
Helps that are given you. But here let me ask you, Are there not many dreadful
Threa^nings to the sloathful Neglectors of this great Salvati^n? Are ye not
earnestly invite^ to come in, and accept of Christ? Is not the God with whom ye
have to do mere^ful and gracious? Is not the great Redeemer full of
Compassions? Are ye not commanded to seek the Lord while he may be sound, and
to call upon him while he is near? Isa. 55 6, ^. And is there not a great deal
of Encouragement in all this? His God set you about needless unpr^^^able W^^^?
Will he not be sound of them that see him? Does not he love Holiness better
than ye? And will he not be as ready to vouchs^^^ the san^^^ you influence^ of
his Grace, as you are ^r^aly to des^^e (...) b^^^r after them? What Iniquity
have ye ^^^u (...) in ^im, that ye should entertain such mean, low, narrow
(...) oughts of his Goodness? Where is the Man, and what is his Name that can
say, Lord, I did to my utmost improve the helps thou gave me, and yer thou
r^^^^^'st to give me more? Is not the case quite contrary? I have called, and
ye have refused; I have siretched out my Hand, and no Man regarded etc. Prove.
1.24. What got he sloth^ul Servant by saying, I knew thee, that thou art an
hard Man? Mat. 25, 24. Did this excuse him for hiding his Lord's Money (tho but
one Talent) in the Earth?

Let me make the Matter yet plainer by a familiar Comparison.

Suppose some great Prince or Nobleman, famous for Bounty and Kindness to the
distressed, who beholding a forlorn helpless Creature, miserable, wretched,
poor, and blind, and naked, and taking compassion on him should say to him,
Friend, come to my Door I have fully supplied the Wants of many whose
Circumstances were as bad as thine, and I delight so to do. Now tho in all this
here be not a full direct Promise made to this poor. Wretch, yet would ye not
take him for a mad Man who should make light of such an Intimation and
Encouragement? Poor Sinner! thou art the Man, so the Case stands between Christ
and thee: And because thou art blind, he appoints his Servants to lead thee to
him; and this is the Errand upon which I am come this day: do not say but that
help was offered thee.

8. Consider how little all that ever ye have done in Matters of Religion will
avail you if ye go not through with the Work. If ye be but almost persuaded to
be Christians, ye will be but almost said. It may be ye expect great Matters
from your frequent customary Attendance upon Gospel Ordinances, and your making
a more strict Profession of Religion than many others do: But O remember, The
Kingdom of God is not is Word, but in Power, 1 Cor. 4.20. Many will say in the
great Day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in the Name? and in thy Name have
cast out Devils? Mat. 7.22. which are greater things than ye can pretend to:
Yet will he profess unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me ye that work
Iniquity, Verse. 23. The foolish Virgins had Lamps of Profession, Mat. 25. but
perished for want of Oil, viz. true Grace. In short, a^ that ever ye have done
in the Service of God will prove but lost labor, as to any saving Benefit,
except your Hearts be effectually wrought upon and turned to God, as has been
fully opened and proved already.

O consider this well, have ye done, and some of you suffered to many things in
vain? if it be yet in vain, Gal 3, 4. Yea, has so much labor been bestowed
upon you in vain? Chap. 4.11. So much Grace received in vain, 2 Co^. 6.1. O how
bitter will the remembrance of these thing be one Day! How will it pierce you
to the very Heart to think, alas! is all my Profession, Prayers, Hearing, etc.
come to this! Namely the Hypocrites Reward It had been well for me that I had
never known the way of Righteousness, rather than to have rested thus in an
outward show of Religion. Alas! that I should be brought so nigh the Kingdom of
God, and yet fall short forever of it!

9. Consider how long the Divine Patience has born with you already. Where had
ye been before this Day, but that ye have had to do with a God who is merciful,
and gracious, and long-suffering. How easily could he long since have taken
your guilty Souls out of your Bodies, and sent them into a place where the Evil
of Sin, and Danger of delaying Repentance are better known? How have ye
despised the Riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and Long-suffering! Even
that Goodness which leads you to Repentance, Romans 2.4.

How many Instances have ye had of the Divine Benignity and Compassion toward
you? And yet how little Effect has all had upon you! Line upon Line, Precept
upon Precept, here a little and there a little; and yet all has not prevailed
with you to repent and turn to God. Are ye not ashamed! do ye not blush to
think of your vile Ingratitude and Disingenuity toward him? Do ye not tremble
to consider what the Consequence of such Obstinacy is like to be? Do ye imagine
that the Spirit of God will always strive with the wilful Despisers of his
Grace? O remember, lento gradu ad vindictam procedie ita divina, etc. Divine
Wrath proceeds slowly to Vengeance, but will compensate that slowness with the
weight of it when it comes. Laesa patientia fit furor.

As the Gospel Dispensation is most spiritual, so spiritual Judgments are more
common to those who trifle under it, than, perhaps, most Men consider. But I
proceed:

Direct. 2. Follow on these Considerations, till suitable Convictions arise from
them, and your Hearts be sensibly affected with them. Think not that some
general slighty superficial Thoughts about these things will serve the turn:
No, no; they are Matters of greater consequence than so, they nearly concern
you, and therefore must be laid to Heart. Urge them home upon your own Spirits,
apply them close; they have a Work to do not only upon your Understandings, but
upon your Wills, Hearts, and Affections. It is not enough that ye acknowledge
these things to be true, but ye must press the Matter further; if they be
Truths, they are weighty Truths indeed: O labor to feel the weight of them,
that they may go to the quick; apply them strictly and warmly to your own
Souls. It is (says one) a great part of a Christian's Skill and Duty, to be a
good Preacher to himself: There is more in this than most Christians are aware
of, or use to practice; this is a lawful and a gainful way of Preaching. No
Body here can make question of thy Call, nor deny thee a License, nor silence
thee, if thou silence not thy self. Imitate the most powerful Preacher, and
plead with thy own Soul as he is wont to do with his Hearers. [Mr. Baxter.]

Tho such Considerations may wound, pierce, or gall you for the present, it is
so much the better; ye must be wounded that ye may be healed; ye must be broken
that ye may be bound up: The truth is ye have wounded your selves already, and
so much the worse, by how much ye are less sensible of it; your putrified
Ulcers must be searched to the bottom if ever ye expect a through Cure: Your
sluggish Hearts must be awakened to purpose; ye have slept too long. O labor
to be deeply convinced of your past folly, till ye groan under the weight of
that Guilt which ye have contracted: Remember ye are ruined to all Intents and
Purposes if your Guilt be not removed; and therefore your present Case is not
to be rested in.

There is yet hope for you, but no time to trifle in. Therefore,

Direct. 3. It Is highly necessary that ye now come to some besitting Resolution
in the case. In general, that ye resolve to do your utmost to put your
spiritual Concerns into a better posture: And that henceforth ye will strive
earnestly to enter in at the strait Gate: And neglect no Means nor Helps in
order thereto: Such Resolutions as these are most proper in your condition: But
if your Hearts still hang back, let me ask ye, what will ye resolve upon? Vita
humana sine proposito vaga est and languida.

Will ye put the Matter to the venture, and trouble your Heads no further about
it, but still go on at the old, dull, stupid rate?

If so, this is wilfully to destroy your own Souls; and whom can ye blame but
your selves?

Will ye sit down in Despair? This is to despise or undervalue the Riches of
Gospel Grace that are set before you. Those that come to Christ, he will in no
wise cast out.

Again, will ye delay for a while, and put off the thoughts of these things
till hereafter? Answ. This indeed is the common Case, but almost as
unreasonable as either of the other two.

Your times are not in your own Hands, ye know not how soon your Souls may be
required of you; the longer ye delay, the more difficult it is like to be; and
the Spirit that should help you, will be grieved by your backwardness: Satan
will have the faster hold of you; and if Death overtake you before the work be
done, ye are damned.

Therefore, I say, turn your Thoughts which way you will, all other Resolutions
will be found mad and dangerous, except that of the Prodigal; I will arise and
go to my Father: So do ye. And here let me tell you it is needful that your
Resolutions be firm and steady, lest those Difficulties which may afterward
arise in your way should discourage you; and that they be speedy, lest Death
overtake you unprepared. And also that in this whole business ye be sensible of
your own Weakness and Insufficiency, lest ye miscarry through foolish
Self-Confidence. But of that more by and by.

Direct. 4. See that your Resolutions be forthwith put into practice. By this
it must appear that they are true and hearty; if the Will be determined in the
case, suitable Endeavors will ensue.

And here your work lies in the following Order.

1. Humble your selves deeply in the Presence of God for all that Sin and Folly
which hitherto ye have been guilty of. Consider the Evil of Sin as it is
contrary to the holy and pure Nature and Law of God. Call to remembrance your
own Sins, and lay them to Heart, that they may not be laid to your Charge. In a
particular manner bewail the Corruption of your Natures; and more especially
the estrangedness of your Hearts from God, and Enmity against him, with that
inordinate propension to the Creature, in which the Heart of the Old Man does
mainly consist.

Proceed then to consider those actual Transgressions which have all along
issued from this Corruption, viz. Your loss of precious Time, misimprovement of
Gospel Ordinances and Means of Grace; your Pride, Passion, Earthliness,
Sensuality, etc. Confess these things humbly and feelingly in the Presence of
God: Labor to melt into an ingenuous Child-like Sorrow, for having carried it
so unworthily to so good and gracious a Father.

That Sorrow for Sin which proceeds only from fear of Punishment, is the Sorrow
of a Slave, and may consist with as much Love to Sin as ever: But Godly Sorrow
is animated by holy Love to God, which raises in the Soul a rational hearty
Grief for its Transgressions against him, an hatred of Sin, and Resolution
against it for the future. This is Repentance from dead Works, and toward God.

He that covers his Sins, shall not prosper; but he that confesses and
forsakes them, shall find Mercy. Prove. 28.13 Yea, as Matters now stand (such
is the wonderful condescension of the Law of Grace) it is an Act of Justice and
Faithfulness, as well as Mercy to forgive. Sin wheresoever with true Repentance
it is confessed. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our Sins, etc.

Therefore, I say, give Glory to God, by an humble acknowledgment of your Sins.
Lay your selves low, that his Glory may ^^e advanced: Put your Mouths in the
Dust, if so be there may be hope. Justify his holy Law, tho in so doing ye
condemn your selves. Say with the returning Prodigal, Luke 15.21. Father, I
have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son, etc.

2. Thankfully acknowledge the Riches of Free Grace, in that God is yet pleased
to offer you Terms of Reconciliation and Peace. The Golden Scepter is held
forth to you that ye may touch it and live. Methinks this should encourage you,
and put Life and Vigor into your Proceedings, and draw out your very Souls in
sweet Returns of Love to God. Lord, is there yet Hope; is there any Mercy for
such an one as I? Behold I come in Obedience to thy Call. Blessed be God for
Jesus Christ.

3. Humbly implore pardoning Mercy for your past Sins, and the help of Divine
Grace for your present and future Duty. As the necessity of your Case should
make you very earnest and importunate in these Requests: So ye have great
encouragement given you to strengthen your Faith and Confidence in the Divine
Goodness. God delights in Mercy, and has proclaimed his gracious Name, Exodus
34.6, 9. Use this as an Argument in Prayer, as the Psalmist did, Psalm. 25.11.
For thy Names sake, O Lord, pardon mine Iniquity, for it is great. Plead the
Merits and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, the Promises of the Gospel, and assure
your selves God is as ready to forgive, as ye are to repent and forsake your
Sins. He will not despise a broken and a contrite Heart, Psalm. 51.17.

And since the work that lies before you is holy and spiritual, therefore trust
not to your own Resolutions or Strength: Pray hard for the help of the Spirit:
^ay your Souls open to the Influences of his Grace; yield your selves to his
Conduct. Carefully strike in with all his Motions. Lord, here am I, what
would thou have, me to do? Teach me the way wherein I should go, incline mine
Heart to thy Testimonies, strengthen me with Might in my inward Man. Magnify
thy Power in my Weakness. Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears, draw me, and I
will run after thee.

4. And now give up your selves unfeignedly to God in and through Christ. If ye
expect he should be your God, that is, your Portion, Happiness, Soul-satisfying
Good, ye must be his People, devoted to his Love and Service: The Covenant must
be mutual, else how should it be a Covenant. Let this be done with great
Freedom, Cheerfulness and Resolution of Spirit, ye will never have reason to
repent of your choice. He will be your Shield, and your exceeding great Reward.

5. Live henceforth as becomes the Vovenant People of God. Renounce your Lusts
and Corruptions: Let the time past of your Lives suffice you to have fulfilled
the Inclinations of the Flesh. Remember ye must now live at another rate than
heretofore ye have done. The Glory of God must be your great End; his holy Word
your Rule; his blessed Spirit your Leader and Guide; His Promises your Support
and Joy. In short, ye must become a peculiar People, zealous of good Works:
Still endeavoring to make further advances in the Knowledge and Love of God,
and in Obedience to him.

Direct. 5. Arm your selves, and watch carefully against those Temptations to
which young Converts are in an especial manner liable.

Under this Head I must only give you some short Hints, for to speak fully to
this Point, would require a very large Discourse. At first setting out ye enter
upon a State of Warfare, and if ye stand not upon your Guard, Satan will be
sure to get an advantage against you,

1. Some Persons at their first Conversion meet with extraordinary Raptures of
Spiritual Joy, full Assurances of the Love of God, and lively Foretasts of the
Heavenly Glory. Their reconciled Father smiles upon them, takes them into his
Arms and comfort them, as one whom his Mother comfort, and dandleth upon
her Knees, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 66.12, 13.

And now Satan takes an advantage to make them impatient of staying upon Earth
any longer; they would needs be removed to Heaven out of hand, and are scarce
content to wait God's time. This case, tho not very common, is yet more than a
meet Supposition. To such I would say,

Ye have great reason indeed to be very thankful that Matters are so well with
you in reference to your eternal State. But O remember how long God waited to
be gracious to you; how frequent were the strivings of his Spirit with you
before ye would yield! How well contented could ye have been to have continued
on Earth for ever, before he gave you these feeling Discoveries of a better
State! And how justly might he have left you to perish in your Aversion from
him!

But now ye think your own turn is served, and your eternal Welfare secured, ye
would quit the Stage, and do no more Service for God, or his Church, in your
Generation, but have your full Blessedness immediately, as if it were of Debt
and not of Grace. Is this your Kindness to your Friend, your Ingenuity, your
Gratitude? Is not the Reward sure? Shall it not come in season? Will not Heaven
be the more welcome after ye have duly waited till ye be at age for that
Inheritance? Is there nothing of Unbelief in this your eagerness? He that
believes shall not make hasle, Isa. 28.16. Had not the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, etc. their time of waiting as well as you? Is not so glorious a State
worth waiting for? And besides, if you patiently continue in well-doing, your
Glory will be encreasing^ And to say no more, Eternity will be long enough to
enjoy that Blessedness which is designed for you.

Tempt. 2. Are ye tempted to overvalue your present Seize?

Answ. Consider ye have nothing but what ye have received, and why then should
ye glory as if ye had not received it? 1 Cor. 4.7. Ye have received nothing but
what ye must give an account for. Your stock of Grace is to be traded with,
your Talents must be improved; what reason then have ye to tremble lest in this
ye should be found wanting? Moreover, ye bear not the Root, but the Root
bears you; without Christ ye can do nothing, be not high minded, but fear.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed list be fall. 1 Cor. 10.12.
Spiritual Pride is the way to lose what ye have got, and to full into the
Condemnation of the Devil. Besides, there is a great deal of Absurdity and
Self-contradiction in it; viz. for a Man to have high thoughts of himself, as
if he had attained unto great Measures of Grace, when the entertaining of such
Thoughts is a sign that he has little true Grace, if any at all. Deep Waters
and full Vessels make least noise; the most fruitful Ears of Corn hang
downwards; not so, those that are shallow, empty, or blasted.

Tempt. 3. Are ye for a factious siding with this or the other Party, and
rashly censuring those that differ from you?

Answ. Think well how great a Sign this is of Weakness in Grace: Unripe Fruit
is sow^, harsh, and unpleasant; so are raw Novices in Christianity: But further
Experience and Humility would mellow and sweeten your Temper and Disposition.
Remember how great a stress the Gospel lays upon servent Charity; loving one
another, is the Note or Mark whereby we must be known to be Christ's Disciples.
The grand essential Points of Religion, which ye must live upon, are generally
owned, and acknowledged by all Parties: Is it not then a great piece of Folly
(tho very common) to overlook these weightier Matters, and to suffer our Zeal
to evaporate and spend it self about Wood, Hay, and Stubble? Of this see my
Discourse concerning the Immortality of the Soul. Page 143. etc.

Tempt. 4. Are ye tempted to grow secure and careless, because ye think your
Case is safe?

Answ. The greater your Hopes of Heaven are, so much the more reason ye have to
be watchful against Sin, diligent and active in the way of your Duty: But if ye
grow negligent or remiss in Matters of Religion, ye have cause enough to
suspect that your Hopes and Confidence are ill-grounded, or not like to last
long. 1 John 3.3. Every Man that has this hope in him, purifies himself, even
as he is pure.

Again; there are many Eyes upon you: The great God is the most reverend
Witness of all your Thoughts, Words, and Actions: The Angels of God encompass
you about, and observe your Behavior: Satan waits to take you at an advantage;
your fellow Christians are concerned for your Welfare and Perseverance: Wicked
Men wait for your halting. Surely this is not a time for you to be slothful or
unconcerned.

Moreover; suppose you be in a State of Grace: many that have been so have
fallen into very grievous Sins, and wounded Conscience deeply; and your Safety
depends upon the continual Influences of the Holy Spirit: and therefore it must
needs be dangerous to grieve or quench that Spirit, by Laziness or carnal
Security.

Tempt. 5. Does the prospect of those Difficulties that lie in your way
discourage you?

Answ. Is not Heaven worth striving for? Would ye have the Crown without
Victory, or a Victory without Conflict, or Conflict without Enemies? (...) ye
not know that there are more with you than agai^^^ you? If ye be sincere, God
is on your side, and wi^^ be with you when you pass through Fire or Water. His
Strength is made perfect in Weakness; his Grace (...) sufficient for you. 2
Cor. 12.9.

The greatest Enemies that ye have without (...) I mean Satan and the World,
are already vanquished by the Captain of your Salvation: And as for the Enemies
within you, that is your own Lusts and Co^ruptions, tho he had none such in
himself to confli^^ with, yet he has procured for you that Grace which shall
certainly enable you to overcome them, if ye be not wanting to your selves.
What tho indwelling Sin sticks very close to our Natures, it is not essentia^
to them, nor had any place in Man's primaeval State. And the second Adam came
to heal those Diseases which the First had brought upon us. Therefore, tho it
be good to be sensible of your own Weakness, and to feel the Burden of Sin,
that you may fly to Christ; yet ye have no reason to faint or be discouraged,
because ye have him to fly to.

Tempt. 6. Are ye perplexed with troublesome Scruples as to matter of Practice,
that ye dare scarce move forward in the way of your Duty for fear of going
wrong?

Answ. It Is certain that our best Services while we are here on Earth, will be
attended with many sinful Weaknesses and Imperfections: But necessary Duty must
not be left un^one for fear of mis-doing it. That which God requires of us, is,
that we chea^* fully and quietly obey his Will so far as we know it, and
sincerely endeavor to understand it better* Thankfully receiving the
Gospel-pardon for our many Failings and Infirmities. If we have the worthiness
(for so the Gospel calls it) of Faith, Repentance and sincere Desire: Christ
has the Worthiness of perfect Holiness and Obedience for us. And tho it be our
great Duty to keep Conscience tender, that is, to be (...) careful to please
God, and fearful of sinning: (...) we must remember that needless
Self-tormenting ^^ruples are not at all pleasing to God, but great ^^derances
to our Duty, and Devices of Satan to ^ake Religion burdensome and uneasy to us.
And ^^at if these and such other Temptations cease not (...) be troublesome, it
is sometimes necessary that we ^^^temn them: The Devil (says Luther) is a proud
^^irit, and cannot endure to be slighted. He will ^^d us work enough to do, if
we will but parley and ^^gue the case with him. To slight him is to resist
^^^m, and then he flies from us.

Tempt. 7. Are ye tempted to ensnare your selves ^^y rash Vows, and to make
Duty to your selves which God never enjoined you; Or to impose ^asks upon your
selves which he has not prescri^ed?

Answ. The use of Vows is to bind us to the performance of that which God
himself had bound ^s to by his Laws before: That is, to express our Consent and
Resolution by a Self-Obligation to obey his Will; but not make a new Religion
to our selves, nor to injure our Christian Liberty by Self-devised Snares. Who
has required this at your ^lands? Such sacred things as Vows are not to be
trifled with: our Baptismal Covenant and Sacramental Engagements at the Lord's
Table must be carefully observed: But Vows about lesser Matters are not to be
made without great Consideration and Caution, alteration of Circumstances may
make that sinful* or however troublesome and inconvenient, which at present
appears, and perhaps really is, a Duty: Good Purposes and Resolutions are
necessary and safe, and may be changed when the nature of the Case requires it;
that is, when they cease to be useful to those Ends whereunto they were first
intended. But it is a dangerous thing after Vows (or Promises made to God) to
make enquiry; (...) tho sometimes even that must be done, yet (...) great fear
and trembling: For God will not hold (...) guiltless that take his Name in vain.

Tempt. 8. Are you tempted to grow weary of ^^rious Religion, and to turn back
again to your w^^ted Formality and Negligence?

Answ. Humble your selves deeply before God (...) those Remnants of Corruption
which thus dispose you to revolt; renew your Covenant with him (...) Christ;
plead the Promise of his holy Spirit; (...) upon his Assistance and Grace: Make
not a lig^^^ Matter of the least Decays or Declinings in Ho^^ness, for these
tend to greater. Gird up the Lo^^ of your Minds, consider the Prize that is set
before you: and look to the Examples of those who by Faith and Patience inherit
the Promises; S^^vings and Difficulties will be soon over; b^ i^ weary of well
doing, you shall reap if you faint (...) Gal. 6.9. Whither will ye fly in the
Hour of your extremity? if the Lord help you not then, who can help you? if ye
forsake him, he will also forsake you.

Tempt. 9. Is there some beloved Sin which you are especially inclined to, and
can scarce forbear or part with it?

Answ. Fortify your Minds with Arguments, (...) your Wills with Resolutions
against it. Avoid the occasions of it, and resist the first Strivings and
Tendencies toward it. Double your Watch, that ye be not surprised by it;
single it out to run i^ down; mortify and destroy it, as that which most
dishonours God, and endangers your own Souls.

Tempt. 10. Are you tempted to place an und^^^ Con^idence in your own Works or
Righteousness?

Answ. Consider that if ye thus go about to establish (...) Righteousness, of
your own, you take the way (...) ^^se the Benefit of Christ's Righteousness. If
^ardon and Life be of Grace, they cannot be of Works; else Grace were no more
Grace. As we ^^e Creatures, we owe our selves, and all that we ^ave or can do
to God; the greatest Angel in Heaven cannot strictly and properly merit any
thing of God, how much less such Worms as we? Every ^^^y which we sincerely
perform is a great Mercy received, and renders us further indebted to that
Grace whereby we are enabled thereto. And besides, we stand in need of pardon
for the sinful Weaknesses of our best Services. When we have done all, we are
but unprofitable Servants. Eternal Life is a free Gift: By the Grace of God we
are what we are.

II. We come now to the second Branch of Exhortation, namely, to those who are
much in the Dark as to the State of their Souls, not knowing what to think of
themselves in reference to this great Question, viz. Whether they be passed
from Death to Life? that is, whether they be wrought for Heaven or no.

To such Persons I would offer the following Directions.

Direct. 1. Remember it is no new thing, nor unusual amongst the People of God,
to be full of Doubts, Fears, and Spiritual Troubles. Do not think that your
Case is singular, lest your Spirits should sink under it. Solamen miseris, etc.
There has nothing befal'n you in this Matter, but what is common to Men, even
to very good Christians. It may be Satan will tempt you to think that none ever
were so perplexed with Fears, Uncertainties and misgiving Thoughts as you: But
the Scripture is very plain in the case, that a truly gracious Person may
sometimes walk in Darkness and have no Light; Isa. ^0.10. Read also the 88th
Psalm. and see (...) that good Man was afflicted, and even distra^^ with the
Terrors of the Almighty.

Therefore in all this, God deals no other^^^ with you, than he has done with
thousands (...) his dearst Children. And as ye ought not to ^^spise the
chastenings of the Lord, so neither sho^^^ ye faint under them: For whom he
loves he ^^steneth, and scourges every Son whom he receive. Heb. 12.5, 6.

Direct. 2. Take special care that no secret Lust (...) indulged, no wilful Sin
maintained nor allowed (...) Sin will breed Doubts, and Fears, and Sorrow^ as
naturally as a putrified Carcass does Vermi^^ unless ye be given up to a
reprobate Sense. If (...) will make your VVounds bleed afresh, no wo^^^^ if you
feel the smart and anguish of them. If you weaken the Habits of Grace by
contrary Acts, you may thank your selves that ye cannot discer^ the sincerity
of those Habits. If ye grieve the Spirit who should comfort you, what can ye
expect but to be in the Dark, and so disconsolate. If you play at fast and
loose with Conscience, and run counter to its Dictates, you may be sure (...)
will wound you for your Folly, and pay you home for the Affronts you put upon
it. If you will harbo^^ the Enemies of your Lord, how can ye look for the Light
of his Countenance? That Darkness you labor under is self-contracted; these
Clouds where of you complain, are of your own raising. If you set up your Idols
in your Hearts, God will answer you according to your Idols, Ezekiel. 14.4. In
short, if you will be making bold with Sin, that Sin will cause Sorrow and
Trouble, if there be any Life of Grace to feel it. Indeed if the Case be thus
with you ye have great reason to bless God that ye are disquieted, and not
given up to searedness of Conscience; and therefore, I say, away with your
Lust, (...) ye expect the Comforts of the Spirit* of God; (...) the Assurances
of his Love.

Direct. 3. Tho you want these special Comforts of Assurance, do not overlook
those general Grounds of Encouragement that are still before you. These are
firm, clear, and certain, how wavering, doubtful, and dark soever your Thoughts
of your own particular Case may be: These are still at hand, how far soever the
Evidences of your Sincerity are to seek: These are the great Foundations upon
which your Comforts must be built, and therefore you ^^^d need to understand
and digest them thoroughly, and lay the Apprehensions of them deep in your ^ouls.
Viz.

1. It is certain that God is infinitely Good, and that his Love, Mercy, and
Compassion to poor Sinners cannot be measured. He has proclaimed his Name,
that is, his Nature: Exodus 34.6, 7. So Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is merciful and
gracious, slow is Anger, and plentious in Mercy. Isa. 55.7. He will abundantly
pardon: [or multiply to pardon] verse. 8. For my Thoughts are not your Thoughts,
neither are your Ways my Ways, says the Lord. For as the Heavens are higher
than the Earth, so, etc. q. d. quanto sum sub^imior, tanto and clementior,
Grot. By how much I am higher than you, by so much I am more merciful. Remember
all the Goodness of the Creatures is derived from him, and therefore he must
needs be infinitely better than they all. How is it that you call his Power,
Omnipotence, his Wisdom or Knowledge, Omniscience; and yet entertain such poor
narrow Thoughts of his Goodness! Is he not All-good as well as Almighty, and
All-wise? Are not his Attributes all alike Infinite? Is it not the Device of
Satan to hide the Goodness of God from you? and to fill you with black unworthy
Thoughts of him? that he may either quite keep you from him, or make your
walking with him uncomfortable? Therefore, I say, lay this dow^ as a
fundamental Truth, and accordingly stay you^selves upon it. viz. That however
it be, yet (...) is Good.

2. It is also certain that the Satisfaction of Christ is of infinite value:
And that he is full of To derness and Pity to poor Sinners. Whatever he (...)
or suffered, had a transcendant Excellency and Men in it, from the Dignity of
his Person; he was God as well as Man. And his Compassions to poor Sinners are
every where set forth in the Gospel: (...) earnestly did he treat with them in
order to their Reconcillation and Peace with God! How feelingly did he weep
over them! How affectionatly did he pray even for those that persecuted and
hated him to the Death! He disdained not to conv^^se with the meanest Persons;
the poor and infirm had free access to him: How readily did he she^ Mercy to
their Bodies, to prepare them for the Belief and Entertainment of that greater
Mercy be bad in store for their Souls!

3. Pardon and Life are freely offered to you all without exception, if ye will
accept thereof upon the reasonable terms of the New Covenant. The way is open,
Whosoever will, let him take the water of Life freely. God was in Christ
reconciling the World to himself. None are excluded by the tenor of the Gospel,
but such as exclude themselves by their own wilful and final Impenitency.

Whatsoever Doubts or Difficulties arise before you, still keep close to these
three grand Foundations of Comfort and Encouragement. Be your Case as bad as it
will, it cannot be desperate, unless ye make it so by persisting obstinarely in
it. Remember, the Love of God was the Cause of our Redemption by Jesus Christ;
and our Redemption was the Foundation of the New Covenant. You have these three
altogether, Joh. 3.16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting Life.

Direct. 4. Waste not your Time in fruitless Musings or heartless Complaints
about your doubtful uncertain state, but fall forthwith to your certain Duty.
What though you cannot tell whether as yet you have sincerely given up your
selves to Jesus Christ, and accepted of him; I hope you are past doubt that ye
ought so to do: Though ye be in the dark as to what is past, your present Duty
is plain and certain: The Door is open, enter and live. Christ is willing if
you be willing; he offers his Benefits to you, he presses them upon you, and
urges you to accept them: Come then, be of good cheer; arise, he calls you.
Gird up the Loins of your Minds; sighing and complaining rid no Business: Set
your selves to the work with all your might. Admit that you have not yet
sincerely closed with Jesus Christ, it is not too late to do it now; and it is a
thing that must be done, or you are undone forever. But if you suppose or hope
you have done it already, it will be so much the easier to do it again; nor
will it be lost labor to renew your Covenant with him: The advantage is great
every way. If your Souls be habitually for Christ, draw out those Habits into
exercise, and that is the way to feel that you have them: Thus Grace will be
more discernable, and Conscience more quiet, while you are intent upon your
Duty. You may be saved though you should live and die under great Doubts and
Fears as to your sincerity, but you cannot be saved except you be sincere.
Therefore, observe, it much more concerns you to enquire What shall I do to be
saved? than How shall I know that I shall be saved? And indeed this is the most
likely way to get assurance, or however such necessary support as may keep you
from sinking. It is one thing to have Grace; another thing to know that ye
have: The former is absolutely necessary to Salvation, the latter is not so.

Moreover, Little things are not easily discerned, a little Faith, Love,
Repentance, etc. (tho sincere) are not so soon discovered: Therefore, I say
again, take pains with your own Hearts to bring them nearer to Christ, labor
to be carried out toward him with a more full bent and resolution of Soul,
even such as may clearly turn the Scale for him against all other Interests
whatsoever; and this is the most dutiful, safe and ready way to know that you
are sincere. Strong Grace will speak for it self. Children and weak Persons are
apt to be peevish and full of Complaints, but with those that are more healthy
and vigorous it is not so. Well then, either you are now willing to comply with
the Offers of the Gospel, or not; if not, it is a sign you are yet in your Sins,
and that this great Change has not yet passed upon you: But if you be willing,
know that the Law of Grace is as much in force as ever; and therefore it is both
your Duty and Interest to give up your selves to Christ, as tho you never had
done it before. And this is the true way to revive and discover any Sparks of
Grace in you, which at present lie hid under many Doubts and Discouragements.
Cast your selves at the Feet of Christ, open your Case to him: Lord, I have a
treacherous deceitful Heart, I know not how to trust it, I dare not say that I
have as yet heartily accepted of thee as thou art offered in the Gospel, but
since thou art still pleased to renew the Offer; Lord, I desire from the botrom
of my Soul, to do it now: O do thou keep this in the imagination of the
Thoughts of my Heart, and prepare my Heart into thee. 1 Chronicles. 29.18.

Direct. 5. Let not the Sense of your present Wants, nor the Fears you are
under, make you forget or undervalue the Mercies which you have received. What
tho you have not the special Comforts of Assurance? Have you therefore nothing
to blessed God for? Has he not in some measure awakened you from the gross and
brutish Stupidity of a carnal unregenerate State? And made you sollicitous
about your spiritual and eternal Concerns? Has he not followed you with the
Offers of his Grace, and the Strivings of his Spirit from one Ordinance and
Providence to another? Has he not given you some tendencies of Soul toward
him, some Desires after him, some Breathings and Longings for an Interest in
him? Does he not still wait to be further gracious to you? Are not the Arms of
his Love and Grace stretched forth toward you, and ready to embrace you? Does
he not offer to take you by the Hand and reach you to go? What say you to all
this? Is there no Tribu^e of Thankfulness due for so much Kindness? Do you
think he will take it well at your Hands that so great Favors should be
extenuated and made nothing of by you? As if he had been a Wilderness, or a
Land of Darkness to you. Jer. 2.31. How can you entertain hard Thoughts of so
good a God! How can you affect estrangedness from him any longer? Is
ingratitude for what you have received the way to get more, or rather to
forfeit what you have already? Do ye not know, that to be much in thankfulness
would familiarize and sweeten the Thoughts of God to you, and should not
ingenuity it self teach you to acknowledge his Favors? Would not this mightily
tend to drive away that Darkness, Fear, and bitterness of Spirit whereof you
are still complaining? Surely the nearer you get to God in the exercise of Love
and Praise, the more your Clouds and Doubts will vanish; the remembrance of
Mercy and Kindness received is in its own Nature pleasant and refreshing to the
Soul: And the more you own him, the more Light and Comfort you may expect from
him. What tho you have not all that you could wish? It Is certain you have much
more than you deserve, yea contrary to your ill-deservings. Therefore I say,
thank God heartily for what you have received, and do not forget his Benefits.

Direct. 6. Observe well whether your own Safety and Comfort be not too eagerly
looked at in your Desires after Assurance, while in the mean time any Glory
which may redound to God thereby is but coldly, or not at all regarded. It much
concerns you that your ends and aims be rightly ordered and settled in this
Matter; Carnal self too often intrudes into, and so corrupts our Desires even
after spiritual things. VVatch your Hearts narrowly here, it is ten to one but
you find them very faulty. Our own VVelfare and Peace may indeed be aimed at,
but in full Subordination to the Divine Glory. What is the interest of a
Worm, to the honor and interest of the great God? How can you expect to
prosper while Self is so much looked at, and God so little? Know ye not that
even your Souls themselves, and all their Hopes and Comforts, must be entirely
submitted to his all-comprehending Interest? Well then, let me ask you, what
is it that makes you so desirous after Assurance? Is it only that you may be
more safe, or that you may be more serviceable? That your Minds may be more
quiet, or that you may with more Heart and Vigor lay out your selves for God
in-Praise, Thankfulness and Obedience? If it be the Honor of God that you
design in it, know that he is glorified by the Humility, Self-resignedness,
Patience and Constancy of his Servants, even when they are under great Doubts
and Fears, and this he expects from you as most suitable to your present
Circumstances. You must not expect all plain way; God is wont to make Men feel
the bitterness of their former Disobedience, and to lay them low in
Self-abhorrence, before he build them high in Comfort and Assurance. He
delights in glorifying his Grace and Power, by supporting his People under
their Fears and Conflicts; as well as in refreshing them with the Joys and
Comforts of his holy Spirit. And are ye not willing to submit to his Methods?
Here Is carnal Self with a witness. What! may he not do what he will with his
own? Remember the Disciples in Christ's School are not all of one standing, it
is enough that all the Sincere are in safe Hands: Labor therefore rather to be
sincere, than to know that you are so.

Direct. 7. Lay not too great a Stress upon the stirrings of Affections and the
passionate feeling thereof in religious Exercises. These are no sure Marks to
judge of your State by: Because they ebb and flow variously according to the
Temper and Disposition of our natural animal Spirits. Tho lively Affections in
Duty are very desirable, and should be endeavored after; yet in trying our
spiritual Estate, the inward deep rational workings of our Souls toward God
are mainly to be looked at, viz. a fixed and high estimation of him above all
in our Understandings, and hearty Resolution for him, and cleaving to him in
our Wills, with correspondent Endeavors to please him and be accepted of him,
through the whole course of our Lives: In these things it is that the Life of
Grace and Duty does consist. Those are the holiest Souls who are inwardly and
deeply most inclined toward God, resolved for him, and sollicitous to please
him: Not those who have the most transporting Passions or moveable Affections.
The sacred Recesses of the Mind (as I may allude to that of the Poet, Persius
Satyr 2d.) are more inward; the affectionate Part comes more into view. God is
not an object of Sense, and therefore more fit for the Understanding and Will,
than the Passions to work upon. The grand Essentials of Holiness are more deep
and steady; passionate strivings of Affection make a greater noise, but are
nothing near so valuable. Besides, weak Judgments and strong Passions often go
together* The wisest and weightiest Persons are usually most sedate, and
composed.

Direct. 8. Remember that God often makes the fullest discoveries of his Love
to his People, when they are engaged in the most difficult Self-denying Parts
of Duty and Obedience: It would be endless to tell you of the transporting Joys
which many of the martyrs have found in their sharpest Sufferings: When all Men
have forsaken them, God has stood by them, and comforted them: He has visited
them in their Prisons, and enlarged their Souls with spiritual Refreshments,
when their Bodies have been under confinement: He has enabled them to triumph
in the very Flames, and to baffle their Enemies by their Patience, Magnanimity
and Cheerfulness in Suffering. Paul and Silas sung in the Stocks: Stephen had
Heaven opened to him when his Enemies were raging against him: The three
Children in the fiery Furnace have one walking with them like the Son of God.
It Is true indeed, we are not to run upon Sufferings till God call us thereto;
but if it please him so to do, we ought thankfully to accept of such a Call, as
a Prize put into our Hands for the exercise of our Graces, and the advancement
of our Comforts. But on the other Hand, if you be for taking up with a cheap
and easy Religion, and excusing your selves from the more difficult
self-denying Parts of Duty, it is a sign your Graces are but weak at best, and
therefore your Comforts are not like to be strong. Would you sow sparingly and
reap plentifully? How can you expect full Assurance-of the Love of God, while
you care not how little you lay out your selves for him?

And what tho you are not called to the fiery Trial: Yet if you will but set
your selves earnestly to the frequent diligent spiritual Exercise of religious
Duties, to the mortificaiton of your beloved Lusts, and to the doing of all the
good you can in the several places wherein you stand; you will certainly find
Difficulties enough to exercise your Graces, and to make way for your greater
Comforts, because the Flesh will draw back from such work as this: the World is
at hand ready to entangle you, Satan will do his worst to hinder you, and so
will all his Instruments. Accustom your selves to self-denying Obedience, and
in so doing you may expect the Comforts of the Holy Spirit.

Direct. 9. Understand aright the ordinary Methods which the Spirit takes in
comforting the Souls of Believers, lest you abuse your selves by expecting what
is unusual or extraordinary.

It Is certain that none have a Right to the saving Benefits of the Covenant of
Grace, but those who comply with the Terms of that Covenant. Nor can any have
the Comforts of Assurance, who do not know that they have so complied. Now it is
the Spirit that enables us to assent to the Truth of the Gospel, and
particularly to the Truth of the Promises that are made to sincere Believers:
And it is he that inclines our Hearts by his Grace to accept of the Benefits
offered, and to perform the Duties required; that is, truly to repent of our
Sins, and to give up our selves to God in Christ: And when we have so done, our
Case is safe. But in order to the comfort of Assurance, it is further requisite
to discern our own sincerity in this Covenant-closure; and from thence to
conclude that we are in a justified State; and have a Right to the heavenly
Felicity. Now here we stand in need of further help from the Spirit, that we
may be enabled to discern the Grace which he has wrought in us, and so to draw
that comfortable Conclusion, viz. that we are passed from Death to Life. Thus
you see the Spirit comfort Believers, and gives them Assurance of Salvation
in a rational way, by helping them to discover the Evidences of their
Sincerity: And it is foolish Presumption to expect Assurance any other way; as
if the Spirit would enable Men to rejoice in they know not what, or to conclude
they shall be saved they know not why. We must be able to give a reason of the
Hope that is in us, 1 Pet. 3.15. So does the Apostle here in the words of the
Text.

O do not deceive your selves by expecting enthusiastical Impulses, irrational
Raptures, inward Voices to tell you that you are the Children of God: But
rather endeavor to get such a Frame and Disposition of Soul as becomes his
Children, and thence to conclude that you are such. The sanctifying operations
of the Spirit in Believers are the Witness or Evidence of their Adopuon.

Take care also, that you deceive not your selves, by expecting such Raptures
of Joy as are extraordinary; all are not fit for such degrees of Comfort, nor
would know how to manage themselves if they had it. But if you have so much as
tolerably supports your Spirits, and keeps them from sinking, bless God, and be
humble: And have a care of Peevishness or Imparience.

Direct. 10. Distinguish carefully between your State in the main, and the more
remote Accidents or Circumstances wherewith it may be attended: Between what is
necessary to the Being of a sincere Christian, as such, and what is further
requisite to his Well-being, Growth and Comfort: Or (if you will) between
foundation and building work: If these things be confounded, it is scarce
possible you should have any settled peace and quiet in your Souls.

Those who have truly consented to the Covenant of Grace, that is, whose Hearts
and Lives are, in the main, for God, Christ, Holiness and Heaven; such, I say,
are in a justified State, ^^d have a Right to eternal Life. But then it must be
remembered, that even such Persons themselves are often guilty of great Defects
and Intermissions in the exercise of Grace, and in the performance of religious
Duties, yea, and sometimes fall into great Sins (besides those of daily
Infirmity) and therefore are often called to Repentance, Humiliation and
Amendment, and to renew their Covenant with God in Christ, and to act Faith
upon his Merits and Satisfaction for Pardon and Peace, and to double their
Watch and Diligence for the future, when in the mean time they are not,
perhaps, obliged at all to call in question their Foundation, nor to perplex
themselves with Doubts and Fears as to their State in the main. Indeed as for
those who often fall into groffer Sins, and lie long in them, even such Sins as
they might easily forbear if they were truly willing, such have great reason to
question their own Sincerity: But as for the common Infirmities of the Godly,
yea, or their greater falls through Inadvertency, Surprise, or the violence of
some sudden Temptation, the Case here is quite different: If a Workman when he
has laid his Foundation, and is proceeding forward in the Building, should upon
evevy lesser, or some few greater mistakes, in the Superstructure, pull down
all again, and question the Foundation it self, he would make very little
progress, and so have but little comfort in his Work: So here, true Believers
who are in a justified State, have still need to beg daily Pardon for their
daily Sins, yet ought they not to give way to needless Doubts or misgiving
Thoughts as to their State in the main: For if any Man sia, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. 1 John 2.1. He that is washed,
needs not, save to wash his Feet, but is clean every whit. John 13.10.

When David had sinned so grievously in the matter of Vriah, and Nathan the
Prophet was se^^ to him to expostulate with him about it, and bring him to a
greater Sense of the Evil he had done, etc. we find that he humbly
acknowledges his Transgression, earnestly implores the Divine Mercy, prays
hard that the Holy Spirit of God may not be taken away from him: but we do not
find that he was called to doubt of his State in the main, nor can we prove
that he did so, but encouraged himself in the Mercy of God. Psalm. 51.17. The
Sacrisices of God are a broken Spirit, a broken and a contrite Heart, O God,
thou will not despise.

There are (says a great Divine) some Sins which every one that repents of
them, does so forsake as to cease committing them: and there are some lesser
Sins, which they that repent of them do hate indeed, but yet frequently renew,
as our defective degrees in the exercise of Repentance it self, Faith, Love,
Trust, Fear, Obedience, our vain Thoughts and Words, some sinful Passions, etc.
many such Sins are fitly called Infirmities, because they consist with Life,
and are forgiven. It is of great use to the peace of our Consciences to discern
the difference between these two: for one fort require a Conversion to another
State; and the other require but a particular Repentance; and when they are
unknown, are forgiven without a particular Repentance, because our general
Repentance is virtually, though not actually, particular as to them. One sort
are cause of judging our selves ungodly, and the other sort are only cause of
Filial Humiliation. [ Baxter's Directory, part 1. page 299.]

Direct. 11. Though you cannot yet attain to the ^uller comforts of Assurance,
do not therefore under^^lue any thing that looks hopefully, or has a likely
endency thereto. Great things are not usually at^^ined but by degrees, and
through many difficul^ies; it is no small matter to be certain that we are (...)
a justified State, nor is such a certainty so common among true Believers
themselves, as perhaps you imagine, who yet have considerable Support and
Comfort from hopeful Probabilities in the case. Now as it is necessary to pull
down the vain Hopes of presumptious Sinners, so it also is to strengthen and
help the Joys and Hopes of weak Christians. Well then, let me ask you, Are you
not grieved or the many Offenses you have committed against God? at least, Is
it not your trouble that you can nourn for Sin no more? that your Hearts are no
nore tender and relenting? Is it not your desire, and in some measure your
endeavor, to renounce your Sins, and to mortify your Corruptions? Could you
bear the thoughts of parting with Christ, or quitting your Interest in him (for
all your Doubts) and letting go your hold of him, for any thing that could
possibly be offered you in exchange? Would you not even loath and abhor the
Proposal? Is it not your endaavour to love him more, and serve him better? Put
such Questions as these are to your own Souls, and then judge whether in all
this there be not something that appears to be more then like special Grace.
And though you are not yet certain that it is so, yet let thus much support you
till you can see further: And (as I said before) be thankful for what you have,
and strive for more Grace, and then you shall find that spiritual strength and
comfort will increase together. And all along be sure to remember that God and
the Redeemer are as willing to accept you upon Gospel-terms as you can be to
desire it, yea, and infinitely m^^^ willing, as loving Holiness better than you
do; (...) the March break between Christ and you, it shall (...) through your
own refusal. Never was any po^^ Sinner beforehand with him; he is the first in
co^senting, and is a Suitor to us for our full (...) hearty consent, nor will
he despise the least tendecies thereto. He will not break the bruised Reed, o^
On his part all is safe and clear; prevail but withy own Heart to hold on and
go through with the work, and All Is thine own.

Direct. 12. Be sure that you exercise the mo^^ deep and entire
Self-resignation to the sovereign Pleasure of the Divine Will in this matter.
Leave it unto God to measure out your Comforts for you, and to determine the
Time and Season thereof. Lay your Souls at his Feet with the profoundest
Reverence, Humility and Submission; say, as David in another Case, It may be
the Lord will look upon my Affliction -- But if he say he have no delight in
me: behold, here am I, let him do as seems good unto him, 2 Samuel 15.26. O learn
to wait upon the Lord, and look for him when he seems to hide his Fa^^. Isa.
8.17. It is not possible that you should be Losers by thus resigning your Souls
and your All into his Hand; it is your certain Duty so to do; and it will be a
mighty evidence of that Sincerity which you are seeking after. And there are
many comfortable Promises made to such actings of Soul as these, and
encouraging Examples set before us. Blessed are all they that wait for him.
Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine Heart: Wait
I say on the Lord. Psalm. 20.14. Methinks that such a Promise should do more
with you than just keep you from sinking. See also Psalm. 40.1, 2. I waited
patiently for the Lord, etc. It is good that a Man should both hope, and quieth
wait for the Salvation of the Lord. Lam. 3.26. Remember, God waited long on you
before you ^ould take up any serious thoughts of repenting ^^d down in sullen
discontent, because he does not ^^smediately give you the Comforts of
Assurance? ^ne would think common Ingenuity should teach ^^ou better. Light is
sown for the Righteous: and sooner or later they shall reap the blessed Fruit:
But in as much as it is sown, it is meet that they should wait till this
precious Fruit grow ^^p, or rather till they themselves be grown to a ^^aturity
and fitness for it; God's time is the ^^st time: He knows perfectly what
Degrees of Comfort are sit for you, and what the fittest ^easons to bestow
it: The Husbandman after he ^^^h cast his Seed into the Earth, does not
im^^diately expect an Harvest, nor yet say I have ^^boured in vain, I will pull
up the Hedge and lay ^ll waste. No, no, his God instructs him to greater
Discretion. Isa. 28.26. He waits till the appointed Season: So do you in the
present Case; wait God's time for Comfort, give an early check to the least
strivings of Impatience: Say not, Why should I wait upon God any longer? as he,
2 King. 6.33. but rather as the Psalmist, Psalm. 42.11. Why art thou cast down,
O my Soul? etc. hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, etc.

CHAP. XIII.
Directions to those who have attained to greater degrees of Assurance and
Comfort.

WE come now to the third Branch of Exhorcation, namely to those who through
Grace have attained unto greater Measures of Assurance, and are enabled
comfortably to conclude that they are past from Death to Lise: to such I would
say,

In general; Hold fast what you have, that no Max take away your Crown, Rev.
3.11. Keep close to God and your Redeemer, live in the Spirit, walk in the
Spirit: Be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord,
etc. 1 Cor. 15.58. You know whom you have trusted, gird up therefore the Loins
of your Minds. We must tug a while with the Diffificulties of our present State
and Work, but these will soon be over. Heaven is in view, we are almost there,
and shall certainly reap if we faint not. But I proceed to Particulars.

Direct. 1. Whatever you do, be sure to keep humble; look upon Pride as the
firstborn of the Devil. It Is a Sin which God does in an especial manner see
himself against. God resists the Proud. [(...)] Jam. 4.6. He stands in battle
array, or in direct defiance and opposition against them. God still
counteracteth the Proud, as Dr. Manton observes upon the place: 'Twas this
which turned Angels into Devils, as may be observed from that of the Apostle. 1 Timothy 3 6. Lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the
Devil. Pride is still the forerunner of some fall and mischief or other. And
tho in the truly Godly it be in some measure mortified, yet is it not utterly
rooted out, but sticks very close to our Natures; and if it be not carefully
watched against, it will be taking occasion to show it self even from our
spiritual Gifts or Graces: And whatever it comes near is tainted and corrupted
by it. O let us think, and think again, how unsuitable it is to our condition to
be lifted up with high thoughts of our selves, how much disingenuity there is
in is; what have we that we have not received? What were we before we received
it? And what should we quickly be again if we were not upheld by the Divine
Power? We bear not the Root, but the Root bears us, Romans 11.18. Without him
we can ^o nothing, Joh. 15.5 Let us therefore endeavor to be clothed
throughout with Humility, this is (as one says) a Christian's Livery without
which Christ will not own us as his Servants. Let us learn of him to be meek
and lowly in Heart. Let this Mind be in us that was in Christ, who made himself
of no Reputation. [(...)] emptied himself, etc. Phil. 2.7. Let us exercise our
selves frequently and solemnly in Self-Annihilation; that is, in affecting our
Hearts with a deep sense of our own Nothingness in the sight of God, and this I
advise you to do as a, set Duty by it self, and all little enough to subdue the
Pride of our Hearts. Think not that some slight Thoughts or general
Acknowledgments of your own Unworthiness, will serve the turn, but labor to
feel what you say, and to be nothing in your own Eyes.

Go therefore into your Retirements, sit down and consider the glorious
Excellencies of the great God, before whom the Angels vail their Face^ who
looks upon the Sun and it shines not, neither are the Heavens clean in his
sight: Who do^^ great things, and unsearchable, marvelous things without
number, Job 5: 9. Get your Hearts as full as they can hold of adoring and
admiring Thoughts of God. And when you have so done, reflect upon you selves,
and you will find abundant reason to cry out, Lord, what am I? A Worm and no
Max, sinful Dust and Ashes, foolish and ignorant, and as a Beast before thee!
Less than the least of a^^ thy Mercies! nothing, or worse than nothing, etc.
etc. etc.

I know not any thing more suitable to our Condition, more pleasing in the sight
of God, more conducive to our spiritual Safety and Comfort, than to be much
employed in such exercise as this.

Be not desirous of vain Glory, do not affect the Applause of Men, if you meet
with it; watch your Hearts as you would do Gunpowder, Tinder, or Flax when
Fire is near. Still say, give Glory to God, I am a poor, vile, worthless Sinner.

Direct. 2. Press earnestly toward the Mark. You have not yet attained, there
is a great deal of Work still on your Hand, many Enemies to conflict withal:
You have run well hitherto, O have a care of making a stand. -- Ad ulteriora
tendens semper -- nilque putans actum dum quid superesset agendum. -- (as it
was said of Julius Caesar) is a fit Motto for a Christian, still pressing
forward, aiming at greater Seize, and thinking nothing done, while any
thing remains undone: Phil. 3.13.14. Forgetting those things which are behind,
and reaching forth unto those things which are before; -- I press toward the
Mark; etc.

Under this Head you may observe the following Particulars.

1. Carry on a continual Warfare against your remaining Corruptions; the Flesh
will be lusting against the Spirit, so long as we are here on Earth. Labor
therefore to keep under the Body, and to bring it into subjection. Do not
indulge your corrupt carnal Inclinations, how agreeable soever to your
Constitutions or worldly Interest. Have a care of being in love with fleshly
Prosperity and Ease. Search after those Sins which do most easily beset you,
those Corruptions which do most frequently foil you, and single them out to run
them down: Spare them not, but deal with them as Samuel with Agag, hew them in
pieces before the Lord. Fortify your selves with Arguments against them: keep a
strict watch, go not to the utmost extent of your Christian Liberty; resist the
first stirrings of them, the least tendencies toward them. Prove. 30.32. If
thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy self, or if thou have thought evil,
lay thine Hand upon thy Mouth. Avoid as much as possible the occasions of Sin,
especially of your beloved Sins: Habituate your selves to frequent serious
Thoughts of the Presence of God. Set the Lord always before you, Psalm. 16.8.

2. Make not a light Matter of the least decays in Grace, or Tendencies toward
backsliding. What tho it should be granted that a regenerate Person cannot (or
rather shall not, Jer. 32.40.) fall away finally; yet it is past all Doubt that
such an one may fall very foully, so as to grieve the Holy Spirit, to wound his
own Conscience, to blemish his Profession, and to obscure his Evidences: 'And
is not all this sad enough?

Moreover; it is certain Men usually decline by degrees, and therefore the least
Degrees or Tendencies thereto are not to be slighted.

If therefore you find that Conscience begins to grow less tender than formerly
it was; if Sin sit lighter, and the sense of remaining Corruption is less
grievous to you than heretofore; If you grow more customacy and careless in
religious Duties, and less regardful to keep up the Life of holy Communion with
God in Christ: If you can more easily let slip spiritual Opportunities, and
find less relish and sweetness in them than formerly; if the Interest of the
the World and Flesh begin to grow more prevalent with you, and you are ready to
fancy that it is good to be here, while in the mean time your Thoughts of
Heaven grow cold and languid, and your Desires or Longings to be with Christ do
abate: If you find it thus with you, you had need bestir your selves in good
earnest to recover your first Love, and to strengthen the things which remain,
and are ready to die. Otherwise you little know how far the Spirit of God may
be provoked, and what considerable Degrees both of Grace and Comfort may
quickly be lost. I need not tell you that Satan will do his worst to hinder you
in your way to Heaven; your own Corruptions, and the Snares of the World will
get Ground upon you: You had need row hard against the Stream, which of it self
will carry you back, if you press not forward. No^ progredi erit regredi.

3. Labor to grow in due proportion as to the several parts of Holiness and
Duty. The beauty of Holiness (as of every thing else) consists much in the
due symmetry and proportion of the several parts of it. Labor to exercise each
Grace and Duty in its proper Order and Place, so that one may not interfere
with, nor exclude another. See that your Judgments be well settled as to the
great Principles of Religion, that your belief of them be firm, deep and solid.
To this end labor to study and digest well the Articles of the Creed; let your
Thoughts dwell much upon them, that you may understand the right meaning and
due improvement of every Article.

Take care also that your Wills and Affections be fullfraught with becoming
Resolutions and Inclinations; that the Purposes and Desires of your Souls be
rightly ordered and placed: To this end study well the Lords Prayer, both as to
the matter and order of the se^eral Petitions, and endeavor to form and settle
the Inclinations and Tendencies of your Souls accordingly. Especially that the
Glory of God be first and last in all your desires, highest in your esteem; and
all things else desired in full Subserviency thereto. Here lies the Life of
Religion, and this we should be still contending and striving to raise our
Hearts more toward, that they may move more naturally; easily, and
delightfully therein; that God's Interest may be of all others the nearest and
dearest to us.

And then for the direction of your Practice, labor to understand the true
sense and extent of the ten Commandments, to see the Amiableness, Righteousness
and Perfection of the Divine Law, that you may heartily approve thereof, love
it, and live accordingly. Delighting in the Law of God, after the inner Man,
Romans 7.22.

The whole Frame of Christian Principles, Graces and Duties, is beyond measure
lovely, in the harmonious connection of the several parts thereof. Labor
therefore that this Frame may be more and more deeply imprinted upon your
Hearts, and expressed in your Lives, That ye may be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing, Jam. 1.4. If you be maimed in one part, all the rest will fare the
worse for that. Remember, Integrity is the Glory of a Christian; viz. that no
part be lacking. 2 Cor. 7.1. Perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. That is,
let us see that no part of Holiness be wanting in us, and that we be not
wanting to any part of Holiness, but still pressing forward toward Perfection
even in degrees.

Take care, for example, that your Zeal be guided by Knowledge, lest it set all
on Fire, and prove mischievous to your selves and others, or at best no better
than an Ignis fatuus. And again, let your Knowledge be improved into holy Zeal
and Fervency, that you be not lukewarm or indifferent in Matters of Religion,
which most justly challenge our whole Hearts. Rev. 3.1^, 16. Let godly Sorrow,
Repentance and Humiliation for Sin be so exercised, as not to exclude humble
Confidence in the Mercy of God, spiritual Joy, etc.

Again, if God give you a large share of Assurance and Comfort; do not
therefore think your selves above the forementioned humbling Exercises; which
will be a means to preserve your Purity and Peace.

Moreover, let not the Duties of the first and second Table justle out each
other, but let both be duly and carefully observed in the several Branches of
them. Think it not enough to be just and upright, or (as they call it) morally
honest in your dealings with Men, except you be also serious, hearty, and
sincere in the Service of God, and in the devotedness of your Souls to him. And
again, think not that any Worship of Service you perform to God will be
accepted, while second-Table-duties are wilfully neglected. It is the design of
Religion to make us better and more useful in every Relation and Capacity
wherein we stand. 1 Pet. 2.16, 17. 2 Pet. 1.5, etc. Tit. 2.12. We are enjoined
to live SOBERLY, RIGHTEOVSLY and GODLY in this present World, viz. We must be
Sober in the Government of our Senses, Appetites, Affections, etc. Righteous in
our dealings with Men, doing to others as we would that they should do to us.
Godly in the Tendency and Inclination of our Souls toward God, and the serious
Discharge of Religious Duties.

To conclude this Head; Be not so intent upon any one part of Duty as to
overlook the rest. Then shall we not be ashamed when we have respect unto all
God's Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. I esteem thy Precepts concerning all things to
be right; and I hate every false way. verse. 128.

4. Continue instant in Prayer. The People of God are called in Scripture a
Generation of Seekers. Psalm. 24.6. So Psalm. 27.8. When thou said, Seek ye my
Face, my H^a^t said unto thee, Thy Face, Lord, will I seek. How (...) do we
find this Duty pressed upon us! Pray always, pray and faint not, watch unto
Prayer. Pray to your Father which sees in secret. Pray every where, pray
without ceasing, etc. Yea, we find the holiest Persons frequently employed in
this holy Duty. Psalm. 55.17. Evening and Morning, and at Noon will I pray, and
cry aloud, and he shall hear my Voice, Psalm. 109.4. I prayer, so it is in the
Hebrew: As if he were made up of Prayer. It were easy to heap up more Examples,
but I forbear. O Sirs, it is on our Knees that we must get Strength to walk
with God. The actuating of holy Desires, and presenting them to God, must needs
tend in its own Nature to strengthen those Habits of Grace from which such
Desires proceed. Besides, as it is the performance of an undeniable Duty,
(should not a People seek unto their God?) a most reasonable piece of Service,
so an answerable Blessing may be expected upon it. God is the Rewarder of them
that diligently seek him.

Open thy Mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.10. Ask for great things,
and with great Earnestness; come not with mean poor narrow thoughts of the
Divine Goodness; be not cold nor lazy in your Requests. Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled. Mat. 5.

A learned Divine mentions secret Prayer in the forefront of those Duties to
which our Souls are naturally most backward. [Mr. Baxter.]

Now one would think our own Necessities should even constrain us to it. Alas,
how should we live without it! and how much does it concern us to strive
against our Indisposition to it! How sweet is a Duty when rescued out of the
Hands of Difficulties!

O Sirs! whence is it that God hears no oftener from us, and with no greater
fervency? Surely frequent and earnest Approaches to the most holy God would be
a great means to make us more like him.

Remember, God has ways enough to bring you to your Knees. What if dark Clouds
should arise upon you, or some sharp Affliction befall you? then it is likely,
you would come crying after him, and seek him early, Hos. 5.15. But why not
without so much ado? why should not gentler Methods prevail with you? Be but
acquainted with your own Hearts, and you need not want either Matter or Motives
for this great Duty. Never expect to grow in Grace, without keeping up Life and
Fervency in Prayer.

Give me leave to shut up this Head, with a Passage which I lately met with in
the Life of the Excellent Mr. Philip Henry. To the Publisher whereof I here
return my most humble Thanks. It Is as follows;

Page 75. Be sure you look to secret Duty, keep that up whatever you do; the
Soul cannot prosper in the neglect of it. Apostasy generally begins at the
Closer-door, secret Prayer is first neglected and carelessly performed, then
frequently omitted, and after a while wholly cast off; and then farewell God,
and Christ, and all Religion.

5. Learn the Art of holy Meditation. It Is by this that we draw in Life,
Strength and Sweetness from those great Gospel Truths, which inconsiderate
Persons lay by as if they were dead or useless things. It Is this that enlarges
our Knowledge and clears our Apprehensions in spiritual Matters, and sets on
work our Resolutions, Affections, and all the Faculties and Powers of our
Souls; it is a Soul-improving Duty indeed. Nor can you want Matter for such
Meditation, if you will but see your Thoughts at work, and keep them close to
it.

Meditate upon the glorious Excellencies and Perfections of the blessed God,
his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness, Truth, All Sufficiency: Think I say on
these, and think again, till becoming Impressions be wrought upon your own
Spirits, changing you from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. Think not upon God in a
slighty or ordinary manner, but with the greatest Reverence and Admiration,
lest you take his Name in vain, whereof you may be guilty in thought as well as
in words. Let every Thought of God be mighty upon you, and participate in some
suitable Measure of the greatness of its Almighty Object.

Think much on your blessed Redeemer, who he was, what he did, what he
suffered, and why, as also what he has further promised to do. Thus let Christ
dwell in your Hearts.

Think on the Holy Spirit of Grace, call to mind his Influences and Operations
upon your Souls, how infinitely you are obliged to him, how much you have still
to do with him. How direct and explicit you ought to be in your actings of
Faith upon him, as well as upon the Father and the Son. And how careful you
should be to carry becomingly toward him.

Think on the Holiness, Purity and Perfection of the Divine Law, how sweet, how
reasonable, how advantageous that Obedience is which God has required of us. O
how I love thy Law! it is my Meditation all the Day, Psalm. 119.97.

Think on the Heavenly Perfection, what the Saints in Glory, and the blessed
Angels are doing, what they are enjoying, till your Souls be on the Wing,
longing to be joined to that holy and happy Society.

Think on the Graces wherein you are most defective, consider the
reasonableness and necessity of them, and how ill you can live without them, or
without greater degrees of them. Plead the cause of every Grace with your own
Hearts, and in the midst of your Meditations lift up your Eyes and your Souls
to Heaven for help therein. O that you would be persuaded to try this Course,
to engage your selves in the frequent and solemn Exercise of this great Duty of
Meditation: the advantage would be great every way. And that you may be the
fitter for this more stated Exercise of Meditation, it will be very useful, in
the midst of your Employments and Business in the World, to be often sending up
a Thought or Ejaculation toward Heaven.

Direct. 3. If your Endeavors thus far prove successful, so that you find more
Grace and Strength coming in thereby; lay out your selves so much the more for
God. Much is expected from them to whom much is given. Your Talents are to be
traded with, no^ hidden in a Napkin. As the Goodness of God abounds toward you,
you must endeavor to abound in the Work of the Lord; that so it may appear,
that the Grace bestowed upon you is not in vain, 1 Cor. 15.10.58. Surely it is
fit God should have the Glory of his own Gifts, while you have the benefit and
comfort of them. This is the way to receive more, To him that has, shall be
given.

Sit down and consider seriously, cast about in your Minds, what shall I do to
promote the Honor and Interest of that God, who has done so much for me? Can
you form no Project for greater servicableness? I will try if I can help you by
and by; in the mean time resolve to walk with God more humbly, strictly and
watchfully than ever yet you have done: and joyfully to embrace every
opportunity which it shall please God to put into your Hands, to testify your
Thankfulness by humble and self-denying Obedience. It Is true God needs not you,
you cannot be profitable unto him: But it is as true that he expects all this
from you, as a due Expression of the Gratitude and Ingenuity of an honest
Heart. Tho you cannot profit him, yet obedient you must be; and besides
Sovereign Authority, you have many indearing Obligations thereto. I will show
you presently that you need not want work, but will endeavor first to fortify
you against the difficulties of it.

Direct. 4. Let Patience have its perfect work. We have need of this Grace at
every turn; the Race set before us will never be finished, nor scarce one step
rightly taken without it. Heb. 12.1.

We must expect to meet with many Afflictions, Psalm. 34.19. which cannot be
born, nor improved as they ought, without patience. Whether they be such as
come more immediately from the Hand of God: Shall we not be subject to the
Father of Spirits, and live? Heb. 12.9. q. d. We must be subject, our Lives lie
on it. To mutiny is mortal; as one glosses upon the place. It is the Lord, let
him do what seems good in his Eyes. When God is glorifying himself in
correcting us, we must with Aaron hold our Peace. Lev. 10.3. Be still, and know
that he is God: Dumb, and not open our Mouths, because he does it.

If we be afflicted by the Pride or Malice of Men, here again we have need of
Patience, that we fret not our selves because of Evildoers; nor entertain any
peevish revengful Thoughts against them. There Is more of Christianity in this
than most Professors think of. To be habitually disposed, to bless those that
curse us, and to overcome Evil with Good. And indeed we shall never be able to
bear the Contradiction of Sinners, without fainting in our Minds, except we
exercise Patience, and eye the Example of Christ, Heb. 12.2, 3.

Again; are we assaulted by the Temptations of Satan? we shall never conquer
without Patience.

Moreover, we have need of Patience to carry us through the religious Duties to
which we are daily called. Because our sluggish Hearts are still drawing back
from Duty, and are prone to grow weary of it, and reluctate against it. These
Fruits of Righteousness will be blasted, or miserably impaired, if not brought
forth with Patience, Luke 8.15. So pron^ are we to be weary of well-doing!

Lastly, We have need of Patience, that after we have done the Will of God, we
may receive the Promise, Heb. 10.36. That we may wait God's time for our
glorious Reward. The wisest Man tells us, Prove. 13.12. Hope deserred, makes the
Heart sick. It Is Patience therefore that must keep us from fainting. O what
need have we to pray, That the Lord would direct our Hearts into the Love of
God, and into the patient waiting for Christ! 2 Thessalonians. 3.5.

Direct. 5. Put on bowels of Compassion to the Souls of others. Say not with
Cain, Am I my Brother's keeper? nor yet think that Ministers only are obliged
to promote the common Salvation. Methinks you should be desirous to take as
many along with you to Heaven as you can. Are you not taught to pray, That the
Name of God may be ^allowed, his Kingdom come, and his Will be done in Earth,
as it is in Heaven? And must not these Prayers be seconded with suitable
Endeayours in your places? Striving to help on others, will be a means to
exercise, and increase your own Graces, and to advance your Comforts: It will
be a sign that you love Christ sincerely, when you lay out your selves to
promote his Interest. And since God has had Compassion upon you, ought ye not
to have some Compassion upon your Brethren. I know the Devil will do his utmost
to oppose you, but you must be armed with Resolution and Patience. There are
more with you than against you.

When you meet with any that are buffeted with Temptations, perplexed with
Doubts and Fears; remember it might have been your own Case. Labor therefore
to administer Comfort to them, by religious Conference, Communication of
Experiences, and all other proper Means that fall in your way; do not despise
the meanest of them.

And then, as for those that are in an unregenerate State; how can you look
upon them, and not be deeply concerned for them? The less they pity themselves,
the greater objects of your pity: If the Children of Israel were obliged to be
kind to Strangers, and not to vex or oppress them, because they themselves had
been such in the Land of Egypt, and therefore knew the Heart of a Stranger,
Exodus 23.9. Levit. 34. O then what reason have you to pity those that are in an
unconverted Estate, estranged from God! It was once your own Case, you cannot
but know what a dead, dark, disaffected thing the Heart of such a Person is;
how obdurate and senseless. O think what they are doing, and whither they are
going, if infinite Mercy do not prevent. Happy you, if you can help to save one
Soul from Hell! But let me urge this Point somewhat more distinctly.

1. Begin with those that are under your special Care and Charge: If these
perish through your neglect, look you to it, their Blood will be required at
your Hands. Those of you that have Families, think how much you have to do for
God in them. It may be some of you will say, we keep up religious Exercises in
our Houses, viz. Praying, Reading the Scriptures, and Singing the Praises of
God. I answer, thus far is well, I wish more could say so too: But this is not
all that you have to do; Children and Servants are to be dealt with plainly,
familiarly, and tenderly, by you, with all the Skill and Application you can in
order to the Salvation of their Souls. I must not stay to give you particular
Directions, honest Hearts and a sincere desire to do their Souls good, will
soon put you in a way to do it.

2. You have a great deal to do for the Souls of your Neighbors. Are not many
of them ignorant, carnal and ungodly? Can you contrive no way to be helpful to
them? Have you no particular Interest in some of them? Have they no dependence
upon you? Are they under no special Obligations to you? Why are not all these
Advantages improved for God? Can you see them perishing by Multitudes round
about you, and not once open your Mouths to help them? Is this to love your
Neighbors as your selves?

3. In a word, I tell you, it is your duty to take all opportunities, wherever
you come, or with whomsoever you converse, to do good to Souls. I do not mean
that sacred Things should be exposed by rashness, indiscretion or imprudent
management, nor Pearls cast before Swine, who will turn again and rent you: But
one thing I will tell you, as bad as the World is, the Names of Holiness,
Justice, Purity, Religion, etc. are still honorable among Men, and the
contrary Vices are accounted odious: No Man would be looked upon as an impious,
profane, unrighteous Villian. Now this gives you some advantage; and a willing
Mind may find many ooportunities to bring in good Discourse, and that in such a
way as the wo^st of Men should scarce dare to contradict it. There is somewhat
in serious Religion which commands Awe and Reverence, even from them that hate
it. Herod feared John the Baptist, knowing that he was a just Man and an holy,
Mark. 6.20. As for those that are civilized or moralized (as some speak) the
difficulty is next to nothing, to bring in some edifying Discourse among them,
and to leave some good savor behind you. (Christians should be the Salt of the
Earth, Mat. 5.13.) And to let them know that the Life of Religion is somewhat
more than they seem to place it in. Can you not gently and prudently reprove
the Sins of others, where you think it may do good? I know that this is a Duty
that goes as much against the Grain as almost any; but the Scripture is plain,
Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine Heart, thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin to the upon him. Or, as the words
may be rendered [that thou bear not Sin for him] you make your selves Partakers
with other Men in their Sins, if you endeavor not to prevent them. In short,
God will own those that own him, and stand up for his Cause; and if that be not
enough, see where you can find a better Patron.

Moreover, as for those that are poor and low in the World, you might make way
for doing good to their Souls, by showing Kindness to their Bodies, if you
thought it worth the while to be at any expense for the interest of Christ in
the World. I say no more than this, if it were possible that Grief could have
any place in Heaven, this sure would be the matter of it; to remember how
little we had done for God on Earth.

Direct. 6. Be much in the exercise of those Graces and Duties which tend most
directly Heavenward, and are nearest a kin to that blessed State. This is the
way to make you ripe for Glory. You need not stay for all of Heaven till you
come thither; there are great Foretasts of it to be enjoyed on Earth, if you be
not wanting to your selves. You may feast your Souls upon the Provisions which
Christ has made for your present support, and more especially upon those
discoveries which he has given you of the Glory intended for you; and you have
need so to do, lest you faint by the way. I may say to you as the Angel to
Elijah, 1. King, 19.7. Arise and eat, because the Journey is too great for thee.

1. Live by Faith upon the great Promises of the Gospel, whereby the Heavenly
Glory is made sure unto true Believers; realize those Promises: there remains
a Rest for the People of God. Blessed. are the dead that die in the Lord, etc.
If any Man serve me let him follow me, and where I am, there shall also my
Servant be. If any Man serve me, him will my Father honor. These are the true
Sayings of God. Rev. 19.9. How comes it to pass that they are no more
considered, and lived upon? What tho at present we have not the satisfaction of
immediate intuition, know ye not that Faith is to be instead of sight, till we
come to Heaven, Heb. 11.1. But alas! how apt are we to take up with some dark,
dreaming, confused Notions and Thoughts, instead of the lively Exercise of such
a Faith.

2. Labor to stir up in your selves earnest Longings after this blessed State.
How can we say we love our Lord, if our Hear^s be not with him? Should we not
set our Affections on things above, where Christ sits on the right Hand of
God? Col. 3.1, 2. Ou^ Lord is there, our Inheritance is there, many of our
Friends and Acquaintance are gone before; how ill does it become us to suffer
our Hearts to flag as if we were indifferent whether we followed them or no?
Surely we should groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our House
which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.2. Do but observe how eager and intent
Worldlings are upon empty Vanities, things that cannot profit: And shall we be
so cold and heartless in the Tendencies of our Souls toward that Happiness
which is solid and substantial? Were our Hearts more set upon Heaven, it would
put Life and Savor into all our Duties, it would support us under Afflictions,
and enable us to baffle Temptations; it would be an Evidence of our Sincerity,
and raise us above the slavish Fears of Death. But I proceed,

3. Be much in the exercise of a lively well grounded Hope. Faith presents the
heavenly Glory to the view of the Soul, Desire reaches forth toward it, Hope
lays hold upon it. To this we are begotten again, 1 Pet. 1.3. By this we are
saved, Romans 8.24. See first that your Hopes be rightly grounded, and then that
they be duly exercised.

4. And now it is time that your Souls should be affected with spiritual Joy.
Faith and Hope must both contribute to this. Thus we read of Joy in believing,
and of rejoicing in Hope. Read Psalm. 32.11. Phil. 4.4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. You are
over and over commanded to rejoice, it is not left to you as a Matter
indifferent: It Is as truly a Duty in its place, as Godly Sorrow, Humiliation
and Repentance are in theirs. And it is more noble, as appertaining to the
primitive and principal Part of Holiness; whereas the other belong to the
medicinal healing part thereof.

5. Above all things strive to keep up the Warmth and Vigor of holy Love to
God and your Redeemer: Let every other Grace do its part to promote this.
Labor still to get nearer to God, more inward with him, and that your Hearts
may move more naturally toward him. God is Love.

Direct. 7. Observe narrowly the Temper and Behavior of those Persons who seem
ripest for Heaven, and take them for your Examples. Converse much with such: He
that walks with the Wise, shall be wise. In such you may observe manifold
Appearances of those inward, gracious Principles, by which they are acted. In
them you may observe great Humility and Condescension toward such as are their
Inferiors. Great tenderness for the Honor and Interest of God in the World;
Great delight in making mention familiarly of those that are gone to Heaven
before them; An excellent composure of Gravity and Cheerfulness; a weighty
Seriousness and Warmth in the Duties of Gods holy Worship: In a word, you may
see plainly enough whither they are going, and how beautiful a thing Holiness
is thus growing up toward its Perfection.

FINIS.

