SEVERAL DISCOURSES Tending to promote Peace and Holiness Among Christians.

To which are added, Three other distinct Sermons.

By Dr. Manton.

LONDON; Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M.DC.LXXXV.

TO THE Right Honorable ARTHUR Earl of Anglesey.
May it please your Honor:
IN the Learned Ages of the World, it has ever been somewhat difficult to suit
Books to the patronage of the Learned, Judicious, and Impartial; such as they
know you are, who know you. And when such Pieces are prepared, and ready to be
sent abroad, it is not easy to make choice of a Patron worthy of such a
Treatise. This presented to your Lordship, worthy of a good, has found out the
best Patron; and like the incomparable History of Thua^^s, happy in its Author
and manner of writing, and in its Patron to whom dedicated, fails only in the
Pen that dedicates it. The things it treats of, express much of your Honor's
Sentiments, Wishes, Value, and Endeavors, to keep the Root of Christianity
flourishing, that Christians may answer their ancient Character, Vivimus, non
loquimu^, magna. It savoureth of that moderation which adorns the Christian; it
does with candor represent things in which many now dissent, that 'twould be
happy for the Church of Christ, if all would, on such terms, forbear each
other, bear one another's Infirmities, and show that they believe the Lord is
at hand. Here I think is rightly stated what are the lesser, what are the
weightier Things of the Law; and here are Directions, which (if followed) would
keep Peace and Love among Brethren, and perfect Holiness in the Fear of the
Lord. The Author enjoys that sight, which Holiness and Peace here recommended,
did lead him, and will lead others unto. He is (...), and reaps the Fruit of
those and other his Labors, which were designed to help others to Happiness
also. Be pleased to give the Publisher leave to send this into the World,
countenanced with your Honor's Name and Favor, which may induce some to read
and consider what you approve, and the Author left (as Elijah did his
Posthumous Letter) to make the Age wiser, i. e. holier and more peaceable.
Assured of this Favor from your Honor, and hoping for this Effect of the
Work, the Publisher leaves it at your Lordship's feet; craving leave to
subscribe himself,

My Lord, Your Honor's most humble and obedient Servant, H. T.

The Contents.
THe preference of Duties, Morals before Rituals; on Matthew. 9. 13. Page 1 A
Description of the true Circumcision; on Phil. 3. 3. 51 What kind of Perfection
is attainable in this Life; on Phil. 3. 15. 149 A Persuasive to Unity in things
Indifferent; on Phil. 3. 15. 182 Not to be offended in Christ, the ready way to
Blessedness; on Matthew. 11. 6. 215 Wisdom is justified of her Children; on
Matthew. 11. 18, 19. 255 The faithful Followers of Christ must expect Troubles in
this World; on Luke 9. 57, 58, etc 315 No excuse against a speedy obeying
Christ's Call. 341 Looking back, ill becomes those that have set their face
Heavenward. 368 The Nature and Excellency of Saving Faith: in two Sermons; from
Heb. 10. 36. and 1 Pet. 1. 4. P. 1 A Wedding-Sermon; on Genesis 2. 22. 65
ERRATA.
PAge 7, line 19. read de ordine modum. P. 71. l. 20. for Business, r.
b^s^ness. P. 74. l. 28. f. tendency, r. Tendry. P. 83. l. 12. f. childish, r.
childlike. P. 87. l. 24. f. sacred, r. sound. P. 109. l. 9. dele Q. and read 2
dly, etc. P. 114. l. 4. f. care, r. cure. P. 117. l. 1. f. oblation, r.
oblectation. P. 118. l. 25. f. of, r. in. P. 124. l. 9. f. justified, r.
instituted. P. 139. l. 26. f. Iustificiaries, r. Iusticiaries. P. 144. l. 25.
f. Creation, r. Creature. P. 157. l. 19. f. many, r. any. P. 170. l. 11. r. Who
being sensible, etc. P. 256. l. 4. f. cry, r. crying. P. 259. l. 6. f. Corath,
r. Wrath. P. 283. l. 21. f. Corah, r. Wrath. P. 295. l. 25. f. Had, r. How. P.
358. l. 21. f. Please, r. plead.

MATTHEW. 9. 13. But go ye and learn what that means, I will have Mercy, and
not Sacrifice.
THese words are part of Christ's Plea for his converse with Publicans and
Sinners, at which the Pharisees took offense.

Three Answers he makes;

1. From their Necessity, represented in a proverbial Speech; The Whole need
not a Physician, but they that are sick.

2. From the end of his Commission, I came not, as the Doctor of the Church, to
call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance.

3. Here is a third suggested in the words read to you, by a saying of the
Prophet Hosea, Chap. 6. 6. where a general Reason is intimated, that a Ceremony
of the Levitical Law must not hinder a necessary Duty of the Moral Law.
Therefore his conversing with them for their Edification, was not unlawful nor
uncomely; for all Rituals must give way to Morals. And so those Laws of not
accompanying with an Heathen, or an unclean Person, were never intended to be a
Bar to an Act of Mercy or Charity, especially spiritual Mercy and Charity. And
therefore though they held the Publicans profane, and unworthy their
Conversation, (therein also stretching the Law) yet Christ, without any breach
of decorum, might converse with them for their good. For if Acts of Mercy and
Charity be to be preferred before the Ceremonies of the Worship of God, this
Act of rescuing and saving a Soul, is to be preferred before all these ritual
Restraints of Conversation, with those who were supposed to be unworthy, or
legally unclean. And it is notable, these words are brought, not only to
vindicate this Fact of Christ, but secretly to tax the Pharisaical Hypocrisy of
those, who place Religion in Rituals more than Morals. Elsewhere you find
Christ at this Argument again on another Occasion, but to the same End and
Purpos^, Matthew. 12. 7. When the Pharisees frowned; because the Disciples
plucked Ears of Corn for their Necessity on the Sabbath Day; If you had known
what this means, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, you would not have
condemned the Guiltless. So that this one Sentence is notably useful to condemn
Pharisaism; or, which is all one, close Hypocrisy, and withal to set us right
in the true Religion.

In the words observe:

1. Christ's Preface.

2. The Words of the Prophet quoted.

Christ's Preface is to be regarded; Go^ye, learn what that means.

And in the other place, If you had known what this means. This shows that
it is a point which deserves well to be studied by u's, This saying of the Lord
by the Prophet, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice.

Where Observe;

1. The form is Negative; but in the sense it is to be understood comparatively;
I will have Mercy rather than Sacrifice. So when Paul says, 1 Cor. 1. 17.
Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel: Not chiefly to
baptize, but rather to preach the Gospel. So here it is not a simple Negation,
but a Comparative, that he approved of Moral Duties more than Sacrifice.

2. Observe; The two things compared, Mercy, and Sacrifice. In the Prophet
Hosea there is another word, I desired Mercy and not Sacrifice, and the
Knowledge of God more than Burnt-Offerings. Mercy comprehends the Duties of
the Second Table, as the Knowledge of God the Duties of the First Table. Now
this Piety toward God, and Charity toward our Neighbor, was more acceptable
Service toward God, than all the Rites of their External Worship.

Doct. There is much to be learned from God's expressing himself in his Word;
that he likes Mercy to them that stand in need of it, better than the Offering
of the richest Sacrifice.

I frame the Point so, as it may comply with Christ's Scope and Purpose.

Three things especially we learn in it.

I. The respective Value and Preference of Duties. II. The Guise of Hypocrites,
as our Savior pincheth and taxes the Pharisees often by this Point. III. The
Excellency of Mercy.
I. I shall speak to the respective Value and Preference of Duties; and there I
shall lay down these Propositions.

1. All that God commands, must be respected, and Obedience endeavored:
partly, because his Laws are all Holy, Just, and Good; Romans 7. 12. The Law is
Holy, and the Commandment Holy, Just, and Good, viz. that Law by which he was
convinced, and which had wrought such trouble in his Heart: Holy, as being the
Copy and Draught of God's Holiness: Just, as doing no Wrong, no Infringement of
our just Freedom: Good, as profitable to direct and perfect our Operations;
nothing therein is in vain or useless. And partly, because they are all
ratified by the same Authority, Exodus, 20. 1. God spoke all these words, not
these words, but all these words: He that said, Thou shall not commit Adultery,
said also, Thou shall not Steal; as the Apostle improveth the Observation, Iam.
2. 11. For he that said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do not kill. God
has expressed his Will in one thing as well as another. And partly, because in
Conversion we have Grace given to obey all; Ephesians. 4. 24. The new Man is
created after God in Righteousness and true Holiness. It Is not only sitted for
Righteousness, but Holiness; not only for Holiness, but Righteousness. As the
Sun is placed in Heaven, that he may shed abroad his Influences every where,
and nothing is hidden from his Heat and Light: So is Grace planted in the
Heart, that it may diffuse it self in an uniform Obedience, and that we may be
Holy; 1 Pet. 1. 15. As he that has called us is holy in all manner of
Conversation. The Heart is framed to resist every Sin, and to observe all the
Commands of God. The new Creature never comes maimed out of the Birth, or
wanting any part. Well then, Holiness and Righteousness must ever go together,
and the Obedience to both Tables be inseparable. We must serve him in Holiness
and Righteousness all our days, Luke 1. 75. Not in Holiness only, or in
Righteousness only, but in both.

2. Though all are to be respected, yet all Duties are not equal, nor all Sins
equal. A vain Thought is not so heinous a Crime as the killing of a Man. And to
blaspheme and curse God, is a greater Sin than an idle Word; and Idolatry, than
stealing of a Shilling. Though all God's Laws stand by the same Authority, yet
the Matter of all is not of a like moment and consequence. And therefore the
Sins and Duties are greater and lesser, according to the importance of the Law.
Mat. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of the least of these Commandments, and
shall teach Men so to do, shall be least in the Kingdom of Heaven. There are
Commandments which may be called the least, and there are others which may be
called the greatest, In ordine motum, the Order shows the Weight. The
Fundamental Article of the Covenant, is to have God for our God, and to prefer
Natural Worship before Instituted; the Means stated, before Manner and Time;
God before Man; Parents before others.

3. Simple Duties of the first Table, are greater than Duties of the Second.
Christ himself says, Matthew. 22. 38. That this is the first and great
Commandment. They must needs be the greatest, because the Object of them is
greatest; God is greater than Man, as it is said Job 33. 12. To oppose a Prince
in Person, is more than to oppose his mean Officer. He that sins against his
Neighbor, sins against God, but not so immediately. 1 Cor. 8. 12. And, 2.
because this is the great Bond on the Heart to enforce the Duty of the second,
the Conscience of our Duty to God: because I love, or fear, or would honor
God, therefore I perform my Duty to Man for the Lord's sake. And so we turn
Second-Table Duties into First-Table Duties. And so Alms is a Sacrifice, Heb.
13. 16. And so Obedience to Masters, is Obedience to God, Ephesians. 6. 6. And as
they enforce, so they regulate; for we are to obey them in the Lord, and so as
will stand with an higher Duty we owe to God. Acts 4. 19. Whether it be right
in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. So that
these are the greatest Duties; but yet this must be understood so, as the
Comparison be rightly made; The chief of the First-Table with the chief of the
Second, the middle with the middle, the least with the least; Externals with
Externals; otherwise not: Disobedience to Parents, is more than an irreverent
Speech of God; Adultery a greater Sin, than coldness in Worship; stealing, than
not giving. The People made many Prayers, but their Hands were full of Blood,
Isa. 1. 15. And therefore the Order must be rightly conceived; first, love to
God, then love to Men; first, the Worship of God, and then Duty to Men in our
several Relations; first, Acts of outward Worship, then Acts of outward
Respects to Men: Duties of Piety, and also Justice and Charity. Thus the
Circumstantial and Ceremonial Duties of the First-Table, must give place to the
necessary and moral Duties of the Second. But when the Comparison is duly made
in the same Rank, those Laws which do simply and directly respect God, are to
be preferred before those Duties which concern Men. And Sins of the highest
Degree against the first Table, are greater than Sins of the highest degree
against the Second. And in Duties, the Love of our Neighbor must give place to
the Love of God. As the Love of Father and Mother, Wife, Children, Friends,
Brethren; Luke 14. 26. If any Man hate not Father and Mother, etc. he cannot be
my Disciple. God is chief, and most worthy of respect.

4. Moral and Substantial Duties should chiefly be made Conscience of, and
ought to take place of Ceremonial Observances, though belonging to the
First-Table; for so in the Text is Mercy preferred before Sacrifices. Which is
to be regarded to a double end; partly, that we may not rest in them as the
better part of our Duty. If Men submit never so much to external Institutions
about Religion and Worship, and think to satisfy their Consciences therewith,
yet they will not at all be accepted and approved of God. No: he looks more
to moral Obedience, than positive Commands concerning the Externals of
Religion. And therefore you have Morals of the First-Table, or the Second,
often compared with, and preferred above the Externals of Religion, as 1 Samuel
15. 22. Has the Lord any delight in Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices? To obey,
is better than Sacrifices; and to hearken, than the Fat of Rams. Rebellion is
as the Sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbornness as Idolatry. 'T was spoken upon the
occasion of Readiness sparing Agag, and the Fat of the Cattle for Sacrifice, when
he was to destroy Man and Beast. At other times it is compared with Duties of
the Second-Table. The Moral Duties of the Second-Table, are better than the
Ceremonial Duties of the first. If we be scanty in the one, and abound in the
other, it is a Note of an Hypocrite; Romans 14. 17, 18. The Kingdom of God
stands not in Meats and Drinks, but in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost. If a Man do these things, he shall be accepted of the Lord, and
approved of Men. There are two Expositions of that place both equally probable,
the one more general. That Righteousness is taken for all new Obedience, and
Peace for Peace of Conscience, resulting from the Rectitude of our Actions; and
Joy in the Holy Ghost, for supernatural Comfort, which the Holy Ghost puts into
our Hearts, by reflecting on our Privileges by Christ, and the Hopes of the
World to come. Now Christianity lies not in outward Observances, but in solid
Godliness. The other Exposition is in a more limited sense; That by
Righteousness, is meant just dealing; by Peace, a peaceable, harmless
inoffensive sort of living; by Joy in the Holy Ghost, a delight to do good to
one another, not dividing from, or hating, censuring, excommunicating one
another for mere Rituals, but pleasing one another to Edification. These Morals
are more acceptable to God, and approved of Men, than a furious Zeal for lesser
things, which belong to the ritual Part, or external Order of Religion. It Is an
Argument of a better Spirit, to be more zealous for Morals and Substantials,
than Rituals; certainly without them we shall be of no account with God. And
partly to that, when Moral Duties come in competition with Ceremonial, the
Moral Duties at that time must take place of the other, and all positive
Commands concerning the Externals of Religion, give way to them. The Lord never
appointed the Ceremonies of the First-Table, to hinder Works of Mercy
prescribed in the Second, therefore the Mercy must be done, and the Sacrifice
left undone: as the Sabbath is both broken and kept, when there is an evident
necessity of preserving the Creature. When David fainted, 'twas a Moral Duty to
relieve him, though there were no Bread at Hand, but the Shewbread; 1 Samuel 21.
4. There is no common Bread under my Hands. And Christ urges that; Mat. 12. 3,
4. Have ye not read what David did when he was an hungered; how he entered into
the House of God, and did eat the Shewbread, which was not lawful for him to
eat; nor for them which were with him, but only for the Priests? In an
extraordinary case of Necessity, the Shewbread is as common Bread. Now the
Reason is plain, because Positives bind only in certain Cases, but we are
everlastingly obliged to things Moral. Therefore Externals must give way both
to Obedience and Mercy. Internal Acts of Worship are never dispensed with.

5. Sacrifices come under a double Consideration, as they relate to Christ the
substance of them all, or as External Performances rested in by that People.

1. In the first Consideration, their Gospel lay much in Sacrifices, and the
main Duties of Godliness were exercised about them, as brokenness of Heart;
Psalm. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: a broken and a
contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise. And Faith in Christ, Heb. 9. 13,
14. For if the Blood of Bulls, and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer sprinkling
the Unclean, sanctifyeth to the purifying of the Flesh: How much more shall the
Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot
to God, purge your Consciences from dead Works, to serve the living God? And
Covenanting with God, Psalm. 50. 5. Gather my Saints together unto me, those
that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. And, Romans 12. 1. I beseech you,
Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a living
Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service.

In the second Consideration; The outward bare Offering considered in it self,
without Faith and Repentance, so God disclaimeth it; Isa. 1. 11. Bring no more
vain Oblations. And, Isa. 66. 2, 3. He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a
Man; He that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dog's Neck; He that
offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swines Blood; He that burns Incense,
as if he blessed an Idol. Their great Confidence was in their Sacrifices. God
therefore shows how loathsome these things were to him, without that
disposition of Soul which should accompany them; being such Persons as those
were, he would take no Offering at their hands. The Lord in all Ages is Uniform
and like himself, in approving and injoining Duty, and in disliking Sin. Morals
are always prized by him before Externals, and an impartial respect to
necessary Duties, was more to him than the greatest pomp of outward Worship.
'Twas so then, and it is so now; Pride, and Malice, and Envy, are greater Evils
than Ceremonial Uncleanness; and to fear God, and work Righteousness, a greater
Duty than the best Sacrifices. The performance of External Duties is not, and
never was a sufficient Testimony of true Piety; nay, without the Love of God
and Men, and an uniform Obedience to his Holy Will, is mere Hyprocrisy.

6. When the breach of a Ceremonial Precept brings with it the Transgression
of a Moral Precept, and is (without any absolute necessity) imposed, in
neg^lect and contempt of the Law of God; then we are to run all Hazards, rather
than to transgress in the smallest Externals: because tho the Matter enjoined
be but small, yet the Contempt of God is a great Sin, and our Sincerity and
Obedience to God is a great Matter. As for Instance; When Antiochus pressed the
Jews to eat Swines-Flesh, which in case of great Extremity no question they
might do; yet when he pressed them out of Contempt of the Law, they chose
rather to be tortured to Death, than to yield to it. And for this they are
registered Martyrs, Heb. 11. 35. They were tortured, not accepting Deliverance,
that they might receive a better Resurrection. There is a plain Allusion to the
Story in the Book of the Maccabees, concerning Eleazar, and the Woman with her
seven Sons, so cruelly tortured. But these Commands were contrary to the Laws
of God: Should they have said, God will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice? No, in
such a case God will have Sacrifice, and not Mercy. Tho often advised to yield,
they would not abate a Jot of their Zeal. For tho the Case be but in Externals,
yet there is a Renunciation of our Relation and Obedience to God's Law. So
Daniel opening his Windows, and praying three times a day, as he was wont to
do, Dan. 6. 10. That Circumstance might have been forborne, you will think, in a
Case of such imminent Peril of Life: No, he would neither forbear praying, nor
opening his Windows; he had wont to do so before, and without dishonouring God,
and renouncing his Profession, he could not forbear to do so now. The Promise
of Audience, made to Solomon at the Dedication of the Temple, required this
Ceremony as an Effect of Faith; 1 Kings 8. 42, 43. When they shall pray toward
this House, then hear thou in Heaven. And David says, Psalm. 5. 7. In thy Fear
I will worship toward thy holy Temple. The Temple did shadow forth the Body of
our Lord Christ, the Mediator, in whom only our Prayers and Services are
accepted with the Father, which Solomon respected in looking toward the
Temple. But the chief Reason is, the Necessity of Profession, and open
Profession too, against this impious Law, contrived by the Malice of his
Enemies to make him afraid. Now to show he was not frighted from his Duty, he
opens his Windows, and would not forgo any Circumstance of his Duty to God. I
might instance in Circumcision, (as urged by the false Apostles) as necessary
to our Justification; Gal. 5. 2, 3, 4. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if you
be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify again to every
Man that is circumcised, that he is a Debtor to do the whole Law: Christ is
become of none effect unto you. Whosoever of you are justified by the Law, you
are fallen from Grace. Such is the difference when God calls us to the
profession of a lesser Truth. Therefore the Case may be such, that Externals
may bear great Weight.

7. If the Externals of God's Worship instituted by himself, must give place to
Mercy, then Externals of Humane Institution, ought much more to give place to
Mercy. Sacrifices were of God's Institution, and a way of expressing their
Obedience and Thankfulness in his Worship; yet God says, I will have Mercy,
and not Sacrifice. And twice is this applied by Christ, to Mercy toward the
Souls of Men in the Text, and Mercy concerning the Bodies of Men, Mat. 12. to
defend the Disciples rubbing the Ears of Corn, because they fainted for Hunger.
Then by like Reason, where the urging of Externals may cross Mercy to the Souls
of Men, by depriving them of the Means of Edification, and the Gifts of a
lively Ministry; or crossing Mercy to the Bodies of Men, by depriving them and
their Families of their necessary Support and Maintenance: in such a case they
should learn what that means, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice. And the
Peace and Edification of the Church, is more valuable than that of a private
Man. In all External positive Institutions, the Apostles often urge Charity to
the Souls of Men, for which Christ died, that we neither wound them with Sorrow
or Sin; as the sure Rule to guide us, either in practicing, or forbearing our
Liberty: Romans 14. 15. Destroy not him with thy Meat for whom Christ died. So, 1
Cor. 8. 11. And through thy Knowledge shall the weak Brother perish, for whom
Christ died. That is, the scandalous Abuse of this Knowledge. In short, if any
great damage to the Souls or Bodies, scandal or inconveniece should come upon
urging these Externals, surely they should be forborne: for if it be the Will
and Pleasure of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that Matters commanded by
his Affirmative Precepts, should be forborne for Charity's sake; Men should be
persuaded to remit of the rigor of their Impositions in this kind, though the
things imposed were indifferent, and the practice of them in some Cases a Duty;
yet if it would destroy Charity, we are to leave our Prayers, public and
private, forsake a Sermon, to save the Life of our Neighbor; nay, to quench
the Fire burning his House; nay, to help his Cattle out of the Ditch. But I
will prosecute this no further.

Let me now make some use of what has been said.

1. Let us take heed that we be not of the number of them that are serious and
zealous in some things, but not in all. Partial Zeal has always been the Note
of Hypocrites; as the Pharisees were earnest for Externals, but neglected
Justice and Charity. Saul is an Instance of Partial Zeal in destroying the
Gibeonites, and sparing the Amalekites; 2 Samuel 21. 2. Saul sought to s^ay them
in his zeal to the Children of Israel and Judah. He was expressly commanded to
root out the Amalekites, but he spared Agag out of seeming pity; but uses
barbarous Cruelty in seeking to root out the Gibeonites, who were to be
preserved by Oath and Covenant; and this he is said to do in his Zeal. Not a
true Zeal, surely, as aiming at God's Glory: for it tended much to his
dishonor to have them destroyed* who were new Proselytes, and professing
Religion, and had put themselves under God's Protection; but a preposterous
hypocritical Zeal, of aiming, as he pretended, at the welfare of the
Commonwealth of Israel, his main Intent was popular Applause, and to gratify
them, who envied the Gentiles should be incorporated into God's People. An
Hypocrite's Conscience is not uniform, but brought upon the Stage for a Turn. I
shall give you another Instance in Ieh^, mighty zealous in destroying the
Idolatry of Baal, which was the Idolatry of the House of Ahab; but not only
cold and indifferent, but resolute against the destroying the Calves of Dan and
Bethel, which was the Idolatry of Jeroboam; 2 Kings 10. 28, 29. Thus Jehu
destroyed Baal out of Israel. Howbeit, from the Sins of Jeroboam, wherewith he
made Israel to sin, Jehu departed not from them, to wit, the Golden Calves in
Dan and Bethel. Reason of State persuaded the one, and dissuaded the other. His
Interest lay in ruining the House of Ahab, and in taking care that the Tribes
might not revert to the House of David. Thus you see Men zealous in some
things, may gri^vously sin in others. Therefore, my Beloved, be you careful to
regard all God's Commands in their place; Piety in its place, Justice in its
place, Mercy in its place. The Jews, after they had smarted in Babylon, were
zealous against Idols, but robbed God of his Dues, never took care to restore
the Riches of the Temple. Therefore the Apostle taxes this partiality of Zeal,
Romans 2. 22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? The latter
Prophets tax them much for that Crime. The Jewish Form still is hatred of
Idolatry, in-so-much that they think that all the Plagues that come upon them,
is for the Idolatry of their Fathers, especially in the si^ of the Golden Calf
in the Wilderness; and translate the Scene of their Repentance far enough from
themselves, that they may not see their present Sins, both in breaking the
moral Law, and despising Christ. And every Party is observ^d to have their
Form; one special Commandment which they stuck unto, which they are zealous
for, whilst they neglect the rest. The reproaches of our Enemies, says the
Pharisee, are only for the fourth Commandment, but neglect the rest; zealous
for the Sabbath, but unconscionable all the week after. Oh, let (...) be no
occasion for this! Others s^em to make little reckoning of other Commandments,
and insist only upon the fifth, obedience to Superiors. The Charge is sometimes
carried between the third and sixth Commandment, they will not swear, but will
lie, and sl^nder their Neighbors. I mention these things, to show what need we
have to be uniform in our Obedience unto God.

I will mention but one Motive. They that do not obey all, will not long obey
any, but where their Interest or Inclinations^ require it, will break all: As
Herod did many things, but one Command stuck with him, his Herodias, and that
brings him to murder God's Prophet, Mark 6. 20. One Sin keeps possession
for Satan, and that one Lust and Corruption may undo all. A Bird tied by the
Leg, may make some show of escape; so do many think themselves at liberty, but
the Fowler has them fast enough.

2. Let us not rest in outward Duties of Worship, and place our Zeal there, for
that is an ill Spirit that does so, It Is the Badg of Pharisaism: they keep a
fair correspondence with God in the outward Duties of his Worship, but in other
things deny their subjection to him; the main reason is, because Externals of
Worship are more easy than the denial of Lusts. The sensual Nature of Man is
such, that it is loath to be crossed, which produces profaneness. Wherefore do
Men ingulph themselves in all manner of sensuality, but because they are loath
to deny their Natural Appetites and Desires, and to row against the stream of
Flesh and Blood, and so to walk in the way of his own Heart, and the sight of
his Eyes? Eccles. 4. 8. If Nature must be crossed, it shall be crossed only for
a little, and in some slight manner; they will give God some outward thing,
which lies remote from the subjection of the Heart to him, therefore be
zealous for Externals; and this produces Hypocrisy, gross Hypocrisy, and
Dissembling, whereby we deceive others, and get a good Name among others, by a
zeal and fervency for God's outward I^stitutions. And this close Hypocrisy or
Partiality of Obedience, is that whereby we deceive our selves, exceeding in
External Actions and Duties, while we neglect those Substantials wherein the
Heart and Life of Religion most lies: such are the Love of God, Contempt of
the World, Mortification of the Flesh, the Heavenly Mind, and Holy Constitution
of the Soul, ^irmly set to please God in all things.

Once more; That this Deceit may be more strong, Men are apt to exceed in
outward Observances, or Bylaws of their own: and this produces Superstition,
either Negative, in condemning some outward things which God never condemned,
as those Ordinances of Men which the Apostle speaks of, Col. 2. 19. Touch
not, taste not, handle not: Or positive, in doing many things as Duties, and
crying them up as special Acts and Helps of Religion, which God never
instituted to that end and purpose; Mark 7. 7, 8. Teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men. The Spirit and Genius of Superstition lies in this;
neglecting many things* which God commands, but multipl^ing Bonds and Chains
of their own making. Sacrifices enough! God shall have any thing for the Sin of
their Souls, Micah 6. 6, 7. Thus these three great Evils, Profaneness,
Hypocrisy, and Superstition, do all grow upon the same Stem and Root. First,
Men must have an easy Religion, where the Flesh is not crossed, but no
mortifying of Lusts, no exercising our selves to Godliness. They can deny
themselves in parting with a Sacrifice, but the weighty things of Piety,
Justice, and Mercy, are neglected; God shall have Prayers enough; Hearing enough,
if the Humor and Temper of the Body will suit with it. They can fast and gash
themselves like Baal's Priests; whip their Bodies, but spare their Sins; but
the Heart is not subdued to God. They can part with any thing better than their
Lusts, and disturb the present Ease of the Body, by attending on long and
tedious Duties, rather than any solid and serious Piety.

II. The next Lesson which we learn is, The Guise of Hypocrites; for our Lord
intimates, that these Pharisees had great need to learn the Importance of that
Truth, as being extremely faulty; I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice.

[1.] The first thing notable in Hypocrites, is a partial Zeal; they have not
an Uniform Conscience, are very exact in some things, but exceeding defective
and faulty in others. The good Conscience is entire and universal: Heb. 13. 18.
We trust that we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to live
honestly. The sincere Purpose and Intention of his Heart, was to direct his
Life according to the Will of God in all things. Though every one has his
failings, yet the Will and constant Endeavor of a sincere Heart, is to govern
himself universally according to the Will of God in all points of Duty, whether
they concern God or Man: as it is said of Zechary and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6. That
they walked in all the Ordinances and Commandments of the Lord blameless. The
renewed Conscience does approve all; and the renewed Will, which is the
Imperial Power in the Soul, the first Mover and Principle of all Moral Actions,
is bent and inclined to obey all; and the New Life is spent in striving to
comply with all. But it is not so with Hypocrites, they pick and choose out the
easiest part in Religion, and lay out all their Zeal there, but let other
things go. In some Duties that are of easy digestion, and nourish their
Disease, rather than cure their Soul; none so zealous as they, none so partial
as they. Now a partial Zeal for small things, with a plain neglect of the rest,
is direct Pharisaism; all for Sacrifice, nothing for Mercy. Therefore every one
of us should take heed of halving and dividing with God: If we make Conscience
of Piety, let us also make Conscience of Justice; if of Justice, let us also
make Conscience of Mercy. It Is harder to renounce one Sin wherein we delight,
than a greater which we do not equally affect. A Man is wedded to some special
Lusts, and is loath to hear of a divorce from them. We have our tender and sore
places in the Conscience, which we are loath should be touched. But if we be
sincere with God, we will keep our selves from all, even from our own Iniquity,
Psalm. 18. 23. such as is most incident to us by temper, or custom of Life, or
course of our Interests; to baulk or break with God, out of private Reasons of
Pleasure, Honor, or Profit, or any corrupt Interest, is to prefer these things
before God, and to set up another chief Good in our Hearts, and to prefer it
before his Favor. Thus in General.

[2.] They place all their Godliness and Righteousness in outward Observances,
or external Discipline, and so their Religion is more in the Flesh, and in the
Letter, than in Heart and Spirit. As the Pharisees rested in outward Worship
only, or some external Rules, without the inward and real Duties, either of the
First or Second Table. Mat. 23. 25. They cleanse the outside of the Cup and
Platter, but within they are full of Extortion and Excess. And, Verse. 28. Ye
appear outwardly Righteous unto Men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and
Iniquity. And every where they are represented as painted Tombs without, but
had much hidden Uncleanness and Corruption within. There was an outward
formality and show of Religion, when they denied the Power thereof. They should
join Obedience to God, and Love to their Neighbor, with their outward
Sacrifices; but these things were of little value and esteem with them. Now,
what Sacrifices were to them, that External Ordinances are to us. And what
their Rituals were, the same is the Mode and Garb of Profession among us. And
therefore External Profession, or the performance of External Duties according
to our way, is not a sufficient Testimony of true Godliness: For Christ says,
Mat. 5. 20. Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Their
Righteousness was an outside Righteousness, without that inward Constitution
of Soul which does belong to a renewed Heart, and yet carried on in such a way,
and applauded by Men, that the Jews had a saying, That if but two Men out of
all the World went to Heaven, the one should be a Scribe, and the other a
Pharisee. Oh Christians! it is one thing to approve our selves to God, who
searches the Heart; and another thing to approve our selves to Men, who look
only to the outside, and f^ir appearance without. A renewed Heart, that is
unfeignedly set to please God in all things, is more than all the Pomp of
External Duties. And therefore we should study to give Evidence of this, by
making Conscience of Obedience, as well inwardly as outwardly, growing in
Holiness all the days of our Lives. This will be comfortable to us, and this
will be approved of God hereafter, even such an Holiness as is manifested in
all the parts of our Conversation, in outward Carriage and secret Practice,
common Affairs, and religious Duties; In the Worship of God, and Charity, and
Justice to Men: Phil. 3. 3. We are the Circumcision which worship God in the
Spirit, and have no confidence in the Flesh. When there is a serious Bent, and
the true spiritual Affections of a renewed Heart toward God and Man; and we do
not rest in outward Duties, but are still growing in internal Grace, Faith,
Hope, and Love, and are still purifying the Heart and Life, that we may
constantly glorify God, and do good to Men. This is that which is over and
above the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; our Duty is to serve God
in the Spirit, and to bring the inward Man in subjection to him, without which
Externals are of little worth.

[3.] They were more in love with Ceremonies, than with Substance: Sacrifices,
which belonged to the Ceremonies of the Law, were in high esteem with them; but
Godliness, Justice, and Mercy, were of little regard. And as outward things
were preferred before Inward, so the lesser things before the weighty: As to
their Duties, tithing Mint, and Annise, and Cummin; but they have omitted the
weightier Matters of the Law, Justice, Mercy, Faith. These ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone, Matthew. 23. 23. Formality and Hypocrisy
makes Men wise about that which is least to purpose. They make a business
about Ceremonies, but neglect the Substance of Religion. They enlarged their
Phylacteries, which were Scroles of Parchment on which the Law was written, but
took no care of having the Law of God written upon their Hearts. Hypocrisy is
an odd trifling Zeal, which runs out upon little things. So for avoiding
Sin, Matthew. 23. 24. They strain at a (...), and swallow a Camel: More
scrupulous in a little Sin, than a great; in small Sins very scrupulous, in
greater Matters very adventurous. And because this is one of the main things
here intended, I shall give you Instances and Reasons.

1. Instances; to prove that Hypocrites have such an odd Conscience, that
straineth greatly at a small Sin. We have them every where out of the Word of
God. Herod's making Conscience of his Oath, but not of shedding Innocent Blood.
The King was sorry: nevertheless for his Oath's sake, etc. Matthew. 14. 9. he
caused John the Baptist to be beheaded. A Sinner is holden in Bonds which he
might lawfully break; rather than Herod will break his rash Oath, John shall
lose his Head. Of such an odd Complexion is the Conscience of Carnal Men. So
the Jews, when Judas laid down the hire of his Treason, and cast the Money at
their feet; Mat. 29. 6, 7. It is not lawful (said they) to put it into the
Treasury, because it is the price of Blood. Pretending to be afraid to offend
in the least things, when they had offended in the greater. They bogled not at
betraying Innocent Blood, and yet they would not meddle with the Gain when it
was thrown back to them. Another Instance of the like Conscience, is, John 18.
28. Then led they Jesus front Caiaphas into the Iudgment-Hall, and it was
early, and they themselves went not into the Iudgment-Hall, lest they should be
defiled, but that they might eat the Passover. They were careful to avoid legal
Pollution, and yet they were at the same time seeking the Life of the Lord of
Glory. Just such another fit of Conscience comes upon them a little after;
John 19. 31. They went to Pilate, and desired that the Bodies might not hang
upon the Cross on the Sabbathday, lest their great Feast should be defiled. And
thus you see, that through Formality and Custom, Men may be strictly bound in
Conscience to perform the Duties of Ceremonial or External Worship, whose
Consciences notwithstanding never scruple to violate the most weighty Precepts
of the Law. Just of this Nature was that solemn Case of Conscience, Zech. 7. 1,
2. about the keeping of their Fasts, when the Prophet tells them they had
higher Matters to mind, the executing of Judgment, and showing Mercy, and
breaking off their Oppressions, verse. 10. The Lord would not answer their Cases
about the Fasts: Some of which were needless and superfluous; but would have
them break off their known Sins. Hitherto may be reduced the Harlot in the
Proverbs, that enticed the young Man to Adultery, and yet she had her
Peace Offerings: I have Peace Offerings with me this day, Prove. 7. 14. with the
18 th. Made Conscience of her Sac^ifices, but not of her Honesty and Chastity.
Yea, also we may reckon to this rank of Conscience, the Instance of Bathsheba.
Even the Children of God have much Hypocrisy, and an odd kind of Conscience,
when they give way to wilful and heinous Sin. The Passage is, 2 Samuel 11. 4.
David took her, and committed Adultery with her, for she was purified from her
Uncleanness. That Uncleanness was Ceremonial only; but in the mean time she was
committing a Moral Uncleanness, from which she was not so careful to keep her
self. Well then, the Consciences of Men being of such a make, well might God
say, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; Substance, and not Ceremony. And we
have all need to take heed to our selves, that we do not boggle and startle at
a Shadow, when in the mean time we are stupid and senseless, in Sins of another
nature and deeper dye; and preserve a tenderness in lesser things, when we give
way to Injustice and Oppression.

2. The Reasons why Hypocrites never find their Consciences awake so much as in
Matters Ceremonial; I shall give these two.

(1.) Because these are of easiest digestion, and will sooner satisfy the
Conscience. Slight Duties suit best with an Heart that is unwilling to come
under the Power of Religion. Conscience is like the Stomach, which naturally
desires to fill its self; and when it cannot digest solid Food, it sucketh
nothing but Wind. They that place their Confidence in their own Righteousness,
presently fly to their External Shows. The right stating of the Duties of the
Law, according to their due weight, would convince them of their Mistake:
Therefore that the Ell may be no longer than the Cloth, they confine their
Obedience to External Observations, and so make their Religion as commodious
for themselves as they can. Adultery is nothing to eating Flesh in Lent, or
breaking some External Rule. The Apostle says, going about to establish their
own Righteousness, they have not submitted to the Righteousness of God, Romans
10. 3. Not to the way of Solid Righteousness, and brokenhearted acceptance of
Christ, but an external appearance of Duty is most for their Interest.

(2.) To put the better Pretense upon their vile Practices, therefore they must
have some External Ceremonies to countenance them. Thus the Pharisees, to
countenance their Oppressions, for a pretense make long Prayers, Mat. 23. 14.
That made them be trusted by the destitute Widows, whom they deceived. As
Iezebel would have the formality of a Fast, for the better color of her
impiety in destroying Naboth. In days of Fasts, they were wont to enquire after
heinous Offenders, to execute the Law upon them, as you may see, Numb. 15. 7,
8. and Psalm. 106. 30. so to stop God's Wrath. So some expound that, Joel 1.
14. Sanctify a Fast, call a Solemn Assembly, gather the Elders: That is, Call a
Court who may enquire into Off^^ders^ that they may be punished and reformed.
So Iezebel calls a Fast, for the be^ter (...) of a Court, to take cognizance of
Naboth's Sin.

[4.] They make Conscience, not only of Externals instituted by God, but mostly
of those that are devised by themselves. This very Abstinence from converse
with Publicans, was a thing not forbidden by the Law, but an Institution of
their own; because of their frequent converse with Heathens, they looked upon
them as a polluted sort of Men, and unworthy of their converse. So that this
helps us to another Character of Hypocrites, they are zealous for Humane
Traditions, but Transgressors of Divine Commands, God's Precepts are little
regarded; and so prefer their own Institutions before the Laws of God. So, Mat.
15. 3. By your Traditions, ye transgress the Commands of God: Namely, by
holding, that if a Man had devoted his Estate to God, he might choose whether he
would relieve his Parents. Men are mightily in love with their own Customs, and
place much Religion in Man's Injunctions, and care not how they loosen or
weaken the Obligation of God's Law by their Impositions. The Pharisees great
Fault was, they would outdo the Law in Externals; and then when they had set
their Post by God's Post, they were more zealous for Man's Inventions, than for
God's Ordinances. And this Zeal is shown, either by imposing upon themselves,
or others. Imposing upon their own Consciences, when they lie in Chains of
their own making. On others, when they make their own Practice, the Rule of
others. Mat. 9. 14. The Pharisees fast, John' s Disciples fast, thy Disciples
fast not. To this Head we may reduce Readiness rash restraining the People by his
Injunction and Oath, 1 Samuel 24. 32. with verse. 38. The People had gotten a
great Victory, and Saul out of his Hypocritical Zeal, commands them to fast
till Evening. Now what was the Issue? The People through Faintness could not
pursue the Enemy; Jonathan that heard nothing of this Curse and Oath, was in
danger of his Life; and the People being hungerstarv'd, for greediness, did eat
the Flesh and the Blood together, contrary to God's Law, Genesis 9. 4. Levit. 17.
13, 14. Mark there, though Hunger could not force to transgress Readiness
Commandment for fear of Death, yet it forced them to break God's express
Commandment, in eating the Blood, which was so expressly forbidden. And at
Night, when God answered him not, Saul thought somewhat was in the Matter, he
goes to ^ast Lots, and the Lot had found out Jonathan. Saul never thinks of
the breach of God's Law; first by himself, in imposing a rash and sinful Oath;
or of the Peoples sin, in eating the Blood with the Flesh: and presume^h it
must needs be the breach of that Oath which he had imposed, and so like an
Hypocrite, prefers his own groundless Command, before the Law of God, and of
punishing this with rigor, when the other is never spoken of. I have brought
this Story, to show you how zealous Men are for their own Impositions on
themselves and others, and how easily they can dispense with God's Laws, to
comply with their own. And how Drunkenness, Whoredom, and Fornication, do not
seem such odious Crimes, as violating Man's Customs and Institutions, and
private Rules of their own.

[5.] Hypocrites have a Conceit of their own Righteousness, and a Disdain of
others. This was the very Case in the Text, they were angry because Christ
entered into the House of Matthew, a Publican, and did eat Meat there, though he
had converted him. And elsewhere it is made the Characteristick Note of the
Pharisees; Luke 18. 9. They trusted in themselves that they were Righteous, and
despised others. Men that fly to Externals, are soon puffed up; and nothing
humbles so much as a sound sense of Religion; and a solemn exercising our
selves to Godliness, makes us see and loath our selves, and pity others. I
find the Pharisees Enemies ever to the ^reeness of God's Grace to Sinners, and
the Work of Repentance. And that the bringing of poor Sinners to Salvation, was
the great eyesore. They call Christ a ^ine-bibber, and a Friend of Publicans
and Sinners, because of his social and free, but sanctified Converse with all
sorts of Men, Mat. 11. 18. He would not take such a strict form as John did,
because he would not seem to justify their Pharisaical Rigors. So again, Luke
15. 2. This Man receives Sinners, and eats with them: Because he went to
them as a Physician to heal their Souls. Christ refused not familiarity with
the poorest and worst, as was needful for their Cure, and would not observe the
humor of proud Pharisaical Separation, by the Parables of the lost Sheep, and
the lost Groat, but confuteth it; shows that this is the Spirit of the Elder
Brother, who envied the Prodigal's Return. And tells them in another place,
that Publicans and Harlots enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before them, Mat.
21. 30. pleads the Case of the Woman against Simon the Pharisee, Luke 7. 30.
If this Man had been a Prophet, he would have known who and what manner of
Woman this is that touched him. Luke 7. 47. Christ tells him, She had much
forgiven her, for she loved much. Well then, a penitent broken hearted sense of
our own being indebted to Grace, and tender compassion toward others that yet
go astray, discovers the true Spirit of the Gospel. But to stand aloof from
others by a foolish singularity; Isa. 65. 5. which say, Stand by thy self, come
not near to me, for I am ^^lier than thou. Some, though impure and profane,
counted all others unholy and unclean but themselves. This enclosing Spirit is
the Spirit of Pharisaism. An outside strictness without that Faith, Love,
Charity, Meekness, Usefulness, and Humility, which is the very Soul and Life of
Christianity. Usually Gifts, and outward strictness, puff up Men with a vain
conceit of their own Righteousness, and a censuring and despising others. This
one Text shows us both the Spirit of Pharisaism, and the Spirit of
Christianity. The Pharisees who abounded in External Observances, censured
Christ for his free Converse, disdained these penitent People whom he invited
to a better Life. But now true Religion makes Men humble and lowly in their
own Eyes, by acquainting them with the desert of Sin, and their own Misery; and
makes Men pitiful and compassionate toward others, more ready to help than to
censure them, and to use all ways and means to do them good. But when Men would
shine alone in the repute of Holiness, they are envious to those who penitently
return to their Duty; as those Servants who had wrought all the day, envied
those that came in at the last hour, Mat. 22. 12. or, as the elder Brother
envied the Prodigal, or Simon the Pharisee repined at Mary Magdalen's
observance of Christ. They esteem much of their own Works, Merits, Sufferings,
and Righteousness: O take heed of this Spirit!

The use of this B^anch, is to press us to regard Internals more than
Externals, and the Substantials more than the Ceremonials of Worship, and a
brokenhearted thankful sense of our Redeemer's Love, before a Legal
Righteousness. Inward Worship is Love, Fear, and Trust; outward Worship is
Prayer, Praise, Hearing, Reading. Outward Worship is not a Duty at all times,
but inward Worship is a Duty at all times; for we should always love God, and
delight in God, and trust in God. Outward Worship may be omitted for a Work of
Mercy, and in case of invincible Necessities; but inward Worship may never be
omitted, never dispensed with. We always owe Love and renewed Obedience to God,
and must depend upon him, and delight in him. Outward Worship may be
counterfeited, and External Worship, without Holiness, is highly displeasing to
God, and never pleasing, but when it is in conjunction with it. Hypocrites may
abound in Externals, but Hypocrites will not delight themselves in the Lord,
nor heartily devote themselves to him, so as to serve, please, and glorify him:
the inward Graces cannot be counterfeited, but the outward Expression may.

2. Be more careful of the Substantials, than of the Ceremonials of Religion;
and to mind the Power of Godliness more than the Form. The Substantials of
Religion are the Love of God and our Neighbor. The Circumstantials are those
ways of Worship which God has appointed, whereby we are visibly to express our
love to him. Now our main care should be, in the first place, to be entirely
devoted and subject to God. That was Job's Character, One that feared God, and
eschewed Evil, Job 1. 11. To do that we do out of love to him; obeying his Laws
as our Rule, and depending upon his Rewards as our Happiness. And as to Men,
let us be faithful, and walk holily in our Places, Callings, and Relations,
being just and kind unto all, but having an exceeding dear love for our
fellow-Saints and everlasting Companions. This is more pleasing to God than the
costliest Sacrifices, than all our Flocks and Herds, or any outward thing that
we do for him. I take notice of those words of God to Solomon, when he was
building him a magnificent Temple, 1 Kings 6. 11, 12. And the Word of the Lord
came to Solomon, saying, Concerning this House which thou art building, if thou will walk in my Statutes, and execute my Judgments, and keep all my
Commandments to walk in them; then will I perform my Word to thee, which I
spoke to David thy Father. God has more respect to Solomon's faithful
Obedience, than to that glorious Building. So far do Morals exceed Ceremonials
in Religion.

3. That you prefer a brokenhearted thankful sense of our Redeemer's Love,
before legal and conceited Righteousness of our own. Christ's love to Sinners,
is that which the Pharisees mainly stumbled at. An external show and fair
pretense of a good Life, which had no bottom of Regeneration, was the
superficial Righteousness of the Pharisees. Nicodemus, who had been of that
Sect, wondered when that was pressed upon him, John 3. 4, 5. an outward
Conformity, which was more in Show than in Substance, in Form and Fashion than
in Power, was their Religion; abstaining from gross Sins, as Murder and
Adultery, but not purifying the Heart from Lusts. Murder they made Conscience
of, but not of Envy, Malice, and Hatred: Theft, but not Covetousness, and close
Extortion; Adultery, but not Wantonness, or looking upon a Woman to lust after
her, as you may see at large Matthew. 5. Thus Christ presses us to exceed the
Pharisees, who turned all Obedience into an empty Formality; wherein they
puffed up themselves as mere Men, and so had never been at the Market of Free
Grace; all their Wares were their own, and their Righteousness of their own
spinning, and therein stood upon their own Bottom, without seeking the
reconciling and renewing Grace of the Redeemer. Luke 18. The proud Pharisee
pleads his own Merits rather than God's Grace, but the Publican pleaded
Mercy. 'Twas long e're Paul was brought to count all but Dung and Dross for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. But on the other side,
a Christian, though he makes progress in Holiness, yet from first to last,
cherishes a brokenhearted sense of his own Wants, and a thankful remembrance
of his Redeemer's Love, who is all in all with him, both for Justification and
Sanctification. Before Pardon, the Sinner is weakened and humbled with a sense
of his lost Condition, and then there is a constant watchfulness, with
Repentance and brokenness of Heart, which follows Pardon; loving much,
because much is forgiven, Luke 7. 47. And loathing himself in his own sight,
because of his vileness and sinfulness, after God is reconciled to him, Ezekiel.
16. 63. This is the frame of Heart which suiteth with the Gospel-state.

III. I come to the third Thing, the value of Mercy. I shall not speak of it at
large, but only with respect to this Scripture.

1. It Is better than Sacrifice. To sacrifice, is to serve God; but to show
Mercy, is to be like God. Luke 6. 36. Be ye therefore merciful, as your
Heavenly Father is merciful. Now Conformity to God is more noble, than
Subjection to God; it has more of Perfection and Blessedness in it especially,
than a particular external mode and way of subjection to God.

2. As it is preferred before Sacrifice, so it is preferred before the external
Observation of the Sabbath. The Sabbath is the great Institution conducing to
the enlivening of other Duties; Mercy, not only to the Souls of Men as here, or
Bodies of Men, but Mercy to the Bodies of the to help a Beast out of a Pit, is
a Sabbathdays work, Mat. 12. 11, 12.

3. It Is more than Gospel-Externals of Worship. The Apostle had spoken of being
not hearers of the Word only, but doers also, Jam. 1. 25. Then says, Verse. 27.
Pure Religion, and undefiled before God, is this, To visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their Affliction, and keep himself unspotted from the World. Is this
Religion, to come to Church to hear the strictest Preachers? Does the Apostle
reckon this another part of Religion? No, but to visit the Fatherless and
Widows. They who are truly Religious, have such a deep sense of God's Mercy to
them, that they are changed into the Divine Nature, that they cannot but pity
the miserable and afflicted. Now the Ordinances of the Gospel are rational, not
so carnal and servile as the Ordinances under the Law.

4. It Is more excellent than all the Gifts of the Gospel. The Gifts of the
Gospel were glorious Things, Gifts of Tongues, Gifts of Healing, Gifts of
Knowledge and Utterance; 1 Cor. 12. 31. Covet earnestly the best Gifts; and yet
I show you a more excellent way. What is that? Love, Charity, Mercy. Though
Abilities are excellent Things, to be able to edify and instruct others, yet no
way to be compared with the Grace of Charity, and the performing all our Duties
to our Brethren out of love to God.

5. I cannot say it is above the Graces of the Gospel, Faith, and Love to God;
yet this I can say, that those Graces are not real, unless accompanied with
Charity: 1 John 4. 20. If a Man say he loves God, and hates his Brother, he
is a liar: for if a Man hates his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love
God whom he has not seen? He speaks there of Love to Christ, verse. 19. We
love him, because he loved us first. There may be a great deal of Hypocrisy in
professing and pretending Love to Christ; and so he does certainly, who does
malign and persecute Christians, or not show Mercy to them in their Distresses.
We daily converse with Men, meet with Objects of Charity, whom we should pity;
but if we do not this, which is the more easy, we will not do that which is
more difficult.

6. It Is the Qualification of finding Mercy; Mat. 5. 7. `Blessed are the
Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy. Compassion to other Men's Bodies and
Souls, gives this hope and confidence of finding Mercy with the Lord, and that
is all our Hope.

It will be inquired into at the Day of Judgment, Mat. 25. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39,
40, 41. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me Meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave
me Drink: I was a Stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me: I was
sick, and ye visited me: I was in Prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the
Righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee?
or thirsty, and gave thee Drink? When saw we thee a Stranger, and took thee in?
or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in Prison, and came
unto thee? And the King shall answer, and say unto them, Verily I say unto you,
in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye
have done it unto me. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart
from me ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Oh then let us make Conscience of this Duty more than ever we have done.

A DESCRIPTION of the True Circumcision.
PHIL. 3. 3. For we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the Flesh.
AMong those that entertain thoughts of Religion, there ever have been, and
will be, many Contests, who are the True Church and People of God: The Lazy
place their Plea and Claim in External Observations. The Serious look to the
Vitals and Heart of Religion, and cannot satisfy themselves in an outward Form,
without the Life and Power: This was the very difference between the True
Christians, and a certain sort of Persons who took upon them to be the
Circumcision. The Jews are often called the Circumcision; Therefore Christ is
said to be a Minister of the Circumcision, as being sent to the People that
were to be Circumcised, Romans 15. 8. And Peter is called the Apostle of the
Circumcision, Gal. 2. 7, 8. as being appointed to deal with that People. Now
these Judaizing Christians, who had a zeal for the Ceremonies of the Law, did
falsely boast themselves to be the only People of God, and the true
Circumcision. This was the difference between them; Who were to be accounted
the true Circumcision, the Jewish Zealots, who placed their Justification in
the Ceremonies of the Law; or those who adhered to Christ only, and looked for
the Mercy of God through him? We are the Circumcision, say they, excluding the
other and better sort of Christians: The one had the Form, and the other the
Effect and Power; The one were circumcised outwardly, the other spiritually.
The Apostle judges for the latter; the former were (...), The Concision; who
instead of circumcising themselves, did cut asunder the Church of God: But the
sound Believers were (...), the Circumcision indeed; as being circumcised by
the Circumcision made without Hands, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the
Flesh by Christ, C^ll. 2. 11. They were the true Children of Abraham, who did
indeed perform that for which Circumcision was intended: For we are the
Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the Flesh.

In the words we have a threefold Description of the True Circumcision: How
they stand affected, To God, Christ, Self.

I. They worship God in the Spirit. II. They rejoice in Christ Jesus. III. They
have no confidence in the Flesh.
I. They worship God in the Spirit. This Clause may be interpreted,

(1.) In opposition to the Legal Ordinances: So it is taken, John 4. 23, 24. But
the hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father
in Spirit, and in Truth: For the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit, and Truth. The
Jewish Worship is in a sense called Carnal; the Christian, Spiritual: Heb. 7.
16. A Carnal Commandment. Heb. 9. 10. Carnal Ordinances imposed on them till
the Time of Reformation. And Shadows, Heb. 10. 1. Now the Lord would have a
Spiritual Worship, and the Truth of what was in these Shadows, these external
Forms, he allowed (instituted in the Infancy of the Church); so that they
worship God in the Spirit, is, they have embraced the true Worship of the
Gospel, and serve God, not by the Carnal Rites of the Law, but by the pure
rational Worship of the Gospel. This is part of the sense.

(2.) It implies worshipping God with the inward and spiritual Affections of a
renewed Heart: Heb. 12. 28. Wherefore, we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be
moved, Let us have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with Reverence
and Godly Fear. Worship flowing from Grace, engaging the Heart in God's
Service, is that which God prizeth; Therefore a Christian should not rest in an
External Form: God is my Witness, whom I serve with my Spirit, Romans 1. 9.

(3.) It does also imply the Assistance, and continual Influence of the Holy
Spirit; Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all Prayer, and supplication in the
Spirit; and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all
Saints. And Jude, v. 20. Praying in the Holy Ghost.

The Doctrine is this:

That a True Christian is known by his Worship; or is one that does worship God
in the Spirit.

Here I shall show you, 1. What is Worship. 2. What a true Christian (1.) does
worship; (2.) Why in the Spirit.


1. What is Worship. 'T is either Internal, or External. The Internal
consists in the Love and Reverence we owe to God. The External in those
Offices and Duties by which our Honor and Respect to God is signified and
expressed.

1. Internal. The Soul and Life of our Worship lies in Faith, and Reverence,
and delight in God above all other things. Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with
Fear, and rejoice with Trembling. Such a delight as will become the greatness
and goodness of God. Worship has its Rise and Foundation in the Heart of the
Worshipper; there it must begin: In our high thoughts and esteem of God,
especially two things, Love and Trust.

(1.) Love; Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart,
with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might. We worship God, when we give him
such a Love as is Superlative and Transcendental, far above the Love that we
give to any other thing, that so our respect to other things may s^oop, and
give way to our respect to God.

(2.) The other Affection whereby we express our esteem of God, is Trust, which
is the other Foundation of Worship: Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in the Lord at all
Times, pour out your Hearts before him. Delightful adhesion to God, and an
entire dependence upon him; if either fail, or be intermitted, our Worship
fails. If Delight; Job 27. 10. Will he delight himself in the Almighty? Will
he always call upon God? Isa. 43. 22. But thou have not called upon me, O
Jacob; but thou have been weary of me, O Israel. They that love God, and
delight in him, cannot be long out of his company. They take all Opportunities
and Occasions of being with God. So Dependence and Trust; Heb. 3. 12. Take
Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil Heart of unbelief, in departing
from the Living God. James 1. 6, 7. Let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering: for
he that wavereth, is like a Wave of the Sea, driven with the Wind, and tossed.
For let not that Man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.
Dependence begets Observance; They that distrust God's Promises, will not long
keep his Precepts: If we look for all from him, we will often come to him, and
take all out of his hands: Be careful that we do not offend him, and displease
him.

2. External. In those Offices and Duties by which our Honor and Respect to
God is signified and expressed: As by Invocation, Thanksgiving, Praises,
Obedience, God will be owned both in Heart and Life. In all these prescribed
Duties by which our Affections toward him are acted. If God did not call for
outward Worship, why did he appoint the Ordinances of Preaching, Praying,
singing Psalms, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper? God that made the whole Man,
Body, and Soul, must be worshipped of the whole Man: Therefore, besides the
Inward Affections, there must be External Actions. In short, we are said to
worship God, either with respect to the Duties which are more directly to be
performed to God, or in our whole Conversation.

1. With respect to the Duties which imply our solemn Converse with God, and
are more directly to be performed toward him; such as the Word, Prayer,
Praise, Thanksgiving, and Sacraments: Surely these must be attended upon,
because they are special Acts of Love to God, and Trust in him: And these
Duties are the ways wherein God has promised to meet with his People, and
appointed us to expect his Grace: Exodus 20. 24. In all places where I record my
Name, I will come unto thee, and bless thee. And, Mark 4. 24. It Is a Rule of
Commerce between us and God; With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to
you; and unto you that hear, shall more be given.

2. In our whole Conversation: Luke 1. 74, 75. That we should serve him without
Fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of our lives. A
Christian's Life is a constant Hymn to God, or a continued Act of Worship: ever
behaving himself as in the sight of God, and directing all things as to his
Glory: He turns Second-Table Duties into First. James 1. 27. Pure Religion,
and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, To visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the World. Heb.
13. 16. To do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such Sacrifices
God is well pleased. Ephesians. 5. 21, 22. Submitting your selves one to another in
the fear of God. Now a true Christian makes Conscience of all this, as of
Internal Worship, so External. As of Solemn and Sacred Acts, so of a constant
Awfulness of God.

Secondly; The Reasons.

1 st, Why a true Christian does worship God.

2 dly, Why in the Spirit.

1 st, For the Worship it self.

1. Because they have a deep sense of his Being and Excellency impressed upon
their Hearts.

(1.) His Being: These two Notions live and die together: That God is, and that
he ought to be worshipped and served, Heb. 11. 6. The one immediately flows
from the other: The first Commandment is, Thou shall have no other Gods before
me. The second, Thou shall not worship a graven Image: If (...), Worship is
certainly (...) They that have no (...) they had no God. The Psalmist proves
At^^ism by that Psalm. 14. 1. The Fool has said (...) Heart, There is no God.
And, verse. 4. They call not upon God.

(2.) His Excellency: They have a cleare^ sight of God than others have, and
are more acquainted with him than other^ are, and therefore are more prone to
worship. When God had proclaimed his Name, and manifested himself to Moses,
Exodus 34. 8. He made haste, and bowed himself to the Earth, and worshipped:
None so ready and forward. Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy Name, will put their
trust in thee.

2. Because they have a Principle within them, which inclines them to God*
Their Hearts are carried to him, as light Bodies are carried upward. There is
such a Grace as Godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 6. and distinct in the Notion from
Righteousness and Holiness. 1 Timothy 6. 11. Follow after Righteousness,
Godliness. 2 Pet. 3. 11. What manner of Persons ought we to be in all Holy
Conversation and Godliness? What is the Notion then of it? It Is Tendentia
mentis in Deum. An Impression left upon their Hearts, which causes a bent and
tendency toward God, as the Fountain of their Mercies, the Joy of their Souls,
and the Center of their Rest. There is such an Inclination, in some stronger,
in others more remiss; but in all that are made Partakers of a Divine Nature,
in some good Degree, so as ordinarily to prevail over the Inclinations of the
Flesh: As Holiness notes purity of Life, so Godliness an Inclination to God.

3. Because of their Relations to God which they own: God pleads his Right,
Mal. 1. 6. If I be a Father, Where is mine Honor? If I be a Master, Where is
my Fear? A Father must have Honor, and a Master must have Fear* And God, who
is the common (...), and (...) Master of all, must have both: A Worship and
Honor in which, Reverence and Fear, is mixed with Love and Joy. Or as the
owning of a King, implies submission to his Government; so the owning of a
God, Adoration, and Worship.

2 dly. Why in the Spirit?

1. Because Worship without the Spirit, is like a Body without the Soul; it is
but the Carcass of a Duty: The Heart must be the principal and chief Agent in
this Business; Mat. 15. 8. This People draws nigh to me with their Mouths,
and honors me with their Lips, but their Hearts are far from me. There is no
Love to God, rather an habitual aversion from him.

2. External Worship is but a Means to the Internal; as Prayer, Hearing,
Reading, Receiving, tend to promote Love, Trust, Heavenly-mindedness,
Self-denial, Mortification, purity of Life and Conversation: Now as the Means
are only valuable with respect to their End, so are these Duties of Hearing,
Reading, Singing. Diligence in the use of Means is good, but those Acts that
are conversant about the End are better; such as the Love of God, and Delight
and Trust in God; for, Finis est nobilior mediis: Nay, amongst the Internal
Acts, as they are Means to one another, so the nearer respect they have to the
last End, the more noble they are: As Faith is more noble than bare Knowledge,
because Knowledge tends to Faith; Psalm. 5. 10. Love, than Faith; because
Faith tends to Love: Gal. 5. 6. 1 Cor. 13. 13. Faith causes Love, and
serves as the Bellows to in-kindle this Holy Fire; and in Love, Desire makes
way for Delight, as its noblest Act. And accordingly must all things be valued,
as they suit the great End, which is the enjoying of God.

3. A Man does not partake of the Gospel-Blessing, till he does serve God in
the Spirit; that is, till he be made partaker of the Regenerating Grace, and
actual Influence of the Holy Spirit.

(1.) Of his Regenerating Grace, Romans 7. 6. That we should serve in newness of
the Spirit, and not in oldness of the Letter. New Life is the principal of
Evangelical Obedience; and when we are renewed by the Holy Ghost, we walk in
newness of Conversation. The Gospel is a Ministry of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8.
It not only requires Duty, but gives Power to perform it. The Letter of the
Law requires, but gives no Principle or Inclination to do it; that is, from
Regenerating Grace, or the Law written upon our Hearts. John 3. 6. That which
is born of Spirit, is Spirit; that is, suited, inclined, disposed, fitted for a
Spiritual Life.

(2.) Actual Influence: He still works in us what is pleasing in God's sight.
Helps to mortify Corruption; Romans 8. 13. If ye through the Spirit, do mortify
the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live: To perfect Holiness, Heb. 13. 21. that so
we may serve God in all purity of Life. We cannot get, nor keep, nor act, nor
increase Grace of our selves, if forsaken by the Spirit of Grace: The foulest
Sins would become our Pleasure, and the most unquestionable Duties our Burden:
If he withdraw his quickening Influences, you can do nothing.

Use 1. It reproves those that either do not worship God, or by halves, or not
worship him in the Spirit.

1. It disproveth their Confidence that do not worship God: There are an
irreligious sort of Men, that neither call upon him in public, or in private,
in the Family, or in the Closet, but wholly forget the God that made them, and
at whose expense they are maintained and kept.

(1.) Let me reason with you as Men: Wherefore had you reasonable Souls, but to
praise, and honor, and glorify your Creator and Preserver? If you believe
there is a God, why do you not call upon him? The neglect of his Worship,
argues a doubting of his Being: If there be such a supreme Lord, to whom you
must one day give an account; how dare you live without him in the World? All
the Creatures glorify him, Psalm. 145. 10. they passively; but you have a Heart,
and a Tongue to glorify him actually: Man is the Mouth of the Creation, to
return to God the praise of all that Wisdom, Glory, and Power, which is seen in
the things that are made. Now you should make one among the Worshippers of God.

(2.) Let me reason with you as Christians: Are you a Christian, and have such
Advantages to know more of God, and will you be dumb, and tongue-tied in his
Praise? Have you the discovery of the Wonders of his Love, in your Redemption
by Christ, and do you see no cause to own and acknowledge him? Have you no
Necessities to bring to the Throne of Grace? In Christianity, you know his
particular Providence, and Redemption by Christ; and should you eat, and drink,
and trade, and sleep, and never think of God? Have you no Pardon to sue out, no
Grace that you stand in need of; that you should live like a brute Beat? go on
in the circle of Trade, Business, Comforts, and never think of God! You profess
you know him, but in your Works you deny him; and sin doubly, both against the
Light of Reason and Christianity. All that are not avowed Ath^ists, must have
some Worship.

2. It cutteth off their Con^idence, that worship him by halves: They are of
many sorts.

(1.) Some worship him in public, but never in private and secret; though
Christ has given us direction to enter into our Closets, Mat. 6. 6. And surely
every Christian should make Conscience of secret Duties. There are many
Disputes about praying in Families; though those that take their daily Bread
should seek God together: but there can be no dispute about praying in Secret;
for the Precept that requires Prayer, first falls upon single Persons,
before it falls upon Families and Churches, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray without
^easing. This cannot concern Families and Churches, they are done at stated
times, when they can conveniently meet; but every Man in secret is to be often
with God. Christ was often alone, Mark 1. 35. He went ^ut into a solitary
place, and there prayed. Surely Christ had not such need to pray as we have,
nor such need of retirement, his Love to God being always ^ervent, and so in no
danger of distraction: God poured out the Spirit, that we might go apart, and
mourn over Soul-Distempers, Zech. 12. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Now God's precious
Gifts are not given in vain. So, Acts 10. 2. Cornelius prayed to God always.
Therefore certainly secret Prayer is a necessary Duty of God's Worship to be
observed by all that acknowledge God to be God, and the World to be ruled by his
Providence, or themselves to have any need of his Grace and Pardon, or hope for
any thing from him in the World to come: Therefore if you have any sense of
Religion, or think you have any need of particular commerce with God, you
should make Conscience of secret Prayer.

(2.) Others that make Conscience of External Worship, Prayer, Hearing,
Reading, Singing of Psalms; but not of Internal Worship, Faith, Love, and Hope:
The External Forms were appointed for the acting or increasing of Internal
Grace; and so they superficially are conversant about the Means, and never mind
the End; External Worship is sensible, and easily done; but Internal Worship is
difficult: External Worship may procure us esteem with Men; but Internal,
Acceptance with God: External Worship satisfies blind Conscience, but does not
better the Heart: External Worship may puff us up with a vain Confidence; but
Internal Worship makes us lament Spiritual Defects: We have not that purity of
Heart, that deep sense of the World to come; that absolute dependence upon God,
which may quiet our Souls in all Exigencies. Surely they are better Christians
that have the Effect of the Ordinances, than they that have only the Formality
of them. The External Duty may procure us toil and wearisomness to the Flesh,
but the Internal Worship brings us Comfort and Peace: The more Faith in
Christ, and Love to God, and lively Hope of Eternal Life, the more is the Soul
comforted: Therefore if you will always lick the Glass, and never taste the
Honey; go on in a Tract of Duties, but you will have no comfort in them. In
short; They that go on in External Duties, may be said in some sense to serve
God, but they do not seek after him: In pretense they make God the Object of
their Worship, for they do not worship an Idol; but they do not make him the
End of their Worship: A Man makes God the End of* his Worship, when he will
not go away from God, without God; when he looks to this, that his delight in
God be quickened, his dependence upon God strengthened, his hatred of Sin
increased, and by every Address to God, is made more like God.

(3.) It reproves, and disproveth those that put on a garb of Devotion, when
ministering before the Lord, but are slight and vain in their ordinary
Conversation: A Man should be in some measure such out of Duty, as he gives
out himself to be in Duty; For his whole Life should be, as it were, a
continued Act of Worship. Prove. 23. 17. Let not thy Heart envy Sinners, but be
thou in the Fear of the Lord all the day long. We should still live in a
dependence upon God, and in subjection to him: Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord
always before me: He is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. In Point of
Reverence, and in point of Dependence, because we are in danger to miscarry,
both by the Delights of Sense, and the Terrors of Sense: If a reverence of, and
a dependence on the great God, do still possess our Hearts, we shall carry our
selves more soberly as to the Comforts of the World, and not be easily
discouraged and daunted with the Fears of the World: This is our Preservative,
and makes us true and faithful to our great End.

3. Those that do not serve God in the Spirit. You should worship God so, as it
may look like Worship and Service performed to God, and due to God. It Is
Spiritual Worship God requires, and is ever pleased with all: He seeks such
to worship him, as worship him in Spirit, and in Truth, John 4. 23. And this is
most agreeable to his Nature, John 4. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. When Hearts wander, when
Affections do not answer Expressions, Is this like Service and Worship done to
an All-seeing, and All-knowing Spirit? Is there any stamp of God upon the Duty,
of his Majesty, Goodness, and great Power?

Use 2. For the Comfort of good Christians: Here is their Carriage toward God
briefly set down; They worship God in the Spirit. A Christian is described by
his proper Act, Worship; and by the pr^per Object thereof, God; and by the
proper part and seat thereof, In the Spirit. Do you worship him with Reverence,
and with Delight and Affection; with a Trust, Hope, and Confidence?

1. With Reverence. Considering God's Majesty, and our own Vileness: The
Majesty of God; Mal. 1. 13. For I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts.
Slight Worship, argues lessening thoughts of God. Do you know to whom you
speak! It Is a contempt of God, if you think any thing will serve the turn, you
have mean thoughts of him, and do not consider him as you ought to do: So our
vileness, Genesis 18. 27. Who am I, that am but Dust and Ashes, that I should
speak unto God? Dust, as to the business of his Original, and Ashes by the
desert of Sin: In our nearer Approaches to God, thus should we think of our
selves.

2. With Delight and Affection, as our reconciled Father in Christ. So, he is
to us, as the Wellspring of all Grace and Goodness: The great Work of the
Gospel, is to bring us to God, as a Father, Gal. 4. 6. God as a Judge, by the
Spirit of Bondage, drives us to Christ: But Christ, by the Spirit of Adoption,
brings us back again to God as a Father. This is the Evangelical way of
worshipping, that in a Child-like manner we may come to God.

3. With Trust, Hope, and Confidence. He knows all our Wants, can relieve all
our Necessities: Psalm. 57. 2. I will cry unto God most high, who performs all
things for me. Worship would be a cold Formality, if we had to do with one that
knew us not, or had not Sufficiency and Power to help us: But God is
Omniscient, and All-sufficient, and has promised to hear and help us in our
straits: He knows our Necessities, when we know them not.

II. We come now to the second Character; And rejoice in Christ Jesus.

Thence observe;

Doct. That the great Work of a Christian, is a rejoicing in Christ Jesus, or a
thankful sense of our Redeemer's Mercy.

In opening this Point, I shall use this method.

1 st, Show you, What is this rejoicing in Christ. 2 dly, I shall prove, That
Christ is matter of true Rejoicing, in his Person, Offices, Benefits. 3 dly,
That Christians are not sound and sincere in their Profession, unless they do
keep up this Rejoicing in Christ.
1 st, What is this Rejoicing? (...): The Original word implies such a degree
of Joy, as amounts to glorification or boasting; or such an exultation of Mind,
as breaks out into some sensible expression of it. There are in it three
things.

(1.) An apprehension of the Good and Benefit which we have by Christ; For
otherwise how can we rejoice and glory in Him? 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. But of him, ye
are in Christ Jesus, who of God is made to us, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption; That according as it is written, He that
glories, let him glory in the Lord; Christ is All. That our whole Rejoicing
may be in him, who has enlightened us with the Knowledge of the Gospel, and
showed us the way of Salvation, and is the Author of our Justification and
Sanctification, and of our deliverance from all Calamities, and from Death it
self. These Benefits are the cause of our rejoicing; namely, the Promises of
the Gospel, sealed by his Death, and the Graces conveyed to us by his Spirit:
We rejoice and glory in him, as the only and all-sufficient Savior. They that
gloried in Circumcision, gloried in their entrance into the Legal Covenant;
They became Debtors to the Law, but Christ has rati^ied it in the New Covenant
by his Blood; therefore here is more abundant cause of rejoicing.

(2.) Due Affections of Contentment, Joy, Love, Exultation of Heart, that
follows thereupon. A blessing our selves in our Portion, that this great
Happiness is fallen to our share, offered to us at least, if not possessed by
us: The very Knowledge of Christianity, breeds Joy, Acts 8. 8. And there was
great joy in that City. That is, upon the tendency of the Gospel, much more
when we believe in Christ, and embrace his Religion, and resolve to become his
Disciples. They received his Word gladly, Acts 2. 41. His Doctrine must be
welcomed with the Heart, with all Love and Thankfulness: It Is said of the
Jailer, Acts 16. 34. That he rejoiced, believing in God, and all his House. He
was but newly recovered out of the Suburbs of Hell, ready to kill himself but
just before; so that a Man would think, 'twere easier to fetch Water out of a
Flint, or a spark of Fire out of the bottom of the Sea, than to expect or find
Joy in such an Heart; yea, though still in danger of Life, for treating those
as Guests, whom he should have kept as Prisoners; yet he rejoiced, when
acquainted with Salvation by Christ: More especially should we rejoice, when
the Comfort is sealed up to our Consciences: Romans 5. 11. Not only so, but we
also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received
the Atonement. The Eunuch, when he was baptized, He went on his way rejoicing,
Acts 8. 39.

(3.) An expression of it, by an open Profession of Christ's Name, both in Word
and Deed, whatever it costs us: They are said to rejoice in Christ Jesus, who
in those Times could profess his Name, though with hazard and self-denial. As
the Thessalonians, who received the Word with much Affliction, and much
Assurance, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. And it is expressed by the
Parable of the Man that found the true Treasure, and for joy thereof, sold all
that he had to buy the Field, Matthew. 13. 44. They are willing to lose all other
Contentments and Satisfactions for this, Christ is enough. They needed this Joy
to encourage them against the Trials which they then underwent for Christ's
sake, and the Gospel's sake.

2 dly, That Christ is matter of true Rejoicing; for they are Fools that
rejoice in Bawbles and Trifles. A Christian's Joy may be owned and justified.
When Christ's Birth was celebrated by Angels, it is said, Luke 2. 10. Behold, I
bring you glad tidings of great Joy. Here is Joy, and great Joy in Salvation by
Christ: And Mary, Luk 1. 46, 47. My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit
does rejoice in God my Savior. Surely, there is no cause of Joy wanting in
God, and in God coming as a Savior. In short, In Christianity, all is fitted
to fill our Hearts with Delight and Joy.

1. The wonderful Mysteries of our Redemption by Christ. Thereby,

(1.) A way is found out for our Reconciliation with God, and how that dreadful
Controversy may be taken up, and Heaven and Earth may kiss each other, 2 Cor.
5. 19. Surely this is glad Tidings of great Joy, to self-condemned Sinners, who
stood always in fear of the Wrath of God, and the Flames of Hell: What Joy is
it to a condemned Man, that is ready every day to be taken away to Execution,
to hear that his Peace is made, that Pardon may be had, if he will seek it, and
sue it out?

(2.) A distinct Relation of a defeat of the great Enemies of our Salvation,
Death, Hell, the Devil, and the World: He has not only made our Peace with the
Father, by the Blood of his Cross, but vanquished our Spiritual Enemies, and
triumphed over them, Col. 2. 14, 15. Long enough might we have lain in Prison,
before the utmost Farthing had been paid, or done any thing to procure our
deliverance, if our compassionate Redeemer had not taken the Work in hand: had
he turned us to any Creature, we had been helpless. 'Twas he purchased Grace to
overcome the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; that quickened you when you were
dead in Sin; that put Satan out of Office, and delivered us from the present
evil World, Gal. 1. 4. And is not this matter of rejoicing to us?

(3.) That hereby he has not only abolished Death, but brought Life, and
Resurrection to Life, 2 Timothy 1. 10. By entering into that other World, after his
Sufferings, He has given us a visible Demonstration of the Reality of the
World to come, and in his Gospel discovered a Blessedness to us, which
satiateth the Heart of Man, and salveth the great Sore of the whole Creation:
If God had made nothing richer than the World, the Heart of Man would have been
as Leviathan in a little Pool.

2. In the Promises of Christ, there is matter of Joy. In the general, God is
your God, and that is more than to have all the World to be yours; compare Genesis
17. 7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after
thee in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant; to be a God unto thee,
and thy Seed after thee. With Psalm. 144. 15. Happy is that People whose God is
the Lord. We have an Eternal and Allsufficient God to live upon, and from whom
to derive our Joy and Comfort. A God infinite in Power, Wisdom, and Goodness,
to be our Portion. And where is Matter of Joy and Comfort, if not in God?
Behold the difference between Carnal Men and the Children of God; The World is
their Portion, and God is ours; and who is better provided for? More especially
we are told, 1 Timothy 4. 8. That Godliness has the Promises of this Life, and
that which is to come. Heaven and Earth are laid at the Feet of Godliness; what
would you more^ Surely we have full Consolation offered to us in the Promises
of the Gospel; He can want nothing to his Comfort who^ has an Interest in
them. To instance in the lowest Blessings, those which concern this Life: God
is our God, that can cure all Diseases, overcome all Enemies, supply all Wants,
deliver in all Dangers, and will do it so far as is for our good; and desires
of any thing beyond this, are not to be satisfied, but mortified, Psalm. 84. 11.
But then for the more Excellent Promises of the New Covenant, which concern
another World, such as the pardoning of our Sins, the healing our Natures, and
the glorifying of our Persons; 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding
great and precious Promises, that by these you might be partakers of the Divine
Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the World through lust. The
pardon of all our Sins, which are the great trouble and burden of the
Creatures. Who will rejoice like the pardoned Sinner, who is discharged of his
Debt, eased of his Burden, and has his Filth covered? Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is
the Man whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin i^ covered. O the
blessedness of the Man^ He is like one fetched back from Execution. Then, the
taking away of the stony Heart, and the giving of an Holy and Heavenly Heart.
Oh what Matter of Joy is this! to have all things necessary to Life and
Godliness: What Is the trouble of a gracious Heart, but the Relicts of
Corruption? Romans 7. 24. Paul groaneth sorely, but yet blesses God for his
Hopes by Christ; Verse. 25. Renewing Grace is dearly bought, and plentifully
bestowed, Titus 3. 5, 6. and graciously offered to those that will seek after
it. Prove. 1. 23. Turn you at my Reproof; Behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto
you. And this promise to be fulfilled by a Divine Power; 2 Pet. 1. 3. Oh what a
Comfort is the Redeemer's Grace, to a Soul that has been long exercised in
subduing Sin! It Is true, it groans while it is a doing, yet the very groans of
the Sick, show that Life and Health is sweet: Healing, renewing Grace makes
other Things sweet: as your whole Duty to God; It makes it become your
Delight. But the great Promise is Eternal Life: 1 John 2. 25. And this is the
Promise that he has promised us, even Eternal Life. That Is a Matter of Joy
indeed: What! to live for ever with God! the forethought of it reviveth us;
the fore-taste of it is a kind of Heaven upon Earth, 1 Pet. 1. 8. The certain
hope of it will swallow up all Grief and Sorrow, Romans 5. 2, 3. So that there is
no question, but that in the Promises of Christ, there is Matter of great Joy.

3. The Enjoiments of Christianity are very pleasing: I add this to show you,
that it is not all in expectation, if we consider not only what we shall be,
but what we are. For the present;

(1.) We have peace of Conscience, Romans 5. 1. Mat. 11. 29. Phil. 4. 7. Rest for
our Souls is anxiously sought after in other things, but only found in Christ's
Religion, and living according to the Precepts and Institutions thereof. As
Noah's Dove found not a place whereon to rest the sole of her Foot; so we
flutter up and down, but never have any firm peace of Heart and Conscience,
till we submit to Christ, and take his counsel.

(2.) A sense of the Love of God; Romans 5. 5. Because the Love of God is shed
abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Spirit given unto us. And, 1 Pet. 2. 3. If so
be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

(3.) God's Presence with us, and our Communion with him. 1 John 1. 3, 4. And
truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, that
your Joy may be full. And, John 8. 29.

(4.) Access to God, with assurance of Welcome and Audience. John 16. 24.
Whatsoever ye ask in my Name, ye shall receive, that your Joy may be full.

(5.) The Fore-tastes of the Life to come; Romans 8. 23. and 2 Cor. 3. 5. So that
all is to stir up this Delight and Joy in the Lord Jesus Christ.

4. The Precepts of Christ show, that we have Matter of Rejoicing in him. What
are the great Duties required? To love God! Now what pain is it to delight in
the Lord as our All-sufficient Portion? To be mindful of him, and meditate of
his Excellencies and Benefits: Psalm. 104. 34. My Meditation of him shall be
sweet, I will be glad in the Lord. Is it any toilsome thing to come in a
childish manner, and unbosome our selves to him, and beg the renewed
Testimonies of his Love to us, especially when set awork by the Holy Ghost?
Gal. 4. 6. To believe in Christ, it is difficult; but pleasant to consider the
Lord Jesus as the suitable Remedy for the lapsed Estate of Mankind, both as to
his Work with God and us: Heb. 3. 1. He came to destroy Sin and Misery!
Whenever we reflect upon Christ, what do we find but ample grounds of Joy?
John 14. 1. Let not your Hearts be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in
me. That is, to get off our trouble, consider, we have an Alsufficient God, and
an Alsufficient Mediator. Romans 15. 13. Now the God of Hope fill you with all
Joy and Peace in believing, that ye may abound in Hope, through the Power of
the Holy Ghost. Repentance requires sorrow for Sin, only as it tends to Joy
and Comfort, Matthew. 5. 5. It Is a tormenting, but a curing Sorrow. The Word of
God takes care, that a Penitent, who has foully miscarried, should not be
swallowed up of overmuch grief, 2 Cor. 2. 7. In the general, Repentance and
Mortification are our Physic to expel the noxious Humors, that would bring
us, not only to Death, but to Damnation; and to keep the Soul in due plight and
health. And then for Self-Government; We are to bridle our Passions and
Appetites: Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with
the Affections and Lusts. The bridling our Passions, it is but forbidding us to
be miserable, and throw out every thing that would disquiet the Soul. Christ's
great care was, that the reasonable Creature might live in Peace, and Holy
Security; therefore has discharged our Cares, and Sorrows, and Fears: Our
Cares, that they might not distract our Minds: Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for
nothing. And, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Cast all your care upon the Lord. These Prohibitions
show you the Goodness of Christ; He has made it unlawful for you to be
troubled, and to perplex your Minds with anxious and distrustful Thoughts. Oh!
what pleasant Lives might we live, if we could entirely cast our selves into
the Arms of God, and refer all things to the Wisdom and powerful Conduct of his
Providence! The Scripture is as plentiful also in forbidding Sorrow; 1 Thessalonians.
4. 13. Sorrow not as those that are without Hope. Dejection and anguish of
Spirit is your Sin. So for Fear; Isa. 41. 10. Fear not, for I am with thee: be
not dismayed, for I am thy God. Heb. 13. 6. So that we may boldly say, The Lord
is my Helper, I will not fear what Man can do unto me. What should a Christian
fear? Dangers by the way? God is his Helper: To be cast into Hell when he goes
out of the World? Christ has showed him how to flee from Wrath to come: He
fears it with a Fear of Caution, so as to shun it; but not with a Fear of
Perplexity, so as to disquiet and perplex his Soul, for Jesus has delivered
him from Wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. Christianity is as contrary to Sadness
and Misery, as Life to Death, and Light to Darkness: For the other, the
crucifying and bridling of our Lusts, which carry us to the good things of this
World; why, that is troublesome, to be debarred of the Delights which Nature
affects! But here are no rigorous Exactions, but such as are agreeable to the
reasonable Nature: Christ has forbidden us no Pleasure, but what may be a Sin,
or a Snare to us: He would not have Man to degenerate and turn Beast. All
Christ's Restraints are but necessary Cautions for our safety: Is it burdensome
to a Man to keep out of Danger's way, and to avoid such things as are
destructive to his Soul? If a Friend will take out of our hands, the Knife with
which we would not only cut our Fingers, but our Throats; Is he to be blamed?
Or is he your Enemy, who forbids you to drink Poison? Forbidden Fruit costs
dear in the Issue.

5. For those Duties which concern our Neighbor. To love all Men; to do good
to all Men, it is a Blessed and Godlike thing, to be giving rather than
receiving, Acts 20. 35. The delight of doing good, is much more than the cost;
it is to be as earthly Gods among our Neighbors. This Work rewards it self,
because it is such a contentment and satisfaction to our Minds. For Justice: To
do, as we would be done to; what more pleasant? We would have others bound by
these Laws, why not our selves? It Is horrible to require one measure of dealing
from them to us, and use a quite contrary our selves! Would Men hate, defraud,
oppress others, and expect nothing but kind and righteous dealing from them?
this is a gross partiality: Therefore as our Interest calls for Justice, so
does our Conscience; and it would be a trouble and an affront to Reason not to
do it. So for Fidelity in our Relations: These things maintain order of
Families, and conduce to our safety and private peace, as well as they belong
to our Duty to God: So that on which side soever we look, we see what Matter of
Joy there is in Christ.

I come now to show you,

Thirdly, The Reasons why Christians are not sacred and sincere in their
Profession, unless they keep up this rejoicing in Christ.

1. We do not else give Christ his due Honor, if we do not esteem him who is
so excellent in himself, and so beneficial to us, even to a degree of
Rejoicing: The magnifying of Christ was intended by God, in the whole Business
of our Redemption and Deliverance, that we might esteem him, delight in him,
count all things Dung and Dross, that we might gain him: Now we do not comply
with this End, but have mean thoughts of his Grace, if we be not affected with
Joy at it.

It argues a double defect;

(1.) That we are not sensible of our great misery without him.

Nor, (2.) affected with the great Love he has showed in our Deliverance, and
the Felicity accruing to us thereby.

(1.) We are not duly sensible of our great Misery without him. Alas, What
could we have done, without his Passion and Intercession? If he had not died
for Sinners, What had you to answer to the T^rrors of the Law, the Accusations
of your Consciences, the Fears of Hell, and approaching Damnation? How could
you look God in the Face, or think one comfortable thought of him? Had we wept
out our Eyes, and prayed out our Hearts, and never committed Sin again; this
would not have made God satisfaction for Sin past: Paying new Debts, does not
quit old Scores: Long enough might we have lain in our Blood, e're we could
have found out a Ransom which God would accept; besides him there is no
Savior. And then for his Intercession: If he did not hide your nakedness, and
procure you a daily Pardon, you would not be an hour longer out of Hell. If he
did not bring you to God, you could have no comfortable access to him: Your
Prayer would be cast back as Dung in your Faces, if the Merit of his Sacrifice
did not make them accepted. And shall all this be told you, and owned by you
for Truth; and will you not rejoice that God has found a Ransom, and provided
an Intercessor for you? Surely it cannot be imagined that you are sensible of
your case, if you be not thankful for your Remedy.

(2.) You are not affected with the great Love which Christ has showed in your
Deliverance; nor the Felicity accruing to you thereby. It Is said, Ephesians. 3. 19.
That you may know the Love of God which passes knowledge. Before he had pressed
them to make it their study to comprehend the height, length, and breadth; and
when they have all done, the Love of Christ passes Knowledge: Christ would pose
Men and Angels with an heap of Wonders, in delivering us from Misery and Sin.
Now should not we rejoice and make our boast of this! Surely, we vilify and
bring down the price of these Wonders of Love, if we entertain them with cold
Thoughts, and without some considerable Acts of Joy and Thankfulness. Shall
Angels wonder, and we the Parties interessed not rejoice! Certainly we are not
affected with the great Felicity accruing to us. Felicity cannot be sought
after without the highest Affections and Endeavors. Now if we can rejoice in
Trifles, and not rejoice in the Love of God; How can we be said to mind these
things?

2. A Man's Joy distinguishes him. There is a seeking Joy, and a complacential
Joy. Psalm. 119. 14. I have rejoiced in the Way of thy Testimonies, as much as
in all Riches. It Is good to observe what it is that puts Gladness into our
Hearts: The Love of God, and his Goodness in Christ. Every Man is discovered by
his complacency, or displiciency. Psalm. 4. 7. Thou have put Gladness into my
Heart, more than in the time that their Corn and their Wine increased. Romans 8.
5. They that are after the Flesh, do mind the things of the Flesh: but they
that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. To rejoice in the
Creatures, as accommodating or pleasing the Flesh, is the Joy of the Carnal: To
rejoice in outward Ordinances and Privileges, without other things, is the Joy
of the Hypocrite and common Professors. Let us carry it a little farther; The
Devils, and Damned, are out of all hope and possibility of Joy: The Angels, and
glorified Saints, rejoice in the full fruition of God: There is Gaudium Viae,
and Gaudium Patriae; there is the Joy of the Way, and the Joy of our Home, at
our Journey's End. The latter is set forth Psalm. 16. 11. In thy presence is
fullness of Joy; at thy right Hand are Pleasures for evermore. The other is in
Christ, and the use of his healing and recovering Methods, and the desires and
hopes of the Glory to come. This is the Joy, or well-pleasedness of mind, which
is proper to us in our Journey: 1 Pet. 1. 8. In whom believing, ye rejoice with
Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. The Comfort of Travelers differs from
that which a Man has in Heaven: It Is a Joy that he has, as he is going Home;
and therefore how should the serious Christian be described, but by his
rejoicing in Christ Jesus?

Use 1. To reprove those that cannot keep up their Rejoicing in Christ Jesus,
as soon as they are mated with any Calamity or Affliction in the World. Is not
Grace better than any natural Comfort taken from us? Heb. 12. 11. No chastning
for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; Nevertheless, afterward it
yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness, unto them which are exercised
thereby. Surely when we have such cause of rejoicing in Christ, to be dejected
with every little Adversity, shows weak Faith. Have you Peace with God, and
Communion with him at every turn? and shall a blasting of the Creature destroy
all your Comfort? Have you hope of Glory, and cannot you bear a Disappointment
in the World? Are you assured of the Care of your Heavenly Father, and his
particular Providence over you, and yet so full of grudging and repining
Thoughts, when he retrencheth you a little, and blasteth your worldly
Probabilities? Surely it argues too much addictedness to present Comforts, and
love of the ease of the Flesh! Have you a due sense of the World to come, and
that better, and enduring Substance; and yet complain so bitterly of Worldly
Losses? Have you a God in Covenant with you, who has engaged all his Love,
Wisdom, and Power, to help you, and to turn all things to your Good? Romans 8.
28. What though the trial of your Faith and Patience be very sore? Did you
capitulate with God, and bargain with him how much you would suffer the Flesh
to be cros^ed, and that in such sharp Afflictions you would be excused, that
your Gourd should not be altogether smitten and dried up? You can bear any
other Cross but this; but was this excepted out of your Resignation?

2. It reproves those that cherish a carnal Rejoicing. A Believer should
rejoice in Christ Jesus. Luke 10. 19, 20. Behold, I give unto you Power to
tread on Serpents, and Scorpions, and over all the Power of the Enemy, etc.
Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject unto you:
but rather rejoice, because your Names are written in Heaven. Rejoice not in
this, that you are in Dignity and Honor; This is not your Felicity, nor the
direct way to your Felicity; the higher you climb, your Station is the more
dangerous: They are safer that stand on the Ground, than those that are on a
Pinnacle: Rejoice not, in that you have abundance of earthly Riches, but that
you have a taste of higher and better things: Be not affected so deeply with
lower Mercies, as to overlook the special Mercies that accompany Salvation:
Rejoice not in this, that you have convenient Habitations in this World; but in
that you have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the
Heavens: In that you have comely Bodies, but that you have hopes of a better
Resurrection, when this mortal shall put on Immortality. Not in the Nobility of
your Birth, but that you are born of the Spirit. John 1. 12, 13. To as many as
received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his Name: which were born, not of Blood, nor of the Will of the
Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. Rejoice not in that you have great
Friends to stand by you; but that in the New Covenant you are made a Friend of
God, as Abraham was. Not in that you have costly Accommodations to please the
Flesh: No, this may be the bane of your Souls: Romans 8. 13. They that live after
the Flesh, shall die. And, Luke 16. 25. Son, Remember that thou in thy Lifetime
receivedst thy good things. (Dives fared deliciously every day, and Lazarus was
full of Sores, and desirous to be fed with the Crumbs which fell from the Rich
Man's Table): Thou have received thy good Things, and Lazarus evil Things: but
now he is Comforted, and thou art Tormented.

Use 2. Is to encourage you to Rejoice in Christ Jesus. Now because we are
helpers of your Joy, 1 Cor. 1. 24. And God is best pleased with this frame of
Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. I shall resume the main Discourse; And,

1. Handle the Nature of it.

2. Show you whether this Joy may be without Assurance.

3. Show you the spiritual Profit of it.

4. The Helps or Means by which it is raised in us.

1. For the Nature of it. It Is an Act of Love, begotten in us by the sense of
the Love of Christ, revealed in the Word, and shed abroad in our Hearts by the
Holy Ghost; whereby the Soul is more affected with delight in the Grace of the
Redeemer, than with all other things whatsoever.

In which Description, Observe, 1. It Is an Act of Love. The Acts of Love are
two: Desire, and Delight. They both agree in this, That they are conversant
about good, and are founded in esteem: We think it good. They differ, because
Desire is the Motion and Exercise of Love, and Delight the Quiet and Repose of
it. Desire is expressed in that Speech, Psalm. 63. 8. My Soul follows hard
after thee. A Believer cannot forbear to seek after God. Desire of Union,
keeps us up in the pursuit of him. Delight is expressed in that form of
Speech, Psalm. 16. 5, 6. The Lord is the Portion of my Inheritance, and my Cup.
The Lines are fallen unto me in a pleasant place; yea, I have a goodly
Heritage. He has all his Joy, and Pleasure, and Contentment in God. Desire,
supposes some want or absence of the valued Object: Delight, some kind of
Enjoyment: Either he is ours, or might be ours if we would our selves. For the
Offer is cause of Joy, as well as the Enjoyment. If our Desires have reached
the lovely Object, it is cause of Joy; or if it be within our reach. As when
Christ and his Benefits are offered to us, and left upon our choice. And
therefore it is said, Jonah 2. 8. They that observe lying Vanities, forsake
their own Mercies. Their own, though not possessed by them, yet they are
offered to them: They might have been their own, if they did not exclude
themselves: The Object is in a sort present, and brought home to us in the
Offers of the Gospel.

2. It Is an Act of Love begotten in us, by the sense of the Love of Christ: For
Love only begets Love; 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he loved us first.
The Object of Love, is Goodness: Now we love God in Christ, for the Goodness
that is in him, the Goodness that flows from him, and the Goodness we expect
from him; all these attract our Love.

(1.) The Goodness that is in him; Moral and Beneficial: Moral, which is his
Holiness, Psalm. 119. 140. Thy Word is very pure, therefore thy Servant loves
it. If we Love his Law, for the purity thereof, then certainly we must love
God, how else can we study to imitate him? for we imitate only that which we
love, and delight in as good. Then for his Beneficial Goodness; Psalm. 100. 5.
For the Lord is Good, his Mercy is everlasting; and his Truth endures to all
Generations. And, Psalm. 119. 68. Thou art Good, and do good.

(2.) The Goodness that flows from him: Not only in our Creation, but our
Redemption by Christ, which is the stupendous Instance of his Goodness to Man.
Titus 3. 4. After the kindness and love of God our Savior toward Man
appeared, etc. (In the Creation, there was (...), in Redemption, (...) That God
found a Ransom for us, and so great as his only begotten Son; this was Love and
Goodness indeed.

(3.) The Goodness we expect from him, both in this World, and the next: Here,
Reconciliation, and Remission of Sins, which is a Blessing that does much draw
the Heart of Man to delight in Christ. For she loved much, to whom much was
forgiven, Luke 7. 47. We keep off from a condemning God, but draw nigh to a
pardoning God. Therefore the Apostle says, Heb. 7. 19. The bringing in of this
better Hope by the Gospel, does cause us to draw nigh to God. Being at peace
with God, and reconciled to him, we may have access with confidence, and
boldness, to the Throne of Grace, are no more at distance with God, looking
upon him as a consuming Fire. The Gospel gives us liberty to come to him, and
expect the Mercy and Bounty of God, through Jesus Christ. So in the next World
Eternal Life and Glory, which is our great Reward, merited by Christ; Mat. 5.
12. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven. This is
a solid, lasting, satisfying, substantial Good. Worldly Joys are but seeming,
they appear and vanish in a moment, every blast of Temptation scatters them.
Well then, offers of Pardon, and Life by Christ, are the Matters of this Joy,
as they free us from the greatest Miseries, and bring us to the enjoyment of
the truest Happiness. If you ask me then, Why is a Christian described rather
by rejoicing in Christ, than by rejoicing in the pardon of Sins, and Eternal
Blessedness? I Answer, Because Christ is the Author and Procurer of these
things to us; And by our Joy, we express not only our esteem of these Benefits,
but our gratitude and thankfulness for the Mercy and Bounty of God, and the
great Love of our Redeemer.

3. The Description shows, how the sense of this Goodness is begotten in us:
The Love of Christ is revealed in the Word, and shed abroad in our Hearts, by
the Holy Ghost; And I add, Believed by Faith, and improved by Meditation.

(1.) It Is revealed in the Gospel, or Word of Salvation which is sent to us.
Therefore it is said, Acts 13. 48. When the Gentiles heard this, they were glad,
and glorified the Word of God; and as many as were ordained to Eternal Life,
believed. Surely the Mind of Man, which is naturally discomforted, and weakened,
and strangely haunted with Doubts and Fears about the pardon of Sin, and
Eternal Life, is mightily revived and encouraged with these glad Tidings of
this Salvation, dispensed to us by a sure Covenant, Heb. 6. 18. And if the
Gentiles that heard these things were glad, proportionably we should be glad,
for the Gospel should never be as stale News to Sinners, or as a Jest often
told: Our Necessities are as deep as theirs, and the Covenant stands as firm
to us, as it did to them: Therefore if we have the Heart of a guilty Man, it
should be as welcome to us.

(2.) It Is shed abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost. So much is asserted by
the Apostle. Romans 5. 5. The Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts by the
Holy Ghost which is given unto us. Our dry Reason cannot give such a lively
sense of these Comforts, as the Revelation of the Holy Ghost. And this is the
difference between a believing by Tradition, and believing by Inspiration.
Believing by Tradition, gives us but cold thoughts of these Mysteries; but
believing by Inspiration, warmeth the Heart, and reviveth it with an
unspeakable Joy; and is called, tasting the good Word; which is the privilege
of those who are enlightened by the Spirit, Heb. 6. 4. And a tasting that the
Lord is gracious, 1 Pet. 2. 3. which much differs from the common reflection
upon those things which Flesh and Blood may give us, or the bare reports of Men
stir up in us. The Spirits light is lovely, and ravisheth, and tra^sporteth the
Soul; And where it is permanent, and rooted, it effectually changes the Soul.
Some^ are altogether careless, not affected at all with these things, as the
habituated worldly Sinner, 1 Cor. 2. 14. They are folly to him. For Spiritual
Things must be spiritually discerned: Some are to a degree affected by the
common Work of the Spirit, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. but it is not rooted, it is not
predominate, so as to control other Affections and Delights; they have a
rejoicing in the Offers of Pardon and Life, but it is a Joy that leaves some
darling Sin still predominant. But there is a third sort, that have such a
taste of these things, that they are renewed and changed by it, Heb. 3. 6. Now
then, if you would have this rejoicing in Christ Jesus, you must apply your
selves to Christ, in the use of the appointed means, for the renewing of your
Natures; for Love and Delight are never forced, nor will be drawn forth by bare
Commands and Threatenings, yea, and not by the proposal of Promises, though the
Injoiments be never so great and glorious. This may a little stir us, and this
is the Matter of Joy, but not the Cause of Joy. But this Joy, proceeds partly
from the Inclination, when the Heart is suited, and partly from the attractive
goodness of the Object: and both are powerfully done by the Holy Spirit, as the
Heart is renewed, and the Object is most effectually represented by him, Ephesians.
1. 17, 18. And this we must wait for.

(3.) It Is received, and believed by Faith. This is often told us in the
Scripture, 1 Pet. 1. 18. In whom believing, ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable,
and full of Glory. And, Romans 15. 13. The God of Hope fill you with Joy and
Peace in believing. We cannot be affected with the great Things Christ has
done and purchased for us, till we believe them. There is in Faith, three
things, Assent, Consent, and Affiance.

(1.) Assent, or a firm and certain belief of the Truth of the Gospel
concerning Christ, as the only sufficient Savior, by whom alone God will give
us the pardon of Sins, and Eternal Life. John 4. 42. We have heard him our
selves, and know, that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the World.
And, John 6. 69. We believe and are sure, that thou art that Christ, the Son of
the Living God. When we are verily persuaded of this, as we are of any thing
that appears true to us; this stirs up Joy. Others have but an hearsay
Knowledge, not a Believing Assent. Surely Christ is a delectable Object, what
hinders then, but that we rejoice in him! Nothing but want of Faith: For if
this be true, we so Necessitous, and he so All-sufficient a Remedy; why are we
not so affected with these things, as the worth of them does deserve! Nothing
can be rationally said, but that we are not soundly persuaded of the truth of
it.

(2.) A Consent. This Grace is dispensed by a Convenant which binds mutually;
assures us of Happiness, and requires Duty from us. Therefore, an unfeigned
Consent, or a readiness to fulfill those terms expressed in the Promise, is
required of us; or a resolution to repent and obey the Gospel. Christ has
Offices and Relations that imply our Comfort; and other Offices and Relations
which imply our Duty: Or rather, the same do both; He is our Teacher, and King,
as well as our Priest; and we must submit to be ruled and taught by him, as
well as depend upon the Merit of his Sacrifice and Intercession. Heb. 5. 9. And
being made perfect, he became the Author of Et^^nal Salvation to all them that
obey him. And they are so taught the Truth that is in Jesus, that they put off
the Old Man, and put on the New, Ephesians. 4. 20, 21. True Believers, must be
Scholars daily learning somewhat from Christ: yea, his Priesthood implies
Duty, Dependence, humble Addresses. A brokenhearted coming to God by him: As
his Kingship and Prophetical Office implies privilege also. His defending and
teaching us by his Spirit.

(3.) There is Affiance: Which is a reposing of our Hearts, or a relying upon
God, promising remission of Sins, and Eternal Life for Christ's sake alone;
that he will be as good as his word, while we diligently use the Means ordained
to this end, Romans 2. 7. And this Confidence has an influence upon this Joy,
Heb. 3. 6. or a delightful sense of our Redeemer's Grace.

4. It Is improved by Meditation: For the greatest things do not work, unless we
think of them, and work them into our Hearts. The natural way of Operation is,
That Object ^tir up Thoughts, and Thoughts stir up Affections; Psalm. 104. 34.
My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord. The more
frequent and serious Thoughts we have of the Love of God in Christ, and the
more deep and ponderous they are, the more do they blow up this Holy Fire into
a Flame. Now for this end was the Lord's Supper instituted, where the whole
Gospel is applied and sealed to us, that this delight might be afresh acted and
stirred in us at the Lord's Table, while our minds are taken up in considering
Christ the great Apostle and High Priest of our Confession, Heb. 3. 1. Surely
it should not be an idle and fruitless Contemplation; it should stir up Love,
and what stirs up Love, stirs up Delight. I come now to the last part of
the Description.

5. The particular Affection caused by this sense is mentioned: We delight in
the Grace of the Redeemer, more than in all other things whatsoever.

Where, 1. Take noice of the Affection it self.

Then, 2. The Degree of it.

1. The Affection it self: Which is Delight, or a well-pleasedness of Mind, in
the Grace that is brought to us by the Knowledge of Christ. This inlargeth the
Heart, and fills it with a Sweetness and Contentment; and the Vent of it is
Praise, for the Heart being enlarged, cannot hold and contain it self: Psalm.
33. 14. I will show forth all they Praise in the Gates of the Daughter of Sion:
I will rejoice in thy Salvation. Joy cannot be kept within doors, it will break
out in all suitable ways of Expression: The Heart does first Rejoice, and then
the Tongue does overflow: The Heart is filled with Joy, and then the Tongue
with Thanksgiving. So Psalm. 35. 9. My Soul shall be joyful in the Lord; it
shall rejoice in his Salvation. Nothing disposes the Heart to praise so much,
as this Holy Joy. There is no true Thanksgiving, if this be not at the bottom
of it.

2. For the Degree: The Heart does delight in Christ above all other Things: As
to the sensitive Expression, in the lively stirring of Joy, we may to
appearance be more affected with outward Benefits; because fleshly Objects do
more work upon our fleshly senses, as carrying a greater suitableness to them.
Religion is a grave severe thing, not seen so much in actual Transports, as in
the habitual complacency, and well-pleasedness of the Mind: yet in sol^mn
Duties, th^re may be as great Ravishment of Soul; Psalm. 6. 35. My Soul shall
be ravished as with Marrow and Fatness; and my Mouth shall praise thee with
joyful Lips. When they feel the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts, they
are in effect transported with it, more than with all the Delicates and
Banquets of the World, and cannot hold from praising God: But generally it must
be measured by our solid complacency, and judicious esteem: What we prize most,
and would least want, and would not forgo for all other things; so the Saints
rejoice in God and Christ, more than in any worldly Matter whatsoever. Psalm.
73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides thee. Psalm. 119. 14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy
Testimonies, as much as in all Riches. Psalm. 4. 6, 7. There be many that say,
Who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon
us; That have put Gladness in my Heart, more than in the time that their Corn
and their Wine increased. Psalm. 63. 3. Because thy loving Kindness is better
than Life, my Lips shall praise thee. This is that which they love most, and
keep best, and are most loath to want. This is that which gives a value to Life
it self; and without which, that which is most precious and desirable, is
little or nothing worth; and gives them more comfort, then what is most
comfortable in this World; and is the most cheerful Employment for their
Thoughts to think upon. This is delight in Christ.

Q. Whether this may be had without Assurance? And can those who are dark in
their interest in Christ, and know not whether they have any Grace or no,
rejoice in him? To this I Answer; Yes certainly: For there are general Grounds
of rejoicing; for the Gospel brings glad Tidings to Sinners, as it offers
to them a way how to escape out of their misery, and enter into the Peace of
God.

But more distinctly;

1. The Scripture speaks of a twofold rejoicing in Christ; Before Faith, and
After Faith. Before Faith is full grown, and is but in the making, as those,
Acts 13. 48. -- When they heard this, they were glad, etc. And he that had
found the true Treasure, for Joy thereof sold all that he had, Matthew. 13. 44.
There was Joy before the through consent, though introductive of it, yet
antecedent to it. And the reason is, because God has showed them the way, how
to free themselves from Misery, and to enjoy true Felicity and Happiness. Now
if there may be a Joy before Faith, certainly before Assurance. The very offer
of a Remedy, is comfortable when in misery. And then there is a Joy after
Faith; as Joy and Peace in Believing: when they take the course to get this
Liberty and Deliverance by Christ; yet this is Faith, not Assurance. As a sick
Man, when he hears of an able Physician, who has cured many of the same
Disease wherewith he is oppressed, he rejoiceth, and conceives some hope that
he may be cured also; When he has lighted upon this Physician, and begins
to make use of his Healing Medicines, he is more glad, and expects the Cure:
But when he is perfectly recovered, and feels it, then he is glad indeed. So
when a brokenhearted Creature hears the glad Tidings of the Gospel, that
Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners; he rejoiceth that God has
found out such a Savior to recover the lapsed Estate of Mankind: But when he
submits to Christ's Healing Methods, and trusts himself with his skill and
fidelity, he is more comforted, and does more intimately feel the benefit of
this course in his own Soul; but as he grows more assured of his Health and
Salvation, his Comfort still increases, and his Joy is more unspeakable and
glorious: So that this Joy may be without assurance, for the Causes of it at
first, are Knowledge and Faith.

2. There is a Joy that accompanies seeking, even before we attain what we
seek after. Psalm. 105. 3. Let the Heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.
There is a great deal of Contentment in this course, though that complacential
Joy, which is our full Reward, be yet reserved for us; yet there is a Joy in
seeking: Better be a Seeker, than a Wanderer. This Blessed Savior am I waiting
upon! Though we have attained to little Communion with him, yet it is a comfort,
that we are seeking farther measure: Delight and Joy keeps up our endeavors.

3. When our Right is cleared, then we have more abundant Joy. 2 Pet. 1. 10,
11. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure; for if ye do these things, you shall never fall: For so an
Entrance shall be administered to you abundantly, into the Everlasting Kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Some are afar off, others not far from
the Kingdom of God: Others make an hard shift to go to Heaven, through many
Doubts and Fears; some sail into the Haven of Glory with full Sails, with much
Joy and Peace of Soul.

3. I shall show you the Spiritual Profit of this Joy.

(1.) It Is such a Joy as does enlarge our Heart in Duty, and strengthens us in
the way of God: Nehem. 8. 10. The Joy of the Lord is your strength. There is a
natural deadness and dullness in Holy Duties, which we often find in our selves,
which comes to pass partly from the back-bias of Corruption, weakening our
Delight in God; and partly from the remissness of our Will toward Spiritual
and Heavenly Things: Now the most proper and kindly cure of it, is this Delight
and Rejoicing in Christ; for a Man will readily do those things which he
delights in, though ^oilsom and difficult. Let the Heart be but affected with
the Grace of Christ, and our Joy will soon vent it self in a thankful and
delightful Obedience; 1 John 5. 3. For this is the Love of God, that we keep
his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. Psalm. 119. 14. I have
rejoiced in the way of thy Testimonies, as much as in all Riches. Psalm. 40. 8.
I delight to do thy Will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within my Heart. The
hardest Services are pleasant to one that delights in Christ; they are
sweetened by his Love, and quickened, and inlivened by the sense and esteem that
we have of the Benefits he procures for us. Shall we refuse to do any thing
for such a compassionate Savior, who died for us, to reconcile us to God, and
bring us to the everlasting fruition of him? So that the Life of all Obedience
depends on this Joy.

(2.) It Is our Cordial, to fortify us against all the Calamities and
Infelicities of the present World, and makes every bitter thing sweet to us;
whether they be the common Afflictions incident to Man, or Persecutions for
Righteousness-sake.

1. For the common Afflictions: A Christian is never in a right Frame, 'till he
has learned Contentment in all Estates. That he does not over-joy in worldly
Comforts, nor over-grieve for worldly Losses, 1 Cor. 7. 3. But carries himself
as one that is above the Hopes and Fears of the World: Now there are many Means
to be used, that we may get this humble and composed frame of Heart; but the
most constant and effectual care of worldly Sorrow, is to keep our rejoicing in
Jesus Christ, and to be satisfied with the Fruits of his Redemption: This, like
the Wood that was cast in at Marah, to make the bitter Waters sweet, does
sweeten our Troubles, and supply our Wants, and swallow up our Griefs and
Infelicities; for we have that in Christ, which is better than the natural
comfort taken from us: Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom,
neither shall Fruit be in the Vines; the labor of the Olive shall fail, and
the Fields shall yield no Meat; the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and
there shall be no Herd in the Stalls. Yet will I rejoice in the Lord: I will
joy in the God of my Salvation. He supposes not only some want, but an utter
destitution and desolation of all things, and yet his Heart was kept up by Joy
in God. So elsewhere, Romans 12. 12. Rejoicing in Hope, patient in Tribulation,
continuing instant in Prayer. The Comfort of Reconciliation with God, and the
Hopes of Heaven, do most breed Patience in Afflictions: And certainly Joy is
the best cure of Sorrow. Contraria contrariis cura^tur. Now the Joy that must
be opposed to worldly Sorrow, is not Worldly, but either Spiritual, or Heavenly
Joy. Spiritual in the present Fruits of Christ's Death; Heb. 12. 11. Now no
chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless,
afterward it yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness unto them which are
exercised thereby. Heavenly; surely Eternal Joys will best vanquish Temporal
Sorrows; Heb. 12. 2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith;
who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God. This will enable
us patiently and cheerfully to bear all things.

2. Persecutions: We need to be fortified against this, that we may boldly
profess our Faith in Christ, without any fear of Sufferings, and may not faint
under them, but bear them with courage and constancy. Now this is the Fruit of
this rejoicing in Christ; witness these Scriptures, Acts 5. 41. They went away
rejoiceing, that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name. Heb.
10. 34. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, knowing in your selves,
that ye have in Heaven, a better and an enduring Substance. So, Mat. 5. 12.
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven; for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. And in many other places;
and, 1 Pet. 4. 13. Rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
Sufferings; that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with an
exceeding Joy. And, James 1. 4. Count it all Joy, when ye fall into diverse
Trials. Surely, Christ and Heaven are worth something, and such Trials do in
part show, how much we esteem him, and value him, above any Interest of ours.

3. It does draw off the Heart from the Delights of the Flesh: Not only
Contraria contrariis curantur, but similia similibus. Carnal Pleasures put the
Soul out of relish with better things, and draw off the Heart from God. A
fleshly Mind is easily blinded, and enchanted with worldly Vanities. Therefore
it concerns us to check our Inclination to sense-pleasing and flesh-pleasing,
which is so natural to us. How shall it be cured, but by seeking our Delight
elsewhere? Every Man must have some Oblation, for Love cannot lie idle in the
Soul; either his Love is taken up with the Joys of Sense, or the Joys of Faith;
with vain Pleasures, or with chaste and spiritual Delights: The one spoileth the
taste of the other. A Spiritual Mind, that is feasted with higher Delights,
cannot relish the Garlic, and Onions, and Fleshpots of Egypt. Cant. 1. 4. We
will remember thy Loves more than Wine. And a brutish Heart, that is wholly
lost and sunk in these dreggy Contentments which gratify Sense, valueth not the
Favor of God, thinks it Canting to talk of Communion with him, and the Joys
of Hope to be fantastical Expressions: They love Pleasures more than God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. Now if we would restrain and check this Inclination, we should
rejoice in Christ, delight our Minds and Hearts in the remembrance of his Love
and Benefits. Whatever Pleasure a Man does find, or imagine to find in sensual
fleshly courses, that and much more is to be had in Christ; where we rejoice at
a surer and more sincere rate; Ephesians. 5. 4. Not Jesting, but rather giving of
Thanks. Carnal Mirth does not so cheer Worldlings, as the remembrance of the
Favors and Blessings we have by Christ. Keep the Heart thankful and sensible
of God's Goodness, and Christ's Love, and you will not need vain Delights. So,
Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not drunk with Wine wherein is Excess, but be filled with the
Spirit. These are Motives and Marks also, for by these three things you may
know whether you have this Joy, yea or no.

4. The Helps or Means by which this Joy is raised in us.

(1.) A sense of Sin and Misery: This makes you more sensible of the Mercy of
the Deliverance, and to be more affected with it: As the grievousness of a
Disease, makes the recovery more delightful. The Law condemned you, his Ransom
must absolve you: Sin made you dead, his Gra^e quickneth, and puts Life into
you. Always as our sense of Misery is, so is the sense of the Recovery: if one
be bitter, the other is sweet. None prize and esteem Christ so much, as the
brokenhearted and burdened.

(2.) An entire Con^idence of Christ: For so it follows, Have no Confidence
in the Flesh. If we have no Confidence in the Flesh, and look for all from the
Mercy and Bounty of God, through Christ, we shall prize him. 1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto
you therefore which believe, he is precious. Phil. 3. 8. Yea doubtless, and I
count all things but loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord.

(3.) A con^^ant use of the Means whereby this Joy may be fed and increased in
us; as the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer. The Word; Psalm. 119. 102. I have not
departed from thy Judgments, for thou have taught me. Then Prayer; suing out of
our Right. John 11. 24. Ask, and ye shall receive, that your Joy may be full.
So for the Sacraments; Baptism: Acts 8. 39. When they were come up out of the
Water, the Spirit caught away Philip; so that the Eunuch saw him no more: and
he went on his way rejoicing. The Lord's Supper; it is our Spiritual Refection.

(4.) Sincerity of Obedience: 1 Cor. 5. 8. Therefore let us keep the Feast, not
with old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness; but with the
unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth. Practical Delight is the chiefest
above that of Contemplation, a more intimate sense.

We come now to the last part of a Christian's Character: -- And have no
Confidence in the Flesh. To understand it, consider there are two things called
Flesh in Scripture.

1. External Privileges belonging to the worldly Life; such as Wealth,
Greatness, and worldly Honor: Now to glory in these, is to glory in the Flesh;
and to trust in these, is to trust in the Flesh; which should be far from
Christians: Jer. 9. 23, 24. Let not the wise Man glory in his Wisdom, nor the
mighty Man glory in his Might. Let not the rich Man glory in his Riches; But
let him that glories, glory in this, that he knows me, that I am the Lord,
etc. Where the Prophet labors to beat them off from their vain Confidences,
that they might not rely upon their Power, Policy, and Wealth; but a saving
Knowledge of, and Interest in God, whose Goodness and Faithfulness could only
secure them against all Evils, and procure them all manner of Blessings.

2. The outward Duties and Performances of Religion, especially the Ceremonies
of Moses: Those consisting in External Observances, are called Flesh; And to
have confidence in the Flesh, is to place our Confidence in External Privileges
and Duties. For the Apostle explaineth himself, Verse. 4. Though I might also
have Confidence in the Flesh: if any other Man thinks he may have confidence
in the Flesh, I more. He was not any whit inferior to any of the Judaizing
Brethren in outward Privileges and Duties; yea, had greater cause of glorying
in the Flesh, than any of the Pretenders among them. And then instances in his
Jewish Privileges, Circumcision, his Family, his Sect, a Pharisee; his Partial
Obedience, or External Righteousness, as to the Law blameless. To rest on these
things then, for our Acceptance with God is, to have Confidence in the Flesh.
And elsewhere he says, Gal. 3. 3. Having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect in the Flesh. When they reverted to the Ceremonies of the Law. This is
called Flesh, because they consist in outward things: Corrupt Nature is pleased
with such things, and does plead and stand for them.

Doct. That a good Christian does not place his Hope and Confidence of
acceptance with God in External Privileges and Performances.

In the first Character, a Christian is described by his Worship; in the
second, by his Joy; in the third, by his Confidence.

In handling this Point, I shall show you: 1 st, What are these Externals which
are apt to tempt Men to a vain Confidence. 2 dly, That naturally Men are for a
mere external way of serving God, and place their whole Confidence therein. 3
dly, Why a good Christian should have no Confidence in this External Conformity
to God's Law.


1 st, What are these Externals in Religion, which are apt to tempt Men to a
vain Confidence. They may be referred to two heads, They are either commanded
by God, or invented by Man* God's Externals, or Man's Externals.

1. God's Externals: Such as he has instituted and appointed, either in the
Law of Moses, or in the Law of Christ. In the Law of Moses; such as
Circumcision, with all the appendant Rites; these are called, Heb. 9. 10.
Carnal Ordinances, imposed on them, till the time of Reformation. These were to
be observed, while the Institution of them was in force, and stood unrepealed,
which was done at the coming of Christ: John 4. 23, 24. The hour comes, and
now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit, and in
Truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in Spirit, and in Truth. These made great
trouble in the Infancy of the Church, for the Jews, and Judaizing Christians
were loath to depart from the Rituals under which they were bred and brought up.
Though Christ fully evidenced his Commission from Heaven, to repeal those Laws,
and his Apostles strongly pleaded the Ancient Prophecies which foretold it. But
these are no more of concernment to us, except to direct us how to behave our
selves in like cases.

2. There are Externals in the Law of Christ; such as the Sacraments, Baptism,
and the Lord's Supper; Hearing of the Word, External Prayer, and the like. Now
the Rule is, that they must be used, but the outward Act not rested in, as a
sufficient ground of our Acceptance with God; used they must be in Faith and
Obedience, because God has justified them under great Penalties: As
Circumcision, while the Command was in force; Genesis 17. 14. The Man-child, whose
Flesh is not circumcised, shall be cut off from his People; He has broken my
Covenant. So Baptism; Mark 16. 16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be
saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned. Not want, but neglect or
contempt. Therefore all these Duties must be used as Means of Salvation, and as
Expressions of the inward Truth of our Faith in God, and Obedience to him; (we
must not cast off Ordinances) but yet they must not be rested in, as sufficient
Grounds of our Acceptance with God. While Circumcision was in force, they
relied on it, as it distinguished them from other Nations, as the genuine Seed
of Abraham, and so reckoned to be within the Covenant. But the Servants of God
did always disprove this vain Confidence; Romans 2. 28, 29. He is not a Jew,
which is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in the
Flesh: but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the
Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of Men, but of
God. They rejoiced in a shadow, when they wanted the thing signified; if there
were no mortification of Sin, or putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh.
But not only the Apostle, but the Prophet long before disproveth their vain
Confidence. Jer. 9. 25, 26. Behold, the days come, when I will punish them
which are circumcised with the uncircumcised, Egypt and Edom, with the Children
of Ammon and Moab, are uncircumcised in Flesh, and all the House of Israel is
uncircumcised in Heart. God would proceed against wicked Persons and People,
circumcised as well as uncircumcised. Were those things spoken to them only,
and not to us also? Surely all may learn from hence, that by a bare submission
to outward Rites, we are not approved of God, without minding the true
Reformation of Heart and Life, and expecting the Pardon of our Sins by Jesus
Christ. You are baptized; but are you washed from your Sins? You hear the Word;
but is it the Power of God to your Salvation? You frequent Sacraments; but is
the Conscience of the Bond of the Holy Oath, into which you are entered, upon
your Hearts? There is more required in Christianity, than outward Profession,
whether in Word or Deed; Namely, the Conscience of your Dedication to God; or
else the Work does not go deep enough: 1 Cor. 13. 3. Though I bestow all my
Goods to feed the Poor, and though I give my Body to be burned, and have not
Charity, it profits me nothing. You content your selves with your Tale, and
number of Duties, praying Morning and Evening, and reading so many Chapters:
But where is the Spirit, and the Fruit of all that you do? They that are given
to Fasting, think themselves very devout, if they fast often, be their Hearts
never so full of rancour. Many huddle over many Prayers, but they do not go
from their Heavenly Father, with an Heavenly Mind: They give Alms, but live
loosly: As Michal laid a Statue in David's Bed, and covering it with David's
Apparel, made Readiness Messengers believe it was David himself sick in Bed: So
many Persons cover themselves with certain External Actions belonging to
Religion, and the World believes them truly sanctified and spiritual, whenas
indeed they are but Statues and Apparitions of Devotion to God. But this is but
a vain show, a placing the Means, instead of the End; the Subordinate instead
of the Ultimate End.

2. Man's Externals: Invented by themselves, by Laws of their own, and outward
Observances of their own devising: Men's whole Religion running out into
Externals, they are not contented with the Forms of Worship instituted by God,
but add somewhat of their own, and love to bind themselves in Chains of their
own making: As the Jews not being perfect as appertaining to the Conscience, by
the use of the Instituted Ceremonies of Moses, invented other things to make
them more perfect.

Now as to this, I shall only observe,

(1.) That as the outside of Worship is most minded by a Carnal Christian, so
the inside by a renewed Christian: Mat. 15. 8. This People draws nigh to me
with their Mouth, and honors me with their Lips, but their Heart is far from
me. Their Hearts are averse from God: The Carnal Christian is all for
uncovering the Head, and bowing the Knee, but takes no care of the Heart; Isa.
58. 5. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? A day for a Man to afflict his
Soul? Is it to bow down his Head as a Bulrush, and to spread Sackcloth and
Ashes under him? will thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable day unto the
Lord? The Pharisees were zealous for washing before Meat, as if it were an holy
religious Act, because it was one of their own Traditions, Mat. 15. 2. But took
no notice of inward Defilement.

(2.) They are more zealous for Humane Inventions, than Moral, and commanded
Duties, Mat. 15. 3, 4. For the Rudiments of the World, as the Apostle calls
them, Col. 2. 10. than the unquestionable Ordinances of Christ. For a worldly
Religion must be supported by worldly Means.

(3.) I observe, That the more external Pomp there is of Man's devising, the
less spiritual Truth; for it gratifieth the natural Corruption, which is all
for the outside: Some few Externals, God intended for an Help, but when Men
will be adding, they become a Burden and an Impediment. God did not abrogate
his own Ceremonies, for Men to appoint theirs.

2 dly. That naturally Men are merely for an external way of serving God, and
place their Confidence therein.

Here I shall show you; 1. That their Hearts are set upon External Worship. 2.
That therein they place all their Confidence.


1. That naturally Men's Hearts are chiefly set upon External Services.

And that (1.) out of laziness; Externals being more easy than worshipping God
in the Spirit. Matthew. 23. 23. They tithe Mint, and Annise, and Cummin, but omit
the weightier things of the Law, (...), Judgment, Mercy, Faith. Conscience is
like the Stomach, which naturally desires to fill it self; and when it cannot
digest solid Food, fills it self only with Wind. So here, outward things are
more easy; but mortifying Sin, and solid Godliness, is more difficult; this the
natural Man cannot digest, and therefore culleth out the easier and cheaper
sort of Religion, which puts him to no great trouble or self-denial.

(2.) Out of their Indulgence to the Flesh: A Man can spare any thing better
than his Lusts: His Estate, the present ^ase of the Body, their Children, any
thing for the Sin of their Souls, Micah 6. 6, 7, 8. The Question is not how to
satisfy Justice, but how to appease Conscience, while they retain their Sins.
They would buy out their Peace with vast Sums of Money, mangle their Flesh, like
the Priests of Baal, to spare the Sin of their Souls; do any thing, endure any
thing, but the subd^ing the Heart to God: The sensual Nature of Man is such,
that he is loath to be crossed; if he must be crossed, only a little, and but
for a while; and therefore affects an easy Religion, where the Flesh is not
crossed, or but a little crossed. Now, ^light Duties performed now and then, do
not much trouble the Flesh; where there is no mortifying of Lus^s, no (...)
Godliness.

(3.) Out of Pride: Man is a proud Creature, and would fain establish his own
Righteousness, and have somewhat wherein to glory in himself, Romans 10. 3. A
R^^^et Coat of our own, is better than a silken Garment that is borrowed of
another: Luke 18. 9. Christ spoke this Parable against those, who trusted in
(...) that they were Righteous. There is such a disposition in Men, that if by
any means they can hold up a pretense of Righteousness of their own, will not
pray, and wait, and consecrate, and devote themselves to God, that they may
attain his Righteousness; if they have any thing to plead, if they have a
partial Righteousness, if they be not to be numbered among the worst of men.
Luke 18. 11. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God I thank thee,
that I am not as other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as
this Publican. If they have an External Righteousness, they will plead that; I
fast twice in the Week, I give tithe of all that I possess, etc. A legal Spirit
is natural to us: Though Men dare not pretend to an universal Conformity to the
Law in a strict sense; yet if they can make a shift to get any external
Conformity to the Law, they are confident of Divine Acceptance: Yea, so sot^ish
is their Conscience, that they will catch hold of any thing. Judge. 17. 13. Now
I know God will bless me, because I have a Levite to my Priest, giving him Meat
and Drink, and about fifty Shillings per Annum. So willing are we to justify
our selves, by something in our selves, or done by our selves: Therefore that
the Ell may be no broader than the Cloth, they devise a short Exposition of the
Law, that they may entertain a large Opinion of their own Righteousness.

(4.) There is another Reason; Interest. External Forms of Religion, draw an
Interest after them: Therefore the Apostle says, Romans 2. 29. Whose praise is
not of Men, but of God. And, Gal. 1. 10. If I yet please Men, I were not the
Servant of Christ. And Rudiments of the World, Col. 2. 10. It makes a Man to
be applauded and countenanced by the World. Let a Man betake himself to such a
Religion, there are these which will back him, and stand by him; and their
disfavour and displeasure he shall incur i^ he forsake it: And where the false
Worshippers are the prevailing Party, he runs great hazard, by contradicting
such Form and Opinions. Therefore the Heart of that Man that is set on
Externals, takes up with the Religion of his Country, whether true or false.

2. They place their Confidence therein. Every Man that has a Conscience, must
have something to trust unto: Now what feeds his Confidence, but the Religion
which he has chosen? There are two things which detain Men from God and
Christ: Some false Imaginary Happiness, and some Counterfeit Righteousness, and
wherein they please themselves. The False Happiness is as their God, and the
Counterfeit Righteousness is as their Christ and Mediator; and so they are
secure and senseless; and 'till God open their Eyes, they neither seek after
another Righteousness, nor trouble themselves about the way whereby they may
attain it. That Men set a false Happiness, is evident; for ever since Man fell
from God, he ran to the Creature; Ier. 2. 13. Left the Fountain for the
Cistern: And if we can make a shift to patch up a sorry Happiness apart from
God, we never care for him, nor will not come at him, Ier. 2. 31. Our Pleasure,
our Profit, our Honor, that is our God: And if we can enjoy these things
without any rubs, and checks, we look no farther, and will not seek our
Happiness in an invisible God, nor wait to enjoy it in an invisible World. But
the second Error is, That there is something instead of Christ to us, to keep
the Conscience quiet. Our Happiness is to satisfy our D^sires, our
Righteousness to allay our Fears. Now here we run to a (...) Religion, or
something External, which is diversified according to (...): Pagans to the
(...), (...) 2. 15. Jews, to the Observances of the Law: Christians, to
Baptism, outward (...), or some strict Form without the Power, under which we
shelter our (...), and by which we bolster up our Confidence, till God convince
us of our (...): And so Christ, and his renewing and reconciling Grace is
neglected (...); certainly not cordially accepted, as our Rede^mer and Savior.

I come now to show,

3 dly, Why a good Christian should have no Confidence in the Flesh.

1 Because till we are dead to the Law, we cannot live to God: Now to be dead
to the Law, is nothing else but to have our Confidence in the Flesh, or
External (...), mortified. You hear often of (...) dead to Sin, and dead to the
World, you must be also dead to the Law, or otherwise you cannot (...) in
Christ, and bring forth Fruit unto God: Gal. 2. 19. For I through the Law, am
dead to the Law, that I may live unto God. And, Romans 7. 4. By the Body of
Christ ye are become dead to the Law, that ye may be married to another, even
to him who is raised from the dead. We grow dead to the Law, when thereby we
understand our sinful miserable Estate without Christ, and how unable we are to
help our selves: By the convincing Power of the Law, we know our Sins; by the
condemning Power of the Law, we know the misery and curse we are subject unto;
by the irritating Power of the Law, we find that the Righteousness which the
Law requires is not in us, nor can it be found in us. Now in one of those
places, we are said by the Law, to be dead to the Law; and in the other, by the
Body of Christ. By the Law it self, we are said to be dead to the Law, as it
makes us to despair of Righteousness by that Covenant: By the Body of Christ,
(that is, by the crucified Body, or Death of Christ); so we are dead to the
Law, as we are invited to a better Hope, or Covenant, which Christ has
established by bearing our Sins on his Body on the Tree, or enduring the Curse
of the Law for us: Be it by the one, or the other, or both; none will value the
Grace of Christ till they be dead to the Law. Men will shift, as long as they
can patch up a sorry Righteousness of their own, mingle Covenants, turn one
into another, make one of both, chop, change, mangle, and cut short the Law of
God; do any thing, rather than come upon their Knees, and beg Terms of Grace in
a serious and brokenhearted manner. None can partake of Christ, but those that
have their legal Confidence mortified; who are first driven, then drawn to him.
None but they who are convinced of Sin, ^ly to Christ for Righteousness; none
but they who are left obnoxious to Wrath, and the Curse, prize his delivering
us from Wrath to come; none but those who are made sensible of their impotency,
will seek after his Renewing Grace: But will still keep to their base shifts,
mingling and blending Covenants; resting in a little Superficial Righteousness,
or half-Covenant of Works, or mingling a little Grace with it; are not brought
in an humble, penitent, and brokenhearted manner, to sue out their Pardon in
the Name of Christ; and so regularly to pass from Covenant to Covenant.

2. The Superficial Righteousness does not only keep Men from Christ, but set
them against Christ, his Way, his Servants, and true Interest in the World:
These were Dogs, evil Workers, to whom the Apostle opposes the true
Christians; usually they that are for the Form, oppose the Power. Gal. 4. 29.
He that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
Spirit. They that have but the Form and Shadow of Godliness, no more than the
Power of Nature carries them unto, will persecute those that have the Reality
and Truth, that is, the renewing and reconciling Grace of Jesus Christ: partly,
because the true Spiritual Worshippers, by their serious Godliness, disgrace
and condemn those that lazily rest in an empty Form; and therefore they cannot
endure them. At the bottom of their Hearts, they have an enmity and hatred
against God, and vent it on his People. 1 John 3. 12. Not as Cain, who was of
that wicked One, and slew his Brother: And wherefore slew he him? Because his
own Works were Evil, and his Brother's Righteous. Partly, Because there is in
them a Spirit of Envy and Emulation: Both are Rivals for the Favor of God: The
Spiritual Worshippers take the right way, and the Formalists the wrong way to
obtain it: The first are received, the latter rejected: And they being at such
great pains and costs in their wrong way, cannot endure that any should be
preferred before them; witness Cain and Abel. Where carnal Confidence is, there
is bitterness of Spirit against sincerity.

3. Because they have so much to do with God: They that look to Men, may rest
in an outward appearance; but one whose Business lies mainly with God, must
look to the frame of his Heart, that it be right set toward Holiness. Now this
is the course of a through Christian: It Is God's Wrath that he fears, God's
Favor, that is his Life and Happiness; God's Presence, into which he often
comes; God's Mercy, from whom he expects his Reward, and with God he hops
to live for ever. Now bare Externals ar^ of no account or worth with God. John
4. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit,
and in Truth. 1 Samuel 16. 7. But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his
Counten^nce, or on the height of his Stature, because I have refused him; for
the Lord sees not as Man sees, for Man looks on the outward Appearance, but
the Lord looks on the Heart. Prove. 16. 2. All the ways of a Man are clean in
his own Eyes, but the Lord weighs the Spirit. Men judge after the outward
Appearance, but God weighs the Spirits.

4. Because of the Nature of Gospel Worship; which is simple, spiritual, and
substantial; therefore called Spirit often in opposition to the Ceremonies of
the Law; and the ministration of the Spirit unto Life, 2 Cor. 3. 8. The Law is
called Letter, and the Gospel Spirit. Now for a Christian to turn the
Ordinances of Christ into Flesh, which were appointed to be the Ministration of
the Spirit, this is to alter the nature of Things, and turn the Gospel, by
which is all our Claim and Hope, into a dead Letter.

5. This Confidence should not be cherished by a Christian, because it can
bring no solid Peace to the Conscience, for the present External Justificiaries
are uncertain; the Man that kept all these things from his youth, says, What
lack I yet? Mat. 19. 20. He asks as a Man unsatisfied; for our Bondage does
not wear off with External Duties, but is increased rather till we are
justified in the Name of Christ, and sanctified by his Spirit. But suppose it
satisfies blind Conscience for the present, yet afterward, Men whose Hearts
are not sound in God's Statutes, fall into sad Complaints, and are involved in
a Maze and Labyrinth of Doubts and Troubles, whence they know not how to
extricate themselves: They have so much sense of Religion, as* to understand
their Duty, and yet are so little brought under the Power of it, as not to be
able to make out their claim. But if this be not the case of all; when the hour
of death comes, we shall find all is but froth, 1 Cor. 5. 56. If we have not
minded the Redeemer's Grace, his whole Grace, the Imputation of his
Righteousness, and the Regeneration of his Spirit, and lived in obedience to
his sanctifying Motions; Then we shall be filled with horror and amazement.

The, 1. Use is Caution: Take heed of having Confidence in the Flesh, of
placing Religion, and valuing your Interest in God by External Observances; but
look to this, That your Hearts be upright with God in the New Covenant. To this
end,

(1.) Take heed of a false Happiness; The Wisdom of the Flesh, which is natural
to us, does incline us to it, James 3. 15. does only prompt us to Pleasure,
Profit, and Honor: We set our Hearts on vain Delights, and are wholly carried
to them, value our Happiness by them: Whilst we indulge this sensual
Inclination, the Soul cares not for God, other things are set up instead of
God. The Belly is God, Phil. 3. 10. Whose God is their Belly. Mammon is their
God, Mat. 6. 24. And Honor, and worldly Greatness, is another Idol which Men
set up, while they value the praise of Men, more than the praise of God, John
12. 42. Carnal Self-love makes Idols, and sets up other Gods instead of the
True God: Now therefore make it your first Work to return to God as your
Rightful Lord, and Chief Happiness, as your Sovereign Lord. If you make it your
business and purpose to worship God in the Spirit, you will rejoice in Christ,
and have no Confidence in the Flesh. Spiritual Worship convinces us of
Defects, and you will see a need of Christ's renewing and reconciling Grace*
Our Treasure and Happiness is our God. Now therefore do you value your
Happiness by the Favor of God, and not by wo^ldly Things.

(2.) In the next place, Take heed of a Super^icial Righteousness: For this is
plain Confidence in the Flesh. This makes you senseless and ignorant of your
Danger, and careless of the means of your recovery, and so your Conviction and
Conversion is more difficult. And therefore Christ says, That Publicans and
Harlo^s enter into the Kingdom of God, before Pharisees and Self-Justiciaries,
Mat. 21. 31. No Condition is more dangerous, than to be poor, and proud;
corrupt, and yet conceited and confident. The most vicious are sooner wrought
upon, than those that please themselves in External Observances, without real
internal Holiness, or change of Heart.

This is Twofold.

1. Outward Ordinances. 2. Partial Morality.
1. Outward Ordinances. To rest in your attendance upon, and use of these.
Consider how displeased God was with those that submitted to Sacraments without
Reformation; 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. With many of them God was not
well-pleased, but they were overthrown in the Wilderness; Spiritual Meat, and
Spiritual Drink, could not keep them from Destruction; when they murmured, when
they fell from Christ to Idolatry, when they lusted after Quails, when they
tempted Christ; And will he be more favorable to you? Oh! rest not then in the
outward use of the Ordinances of Christ; God may vouchsafe you this Favor, and
yet not be well-pleased with you. Many that have eaten and drunk in his
Presence, yet are finally rejected for their sins, Luke 13. 26. Many prize the
Seal, yet tear the Bond; that is, break the Covenant, yet seem to value the
Seal of the Covenant, that they may have Confidence in the Flesh, in the bare
external Performance.

2. Partial Morality: Those that live fairly, and plausibly, but want the true
Principle, the Spirit of Christ; the true Rule, the Word of God; the true End,
the Glory of God: that are in with one Duty, and out with another; fail in
their Duties to God or Men: Are much in Worship, but defective in common
Righteousness: Love Friends, but cannot forgive Enemies: It may be they will
forgive Wrongs, but make no Conscience of paying Debts. Now there are two
Arguments against these; these neither understand the Law, nor the Gospel: Not
the Law, its Strictness, Purity, and Spiritual Exactness: Nor the Gospel, which
offers a Remedy only to the Penitent; those who are deeply affected with the
pollution of their Natures, the Sins of their Lives, and the Consequent Misery.
But those that are puffed up with a vain conceit of the goodness of their Estate,
without any brokenness of Heart,

1. They are injurious to the Law: As they curtail it, and reduce it to the
External Work. Gal. 4. 20. Ye that desire to be under the Law, hear what the
Law says; if you will stand to that Covenant, Do you know what it is? The Duty
is impossible. Romans 8. 3. The Penalty is intolerable: For the Law works
Wrath; and it is a Law of Sin and Death to the ^aln Creation: Romans 8. 2. The
Curse is very dreadful and terrible. Nothing more opposite to the Law, than
this partial Righteousness. The Law well understood, would humble them.

2. This resting in a partial external Righteousness, is also opposite to the
Gospel, which inviteth us in a brokenhearted manner to accept Christ. He came
to call Sinners, not those who are Righteous in their own eyes, Mat. 9. 13.
It Is a Remedy for lost Sinners, not for them that need no Repentance. Luke 15.
7. I say unto you, That likewise Joy shall be in Heaven over one Sinner that
repents, more than over ninety and nine just Persons that need no repentance.
Nothing is more opposite to the Gospel, than this Confidence in the Flesh. The
Woman that was a Sinner, was preferred before Simon a Pharisee, Luke 7. 44. And
the Self-condemning Publican, before the Self-justifying Pharisee, Luke 18. 13.
The Penitent Adulteress, before her Accusers, John 8. 7. The most despised
Sinners, repenting, and believing in Christ, find more Grace and Place with
him, than those that satisfy themselves with some External Conformities.

A second Use is by way of Examination: Are you of this Temper, that you have
no Confidence in the Flesh?

If you are,

1. You are still kept humble, and thankful: Humble, with a sense of Sin, and
deserved Wrath; confessing and forsaking your Sins, and glorying in Christ
only, you are kept vile in your own Eyes, and in an humble admiration of Grace;
Luke 7. 47. Wherefore I say unto you, Her Sins which are many are forgiven her,
for she loved much, etc. She loved much, because much was forgiven. When God is
pacified, yet you loath your selves. Ezekiel. 16. 63. That thou may remember,
and be confounded, and never open thy Mouth any more, because of thy shame,
when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done, says the Lord
God. And you ascribe all to the Mercy of God, and the Merit of Christ; Blessing
God for him, and imploring Pardon for your best Duties; our Righteousness being
but as filthy Rags.

2. A partial outside Obedience will not satisfy you. An Heart that finds
rest in empty formal Services, certainly places Con^idence in the Flesh. They
neither look after the change of their Natures, nor their Reconciliation with
God by Christ. They challenge God; Isa. 58. 3. Wherefore have we fasted, say
they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our Soul, and thou take
no knowledge? And, Luke 18. 12. I fast twice in the week, and I give tithe of
all that I possess.

3. Thankfulness, or Gratitude, sets you awork for God, rather than a Legal
Conscience. Duties are performed as a Thank-Offering, rather than a
Sin-Offering, out of Love to God, rather than Fear.

What kind of PERFECTION Is attainable in this LIFE.
PHIL. 3. 15. Let therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in
anything ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.
THese words are inferred out of the foregoing Context, as the illative
Particle [therefore] shows.

In the words are two things:

1. His Exhortation to the strong and grown Christian, Let us therefore, as
many as be perfect, be thus minded.

2. His Condescension to the Weak; And if in any thing ye be otherwise minded,
God shall reveal even this unto you.

In the former Branch we have,

1. The Term by which the strong Christian is expressed, As many as be perfect:
He had said before of himself, that he was not yet perfect, verse. 12. Yet now,
he supposes it both of himself and others, Let us therefore, as many as be
perfect. Therefore Perfection must be taken in a limited sense, to avoid the
seeming Contradiction.

2. The Advice or Counsel given, be thus minded; What is that? (...), think the
same thing with me: What that is, must be known by the foregoing Context, and
may be gathered from the third Verse, he had spoken of some false Teachers and
judaizing Brethren, who gave out themselves to be Patrons, and Defenders of the
Circumcision, and other Ceremonies of the Law, as if these things did commend
them to God: Now the Apostle reproves them, and says they were not (...), the
Circumcision, but (...), the Concision, Destroyers and Renders of the Church,
not the true People of God, who were sometimes noted by the Term Circumcision:
they are the Concision, the Cutters and Dividers of the Church; but we are
(...), the true Circumcision, who serve God in the Spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the Flesh: That is, who have no
confidence in any superficial Righteousness, but seek our Justification before
God, and the renovation of our Natures from Christ alone; and serve God, by
exercising this Grace, in Faith, Love, and Hope; or who seek to Christ alone,
for his renewing and reconciling Grace, that we may serve God in a spiritual
Manner, and so at length attain the promised Glory. Now this he proves by his
own Instance, who had as much cause to glory in the Flesh, as any of them, but
suffered the loss of all things, and counted all things wherein they gloried,
and he might have gloried, but loss and dung, that he might obtain this Grace
from Christ Jesus; and at length, after a diligent self-denying course of
Service and Obedience, be brought home to God. Now, says he, As many as be
perfect, (...), mind this, take care of this, and do you, with the loss of all
things, press to this.

3. His Condescension to the Weak, who were not satisfied with the abrogation
of the Ceremonies of the Law, though they had embraced other Parts and Points
of Christianity; And if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal
even this to you. Here,

1. Something is supposed, that they should not be cut off from the rest of
Christians, either by the harsh Censures, or rigorous dealing of the Strong, or
the pertinacious obstinacy of the Weak. The Perfect, that have the Truth of
their side, must not condemn others; nor the Weak must not condemn and censure
them.

2. Something expressed: Or the Reason of this mutual Condescension and
Forbearance; if they be sincere, and humble, God will at length show them the
Truth.

I begin with his Counsel to the Strong and Grown Christian; and there I shall
speak, first of the Term by which they are expressed; Let as many of us as be
perfect.

Doct. That there is a kind of Perfection attainable in this Life.

I shall, first, explain the Point by several Distinctions.

Secondly, Prove that all Christians should endeavor to be perfect.

For the first: There is a double Perfection; Perfectio termini and praemii:
and perfectio viae seu cognitionis, and sanctitatis. A Perfection of the
Reward, and a Perfection of Grace.

1. Of the Reward which the Saints shall have in Heaven, where they are freed
from all sinful Weakness: 1 Cor. 13. 10. When that which is perfect shall come,
then that which is in part shall be done away. In Heaven there is perfect
Felicity, and exact Holiness; then the Saints are glorious Saints indeed, when
they have neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor blemish, nor any such thing, Ephesians. 5.
27. When presented faultless before the presence of his Glory, Jude 24. Now
this we have not in the World; but because this we expect in the other World,
we are to labor after the highest perfection in Holiness here, because allowed
Imperfection is a disesteem of Blessedness. Do we count Immaculate Purity and
Perfection in Holiness, to be our Blessedness hereafter? and shall we shun it,
and fly from it, or at least neglect it, as if it were our Burden now? No
surely! he that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, as Christ is pure, 1
John 3. 3. That looks not for a Turkish Paradise, but a Sinless Estate, will
endeavor it now, get as much as he can of it now. When you cease to grow in
Holiness, you cease to go on any farther to Salvation; you seem to be out of
love with Heaven and Blessedness, when your Desires and Endeavors are slaked.

2. The Perfection of Grace and Holiness is such, as the Saints may attain unto
in this Life. Col. 4. 12. That ye may stand perfect and complete in all the
Will of God. So we are perfect, when we want none of those things which are
necessary to Salvation, when we study to avoid all known Sin, and address our
selves to the practice of all known Duty, serving God universally and entirely.

Secondly, There is Perfection Legal, and Evangelical: Legal, is unsinning
Obedience; Evangelical, is sincere Obedience; the one is, where there is no
Sin; the other no Guile, no allowed Guile. The one stands in an exact
conformity to God's Law; the other, in a sincere endeavor to fulfill it; the
one will endure the Balance, the other can only endure the Touchstone.

1. The legal Perfection is described, Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all the words of this Law to do them. A personal, perpetual
perfect Obedience! It supposes a Man innocent, it requires that he should
continue so; for the least Offense, according to that Covenant, lays us open
to a Curse: As the Angels for one Sin once committed, were turned out of
Heaven, and Adam out of Paradise. The omitting of ought we are to perform, the
committing ought we are forbidden, yea the least warping, as well as swerving,
by an obliquity of Heart and Spirit, makes us guilty before God. Now this is
become impossible, through the weakness of our Flesh. Romans 8. 3. Man is fallen
already, and has mixed Principles in him, and cannot be thus exact with God.

2. Evangelical: When the Heart is faithful with God, fixedly bent and set to
please him in all things. 2 Kings 20. 3. Remember Lord, I have walked before
thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart. This may be pleaded in subordination
to Christ's Righteousness; this Perfection is consistent with Weakness. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. Nevertheless, the Heart of Asa was perfect all his days. And yet
he is taxed with several Infirmities: This Perfection all must have; 1 Chronicles.
28. 9. And thou, Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him
with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind. What is done for God, as it must be
done willingly, readily, not by constraint, but the native Inclination of the
Soul; so perfectly, that is, with all exactness possible. As some may do many
things which are good, but their Hearts are not perfect with God: 2 Chronicles. 25.
2. He did that which is right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect
Heart. Not a sincere bent of Soul toward God alone, when the Heart is divided
between God and other things, Hosea 10. 2. Their Heart is divided. Jam. 1. 8. A
double-minded Man is unstable in all his ways. An Heart against an Heart; In
point of Faith, between God and other Confidences; in point of Love, between
God and the Vanities of the World, and God's Interest, is not chief, nor do we
love him above all things: In point of Obedience, between pleasing God, and
pleasing Men, and pleasing God and our own vain Fancies and Appetites,
honoring God, and promoting our Worldly Ends, you set up a Rival and Partner
with God. Now this Perfection we must have, or else not in a state of Salvation.

3. There is a Perfection Absolute and Comparative.

1. That is absolutely perfect, to which nothing is wanting: This is in our
Lord Christ, who had the Spirit without measure; this is in our Rule, but not
in them that follow the Rule; Psalm. 18. 30. As for God, his way is perfect. But
that absolute Perfection is not in any of the Saints here upon Earth, I prove
by these Arguments.

(1.) Where there are many Relics of Flesh, or carnal Nature left, there a Man
cannot be absolutely perfect; but so it is with all the Godly, there is a double
warring-working Principle in them; Gal. 5. 17. For the Flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary the one to
the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. And it is actually
confirmed in Paul, witness his Groans, Romans 7. 24. Oh wretched Man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! Mark there, the Apostle
speaks of himself, not of another; of himself, in his present renewed Estate,
not of his past and unconverted Estate, when a Pharisee. His past Estate he had
spoken of, verse. 9. Sin revived, and I died; but, verse. 14. I am Carnal: and
verse. 15. That which I do, I allow not* and verse. 18. How to perform that which
is good, I find not. Many things there said, cannot agree to a Carnal Man: As
for instance, not allowing Sin, verse. 15. Hating Sin in the same Verse. What I
hate, that do I, so delight in the Law of God, verse. 22. Again, there is a
double Man distinguished, verse. 17. It is no more I, but sin that dwells in
me. Again, he distinguishes between Him and his Flesh, verse. 18. So between an
outward and inward Man, verse. 22, 23. Lastly, He gives thanks for deliverance
by Christ, all which are competent only to the Regenera^e. Now these things
being so, surely God's best Servants are not absolutely perfect.

(2.) There are none but sometimes sin. 1 Kings 8. 46. For there is no Man that
sins not. And, Eccles. 7. 20. There is not a just Man upon Earth, that does
good, and sins not. And, James 3. 2. In many things we offend all. 1 John 1.
8. If we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us.
Therefore no Man so perfect, as to be without all Sin.

(3.) There is none but need the Mercy of God, and ought to pray for this Mercy
for the Pardon of their daily Sins, Mat. 6. 13. as we pray for daily Bread:
This Petition our Lord directs us to put up, not for the Sins of others, but
our own. Now these Arguments prove that no Man has a Righteousness that is
perfect without Defects: The best of God's Children have innumerable Frailties
which may humble them, and which should be seriously laid to Heart, and watched
over, every step of our way to Heaven.

2. There is a comparative Perfection: And that is Twofold.

1. When those who live under the Law of Christianity, are compared with other
Institutions.

2. When the Professors of Christianity are compared among themselves.

1. When the Professors of Christianity are compared with those that live under
other Institutions. They that submit to Christ's Terms, are said to be perfect,
because Christianity it self is a Perfection. For Instance, take that one
place, (and the rather, that I may wrest it out of the Hands of the Papists,
who distinguish between Evangelical Precepts of necessary Duty, and Counsels of
Perfection to establish Monkery and voluntary Poverty, as a more perfect state
of Life than that which the common sort of Christians live.) Their most
colorable place is, Mat. 19. 21. Jesus said unto him, If thou will be perfect,
go sell all that thou have, and give (...) the poor, and thou shall have
Treasure in Heaven, and come and follow me. Is not this a Counsel of
Perfection? does not Christ call it so? Or, is every one bound to give all his
Goods to the Poor, and turn Monks or Anchorites? No, the meaning of the word,
If thou will be perfect, is no more but this; if thou will ascend to that
higher pitch and rule of living, to which I come to raise Men, if thou will be
a Christian. The Perfection here spoken of, is Christianity it self, not an
Heroic eminent degree of it: And the Condition here required, is Matter of
Command, not Counsel, only such as if we will not submit to, we are not
Christians; for a Man that would have the Privileges of the Gospel, he must
submit to the Duties of the Gospel, or the Conditions required by Christ, that
is, to be a perfect through Christian. You will say, Must we sell all, and give
to the Poor, in contemplation of the Heavenly Reward?

Answ. 1. Every Man is bound to bestow Goods, Land, and Life, as God shall
direct, and part with all the Wealth in the World whenever it is required of
him. Now it may be required of us directly, or by consequence: directly, by an
express Command, such as this young Man had from Christ. And actually, to sell
our Estates, and give to the Poor, obliges none, unless we have such alike
Command from Christ himself, as this young rich Man had: By Consequence, when
we cannot obey any particular Precept of Christ, without danger of being undone
by it. And so it obliges all Christ's Disciples to part with all, rather than
to break with Christ: for no Man is a Christian, unless he sells all for the
Pearl of Price, Mat. 13. 46. And our Lord tells us, that he that loves any
thing more than him, is not worthy of him, Mat. 10. 37. that is, is no
Christian; so that if it be impossible to preserve our Fidelity and Obedience,
without parting with our Wealth, we must impartially perform it, though it be
with loss of Estate and Life it self; and if we do not resolve and undertake to
do so, we are no Christians, and cannot be saved. In Baptism, we vow to forsake
the World, and follow Christ, when the World comes in competition with him; if
in a time of trial we do not perform it, we forfeit the Privileges of
Christianity, and all title to Blessedness. Therefore this Perfection is
necessary for all Christians: you esteem, prefer, choose Christ above all,
resolving, whatever it cost you to be faithful to him; it is not an high and
arbitrary Point in Christianity, but a necessary Duty. You will say, What can
the strongest Christian do more, than (...) all, than part with all? Answer,
They can do it with far greater love, readiness and joy, than the weak
Christian can (...) The difference between Christians is no^ in the thing done,
but the manner of doing: Well then, this is to be perfect, thus must you all be
perfect, for this Perfection is necessarily constitutive of sincerity, you
(...) not true Christians without it.

2. When compared with others of the same Profession. Believers are
distinguished into Perfect and Imperfect. Though none can attain to absolute
Perfection of Holiness, yet there are several degrees of Grace, and diversities
of growth among Christians, and the strong are said to be perfect in comparison
of those weak Ones who are raw in Knowledge, or feeble and impotent in the
resistance of Sin. Thus the Perfect are opposed to the Babes in Christ; as when
he had spoken of our growing into a perfect Man in Christ Jesus, he presently
adds, That henceforth we be no more Children, Ephesians. 4. 13, 14. And
elsewhere, when he had spoken of the Perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6. who are skilful in
spiritual Things, he presently opposes to them, the Babes in Christ, Chap. 3.
1. The same you may observe in Heb. 5. 13, 14. He that uses Milk, is unskilful
in the Word of Righteousness, for he is a Babe. But strong Meat belongs to
them that are of full age, (...), perfect, as in the Margin. See also 1 Cor.
14. 20. Brethren, be not Children in understanding: howbeit, in Malice be ye
Children, but in Understanding be Men, perfect, or of ripe Age. These, and many
other places, show the Notion of perfect; it is not absolutely taken, but
comparatively: Those who well and thoroughly understand Christian Doctrine, and
are habituated to a course of Godliness, and have a confirmed Faith and Love to
God, and this in Opposition to Novices, and unexperienced Christians newly
entered into Christ's School: Now thus we must be perfect, not always Children.
It Is a monstrous Thing, after many Years growth to be a Babe still, and an
Infant still. This sense is of chief regard here.

3. There is a Perfection of Parts, and a Perfection of Degrees; that is Growth.

(1.) Perfection of Parts is, when we have all things that belong to a sincere
Christian, or to a state of Salvation: As living Creatures are perfect as soon
as they are brought forth, for they have all things belonging to that Creature,
it is not maimed or defective in any part; thus an Infant is perfect the first
day of his Birth, as well as a Man of riper Age. Thus a Christian must have the
perfection of Integrity, all the parts which belong to a New Creature: Grace to
enlighten the Mind, bend and incline the Heart to God, govern the Affections,
rule the Appetite; one Grace added to another, that the Christian may be entire
and perfect, and in no point lacking, Iam. 1. 4. What is defective in parts,
cannot be supplied by any aftergrowth. A Christian cannot be perfect in
Degrees, unless he be perfect in parts; leave out one necessary Grace, and the
new Creature is maimed; some leave out Temperance, others Patience, others
Love, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 6, 7.

(2.) There is a Perfection of Degrees, that is, when a thing is absolute and
complete, and to which nothing is wanting, and has attained its (...) and
highest pitch; so we are only perfect in Heaven, Heb. 12. 23. The Spirits of
just Men made perfect. Those Spirits who are uncloathed and divested of the
Body, in their mortal Life only they were upright, but in their Heavenly Life
perfect: Here they walked with God, and endeavored an Universal Obedience to
him, and so made capable, but now live with God, and are admitted into a nearer
Communion with him than we Mortals are; they are freed from all Sin and
Temptation, they are beyond growth: Corn does not grow in the Garner, but in
the Field Well then, though we be not perfect in Degrees, yet we must all be
perfect as to parts, we must entirely resign our selves to God's use, without
allowing any part or corner of our Hearts to be possessed by any other.

4. Perfection is to be considered with respect, 1. to our Growth, or, 2. our
Consummation: Here it is only in sieri, there in facto esse. Things are said to
be done, when they are begun to be done, 2 Cor. 5. 17. And so they are said to
be perfect, who are in the way of Perfection; he that is, in his growing
Estate, increasing more unto Grace and Righteousness, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Beholding
as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image. 2 Cor. 4.
16. Though the outward Man perish, yet the inward Man is renewed day by day.
They do seriously set upon the Work. Thus Perfection is taken;

(1.) As to Means: The Ministry was appointed for the perfecting of the Saints,
Ephesians. 4. 12. That they may be more enlightened, and more sanctified, more
brought to the Knowledge of God, and Obedience of his Will. There are Mean^
appointed by God for the perfecting (...) Grace, as well as the first working
of (...) in us; 1 Thessalonians. 3. 10. That I may perfect what is lacking to your
Faith.

(2.) As to the improvement of Means: 2 Cor. 7. 1. Perfecting Holiness in the
Fear of God, making progress in the Way of Grace toward Perfection, when the
Habit is more increased: 2 Pet. 1. 8. For if these things be in you, and
abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the
Knowledge of Christ. And Christian practice is more uniform. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. That
as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and please God, so that ye
would abound more and more. It Is not enough to have Grace, but we must grow in
Grace: Progress is always necessary, though exact Perfection be not attained:
So that then the Heart is perfect with God, when you make it not a slight
purpose only, but your constant endeavor to come up to your Pattern and Rule,
continually striving against Sin, and aiming at an higher degree of Holiness.

2. Consummate: When after all the hazards of the present Life, when at length
we shall be presented to Christ, and by Christ to God: Presented to Christ;
Col. 1. 28. That we may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus: That is,
fully complete, according to that Holiness required and exemplified by Christ:
And by Christ to God; Col. 1. 22. To present you holy, and unblameable, and
irreproveable in his sight.

I now come to the Reasons.

Secondly; The Reasons why we must be perfect, that is, not only sincere,
having all parts of a Christian, but endeavor after the highest Perfection;
and for the present, want nothing conducible nor necessary to Salvation.

1. We have a perfect God; Matthew. 5. 48. Be ye perfect, as your Heavenly Father
is perfect. God's Perfection is our Copy, and that is (...), and we are
required to imitate him; and therefore we must not set Bounds to our Holiness,
and say, Hith^rto shall thou come, and no farther; when we are come never so
far, yet this is not like God. The force of this Rule is not taken off, because
it is limited to one Perfection in the Divine Nature in the Evangelist Luke; for
he reads, instead of being perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect, Be ye
merciful, as your Heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6. 36. that is a special
way of Christian Perfection; but God's Children must aim at the Perfection of
all Virtues. Not only love to Enemies; as Mercy is one of the Divine
Perfections which we ought to imitate, so is Holiness, Veracity, and Wisdom, 1
Pet. 1. 15, 16. Surely this direction was given in the Gospel to some purpose,
or not: if not, then Christ spoke words in vain; if to some purpose, we are
obliged to Perfection: though we cannot fully obtain it in this life, we must
still aim at more, and come more near to it. And having God for our Pattern, we
should always set him before our Eyes, as he is represented to us in his Word,
and his Son Jesus Christ, the express Image of his Person, to be imitated by us.

2. We have a perfect Rule; Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of God is perfect. And, 2 Timothy 3. 17. The Word of God is able to make the Man of God perfect, thoroughly
furnished to every good Work. The strictness of the Law as a Rule, is adopted
into the Covenant of Grace, into the very frame and constitution of it, and so
far binds, as to allow no Weaknesses and Imperfections, but that we must
still bewail Failings, and strive after the utmost conformity to it in all
things. As we have a perfect Pattern, so we have a Law still, that is the
perfect Rule of all Righteousness, and therefore we should endeavor to conform
to it more and more.

3. We have a perfect Redeemer: Col. 2. 10. Ye are complete in him. We have all
things from him, and in him, necessary to Salvation. In our selves we are
empty, destitute of every thing which might commend us to God, but there is a
fullness in Christ to be communicated to all, who sensible of their own
emptiness, do seriously apply themselves to him; a perfect Wisdom, a perfect
Righteousness, perfect Sanctification, and supplies for ou^ perfect Glory and
Blessedness. He begins by his Spirit to renew our Natures; and this Grace is
still of the growing Hand, till all be crowned in Glory; there is a complete
Fullness in our Mediator.

4. There is a perfect Reward, or a perfect state of Glory, in which there is
nothing wanting, either to Holiness or Happiness. The Scripture describes it
by our growing up into a perfect Man in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 13. We have our
Infancy at our first Conversion, when liable to childish Ignorance, and many
Infirmities: we have our youth and growing Age, when making Progress in the way
of Grace toward Perfection.

And lastly, We have our perfect manly Age, when we are come to our full pitch,
when Grace is fully perfected in Glory. In Scripture, there is nothing said of
the fading and declining time of old Age. Oh! blessed will that time be, when
we shall be holy and undefiled, above the reach of Temptations; when Believers
receive all immediately from the Fountain of Holiness, and are filled with the
fullness of all Perfections; And shall we that have such Hopes, be lazy and
negligent? No, we must press toward the Mark, if we expect it as our Felicity,
we must prize it, and seek after it, and get more of it every day.

Use 1. Is to press and exhort you, to labor after Christian Perfection.

1. Motives. What you lost in Adam, must be recovered in Christ, or else you
dishonor your Redeemer. Now we lost in Adam Innocence and perfect Holiness,
therefore you must seek to recover it by Christ; for certainly Christ is more
able to save, than Adam to destroy, Romans 5. 17. The abundance of Grace, and the
Gift of Righteousness, came by Jesus Christ. It Is true, Christ does his Work by
Degrees; but if we mind it not, and lazily expect that he should make us
perfect, how will it ever be? for God will not save us without us; and as far
as we hope for any thing, we must endeavor after it, for Christian Hope is not
a devout Sloth, but an encouragement to Diligence.

2. We pray for Perfection, and therefore we must endeavor after it, otherwise
our Prayers are a Mockery. We pray, Mat. 6. 8. and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. The God of
Peace sanctify you throughout, even your whole Body, Soul, and Spirit. We pray
for complete Sanctification, in hope to obtain it: Prayer is not for God's
sake, but ours; a solemn binding our selves to use the means, that we may
obtain the Blessings that we ask.

3. In our making Covenant, we purpose to do the whole Will of God: now where
there is a Purpose, there must be an Endeavor, and a Progress, for otherwise
it is not made with a true heart, Heb. 10. 22. A Man may purpose Duty in a Pang,
which afterward he retracts in his Conversation and Practice; he may wish for
Perfection, like it in the general, not considering it as exclusive of his
beloved Lusts, but there he will be excused. Yea, he may sincerely purpose it,
yet be faint and slack in his Endeavors. Therefore we need to be exhorted
continually to be more earnest and diligent in Holiness, to avoid all
appearance of Evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Not to allow our selves in the omission of
any known Duty, James 4. 13. or the commission of any known Sin, though never
so near and dear to us. Psalm. 18. 23. I was upright before thee; and kept my
self from mine Iniquity. Therefore unless we comply with these Exhortations,
and set our selves sincerely to do the whole Will of God, the Challenge will be
brought against us, which was brought against the Church of Sardis; I have not
found thy Works perfect before God, Rev. 3. 2. Your Vows were good, but your
Practice is not answerable.

4. Consider the Comfort and Peace of that Man who does more and more press
toward Perfection: Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the perfect Man, behold the Upright;
for the End of that Man is Peace. They have a sweet Life, and an happy Close, a
tolerable passage through the World, and a comfortable passage out of the World.

For Means;

1. See that the Work be begun, for there must be converting Grace, before
there can be confirming Grace, Life before there be Strength and Growth, as
there must be Fire before it can be blown up; for what good will it do to blow
a dead Coal, to seek Strength before we have Life? it is as if we should give
Food or Physic to a dead Man. The Secure and Impenitent are not to be
confirmed and strengthened, but humbled and changed. We must first choose God for
our Portion, before we can be exhorted to cleave to God, Acts 11. 23. First,
the Perfection of Sincerity, before the Perfection of Growth and Progress, the
Measures and Degrees following the real being of Grace in the Soul.

2. If you would be perfect, the radical Graces must be strengthened, which are
Faith, Hope, and Love; strong Faith, fervent Love, lively Hope. Such a Faith as
realizeth the unseen Glory, and gives such a deep sense of the World to come,
as that you are willing to venture all upon the Hopes of it; such an Hope as
sets the Heart upon Glory to come, as present things do not greatly move us;
such a Love as levelleth all our Actions to God's Glory, and our eternal
enjoyment of him, Jude 20, 21.

3. Use the Means with all Seriousness and good Conscience, these conduce to
perfect what is lacking to your Faith, to root you, ground you in Love, confirm
you in Hope, that the Thoughts of Heaven may be more affecting and engaging.
Now the principal Means are, the Word, and Sacraments, and Prayer.

(1.) In the Word you have Principles of Faith, Obligations to Love, and
Arguments of Hope; therefore it is said, God builds us up by the Word of his
Grace, Acts 20. 32.

(2.) The Sacraments strengthen Faith, Hope, and Love; as Signs and Seals of
the Love of God, through Jesus Christ in the new Covenant, that so our
Consolation may be more strong, they strengthen our Faith and Hope; as a Bond
or a Vow: So they excite and engage our Love and Obedience, we bind our selves
to God anew, to pursue our everlasting Hopes, whatever they cost us. Our great
Diseases are proneness to Evil, and backwardness to Good; we check the one, and
cherish the other.

(3.) Prayer; for it is God that perfects us, 2 Pet. 5. 10. he must be sought
to, his Blessing makes the means effectual.

4. Think much and often of your perfect Blessedness, which you expect
according to promise; which will quicken and excite you to more diligence.
There is a time coming, when the Mind shall be filled with as much Light, and
the Heart with as much Love and Joy as the capacity of it is able to contain.
There will be,

1. A complete Vision of God and Christ, 1 Cor. 13. 12. No desire of the Mind
shall be unfilled or unsatisfied with the Knowledge of God in Christ.

2. A complete Possession and Fruition of God: Here, we are in a waiting,
expecting, longing Posture; but there is a plenary Fruition; we are filled up
with all the Fullness of God, Ephesians. 4. 19. and 1 Cor. 1. 20. God is all in all.

3. A complete Similitude and Transformation in the Image of Christ, 1 John 3.
2. Psalm. 17. 15. Here Grace is mingled with Corruption; we are like God by the
first Fruits of the Spirit, but unlike him by the Remainders of Corruption; But
in Heaven we shall be wholly like him. Here we resemble Christ, but we also
resemble Adam, yea, and often show forth more of Adam than Jesus: But there we
only show forth the Holiness and Purity of Christ; His Image shines in us
without Spot and Blemish.

4. A complete Delectation arising from all the rest. The Vision, Fruition, and
Likeness of God, Psalm. 16. 11. Those Delights are full and perpetual: Our great
Business will be to love what we see, and our great happiness to have what we
love: This is our never-failing Delight; we enter into our Master's Joy, Mat.
25. and 1 Pet. 4. 13. That when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad
with an exceeding Joy. The Lord has reserved the fullness of his People's Joy,
until that time when Sorrow will be no more.

Use 2. Are we perfect, that is, grown Christians in the way to Perfection?

The Notes of it are;

1. When there is such a base esteem of worldly Things, that our Affections are
weakened to them every day: One half of Religion, is dying to the World, as the
other half is living to God, the mortifying of Self-love, and the strengthening
and increasing our Love to God: Self-love is gratified by the Pleasures,
Honors, and Profits of the World; so love to God aims at the enjoyment of
God, when we get above the Hopes and Fears of the World, and the Delights of
Sense; I am crucified to the World, Gal. 6. 12. when every thing is loss and
dung for Christ's sake.

2. When more unsatisfied with present Degrees of Holiness, with a constant
endeavor to grow better: Our maimed and defective Service, is a real trouble
to us: we bewail our Wants and Imperfections; I cannot do what I would; O^
wretched Man that I am! Who shall deliv^^ me from the Body of this Death? It Is
the grief and shame of your Hearts, that yo^ serve God no better; you are still
groaning, longing, striving after greater Perfection; but when you allow your
selve^ in your Imperfections, and digest Failing without remorse, you are
Weaklings i^ Christianity. A true Christian desires the highest degree of
Holiness, and to b^ freed from every thing that is Sin, cannon sit down
contented with any low degree of Grace; it is a trouble to him that he knows
and loves God no more, and serves him no better; his smallest Sins are a
greater burden to him, than the greatest bodily Wants and Sufferings, Romans 7.
23, 24.

3. Such are more swayed by Love than Fear: Weak Christians are most obedient,
when most in fear of Hell; but the more we love the Lord our God with all our
Hearts, the more we advance toward our final Estate. At first our Pride and
Sensuality bears sway and rule in us, and have no resistance, but now and
then some frightnings and uneffectual checks from the fears of Hell, such they
are not converted yet. And if the sense of Religion do more prevail upon us,
yet our Condition is more troublous than comfortable, and all our business is,
to escape the everlasting Misery which we fear, and so we may forsake the
practice of those grosser Sins which breed our Fears, or perform some Duties
that may best fortify us against them; but this Religion is animated by Fear
alone, without the Love of God, and Holiness, that is only preparative to
Religion, near the Kingdom of God: But when really converted, we have the
Spirit of his Son inclining us to God as a Father, Gal. 4. 6. But as yet the
Spirit of Adoption produces but weak Effects, we differ little from a Servant;
It Is perfect Love casts out Fear, 1 John 4. 18. When the Soul loves God,
minds God, and is inclined to the Ways of God, delights in them as they
lead to God; then we are in a better progress, and more prepared for our final
Estate: His great Motive is Love, his great End is perfect Love. For the
present, he would serve him better, because he delights in his ways. O how I
love thy Law! Psalm. 119. 97. and verse. 140. Thy Word is very pure; therefore
thy Servant loves it. They are willing and ready for God, these are thoroughly
settled in a Christian Course.

4. The grown Christian is more humble; he sees more of his Defects than
others do: Weak Christians are more liable to be puffed up, than the wiser and
stronger; for the more Men increase in Grace, whether Knowledge or Holiness, the
more they know their Emptiness, Unmortifiedness, and manifold Sins and
Failings: The more they know of the Jealousy of God's Holiness, of the Evil of
Sin, of the Strictness of the Covenant, have a deeper sense of their
Obligations to God, and have more experience of their own slippery Hearts: Sin
is more a burden to them than ever they see; they have more difficulties to
grapple with, and all this keeps them humble and low in their own Eyes. All
this is spoken to press you to look to this growth and progress, which is our
Perfection. By the way, He that thinks he has Grace enough to be saved, and
cares for no more, deals more niggardly with God than he would do in the
World; if a Man has Bread enough to keep him from starving, would he be
content? There is no Truth, where no care of growth; if our Condition be safe,
it is not sure to us.

A Persuasive to Unity in Things Indifferent.
PHIL. 3. 15. -- As many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in anything ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.
I Now come to the other part of the Text;

1. As many as be perfect, be thus minded; (...), think the same thing with me,
that is, forsaking all other Confidences, cleave to Christ alone whatever it
cost you. Mind this, take care of this, be thus affected; let us actually
perform that to which Circumcision was designed; let us worship God in a
spiritual manner, trusting Christ as the substance of all these Ceremonial
Shadows, depending upon him for his renewing and reconciling Grace, and
adhering to pure Christianity, without mingling with it the Rudiments of Moses.

2. If in any thing ye be otherwise minded, know not the abolition of the
Ceremonies through weakness of Faith, or an affected Ignorance; yet having
knowledge of so many saving Truths, we hope in time God will reclaim you from
your Error. Well then,

1. Here Is a Difference or Dissent supposed, Thus minded, and otherwise minded.

2. Lenity expressed toward the Dissenters; If in any thing ye be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even ^his to you.

Doct. That when God's People are divided in Opinion, all Lenity and mutual
Forbearance should be used, to prevent things from coming to an open Rupture.

So sweet and mild was the Discipline in the Apostles days, that he would not
compel Men to do whatever he or others did conceive to be Good, or to forbear
what they did conceive to be Evil, but without force, leave them to God's
Direction and Illumination.

Here let me show you,

I. What Lenity and Forbearance should be used.

II. The Reasons why Lenity and Forbearance should be used.

I. What Lenity and Forbearance should be used. Let us state it in these
Considerations.

1. There may be, and often are, Differences of Opinion about lesser Things in
the Church: Partly, Because of the different degrees of Light. All Barks that
sail to Heaven, draw not alike depth of Water. And partly, because of the
remainders of Corruption in all. Inordinate Self-love is not in all alike
broken and mortified, and so their particular Interests have an influence upon
their Opinions. And partly, because of the accidental Prejudices of Education
and Converse, etc.

2. When these Differences arise, we should take care they come not to a
Rupture and open Breach. This is the course the Apostle takes here, he does
not by and by despair of the Dissenters, and reject them as Heretics, but
bears with them, hoping in charity God will at length reveal their Error to
them by the ministry of his Servants, through the powerful Operation of his
Spirit, and not suffer them to run on in dividing Courses from the rest of his
People: So should we do in like cases; partly, because when these Differences
of Opinion breed Divisions and Separations, the Church is destroyed: Gal. 5.
15. For if ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of
another. Backbitings, Revilings, and Reproaches, make way for a total Vastation
of the whole Church, a ruin to both Parties: Partly, because the whole is
scandalized; John 17. 21. That they may all be one, that the World may believe
that thou have sent me. Divisions in the Church, breed Atheism in the World;
Partly, because there are Enemies which watch for our halting, and by our
Divisions we are laid open to them. Our Lord and Master has told us with his
own Mouth, That a Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand, Mat. 12. 35.
Never was it so well with the People of God, but besides their Divisions among
themselves, they had common Enemies: and Nazianzen calls them, Common
Reconcilers, because they should engage God's People to an unanimous opposition
to the Kingdom of Satan in the World. And partly, because then mutual Means of
Edification are hindered. As long as Charity and mutual Forbearance remains,
there is hope of doing good to one another; but when Men break out into
opposite Parties, they are prejudiced against all that Light that they should
receive one from another, suspecting every Point as counsel from an Enemy: Gal.
4. 16. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth? When Men
are once engaged in a way of Error, whosoever is an Enemy to their Error, is
counted an Enemy to themselves. Y^a, they can hardly bear that sound Doctrine
which does directly cross their Opinions, but are apt to cavil at all that is
said by a Dissenter. And partly, because when Men give themselves up to
separating and narrow Principles, the Power of Godliness is lost, and all their
Zeal is laid out upon their petty and private Opinions, and so Religion is
turned into a disputacity. That Is the Reason why the Apostle does so often tell
them, Gal. 6. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature. And, Gal. 5. 6. For in Jesus Christ
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith that
works by Love. And, 1 Cor. 7. 19. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision
is nothing, but the keeping the Commandments of God. Observe it where you will,
and you shall find, that Separation and Distance from the rest of Believers,
does not befriend Godliness, but undermine it. A Regiment fighting apart from
the rest of the Army of Christ, is always lost through their own peevishness;
at least, they lose great Advantages of promoting the Kingdom of Christ.

3. To prevent this open Rupture, there must be all Lenity used, and mutual
Forbearance; we must not rigorously obtrude our Conceits upon others, either by
Church Power, or private Censure; it may be done either way: Sometimes by
Church Power, especially when it is possessed or invaded by the more
self-seeking sort of Christians: as we read in the Revelations, of the Beast
that pushed with the Horns of a Lamb; that is, used Church Power, and under a
pretense of Church-Constitution, destroyed them that were truly the Church of
Christ. And our Lord tells us, John 16. 2. They shall put you out of the
Synagogues: yea, the time comes, that whosoever kills you, shall think that
he does God good service. Putting them out of the Synagogues, was an abuse of
Ecclesiastical Power; it may be so, the Builders may refuse the Cornerstone.
On the other side; private Censures may as much break the Law of Forbearance,
as public Censures. When Inferiors promote their Differences with Turbulency,
Heat, and Animosity, and rend and tear all things, yea themselves, from the
Body of Christ, and sober Christians, censuring all that dissent from them, as
no Christians. There is such a Sin under the Gospel, as the gainsaying of
Corah, Jude 11. The Sin of Corah is and may be committed in the New Testament.
The Sin of Corah was invading an Office, that no way belonged to him; and
censured his Superiors, as if they took too much upon them, because all the
Lord's People were Holy, and erected another Ministry in their stead: He being
a Levite, would do the Office of a Priest as well as Aaron; and when summoned
to appear before Moses, said, We will not come, Numb. 16. 11, 12. Now the
Apostle says, in the perishing of Korah, their own Doom was foretold. Again,
verse. 19. These are they that separate themselves, sensual, not having the
Spirit. Whence it is clear, that private Men, in their Sphere, may rend the
Church. And the Factions at Corinth proved it, 1 Cor. 1. 12. I am of Paul, and
I am of Apollo, and I am of Cephas, and I am of Christ: As impailing and
impropriating the common Salvation to themselves. Much milder was the Apostle,
1 Cor. 1. 2. Jesus Christ, theirs and ours. Now what Remedy is there, but
Lenity and mutual Forbearance? This I shall state,

1. As to the matter of the strife. It must be considered, that we must
dispense this Forbearance as the Matter will bear. There are great Disputes
about Toleration, only let me tell you now, that we speak not of the Toleration
of the Magistrate, but of the Church, what things are within the latitude of
allowable Differences within the Church. The Magistrates Concessions may be
larger; for in supernatural Things, such as Matters of Religion are, he may
bear with that which the Church ought not to bear with in them that have
submitted to an higher Institution, or in its own Members, or rather private
Christians one with another. But in this limited Forbearance, there are
Extremes, and for want of right stating of things, Men fight with their Friends
in the dark; some think all things should be suffered; some nothing wherein to
bear with our Brethren. The one sort of Christians is for imposing on their
Brethren all things that have gotten the vogue and the favor of Authority, and
that not only on their Practice, but their Judgments too: And this in Matters
not fundamental or destructive to Faith or Worship, but in things controversal
or doubtful among godly and peaceable Men. But if it should not go so high,
contending about every Difference of Opinion, and urging our Brethren with
every thing we conceive to be right, is a Breach of Christian Love, and
destroys the use of those differing Gifts which Christ has given to the
Church, and crosses his Mind in the frame of the Scriptures, which are clear
in Soul-saving Matters, in other things, especially Matters of Discipline and
Order, more dark and obscure. It Is also contrary to the mild and gentle
Government of the Apostles, who press in lesser Matters a Forbearance; as Paul,
Romans 14. 1. The weak in Faith receive, but not to doubtful Disputations;
receive him, own him, but do not cast him out of the Church, nor trouble him
for doubtful Things, but let him come to himself, for Men will sooner be led
than drawn.

The other Extreme is, of them that will have all things to be tolerated, even
Blasphemy and Fundamental Errors, as if the Scriptures were uncertain in all
things. No, in Things absolutely necessary to Salvation, it is clear, open, and
plain, The Law is a Lamp, and a Light, Prove. 6. 23. and Psalm. 119. 105. And in
such a case we are not to bid him God-speed, 2 Epist. John 10. In such cases of
damnable Heresy, the Law of Christian Lenity holds not; but if we agree in
the principal Articles of Faith, let us embrace one another with mutual Love,
though we differ from one another in variety of Rites and Ceremonies, and
Discipline Ecclesiastical; if we agree in the Substantials of Worship, let us
go by the same Rule, do the same Thing: Though in Circumstantials there be a
difference, these are Matters of lesser moment than Separation, or the other
division of the Church.

2. As to the Persons contending, there is a difference: The Apostle, when he
persuades this Lenity and mutual Forbearance, excepts those that raise
Troubles in the Church, and distinguishes between Erring Christians, and their
Factious Guides; Verse. 2. Beware of Dogs, beware of Evil Workers, beware of the
Concision; the poor seduced Christians he would have to be pitied; but the
Renders and Cutters of the Church, he would have them beware of such.

3. The Forbearance it self; it is not a Forbearance out of Necessity, because
we dare do no otherwise, but voluntary choice out of Christian Pity and
Compassion, knowing that we need as much Forbearance from God and others, for
we all have our Mistakes and Failings; not a Forbearance out of Policy, till we
get opportunity to suppress others: The Sons of Zerviah are too hard for us;
God often lays that restraint upon us by his Providence; and it is well he
does: but it should be the restraint of Grace, not a respect to our own ease,
lest we create trouble to our selves, but upon Christian Reasons. No, the
Apostle shows you whence this Forbearance should come; Ephesians. 4. 2, 3. With
all lowliness and meekness, and long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love;
endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

There are four Graces enforce it.

(1.) Lowliness, which is a Grace and Virtue, whereby a Man, from the sense of
his own Infirmities, does esteem but meanly and soberly of himself, and all
that is his.

(2.) Meekness, whereby we are rendered tractable, gentle, affable, and easy to
be entreated and conversed withal, Iam. 3. 17.

(3.) Long-suffering, which is nothing but Meekness extended or continued, and
not interrupted by length of Time, or multiplication of Offenses.

(4.) Love to our Christian Brother or Neighbor, whereby our Hearts are
inclined, or well-disposed toward them for their good. Love covers a
multitude of Sins, 1 Pet. 4. 8. Makes us bear with many things in the Person
loved: 1 Cor. 13. 4. Charity suffers long, and is kind. And, Verse. 7. Bears
all things, hops all things. This is the Forbearance we press, a Forbearance
out of Meekness, and Humility, and Love for Christ's sake.

4. In this Forbearance, both strong and weak have their part, and are much
concerned, as having either of them much to do herein. Which that we may clear
to you, let us consider,

1 st. What they are not to do.

1. Not to leave the Truth, or to do any thing against it: No, the Apostle
says, Let as many as be perfect, be thus minded; not change Truth for Error.
Strings in Tune must not be brought down to strings out of Tune, but they
brought up to them.

2. Not to connive at their Sin or Error, for that is not Love but Hatred;
Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine Heart; thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him. To let him go
unconvinced, is to harden him; 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. Yet count him not as an Enemy,
but admonish him as ^ Brother. The Sins of others must not be le^ alone, under
the pretense of Forbearance; and there must be no neglect of Means to reclaim
them from their Sin, but meekly we are to hold our Light to them, and use all
Holy Means of convincing and satisfying their Judgments.

2 dly. What they are to do.

1. The Strong are not to deal rigorously with the Weak, nor insult over them,
nor pursue them with Censures, but wait till God declare the Truth un^o them,
and must promote their Conviction with all gentleness and condescension. We are
to feed Christ's Lambs as well as his Sheep, and for both we need Love, John
21. 15, 16. Among the Flock of Christ, there are variety of Tempers and Degrees
of Strength, both Lambs and Sheep, we must imitate our Lord: Isa. 40. 11. He
shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd; he shall gather the Lambs with his Arms,
and carry them in his Bosom; and shall gently lead those that are with young.
We should condescend to the weak and feeble Ones, as well as consider what the
strong and confirmed can bear: though we cannot love their Weakness, yet we
must love the Weak, and bear with the Infirmities of the Weak, not break the
bruised Reed. Infants must not be turned out of the Family, because they cry,
and are unquiet and troublesome; though they be peevish and froward, yet we
must bear it with gentleness and patience, as we do the frowardness of the
Sick; if they revile, we must not revile again, but must seek gently to reduce
them, notwithstanding all their Censures; to entertain them with contempt, is
to prejudice them quite against all Instruction. Job would not despise the
Cause of his Manservant, or Maidservant, when they contended with him, Job
31. 13.

2. The Weak. But who will own this Title and Appellation? Because in
Controversies of Religion, all seem to stand upon the same Level, and another
differs from me, as much as I do from him; their Opinion is as far from mine,
as mine from theirs; who then shall be accounted weak?

I Answer;

1. Our Rule is plain; and as it distinguishes Error from Truth, so Weakness
and partial Christianity from that which is more perfect and thorough. Besides,
it is clear, some have not the Gifts of Knowledge and Experience that others
have, nor such advantages of Education and Study, and helps of knowing the
Truth; and though they are not to captivate their Understandings to the
Dictates of others, yet they should search, and search again and again, and
have double Light, when they are by the seeming Evidence of Truth forced to
differ.

2. Christianity teaches us to think meanly of our selves, and not to be wise
in our own Conceits; Phil. 2. 3. In lowliness of mind, let each esteem others
better than themselves; at least, we should have such a sense of our
Imperfections, as to make us tractable and teachable.

3. If you will not own your selves Weak, do the part of the Strong meekly,
hold forth your Light, produce your Reasons to convince others; but if you have
nothing to produce but your Obstinacy and Ignorance, surely you are not only a
weak, but a perverse Brother. But what are the Weak to do? not to rend and cut
off themselves from the rest of Christians, or be strange to them upon every
lesser dissent, nor to raise Troubles by your Censures, but to be humble,
teachable, diligent in the use of Means, to lay aside obstinate Prejudices, to
examine how it comes to pass that the rest of the Godly and you differ; to
leave room still for the discovery of God's Mind, where your Grounds are not
clear and certain, and to count it no shame to retract that former practice
which a future Conviction disproveth.

II. The Reasons.

1. From the Necessity, Excellency, and Utility of Union: What more clear in
the Scriptures, than that Christians should endeavor to be united. Christ
prayed for it, Ioh. 17. 21, 22, 23. That they all may be One; that they may be
One as we are One; that they may be perfect in One. And the Apostle enforces
it, by the most vehement Entreaties that can be used. Phil. 2. 1, 2. If
therefore there be any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if any
Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels of Mercy, fulfill ye my Joy, that ye be
like-minded, having the same Love, being of one Accord, and of one Mind. Who
can withstand such an adjuration and powerful beseechings as these? that if
ever they found any comfort by his Ministry, and ever had any Hope by Christ,
ever any Influence of the Spirit, ever any Pity and Compassion over Souls, that
they would look after Unity in Judgment, Love, and Affection, and lay aside
their Differences, and Carnal Emulations? Again, they caution us against those
that cause Divisions; Romans 16. 17, 18. Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them
which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them; for they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own Belly; and by good Words, and fair Speeches, deceive the
Hearts of the Simple. They press Unity upon us by very cogent Arguments, that
carry the highest Reason with them; Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. There is one Body, and
one Spirit, even as ye are called in one Hope of your Calling, one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through
all, and in you all.

Seven uniting Considerations are there heaped up together.

1. There is one Body of Christ, whereof all are Members. The whole Church
makes but one Body knit by Faith to Christ their Head, and by the Bond of Love
among themselves; and the meanest Christian is a Member in this Body. Now it is
unnatural, if the Members of the same Body should tear and destroy one another,
and that the Body of Christ should be rent and torn; and woe be to them by whom
it is so.

2. This Body is animated by one Spirit, that if any be a Member of this Body,
it is necessary that he have the Spirit of God abiding in him, to renew and
quicken him. Now this one and the self-same Spirit, as the Apostle calls him,
1 Cor. 12. 13. works in all the Saints; if his Gifts be various, they proceed
from the same Author, and they are variously dispensed to preserve Society and
Communion, that one may not say to another, I have no need of thee. However,
there is but one new Nature in all the Sancti^ied.

3. One Hope of Glory. We are all joint Heirs of the same Kingdom, we all
expect one End and Happiness, where we shall meet and live together for ever.
Now those that shall meet and live together in Glory hereafter, should live
together in Peace and Concord here.

4. There is one Lord, one Mediator and Blessed Savior. Now shall the Servants
of one Master fall at odds with themselves, neglect their Master's Work
committed to them, beat their Fellow Servants, and eat and drink with the
Drunken?

5. One Faith; Fides quae creditur, he means the Doctrine of Faith in the
Gospel. We agree in the same Fundamental Truths of the Gospel, as the only
Object of saving-Faith, and shall we strive about Things of less Importance and
Moment? there is but one Gospel, which is the Seed of our New Birth, the Rule
of our Faith and Lives, the Foundation of our Hope, the Food of our Souls.

6. One Baptism, that is the same New Covenant, sealed and confirmed by
Baptism; and when our Father's Testament is clear, do we quarrel about petty
and mean Things?

7. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you
all. We have one common God and Father, whose Eminency is above all Creatures,
whose presence and powerful Providence runs through all Creatures; but his
special Presence, by the gracious Operations of his Holy Spirit, is in the
Regenerate. Surely this is a strong Bond of Union, to be one in God, he is the
common Father of all Believers, through Jesus Christ. Some are Weak, some
Strong, some Rich, some Poor, but they have all an equal Interest in God. Now
for us, who are so many ways one, to be rent in pieces; How sad is that! All
these places, and many more, show how every Christian should, as far as it is
possible, be an esteemer and promoter of Unity among Brethren, and not only
make Conscience of Purity, but of Unity also, which next to Purity, is the
great Badg of Christianity.

2 dly. From the consideration of our mutual Frailties, who have all in part a
corrupt Will, guided by a blind Mind. Now as the Apostle says of the High
Priest, who is taken from Men, Heb. 5. 2. That he is one that can have
compassion of the Ignorant, and them that are out of the way, for that he is
compassed about with Infirmities. This should be verified in every one of us;
one Sinner ought to have compassion of another; the word is (...), can
reasonably bear with the ignorance of Brethren, because of the common Relation.
Gal. 6. 1. Ye which are Spiritual, restore him with meekness; so him that is
weak, receive, Rom, 14. 1. The Apostles being immediately inspired, were more
infallible than we are.

Oh, do but consider what we were, and what we are; For we our selves were
sometimes foolish and disobedient, Titus 3. 3. Did not we all sit in Darkness,
and in the shadow of Death? Were we not all ignorant of the Ways of God, and
the Things which belong to our Peace? Has God merely by his Grace brought us
to the knowledge of his Truth, and shall we contemn and disdain our weak
Brother? or insult over him, and determine and judge rashly of him? Who makes
thee to differ? 1 Cor. 4. 7.

2. What we are: weak Creatures, not infallible; now after we are light in the
Lord, we have our Errors in Knowledge and Practice, some more, some less,
according to the degree of our growth; Psalm. 19. 12. God reveals to his
Saints all necessary Truth, but not every particular Truth, out of wise
Dispensation.

3 dly. From the consideration of the probability of Divine Illumination.

1. This Illumination comes from God only. It Is he that powerfully reveals
it, and setleth the Heart in the belief of it, Acts 16. 4. And, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7.
I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. The best Means may
be disappointed, till God cooperate with them; let us then with patience use
the Means, and refer the Issue to God; 2 Timothy 2. 25. In meekness instructing
those that oppose themselves, if peradventure God will give them Repentance
unto Life. If we seek to force Men to our Opinion, before Men are convinced,
that is a tyranny which will do little good; it may make Hypocrites, but it
will never make real Converts.

2. This Illumination is given by God by degrees: The Apostle prays for the
converted Ephesians, That God would give them the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, Ephesians. 1. 17. They had it before, but he means a greater measure.
Therefore weak Christians are not to be discouraged, though they see not as far
as others; some see more, some less, according to the state and condition
wherein God will employ them. Some need more Light than others, as Ministers
more than People, Governors more than Inferiors; but all have sufficient: some
at first see Men walking like Trees, Mark 8. 24, 25. but afterward the Light
grows more clear and more distinct. In short, he does not reveal his Mind to
his Children all alike, nor all at once, but here a little, and there a little,
as narrow-mouthed Vessels can take it in.

3. Those who are not for the present, may be afterward instructed in the
Truth. The Apostle proceeds in the hopes of that;

1. Upon the Supposition, That they were already converted to the Christian
Faith, and were sincere in the Belief and Profession of it. Those that belong
to God, will one time or other be enlightened in the knowledge of all necessary
Truths; For God that has begun a good Work, will perfect it, Phil. 1. 6. If
the Saints at first Conversion, when they were called from Darkness to Light,
did not hinder Illumination then, and the knowledge of those many Soul-saving
Truths which God revealed to them then, so as to recover them from a partial
Error, we may presume that God will give them a farther understanding of the
Way of Salvation, though now under some Error; as Aquila and Priscilla
expounded to Apollos the Way of God more perfectly, Acts 18. 26.

2. Upon the Supposition that they were humble and tractable; Psalm. 25. 9. The
Meek he will guide in Judgment, the Meek he will teach his Way. They lie open
to Information; but if Men be puffed up with Self-conceits, there is more hopes
of a Carnal Fool than of them, that is, a sensual and brutish Man.

3. That they will not neglect any means of Study and Prayer: Study; For we
must dig for Knowledge as for Silver, Prove. 2. 4. not only cry for it, but dig
for it in the Mines of Knowledge; common and obvious Apprehensions lead us into
Error. And then Prayer, Psalm. 119. 18. Lord open mine Eyes, that I may see
wondrous Things out of thy Law. God must take away the Vail. Now then upon
prayer to God, and applying themselves to the use of Holy Means, God will show
them they are deceived. If you Study and not Pray; it is just with God to leave
you to your Prejudices; if you pray, and neglect Means, you must not think that
God will extraordinarily inspire you, for he reveals Truth by his Blessing on
ordinary Means.

4. Upon suspicion that they continue in the Communion of the Church, Ephesians. 4.
15. Speaking the Truth in love. While we keep Unity, and keep Love, others have
greater hopes to convince, they to be convinced; and so both, while they divide
not, by this mutual Condescension, may the better wait for this Illumination;
but in their Separation, their Errors are confirmed while they hear but one
side, nothing to undeceive them, but all to root them in their Errors.

5. He supposes that they walked orderly according to their Light. Now if God
has begun to enlighten them in other things, he will discover more Truths to
them, John 7. 17. Upon the whole, deal tenderly with them, and tolerate them,
till they be taught of God.

6. As to the Nature of his Confidence, God shall reveal. There is a twofold
Confidence, a Confidence of Faith grounded on a Promise, and a Confidence of
Charity grounded on Appearance and Probability, 1 Cor. 13. 7. We hope the best,
though the Event does not always follow, the former is on the forementioned
Grounds, the latter on Appearance. The Appearance of them; so, Gal. 5. 10. I
have confidence in you, through the Lord, that ye will be no otherwise minded;
for he that troubles you, shall bear his Judgment whoever be be. This
Confidence was grounded on Charity, that through the Lord's Grace they should
be reclaimed from their Error, and brought to embrace the Truth. We are not to
despair of the recovery of any, but in charity to hope the best of all Men, as
long as they are cureable. Thus for the third Reason.

4 th Reason, from the temper of those that are perfect. A grounded Christian
bears with the Infirmities he sees in others, and pitieth and helps them,
and prays for them more than the Weak, who are usually most censorious, and
addicted to the Interest of their Party and Faction in the World, and make a
bustle about Opinions, rather than solid Godliness: but the grown Christian is
most under the Power of Love, and an heavenly Mind, and so loves God and his
Neighbor, is most sensible of his own Frailty, has a greater Zeal for the
welfare of his Church and Interest in the World, and sees further than others
do.

Use is, to press us to this Lenity and Forbearance to one another.

To this end take these Considerations.
1. Consider in how many Things we agree, and in how few we differ. There is a
threefold Unity, in Mind, and Heart, and Scope.

In Mind: Romans 15. 5, 6. Now the God of Patience and Consolation, grant that
you be like minded one toward another; that ye ^^ay with one Mind, and one
Mouth, glorify God.

In Heart: Acts 4. 32. And the multitude of them that believed, were of one
Heart, and of one Soul.

As to the Scope: Romans 15. 5, 6, 7. Now as to the Way, It Is either the general
way of Faith and Holiness; for all that shall be saved, are of one mind, as to
the Substantials of Faith and Worship; Ier. 32. 30. I will give them one Heart,
and one Way, that they may fear me for ever. But there may be a different
practice as to some lesser things; Should we for these break with one another?

2. Take more notice of their Graces, than of their Infirmities; Is there no
good thing found in them; Rev. 2. 6. But this thou have, that thou hate the
Deeds of the Nicolaitans. See also verse. 2. and 5. he begins and ends with
their Commendation, though in the middle of the Epistle he reproves them for
their Decay. He takes more notice of what is right, than what is wrong: We
reflect upon the Evil of every Party, but do not consider the Good.

3. Remember how open the Enforcements to Love and Unity are, and how much the
Grounds of Separation lie in the dark, and are in a doubtful Case, but Union is
the safest part.

4. Think of God's Love and Forbearance toward us, before we received the
Light of his Truth, and were brought to the Obedience of his Will; as God dealt
with the Israelites, so with every one of us; Acts 13. 18. He suffered their
Manners in the Wilderness; If we had been dealt with rigorously, we had been
cut off from the number of God's People, had such Stumbling Blocks and
Prejudices laid in our way, that we should never have been converted to God.

5. This Forbearance cannot in Reason be expected from others to our selves, if
we be not ready to repay it to others. There is no Man which has not
Infirmities of his own, which call for Forbearance, Iam 3. 2. In the general,
Every Man is obliged to do as he would be done unto, Mat. 7. 12. So in
particular, He is reproved when he had his own Debt forgiven him, yet took his
Fellow Servants by the Throat, and showed him no Mercy, Mat. 18. 28. We have all
our Failings and Mistakes; usually God punishes Censures with Censures, Mat.
7. 1. Injuries with Injuries. Paul that stoned Stephen, was himself stoned at
Lystra. So he punishes Separations with Separations: they are endless; as
Circles in the Water beget one another.

6. Consider how dangerous it is to reject any whom Christ will own for his:
Will Christ admit him to Heaven, and will you think him unfit for your
Communion here upon Earth? Despise not the weak Brother, for God has received
him, Romans 14. 3. The Gentile Believer must not despise the s^rupulous Jewish
Believer, and cast out of his Communion the Gentile Christian: if God has
admitted him into his Family, shall we exclude him? So, Matthew. 18. 6. Whosoever
shall offend one of these little Ones which believe in me, it were better that
a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that he were cast into the Sea. Now
what greater Offense, than to cast them off from the Privileges of the
Christian Church, either by public or private Censures, which are causless or
unwarrantable, at least no way grounded on necessary Things?

7. As we must not on our part give Offense, or occasion the Divisions, so we
must not take Offense when it is given by others; for Charity, as it provokes
not, so it is not easily provoked, 2 Cor. 13. 5. So likewise if a Rent be made
by others, we must do what we can to heal it; if an angry Brother call us
Bastard, yet let us own him as a Brother, and a Child of the Family; for,
Blessed are the Peacemakers, Matthew. 5. 9. The World censureth us for
Complyers, and Dawbers; but God counts us his genuine and true Children.

8. Our endeavors after Unity among the Professors of Christians, ought to be
earnest and constant, Ephesians. 4. 3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit
in the Bond of Peace. I add this, partly, because many make fair Pretenses of
Peace and Union, which their Practice contradicts; all cry out of the
Divisions, but every one keeps them up: And partly, because when it is
endeavored, we shall find Difficulties and Disappointments; but we must not
rest in some careless Endeavors, nor grow weary, tho we meet not with present
success: And partly, because the Instruments of so great a Good, are usually
sacrificed to the Wrath of both Parties. We must be content to digest Affronts,
Reproaches, Censures, and Injuries, and love them that hate us, 2 Cor. 12. 15.
Though the more abundantly I love you, the less I am beloved of you.

Not to be offended in Christ, the ready way to Blessedness.
MAT. 11. 6. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.
THese words are the conclusion of Christ's Answer to John's Disciples, who
were sent from him in Prison, to inquire if Christ were the True Messiah, or
they must look for another. This Message was not sent for his own Satisfaction,
but theirs; not his own, for he had before openly owned Christ as such, John 1.
29. But theirs, they are offended in Christ, out of respect to their Master.
For Answer, Christ refers them to his Works, whether they were not such as
the Prophets foretold were to be performed by the Messiah.

Two things he urges.

First, His Miracles. Secondly, His Preaching the Gospel.
First, His Miracles. The Blind receive their sight, the Lame walk, the Lepers
are cleansed, and the Deaf hear, and the Dead are raised, and the Poor have the
Gospel preached to them; This was foretold, Isa. 35. 5, 6. Then the Eyes of the
Blind shall be open, and the Ears of the Deaf shall be unstopped: Then shall
the Lame leap as an Heart, and the Tongue of the Dumb shall sing. And then for
his setting afoot the Gospel, compare Isa. 61. 1. with Luke 4. 18. Isa. 61. 1.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to
preach good Tidings unto the Meek: He has sent me to bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the opening the Prison
to them that are bound. Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the Poor; He has sent me to heal
the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and rec^vering of
sight to the Blind; to set at liberty them that are bruised; to preach the
acceptable Year of the Lord. And, Luke 4. 21. This day is this Scripture
fulfilled in your Ears. This is here expressed, The Poor have the Gospel
preached to them: (...) The Poor are Evangelized; have not only the Promises of
the Gospel offered to them, but the impression and power of it is left upon
their Hearts: By the Poor, may be meant the humble-minded, or Persons of the
meanest and lowest Condition: The humble-minded, or such as were affected with
their Sin and Misery. The Proud resist, and stand out against the Gospel; but
the brokenhearted, thankfully accepted glad Tidings of this Salvation. The
Messiah was to preach to the Poor, Luke 4. 18. But in Isa. 61. 1. it is the
Meek. The Gospel does affect the poor needy Soul, so as to put a stamp of Grace
upon it. They that are sensible of their Sin and Misery, are the proper Objects
of this Dispensation: or else it may be meant of Persons of the meanest and
lowest condition. The Christian Church was made up of such at first; James 2.
5. Hearken my beloved Brethren, Has not God chosen the po^r of this World rich
in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to them that love
him? And, 1 Cor. 1. 26. For ye see your Calling, Brethren, how that not many
wise Men after the Flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. Christ
did not then call the Eminent and Great, but the obscure and despised of the
World, lest Religion should seem to owe its growth and progress, rather to the
Power of the World, than to the Evidence of the Truth. Now these are said to be
Evangelized, that is, to have a good share in the blessed Message, they above
others being wrought upon and affected with it. To be Evangelized, implies
Grace on God's part, and on theirs, a willing reception of the Impression of
it, so as to be changed by it. The Poor are all to be gospelled; those whose
Poverty is sanctified, to make way for brokenness of Heart; which is not said
to exclude the Rich from all Benefit, some were called then, though not many.
Grace where it prevails in the Heart, puts Rich and Poor on the same level. It
humbles the Rich, and exalts the Poor, Iam. 1. 9, 10. It teaches the one to
abound, the other to be abased, Phil. 4. 12. Poverty and Riches do as they are
used. Now, says Christ, tell John the things that ye hear and see; let him
expound the Characters of the Messiah as they lie in the Old Testament; and if
they be verified in me, see what Application and Inference you ought to make:
Therefore he dismisseth them with this Conclusion; And blessed is he, whosoever
shall not be offended in me.

In which words observe,

1. The Privilege; And blessed is he: it is meant of our Supreme Blessedness.

2. The Qualification; Whosoever is not offended in me. Where observe, 1. It Is
Negatively expressed; Not offended. 2. There is an universal Negative;
Whosoever is not. But are all those who are not offended at Christ, saved? I
answer, No, you must look upon this Conclusion, as annexed to the last clause
of the former Verse, -- The Poor have the Gospel preached unto them: And
blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me. To be offended, is to be
scandalized, or kept from owning Christ as the True Messiah: All are happy and
blessed, so far as they are Evangelized; and miserable, so far as Scandalized.
When the Kingdom of Heaven is brought to us, nothing can bar us from entering
into it, but our being offended in Christ. But if we be not scandalized, so as
to hinder our being Evangelized, Then we are in a happy and blessed Condition;
that is, blessed so far, as the impediment of our Blessedness is removed; and
indeed, that is all the blessedness we can attain unto in this Life. Thus
Blessedness is ascribed to pardon of Sins, Psalm. 32. 1. because that takes
away the legal Impediment. Blessedness is ascribed to Sanctification, Psalm.
119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the Way; because that removes the moral
Incapacity, and so is a forerunner of Eternal Happiness: And here it is
ascribed, to not being offended in Christ, when he is sufficiently revealed to
us, as it removes the Impediment of our Faith, which is always some offense
and dislike that we take at Christ, and the Ways of God.

The Point that I shall insist on, is this;

That whosoever being invited to embrace the Gospel, is not offended in Christ,
is in the ready way to true Blessedness.

In the prosecution of this Point, I shall use this method: First, To show you
what it is to be offended in Christ. Secondly, Upon what Occasions Men were
then offended. Thirdly, Whether this Sin were proper to that Age only, or we
may now be guilty. Fourthly, I shall show you the Kinds of this Sin. Fifthly,
How it is true, that those which escape this Sin, are in the ready way to
Salvation.


First, What it is to be offended in Christ.

I Answer, To be offended in Christ, is to be offended because of Christ.
Something in him which we dislike, which is an hindrance to our receiving and
owning him in that quality wherein he appeared in the World, and offers
himself to us: namely, as our Lord and Savior, (...), in the natural sense of
it, signifies either any obstacle or hindrance laid in a Man's way, by which
the Passenger is detained or stopped: Peculiarly it is put for those sharp
Stakes which they were wont to stick in the Ground in the ancient way of
warring, to wound the Feet and Legs of their Enemies in their pursuit of them;
against which they used greaves of Brass; most usually, (...), signifies a
Stone or Block in the way, at which a Man is apt to stumble and fall. So, 1
Pet. 2. 8. Unto them which believe, Christ is precious; but a Stone of
stumbling, and a Rock of offense, to them that stumble thereat. A Rock with
respect to those that travel by Sea; a Stone of stumbling, with respect to
those that travel by Land: so it is used here, Who are not scandalized at
Christ. In this Expression, there is something expressed, and something
supposed.

1. It supposes some Offer and Revelation made to us; that Grace is brought
^ome to us, and Salvation offered to us: Jews, and professing Christians, are
more properly said to be offended in Christ, than Heathens who never heard, nor
sought after him; 1 Cor. 1. 23. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a
stumbling block, to the Greeks, foolishness. They stumble, who being invited to
come to him, dislike and are displeased with something in him; or being on
their way, are upon some occasion and temptations, laid aside and prejudiced;
and either stumble or fall in the way undertaken by them, or have no heart to
go forward, but either directly retire or saint.

2. It expresses or implies such an Offense, that either they are kept off
from Christ, or else drawn away from him.

1. Some are kept off by their Carnal Prejudices, or offense they take at
somewhat of Christ, and so continue in their unbelief; thus Christ is said to
be a Rock of Offense to the Disobedient, 1 Pet. 2. 8. that is, the impenitent
and unbelieving World, who out of indulgence to their Lusts, slight an offered
Savior.

2. Others are drawn from him: as those that had carnal Expectation when they
were disappointed; Joh. 6. 6. From that time many of his Disciples went back,
and walked no more with him. This is the Offense, when we are either
discouraged from, or in the ways of Godliness.

I now come to show you,

Secondly, Upon what Occasions were Men then offended in Christ: They were
displeased with his Person, Sufferings, Doctrine.

1. His Person: They were somewhat alarmed with his Miracles, and the Wisdom of
his gracious Speeches; but how to reconcile this with the meanness of his
Person, they were at a loss; sometimes his birth and breeding were a distaste
to them; Matthew. 13. 55, 56. Is not this the Carpenter's Son? is not his Mother
called Mary? and his Brethren, James, Joses, Simon, Judas? And his Sisters, are
they not all with us? Whence then has this Man all these things? And they were
offended in him. So, Mark 6. 3. Is not this the Carpenter, brought up in the
same Trade with Joseph? Thus upon the consideration of his mean and known
beginning, they forsook him. Sometimes they quarrelled at his Country, not
where he was born, but bred: He was born in Bethlehem, but bred in Nazareth,
which was in Galilee: And Galilee, as they conceived, was looked upon by God,
as a mean and despicable place; John 7. 52. Art thou of Galilee, (speaking to
Nicodemus) search and look, for out of Galilee arises no Prophet: This was the
common conceit, for Iona was of that Country. So, John 7. 41. When some said,
This is the Christ; others said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee? that Country
was under ^ reproach: Nay, a good Man was possessed with this prejudice, John
1. 46. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? And Philip says, Come and see.
Trial would make him of another Mind. But many good People are led away with
common prejudice, and so overlook Things and Persons of the chiefest regard,
etc. Sometimes they were offended at the meanness of his Followers; John 7. 48.
Have any of the Rulers and Pharisees believed in him? But this People that
knows not the Law, are cursed; that is, the Rabble are ready to follow any
false Teacher; and such ones follow him.

2. They were offended at his Doctrine, the Mysteriousness of it; as when he
had spoken of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, they could not tell
what to make of it. If it signified any thing, it signified his Death, and that
was a Point not to be touched upon in the hearing of them, that expected a
glorious pompous Messiah, that should subjugate other Nations to them.
Therefore Christ says, Does this offend you? John 6. 61. Yea, the Offense was
so great, that many of his Disciples went backward, and walked no more with
him, verse 66. Sometimes they were offended at the Holiness of it; as when he
pressed the Pharisees, who were altogether for external Observances, to look
after an i^ward Cleansing. Mat. 15. 12. Know thou not that the Pharisees
were offended after they heard this saying? This was a great distaste to them,
to hear that a Man is defiled by Sin, and not at all by Meats, and that the
washing of the Heart is the chief thing.

3. The great stumbling block of all, was his Sufferings: This offended Good
and Bad; The Good, Mat. 26. 31. All of you shall be offended because of me this
night: For it is written, I will smi^e the Shepherd, and the Sheep of the Flock
shall be scattered abroad. And Peter says, Though all Men shall be offended
because of thee, yet will I never be offended, verse. 33. The Bad: This was the
great Stumbling Block to the Jews, 1 Cor. 1. 23. We preach Christ crucified,
unto the Jews a stumbling block. By this they f^d their obstinacy and
prejudice; they could not believe that he that was crucified as a Malefactor,
was the Son of God, and the Savior of the World.

Thirdly, Was it not proper to that Age only? I Answer: No, We also may be
prejudiced and guilty of this Sin, of being offended in Christ. You will say,
What danger is there of that now, since Christ is publicly owned, and
Christianity in fashion, and the World run into the Church?

I shall show you; 1. That there is danger still. 2. What is likely to offend
since Christ's Exaltation.


1. There is danger still.

(1.) Because though the Name of Christ be had in honor, yet the stricter
profession and practice of Godliness, is under reproach; and the nominal,
hates the serious Christian; tho both own the same Bible, believe the same
Creed, and are baptized with one and the same Baptism, into the same
Profession: Those that are false to their Religion, will m^lign and scorn those
that are true to it, and live up to the Power of it: As there is no commerce
between the Living and the Dead, so no true friendship between the Carnal and
the Heavenly. Among the outside Christians, it will be matter of Reproach to
be serious and diligent; and they that are so, will be accounted more precise
and nice, than wise. No wonder if they slight you, who first slight God, and
Christ, and their own Salvation.

(2.) It may happen, that the stricter sort of Christians, are the poorer sort;
and such as carry no great port and appearance in the World: And so, though
they be precious in the Eyes of God, yet they may be despised by Men.
Strictness of Religion is many times looked upon by some, as too mean a thing
for Persons of their Rank and Quality; and so whilst the Poor receive the
Gospel, they, to keep up their greatness, go the broad way to Hell; these are
offended in Christ. In Salvian's Time; Quantus in Christiano populo honor
Christi est, ubi religio ignobilem facit: Coguntur esse mali neviles habeantur.
Religion makes them base, and Men are compelled to be evil, that they may not
be scorned and disgraced. Now we should resolve to be more vile for God, 1 Samuel
6. 22.

(3.) Though Men be not distasted against Christianity in whole, yet in part:
though they be not offended in Christ altogether, yet they take offense at some
of his ways, wherein his Glory and Interest is concerned. In the Age that we
live in, many of those things that f^ll within the Conscience, and compass of
our Duty, may be under a cloud and disesteem: Now they that have received light
about these things, should not be offended, though the generality of the World
decry and oppose them. Christ gets up by degrees; and where the Main of
Religion is received, yet all the parts and branches of it are not received,
which must be required in their place; and though we are not always bound to
the positive profession of lesser things, yet we are bound negatively; we must
do nothing against the Truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. We must not renounce a Truth,
because it is run down by vulgar Prejudice, but in all meekness of Wisdom own
the better way: Such constancy of mind is expected from a good Man, who
consults with Conscience, rather than Interest.

(4.) The World may not be able to bear the owning of these Truths; and
therefore those who set them afoot, may be disgraced, afflicted, and
reproachfully used; but the knowledge of an hated Truth, is a greater Argument
of God's Favor, than the prosperity of the World. Prove. 3. 32. Envy thou not
the Oppressor, and choose none of his ways; for the Froward is an abomination
unto the Lord, but his Secret is with the Righteo^s.

(5.) There is no Man in the World, but if he run up his refusal of Christ, or
his impenitency and unbelief to its proper Principle, he will find it to be
some offense or dislike; either because of the inward constitution of his Mind,
or the external state of Religion in the World: Either he cannot bring his
Heart to suit with the strictness, purity, and self-denial of Christ's
Religion, or Christ's Religion to suit with his Heart: As the young Man, Mark
10. 22. He was sad at that saying, and went away grieved, for he had great
Possessions. Or else if both suit, the World likes not the Match; so that it
comes to this Point, That he must be an Enemy to God, or the World: James 4.
4. Ye Adulterers, and Adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the
World is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a Friend of the World, is
the Enemy of God.

2. What is likely to offend, since Christ's exaltation of his Person in
Heaven, and his Religion in the Word?

(1.) The many Calamities which attend the Profession of it: John, who was his
forerunner, was now in Prison when Christ spoke these words; and Christ
foretells grievous Troubles and Afflictions; Mat. 24. 10. -- And then many
shall be offended. And he foretells us, that we may not be offended: John 16.
1. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended, that
is, scandalized by the Hazards which attend Christ's Service, or take occasion
to alienate themselves from him, yet all will not do; Mat. 13. 21. When
Persecution arises for the Word, by and by he is offended. A Man is offended,
when he finds that which he did not look for. Many promise themselves ease
and peace in Christianity; and when it falls out otherwise, they dislike what
they formerly seemed to prize.

(2.) They may take offense at Christ's Doctrine; at the Purity, the
Self-denial, the Simplicity; the Mysteriousness of it.

1. The Purity of it: To Holy Men, this is an Argument of Love; Psalm. 119. 140.
Thy Word is very pure, therefore thy Servant loves it. But to the Carnal, of
dislike and offense; John 3. 20. Every one that does evil, hates the Light;
neither comes he to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved. They have
somewhat to conceal, somewhat which they are loath to part with. And so, lest
they should be found faulty, and engaged to reform themselves; they cannot
endure the Light of the Gospel, and are offended at Christ's strict Doctrine,
as sore Eyes are at the brightness of the Sun: This Light is not only shining,
but scorching.

2. The Mortification, and Self-denial of it. Mortification respects our Lusts,
and Self-denial our Interest: Our Worldly Interests are the Baits of our Carnal
Desires or Lusts: Now to crucify the Flesh, or deny the World, are both
distastful to Flesh and Blood. And therefore they are apt to say, This is an
hard saying. And what strange Doctrine is this? 1 Pet. 4. 4. They think it
strange, that you run not with them to the same excess of riot. It Is matter of
great admiration, that others should abandon their course of Life. The
sweetness of Christ's Service, is wholly hidden from them; therefore they hate
that Religion which they do profess, and all that are serious in it: They think
strange God should plant desires in them, which he would not have to be
satisfied: But they do not distinguish between what Nature craveth, and
Corruption lusts after: That the inordinacy is from themselves; and therefore
have a secret dislike of Christ in their Souls, because they would do what they
list, not what they ought. They would not be fettered by any of his Laws, or
look upon that Fruit as forbidden, which corrupt Nature has a longing unto, as
if all necessary restraint were a kind of Prison to them.

3. The simplicity and plainness of the Gospel, void of humane Wisdom, and
excellency of words. It is a plain thing, teaching the way how Sinners may
return to God and Blessedness. This Doctrine is clad in the simple attire of a
vulgar style; and this was the offense of the Gentiles, who would be gratified
with Eloquence and profound Knowledge: 1 Cor. 1. 22. The Jews require a Sign,
and the Greeks seek after Wisdom; that is, the Jews who were trained up in
extraordinary Dispensations, they would have Miracles and Prodigies from
Heaven: The Gentiles look for profound Philosophy in the Gospel, and scorn it,
because they find it not there: Their offense was, because they found not
matter of Dispute, but Practice; for they were altogether bred up in the
uncertain Debates of their Philosophers: But little did these mind that there
was a sublimity of Wisdom in this plain Doctrine, (1 Cor. 2. 6. We speak wisdom
among them that are perfect; yet not the Wisdom of this World, etc.) as
discovering the true way of easing the Conscience, and the nature of true
Happiness; which were the two things about which the wisest and profoundest of
them spent all their Thoughts and Speculations: Nor did they mind this, That
Laws would lose their Authority, if not delivered in a plain style; nor would
our Duty so clearly be stated by Man's Reason, as by God's Authority. When it
is to be found out by Man's Reason, it is left more to the uncertainty of
Dispute. Bare Nature is an hard Book to study in, nor are the Lessons of it so
easily found out. While the wise Men of the World were debating about Felicity
and Happiness; Practical Godliness died upon their Hands, and Men strove rather
to be witty than good, and so delivered things more coldly, and not with that
Life, and Power, and Authority, for the reclaiming and reducing Man to his Duty
to God. Like the curious Wits of our Age, who delight to speak finely, rather
than successfully in the Matters of Religion.

4. The Mysteriousness of it, above all natural Reason. The Devil plays on
all hands; sometimes the Doctrine of the Gospel is too plain, sometimes too
mystical. It cannot enter into their Hearts to conceive how God should be
distinguished into three Persons; how God should become Man, and the like: and
therefore scoffing Atheists, such as are rife in the latter days, question all:
And having lost the Light of their Reason, yet retain the pride of their
Reason, and are objecting all the Difficulties they can think of, against the
Truth of the Word of God; and are apt to say as Nichodemus, John 3. 9. How can
these things be? Till they see a Reason for every thing, they will not own it.
Indeed, we must see a Reason why we believe every thing, and that is, Divine
Revelation contained in the Word of God; but we cannot always see a reason of
every thing which we do believe, for many things are Mysteries, and we receive
them as we do Pills, not chew, but swallow them; we take them upon the Credit
of the Revealer: to chew, produces a loathsome ejection, to swallow an
wholesome Remedy. Believing in the common Notion of it, is a receiving a Truth
upon the trust of another: So it differs from knowing, for then we reason of
our selves; and Divine Faith is a receiving such things as God has revealed,
because he has revealed them: Then our first enquiry is, Whether these things
be so or so? not how they can be so? Therefore we begin at the wrong end, if we
enquire first, How can this be? In many cases, constat de re, the thing is
evident in Scripture; but, non constat de modo, how it can be, is beyond our
reach. Now when we should believe, we dispute, and cavil rather than enquire.
If any thing be not plainly revealed by God, you may reject it without sin; but
if it be, you must not contradict all that you cannot comprehend; The Trinity
of the Persons, in the Unity of the Divine Essence; or how a Virgin should
conceive; o^ how a God can become Man: It Is sufficient that all this is
revealed in Scripture, which carries its own Evidence in its Forehead, and
shines by its own Light, and has the Seal and Stamp of God upon it. In short,
to believe, is not to receive a thing in its own Evidence, but upon the credit
of the Testifier: If you will not credit it, unless the thing be evident in it
self, you do not believe Christ, but your own Reason; and instead of being
thankful for the Revelation, you quarrel with his Truth, because it is somewhat
above your Capacity: you should captivate your Understandings to the Obedience
of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5.

I now come to show you;

Fourthly, The Kinds of this Sin, of being offended in Christ. Three
Distinctions I shall give you.

1. There is an Offense with Contempt, and an Offense with Discouragement.

1. The Offense with Contempt, is, when we are prejudiced against, or turn from
the Faith; either never embrace it, or quite forsake it. Contempt produces
Unbelief and Disobedience: They are so given over to their sinful Courses, that
they cannot be persuaded to relinquish them; John 3. 19. This is the
condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and that Men love Darkness
rather than Light, because their Deeds are Evil. Nothing will gain them to
submit to Christ's healing Methods, they think he seeks their Loss and Hurt,
rather than their Benefit, because he would reclaim them from their Lusts.
These reject all Admonitions, and remain obstinate and impenitent in their Sins.

2. The Offense with Discouragement: When Men are staggered in their Hope and
Obedience: Troubles are distastful to the Flesh, which seeks its own ease:
Some are discouraged in a greater, some in a lesser degree; Heb. 12. 3. -- Lest
^e wax weary, and faint in your minds. Weariness is a lesser degree of
deficiency, Faintness a greater. These Terms are translated from the Body to
the Mind.

2. There is an Offense of Ignorance, and an Offense of Malice and Opposition.

1. The Offense of Ignorance and Weakness: When Men are carried with a blind
Zeal. -- I verily thought that I ought to do many things against Jesus of
Nazareth, says Paul, Acts 26. 9. Men of a superstitious Conscience, are like a
blind Horse full of Mettle, but ever and anon stumbling. But this is more
pardonable, 1 Timothy 1. 13. Who was before a Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and
Injurious; but I obtained, Mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.

2. There is the Offense of Malice and Opposition, when Men err, not only in
their Minds, but in their Hearts; do not know, and do not desire to know; they
would not know what they know, and are willingly ignorant; Nolentes audire,
quod auditum damnare non possunt, etc. Tertul. in Apol. They have not a mind to
know, that which they have not a mind to do. They would not know the Truth,
because they have a mind to hate it; this is spoken of, Acts 13. 45. They were
filled with Envy, and spoke against those things which were spoken by Paul,
contradicting and blaspheming: This is malice; Men first hate, then persecute
and oppose the Truth. Conviction choked with Prejudices, breaks out into
rage against that way they were convinced of, or the Light of which they cannot
rationally withstand: Herod takes offense against John Baptist, whom he
formerly liked, and then beheadeth him. Light resisted, or not kindly used,
makes a Man turn Devil, that he may the more deface all feelings of
Conscience: This is the malignity of Revolters, Hosea 5. 5. they will hear
nothing to the contrary.

3. There is a Total, and there is a Partial Offense: The Total Offense is,
when Men will give Christ no place in their Hearts, but remain in their
Infidelity; John 8. 24. Because ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in
your sins. When they will take no warning, they shall perish for despising the
Remedy. The Partial Offense is, when they do not receive all of Christ, though
they may be sound in the Main: these are those that the Apopostle speaks of,
That they are saved as by Fire, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Some Doctrine or Practice wherein
they allow themselves, may prove false and unchristian; yet the Man may be
mercifully dealt with by Christ, and freed from having his Portion with
Unbelievers; yet it goes hard with him: as one involved in a common Fire
hardly escapes out of it, their Salvation is more difficult. In short, every
one is more happy, as he is less apt to be offended in Christ; but they are
most unhappy, that are most offended in him.

I now come to show you,

Fifthly, How it is true, that those that escape this Sin, are in the ready way
to Salvation.

To this I answer:

1. The Negative includes the Positive, and must be thus explained: He that is
not offended, but evangelized, has the Power and Virtue of the Gospel stamped
upon his Heart. Blessed is he! Among them that are offended, some forsake and
fall off from Christ, others never come at him: But these believe, so as to be
changed and converted. Nothing hinders them, when Christ has gained their
liking and esteem; for this esteem that we speak of now, is not a simple
speculative Approbation; (for that may be, and no change follow; Romans 2. 18.
Thou approvest the things that are excellent); but a practical comparative
approbation, all things considered, Christ is best for their turns: always a
change follows this esteem; Phil. 3. 8. I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. And till we have this
esteem, there is some secret Offense that we take at Christ, either at his
Person, Doctrine, Precepts, or the bad entertainment they have in the World;
and for the contrarie^y of our Affections, Christ and we do not close with full
complacency and delight.

2. This esteem produces an uniform Obedience: For they that thus esteem
Christ, will study to please him: Delight in our Master, breeds delight in
our Work: Col. 1. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing,
being fruitful in every good Work, and increasing in the Knowledge of God. And,
1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his
Kingdom and Glory. The only way to know whether we be more or less offended in
Christ, is to compare our Conversation and Practice with his Precepts: His
Benefits commend themselves to our Affections, his Precepts to our Consciences;
the one sweeten the other. We have such a good Master, we can never do enough
for him. If we like Christ, nothing will be grievous that he gives us in
charge; 1 John 5. 3. -- His Commandments are not grievous.

3. When we are not offended in Christ, we are the better fortified against
Temptations to Apostasy: They are of three sorts; Errors, Scandals,
Persecutions.

1. Errors: Many are drawn away with vain Pretenses, But we have an unction
from the Holy One, and know all things, John 2. 20. But they are an offense,
not only of Seduction, but Contristation Romans 16. 17. Mark them which cause
Errors and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avid
them; these are Wens of Christ's Mystical Body, not Parts. Errors in the
Church, breed Atheism in the World. Many question the Ways of God, and give
over all Religion; because there are so many Differences and Sects, therefore
they think nothing certain. Certainly God saw this Discipline to be fittest for
his People; he has told us, there must be Errors; he would not have us to take
up Religion upon trust, without the pains of Study and Prayer. Lazy Men would
fain give Laws to Heaven, and teach God how to govern the Affairs of the World,
they would have all things clear and plain, that there should be no doubt about
it. But the Lord in his wise Providence sees it fit to permit these things,
That they which are approved, may be made manifest. To excuse the trouble of a
Search, Study, and Prayer, Men would have all things agreed, else they take
offense at Religion, and that is one means to draw them off, even after
profession. The Canonists say, Non fuisset discretus Dominus Deus, nisi unum
consti^uerit Vniversalem Iudicem. This was their Blasphemy, that God were not
discreet and wise, unless he had appointed one Universal and Infallible
Interpreter. This is Men's natural thoughts; the Jews say, That Christ was not
the True Messiah: Why? Because if he had been, he would not have come in such a
way as to leave any of his Countrymen in doubt; but would so plainly have
discovered himself, that all might know him: So many think Religion is but a
Fancy, and so fall off to Atheism and Sceptieism at last, and irresolution in
Religion, because there are so many Sects and Divisions, and all upholding it
with plausible pretenses. And to excuse Laziness or Prejudice, Men pretend want
of certainty: But God's Word is plain to all that will do his Will, John 7. 17.

2. The scandalous and ^vil Practices of Professors: These do not only infect
but offend many, and cause them to stumble at Religion, or fall into a dislike
of the Way of Salvation. Scandal is far more dangerous than Persecution: In
Persecution, though many be discouraged, yet others are gained to a liking of
Religion: There are many that have been gained by the patience, courage, and
constancy of the Martyrs, but never any were gained by the scandalous falls of
Professors: Persecutions do only work upon our Heart, which may be allayed by
proposal of the Crown of Life: But by scandalous Actions, how many settle into
a resolved hardness of Heart? In Crosses and Persecutions, many Men may have a
secret liking of the Truth, and a purpose to own it in better times: But by
this kind of scandal, Men grow into an open and professed dislike thereof. In
Persecutions, there is not a dislike of Religion it self, but of the hard terms
upon which it must be received: But by Scandals, Men dislike Religion it self,
and nourish a base and vile Opinion thereof in their Hearts, and so they grow
loose and fall off. And this mischief does not only prevail with the lighter
sort of Christians, but many times those which have had some taste, it makes
them fly off exceedingly; Matthew. 18. 7. There will be Offenses, but woe unto
them by whom they come. Christ has told us, all will not walk up to the
Religion they own: But a Man that is not offended in Christ, will not be
offended at the Disorders of those that profess his Way: 1 Ioh. 2. 10. He that
loves his Brother, abides in the Light, and there is no occasion of stumbling
in ^im. All things that offend, will not be taken away till the Reapers come:
Matthew. 13. 41. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall
gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity.
In the mean time, he that loves Christ, and loves his Brother, dares not
reason from some to all, from Persons to the Religion: for Religion is not to
be judged by the Persons that profess it, but the Persons by the Religion.
These things must ever be distinguished, the Rule and the Practice, the Form
and the Power: The Form, Manner, or Model of Truth, may be complete, though the
virtue of this Religion does not prevail over all those that come under the
profession of it. It Is against all Reason, that the excellency of Christ should
stand to the courtesy of Man's Obedience: The Art is not to be judged by the
bungling of the Artist. And then for the other, The Love of the Brethren will
not permit them, that they should judge of all the rest by a few, and those the
worser part: This is, as if a Man should judge of a Street by the Sink or
Kennel, or throw away the whole cluster or bunch of Grapes, for one or two
rotten ones. Shall the Apostles be judged of by Judas? or the good Angels by
the Bad? or Abraham's Family by Ishmael? If some make shipwreck of a good
Conscience, others keep up the Honor and Majesty of Religion, as well as they
disgrace it.

3. The troublesome Poverty, and mean outside of those that profess the Gospel,
and their many Troubles and Calamities: As in Christ's time, the Grandees and
learned Rabbis, did not own Christ. Have any of the Pharisees or Rulers
believed in him? That is, Persons of eminency and place. Celsus the Heathen
makes the Objection, Should a few Mariners, (meaning Fishermen) prescribe to
the World? But God never intended that Truth should be known by Pomp, nor
condemned, or disallowed for Troubles that accompany it: The drift of
Christianity, is to take us off from the hopes and fears of the present World;
therefore he that likes Christ and his Promises, is not likely to be separated
from him by Persecution, Romans 8. ^7. He is held to him, not only by the Head,
but by the Heart.

Now the use that we should make of this, is Caution: Take heed of being
offended in Christ.

I shall, 1. show you who are in danger of it.

2. I shall show you the hainousness of it.

3. What we should do to avoid it.

1. Who are in danger of it? I Answer;

(1.) All such as are hardened in malice and opposition, against those that
profess Godliness; and have a male Talent against Strictness, and are glad when
it meets with any trouble or disgrace: The clearest Evidence will not
convince these Men. Such were the froward obstinate Jews, who were hardened, and
believed not, but spoke evil of that way, Acts 19. 9. Again, There are some
that are more moderate, but are discouraged in their first attempts of a godly
Life, and so give over through despondency. The Bullock is most unruly at the
first yoaking: The Fire at first kindling casts forth most smoke; this they
cannot bear, therefore give it over as hopeless. And then partly, the
insincere, whose League with their Lusts was never dissolved. And again, weak
Christians, who are not fortified and rooted in the Love of God, and the Faith
and Hope of the Gospel.

2. I shall show you the hainousness of it.

(1.) It Is unreasonable; whatsoever hinders any Man from coming to Christ, or
embracing the Gospel, it is an Offense not given, but taken. There is nothing in
Christ to make us stumble, and be offended at him; Jer. 2. 5. What Iniquity
have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked
after Vanity, and are become vain? But every thing that may draw our desire or
delight toward him; yet by Men's blindness and ignorance, it is very frequent;
Luke 19. 42. They do not know the things which belong to their peace, in this
their day.

(2.) It Is very natural; we are apt to set stumbling blocks in our own way, and
matter of offense before our own feet. And take up every obvious pretense to
excuse our selves to our selves, from harkening to the Offers of the Gospel:
Flesh and Blood will stumble in God's plainest ways; Hosea 14. 9. The ways of
the Lord are right; the Just shall walk therein, but the Transgressors shall
fall in them. They will count every Molehill a Mountain, and offended at every
thing which concerns God, and their Duty and Obedience to him.

3. A prejudicate Opinion and Malice is always apt to pick quarrels at Truth
and Goodness; Acts 17. 5, 6. The Jews which believed not, moved with Envy, took
unto them certain lude Fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a Company, and
set all the City on an uproar, and assaulted the House of Jason, and sought to
bring them out to the People: and when they found them not, they drew Jason,
and certain Brethren, unto the Rulers of the City, crying, These which have
turned the World upside down, are come hither also. So, Chap. 18. 6. They
opposed themselves, and blasphemed.

4. It Is a dangerous Sin: If we continue to be offended in Christ, Christ will
be offended at us at the last day. We get nothing by dashing against the
Cornerstone, we hurt not Christ, but our selves. Mat. 21. 44. Whosoever shall
fall on this Stone, shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will
grind him to powder.

3. What shall we do to avoid it?

1. Get a clear Understanding, or a Zeal according to Knowledge; Romans 10. 2. and
John 9. 39. For judgment I am come into the World, that they which see not,
might see, and they which see, might be made blind. This will be the effect of
my coming, that the Ignorant will be enlightened, and learned Men will not see
the things before their eyes; they were hardened and left to their own
prejudices.

2. Get a good measure to mete things withal. The Jews were offended in Christ,
because they were leavened with a notion of a pompous Messiah; and so judged of
all things concerning Christ, as they suited with that conceit: So John 7. 24.
Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous Judgment. We judge
according to appearance, but judge not righteous Judgment: This is no good
measure, but an Idol of our Hearts. Many are in an evil way, but yet want not
their pretenses: As the Tradition of the Elders, Matthew. 19. 2. And Succession,
John 8. 33. The Novelty of Christ's Doctrine; Mark 1. 27. What new Doctrine is
this? The vile abject condition of Christ and his Disciples: They never enter
into the merits of the Cause, but determine it by prejudicate Opinions: A good
measure therefore is necessary; there is mensura mensurans, and mensura
mensurata, a measure measuring, and the measure that is measured; the measure
that is measured, is an upright unbiassed Mind.

3. Labor to get a mortified Heart: They are most apt to be scandalized, that
have a carnal biass upon their Hearts, a contrariety of affections to the
Gospel, Luke 16. 14. John 5. 44. and John 12. 42, 43. who are leavened with
covetousness, jealousy of reputation, fear of disgrace, and the like.

4. Get a fervent Love: Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they which love thy
Law, and nothing shall offend them. It Is want of a true and hearty love that
makes us so easy and apt to take offense.

A secoud use that we make of it is this, Be sure to take heed of Prejudices
against practical Godliness.

1. Some take prejudice against the necessity of Regeneration: But surely there
is a necessity of fitting us anew to the use and end for which we were made:
For the Use, see Ephesians. 2. 10. and for the End, John 3. from the third to the
fifth verse.

2. Another prejudice is, the difficulty of a godly life, Mat. 19. 25. With Men
it is impossible, but with God all things are possible; use will make it easy;
at first it is most hard and tedious.

3. Another Prejudice, is the Persecutions which attend it: God will have his
Servants and Graces tried. They that go to Sea, must look for Wind and Waves;
but in the Haven we shall have rest: In Heaven we shall enjoy full and eternal
rest.

Wisdom is justified Of her CHILDREN.
MAT. 11. 18, 19. For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He
has a Devil.

The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold, a Man
gluttonous, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners: but Wisdom is justified of her
Children.


IN this Context, Christ had likened the People of the Generation in which he
lived, to Boys playing in the Streets, and personating (as Children are given
to imitate what they have seen in Elder Persons) sometimes Festivities, acting
the part of a Musician, but their Fellows danced not; Sometimes Funerals,
acting the part of the Mourning Women who were to weep for the dead, cry, Ah,
my Brother! but they upbraided their Fellows, that they would do nothing as
they should, neither follow them in their Mirth, nor sadness. So the people of
that Generation, whatsoever Messages God sent unto them, they accepted them not
and obeyed them not. Some great Exceptions they had still to the Messengers
employed: one kind of Exception they have to John, and the quite contrary to
Jesus; and so they are not pleased, neither full nor fasting, as we say. Their
censure of John was, That he was an Hypocondriack, or a frantic Fellow; the
Devil was in him, that he was so austere. But Christ, that was gentle and
affable, they censure him as a loose Person, or favorer of such. For John came
neither eating and drinking, and they say, He has a Devil: The Son of Man came
eating and drinking, and they say, a Man gluttonous, and a Friend of Publicans
and Sinners: But Wisdom is justified of her Children.

In the words, three Things are observable.

1. The different Form and Course of Life wherein John and Christ appeared. 2.
Their Censures both of John and Jesus. 3. The receiving of the Gospel by the
unprejudiced.
1. The different Course of Life wherein John and Christ appeared: John came
neither eating, nor drinking: that is, lived in a strict austere Course of
Life, not after the ordinary Diet of Men; for we read he had his Raiment of
Camels Hair, and a leathern Girdle about his Loins, and his Meat was Locusts
and wild Honey: But the Son of Man came eating and drinking, that is, using the
ordinary Diet of Men, and eating promiscuously with all company, in a more free
use of the Creatures, taking the fare as he found it, and conversing with all
sorts of Men in a familar Course of Life: Sometimes with Publicans, as Zacheus:
sometimes with Pharisees, as Simon, Luke 7. He observed no such abstinency, but
ate Meats indifferently: sometimes he had nothing but barely Bread and Water;
sometimes he was at Feasts, and using Wine, and conversed with Men
indifferently.

2. Their Censures both of John, and Jesus: John has a Devil; that is, he is a
Person possessed, out of his wits: For the Jews ascribed all Distempers to the
Devil. And of Christ, their censure was, That he was a Glutton, and a Friend of
Publicans and Sinners.

3. The reciving of the Gospel by the unprejudiced; But Wisdom is justified of
her Children. This last clause, needs opening; that we may know what is
Wisdom, who are her Children, and how they justify it.

1. By Wisdom is meant, the Doctrine of the Gospel, called elsewhere, The
Counsel of God; as appears by the parallel place, Luke 7. 29, 30. And all the
People that heard him, and the Publicans, justified God, being baptized with
the Baptism of John: But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the Counsel of God
against themselves. The Gospel is called Wisdom, because it is the result of
God's eternal Wisdom. The Doctrine of Christ Crucified, is called, The Wisdom
of God, 1 Cor. 1. 22. And again, 1 Cor. 2. 7. The Wisdom of God in a Mystery.

2. The Children of Wisdom, are the Professors of it: It Is an Hebraism; As
Children of Corath; Children of Light; Children of this World, etc. the
Professors, and Followers of the Gospel. Wisdom has her Children; all are not
alike indisposed, some are begotten to God by the Doctrine of Grace.

3. Justified. As this is opposed to Crimination; so to justify, is the work of
an Advocate. As it is opposed to Condemnation, so it is the work of a Judge.
Wisdom's Children will bear witness to their Faith, or the Doctrine of God by
their Profession, and Godly Life, and ready Obedience: And exalt it as much as
others decry it, and every way manifest that they hold it for good and right.

Many Points might be observed hence: As,

1. That God sends forth his Servants with diverse dispositions: Some more
austere in Life, others more social in their Carriage: some sad and mournful,
others cheerful and pleasant: some more thundering in Doctrine, others more
gently inducing people to Repentance. Since God makes use of variety of Gifts
and Tempers; Let us observe this Wisdom, not bring all to the Law of some
admired Instance and Example: As there is a difference of Stomachs, some for
Meats baked, or roasted, others for boiled; so God fits his Servants severally
to do good, as the Persons they are to treat with need.

2. That Men are qualified according to the dispensation wherein God uses
them: John, as a Preacher of Repentance, was austere: Christ, as a giver of
Pardon, mild and affable: John was to come in the Spirit and Power of Elias;
and therefore to imitate him in his Course of Life: He was sent forth to raise
and awaken a sleepy World, besotted in security: But Christ who was to come
with the glad Tidings of Salvation, and to call Sinners to Grace and Pardon,
chose to appear in a meek, sweet, and social way of converse, that his
Benignity in drawing the most grievous Sinners to himself, might thereby be
manifested.

3. That Men are apt to complain, quarrel, and except against what is done by
God, and whatsoever Methods are used to reduce them to a sense of their Duty.
Both John and Jesus were sent by God, but Men have ever somewhat to say: John
is too rough and austere; and Christ too sociable, and familiar with Sinners:
They dislike the Severity of the one, and the free Converse of the other. So in
other Cases, old Men, they say, dote; young Men are too rash: some they find
fault with, because they are so facil and easy; with others, because they are
obscure and deep: People are always unsatisfied.

4. That neither the Severity of the Law, nor the glad Tidings of Salvation,
will of themselves work upon Men, unless God set in by his Spirit: For both the
Dispensation of John and Jesus was without its effect.

5. Though some obstinately refuse the Gospel, yet others accept of it, and
live accordingly: Wisdom has her Children, who justify and defend her ways as
much as others impugn and oppose them, Acts 17. 34. God seldom lights a
Candle, but he has some lost Groat to seek.

All these Points might be profitably insisted on: But I shall make use of this
Text, to give you this Observation.

That Jesus Christ, when he came to set up the Gospel, did not tie himself to a
Wilderness-life of austerity in total abstinence from common Meat and Wine, as
John the Baptist did, and as they thought that he that professed extraordinary
Sanctity should have done.

In the prosecution of this Point, I shall use this Method.

1. I shall show you, That the Censures of the two Things disliked in Christ,
were not just. 2. Give you the Reasons why he lived, and chose this form and
sort of Life. 3. The profitable Observations that we may build thereon.
1. That the Censures of the two things disliked in Christ, were not just. The
two things disliked in Christ were; (1.) His Diet. (2.) His Company.


(1.) His Diet: He came eating and drinking: He did eat and drink as other Men,
but with great piety, and with great temperance and soberity. His Piety was
remarkable, John 6. 11. And Jesus took the Loaves, and when he had given
Thanks, he distributed them among the Disciples. And, verse. 23. -- Nigh unto
the place were they had eaten Bread, after the Lord gave Thanks. All our
Refreshments should be sanctified; They are great Mercies, though ordinary:
They come down from Heaven, and direct us to seek the Blessing thence, from
whence we have the Comforts themselves: Though we have but slender provisions,
we should be thankful: Christ gave Thanks for five Barley Loaves and two
Fishes. Mark, here he does not mention the Miracle, but the Thanksgiving.
Christ had expressed himself in such a way, as made deep Impression on the
standersby, and would fully convince us, that the blessing of all Enjoyments is
in God's Hand.

(2.) His Temperance and Sobriety is observable; Five Barley Loaves, and two
Fishes were carried about, as the standing Provision for Himself and Family,
Luke 9. 13. Christ's Provision is such as may teach sobriety and contentment
with a mean condition unto all: At another time he beggeth a draught of Water
to quench his Thirst, John 4. 7. And therefore the Exceptions against his Diet
were not just.

2. Against his Company: They accused him of eating with Publicans and Sinners,
in the Text. So Luke 15. 2. This Man receives Sinners, and eats with them:
Because he went to them as a Physician to heal their Souls, Luke 5. 30. He
conversed with the meanest, and refused not familiarity with the poorest and
worst, as was needful for their Cure. The Pharisees thought it to be against
all Decorum, that he would spoke and converse with all sorts of People,
Publicans and Harlots not excepted: But Christ coming to save all sorts of
People, it was necessary that he should Converse with all sorts of People.

2. The Reasons why he lived, and chose this sort of Life.

1. Because he would not place Religion in outward Austerities and Observances:
Men superstitiously appoint to themselves unnecessary Tasks, and, forbid
themselves many lawful Things, and this they call by the name of Holiness. When
Satan who is usually a Libertine, pretends to be a Saint; He will be stricter
than Christ Himself: As the Pharisees were in the choice of their Company and
outward Observances. Christ foresaw this Spirit would be working in the World:
Touch not, taste not, handle not, after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men,
Col. 2. 21, 22. That Men were apt to place Religion in a simple abstinence from
the common Comforts of Life, under a pretense of more than ordinary
mortification: neither eat, nor taste, nor touch: over-doing in Externals, is
usually an undoing in Religion: The Quaker's Spirit, and the Monkish Spirit, is
an Apochryphal and bastard sort of Holiness, a Spirit that suiteth not with the
Temper of the Gospel, and the example of Christ.

2. Christ would live a strict, but sociable and charitable Life, and did not
observe the Laws of proud Pharisaical separation, but spent his time in doing
good, and healing all manner of bodily Diseases, and instructing the Souls of
Men upon all occasions: There is a disposition in Men by a foolish singularity,
to stand aloof from others: The Prophet touches it, Isa. 65. 5. They said,
Stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am holier than thou. Some then,
though impure and profane, would seem holier than others, and counted all
unclean and polluted besides themselves: This Spirit rested in the Pharisees in
Christ's time, Luke 5. 30. The Scribes and Pharisees murmured against his
Disciples, saying, Why do you eat and drink with Publicans and Sinners? So,
Luke 7. 39. If this Man had been a Prophet, he would have known who, and what
manner of Woman this is that touches him; for she is a Sinner. And afterward
the whole People of the Jews were possessed with this Spirit, and would not
endure that any should converse with the Gentiles, as fearing to be defiled by
them. Now Jesus Christ would not countenance this enclosing Spirit; coming to
do good to all, he would converse with all.

3. Jesus Christ coming into the World as to redeem us to God, so to set us an
example, would take up that course of Life which was most imitable by all sorts
of Persons, and calculated as for the Honor of God, so for the Benefit of
Humane Society. He intended his Religion, not only for Recluses and Votaries,
but for Men of all Conditions, Professions, and Employments: and therefore
would not fright us from Religion by affected Austerities, but invite us to it
by a sanctified converse with all kind of Companies: And no Man now can excuse
himself, saying, That he cannot imitate the form of Christ's Living, since it
is competent to all kind of Persons, even those who are not shut up, but whose
Callings engage them to be abroad in the World: For it is Religion that puts us
upon the discharge of all Duties to God and Man: The sum of it is comprised in
the Love of God above all, and our Neighbor as our selves. We love all, even
Enemies, with that common Love which is due to Humanity; and all that fear God
with a special Love. Now this may be exercised in the Shop, better than in the
Cloister and solitudes; and wherever we go, we may go about doing good: And
this may be done by all sorts of Persons, Princes, and Peasants, Noblemen or
Tradesmen, as well as Ministers and People of a more retired Life.

4. Coming into the World, to set up the Kingdom of God, it was sit his Form of
Life should suit with the Nature of that Kingdom. John Baptist tells them,
The Kingdom of God is at hand; and Christ himself, That the Kingdom of God was
come, and was among them. Now what is the nature of this Kingdom of God? The
Apostle tells you, that, Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God stands not in Meat
and Drink, but in Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. There are
two expositions of that place, and both equally probable; the one more general,
the other more limited and restrained to the Context: More general, That
Righteousness is taken for all new Obedience, and Peace for peace of
Conscience, resulting from the rectitude of our Actions; and joy in the Holy
Ghost, for that supernatural comfort which the Holy Ghost puts into our Hearts,
by reflecting upon our Privileges in Christ, and the Hopes of the World to
come. Now Christianity consists not in eating, or not eating such or such
Meats, or such kind of Observances, but in solid Godliness, or in the practice
of Christian Graces and Virtues. The more limited sense is, That by
Righteousness is meant just dealings; by Peace, a peaceable, harmless,
inoffensive sort of living; by Joy in the Holy Ghost, a delight to do good to
one another; to advance and build up one another in Godliness, not dividing,
hating, excommunicating, censuring one another for lesser Things and mere
Rituals, but pleasing our Neighbor to edification, Romans 15. 2. and 1 Cor. 10.
31, 32, 33. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory
of God: give no offense, neither to Jews nor Gentiles, nor to the Church of
God: even as I please all men in all things, not seeking my own profit, but the
profit of many, that they may be saved. This meek, holy, charitable converse to
the Glory of God, without offense and scandal, is that which promoteth God's
Kingdom: And this would Christ teach us in his own form and course of Life,
conversing in a sanctified manner with all sorts of Persons to their profit and
benefit.

5. Because Christ would not gratify Humane Wisdom: As he would not gratify
Sense, by choosing a pompous Life; so he would not gratify Humane Wisdom, by
choosing an austere Life. There are two sorts of Men in the World who are not of
God; the Men of the World, and the Saints of this World. The Men of the World
are brutish Sensualists, who are all for Pomp and Glory, Christ would not
gratify these, but came meek and poor, to teach us Humility, Self-denial, and
Contentation; Mat. 11. 29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. He
did not bustle in the World for Respect and Honor: His Complaints of his
Enemies, and his Answers to them, were full of Meekness, and stood not to abase
himself for the Father's Glory and Men's Good: so he did not gratify the Men of
the World. The Saints of this World are such as are strict in outward
Observances, in eating or not eating, in marrying or not marrying, in
forbearing such Company, in such a number and tale of Devotions; in abstaining
from such lawful things: These things the Apostle says have a show of Wisdom,
Col. 2. 23. The World is mightily taken with bodily Exercise, and outward
Strictness: As the Men of the World love to pamper the Body, so the Saints of
this World needlessly afflict and dishonor the Body: This has a show, and
nothing but a show; but Christ would not gratify these neither; he used a free,
but an holy Life, and so was censured and traduced as a Wine-bibber and a
Glutton, to teach his Followers to be contented to be judged according to Men
in the Flesh, and live to God in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 4. 6. He came to preach,
and to give inward Regeneration and Renovation. To show the proper way of
Mortification, which is not by a severity of Life, but by deadning the mind to
the esteem of the World. That kind of Life which consists in outward Rigors,
has some honor and reputation in the World, and makes a fair show in the
Flesh; but he would teach us the Life which consists in Faith, Holiness,
Sobriety, Humility of Mind, Charity, Obedience to God, Joy in the Spirit, and
comfort of the Promises, which the World likes not so well; outward and
rigorous Observances are more plausible, but the Power of Godliness, and a true
sense of the World to come, the World hates.

6. To show us the true nature of Mortification, which consists not in a bare
abstinence, and shameful retreat from Temptations, but in a Spirit fortified
against them: not in a monkish discontent with the World, but an holy contempt
of it when we most freely use it. And in bridling and governing the Appetite
and Desire, rather than in scrupulous refraining from the Object it self. In an
using of the World, but not abusing of it, 1 Cor. 7. 31. Not so much scrupling
the Comforts of the present Life, as a valuing and esteeming the Comforts of a
better Life; prising more the Christian Vow, than any Bylaws of our own. The
Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 4. 8. That bodily Exercise profits little, but
Godliness is profitable to all things. Abstinence from daily Meats, Wines,
Marriage, is an act of Self-denial, but a very small one; for all the good it
does, is to tame the Members of the Body, and its external Motions and Actions,
without sanctifying the Heart and inward part, as a lively Faith, Fear and Love
of God does. The profit of bodily Exercise, is little in comparison of inward
Piety, which is necessary to a comfortable Life here, and a blessed hereafter.

Thirdly, The Observations which we may build thereon.

1. We may observe the Humanity, Goodness, and Kindness of that Religion which
we do profess, both with respect to our selves and others.

(1.) Our Selves. Man consists of a Body and a Soul, and has respects for
either, else he were unnatural: The Body indeed we are apt to overprize, and
therefore we need not ^^^pur but a Bridle for our Affections to the bodily
life. And therefore Religion, in the Precepts of it, interposeth by way of
restraint, rather than exhortation; Titus 2. 12. That we should live soberly,
etc. And, Romans 13. 14. Make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts
thereof. Do not cherish carnal Desires. The Apostle tells you, No Man ever
yet hated his own Flesh, Ephesians. 5. 29. but nourishes and cherishes it. Our
usual fault is, an excessive pampering of the Flesh: Some have hated their own
Souls, at least by consequence and interpretation; therefore we dare not let
loose the Reins, and give either encouragement or allowance to Men to indulge
their carnal Desires; yet to avoid prejudice, we must grant what may be
granted: for Men are apt to think that Religion is a sower thing, and abridges
them of all the Comforts of their lives. No, besides the rich Comforts it
provideth for the Soul, it allows and forbids not so much sensitive
pleasure, as tends to the holiness of the Soul, and furthereth us in God's
Service: It rebuk^th and forbids nothing but what really may be a Snare to
us: It considers all things, Meats, Drinks, Marriage, Wealth, Honors, and
Dig^^ties of the present World, as they have respect to God and a better World,
and as they help and hinder us in the pleasing God, and seeking Immortality.

(2.) With respect to others. The Spirit of our Religion may be known by the
Example of our dearest Lord: It Is not a proud disdainful Spirit that refuses
the company of the meanest and worst, so we may do them good: He came to save
Sinners, and conversed with Sinners: He came to redress the miseries of
Mankind, and went up and down doing good; tho his familiarities were with the
most godly, yet he disdained not the company of others: And surely his
Religion, where it prevails in the Hearts of any, it causes them not only to
deal justly with all, but to love all, all Mankind, with a love of Benevolence;
it makes us to long for the good of their Souls, and desirous also to do good
to the Bodies of those that are in need. It Is said indeed, Prove. 29. 27. An
unjust Man is an abomination to the just: and he that is upright in the way, is
an abomination to the wicked. But we must distinguish of the hatred of
Abomination, and the hatred of Enmity: We hate our sinful Neighbor, as we must
our selves much more, in opposition to the love of Complacency, but not in
opposition to the love of Benevolence; so we must neither hate our selves, nor
our Neighbor, no nor our Enemy. The business of your lives must be, to do good
to all, especially to the Household of Faith: God's Natural Image is on all Men,
his Spiritual Image on his Saints: and we must love God in all his Creatures,
especially in his Children. This is true Religion, consecrated by our Lord's
Example.

Secondly, We may observe, That an External Holiness, which consists in an
outside strictness, without that Faith, Love, Charity, Hope, usefulness and
activity which is the very soul and life of Christianity, usually puffs up
Men with a vain conceit of their own Righteousness, and a censuring and a
despising of others. This Text shows us both the Spirit of Pharisaism, and
the Spirit of Christianity. The Pharisees who abounded in outward Observances,
censured Christ for his free Converses, and disdained those Sinners whom he
invited to a better life, Luke 18. 9, 10, 11, 12. And they were ignorant of
true Wisdom, which is justified, embraced, and received by all her Children.
Learn then, that an unruly, fierce, censorious Spirit, which is only born up by
external advantages, is not the right Spirit of the Gospel. True Religion
makes men humble and low in their own eyes, acquainteth them with their
Desert, Sin, and Misery, and makes them pitiful and compassionate to others,
and more ready to help them, than to censure them, and to use all ways and
means to do them good.

Thirdly, The main Observation is this, That a free Life, guided by an holy
Wisdom, is the most sanctified Life, and brings most honor to God, and is
most useful to others.

Here I shall show you,

1. Wherein lies this free life guided by holy Wisdom.

2. How it is the most sanctified life.

1. Wherein lies this free life guided by holy Wisdom. It Is said of Enoch,
Genesis 5. 22. That he walked with God, and begat Sons and Daughters: that is,
dedicated himself to God's Service, and lived in most strict Holiness. And
there you see the use of a conjugal life in its purity, may stand with the
strictest Rules of Holiness. So for worldly Affairs, when the course of our
calling ingageth us in them, it is not using of the World, but over-using is the
fault, 1 Cor. 7. 31. So for the Comforts of this life: Psalm. 62. 10. If Riches
increase, set not your heart upon them. The business is not to withdraw them
away, but to withdraw the Affection. So for the lawful Delights; there are two
extremes, clogging and retrenching our liberty with outward burdensome
Observances, or abusing our liberty to wantonness; Gal. 5. 13. Ye are called to
liberty, only use not your liberty as an occasion to the Flesh. Corrupt Nature
venteth it self both ways, either by superstitious rigors, or by breaking all
Bonds, and enlarging it self, according to the licentiousness of the Flesh.
Meat, Drink, Apparel, are in their own nature indifferent, neither must
Superstition work upom them, nor Profaneness, and in the mean between both
lies Godliness.

2. How it is the most sanctified life.

1. Partly because it suiteth with the Example of Christ: He came as to expiate
our Offenses, so to give us an Exsample; 1 Pet. 2. 21. Leaving us an Example,
that we should follow his steps: and, 1 John 2. 6. walk as he walked. It Is high
presumption to aim at an imitation of Christ in those acts of his, which he did
for satisfying the Father's Justice, or proving his D^ity; yea, it is impossible
to imitate him in those: yet in Actions moral, we are bound to imitate him, and
in Actions indifferent, not to suffer our Liberty to be str^ightned, but to
govern Circumstances according to that holy Wisdom. Christ retired not from the
society of Men, but used the greatest freedom in an holy way.

2. Because there is more true Grace in being dead to the Temptation, than to
retreat from the Temptation. A Christian is not to go out of the World, neither
by a voluntary Death, John 17. 15. nor by an unnecessary sequestration of our
selves from Business, and the Affairs which God calls us to: 1 Cor. 7. 20.
Let every Man abide in the same Calling wherein he was called. But to be
crucified to the World, Gal. 6. 14. that is Grace to withdraw our Hearts from
the World, while we converse in it, and with it. Many real Christians, when
they hear us press Mortification, and deadness to the World, think they must
leave their Callings, or abate of their necessary activity in their Callings.
Alas, in the Shop a Man may^keep himself unspotted from the World, as well as
in the Closet; in a Court as well in a Cell. We read of Saints in Nero's
Household, Phil. 4. 22. he was a great Persecutor, yet some Saints could live
there within his Gates: There were some Professors of the Gospel. So Rev. 2.
13. I know thy Works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is; and
thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied my Faith, even in those days
wherein Antipas was my faithful Martyr, who was slain among you where Satan
dwells. In the sorest and thickest of temptations, a Christian may maintain
his Integrity. In short, our way to Heaven lies through the World; and tho if
I be left to my choice, I should choose that course of life in which there are
least Temptations; yet when God, by the posture of our temporal Interests, or
the course of our Education, or the nature of my Employment, and usefulness,
has determined me to a life more incident to a throng of Temptations, I may
the better venture upon them, and must not leave my Service for supposed
Snares. Affectation of privacy, may be a slothful retreat from public
Business* and it is more glorious to beat an Enemy, than to fly from him; and
Grace is seen in overcoming, rather than in shunning Difficulties.

Well then, learn from the whole, That true Mortification consists in a change
of the frame of Heart, in a resolution against the baits of sense, rather than
removing our presence from them: in being not of the World, tho we are in the
World: not in casting away our enjoyments, but in an equal mind in all
Conditions, James 1. 9, 10. That to be poor in Abundance, humble in high
Places, temperate and godly in the freest course of life, is to imitate the
life of Christ. That then we are properly mortified, when our esteem, value,
and affection, is mortified. That Grace shows it self more in choice, than in
necessity. In an abstinence from the delights of the Flesh, when we have them,
rather than when we want them: that we may follow our business, and yet be
godly; that the overcharging of the Heart is the great Evil that we should
beware of; that we may use Company, but not to partake of their Sins; yea to
make them better, and to purify them by our example.

I now proceed to the last Clause;

-- But Wisdom is justified of her Children.

We have observed, 1. The different form and course of life wherein John and
Jesus appeared. 2. Their Censures of both. 3. The receiving of the Gospel by
the Unprejudiced.


In this last observe;

1. The exceptive Particle [But]; tho undeserved Censures are cast upon the
Ways of God, yet at length there is a Wisdom found in them. Ignorant Men
mistake them, carnal Men slight them, the Profane snuff at them; few or none
entertain them with that respect they ought to do, yet this Wisdom will not
want Advocates.

2. The thing spoken of, Wisdom. By Wisdom is meant the Doctrine of the Gospel,
called elsewhere the Counsel of God, as appears by the parallel place, Luke
7. 29, 30. And all the People that heard him, justified God, being baptized
with the Baptism of John. But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the Counsel of
God against themselves. The Gospel method of Salvation, is there called the
Counsel of God, because it is the Counsel he gives Men for their good; as here
Wisdom, because it is the result of God's eternal Wisdom and Decrees. And
elsewhere the Doctrine of Christ crucified, is called the Wisdom of God. And
again, 1 Cor. 2. 7. The Wisdom of God in a Mystery.

3. What is said of it, or how it is used; it is justified. Justification is a
R^lative word; as it is opposed to Crimination, so to justify is the work of an
Advocate; as to Condemnation, so it is the work of a Judge. The Children of
Wisdom discharge both parts, chiefly the first; they bear witness to their
Faith, or the Doctrine of God concerning Salvation by Christ; by their
Profession, and godly Life, and ready Obedience; and exalt it so much as others
decry it, and every way manifest they hold it for good and right; only this
pleading is real, not by Word but Deed; Sapientia non quaerit vocis testimonium
sed operam, says Hierom. Divine Wisdom is justified more by Works, than by a
verbal Plea. Wisdom's Children hear her Instructions, follow her Directions and
Institutes; and with diligence observe the way of Salvation prescribed by God,
tho others slight it, and so justify it against the Exceptions and Reproaches
of the carnal World.

4. Of whom; Of her Children. The Children of Wisdom are the Professors of it;
those who are begotten by God, by the Word of Truth, James 1. 18. and are
willing to attain the end, by the ways and means wherein God affords it:
These are Wisdom's Children, begotten, bred up, and instructed by her; it is an
Hebraism, as Children of Corah, Children of Light, Children of this World, and
the like; the Professors and Followers of the Gospel.

The Point that I shall insist on is this;

That the Wisdom of God, leading Men to Salvation, in the ways and means
pointed out in the Gospel, is and should be justified of all the sincere
Professors of it.

In managing this Point, I shall show you, First, What is the Wisdom of God in
the way of Salvation prescribed by the Gospel. Secondly, That this Wisdom is
despised, slighted, and contradicted by the carnal World; and why? Thirdly,
How, and why it must be justified by the sincere Professors of the Gospel.


First, What is the Wisdom of God in the way of Salvation prescribed by the
Gospel. The sum of the Gospel is this, That all th^se who by true Repentance
and Faith, do forsake the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and give up
themselves to God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, as their Creator, Redeemer,
and Sanctifier, shall find God as a Father, taking them for his reconciled
Children, and for Christ's sake pardoning their Sins, and by his Spirit giving
them his Grace; and if they persevere in this course, will finally glorify
them, and bestow upon them everlasting Happiness; but will condemn the
Unbelievers, Impenitent, and Ungodly, to everlasting punishment. That this is
the sum of the Gospel, appears by Mark 16. 15, 16. Go, preach the Gospel to
every Creature. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that
believes not, shall be damned. Where you have all the Christian Religion laid
before you in one short view and prospect. It concerns either the End, or the
Means.

1. The End. The Apostle tells you, That God has brought Life and
Immortality to light in the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. or clearly discovered an
Happiness, and a misery in the World to come.

2. The Means. He has pointed out a sure way for obtaining the one, and
avoiding the other. As to the Means, Christian Religion is considerable, either
as to the entrance, or the progress of it. Our Lord tells us, Mat. 7. 14.
Straight is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads unto Life. He
speaks of a Gate, and a Way: The Gate, notes the Entrance, the Way, the
Progress therein. In other Scriptures we read of making Covenant with God, and
keeping Covenant with God: The Covenant must not only be made, but kept. So
again we read of Dedication and Use: of devotedness to God, and faithfulness to
him; of our Purpose and Progress, Choice and Course; all which expressions tend
to the same effect.

1. As to the way of entering into Covenant with God; there is required,

(1.) True Repentance and Faith. Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 21. Repentance respects God as our End, and Faith
respects Christ as Mediator, as the only way of returning to God, from whom we
have strayed by our own folly and sin.

(2. In the exercise of this Repentance and Faith, there must be a forsaking
the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and a giving up our selves to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier. For the
former, there are three great Enemies to God and us, the Devil, the World, and
the Flesh, reckoned up Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. In time past y^ walked according to the
course of this World, after the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that
now works in the Children of disobedience: Among whom also we all had our
conversation in times past, in the lusts of the Flesh, fulfilling the desires
of the Flesh, and of the Mind. There all your Enemies appear abreast; the Devil
as the grand Deceiver, and principle of all wickedness. The World with its
Pleasures, Honors, and Profits, as the Bait by which the Devil would deceive
us, and steal away our Hearts from God, and divert us from looking after the
one thing necessary. The Flesh, as the corrupt inclination in us, which
entertaineth and closes with these Temptations, to the neglect of God, and
wrong of our own Souls; this is importunate to be pleased, and is the proper
internal cause of all our mischief; for every Man is enticed and drawn away by
his own Lusts. Now these must be renounced, before we can return to God by
Jesus Christ: for, as Joshua told the Israelites, so must we say to all of you,
Josh. 24. 23. Put away the strange Gods which are among you, and incline your
Heart to the Lord God of Israel.

1. There must be a renouncing of our Idols, before our Hearts can incline unto
the true God: We must be turned from Satan to God, Acts 20. 18. And the World
must be renounced, Titus 2. 12. Denying all ungodliness and worldly Lusts. And
we must not look upon our selves as Debtors to the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts
thereof, Romans 8. 10. God will have no Copartners and Competitors in our Hearts.

And then the second part in exercising of our Faith and Repentance, is giving
up our selves to God the Father, Son, and Spirit, as our Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier: And therefore in Baptism, which is our first entrance and
initiation into the Christian Religion, we are baptized in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19. which implies a dedication, and
giving up our selves to them, according to their personal Relations. To the
Father, as our Creator, to love him, obey him, and depend upon him, and be
happy in his love as dear Children. To Christ as our Redeemer, to free us from
the guilt of Sin, and the wrath of God. To the Holy Ghost, to guide and
sanctify us, and comfort us, with the sense of our present interest in God's
Love, and the hopes of future Glory.

Secondly, As to our Progress and Perseverance, which is our walking in the
narrow way: Three things are required. And that,

1. As to the Enemies of God and our Souls. As there is a renouncing required
at first, so at length there is requisite an overcoming, the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh; Rev. 2. 7. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the
Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. We overcome the
Devil, when we keep up our Resistance, and stand out against his Batteries and
Assaults; 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Be sober, be vigilant, because your Adversary the
Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. Whom
resist steadfast in the Faith. We overcome the World, when the terrors and
allurements of it have less force and influence upon us; 1 John 5. 4, 5.
Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World: And this is the Victory that
overcomes the World, even our Faith. Who is he that overcomes the World, but
he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? and, Gal. 6. 14. But God forbid
that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the
World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World. We overcome and subdue the
Flesh, when we have crucified the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.
24. When we get the mastery over the passions and affections thereof: and tho
we be sometimes foiled, yet the drift and bent of our lives is for God, and our
Salvation.

2. As to God, to whom we have devoted our selves. We must love him above all,
and not put him off with what the Flesh can spare, or the World will allow, or
the Devil will suffer us to go on contentedly with; but we must serve him
sincerely, in Holiness and Righteousness all our days, Luke 1. 75. The love and
patient service of our Creator, is our great and daily work.

3. As to our End. We must live in the hope of the coming of Christ, and our
everlasting Glory, Titus 2. 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. And Jude, verse. 21.
Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ unto eternal Life. Well then, as we did at first thankfully accept of
our recovery by Christ, and did at first renounce the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, and consented to follow his direction, and use his means in order to our
final Happiness, so we must still persevere in this mind and resolution, till
our Glory come in hand. This is God's Wisdom.

Secondly, Let us now see how this Counsel of God is entertained by the carnal
World; it is there despised, slighted, and contradicted. The World is a
distracted World; some neglect God's Counsel, and never lay it to heart; Heb.
2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? and Mat. 22. 5. But
they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his Farm, another to his
Merchandise. Some laugh at these things, and make an holy and heavenly life the
matter of their scorn and derision. Luke 16. 14. The Pharisees also, who were
covetous, heard all these things, and they derided him. And, Acts 17. 32. --
Some mocked; and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter --
Howbeit, certain Men clave unto him, and believed. There are others who fasten
odious reproaches on the godly. And tho the Christian Religion be so holy and
innocent in its design, so agreeable to the nature of God and Man, so well
contrived to remedy our Miseries, and to secure our true and proper Happiness;
yet the strictness of it is distasted by the World: By the profane, who have
nothing to excuse their wickedness, it is counted hypocrisy; As deceivers, yet
true, 2 Cor. 6. 8. because they cannot condemn the Life, they judge the Heart:
By them who affect the Vanities of the World, and have a passionate love for
the Pleasures and Honors thereof; because the generality of the World are of
that mind, they brand it with the imputation of foolish singularity. And the
Carnal Politicians, because it was never yet so well with the World, but some
things which God requires are discountenanced, they tax it of disobedience,
and they counted Paul as a mover of Sedition, Acts 25. 5. And because the
Operations of Grace are above the Line of Nature, others tax it of Fanaticism
and Enthusiasm: Atheists who are all for demonstrations of sense, sight, and
present things, because Christianity mainly inviteth to things Spiritual and
Heavenly, and to live upon the hopes of an unseen World that is yet to come,
they judge it to be a foppery, or mere imposture, or needless superstition.
Though both the Hopes and Precepts of Religion carry a mavelous compliance
with right-reason, yet none of these things move them. Lastly, There are others
that malign, oppose and oppugn Holiness. There is an everlasting enmity between
the two Seeds; as between the Wolf and the Lamb, the Raven and the Dove; the
World will love its own, and hate those that go a contrary course, John 15. 19.
And as he that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
Spirit, even so it is now, Gal. 4. 29. and so it will be to the end of the
World. When the Powers of the World give any rest, yet the carnal Seed will be
mocking and scoffing, and bringing God's holy Ways into contempt, branding them
with Censures and Calumnies. The Reasons of this, are partly because Men are
drunk with the delusions of the Flesh, and so cannot judge of Spiritual Things;
partly to excuse themselves. Men will be quarreling at Religion, when they have
no mind to practice it; and dispute away Duties, when they are unwilling to
perform them: Partly, they take occasion from the failings of God's People, tho
there is no reason why they should do so. An Art should not be condemned for
the workman's want of skill; but they do so. If Christians be serious to any
degree of sadness, then Religion is counted an uncomfortable thing, it mopeth
them. If there be any differences among God's People, because of their several
degrees of light, oh then there are so many Sects, and Factions, and
Controversies about Religion, they suspect all, and are true to none. If any
creep into the Holy Profession, and pallute it with their Scandals, then all
strictness in Religion is but a pretense and imposture. If Men be strict, and
would avoid every ordinary failing incident to Mankind, then they are more nice
than wise, and this is preciseness and indiscretion. 'Twere endless to rake in
this Puddle, and to reckon up all the Cavils and Exceptions which naughty Men
commense against the Ways of God.

Thirdly, How, and Why it must be justified by the sincere Professors of the
Gospel.

1. How.

I answer; three ways.

(1.) It must be approved and received by themselves. It Is Wisdom's Children
that can only justify Wisdom; they that have entertained it, felt the power and
force of it in their own hearts: yea, their very receiving is a justifying;
they show the clamourings of the World do not move them: Therefore it must be
approved by us, before it can be recommended to others; and approved, not
speculatively only, but practically, so as to resolve to follow after Salvation
in this way. Speculatively, they may approve it that have but (...), Romans 2.
18, and 20 verses; a form of Knowledge, and dishonor it in their practices, as
verse. 23, 24. Men may justify Religion in word, by a bare naked approbation,
and soundly vindicate it from the Cavils and Exceptions of Men. But godly Men
have eyes to see the beauty and excellency of it, and have sincerely accepted
it; Acts 2. 41. They received the Word gladly. 'T is good news to a poor guilty
Conscience, to hear of a pardoning God, and a merciful and faithful Redeemer;
the promise of eternal Life, and a sure way had to come to it. They are said to
justify God, that accepted his Counsel, Luke 7. 29, 30. The Hearts of God's
Children are thoroughly possessed with the reality, excellency, and blessedness
of this Religion; they know and believe the infinite consequence of these
things: Their Faith is a kind of justifying, John 3. 33. He that has received
his Testimony, has set to his Seal that God is true.

2. It must be professed and owned, when it is vilified, and in contempt and
disgrace in the World. We must stand to Christ and his ways, tho we stand
alone; as Elijah, 1 Kings 19. 10. and not be ashamed of Holiness,
notwithstanding trouble and contradiction. Christ will be confessed before Men,
and will be ashamed before God and Angels, of them who are ashamed of him in
the World, and refuse to own Him, and his Ways, and Truths, only because they
are despised, and contradicted, and discountenanced in the World. Pleading for
Religion is one of the professing Acts, 2 Cor. 4. 13. We having the same Spirit
of Faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken:
We also believe, and therefore speak. As David when sore afflicted, did confess
and avow his confidence in God; so we heartily believing and approving the
Gospel, must make a bold profession of it. The Sacraments were ordained for
this purpose, for badges of Profession. Baptism is a visible entering into
Covenant with God; Mark 16. 16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be
saved; and he that believes not, shall be damned. Where not only Belief is
required, but open Profession. Baptism is a Badg and a Bond; a Badg to
distinguish the worshippers of Christ from others, and a Bond to bind us to
open profession of the Name of Christ. The Lord's Supper, it is a profession of
Communion; 1 Cor. 10. 16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the Body of Christ? and, verse. 18. Are not they which eat of the
Sacrifices, partakers of the Altar? They that did any part of the Sacrifices,
did eat and drink with God at the Altar. And, ver. 20, 21. -- I would not that
ye should have fellowship with Devils. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and
the Cup of Devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's Table, and the Table of
Devils. Professing communicating with Christ, is not consistent with professing
communicating with Devils. So Prayer and Praise is a part of Confessing; Romans
10. 10. With the Heart Man beliveth unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation. The first is proved verse. 11. For the
Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him, shall not be ashamed. The second,
verse. 13. For whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.
Calling upon the Name of the Lord in Prayer and Praise; It Is an open professing
Act, by which we own God in Christ for our God. So the assembling our selves
together for public Worship, is a part of this Profession, and must not be
omitted for fear. Heb. 10. 23, with 25. Let us hold fast the profession of our
Faith without wavering. How? verse. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is. These Assemblies were instituted for
public converse with God, testifying their Union and Agreement in the same
Faith and Worship: Indeed, in lesser Truths, that fall within the latitude of
allowable differences in the Church, Profession is not always a Duty, for in
some cases we may have Faith to our selves: But a denying of God, or being
ashamed of him, is always a sin. When called to give an account, we are with
boldness to own our Profession; Acts 4. 10. Be it known unto you all, and to
all the People of Israel, that by the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye
crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him does this Man stand here
before you whole. And, Dan. 3. 17, 18. If it be so, our God whom we serve, is
able to deliver us from the burning fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us out
of thy hand, O King. But if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will
not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image, which thou have set up.

3. This Profession must be honored, and recommended to others, by an holy
Conversation. But now what kind of conversation honors Religion.

1. Such as is carried on with diligence and seriousness: As Noah, Heb. 11. 7.
By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear,
prepared an Ark to the saving of his House; by the which he condemned the
World, and became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith. They behaved
themselves, as those that in earnest believed a Flood, when they made such
through preparation, which was a just reproof to the security and incredulity of
the carnal World. When we do, as we say in good earnest, make preparation for
another World, otherwise Religion is but suspected as a vain pretense, and
empty talk. Then we look after Heaven indeed, then we believe it, when we do
the things that belief binds us unto. A carnal Man that is all talk and no
practice, he does not Religion so much honor in his words, as he does
dishonor it in his works. He lives down his Profession, while he seems to
cry it up, Titus 1. 16. They profess that they know God, but in works they deny
him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.
Contrary motions are an implicit denial of the Faith, 1 Timothy 5. 8. But
laziness and negligence do also foment and breed Atheism; and we carry on the
life of Godliness coldly and faintly, and so our Conversations, which should be
a confirmation of the Gospel, prove a confutation rather. Those that are
Disciples in Name only, the Word of God comes to them in Word only. The
careless Practicer is as bad as he that is haunted with actual doubts about the
Truth of Christianity. The troubled Doubter minds his business, but these
never regard it, and do in effect say, That Christ and his Salvation is not
worth the looking after. As it is said of the Israelites, Psalm. 106. 24. They
despised the good Land, they believed not his Word. Those that resolved to give
over the pursuit of Canaan, are said to doubt of his Promise. So they that
neglect Salvation, do not believe the truth of it, Heb. 2. 3, 4. and tho they
talk high, they secretly propagate their infidelity. The strength of our Faith
should appear by the diligence of our Lives, the seriousness of our Endeavors,
and the fervor of our Duties. Practices do more express the Image of our Minds
than Words. The Faith that issues out into Works, does most commend it self to
others; 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11, 12. That you may fulfill the Work of Faith with Power;
that Christ Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him. Then is Christ
glorified, when you live answerably to your Profession, and do by the Power of
God carry on an Holy Life upon the encouragements of the Promises of the Gospel.

2. Such as is governed by the respects of the other World. When we are patient
and joyful under the Cross, and full of hope and comfort in great straits, and
delight in our Work, which the World hates and discountenanceth, and hope
against Hope, and live in the Promises; Psalm. 119. 111. Thy Testimonies have I
taken as an Heritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart. Then we
justify Wisdom, and commend our Faith to others. God was angry with Moses and
Aaron; Numb. 20. 12. Because ye believed not, to sanctify me in the Eyes of the
Children of Israel. We are not only firmly to believe our selves, but to
sanctify him in the eyes of others; and that is done by the labor of our
Faith, the patience of our Hope, our joyfulness and delight in God, when we
have but little in hand, and the readiness of our Obedience, even under deep
Sufferings. When the Thessalonians had received the Word in much Assurance and
(...), and much joy in the Holy Ghost; The Apostle tells, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 6,
7. They were ^^samples to all that believed in Achaia and Mac^donia, and from
them sounded out the Word of God to other places. Thus we propagate our Faith,
and commend the Truth of God to others. The Life of Faith is a glorious Thing,
but the Life of Sense or Reason has no glory in it, or a Life carried on
merely upon external Probabilities. When we can contemn this World, both the
good and evil things of it, in hopes of a better, and part with all that is
dear to ^s in this World, upon the Conscience of our Duty, then we justify
Wisdom.

3. By an exact purity and holiness, or a full conformity to all God's Precepts
and Institutes, and by a faithful discharging all Duties to God and Men. Every
true Christian should be a transcript of his Religion; 2 Cor. 3. 3. Ye are
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, written not with Ink, but with
the Spirit. An Epistle is that wherein a Man has written his Mind; our
Conversations should be Religion exemplified, a real Sermon, Phil. 2. 16.
Holding forth the Word of Life. The Wax has an impression and stamp left upon
it, according to what is engraven upon the Seal. Then we honor Religion, when
the impression and print of it is left upon our Hearts and Lives, and we are
cast into this Mould. More particularly, Duties of Relations, which are
visible, and easily observed, justify and honor Religion; Titus 2. 10. and 1
Pet. 2. 15. So is the Will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence
the ignorance of foolish Men. These conduce to the good of humane Societies,
are most regarded, and make the ways of God amiable. Thus how Wisdom is to be
justified.

I now come to show you,

2. Why.

1. Because of the charge that is put upon us to testify for God, and justify
his Ways; Isa. 43. 10. Ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord. They that are most
acquainted with God, can most witness for him. So Wisdom's Children can most
justify Her. They are acquainted with her Promises and Precepts, and have
experience of the virtue and power of them, in comforting and changing the
Heart. A report of a report, is a cold thing; they that have felt somewhat in
their Hearts, that which they have seen and felt, they can speak of. The World
needs some Witnesses for God, some Testimony and preparative inducement to
invite them to embrace the ways of God. Miracles served for that use
heretofore; Acts 5. 32. And we are his witnesses of those things, and so is
also the Holy Ghost, whom God has given to them that obey him. And in the
place of Miracles, there succeeded good conversation, or the wonderful effects
of his Spirit. Grace in the Heart and Lives of his Children; this is apt to
beget wonder, as Miracles did, 1 Pet. 4. 4. When they can renounce the Lusts
which most are mastered by, and grow dead to worldly Interests, live in the
World above the World, in the Flesh contrary to the Flesh. A Miracle strikes a
little wonderment at first, but this sinketh and soaketh to the Heart. When Men
are so strictly Holy, so ravishingly Heavenly, and bear up upon the hopes and
encouragements of the other World, and are so conscientious in all Duties to
God and Man, you show that Religion is not a Notion, or an Imagination.

2. Wisdom deserves to be justified by us. What is there in all the Christian
Religion, but what is justifiable, or that we should be ashamed of? Is it the
hopes of it? The hopes of it are such as are fit to be propounded to Man,
sought after by all the World, but no where discovered with such certainty and
distinctness as in the Gospel. Nothing does resine and en^ble the Heart so much
as these hopes; the heavenly Spirit, that can support it self with the hopes of
an unseen Glory, is the only true sublime Spirit: an earthly Spirit, is a base
Spirit, so a sensual, the dregs of Mankind. Amongst Men, the ambitious, who
aspire to Crowns and Kingdoms, and aim at perpetual Fame by their Heroic
Virtues and Exploits, are judged Persons of far greater Gallantry, than
covetous Muckworms or brutish Epicures; yet they are poor base spirited People
in their highest Thoughts and Designs, to that noble and divine Spirit which
works in the breast of those who sincerely and heartily seek Heavenly Things.
For what is the honor of the World to approbation with God? temporal Trifles
to an everlasting Kingdom? Is it the way and means, the first, the terms of
settling our Souls in the way of Faith and Repentance? What more Rational?
Should we return to our Creator's Service without acknowledging our Offense in
straying or humbling our selves for our Errors, and purposing for the future to
live in his Love and Obedience? Or can we expect Mercy without returning?
Reason will say, our case is not compassionable: Or should God quit* his Law
without satisfaction? Or should we not own our Benefactor, the (...)
satisfying? certainly there is (...) reasonable? So also for new (...).
Therefore Wisdom deserves (...) by us.

3. Those that condemn Wisdom, yet do in some measure at the same time justify
it. They condemn it with their Tongues, but justify it with their Consciences:
They hate and fear strictness; Mark 6. 20. Herod feared John, because he was a
just Man, and an holy, and observed him. They sco^f at it with their Tongues,
but have a fear of it in their Consciences: They revile at it while they live,
but what mind are they of when they come to die? Then all will speak well of an
holy Life, and the strictest obedience to the Laws of God; Numb. 23. 10. Let me
die the death of the Righteous, and let my last end be like his. And, Mat. 25.
8. Give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone out. Oh that they had a little
of that holiness and strictness which they sco^fed at, whilst they were
pursuing their Lusts! How will they desire to die? As carnal and careless
Sinners, or as morti^ied Saints? They approve it in These, and condemn it in
Hypothesi. All the opposers and scoffers at Godliness, within the Pale of the
visible Church, have the same Bible, Baptism, Creed, and pretend to believe in
the same God and Christ, which they own with those whom they oppose: All the
difference is, the one are real Christians, the other are nominal; some profess
at large, others practice what they profess; the one have a Religion to talk
of, the other to live by; they approve it in the Form, but hate it in the
Power. A Picture of Christ that is drawn by a Painter they like, and the
forbidden Image of God made by a Carver, they will reverence and honor, and be
zealous for; but the Image of God framed by the Spirit in the Hearts of the
Faithful, and described in the lives of the heavenly and the sanctified, this
they scorn and scoff at.

4. If we do not justify Religion, we justify the World. It must needs be so,
for these two are opposites, the carnal World, and Wisdom: the carnal World
must be condemned, and Religion justified; or Religion will be condemned, and
the World justified. Some condemn the World, Heb. 11. 7. By Faith Noah being
warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark to
the saving of his House; by the which he condemned the World, and became Heir
of the Righteousness which is by Faith. Some justify the World, as Israel
justified Sodom, Ezekiel. 16. 51. But thou have multiplied thy Abominations more
than they, and have justified thy Sisters in all thine Abominations which thou
have done. Their Sin seems more excusable; you either upbraid their security
and carelessness, or countenance it by your own practice; your seriousness is a
real rebuke to the carnal World: your working out your Salvation in fear and
trembling, upbraideth their security and carelessness; your rejoicing in God,
condemns their carnal delight. When you are troubled about a vain Thought,
and are watchful against a light Word, you condemn them for their looseness, and
wallowing in all silthiness: but if not, you justify the World, and harden the
Wicked in their Prejudices, and cause them to hold up their course with the
greater pretense. When you are wrathful, proud, sensual, turbulent,
self-seeking, you are an occasion of stumbling unto them. Cyprian in his Book
de duplici Martyro, brings in the Heathens thus speaking, Ecce qui jac^ant se
Redemptos a Tyra^^idae Sathanae, qui pr^^dicant se mortuos mundo, nihilo minus
vincuntur a cupi^itatibus suis, quam nos quos dicunt, teneri sub Regno
Sathan^e, quid prodest illis Baptismus, quid prodest Spiritus Sanctus, cujus
arbitrio dicunt se Temperari? etc. Behold those that boast themselves to be
redeemed from the tyranny of the Devil, to be dead to the World, to have
crucified the Flesh: They are overcome by their base and bru^ish Lusts, even as
we are, whom they account to be still under the Kingdom of the Devil. What does
their Baptism profit them? what the Holy Ghost, whose direction they profess to
live by? Why should we trouble our selves about changing our course, which is
as good as theirs. So in Salvian's time, the Heathens were wont to upbraid the
Christians thus; Vbi est ^atholica Lex quam credunt? Vbi sunt pietatis, and
castitatis exempla quae discunt? Evangelia legunt and impudi^u^t Apostolos
audiant, and ine^riantur, Cristum s^quuntur, and capiunt? etc. They talk of an
Holy Christ, and yet are unjust, unclean, wrathful, covetous; of a meek patient
Christ, and yet are rapacious and violent; of Holy Apostles, and yet are impure
in their conversations. Our Author goes on thus, Sancta a Christianis fierent;
si Sancta Christus docuisset, aestimari a (...) potest is^e qui colitur,
quomodo bonus Magister, ^ujus tum malos esse videmus Discipulos? If their
Christ were an holy meek Christ, they would be better, etc. And as carnal Men
now speak. For all their Godliness and Religion that they talk of, our life,
and course, and dealings, are as good, and honest, and justifiable as theirs.
Thus the wicked are justified in their way.

5. Christ will one day justify all his sincere Followers before Men, and
Angels, and Devils. Luke 12. 8. Whosoever shall confess me, him shall the Son
of Man confess before the Angels of God. Let us justify his ways, and he will
justify us, and our Faith at length shall be found to Praise, and Glory, and
Honor. Christ will then wipe off all the Aspertions which be cast upon the
Children of Wisdom for Godliness-sake, as Faction, Pride, Singularity,
Hypocrisy; and that which was branded with such ignominious Titles, will then
be found to be the very Wisdom of God.

6. Because of the necessity of justifying Wisdom, in the times we live in;
it is said, 2 Pet. 3. 3. In the last Time there shall come Scoffers, and
Mockers, walking after their own Lusts. The last days shall be full of these
profane Scoffers. While Truths were new, and the exercises of the Christian
Religion lovely, there was great concord and seriousness amongst the Professors
of the Gospel, and then profane Scoffers were rare and unfrequent. Before Men's
senses were benumbed with the customary use of Religious Duties, the Notions of
God were fresh and lively upon their Hearts; but afterward when the Profession
of Christianity grew into a form and national Interest, and Men were rather
made Christians by the chance of their Birth, than choice and rational
Convictions; then the Church was much pestered with this kind of Cattle;
especially now are they rise among us, who live in the dregs of Christianity,
when Men are grown weary of the Name of Christ, and the ancient severity and
strictness is much lost, and the memory of those Miracles, and wonder^ul
Effects by which our Religion was confirmed, is almost worn out, or else
questioned by Men of subtle Wits, and a prostituted Conscience. Therefore now
Mockers, and Men of atheistical Spirits swarm every where, and it concerns
Wisdom's Children to justify it, and to maintain its former Vigor and Power.

The Use that we may make is double;

1. To the Enemies of Wisdom. Judge not of an Holy Life, and those that profess
it at a distance and by hearsay, but try. We are not afraid to come to the Bar
with our Enemies; John 7. 24. Judge not according to appearance, but judge
Righteous Judgment. If Men would not be blinded with visible Appearance, and
the Mask of Passiou, Prejudice, and Interest, and condemn the People of God as
they are represented in a false Mirror; judge and spare not, and where you ^ind
the true Spirit of Christianity, take all leave, we desire no other Trial; but
speak not against things you know not. Try, and judge as you find, where is the
deepest sense of the other World, where the most careful preparation to get
thither; the joy of Faith, the love of Holiness. If Christianity will allow
that worldly Pomp, that vanity and liberty which others take, then judge the
Servants of the Lord as guilty of a foolish niceness, preciseness, and
singularity; but if we be baptized into these things, and unquestionably and
indispensibly bound to them, either renounce your Baptism, or forbear your
Censures, or rather choose this clear and pure way to everlasting Glory. If you
will not stand to God's Word, stand to your own sober Moods. We will make you
your selves Judges, when you are serious and best able to judge of things, not
in you Passion, when Lusts are stirring. When you are entering the Confines of
Eternity, when Conscience is likely to speak truth to you, you will wish then
you were one of those poor godly Men, whom now you count proud, humorous, and
factious.

2. To the Children of Wisdom. Do not scandalize the Holy VVays of God, but
justify them; be neither ashamed of them, nor a shame to them: Till the ancient
strictness be revived, Wisdom will never be justified.

The faithful Followers of Chirst must expect Troubles in this World.
LUKE 9. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62. And it came to pass, that as they went in the
way, a certain Man said unto him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou
go.

And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have Holes, and Birds of the Air have Nests,
but the Son of Man has not where to lay ^^s Head.

And he said unto another, Follow (...), but he said, Lord, suffer me first to
go and bury my Father.

Jesus said unto them, Let the Dead (...) their Dead; but go thou and prea^^
the Kingdom of God.

And another also said, Lord, I will foll^^ thee: but let me first go bid them
farewell which are at home at my House.

And Jesus said unto him, No Man having put his Hand to the Plough, and looking
back, is fit for the Kingdom of God.


HERE are three Stories put together by the Evangelist, to teach us in what
manner we should address our selves to follow Christ.

The first is of a Scribe, that came uncalled, but his Heart was not right with
God, having a temporal biass upon it.

The second is of one called, verse. 59. Christ says, Follow me. But he would
first cherish, then bury his dying Father. But Christ would have no delays, but
presently sets him about his Ministry and Service in the Gospel. This upon the
Authority of Clemens Alexandrinus, who received it upon Ancient Tradition, is
supposed to be Philip.

A third offers himself to follow Christ; but first he would take his farewell
at home, and compose Matters in his Family. But when we set our Faces Godward,
there is no looking back. There must be no more consulting with Flesh and
Blood; The Divine Instinct must be obeyed speedily, and wholly, and Christ
followed without Reserves and Conditions.

Of these in their order.

I begin with the First. And it came to pass, as they went on the way, a
certain Man said unto him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go,
etc.

In which words observe;

1. The Time. It came to pass, as they went on the way, a certain Man said to
him.

2. A Resolution professed. Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go.

3. Christ's Reply. And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have Holes, and the Birds of
the Air have Nests; but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head.

1. The Time. In Matthew. 8. 19. It Is when Christ had a mind to retire, and had
declared his purpose to go into the Desert. In Luke, when he steadfastly set his
Face to go to Jerusalem: Both may agree; the one more immediately, the other
more remotely; first to the Desert, then to Jerusalem. About that time, a
certain Man seeing Christ about to remove from the place where he then was,
offers himself to be one of his Disciples. This certain Man is by St. Matthew
said to be a Scribe. Men of that Rank and Order, had usually a Male Talent
against the Gospel, and are frequently coupled with the Pharisees, Men
covetous, and of a bitter Spirit. This Man seeing Christ did great Miracles,
and hoping that he would set up a Temporal Kingdom, he puts in for a place
betimes, that he might share in the Honors of it.

2. Here is a Resolution professed; Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou
go. Where take notice,

(1.) Of the ready forwardness of the Scribe: He was not called by Christ, but
offered himself of his own accord.

(2.) Observe the largeness of the Offer, and unboundedness of it,
Whithersoever; as indeed it is our Duty to follow Christ through thick and
thin. In the Revelations, Christ's unde^iled Company are described to be such
as follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Rev. 14. 4. That is, obeyed him,
though to their great peril and loss. Well then, here is readiness, here is
largeness; it is well if all be sincere. Therefore let us see,

3. Christ's Answer and Reply: And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have Holes, and
the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his
Head. By the tenor of Christ's Answer, you may know what ails him, and on what
Foot he limped; For this is spoken either by way of preparation, to enable him
to keep his Resolution, or rather by way of probation, to try the truth and
strength of it, whether it were sincere and sound, yea or no: As the young Man
was tried; Mark 10. 21. One thing thou lackest, go thy way, sell whatsoever
thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven; and
come, and take up thy Cross and follow me: But he went away sad at that saying.
So here, we hear no more of this Scribe; our Lord knew how to discover
Hypocrites. Two things were defective in this Resolution.

1. 'Twas sudden and rash, not weighing the Difficulties. They that rashly
leap into a Profession, usually fall back at first trial. Therefore we must sit
down and count the Charges, Luke 14. 28.

2. There was a carnal Aim in it. He minded his own Profit and Honor:
Therefore Christ in effect tells him, you had best consider what you do, for
following of me, will be far from advancing any temporal Interest of yours. The
Scribe was leavened with a Conceit of a worldly Kingdom, and had an Eye to some
Temporal Advantage: Therefore Christ tells him plainly, There was no worldly
Ease and Riches to be expected from him: And so, Non repulit valentem; sed
fingentem prodidit; He did not discourage a willing Follower, but discover a
worldly Hypocrite, says Chrysologus.

The Doctrine we learn from hence is this;

They that will sincerely follow Christ, must not look for any great Matters in
the World, but rather prepare themselves to run all hazards with him.

This is evident;

1. From Christ's own Example. And the same Mind should be in all his
Followers; John 17. 16. They are not of the World, even as I am not of the
World. Our estranging of our Hearts from the World, is an evidence of our
conformity to Christ. Christ passed through the World to sanctify it as a Place
of Service; but his constant Residence was not here, to ^ix it as a Place of
Rest: And all that are Christ's, are alike affected. We pass through as
Strangers, but are not at home as Inhabitants or Dwellers; and if we have
little of the World's Favor, it is enough if any degree of Service for God.

2. From the Nature of his Kingdom. His Kingdom is not of this World, John 18.
3, 6. It Is not a Kingdom of Pomp, but a Kingdom of Patience. Here we suffer
with Christ, hereafter we reign with him. The Comforts are not earthly, or the
good Things of this World; but heavenly, the good Things of the World to come.
This was the Scribes Mistake.

3. From the Spirit of Christ. His Spirit is given us, to draw us off from this
World to that which is to come. 1 Cor. 2. 12. Now we have not received the
Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may know the
Things which are given us of God. The Spirit of the World, is that which
possesses and governs worldly Men, and inclines them to a worldly
Happiness; this is in all Men naturally: Corrupt Nature does sufficiently
prompt and incline Men to look after the Honors, and Pleasures, and Profits of
this World. James 3. 15. the Apostle, when he would describe the Wisdom which
is not from above, he says, that it is earthly, sensual, devilish; this
Wisdom comes not from above. Present Things are known by Sense, and known
easily, and known by all. But there is a Divine Spirit put into Christians,
which inclines them to Things to come, and works Graces suitable: Some of
which give us a sight of the Truth of those Things, as Faith; some, a Taste or
an Esteem of them, as Love; some an earnest Desire, as Hope: This Spirit comes
from God and Christ, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. And without these Graces we can have no
sight nor desire of heavenly Things. 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural Man receives
not the Things of the Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness unto him; neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. They think it is folly
to hazard present Conveniences for future Rewards; and the truest Wisdom to
live in Ease, Plenty, and Honor. On the contrary, the Divine Spirit convinces
us, that there is no such Business of Importance, as looking after eternal
Life: That all the gay Things of Sense are but so many Maygames to Heavens
Happiness; the terrible Things of the World, are but as a Flea-biting to
Hell Torments; and the Pudder and Business of the World, but as a little
childish Sport, in comparison of working out our Salvation with fear and
trembling. This Spirit helps us to overcome the World, and grow dead to the
World, that we may be alive to God; to look for no great things here, but in
the World to come. This Spirit is that which we should all labor after.

4. From the Covenant of Christ. It Is one thing implied in the Gospel Covenant,
when our Lord Jesus sets down the Terms, Mat. 16. 24. he says, If any Man will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me: That
is, we must so believe in Christ, and be persuaded of the Truth of his heavenly
Doctrine, that we are willing to deny our Wit and Will, natural Interests and
Affections, and to lose all, rather than lose our Souls, or miss of the
Happiness he offers us. Nay, taking up the Cross is so considerable a part of
our Resignation to Christ, and Trust in him, that in Luke it is said, chap. 9.
23. Let him take up his Cross daily: How daily? There are fair Days as well as
foul, and the face of Heaven does not always look sad and lowering. What is the
meaning then of that, Let him take up his Cross daily? I answer; First, it must
be meant of daily Expectation. The first day that we begin to think of being
serious Christians, we must reckon of the Cross, we know not how soon it may
come. If God sees fit to spare you, yet you must be prepared for it; Stand
ready, as Porters in the Streets, to take up the Burden which you must carry.
Daily inure your thoughts to the Cross, that the grievousness and bitterness of
it may be somewhat allayed. St. Paul says, Acts 21. 13. I am ready not to be
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus. And,
Ephesians. 6. 15. one great Piece of the spiritual Armor is, the Preparation of the
Gospel of Peace. And, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to give an Answer to every
Man that asks a Reason of the Hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. Be
ready in point of Courage. Now this is necessary, because we are so apt to
promise great things to our selves, and indulge the Security of the Flesh, by
putting off the Thoughts of the Cross. But Evils familiarized are the less
burdensome, and by renewing our Resolution daily, we are the more fortified.
Secondly, to show the Continuance of our Conflicts, as if every day there were
some new Exercise for our Faith and Patience. We are not to prescribe to God,
how long he shall afflict us, nor with how much Affliction he shall exercise
us; No, tho it were all the days of our Lives, we must be content: It Is but a
Moment to Eternity. We must take up our Cross, till God remove it. Some promise
fair, to be contented with a naked Christ, tho they run all Hazards, because
they hope God will not take them at their Words; but as soon as the Cross
comes, wriggle, shift, and distinguish themselves out of their Duty; or else
if it be long, and frequently return, quite tire and are faint. So that Take it
up daily, is as much as, Let Patience have its perfect Work. James 1. 4. If day
after day we must be troubled, we must be content to be troubled. If God send
it daily, we must take it up daily. Well then, in the New Covenant we undertook
this: the New Covenant does comprize this as a clear branch and part of it.
Christ tells us the worst at first; the Devil shows us the Bait, but hides
the Hook. The World uses to invite its Followers with promises of Honor and
Riches; but Christ tells us of the Cross, and that partly to discourage
H^pocrites, who cheapen and taste, but will not buy; and also to prepare sound
Believers for the Nature and Temper of his Kingdom, which lies in another
World. But here by the way we are to und^rgo several Trials, and therefore we
should be arm^d with a mind to ^ndure them, whether they come or no* God never
intended (...) should be (...)

(...) Many think they (...) be good Christians, yet live a Life of (...) and
^ase, and pleasure, free from all trouble and molestation. This is all one as
if a Soldier going to the Wars, should promise himself a continual Peace or
Truce with the Enemy: Or as if a Mariner, undertaking a long Voyage, should
only think of fair Weather, and a calm Sea, without Waves and Storms; so
irrational is it for a Christian to look for nothing but Rest and Peace here
upon Earth. No, a Christian had need think of this to a double end, that he may
be a mortified and a resolute Man: If he be not mortified and dead to the
World, he can never undergo the variety of Conditions which his Religion will
expose him unto; and say with the Apostle, Phil. 4. 12, 13. I can do all things
through Christ which strengthens me. Notwithstanding, ye have well done, that
ye did communicate with my affliction. And there is usually in us a propensity
and inclination, either to Honors, Riches, or Pleasures. And the Devil will
work upon that weakness; Heb. 12. 13. That which is lame, is soon turned out of
the way. If we have any weak part in our Souls, there the Assault will be most
strong and ^ierce. A Garrison that looks to be besieged, will take care to
fortify the weak places, where there is any suspicion of an Attaque: So should
a Christian mortify every corrupt inclination, lest it betray him, be it love
of Honor, Pleasure, or Profit. He had need be also a well-resolved Man, well
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, or else in hard way he will
soon founder and halt. If you be Christians indeed, you will soon see the
necessity of it. Pure Nature it self is against bearing the Cross: Christ
showed the innocent Affections of humane Nature in his own Person: it recoiled
a little at the thought of the dreadful Cup; Heb. 5. 7. Who in the days of h^s
Flesh, when he had offered up Prayers and Supplication, with strong crying and
tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he
feared. And to us it is much more grievous to suffer. Heb. 12. 11. Now no
chastning for the prese^^ s^emeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless,
afterward it yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness, unto them which are
ex^rcised thereby. But corrupt Nature will certainly draw back, unless we be
armed with great resolution; for after we have launched out into the deep with
Christ, we shall be ready to run (...) again upon every Storm, unless we be
resolved: therefore you need to think of the Cross to breed this resolution. If
Christians be not mortified, they trip up their own Heels: if they be not
resolved and prepared for all Weathers, they take up Religion, rather as a Walk
for Recreation, than as a Journey or serious Passage to Heaven. Therefore we
must all of us prepare for Sufferings in this World, looking for no great
matters here. We must expect Persecutions, Crosses, Losses, Wants, Defamation,
Injuries: and we must get that Furniture of heart and mind, which may support
and comfort us in such a day of trial.

2. It informs us what Fools they are, that take up Religion upon a carnal
design of Ease and Plenty, and will follow Christ to grow rich in the World: As
this Scribe thought to make a Market of the Gospel, as Simon Magus did, Acts 8.
19, 20. He thought to make a gain by the Power of Miracles. There are
Conveniences which Religion affords in peaceable Times; but the very
Profession, at other Times, will engage us in great Troubles: And therefore Men
do but make way for the shame of a Change, and other Mischiefs, that hope for
Temporal Commodities by the Profession of the Gospel. There are few that are
willing to follow a naked Christ, upon unseen encouragements; but this must be,
for they that aim to seek the World in and by their Religion, are disclaimed by
our Lord as unfit to be his Servants: and indeed sorry Servants they are, who
cannot live without Honor, Ease, and Plenty; therefore turn and wind to shift
the Cross, put many a fallacy upon their own Souls. Gal. 6. 12. As many as
desire to make a fair show in the Flesh, compel you to be circumcised only,
lest they should suffer persecution for the Cross of Christ. If that be their
only Motive, they are apt to desert or pervert Christ's Cause. Again, the
Apostle tells us of some, who are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God
is their Belly, who mind earthly Things, Phil. 3. 18, 19. Men that have no love
to God, but only serve their fleshly Appetites, and look no higher than
Honors, Riches, Pleasures, and applause with Men, will never be faithful to
Christ: They are such as study to save themselves, not from Sin, but from
Danger, and accordingly accommodate themselves to every Interest: As the Men of
Keilah dealt with David, entertained him for a while; But when Saul pursued
him, were resolved to betray him: They would come into no danger for David's
sake. So they deal with Christ, and Religion. They profess Christ's Name, but
will suffer nothing for him: If they may enjoy Him, and his Ways with peace and
quietness, and convenience, and commodity to themselves, well and good; But if
Troubles arise for the Gospel's sake, immediately they fall off; not only these
Summer-Friends of the Gospel, but the most, yea the best, have a secret
lothness and unwillingness to condescend to a condition of Trouble or Distress.
This is a Point of hard digestion, and most Stomachs will not bear it.

3. It informs us what an unlikely design they have in hand, who would bring
the World and Christ fairly to agree, or reconcile their worldly Advantages,
and the Profession of the Gospel: And when they cannot frame the World, and
their Conveniences to the Gospel, do fashion the Gospel to the World, and the
carnal courses of it. It Is pity these Men had not been of the Lord's Council,
when he first contrived and preached the Gospel, that they might have helped
him to some discreet and middle courses, that might have served turn for Heaven
and Earth too. But do they what they will, or can, the Way is narrow that
leads to Life; and they must take Christ's Yoke upon them, if they would find
rest for their Souls. They will find that pure and strict Religion will be
unpleasing to the Ungodly and the Carnal; that the Enmity between the two Seeds
will remain, and the Flesh and the World must not always be pleased: that there
is more danger of the World smiling, than frowning. As to the Church in
general, (in Constantine's Time) Ecclesia facta est opibus major, virtutibus
minor: so to Believers in particular, that the Heart is corrupted by the Love
of the World; and Men never grow so dull and careless of their Souls, as when
they have most of the World at will. And that we are more awakened, and have a
more lively sense of Eternal Life, when under the Cross, than when we live in
the greatest ease and pomp. That Christ permits Troubles, not for want of
love to his People, or want of Power to secure their peace, but for holy and
wise ends to promote their good.

Use 2. Is Instruction. When you come to enter into Covenant with Christ,
consider,

1. Christ knows what Motives do induce you; John 2. 25. He needs not that
any should testify of Man, for he knows what is in Man. Some believed, but
Jesus committed not himself unto them: He knows whether there be a real bent,
or carnal biass upon the Heart.

2. If the Heart be false in making the Covenant, it will never hold good: An
error in the first Concoction, will never be mended in the second; Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my
Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their Children
for ever. So, Mat. 13. 21. The stony Ground received the Word with joy; Yet
has he not root in himself, but dureth but for a while; for when Tribulation
or Persecution arises because of the Word, by and by he is offended. Some
temporal thing sits too near, and close to the Heart: you are never upright
with God, till a Relation to God, and a Right to Heaven, do incomparably weigh
down all temporal Troubles; and you can rejoice more in the Testimonies of God,
fatherly Love, and right to eternal Life, than in outward things; Psalm. 4. 6,
7. There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the
Light of thy Countenance upon us. Thou have put gladness in my heart, more than
in the time that their Corn and their Wine increased. David speaks in his own
Name, and in the Name of all those that were alike minded with himself. And,
Luke 10. 20. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject
unto you, but rather rejoice because your Names are written in Heaven.

3. That Christ cannot but take it ill, that we are so delicate and tender of
our Interests, and so impatient under the Cross; when he endured so willingly
such great things for our sakes: we cannot lose for him, so much as he has
done for us; and if he had been unwilling to suffer for us, what had been our
state and condition to all Eternity? we should have suffered eternal Misery. If
you would not have Christ of another mind, why will you be of another mind? 1
Pet. 4. 1. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the Flesh, arm your
selves likewise with the same mind; for he that has suffered in the Flesh,
has ceased from Sin.

4. If you be not dead to the things of the World, you are not acquainted with
the Virtue and Power of Christ's Cross, and have not a true sense of
Christianity, cannot glory in it as the most excellent Profession in the World;
Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World. You are
in a dangerous temptation to Atheism.

5. We are gainers by Christ, if we part with all the World for his sake, Mark
10. 29, 30. Therefore no loss should seem too great in obeying his Will.
Certainly a Man cannot be a loser by God.

6. All worldly things were confiscated by the fall, and we can have no
spiritual right to them, 'till we receive a new grant by Jesus Christ, who is
the Heir of all things. Dominium Politicum, fundatur in providen^ia Evangelicum
in gratia. 1 Cor. 3. 23. All things are yours, because you are Christ's, and
Christ is God's. And, 1 Timothy 4. 3. God has made them to be received with
thanksgiving of them which believe, and know the Truth. So that what we enjoy,
is by the mere favor of the Redeemer, and should be parted with again when he
calls for it.

Thus much for the first Point.

A second Doctrine or Point here offered is,

The great Poverty of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Beasts and Fowls have places to shelter themselves in, but Christ had no
certain place of residence, or dwelling wherein to rest. He does not say, Kings
have Palaces, but I have none; rich Men have Houses and Lands, but I have none:
But he says, Foxes have Holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the
Son of Man has not where to lay his head.

The Reasons of this, are these following.

1. To increase the value and merit of his Satisfaction. Our Sins did deserve
this, his whole Humiliation, and every degree of it; and Christ was content to
suffer it for the ransom of our Souls. It Is clear this, that all his
condescension conduced to make up the Remedy more full: and it is evident by the
Apostle, that it gives us a right to a larger allowance of Grace; 2 Cor. 8. 9.
For ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet
for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might become rich.

2. Christ came to offer the Kingdom of Heaven, and the good things of the
other World, and to draw Men's minds and hearts thither. And therefore that he
might appear a fit Teacher of the World, by his own Example, he taught us
contempt of outward things. If he had preached up heavenly-mindedness, and
lived himself in pomp and fullness, the People would not have regarded his
words. Alexander, when his Army grew sluggish, because laden with the spoils of
their Enemies; to free them from this encumbrance, commanded all his own
Carriages to be set on fire; that when they saw the King himself devote his
rich Treasures to the flame, they might not murmur if their Mite and Pittance
were consumed also. So if Christ had taught us contempt of the World, and had
not given us an instance of it in his Person, his Doctrine had been less
powerful and effectual.

3. To season and sanctify a mean estate and degree of Life, when we are called
to it by God's Providence. Christ's own poverty teaches us to bear a mean
condition well; Mat. 18. 25. It is enough for a Disciple that he be as his
Master, and a Servant as his Lord. Vriah would not give way to any softness,
while Ioab his General was in the Field; 2 Samuel 11. 11. The Ark, and Israel,
are in Tents, and my Lord Joab, and the Servants of my Lord are in the open
fields; Shall I go into my House, and eat, and drink? etc. We must be contented
to fare as Christ did, we cannot be poorer than Christ as poor as we are; for
the poorest have some place of shelter, but he had none whereon to lay his head.

1. Let this then enforce the former Lesson, and teach us contempt of the
World, and the Riches and Greatness thereof. It Is some Argument that the vilest
are capable thereof, as well as the most generous and best deserving, and
oftener it happens to be so. But this is the Argument of Arguments, That the
Lord Jesus, when he came to instruct the World by his Example, he was not one
of the Rich and Voluptuous, but chose a mean estate, as most conducible to his
ends.

2. If you be rich, yet be poor in Spirit; Mat. 5. 3. Blessed are the poor in
Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Let us possess all things as if we
possessed them not, 1 Cor. 7. 31. And so, James 1. 9, 10. Let the Brother of
low degree rejoice in that he is exalted: but the rich, in that he is made low,
because as the flower of the Grass he shall pass away. We should be as having
nothing, sitting loose from earthly things, considering that shortly we shall
be as poor as the poorest, for we can carry nothing away with us.

3. Let us prepare our selves to entertain Poverty; and if it be already come
upon us, and God has reduced us to a mean inferior Life; let us have our
hearts reconciled and suited to a low estate, so it may be an help to Heaven,
so we may have the true Riches, and may learn to live by Faith, though God
feeds us from Hand to Mouth; so we may imitate Christ, and follow him into
Glory, it is enough for us.

No excuse against a speedy obeying Christ's Call.
WE have done with the first instance of a Scribe that came uncalled, we come
now to another: this Man offers not himself, but is called by Christ. And he
said unto another, Follow me, etc. He was already a Disciple at large; for in
Matthew it is said, Chap. 8. 21. Another of his Disciples said unto him, Suffer
me first to go any bury my Father. He was now called to a nearer and constant
attendance on Christ. Clemens Alexandrinus, from an ancient Tradition, tells
us, this was Philip. But before he complied with this Call, he desires a
little delay and respit, 'till his aged Father were dead and buried; whether
his Father were already dead, and he would do this last Office to see him
decently interred; or whether his Father were yet living, but not likely long
to continue, and he would attend him till his Death and Funeral, and then
follow Christ as Theophilact thinks, it is not much material. Clear it is, he
puts off the matter with an excuse; even the Elect do not at first so
readily obey the Heavenly Calling; some of them may put off Christ, but when he
intends to have them, he will not be put off so, the importunity of his Grace
overcoming their unwillingness.

But what was Christ's Answer? L^^ the Dead bury their Dead* but go thou and
preach the Kingdom of God; that is, leave that Office to others, who are not
designed for this Divine and Holy Employment. It seems hand to many, that
Christ should ^eny him to do this little Office of Love to his Father; and they
know not the meaning of that expression, Let the Dead bury their Dead.
Therefore, 1. Let us open the Expression. 2. Show you what Christ teaches us
by this Refusal.


1. For the Expression. It may be used either Proverbially, or Allusively.
Proverbially; Let one dead Man bury another; that is, let them lie unburied,
rather than my Service be neglected; or, there will not want others that will
remove the dead out of their sight: and it is our Wisdom to let go things
unnecessary, and mind the main. Or else it is used Allusively, to the Law of
the Nazarites, and the Priests of the Old Testament. The Law of the Nazarites
is in Numb. 6. 6, 7, 8. All the days that he separateth himself unto the Lord,
he shall come at no dead Body. He shall not make himself unclean, for his
Father, or his Mother, for his Brother, or his Sister, when they die: because
the consecration of his God is upon his Head. All the days of his separation he
is holy unto the Lord; that is, he must rather follow his Vow, in honoring the
Lord, than to follow natural Duty, in honoring his dead Parents. Now those
whom Christ called especially to follow him, were consecrated to that service,
as the Nazarite unto the Lord, during the days of his separation. And as they
might not meddle even with the interment of their Parents, so this excuse was
frivolous. Or else the Allusion might be to the High Priests, of whom we read,
Deuteronomy. 33. 9. Who said to his Father, and his Mother,. I have not seen him;
neither did he acknowledge his ^Brethren, nor know his own Children. Some think
this has reference to the Levites Fact, who being commanded by Moses, killed
every Man his Brother, Neighbor, Friend, and Son, that had sinned in making or
worshipping the Golden Calf, Exodus 32. 26, -- 29. Rather it is meant of the
Priests continual Duty, who by the Law, if his Father, Mother, Brother, or
Child did die, he might not mourn for them, but carry himself as if he did not
respect or know them; for God would have them more regard their Function or
Duty in his Service, than any natural Affection whatsoever: The Law is, Levit.
21. 11, 12. He shall not go in to any dead Body, nor de^ile himself for his
Father, or his Mother; neither shall he go out of the Sanctuary, nor profane
the Sanctuary of his God, for the Crown of the anointing Oil of his God is upon
him. Now Christ alludeth to the Law, to show the urgency of this present
service and imploiment to which he was consecrated: and the burial of the Dead
might be left to Persons less sacred, or more at leisure.

2. The Reasons of Christ's refulsal. Christ would show hereby, 1. That all
Humane Offices and Duties, must give place to the Duty we owe to God. Duty to
Parents must be observed, but Duty to God must be preferred before that, or any
thing whatsoever. A Truth justified by Christ's own Example. He began betimes,
at twelve years old, when he was disputing with the Doctors, and his Parents
sought for him; Luke 2. 49. He said unto them, How is it that you sought me?
Wist you not that I must be about my Father's business? So, Mat. 12. 47, 48.
When his Mother and Kindred waited for him, desiring to speak with him, He
answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my Mother, and who are my
Brethren? Obedience to God, and declaring his Father's Will, was dearer to him
than all Relations. Natural and secular respects swayed not with him, in
comparison of gaining Pro^elites to Heaven; his Mother's Conference with him,
was nothing to his Father's Service, and teaching the People a more acceptable
Work, than paying a civility to his natural Relations: So, John 2. 4. Woman,
what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come. His Office to which he
was sent by God, was a matter in which she, though his earthly Parent, was not
to interpose, God's Work must be done in God's own Way, Time, and Method: God
has greater authority over you, than all the Men in the World. 2. He would
teach us hereby that the Ministry requires the whole Man, even sometimes the
omission of necessary Works, much more superfluous; Give thy self wholly to
these things, 1 Timothy 4. 15.

The words are now explained; The practical Notes are these two; First, That
nothing in the World is a matter of such great weight, as to be a sufficient
excuse for not following of Christ. Secondly, That those who are called to
follow Christ, should follow him speedily, without interposing any delays.


For the first Point; That nothing in the World is a matter of such great
weight, as to be a sufficient excuse for not following of Christ.

I will illustrate it by these Considerations.

1. There are two sorts of Men; Some understand not their Lord's Will, others
have no mind to do it, Luke 12. 47, 48. Some understand not the Terms of the
Gospel; they think to have Christ, and the Pleasures of the Flesh, and the
World too. But there are others who understand Christ's Terms, but are loath to
become Christ's Disciples; they know their Master's Will, but they do not
prepare themselves to do it; that is, they do not presently set upon the Work,
but make so many delays, that it plainly appears that they are loath to yield
to Christ's Terms; that is, to turn their backs upon the Vanities of the World,
and renounce their most pleasing Sins, and to take the Word for their Rule, the
Spirit for their Guide, and eternal Life for their Felicity and Happiness; to
such we now speak.

2. They that have no mind to follow Christ, put off the Matter with dilatory
shifts and excuses. To refuse altogether is more heinous, and therefore they
shift it off for a time; Non vacat is the pretense, I am not at leisure; Non
placet, I like it not, is the real interpretation, disposition, and inclination
of their Hearts; for Excuses are always a sign of an unwilling and backward
Heart. When they should serve God, there is still something in the way, some
danger, or some difficulty which they are loath to encounter with: As, Prove. 26.
13. The slothful Man says, There is a Lion in the way, there is a Lion in the
streets. Palestine was a Land infested with Lions, because of the many Deserts
and Thickets that were in it; but being well peopled, they did rarely appear.
Now the Sluggard takes this pretense from thence; if his Business lay in the
Fields, there was a Lion in the way; if his Business lay in the Towns and
Cities, there is a Lion in the streets: as sometimes, though but rarely, they
came into places inhabited, and of great resort. Now if he should go about his
Business too early, he might meet with a Lion in his range and walk, before
they were retired into their Dens. Thus do Men alarm themselves with their own
foolish fears, to excuse their idleness and negligence. So again, Prove. 15. 19.
The way of the slothful, is as an hedge of thorns, but the way of the Righteous
is made plain. They imagine difficulties, and intolerable hardships in a
course of Godliness; but it is their cowardice, and pusilanimous negligence,
which makes the Ways of God seem hard: they are all comfortable, plain, and
easy, to the pure and upright Heart, and willing Mind. Come we to the New
Testament; Luke 14. 18, 19, 20. They all with one consent began to make excuse:
The first said, I have bought me a piece of Ground, and I must go to see it; I
pray thee have me excused. And another said, I have bought five yoke of Oxen,
and I go to prove them: I pray thee have me excused. And another said, I have
married a Wife, and cannot come. The meaning is, Many were invited to
everlasting Happiness, but they preferred their designs of worldly advantages.
Mark, they do not absolutely deny, but make excuse. Excuses are the fruit of
the quarrel between Conviction and Corruption. They are convinced of better
things, but being prepossessed and biassed with worldly Inclinations, they dare
not fully yield, nor flatly deny; therefore they chose a middle course, to make
excuses. Doing is safe, or preparing our selves to do; but excusing is but a
patch upon a filthy sore, or a poor covering of Fig-leagues, for a naughty
Heart.

3. The usual excuses which Sinners may, and usually do allege, are these four.
The Difficulty of Religion. The danger that attends it. Want of Time. And
that they have no power or strength to do good.

1. For the first; It Is troublesome and tedious to Flesh and Blood to be held
to so much Duty, and to wean our Hearts from things we so dearly love; and the
World thinks that we are too nice and precise to urge Men to such a strict
and holy and heavenly Life, and less ado will serve the turn.

To this I answer*

(...) deligent, that ye may be found of him in peace without spot and
blameless. And therefore if you cannot deny the ease and sloth of the Flesh,
you are wholly unfit for the Work of Godliness.

(2.) This Diligence is no more than needs, whatever the carnal World
thinks, who leave the Boat to the Stream, and hope to be accepted with God,
for a few cold and drowsy Devotions, or some superficial Righteousness. A
Painter-stainer, will think a Painter-limner too curious, because his own work
is but a little daubing. The broad way pleases the World best, but the narrow
way leads to Life.

(3.) This Diligence may be well afforded, considering that eternal Life and
Death is in the case. Life: Will you stop a Journey for your Lives, because
it is a little tedious? or there is Dirt in the way, or the Wind blows on you,
and the like? Since it is for God and Heaven, we should not grudg at a little
labor; 1 Cor. 15. 58. Therefore be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the Work of the Lord; forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain
in the Lord. There is also Death in the case. Now which is better, To take a
little profitable pains in Godliness, or to endure everlasting Torments? to
save a little labor or diligence in the holy Life, and run the hazard of being
miserable for ever? Which is worst, the trouble of Physic, or the danger of a
mortal Disease?

2. Another Excuse is, the Danger which attends it. It may expose you to
great Troubles to own God and Religion heartily: And if there be Peace abroad,
and Magistrates countenan^^ Religion, yet many times at home a Man's greatest
Foes may be those of his own Household, Mat. 10. 36. But for the pleasing or
displeasing of your Relations, you must not neglect your Duty to God; as Ierom
to Helidorus; Per calcatum perge Patrem; If thy Father lie in the way, tread
upon his Bowels rather than not come unto Christ. Our Lord has expressly told
us, Mat. 10. 37. He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of
me. Neither favor nor disfavour of our Friends, is a just let or impediment
to our Duty: The Advantages we can, or are likely to receive from Parents, are
not worthy to be compared with those we expect from God; nor is their Authority
over us so great as God's is; Luke 14. 26. If any Man come to me, and hate not
his Father or Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and
his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple. Though Christianity does not
discharge us from obedience to Parents, yet the higher Duty must be preferred,
namely obedience to Christ, and loving less is hating.

3. Another excuse is, I have no time to mind Soul-affairs. My distractions in
the World are so great, and my course of life is such, that I have no leisure.
I answer, Will you neglect God and Salvation, because you have worldly things
to mind? Whatever your business be, you have a time to eat, and drink, and
sleep; and have you no time to be saved? Better incroach upon other things,
than that Religion should be cast to the Walls, or justled out of your
thoughts. David was a King, and he had more distracting cares than most of us
have, or can have; yet he says, Psalm. 119. 147, 148. I prevented the dawning
of the Morning; and cried, I hoped in thy Word. Mine Eyes prevent the
Night-watches, that I may meditate in thy Word. And, v. 164. S^ven times a day
do I praise thee, because of thy Righteous Judgments. Do you spend no time in
idleness* vain talking, and carnal sports? and might not this be better
employed about heavenly things? Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. See then that ^e walk
circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, redeeming the time, because the days
ar^ evil. Vitam non accipimus brevem, sed fecimus, nec inopes temporis, sed
prodigi sumus. God has not s^t you about Work that he allows you no time
for; but we waste our time, and then God is straightened. Many poorer than you
have time, because they have an heart and will to improve it.

4. I have no power or strength to do good; And what will you have us do? This
is the excuse of the idle and naughty Servant; Mat. 25. 24. I knew that thou
were an hard Man, reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering where thou
have not strawed. God sets you about work, but gives you no strength, is your
^xcuse: but certainly you can do more than you do, but you will not make trial.
God may be more ready with the assistances of his Grace thau you can imagine.
The tired Man may complain of the length of the way, but not the lazy, who will
not stir a foot. If you did make trial, you would not complain of God, but your
selves, and beg Grace more f^^lingly. In short, you are not able, because you
are not willing. And your impotency is increased by evil habits contracted, and
long custom in Sin.

I now proceed to the fourth Consideration.

4. None of these Excuses are sufficient for not following of Christ. And that,

1. Because of his Authority. Who requires this Duty from us, or imposes it
on us? It Is the Lord Jesus Christ, to whose Sentence we must stand or fall.
When he bids us follow him, and follow him speedily; to excuse our selves,
is to countermand and contradict his Authority: It Is flat disobedience, though
we do not deny the Duty, but only shift off and excuse our present compliance.
For he is as peremptory for the Time and Season, as for the Duty. Now while
it is called to day, harden not your hearts, Heb. 3. 7, 8. God stands upon his
Authority, and will have a present Answer. If he say, To day, it is flat
disobedience for us to say, To morrow; or suffer me first to do this and that
business.

2. It appears from his Charge to his Messengers. Nothing can take off a
Minister of the Gospel from seeking the Conversion and Salvation of Souls. We
cannot plead any thing to exempt us from this Work: to plead that the Peoples
hearts are hard, and that the Work is difficult and full of danger, will not
serve the turn; no, Their Blood will I require at thy hands. Therefore all
excuses set aside, we must address our selves to our work. Acts 20. 23, 24.
Paul went bound in the Spirit; and the Holy Ghost had told him, that in every
City Bonds and Afflictions did abide and wait for him: But, says he, None of
these things move me, neither count I my Life dear to my self, so as I may
finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of my Lord
Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God. He was willing and ready to
endure what should befall him at Jerusalem, and reckoned nothing of it, nor of
loss of Life, if he might successfully preach the Gospel, and serve Christ
faithfully in the Office of the Ministry. If nothing be an excuse to us, can
any thing be an excuse to you? Should your Souls be nearer and dearer to us
than to your selves?

3. It appears from the matter of the Duty imposed on you: If you consider,
the Excellency, and the Nececessity of it.

To begin first, the Excellency. All Ex^uses against Obedience to God's Call,
are (...) from the World, and the things (...) in the World. Now there is no
(...) between the things of the (...) following Christ's Counsel, (...)
^verlastingly happ^. The Question will soon be reduced to this, Which is most
to be regarded, God or the Creature, the Body or the Soul, Eternity or Time?
The Excuses are for the Body, for Time, for the Creature; but the Injunctions
of Duty are for God, for the Soul, and for Eternity. Sense says, Favor the
Flesh; Faith says, Save thy Soul: The one is of everlasting Consequence, and
conduces to an happiness that has no end; the other only for a time. 2 Cor.
4. 18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal; but the things which
are not seen, are eternal. One turn of the Hand of God, separateth the
neglected Soul from the pampered Body: And then whose are all these things?

2. The Necessity; that we may please God, and enjoy him for ever. We can never
plead for a necessity of sinning, for a Man is never driven to those streights,
whether he shall sin more or less; but sometimes Duties come in competition,
Duty to a Father, and a special injunction of Christ's to follow him: One must
be subordinated to the other, and the most necessary must take place; the less
give place to the greater. Now this is much more true of those things which are
usually pleaded by way of hesistancy, or as a bar to our Duty; as our worldly
and carnal satisfactions. But you will say, We must avoid poverty and shame.
But it is more necessary to avoid damnation. Not to preserve our temporal
Interests, but to seek after eternal Life; Luke 10. 42. One thing is necessary.

4. It appears from the nature of the Work. To follow Christ, is not to give
to him as much as the Flesh can spare, but wholly to devote your selves to his
Service, to sell all for the Pearl of great price, Mat. 13. 46. And you are
obliged to walk so, that all may give way to the Glory of God, and the Service
of your Redeemer. If he will employ us thus and thus, we must not contradict
it, or please any thing by way of excuse.

Use. Do not neglect your Duty for vain Excus^s. The excusing humor is very
rife, and very prejudicial to us, for the Sluggard has an high conceit of his
own Allegations: Prove. 26. 16. The Sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, than
seven Men that can r^nder a reason. In the Eastern Countries their Counsel
usually consisted of seven; as we read of the seven Princes of Media and
Persia, Esther 1. 14. Therefore let us a little disprove this vain conceit. The
Sluggard thinks himself so wise, that all others are but giddy and
^raisy-brain'd People, that are too nice and scrupulous, and make more ado with
Religion than needs: But can a Man do too much for God and Heaven? 1 Thessalonians.
2. 12. The Sluggard thinks it is a venture, and he may venture on one side as
well as the other; but it is a thousand to one against him in the eye of Reason,
put aside Faith: in doubtful Cases, the surest way is to be taken. But to draw
it to a more certain determination.

1. Nothing is a reasonable excuse which God's Word disproveth: for the
Scriptures were penned to discover the vain Sophisms which are in the Hearts of
Men. Heb. 4. 12. For the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than
any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit,
and of the Ioints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of
the Heart. To discover the Affections of a sensual Heart, however palliated
with the pretenses of a crafty Understanding. Certainly our private Conceits
must not be lifted up against the Wisdom of God, nor can a Creature be
justified in going against his Maker's Will. Nothing can be Reason, which the
God of Wisdom contradicts and calls Folly; Jer. 8. 9. Lo, they have rejected
the Word of the Lord, and what Wisdom is in them?

2. Nothing can be pleaded as a reasonable Excuse, which your Consciences are
not satisfied is Reason. Men consult with their Affections, rather than with
their Consciences. Conscience would draw other Conclusions, therefore our
Excuses are usually our Aggravations: Luke 19. 22. Out of thy own mouth will I
judge thee, thou wicked Servant. The Master expected increase, therefore he
should have done what he could; Job 15. 6. Thine own Mouth condemns thee; --
yea, thine own Lips testify against thee. That Is the strongest Conviction which
arises from a Man's own Bosom; that is the reason why there are so many Appeals
to Conscience in Scripture; 1 Cor. 10. 15. I speak as to wise Men, judge ye what
I say. Your own Hearts tell you, ye ought to be better; to mind God more, and
the World less; to be more serious in preparing for your eternal estate.

3. Nothing can be a reasonable Excuse which reflects upon God, as if he had
made an hard Law which none can keep; especially if urged against the Law of
Grace: This is to say, the Ways of God are not equal; therefore there can be no
excuse for the total omission of necessary Duties.

4. No Excuse can be reasonable, but what you dare plead at the Bar of Christ:
for that is Reason, which will go for Reason at last. Then the weight of all
Pleas will be considered, and all negligent Persons that have not improved the
Light of Nature, or have not obeyed the Gospel, will be left without excuse.
What does it avail Prisoners to set up a Mock-Sessions among themselves to
acquit one, and condemn another? He is in a good condition that shall be
excused in the last Judgment, and in a bad condition that shall be condemned
then.

I now proceed to the second Point.

Secondly, That those who are called to follow Christ, should follow him
speedily, without interposing any delays.

Consider;

1. Ready Obedience, is a good evidence of a sound Impression of Grace left
upon our Hearts. There is slighter Conviction, which breeds a sense of our
Duty, but does not so strongly urge us to the performance of it. And there is a
more sound Conviction, which is accompanied with a prevailing efficacy, and
then all Excuses and Delays are laid aside, and Men kindly comply with God's
Call. Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, I will run after thee, Run; It notes an earnest and
speedy motion; the Fruit of the powerful attraction of the Spirit; Mat. 4. 20.
They straightway left their N^ts, and followed him. The scoffing atheistical
World, thinks it easiness and fond credulity: but it argu^th a sound
Impression. The impulsions of the Holy Spirit work in an instant, for they
carry their own evidence with them: Gal. 1. 11. Immediately I consulted not with
Flesh and Blood. In Divinis, non est deliberandum. When our Call is clear,
there needs no debate or demurring upon the Matter.

2. The Work goes on the more kindly, when we speedily obey the sanctifying
motions of the Spirit, and the present influence and impulsion of his Grace.
You have not such an advantage of a warm conviction afterward: When the Waters
are stirred, then we must put in for a cure, John 5. 4. To adjourn and put it
off as Foelix did, Acts 24. 15. does damp and cool the Work, you quench this
holy Fire; or to stand hucking with God, as Pharaoh did, the Work dies on your
hand.

3. There is hazard in delaying and putting off such a business of concernment,
as Conversion to God. Certainly this is a business of the greatest concernment,
and the greatest Work should be first thought of: [Mat. 6. 33. Seek first the
Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof.] and most thought of, Psalm. 27.
4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may
dwell in the House of the Lord. Now if we delay, it is left upon great hazards.
Life is uncertain, for you know not what a day may bring forth; Prove. 27. 1.
Boast not thy self of to morrow; for thou know not what a day may bring
forth. If God had given leave, (as Princes sometimes in a Proclamation, for all
to come in within a certain day); so if God had said, Whosoever does not repent
till thirty of forty Years be out, there were no great hazard till the time
were expired; we might entertain Sin a little while longer: But we know not the
day of our death, therefore we should get God to bless us er'e we die. A new
Call is uncertain, 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2. It may be he will treat with us no more in
such a warm and affectionate manner. If he call, yet not vouchsafe such
assistances of his Grace, if peradventure God will give them repentance unto
Life, 2 Timothy 2. 25. It Is an hazard or uncertain, if the Spirit of God will put
another thought of turning into your hearts, when former Grace is despised.
Isa. 55. 6. Call upon the Lord while he is near, and seek him while he may be
found.

4. Consider the mischiefs of delaying; every day we contract a greater
indisposition of embracing God's Call. We complain now it is hard: if it be hard
to day, it will be harder to morrow, when God is more provoked, and Sin more
strengthened, Ier. 13. 23. Yea, it may be, our natural Faculties are decayed,
the vigor of our Youth exhausted. When the tackling is spoiled, and the Ship
rotten, it is an ill time to put to Sea. Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy
Creator in the days of thy Youth. And besides, consider the suspicion that is
upon a late Repentance. The most profane would have God for their portion at
last.

5. The Reasons for delay are inconsiderable. Suppose it be our satisfaction in
our present estate. The Pleasures of Sin are sweet, and we are loath to forgo
them; but those Pleasures must one day be renounced, or you are for ever
miserable; Why not now? Sin will be as sweet to the carnal Appetite hereafter
as now it is; and Salvation is dispensed upon the same terms; you cannot be
saved hereafter with less ado, or bring down Christ and Heaven to a lower rate.
If this be a Reason now, it will for ever lie as a Reason against Christ, and
against Conversion. The Laws of Christianity are unalterable, always the same,
and your Hearts not like to be better. Or is it, That you are willing now, but
you have no leisure; when such encumbrances are over, you shall get your Hearts
into a better posture! Oh no, it is hypocrisy to think you are willing, when you
delay. Nothing now hinders, but a want of Will; and when God treats with
thee about thine eternal Peace, it is the best time; but God always comes to
the Sinner unseasonably in his own account. But consider, it was the Devil that
said, Mat. 8. 29. Art thou come hither to torment us before the time?

The Use is, 1. To reprove that dallying with God in the Work of Conversion,
which is so common and so natural to us.

The Causes of it are,

1. Unbelief, or want of a due sense and sight of things to come. If Men were
persuaded of eternal Life, and eternal Death; they would not stand hovering
between Heaven and Hell, but presently engage their Hearts to draw nigh to God:
But we cannot see afar off; 2 Pet. 1. 9. He that lacks these things, is
blind, and cannot see afar off.

2. Another cause is Security. They do not take these things into their serious
thoughts. Faith shows it is sure, and Consideration brings it near; Amos 6.
3. Ye put far away the evil day. Things at a distance do not move us. We should
pray, and preach, and practice, as if Death were at our backs. And remember,
that all our Security depends upon the slender Thread of a frail Life.

3. Another cause is, Aversness of Heart, they have no mind to these things;
Romans 8. 7. The carnal Mind is enmity against God. The Heart is inclined to
worldly Vanities, set against God and Godliness. Now let us consider the
hainousness of this Sin. It Is ingratitude and unthankfulness for God's eternal
Love; Psalm. 103. 17. The Mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him. It Is also disingenuity; we would be heard presently;
Psalm. 102. 2. Lord, hear me speedily. To day is the season of Mercy, to morrow
of Duty. We are always in haste, would have the Lord to tarry for our sinful
leisure, when we will not tarry his holy leisure. It Is also base Self-love, we
can be content to dishonor God longer, provided at length we may be saved.
Lastly, It is great injustice to keep God out of his Right, he has been long
enough kept out of his Right already; 1 Pet. 4. 3. The time past of our Life
may suffice to have wrought the Will of the Gentiles. Therefore let us no
longer delay, but speedily address our selves to entertain the Motions of the
Holy Spirit.

Looking back, ill becomes those that have set their face Heavenward.
WE are now come to the third Instance, wherein we are instructed how to avoid
Miscarriages in following Christ.

The first Instance teaches us to beware of hasty and hypocritical Profession,
which is the Fruit of Resolution without Deliberation, or sitting down and
counting the Charges; this was the fault of the Scribe.

The second Instance cautioneth us against dilatory Shifts and Excuses. The
most necessary Business must not be put off upon any pretense whatsoever.

The third Instance forbids all thoughts of compounding, or hopes to have
Christ and the World too. As this Man hoped first to secure his worldly
Interest, and then to follow Christ at leisure. Whether this Man were called,
or uncalled, it appears not. It Is only said in the Text [Another also said];
the middle Person was only called by Christ; the other two offered themselves.
The first was forward upon a mistaken Ground, to share the Honors of the
Kingdom of the Messiah, which he supposed to be Temporal. This last offers
himself, but his Heart was not sufficiently loosned from the World. From both
we see, That it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but God
that shows Mercy, Romans 7. 16. For neither of those that offered themselves
are accepted.

In the words you may observe; 1. His Request. 2. Christ's Answer.


1. His Request. This third offers himself to be a Disciple of Christ; but
with an Exception, That he might take his farewell at home, and dispose of his
Estate there, and so secure his wordly Interests. -- I will follow thee, but
let me bid those farewell which are at home in my House. You will say, what harm
is in this Request? Elijah granted it to ^lisha, 1 Kings 19. 21. When he had
laid his Mantle on him, thereby investing him in the Office of a Prophet.
Elisha said, Let me, I pray thee, go and kiss my Father, and my Mother, and
then I will follow thee. Which the Prophet grant^th, and gave way to Elisha to
go home and salute his Friends.

I Answer;

1. The Evangelical Ministry exceeds the Prophetical, both as to Excellency
and Necessity, and must be gone about speedily without any delay. The Harvest
was great, and such an extraordinary Work was not to be delayed nor interrupted.

2. If two Men do the same thing, it follows not, that they do it with the
same mind. Things may be the same, as to the substance or matter of the Action,
yet Circumstances may be different. Christ knew this Man's Heart, and could
interpret the meaning of his desire to go home first. He might make it a
pretense to depart clean away from Christ. We cannot distinguish between the
look of Abraham, and the look of Lot. One is allowed, the other forbidden.
Abraham is allowed to look toward Sodom, Genesis 19. 28. And Abraham got up early
in the morning, and looked toward Sodom, and beh^ld the smoke of the Country
went up as the smoke of a ^urnace. Yet Lot and his Family are forbidden to look
that way; Genesis 19. 17. Look not ^ehind thee. We cannot distinguish between the
laughter of Abraham, and the laughter of Sarah; Genesis 17. 17. And Abraham ^ell
upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a Child be born to him
that is an hundred years old? And shall Sarah that is ninety years old, ^ear?
Now compare Genesis 18. 12. it is said, And Sarah laughed within her self, saying,
After I am waxed old, shall I have pleasure, my Lord also being old? Yet she is
reproved, For the Lord said, Wherefore did Sarah l^ugh? The one was Joy and
Reverence, the other Unbelief and Contempt. We cannot distinguish between the
Virgin Mary's Question, Luke 1. 34. How can this be? and the Question of
Zachary, John's Father, Luke 1. 18. How shall I know this, ^or I am an old Man?
Mary was not reproved, but he was struck dumb for that Spe^ch: But though we
cannot distinguish, God, that knows the secrets of all hearts, can
distinguish.

3. Those that followed Christ on these extraordinary Calls, were to leave all
things they had, without any farther care about them; Matthew. 10. 21. S^ll all
that t^ou have, and follow me, and thou sha^t have Treasure in Heaven. So, Mat.
4. 19, 20. He s^ith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you Fishers of Men;
and they straitway left their Nets and followed him. So, Matthew. 9. 9. As Jesus
passed forth from thence, he saw a Man named Matthew, sitting at the receipt of
custom; and he says unto him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him.
Therefore it was preposterous for this Man to desire to go home, to order and
dispose of his Estate and Family, before he complied with his Call.

4. In Resolution, Estimation, and Vow. The same is required of all Christians,
when Christ's Work calls for it. Luke 14. 33. So likewise whosoever he be of
you, that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple.

2. Christ's Answer. Which consists of a Similitude, and its Interpretation
joined together.

1. The Metaphor or Similitude: Taken from Ploughmen, who cannot make straight
Furrows if they look back: So to look back, after we have undertaken Christ's
Yoke and Service, renders us unfit for the Kingdom of God. Putting our hands
to the Plough, is to undertake Christ's Work, or to resolve to be his
Disciples. Looking back, notes an hankring of Mind after the World; and also a
return to the worldly Life. For, first, we look back, and then we go back:
First, we have an over-valuing of the World, and then we return to the worldly
Life.

Doct. That looking back will not become those who have set their faces
Heavenward.

We have an Instance in the Text of a Man which pretended to follow Christ,
which is to set our Faces Heavenward, (for we follow Christ, first in Labor
and Patience, and then into Glory): But he would look back, and had many
thoughts of what he had left at home: And he is pronounced un^it for the
Kingdom of God, that is, to be a Disciple of Christ. And we have another
Instance recommended to our Observation by our Lord himself. Luke 17. 32.
Remember Lot'^ Wi^e; that is, remember her Sin, and remember her Punishment:
Both are taken notice of, Genesis 19. 17. But his Wi^e looked back from be^ind
him, and she became a (...). There was a hankring of mind after what she had
le^t in Sodom: She looked back, because she had l^ft her (...)

In (...) show you, 1. Upon what (...) we may be said to look (...). 2. (...)
those that ^^ve put their (...) to the Plough.


1. Upon what Occasions we may be (...) to look back. A double pair I shall
mention.

The first sort of those,

1. That pretend to follow Christ, and yet their Hearts ha^ker after the World;
the Cares, Pleasures, and vain Pomp thereof. Certainly all that would follow
Christ, must renounce their worldly Affections and Inclinations, or else they
can make no work of Christianity. I prove it from the Nature of Conversion,
which is a turning from the Creature to God, from self to Christ, and from Sin
to Holiness. The first is proper to our ^ase: As our degeneration was a falling
from God to the Creature, Ier. 2. 13. so our Regeneration is a turning from the
Creature to God. If we leave the World unwillingly, our dedication will soon
come to nothing, for then our Hearts are false with God in the very making of
the Covenant. If we engaged our s^lves to God, before the ^leshly Mind and
Interest were never well conquered; as we w^r^ not well loosned from the World,
so not ^irmly engaged to God; and therefore when our Interest requires it, we
shall soon fors^ke God.

2. When Men are discouraged in his Service by Troubles and Difficulties; and
so after a forward Profession, all comes to nothing. Heb. 10. 38. If any M^n
draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in (...). The former is looking back,
and this is drawing back. The one arises out of the other; all their former
Zeal and Courage is lost, they are affrighted and driven out of their
Profession, and relapse into the Errors they have escaped: This is the first
^air. Once more; The other pair i^ this;

There is a looking back with respect to (...); And a looking back with r^sp^ct
to Vivification.

1. Wi^h respect to Mortification, which is the first part of Conversion. So we
must not look back, or mind any thing behind us, which may turn us back and
stop us in our course. The World and the Flesh are the things behind us; we
turned our back upon them in Conversion when we turn^d to God. Grace (...) deny
Ungodlin^ss and (...), T^tus 2. 12. It is the (...) does call back our
Thoughts, (...) our Affections. The World that is an Enemy to God, and our
Religion, James 4. 4. Therefore the World must be renounced, and we must grow
dead to the World, that we may be alive to God: There is no halting between
both.

2. With respect to Vivification, or progress in the Duties of the Holy and
Heavenly Life. So the Apostle tells us, Phil. 3. 13. But this one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before, etc. Farther progress in Holiness, is the one thing that we
should mind, and that above all other things. This is the unum necessarium,
Luke 10. 42. The Primum, or Principium; the one thing, that is the main thing.
Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after. But
how should we mind it? Not looking to the things which are behind, but looking
to the things which are before. The things behind, are our imperfect
beginnings, or so much of the race as we have overcome and got through. It Is
the Sluggard's trick, to consider how much of the Journey is past, or how far
the rest of the Racers are behind him. But he that sets heartily to his
Business, considers how much is before, that he may get through the remainder
of his Race, and so obtain the Prize. The Things which are before us, are God,
and Heaven, and the remaining Duties of the Holy Life. These we should mind,
and not look back, as satisfying our selves with what we have attained to
already.

2. How ill it becomes those that have put their hands to the Spiritual Plough.

1. In respect of the Covenant into which they enter, or the manner of entrance
into it; which is by a fixed, unbounded resignation of themselves unto God.
Till this be done, we are but half Christians: As suppose we desire Privileges,
would have God to be our God, but neglect Duties, and are loath to become his
People; or, suppose we see a necessity of that, and so are in some measure
willing to give up our selves to him: yet if our resolution be not ^ixed, or be
not unbounded without reserves, and against all reserves, the Covenant is not
condescended unto; we do nothing, unless we do that which is farther required
of us.

(1.) If it be not fixed, but wavering, we do but treat, we do not conclude and
come to a full agre^ment with God. Acts 11. 23. He exhorted them all, that with
full purpose of Heart they would cleave unto the Lord: It implies such a
resolution as carries the force of a Principle. Agrippa was almost a
Christian, had some in^mouring and uncertain Inclinations; Acts 26. 28. Almost
thou perswadest me to be a Christian. Christ is resolved to stick to his
Servants, and therefore he expects that they should be resolved to stick to him.

(2.) If it be not unbounded, reserving nothing, but leaving all to Christ, to
be disposed of at his Will. Except but one thing, and the Covenant is not fully
concluded, it sticks at that Article: it is but hucking with God, not agreeing
with God: Resolving with reserves is no resolution at all. ^Tis but dealing
like Ananias and Sapp^ir^, giving something, and keeping back the rest, Acts 5.
Christ will have no Disciples which will not part with all. Nothing must be
reserved, neither Credit, nor Life, nor Estate, Luke 14. 28. Now none of this
can be as long as you look back, or allow that, that will tempt you to look
back; that is, till you be thoroughly loosned from the World; for whilst the
Heart cleaves to any earthly thing, your resolution is unfixed: They that only
take Christ upon liking, will soon be tempted to mislike him and his ways; And
your resolution is not unbounded, whilst you set upon the Profession of
Religion, and yet keep the World, or something of the World, your Heart will
ever and anon be seeking occasions to withdraw; for you were false at heart at
your first setting out, and treacherous in the very making of your Covenant.

2. With respect to the Duties of Christianity; or that part of the Kingdom of
God which concerns your Obedience to him. You are never ^it for these, while
the Heart cleaves to earthly things; and you are still hankring after the
World.

A threefold Defect there will be in our Duties.

1. They will be unpleasant. 2. They will be inconstant. 3. Imperfect in such a
degree, as to want sincerity.
1. Your Duty will be unpleasant to you, so far as you are wordly and carnal;
so that you can never yield ch^arful and ready obedience to God. Certain it is,
that we must serve God, and serve him with delight; his Commandments should be
kept, and they should not be grievous to us, 1 Ioh. 5. 3. Now what is the great
Impediment? Worldly Lusts are not thoroughly purged out of the heart; for
presently he adds this reason, For whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the
World. It Is an hard Heart makes our work hard; and the Heart is hard and
unperswadable, when our Affections are engaged elsewhere. The readiness of our
Obedience depends on the fervency of our Love; the fervency of our Love, on
our victory over the World; our victory over the World, on the strength of our
Faith; the strength of our Faith, on the certainty we have of the principal
Object of our Faith; the principal Object of our Faith is, That Jesus is the
Son of God, whose Counsel we must take, if we will be happy. And the evidence
of that Principle, is the double Testimony or Attestation given to him from
Heaven, or in the Heart of a Believer. Once settle in that, that you can
entirely trust your selves, and all your Interests, in the hands of Christ, and
all Duties will be easy.

2. You will be inconstant in it, and apt to be ens^ared again, when you meet
with Occasions and Temptations that suit with your Heart's Lusts. As the
Israelites were drawn out of Egypt against their Wills. The Flesh^pots of Egypt
were still in their minds, and therefore were ready to make themselves a
Captain, and return again, Numb. 14. 4. and James 1. 8. A double-minded Man is
unstable in all his ways. Nothing will hold an unwilling Heart; Demas had not
quitted this hankring mind after the World, and therefore it prevented him
doing his Duty. 2 Timothy 4. 10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present
World. He left the Work of the Gospel, to mind his own private Affairs. The love
of Riches, Pleasure, Ease, and Safety, if they be not thoroughly renounced, will
tempt us to a like revolt and neglect of God. Therefore to prevent it, when we
first put our hands to the Plough, we must resolve to renounce the World. Psalm.
45. 10. -- Forget also thine own People, and thy Father's House. Look back no
more; as long as we are entangled in our Lusts and Inticements of the World, we
are unmeet to serve God. Paul counted those things that were gain to him, to be
loss for Christ, Philip. 3. 7, 8. Yea doubtless and I count all things but
loss, for the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and count them but Dung, that I may win
Christ. Paul repented not of his Choice, but shows his perseverance in the
contempt of the World; I have counted, and do count. He sees no cause to
recede from his Choice. Many affect Novelties, are transported at their first
Change, but repent at leisure.

3. We are imperfect in it; I mean, to such a degree, as to want sincerity, for
they bring nothing to perfection, Luke 8. 14. Their Fruit never grows ripe,
or sound; for Religion is an underling. Some good Inclinations they have to
heavenly things, but their worldly Affections are greater, and overtop them so,
that though they do not plainly revolt from their Profession, yet their Duties
want that Life and Power which is necessary; so that they bring little honor
to Christ by being Christians.

3. In respect of the hurt that comes from their looking back; both to
themselves, and to Religion.

1. To themselves. 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. For if after they have escaped the
Pollutions of the World, through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein, their latter end is worse with them
than their beginning; for it had been better for them not to have known the way
of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the Holy
Commandment delivered to them. Many have so much of the knowledge of Christ, as
to cleanse their external Conversation. But Sin and the World were never so
effectually cast out, but they are in secret League with them still; and
therefore they are first entangled, and then overcome; first enticed by some
Pleasure or Profit, and then carried away with the Temptation. But what comes
of this? Their lattar end is worse than their beginning. Their Sin is gre^ter,
since they sin against Light and Taste; their Judgment is greater, both
Spiritual and Eternal. As God gives them over to brutish Lusts, and to the
Power of Satan. And this will be a cutting thought to them to all Eternity, to
remember how they lost their acquaintance with, and benefit by Christ, by
looking back to the World, and deserting that good way wherein they found so
much sweetness in Christ.

2. The Mischief which is done to Religion. They wonderfully dishonor God, and
bring contempt upon the Ways of Godliness, when after they have made trial of
it, they prefer Sin before it; as if God had wearied them, Mich. 6. 3.
Therefore it is just with God to vindicate his Honor. And Satan, after he
seems to be for a while rejected, takes a more durable possession of them,
Luke 11. 26. O think of this often! to look back after we seemed to escape,
does involve us in the greater Sin and Misery: Better never to have yielded to
God so far, than to retract at last; partly, because their Sins are Sins
against Knowledge. Luke 12. 47. That Servant which knew his Lord's Will, and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall be beaten with
many stripes. Partly, because they are unthankful for so much deliverance by
the knowledge of Christ as they received; and that is an heinous aggravation of
their Offense. Partly, because their Sin is Treachery, and breach of Vows; for
they turned the back upon the World, and all the Allurements thereof, when they
consented to the Covenant, and resolved to follow Christ in all Conditions,
till he should bring them into a place of Rest and Safety. Partly, because they
sin against Experience, after they have had some relish and taste of better
things, Heb. 6. 4. Partly, because their Conversion again is the more
difficult, the Devil having a greater hold of them, Mat. 12. 44.

4. With respect to the disproportion that is between the things that tempt us
to look back, and those things that are set before us.

1. The things that tempt us to look back, are the Pleasures of Sin, and the
Profits of the World; both are but a tempory enjoyment; Heb. 11. 25. The
Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a Season. The pleasures of Sin are base and
brutish, which captivate and bring a slavery on the Soul, Titus 3. 3. The
enjoiments of the World cannot last long; your gust and relish of them, within
a little while will be gone, 1 John 2. 17. yet these are the things that tempt
you to forget and draw you off from God: And will you marry your Souls again to
those Sins from which they were once divorced, and for such paltry Vanities
repent of your Obedience to God, even after you have made trial of him? Are
these things grown better, or God grown worse, that you should turn your Hearts
from him to them?

2. The things that are before you, are God, and Heaven; Reconciliation with
God, and the everlasting Fruition of him in Glory.

1. Reconciliation with God, with the consequent Benefits; Communion with God
now, Peace of Conscience, the Gift of the Spirit, and the Hopes of Glory. If
there were no more than these, Shall we look back? Can we find better things in
the World? Alas! there is nothing here, but Fears and Snares, a vexatious
Uncertainty, and polluting Enjoyments, such as may easily make us worse, but
cannot make us better. What is this, but to forsake the cold flowing Waters for
a dirty Puddle? Ier. 18. 14. Our own Mercies for lying Vanities, Jonah 2. 8.

2. The everlasting Fruition of him in Glory. Shall we look back that are
striving for a Crown of endless Glory, as if we were weary of the pursuit, and
give it over as an hopeless or fruitless Business? If Christ will lead us to
this Glory, let us follow him, and go on in what is well begun without looking
back. Never let us leave a Crown of Glory, for a Crown of Thorns.

Use 1. Is for Instruction, to teach us what to do if we would set about the
strict practice of Religion.

1. See that your worldly Love be well mortified: For till you be dead to the
World, God cannot recover his Interest in your Souls, nor the Divine Nature be
set up there with any Life and Power, 2 Pet. 1. 4. see also 1 John 2. 15. and 1
John 5. 4. Till this be done, God and Glory cannot be your ultimate End, nor
the main design of your Life; for the World will turn your Hearts another way,
and will have the principal ruling and disposing of your Lives: The World will
have that Love, Trust, Care, and Service, that belongs to God, and be a great
hindrance to you in the way to Heaven, and you will never have peace. The World
does first delude you, and then disquiet you. And if you cleave to it as your
Portion, you must look for no more. Well then, mortified it must be; For how
can you renounce the World as an Enemy, if your Hearts be not weaned from it so
far, that it is a more indifferent thing to you to have it, or want it, and
that you be not so eager for it, or so careful about it?

2. Let not the World steal into your Hearts again, nor se^m so sweet to you,
^or th^n you are under a temptation; it is our remaining-Folly, and
backsliding-Nature, that is ever looking to the World which we have forsaken.
Now when you find this, whenever the World has insinuated into your
Affections, and chilled and cooled them to God and Heaven, see that the
Distemper be presently expelled; pray, as David, Psalm. 119. 36. Incline my
Heart unto thy Testimonies, and not unto Covetousness. Be sure to be more
fruitful in good Works; Luke 11. 41. Give Alms of such things as you have, and
behold all things are clean unto you. We renounced the World in our Baptismal
Vow, we overcame the World in our whole after-course. It Is not so got out of
any, but that we still need an holy jealousy and watchfulness over our selves.
Now that we may do both of these, I shall give you some Directions.

1. Fix your End and Scope, which is to be everlastingly happy in the enjoyment
of God: The more you do so, the less in danger you will be of looking back. We
are often pressed to lay up Treasures in Heaven, Mat. 6. 20. And, as those that
are risen with Christ, to seek the things which are above, Col. 3. 1. Our Lord
himself says to the young Man, Mark 10. 21. Go, sell all that thou have, and
give to the Poor, and thou shall have Treasures in Heaven. If our Life and
Business be for Heaven, and your mind be kept intent on the greater Matters of
Everlasting Life, nothing will divert you therefrom; you will almost be ready
to forget Earth, because you have higher and better things to mind. It Is not
barely thinking of the Troubles of the World, or confessing its Vanities, will
cure your Distempers, but the true sight of a better Happiness. A little in
hand is better, you will think, than uncertain Hopes; but a sound Belief, which
is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, that
opens Heaven to you, and will soon make you of another mind.

2. Entirely trust your self, and all your Concernmen^s in the Hand of God.
Christ expected from all those whom he called in an extraordinary manner, that
they should leave all without any thought or solicitude about it, trusting in
him not only for their ^ternal Reward, but for their Provision and Protection
by the way during their service. And the same in effect is required of all
Christians, not to leave our Estates, or neglect our Calling; but renouncing
the World, and resolving to take such a lot in good part, as he shall carve out
to them. All that enter into Covenant with God, must believe him to be God
All-sufficient, Genesis 17. 1. The Apostle when he diswadeth from Worldliness, he
produces a promise of God's not forsaking us, and leaving us utterly
destitute; Heb. 13. 5. Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, and be
content with such things as you have. For he has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee. On the other side, certainly it is Unbelief that is the
cause of Apostasy, or falling back from God; Heb. 3. 12. Take heed, Brethren,
lest there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the
living God. Certainly when we have resigned up our selves to Christ to do his
Work, we may trust him boldly, and serve him cheerfully, we need not look back
to shift for our selves. If you are willing to be his People, he will be your
God, and your Savior, and then you may conclude, that God, even our God shall
bless us, Psalm. 67. 6. He will not be wanting to those that unreservedly yield
up themselves to his Obedience.

3. Consider that they are deluded Hypocrites, that will meddle no farther with
Religion, than they can reconcile it with their worldly Happiness: Whatever
glorious Notions they have of God, or pretenses of admiring free Grace; it is
Self-denial that Christ calls for; and taking up our Cross, is the first
Lesson in his School. And true Conversion is a turning from the Creature to
God, and begins in Mortification; and Baptism implies a renunciation of the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh. Therefore those that will save their wordly
State, and launch out no farther in the Cause of Religion, than they may easily
get ashore again when a storm comes; and love and serve God no farther than
will stand with the contentment of the Flesh; and divide their Hearts between
God and the World, give God but half, and the worst half; surely these were
never sincere with God. It Is an impossible Design they drive on, to serve two
Masters, Mat. 6. 24. You must let go Christ, and Glory, if you be so earnest
after the World, and so indulgent to the Flesh.

4. Consider how much it is your business to observe what makes you fit, or
unfit for the Kingdom of God. The aptitude or inaptitude of means is to be
judged with respect to the end; as they help or hinder the attainment of your
great End: For, Finis, est mensura mediorum: Mat. 6. 22. The Light of the Body
is the Eye; If therefore thine Eye be single, thy whole Body shall be full of
Light. Now our great end, is to enjoy God for ever. And what fitteth you for
this, looking back, or keeping the Heart in Heaven? Experience will show. The
observant and watchful Christian will soon find where his great hindrance
lies. How much he finds his Heart down by minding the World, and how he
needs to wind it up again, by Faith and Love: Psalm. 25. 1. Unto thee, O Lord,
do I lift up my Soul. The World is the great Impediment that keeps him from
God, and indisposeth him for his Service; dampeth his Love, and quenches his
Zeal, and abateth his Diligence; he will soon find how much more he might do
for God, if he could draw off his Heart more from those inferior Objects: This
is the weight that presses us down, and makes us so cold and cursory in God's
Service.

5. Consider, in the Text, here is the Kingdom of God; which is double; The
Kingdom of Grace, and the Kingdom of Glory. The one is called, The Kingdom and
Patience of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1. 9. The other is called, His Kingdom and
Glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. By the first, we are prepared for the second; and the
second is the great Encouragement. Now they that look back, are unfit for
either; the Duties of Christians, or the Reward of Christians; he slincheth
from his Duty here, and shall be shut out of Heaven at last: 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. --
That ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer.
They are only counted worthy, who constantly and patiently look for it, and
venture something on it.

6. Consider the great loss you will incur by looking back after you have put
your hand to the Plough. You will lose all that you have wrought, and all that
you have suffered.

1. What you have wrought; 2 Ep. John 8. Look to your selves, that ye lose not
the things which ye have wrought, but that ye receive a full Reward. You
forfeit the Reward of your good Beginnings. A partial Reward they may have in
this Life, while they continue their well-doing, (for no Man is a loser by
God); but not a Complete and full Reward till the Life to come. Some
overflowings of God's Temporal Bounty they may have, but not the Crown of Life
and Glory. So, Ezekiel. 18. 24. All his Righteousness that he has done, shall not
be mentioned. All is obliterated, and forgotten, and made void, as to any
Interest in the great Reward. This was represented in the Type of the Nazarite,
Numb. 6. 12. The days that were before shall be lost, because his separation
was defiled. He was to begin all anew.

2. All that you have suffered; as a Man may make some petty losses for Jesus
Christ. Gal. 3. 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in
vain. This makes all the cost and expense that you have been at, to be to no
purpose.

FINIS.
THE Nature and Excellency OF Saving Faith. IN TWO SERMONS. FROM Heb. 10. 39.
and 1 Pet. 1. 4. To which is added, A Wedding Sermon, On Genesis 2. 22.

THE EXCELLENCY OF Saving Faith.
HEB. 10. 39. But we are not of them who draw back unto Perdition; but of them
that believe, to the saving of the Soul.
IN the Verse immediately preceding, there is a dreadful Doom pronounced on
Apostates, that God will take no pleasure in them. Now lest they should be much
afrighted with the terror of it, and suppose that he had too hard an Opinion of
them, he shows, That tho he did warn them, he did not suspect them, presuming
other things of them according to their Profession. But we are not of them that
draw back unto Perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul.

In the words two things are observable.

1. The denial of the suspicion of their Apostasy. 2. An Assertion of the Truth
and Constancy of their Faith.
That Clause I shall insist upon, (...). Where, first take notice of their
Faith; (...). Secondly, Their Perseverance; (...). The word signifies their
purchasing, acquiring, obtaining, finding the Soul; meaning thereby, that
though they lost other things, they did not lose their Souls.

Doct. That a true and sound Faith, will cause us to save the Soul, though with
the loss of other things.

1 Pet. 1. 5. Ye are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation.
It Is the Power of God indeed that keeps: He that reserveth Heaven for us,
reserveth and keeps us for Heaven. But by what Instrument or Means? By Faith;
to depend upon an Invisible God, for an Happiness that lies in an invisible
World; when in the mean time he permits us to be harrased with Difficulties
and Troubles, requires Faith: And by Faith alone can the Heart be upheld, till
we obtain this Salvation. So, verse. 9. Receiving the End of your Faith, the
Salvation of your Souls. It Is Faith makes us row against the stream of Flesh
and Blood, and deny its Cravings, that we may obtain eternal Salvation at
length. The Flesh is for sparing and favoring the Body; but Faith is for
saving the Soul: That Is the End and Aim of Faith.

To make this evident to you; 1. I shall prove, That all other things must be
hazarded for the saving of the Soul. 2. That nothing will make us hazard all
things for the purchasing or acquiring the Salvation of the Soul but only Faith.


1. That all other things must be hazarded for the saving of the Soul. Mat. 10.
39. He that finds his Life, shall lose it: and he that loses his Life for my
sake, shall find it. So it is repeated again upon the occasion of the Doctrine
of Self-denial, Mat. ^6. 25, 26. The saving of the Soul, is more than the
getting, and keeping, or having of all the World. For the World concerns only
the Body, and bodily Life; but the saving of Soul concerns Eternal Life. If
Life be lost Temporally, it is secured to Eternity, when we shall have a Life
which no Man can take from us. And the Case stands thus, That either we must
bring Eternal Perdition upon our selves, or else obtain Eternal Salvation. They
that are thrifty of Life bodily, and the Comforts and Interests of it, are
certainly prodigal of their Salvation. But on the other side; If we are willing
to venture Life Temporal, and all the Interests thereof, for the saving of the
Soul, we make a good Bargain; That which is left for a while, is preserved to
us for for ever. In short, so much as God is to be preferred before the
Creature, Heaven before the World, the Soul before the Body, Eternity before
Time, so much does it concern us to have the better part safe. And as Men in a
great Fire, and general Conflagration, will hazard their Lumber to preserve
their Treasure, their Money, or their Jewels: So should we take care, that if we
must lose one or other, that the better part be out of hazard: And whatever we
lose by the way, we may be sure to come well to the end of our Journey.

2. That nothing will make us hazard all things, for the purchasing, or
acquiring the Salvation of the Soul, but only Faith. The Flesh is importunate
to be pleased: Sense says to us, Favor thy self, that is, spare the Flesh;
But Faith says, Save thy Soul. Faith, which apprehends things future and
invisible, will teach us to value all things according to their worth, and to
lose some present satisfaction, for that future and eternal Gain which the
Promises of God do offer to us. Now Faith does this two ways; By convincing us
of the Worth, and of the Truth of things promised by God through Christ. The
Apostle when he blows his Trumpet, and summoneth our reverence, and attentive
regard to the Gospel; in that Preface, 1 Timothy 1. 15. he says, This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
World to save Sinners. Salvation by Christ is worthy to be regarded above all
things: And if it be true, all things should give place unto it. Now Faith
convinces us of the Worth and Truth, and makes us to take the thing promised
for all our Treasure and Happiness; and the Promise it self, or the Word of
God, for our whole security.

1. It makes us to take the thing promised, for all our Treasure and
Happiness; Mat. 6. 19, 20, 21. Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon Earth,
where Moth and Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal.
But lay up for your selves Treasure in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does
corrupt, nor Thieves break through and steal. For where your Treasure is, there
your Heart will be also. It highly concerns us to consider what we make our
Treasure. Worldly things are subject to many Accidents, and dese^ve not our
love nor esteem; only heavenly things deserve to be our Treasure. If our Hearts
be set upon these things, it is a sign we value what Christ has offered. So, 2
Cor. 4. 18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen: for the things which are seen, are Temporal; but the things
which are not seen, are Eternal. We make these things our End, and Scope, and
Happiness. It Is easy to prove the worth of these things in the general, as it is
easy to prove that Eternity is better than Time; that things incorruptible, are
better than those which are subject to corruption: That things exempted from
Casualty, are better than those things which are liable to Casualty, and are
not out of the reach of Robbery and Violence. But to Creatures wedded to sense
and present enjoyment, it is difficult and hard to cause them to set their
Hearts in another World, and to lay up their Hopes in Heaven, and to part with
all things which they see and love, and find comfortable to their Senses, for
that God and Glory which they never saw. This is the Business of Faith, or the
Work of the Spirit of Illumination changing their Hearts and Minds. This
general Truth all will determine, as that things Eternal, are better than
things Temporal. But we undervalue these gracious Promises, whose
accomplishment must with patience be expected, whilst their future Goodness
comes in actual competition with these bodily Delights which we must forgo,
and those grievous bodily Afflictions which we must endure out of sincere
respect to Christ and his Ways. Therefore before there can be any true
self-denial, Faith must incline us to this offered Benefit, as our true
Treasure and Happiness, whatever we forgo, or undergo to attain it.

2. For the truth of it, the Word of God must be our whole security, as being
enough to support our Hearts in waiting for it, however God cover himself with
Frowns, and an appearance of Anger, in those Afflictions which befall us in the
way thither. The Word of God is all in all to his People: Thy Testimonies have
I taken as my Heritage for ever: they are the rejoicing of my Soul, Psalm. 119.
111. If a Man has little ready Money, yet if he have an Heritage to live upon,
or sure Bonds, he is well ^paid: So is a Believer rich in Promises; which being
the Promises of the Almighty and Immutable God, and built upon the everlasting
Merit of Christ, are as good to him as Performances, and therefore cause joy in
some Proportion as if the things were in hand; Heb. 11. 13. These all died in
Faith, not having received the Promises, but having seen then afar off, and
were persuaded of them, and embraced them. And, Psalm. 56. 4. In God will I
praise his Word, in God have I put my trust, I will not fear what Man can do
unto me. Faith rests upon God's Word, who is able to save to the uttermost
all that come to him by Christ.

1. Use is Information concerning a weighty Truth; namely, what the Faith is by
which the Just do live. It Is such a trust or confidence in God's Promises of
eternal Life through Jesus Christ, as that we forsake all other hopes and
happiness whatsoever, that we may obtain it.

To make good this Description to you, let me observe,

1. That Faith looks mainly to Heaven, or the saving of the Soul, as the
prime Benefit offered to us by Jesus Christ. For all attend to this; 1 Timothy 1.
16. For a Pattern to them who should hereafter believe on him to life
everlasting. This was that they chiefly aimed at, and therefore called the End
of our Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 9. For this end were the Scriptures written; John 20.
31. These things are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ,
the Son of God, and that believing ye might have Life through his Name. The
Scriptures are writ^en, to direct us to know Christ aright, who is the Kernel
and Marrow of all the Scriptures, who is the great Subject of the Gospel; and
that the chief Benefit we have by him, is eternal Life, by which all our Pains
and losses for Christ are recompensed, and from whence we fetch our Comfort all
along during the course of our Pilgrimage, and upon the hopes of which the Life
of Grace is carried on, and the Temptations of Sense are defeated; so that this
is the main Blessing which Faith aims at.

2. That the sure grounds which Faith goes upon, is God's Promise through
Jesus Christ; and so it implies.

(1.) That there is a God, who is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him:
for the Apostle pursuing this Discourse, tells us, Heb. 11. 6. That a Man
must believe God's Being and Bounty, before he can do any thing to the purpose
for him.

(2.) That this God has revealed himself in Jesus Christ, as willing to accept
poor Creatures who refuse not his New Covenant and remedying-Grace, to Pardon,
and Life. For the guilty Creature would stand at a distance, and not receive
his Offers with any comfort and Satisfaction, had not God been in Christ
reconciling the World to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. But now they may be invited to
come to him with hope, verse. 20. And his gracious Promises standing upon such a
bottom and foundation, are the sooner believed; 2 Cor. 1. 20. For the Promises
of God are in him Yea, and in him Amen, to the Glory of God by us; that is, the
Promises of God propounded in Christ's Name, are undoubtedly true; they are not
Yea and Nay, but Yea, and Amen: They do not say Yea to Day, and Nay to Morrow;
but always Yea so it is, and Amen, so it shall be; because they stand upon an
immutable Foundation, the everlasting Merit and Redemption of Christ.

(3.) It implies, That the Scriptures which contain these Offers and Promises,
are the Word of God: For though God's Veracity be unquestionable, how shall we
know that we have his Word; it is laid at Pledge with us in the Scriptures, which
are the Declaration of the Mind of the Eternal God. The Promises are a part of
those Sacred Scriptures which were written by the inspiration of the Holy
Spirit, and sealed with a multitude of Miracles, and bare the very Image and
Superscription of God, (as every thing which has past his Hand, has his
Signature upon it, even to a Gnat or Pile of Grass) and have been received and
preserved by the Church, as the certain Oracles of God, and blessed by him
throughout all Generations, and Successions of Ages, to the convincing,
converting, sanctifying, and comforting of many Souls: And carry their own
Light, Evidence, and Recommendation to the Consciences of all those who are not
strangely perverted by their brutish Lusts, and blinded by their worldly
Affections: For the Apostle says, By the manifestation of the Truth,
commending our selves to every Man's Conscience. For if our Gospel be hid, it is
hid to those who are lost: The God of this World having blinded their Eyes,
lest the Light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 2, 3,
4. Upon these grounds does Faith proceed, which I have mentioned the more
distinctly, that you might know how to excite Faith; for besides praying for
the Spirit of Wisdom and Illumination to open our Eyes, we must use the means,
both as rational Creatures, and new Creatures. And what Means are more
effectual than those mentioned?

1. Is there not a God? If there be not a God, How did we come to be? Thou
were not made by chance; And when thou were not, thou could not make thy
self. Look upon thy Body, so curiously framed, Whose workmanship could this be,
but of a Wise God? Upon thy Soul, Whose Image and Superscription does it bear?
Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which
are God's. Nay, look upward, downward, within thee, without thee, what do
thou see, hear, and feel, but the Products and Effects of an eternal Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness? Thou can not open thine Eyes, but the Heavens are ready
to say to thy Conscience, Man, there is a God, an in^inite eternal Being, who
made us, and all things else.

Now for the second: Has not this God revealed himself gracious in Christ?
Nature declares there is a God; and Scripture, that there is a Christ. As
there is one God, the first Cause of all, infinitely powerful, wise, and good;
therefore it is but reasonable that he should be served, and according to his
own Will. But we have faulted in our Duty to our Creator, and therefore are in
dread of his Justice. Certainly reasonable Creatures have immortal Souls, and
so die not as the Beasts; therefore there is no true Happiness in these things
wherein Men ordinarily seek it. Is it not then a blessed discovery, that God
has brought Light and Immortality to light by Jesus Christ; that he sent him
into the World to be a Propitiation, and to satisfy his Justice, and to redeem
us from our guilty Fears? And shall we neglect this great Salvation brought to
us by Jesus Christ? or coldly seek after it? Surely God is willing to be
reconciled to Man, or (...) he would presently have plunged (...) into our
^ternal Estate, as he did the Angels upon their first sinning: But he wai^eth,
and bears with many (...); he beseeches us, and prays (...) to be
reconciled. And how shall we (...), if we neglect so great Salvation, which was
first spoken by the Lord, and then conf^^m^d unto us by them that heard ^im;
God also bearing them witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and diverse
Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will? Heb. 2. 3, 4.
Would Holy Men cheat the World with an Imposture? or would God be accessory in
lending his Power to do such mavelous things? It cannot be.

And then for the third: Is not this a part of the Word of God, which Holy Men
have written to consign it to the use of the Church in all Ages? 1 John 2. 45.
This is the Promise which he has promised us, Eternal Life. Is not this God's
Promise? And will not God be mindful and regardful of his Word? He was wont to
be tender of it. Psalm. 138. 2. Thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name:
above all that is named, or famed, or spoken and believed of God. His Truth and
Trustiness is most conspicuous. In the New Covenant he has given his solemn
Oath, as well as his Word, that the Heirs of Promise might have strong
Consolation, Heb. 6. 18. What is the matter that my belief of these things is
so cold and ineffectual? If this be God's Promise, and he has put in no
exception against me, to exclude me from the benefit of this Promise, What is
the reason why I can no more encourage my self in the Lord to seek after this
Salvation; but am disturbed so often by distracting Fears and Cares, and so
easily misled by vain Delights. Thus should we excite our Faith.

But I digress too long.

3. The Nature of this Faith, I express by a Trust and Confidence. There is in
Faith an Assent, which is sufficient when the Object requires no more. As
there are some speculative Principles which are merely to be believed, as they
lead on to other things, Heb. 11. 3. there an intellectual Assent suffices.
But there are other things which are propounded, not only as true, but good:
There, not only an intellectual Assent is required, but a practical Assent, or
such as is joined with Consent and Affiance. As suppose when Christ promises
Eternal Life to the serious Christian, or mortified Believer: There must be not
only an assent, or a believing that this proposal and offer is Christ's, and
that it is true; But there must be a consent, to choose it for my Portion and
Happiness, and then a confidence and dependence upon Christ for it, though it
lie out of sight, and in the mean time I be exercised with sundry Difficulties
and Temptations. Trust is not a bare Opinion of Christ's Fidelity, but a
dependence upon his Word. I do believe there is a God, and that there is a
Christ, I do well; I do believe that this God in Christ, has brought Life and
Immortality to light, I do well still, but I must do more; I believe that he
has assured his Disciples and Followers, That if they continue faithful with
him, they shall have eternal Life: John 5. 29. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
He that hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
Life, and shall not come into condemnation. I know that Christ has fidelity
and sufficiency enough to make good his Word. This is well, but I must go
farther, that is to say, I must choose this eternal Life that is offered to me,
for my felicity and portion, this is Consent; and I must continue with patience
in well-doing, depending upon his faithful Word whilst I am in the pursuit of
it, this is Trust or Confidence. As this World is Vanity, and has nothing in
it worthy to be compared with the Hopes which Christ has given me of a better
Life, so I choose it for my Happiness. But as I judge him faithful that has
promised, and depend upon him that he will make good his Word, though this
Happiness be future, and lies in another, an unseen, an unknown World, to
which there is no coming but by Faith, this is the Trust, and by that Name it
is often expressed in Scripture. It Is nothing else but a sure and comfortable
dependence upon God through Jesus Christ, in the way of well-doing for the Gift
of eternal Life. Psalm. 112. 7. His Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. So,
Isa. 26. 3. Thou keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. The New Testament also uses this term, 2 Cor. 3.
4. Such trust have we through Christ to Godward. And, 1 Timothy 4. 10. For
therefore we both labor, and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living
God. Well then, this Trust is more than an Assent, or bare Persuasion of the
mind that the Promises are true; yea, it is more than a motion of the Will
toward them as good and satisfying; for it notes a quiet repose of the Heart,
on the fidelity and mercy of God in Christ, that he will give this Blessedness,
if we do in the first place seek after it. The more we cherish this Confidence,
the more sure we are of our Interest, both in Christ and the Promise; Heb. 3.
6. Whose House we are, if we hold fast our Confidence, and rejoicing of Hope
firm unto the end. And, verse. 14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold
the beginning of our Confidence steadfast unto the end. And, Heb. 10. 35. a
little before the Text, Cast not away your Confidence, which has great
recompense of reward. In all which places, Confidence notes our resolute
engaging in the heavenly Life, because we depend upon Christ's Rewards in
another World. In our passage to Heaven, we meet with manifold Temptations, we
are assaulted both on the right hand, and on the left, with the terrors of
sense, which are a discouragement to us; and the delights of sense, which are a
snare to us. Confidence or Trust, fortifieth us against both these Temptations,
the Difficulties, Dangers, and Sufferings, which we meet with in our passage to
Heaven, yea tho it should be death it self: for Faith sees the end glorious,
and that the Salvation of our Souls is sure and near, if we continue faithful
with Christ. On the other side, Affiance or Trust draws the Heart to better
things, and we can easily want or miss the Contentments of the Flesh, the pomp,
and ease, and pleasure of the present Life, because our Hearts are in Heaven,
and we have more excellent things in view and pursuit. This breeds a
weanedness from the Baits of the Flesh, and a rejection and contempt of what
would take us off from the pursuit of eternal Life: 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27. I run not
as one that is uncertain. As if he had said, I am confident, therefore I am
mortified to the World.

4. The immediate Fruit and Effect of it, is a forsaking all other Hopes and
Happiness for Christ's sake, and for the Blessedness which he offers. That
forsaking all belongs to this Affiance and Trust, is plain, because I can
neither trust God, nor be true to him, till I can venture all my Happiness upon
this security. And if God calls me to it, actually forsake all upon these
Hopes. This will appear to you by these Arguments.

1. By the Doctrinal Descriptions of the Gospel-Faith. Our Lord has told us,
that the Kingdom of Heaven is like a Merchant-man, Matthew. 13. 45, 46. The
Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-man, seeking goodly Pearls; who when
he had found one Pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and
bought it. And certainly he knew the Nature of that Faith better than we do.
Many cheapen the Pearl of Price, but they do not go through with the Bargain,
because they do not fell all to purchase it. No, you must have such a sense of
the Excellency and truth of Salvation by Christ, that you must choose it, and
let go all that is inconsistent with this Choice and Trust. You must be
resolved to let go all your sinful Pleasures, Profit, and Reputation, and your
Life it self, rather than forfeit these Hopes. So, Luke 14. 26. If any Man come
unto me, and hate not Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren,
and Sisters, yea, and his own Life, he cannot be my Disciple. So, Verse. 33.
Whosoever he be, that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my Disciple.
After such express declararions of the Will of Christ, why should we think of
going to Heaven at a cheaper rate, and that the Covenant will be modelled, and
brought down to our Humors? Christ's Service will bring Trouble with it. All
that is precious in the World, must be renounced, or else we shall not be able
to hold out. The same is inferred out of the Doctrine of Self-denial, Matthew.
16. 24. It Is the immediate Fruit, yea, the principal Act of our Trust; for if
God be trusted, as our F^licity, he must be loved above all, and all things
must give way to God. The same is inferred out of the Baptismal Covenant, which
is a renouncing the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and a giving up our selves
to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as our God. This Renouncing, implies a
venturing of all, that we may obtain this Blessedness, or eternal Life.

2. By all the extraordinary Calls, and Trials, that are propounded as a
Pattern to us. Faith was ever a venturing all, and a forsaking all, upon the
belief of God's Veracity. Let us see Noah's Faith; Heb. 11. 7. By Faith Noah
being warned of God, concerning things not seen as yet, prepared an Ark for the
saving of his House. That warning that God gave him of the Flood, was
extraordinary, but they were of things not seen as yet; whilst these things
were in the mind of God, no Man or Angel could know them; and after God
revealed them, there was nothing but his bare word for it. But Noah believed;
And what then? At God's prescription, with vast expense, he prepares an Ark,
and that was selling all. He was of a vast Estate, or else he could not have
prepared such a Fabric, so many Years in building, and so furnished; but this
was the prescribed means to save his Household. In the next place, let us
consider Abraham's Trial, who was the Father of the Faithful. His first trial
was, Heb. 11. 8. By Faith Abraham when we was called to go out to a place,
which he should afterward receive for an Inheritance, obeyed, not knowing
whither he went. Here was trusting, and venturing all upon God's Call. He
forsook his Kindred, and Father's House, and All, to seek an Abode he knew not
where. Therefore we must forsake the World, and all things therein, yea, Life
it self, having our Thoughts and Affections fixed on Heaven. There must be a
total resignation of Heart and Will to God. We owe God blind Obedience. To
fors^ke our Country, Kindred, Friends, Inheritance, is a sore Trial; yet this
was done by him, and must be done by all that will be saved; We must deny our
selves, take up our Cross, and forsake Father and Mother, Wife and Children,
all Relations. All this he did, for a Land which he neither knew where it was,
nor the way to it. Our God has told us, He will bring us into the Heavenly
Canaan. His second trial you have recorded, Verse. 17. By Faith Abraham when he
was tried, offered up Isaac; and he that received the Promises, offered up his
only Son. God would try Abraham, that he might be an Example of Faith to all
future Generations, whether Abraham loved God, or his Son Isaac more. But he
did not shrink upon Trial; he offered him up, that is, in his Heart he had
parted with him, and given him wholly unto God, and made all ready for the
Offering, being assured of God's fidelity; even Isaac, upon whom the Promises
were settled, must be offered; Children, dear Children, every thing must be
given up to God. In the next place, Consider we the Israelites in the Red Sea;
Heb. 11. 29. By Faith they passed through the Red Sea, as by dry Land. God
commands Moses, when in straits, to strike the Sea with his Rod, and Israel to
pass forward, and expect the Salvation of God, promising to deliver them. They
did so, and the Sea was divided, and the Waters stood like Walls and Mountains,
as if they had been congealed and turned to Ice; and the bottom, which never
saw Sun before, is made like firm Ground, without Mud and Quicksands. Thus
entirely will God be trusted by his People, and they must put their All into
his hands. If God will have it so, Faith must find a way through the great
Deep. No Dangers so great that we must decline. Come we now to the New
Testament; Christ's trial of the young Man: Jesus said unto him, Go thy way,
sell all that thou have, and give to the Poor, and thou shall have Treasure in
Heaven, Mark 10. 21. But he could not venture on Christ's Command, and went
away sad. The Promise of Eternal Life, and Treasure in Heaven, could not part
the young Man and his great Estate, and therefore he continued incapable of
eternal Bliss. This young Man is set forth in the Gospel as a warning to
others. So in Peter's Trial, Mat. 1^. 29, 30. If Christ bid Peter come to him
upon the Waters, Peter must come though the storm continues, and he be ready
to sink at every step.

3. By all the Instances of Faith, in the ordinary and common case of
Salvation. Moses had Faith, therefore he forsook all Honors, Pleasures, and
Treasures, for he trusted God, and waited for the recompense of Reward, Heb.
11. 24, 25, 26. It Is endless in instancing in all: Take these, Heb. 10. 34. Ye
took joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have
a better and more enduring substance. They were not ^iscouraged, but took this
Rapine joyfully, which argued a lively Faith in Christ, and a sincere love to
h^^. It goes (...) to the Hearts of Worldling^ to part with these things, but
they valued Christ as infinitely m^^e (...) than all the Wealth of the World.
If they lost their Goods, yet if they lost not Christ, they were happy enough;
for then they still kept the Title to the enduring Substance. Thus you see what
is Faith; Such a trusting in God for eternal Life, as makes us willing to
forsake all, rather than be unfaithful to Christ. Others may delude you,
inchant your Souls asleep with fine strains of illunderstood and abused Grace.
But if you would not be deceived, take the Faith and Christianity of Christ's
Recommendation, which is the Faith now described. Are we in the place of God,
that we can make Heaven narrower or broader for you? Surely it is Grace, rich
Grace that God will pardon us, and call us to eternal Life by Jesus Christ. Now
if you will have it, you must believe to the Salvation of the Soul, so believe,
as to quit all other things to obtain it.

Use 2. Is for Examination. Let us examine our Spiritual Condition, whether it
be good or bad; whether our Faith be sincere, our Profession real; whether we
tend to Perdition, or to Salvation; whether we believe to the saving of the
Soul; that is, if we care not what we lose, so we may obtain the heavenly
Inheritance. Have you such a trust, as that you can venture the loss of
something which is dear to you for this Trust; yea, not only something, but all
things? Certainly we have not a true belief of the promise of eternal Life, if
we can venture nothing upon it, hazard nothing for it. Now we venture things
upon the account of God's Promise, four ways.

1. In a way of Mortification. 2. In a way of Self-denial. 3. In a way of
Charity. 4. In a way of submission to Providence.
1. In a way of Mortification. Denying our selves the sinful Pleasures of the
Senses. Our Sins were never worth the keeping; these must always be parted
with, other things but at times; therefore I can venture but little upon the
security of eternal Life, if I cannot deny my fleshly and worldly Lusts, and a
little vain Pleasure, for that fullness of Joy which is at God's right hand for
evermore. I have God's Word for it, that if I mortify the Deeds of the Body, I
shall live, Romans 8. 13. It Is yet hard to abjure accustomed Delights; and to
Hearts pleasantly set, the strictness of an holy Life seems grim and severe;
but a Believer that has a prospect into Eternity, knows that it is better to
deny the Flesh, than to displease God; To take a little pains in rectifying our
disordered Hearts, and distempered Souls, than to endure pains for evermore.
And that a little momentany Delight is bought too dear, if it be bought with
the loss of eternal Joys. No, let me lose my Lusts, rather than lose my Soul,
says he. Every Man's Heart cleaves to those things which he judges best; and
the more it cleaves to better things, the more it is withdrawn from other
things. Therefore Faith showing us the truth and worth of heavenly Things, and
taking God's Word for its security; it mastereth our Desires and carnal
Affections. It Is the Stranger and Pilgrim (whose Mind is persuaded of things to
come, and whose Heart is set upon them) that abstaineth from fleshly Lusts, 1
Pet. 2. 11. Upon the assurance of God's Word, he is taking his journey into
another World: Tho the Flesh will rebel, yet he counterballanceth the Good and
Evil which the Flesh proposes; with the Good and Evil of the other World,
which the Word of God proposes; and so learneth more and more to contemn the
pleasures of Sin, and curb his unruly Passions. Mortify your Members upon
Earth, for your Life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3, ^5. And they that
look for a Life of Glory hereafter, will choose a Life of Purity here upon
Earth. It Is the Unbeliever finds such an impotency in resisting present
Temptations; he has not any sense, or not a deep sense of the World to come.

2. In a way of Self-denial. What can you venture and forgo that way upon the
security of God's Promise? Mortification concerns our Lusts, and Self-denial
our Interests. What Interest can you venture upon the warrant of the Promise?
Christ says, He that denies me before Men, I will deny him before my Father
in Heaven, Luke 12. 9. And again, Whosoever shall save his Life, shall lose it,
etc. Luke 9. 24. And once more, verse. 26. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and
my words, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in his Glory.
Now urge the Soul with the Promises; Am I willing to hazard my temporal
Conveniences for the enduring Substance? to incur shame and blame with Men,
that I may be faithful with God, and own his Interest in the World? and do I so
when it actually comes to a trial? The Heart is deceitful, and a Temptation in
Conceit and Imagination, is nothing to a Temptation in Act and Deed: Therefore
when your Resolutions are assaulted by Temptations of any considerable
strength, Do you acquit your self with good fidelity? Can you trust God, when
he tries your Trust in some necessary Point of Confession, which may expose
you to some loss, shame, and hazard in the World?

3. In a way of Charity, and doing good with your Estates. That Religion is
worth nothing that costs nothing; and when all is laid out upon Pomp and
Pleasure, and worldly Ends, as the advancing of your Families and Relations;
and little or nothing for God, upon the security of his Promise, or only so
much as the Flesh can spare, to hide your self-pleasing and self-seeking in
other things. Can you practice upon that Promise, and try your Faith; Luke 12.
33. Sell that you have, and give Alms; provide your selves Bags that wax not
old, a Treasure in the Heavens that fails not. What have you ventured in this
kind? Do you believe, that he that gives to the Poor, lends to the Lord? and
that he will be your Paymaster? Do you look upon no Estate so sure, as that
which is trusted in Christ's Hands? and are you content to be at some
considerable cost for Eternal Life? Most Men love a cheap Gospel, and the Flesh
ingrosseth all. Faith gets little from them to be laid out for God. Do not
these Men run a fearful hazard? And while they are so over-careful to preserve
their Estates to themselves and Families, Do they believe to the saving of
their Souls? Or if they do not preserve their Estates, but waste them, and are
at great costs for their Lusts, they do nothing considerably, or proportionably
for God; this is saving to the Flesh, and they shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption.

4. In a way of submission to Providence. Whether you will or no, you are at
God's disposal, and cannot shift your selves out of his Hands, either here, or
hereafter: But yet it is a part of your Duty voluntarily to surrender your
selves, to be disposed of, and ordered by God according to his pleasure, to be
content to be, what he will have you to be, and to do what he will have you to
do and suffer, is included in selling all. You must submit to be at God's
finding, which is that poverty of Spirit spoken of, Mat. 5. 3. Blessed are the
poor in Spirit. Such whose Minds and Spirits are subdued, and brought under
Obedience to God; you must be content to enjoy what God will have you to enjoy,
and to want what he will have you want, and to lose what he will have you lose.
2 Samuel 15. 26, 27. and Job 1. 21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the Name of the Lord. Many seem to resign all, Goods, Life, and All,
to the Will of God. But it is because they secretly think in their Hearts, that
God will never put them to the trial, or take from them what they resign to
him; but they are not prepared for a submission to all Events. Like those that
make large Promises to others, when they think they will not take them at their
words. So their Hearts secretly except, and reserve much of that they resign to
God. But this is false-dealing, and is shown in part, in murmuring when God
takes any thing from us.

1 PET. 1. 9. Receiving the End of your Faith, even the Salvation of your
Souls.
THE Apostle here gives a reason why Believers rejoice in the midst of
Afflictions; they are qualified thereby to receive Salvation; yea, in part have
it already; Receiving the End of your Faith, the Salvation of your Souls.

In which words observe; 1. The Benefit. The Salvation of our Souls. 2. The
Grace which quali^ieth us for that Benefit. Faith. 3. The respect between the
Benefit and the Grace, it is (...), the End, or Reward.


1. The Benefit. Which may be considered as consummated, or as begun. And
accordingly the word (...) must be interpreted: If you consider it as to
Consummation, and actual Possession, so we receive it at Death, when our
Self-denying Obedience is ended: And for the present we are said to receive it,
because we are sure to receive it at the close of our days. We believe now that
we shall at length have it, and therefore rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full
of Glory. 2. If you consider it with respect to Inchoation, or begun
Possession. We have an undoubted Right now, and some beginnings of it in the
Consolations of the Spirit. Now we receive it in the Promises, we receive it in
the first Fruits, which are some forerunning Beams of the daylight of eternal
Glory.

2. The Grace which qualifieth, and gives us a Title to this Benefit, is
Faith. The word Faith is taken in Scripture sometimes for fides quae creditur,
sometimes for fides qua creditur, for the Doctrine, or Grace of Faith. The
first Acceptance will make a good sense here, namely, that the whole Tenor of
Christian Doctrine, leads us to the expectation of, and diligent pursuit
after eternal Salvation: It Is the whole drift of the Christian Religion. But I
take it rather for the Grace. This is the prime Benefit which Faith aims at,
as I shall show you by and by.

3. The Respect between Faith and Salvation. It Is (...) the End; or the word
signifies the Fruit, and the Reward. As (...) is taken for an End and Scope,
the Scripture favors that Notion: (...), I press toward the Mark or Scope,
Phil. 3. 14. And, 2 Cor. 4. 18. (...), the Salvation of our Souls is the prime
Benefit which Faith is not only allowed, but required to aim at. A Believer
levelleth and directs all his Actions to this end, that at length he may
obtain eternal Life. Sometimes it is put for the Fruit or Reward; Romans 6. 22.
Being made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your Fruit unto
Holiness, and the end everlasting Life. The issue of all, the final result was
your Salvation.

The Point that I shall in^ist on is this;

Doct. That the End and Reward of Faith, is the Salvation of our Souls.

I shall open the Point, by explicating three Questions.

1. What is this Salvation of our Souls? 2. What Right the Believer has to it?
3. What is that saving-Faith which gives us a Title to it? The last is most
important.
1. What is the Salvation of the Soul? It Is not meant of temporal Deliverance,
or an escape from Danger, as some would affix that sense upon it, but of
eternal Life, or our happy Estate in Heaven: This belongs to our whole Man,
the Body as well as the Soul; but the Soul is the chief part of Man, and that
which is first glorified. When Men come first into the World, first the Body is
framed, and then the Soul comes after: As we see in the Creation of Adam,
first his Body was organized, and then God breathed into him the Spirit of
Life. And we see it in common Generation, when the Body is first framed in the
Womb, then it is quickened by a living Soul. This lower Region of the World is
properly the place of Bodies, therefore Reason requires that the Body, which is
a Citizen of the World, should first be framed, that it may be a receptacle for
the Soul, which is a stranger, and comes from the Region of Spirits that is
above. But when we must remove into these heavenly Habitations, then it is quite
otherwise; for then the Soul as a Native of that place, is presently admitted,
but the Body as a stranger, is forced to recide in the Grave till the Day of
Judgment; and then for the sake of the Soul, our Bodies also are admitted into
Heaven: This is the ordinary Law for all private Persons. Christ indeed, who is
the Head of the Church, and the Prince of this World, and that which is to
come, his Body, as well as his humane Spirit, was made a Denizon of Heaven as
soon as he ascended: He entered into Heaven, not as a private Citizen, but as
King and Lord of the Heavenly Jerusalem; and therefore carried both Body and
Soul along with him. But as to us, first the Soul goes there, as into his
ancient Seat, and proper Habitation, and afterward the Body follows.

Well then, 1. at Death our Souls go to Christ, and enter into a state of
Happiness; Phil. 1. 23. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. The
Soul is not annihilated after Death, nor does it sleep till the Resurrection,
nor is it detained by the way from immediate passing into Glory: but if it be
the Soul of a Believer, as soon as it is loosed from the Body, it is with
Christ; Luke 23. 43. Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. He asked to be remembered when Christ came into his Kingdom; and
Christ assures him of a reception there that day as soon as he should expire.

2. In due time the Body is raised and united to the Soul; and then Christ will
be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
10. Such glory and honor will be put upon those who are but newly crept out of
Dust and Rottenness; the Saints themselves, and all the Spectators, shall
wonder at it.

3. There is another Period in this Happiness; Our everlasting habitation in
Heaven, near unto the Throne of God, and in the presence of his Glory; John 14.
2. In my Father's House are many Mansions. There we shall also have the company
of Angels, and blessed Spirits, and make up one Society with them; Heb. 12. 23.
To the general Assembly and Church of the first Born, which are written in
Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men made
perfect. This is the sum of the Salvation which we expect, or our everlasting
Happiness with God in Heaven.

2. What is the Right of Believers, or the Interest of Faith in this great
Benefit?

I Anser;

1. It does not merit this Reward; for it is not a Reward of due Debt, by
virtue of any intrinsic Righteousness in us, or any thing that we can do and
suffer; but of mere Grace and Favor; Ephesians. 2. 8. For by Grace ye are saved
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God. The Apostle
is very tender of the Honor of Grace, and the Interest of Grace in our
Salvation. From the first step to the last period, all is of Grace, and this
Glory of his free Grace, God must not be robbed of, neither in whole nor in
part. We have all from his Elective Love, we have all from the Merit and
Righteousness of Christ, and all from the almighty Operation of the sanctifying
Spirit. Faith it self is a Gift and Fruit of God's Grace in us. To you it is
given to believe, Phil. 1. 29. Therefore surely it is God's free Grace, Favor,
and Good Will, which does freely bestow that Salvation on the Elect, which
Christ by his Merit has purchased; and that very Faith by which we apply and
make out our actual Claim and Title, is wrought in us by the Spirit; so that
there is nothing in the Persons to whom all this is given, to induce God to
confer so great Benefit on us.

2. Tho it be an undeserved Favor, upon which our Works have no meritorious
Influence, yet Believers have an undoubted Right by the Grant and Promise of
God, wherein they may comfort themselves, and which they may plead before God.
John 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have Life Everlastingly.
And, John 5. 24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that hears my words, and
believes in him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from Death to Life. And in many places, where the
Believer is qualified as the Heir of Glory. He that entertaineth Christ's
Doctrine, and receives and owneth him as the True Messiah and Savior of the
World, and depends upon him, and obeys him, this Man has a full right and
new Covenant-Title to eternal Life.

3. He has not only a new Covenant-Right, but a begun Possession. We have some
small Beginnings, Earnests, and Foretastes of it in this; partly in the Graces,
partly in the Comforts of the Spirit.

(1.) In the Graces of the Holy Spirit. For Salvation is begun in our new
Birth, Titus 3. 5. And therefore Sanctifying Grace is called Immortal, or
incorruptible Seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. There is an eternal Principle put into them,
which carries them to eternal Ends. The Life is begun in all that shall be
saved, and it is still working toward its final Perfection. The Apostle
tells us, That he that hates his Brother, has not eternal Life abiding in
him, 1 John 3. 15. Whereby he implies, That he that loves his Brother, or
has any saving Grace, he has eternal Life begun in him.

(2.) As to Comforts, so they have some foretastes of that sweetness which is
in Heaven, by the Life and Exercise of Faith, which is followed with Peace and
Joy, Romans 15. 13. Or in their approaches to God in the Word and Prayer, where
Cod most familiarly manifests himself unto his People, 1 Pet. 1. 3. or upon
some apprehensions of his favor, or the exercise of Hope and Love, 2 Pet. 1.
8. By these or the like ways, the Spirit of God gives us the foretaste. Surely
such an Author, such an Object, must needs put ravishing and heavenly Joy into
the Heart of a Believer.

4. They are also made meet to partake of the heavenly Inheritance, Col. 1. 12.
There is Ius Haereditarium, and Ius Aptitudinale. The difference is, as between
an Heir grown, and in his nonage, when a Child in the Cradle. As their Natures
are more renewed and purified, and their Souls weaned from the delights of
sense, they are changed into the Divine Nature.

3. What is that saving-Faith which gives us a title to it? This deserves to
be cleared, that we may not deceive our selves with a false claim.

Saving-Faith is such a believing in Christ, for reconciliation with God, and
the everlasting Fruition of him in Glory; as makes us to forsake all things in
this World, and give up our selves to the conduct of the Word and Spirit for
the obtaining of it.

1. The general Nature of it I express by believing. There is in it, Assent,
Consent, and A^^iance.

1. Assent. That leads on the rest, when we believe the Truth of God's Word,
Acts 24. 14, 15. especially those practical Truths which do most nearly concern
our recovery to God; as concerning Man's Sin and Misery, that we have broken
his Laws, and are obnoxious to his Justice, and have deserved punishment for
our Sins, Romans 3. 23. And concerning Christ, his Person and Office, that he is
the Son of God, and that he came from God, to bring home Sinners to God, and
what he has done to reconcile us to him; 1 Pet. 3. 18. For Christ also has
once suffered for our Sins, the Just for the Unjust; (that he might bring us to
God) being put to death in the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. And also
concerning your Duty and Happiness, the End and the Way: There is no other End
and Happiness but God, no other Way but the Mediator, and the Means appointed
by him, John 14. 6. Now these and suchlike Truths must be believed, that is,
in the sense we are now upon, assented unto as faithful Sayings, and worthy of
all acceptance and regard.

2. There is a Consent in Faith, whether you apply it to the Word, or Christ.
If Christ be propounded as the Object of it, it is called a receiving, John 1.
12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of
God: So the word, Acts 2. 41. They gladly received his Word; that is, embraced
the Gospel Covenant, being really affected with what he had spoken, concerning
their Sin, and their Duty. Without this, the Assent is but Intellectual and
Speculative, not Practical. An Opinion, not an Act, or Motion of the new
Nature: I am to receive the Christ offered, to embrace the Covenant propounded.
To accept of the Blessings offered for my Happiness, and to resolve upon the
Duties required as my Work. This is Consent, or an hearty accepting of Christ,
or the Covenant of Grace offered to us in his Name.

3. There is Affiance, Trust, Dependence, or Confidence; which is a quiet
repose of Heart in the Mercy of God, or Fidelity of Christ, that he will give
me Pardon and Life, if I seek after it in the way that he has appointed. This
comes in upon the former; for when I consent to seek my happiness in God,
through Christ, I depend upon the security of his Word, that so doing I shall
obtain it. This intitleth us to the Reward; Heb. 3. 6. Whose House we are if we
hold fast the Confidence, and rejoicing of Hope firm unto the End. And, Verse.
14. For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
Confidence steadfast unto the End. And, Heb. 10. 35. Cast not away your
Confidence, which has great recompense of Reward. The Happiness which Christ
promises us, is spiritual; and for the most part future, an lies in an unseen
and unknown World; but whilst we are engaged in the pursuit of it, we must
depend upon his ^aithful Word: That must be security enough to us, to engage us
to continue with patience in the midst of manifold Temptations, till we obtain
what he offers to us. These three must be often renewed; Assent, Consent, and
Affiance.

2. It Is a believing in Christ. I make Christ the special Object of this
Belief, not as exclusive of the Father, or the Spirit, but because of the
peculiar reference which this Grace has to the Mediator in this New and
Gospel Dispensation, which was appointed for the Remedy of the collapsed estate
of Mankind. So, Acts 20. 21. Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ. He speaks of Repentance as respecting God, and Faith as
respecting Christ. These are the two recovering Graces; Repentance is
necessary, because of the Duty we owe to our Creator and supreme Lord; and
Faith respects our Redeemer, who principally undertook our recovery to God.
Christ is believed in, in order to the Salvation of our Souls.

1. Because he purchased and procured this Salvation for us, as Mediator of the
New Testament. Heb. 9. 5. He is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by
means of Death for the Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the
first Covenant, they which are called, might receive the Promise of the eternal
Inheritance. By the intervention of his Death, Sins are expiated, that penitent
Believers might have everlasting Life.

2. Because it is by him promised, or in his Name. 1 John 2. 25. This is the
Promise which he has promised us, even eternal Life. Christ's great Business,
as a Prophet, is to discover with certainty and clearness, such a blessed
Estate, that it may be commodious for our acceptance, laid at our doors if we
will take it, well and good: He is Amen, the faithful Witness, Rev. 3. 14. who
came with a Commission from Heaven, to assure the World of it: and to confirm
his Message, he wrought Miracles, died, and rose again, and entered into that
Happiness which he spoke of, that our Faith and Hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.
21. Guilty Man is fallen under the Power and Fear of Death, and strangely
haunted with Doubts about the other World. Now he that came to save us and heal
us, did himself in our Nature rise from the Dead, and ascend into Heaven, that
he might give a visible demonstration, both of the Resurrection and Life to
come, which he has promised to us. And when he sent abroad Messengers in his
Name, to assure the World of it, their Testimony was accompanied with diverse
Signs, and Wonders, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 2. 3, 4. that the stupid
World might be alarmed to regard the offer, and by this Evidence be assured of
the Truth of it; therefore still it is a believing in Christ.

3. Because as King he does administer and dispense the Blessings of the New
Covenant; and among them, as the Chief and Principal, this Salvation unto all
those who are qualified: And therefore it is said, Heb. 5. 9. Being made perfect
through Sufferings, he is become the Author of eternal Salvation to all that
obey him. Every Effect must have some Cause; and this noble and glorious Effect
of eternal Salvation, could have no other Cause but Christ: and he as perfected
and consecrated, is the Author and efficient Cause of it: for as King, he
sends down the Holy Ghost to reveal the Gospel, and work Faith in the Hearts
of Men, to qualify them for Pardon and Salvation; and all those that sue for
Pardon and Salvation in his Name, by the Plea of his Blood before the Throne of
God, and promise obedience to his Laws and Institutes, he actually bestows
Pardon, and eternal Salvation upon them. There be many other ministerial, and
adjutant Causes, which conduce to this effect; But he is the Principal; and the
word (...), which signifies a Cause in general, is fitly by our Translation
termed, the Author of eternal Salvation: So that still you see a new Reason why
saving-Faith should be described to be a believing in Christ.

3. The prime Benefits which Faith respects, I make to be two. Reconciliation
with God, and the everlasting Fruition of him in Glory.

1. Reconciliation is necessarily eyed and regarded by the guilty Soul.

(1.) Because there has been a breach, by which we have lost God's Favor and
Happiness. We have to do with a God whose Nature ingageth him to hate Sin, and
whose Justice ingageth him to Punish it: And before we can be induced to treat
with him, such a Reconciliation is necessary for all Mankind, as that he should
be willing to deal with them upon the term of a New Covenant, wherein Pardon
and Life might be offered to penitent Believers. This Reconciliation is spoken
of, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not
imputing their Trespasses; and has committed unto us the Word of
Reconciliation; that is, upon the sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice, Ransom,
and Satisfaction; there was so much done toward an actual Reconciliation with
God, that he offered a conditional Covenant to as many as were willing to enter
into his Peace. He provided a sufficient Remedy for the Pardon of Sin, if Men
would as heartily accept of it, as it was freely given them. And the Office of
Ambassadors was appointed, to beseech Men so to do. And unless this had been
done, a guilty Soul could never be brought to love an holy, sin-hating God,
engaged by Justice to damn the Sinner: But it must be a loving reconciled God
that is willing to forgive, that can be propounded as an Object of Faith and
Love, or as an amiable God to us. Psalm. 130. 4. There is forgiveness with
thee, that thou may be feared.

2. Reconciliation is necessarily eyed by the penitent Believer, because this
Reconciliation and Recovery by Christ, consists both in the Pardon of Sin, and
the Gift of the Sanctifying Spirit.

1. One branch of the actual restitution of God's Favor to us, is the Pardon
of Sins; without which we are not capable of Life and Happiness, Ephesians. 7. The
possible conditional-Reconciliation, consists in the offer of Pardon, and the
actual Reconciliation, in the actual pardon and forgiveness of our
Transgressions; and then the Man begins to be in a blessed Estate, Psalm. 32.
1, 2.

2. The other Branch is the Gift of the Sanctifying Spirit, which is the great
Testimony and Pledge of his Love; then is our Pardon executed, or actually
applied to us: And we receive the Atonement, Romans 5. 11. And, 2 Cor 5. 8. All
things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ; that is,
all things which belong to the New Creature, verse. 17. And that is the Reason
why God is said to sanctify as a God of Peace; that is, as reconciled to us in
Christ; see 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly: and
Heb. 13. 20, 21. Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our
Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good Work, to do his Will, etc.
And in all God's internal Government with the Saints, he shows his pleasure
or displeasure with the Saints, by giving, or withholding and withdrawing the
Spirit, as it were easy to prove to you. Well then, you see the Reasons why in
believing in Christ, we reflect the Eye of our Faith on Reconciliation, as the
prime initial Benefit.

2. The next great consummating Benefit is, the everlasting Fruition of God in
Glory: For Christ's Office is to recover us to God, and bring us to God, which
is never fully and completely done till we come to Heaven. Therefore the saving
of the Soul is the prime Benefit offered to us by Jesus Christ, to which all
other tend. As Justification, and Sanctification, and by which all our Pains
and Losses for Christ are recompensed, and from which we fetch our comfort all
along the course of our Pilgrimage, and upon the Hopes of which the Life of
Grace is carried on, and the Temptations of sense are defeated. So that this is
the main Bl^ssing which Faith aims at; see the Scriptures, 1 Timothy 1. 16. For
a Pattern to them who should hereafter believe on him to everlasting Life.
Wherefore do Men believe in Christ, but for this end, that they may obtain
everlasting Life? Wherefore were the Scriptures written? John 20. 31. These
things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God; and that believing, ye might have Life through his Name. The Scriptures
are written, th^^ we might know Christ aright, who is the ^ernel and Marrow of
them; and the chief Benefit we have by him, is Life, or the Salvation of our
Souls; and therefore well may it be called in the Text, The End of our Faith.

4. In the next place, I add the immediate Acts and Effects of it: 1. Such as
makes us to forsake all things in this World. And, 2. give up our selves to
the Conduct of the Word and Spirit, for the obtaining this Happiness.


1. To forsake all things in this World. As soon as we address our selves
seriously to believe, we turn our backs upon them, namely, upon the Pleasures,
and Honors, and Profits of this World. We forsake them in Vow and Resolution,
when we are converted and begin to believe; for Conversion is a turning from
the Creature to God. As soon as we (...) believe, and hope for the Fruition of
God in Glory, as purchased and promised by Christ, our hearts are weaned and
withdrawn from the false Happiness, not perfectly, but yet sincerely; and we
actually renounce and forsake them at the call of God's Providence, when they
are inconsistent with our fidelity to Christ, and the hopes of that Happiness
which his Promises offer to us. Now that our Faith must be expressed by
forsaking all, yea, that it is essential to Faith; and nothing else is
saving-Faith but this, as appears,

1. By the Doctrinal Descriptions of it in the Gospel, (which I shall describe
to you according to my usual method); our Lord has told us, That the Kingd^m
of Heaven is like a Merchant man, Mat. 13. 45, 46. seeking goodly Pearls. Who
when he had found one Pearl of great Price, he went and sold all that he had
and bought it. And surely he knew the Nature of Faith better than we do. Many
cheapen the Pearl of Pri^e, but they do not go through with the ^^^gain,
because they do not sell all to purchase i^. Faith implies such a sense of the
Excellency and Truth of Salva^ion by Christ, that you must choose it, and let go
all which is inconsistent with this Choice and Trust. All your sinful Pleasures
Profit, Reputation, and Life it self, rather than forfeit these Hopes: Luke 14.
26. (...) any Man come to me, and hate not Father and Mother, and Brother and
(...) Disciple, and his own Life, he cannot (...). And, verse. 33. Whosoeve^
(...) that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple. After such
express Declarations of the Will of Christ, why should we think of going to
Heaven at a ch^^per rate? Christ must be preferred above all that is nearest or
dearest, or else he will not be for our turn, nor we for his. The same is
inferred out of the Doctrine of Self-denial; Mat. 16. 24. If any Man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. For
Self-denial has a greater Relation to Faith, and is nearer of kin to Faith
than the World imagines, it is the immediate Fruit of our Trust. If God be
trusted as our supreme Felicity, he must be loved above all things, and all
things must give way to God. If Christ be trusted as the way to the Father, all
things must be counted dung and loss, that we may gain Christ, Phil. 3. 8. The
same is inferred out of the Baptismal Covenant, which is a renouncing the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and a choosing Father, Son, and Holy Ghost for
our God; if there be a choosing, there must be a renouncing. The Devil by the
World, tempts our Flesh from the Christian Hope; therefore Idols must be
renounced, before we can have the True God for our God: Josh. 24. 23. Put away
the strange Gods which are among you, and incline your Heart to the Lord God of
Israel. Naturally our God is our Belly, while Carnal, Phil. 3. 19. Mammon is
our God, Mat. 6. 24. The Devil is our God, Col. 1. 13. And, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
Wherein in times past ye walked according to the course of this World,
according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that now works in
the Children of Disobedience. Among whom also we all had our Conversation in
times past, in the Lusts of our Flesh, fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh, and
of the Mind; and were by Nature the Children of Wrath, even as others. Besides,
the Nature of the thing, Baptism implies this Renunciation, 1 Pet. 3. 21. And
this Renunciation is nothing else but a forsaking all, that we may have eternal
Life by Christ.

2. It appears; by Reasons.

For (1.) Faith cannot be without this forsaking;

Nor, (2.) this forsaking without Faith.

(1.) Faith cannot be without this forsaking. For Faith implies a sight of the
Truth and Worth of those blessed Things which are to come, and so to take the
Thing promised for our Happiness, and the promise for our Security. 1. There is
no true sound Faith, till we take the everlasting Fruition of God in Glory for
our whole Felicity, till our Hearts be set upon it, and we do desire it, intend
it, wait for it, as the chief Good and Blessedness. The upright Heart is known
by its Treasure; Mat. 6. 20, 21. Lay up Treasure in Heaven; for where your
Treasure is, there your Heart will be also. Now if this be so, other things
will be lessened, all other Hopes and Happiness is nothing worth; and will
appear so, if compared with this better part, with what we account our
Treasure; you will see all this World is Vanity, and has nothing in it worthy
to be compared with the Salvation of our Souls. 2. There is no true Faith,
where the Word and Promise of God is not taken for our Security, so as our
Trust in his Word, may quiet and embolden us against Temptations, and give us
stronger Consolation than all the visible things on Earth, Psalm. 119. 111. and
Heb. 6. 18. We should do more, and go farther upon such a Promise, than for all
that Man can give unto us. Earthly Pleasures and Possessions should be small
things in regard of the Promise of God. This should make us row against the
stream of the Flesh, and cross its desires and appetites, and deny the
Conveniences of the World, and all because we have God's Promise of better
things.

(2.) This forsaking cannot be without Faith; because the Flesh is importunate
to be pleased with present Satisfactions, and loath to part with things which we
see and love, for that God and Glory which we never saw; to quit what is
present, for what is future, and with patience to be expected. The Flesh is for
pleasing the Body, but Faith is for saving the Soul, Heb. 10. 39. (...):
Purchasing the Soul with the loss of other things. So that this is Faith,
nothing but Faith, and other Faith is not true and sound.

2. It makes us to give up our selves to the conduct of the Word and Spirit
for obtaining this Happiness. I add this, because the Word is our Rule, Gal. 6.
^6. and the Spirit our Guide, Romans 8. 14. And Faith is not only an apprehension
of Privileges, but (...) of Subjection: And the sound Believer devoteth himself
to the Love, Fear, Service, and Ob^dience of God. 2 Cor. 8. 8. They first gave
up themselves to the Lord, and to (...) by the Will of God; that is, to the
Apostles as Christ's Messengers, to be directed in the Way to Heaven: Psalm.
119. 38. Stablish thy Word unto thy Servant, who is devoted to thy fear. This
now is saving-Faith.

The Use is, to exhort you to believe to the saving of the Soul.

To this end;

1. Because Faith is the Gift of God, beg the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation,
that your Eyes may be opened, that you may see what is the Hope of his Calling,
and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints, etc. Ephesians.
1. 17, 18. That you may be convinced of the truth and worth of the Blessedness
promised, and know and see it, not by a traditional Report, but in the lively
Light of the Spirit, such as may affect and engage your Hearts. Naturally we
are purblind, 2 Pet. 1. 9. have no accute discerning, but in Back and Belly
Concernments. We know what is noxious or comfortable to the present Life,
pleasing or displeasing to the Flesh; but are little affected with the danger
of perishing for ever, the need of Christ, or the worth of Salvation: and till
God make a change, how slight and sensual are we!

2. Think often and seriously how much the saving of the Soul, is better than
the saving, or getting, or keeping all the World. Matthew. 16. 26. What will it
profit a Man, if he should gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? So much
as God is to be preferred before the Creature, Heaven before the World,
Eternity before Time, the Soul before the Body; so much must this Business of
saving the Soul have the pre-eminence, and be preferred before the Interests of
the Body, and the bodily Life. But alas! what poor things divert us from this
Happiness; the satisfying of the Flesh, the pleasures of Sin for a season; a
little Ease, or Profit, or Vainglory; this is all for which we slight Heaven,
and our own Salvation.

3. Put your selves into the way of Salvation, by s^eking Reconciliation with
God by Christ. You are invited in the universal conditional Offer, John 3. 16.
It Is offered to all that will repent and believe, and there is no exception put
in against you to exclude you; Why then will you exclude your self? Therefore
come forward in the way of Faith, and God will help you.

4. Mind often the genuine Effect of the True Faith. It makes you forsake all,
that you may be obedient to Christ, and resolved upon it.

Therefore consider, 1. the Necessity of it: You can neither trust God, nor be
true to him, till your Heart be loosened from the Pleasures, and Profits, and
Honors in the World; and you can venture all upon the security of his Promise,
other Hopes and Happiness will divert us from the true Happiness; and the good
feed will be choked by the cares of this World, and voluptuous Living, that
you can bring nothing to perfection. Either you will turn aside by open
Defection or Apostasy, or else be a Dwarf and Cripple in Religion all your
days; either in Mortification, in denying the sinful Pleasures of the Senses,
you will slight the fullness of Joy at God's right Hand, for a little vain
Pleasure; which when it is gone, it is as a thing of naught. It Is the Pilg^im
abstaineth from fleshly Lusts: He that run^eth not as uncertain, that keeps
down his Body, 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27. or in a way of Self-denial, run few hazards
for Christ: It may be they may make some petty losses, but do not sell all for
the Pearl of great Price: Or, in a way of Charity; How else can you lend to the
Lord upon his Bond, or the security of his Promise; Prove. 19. 17. He that has
pity on the Poor, lends unto the Lord; and that which he has given, will he
pay him again.

2. Consider the Profit. Whatever a Believer los^th by the Way, he is sure to
have it at the end of his Journey; Mat. 19. 28. Jesus said unto them, Verily I
say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son
of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. You will be no losers by God at
the last.

A Wedding SERMON.
GENESIS 2. 22. -- And brought her unto the Man.
THE words belong to the Story of the first Marriage that ever was celebrated
in the World, between the first Man, and the first Woman; a Marriage made by
God himself in Paradise; who, when he built the Rib taken from Adam into a
Woman, from a Builder, becomes her Bringer, He brought her unto the Man, says
the Text.

God's bringing Eve to Adam, implies five things.

1. His Permission, Allowance, and Grant; for that Adam might thankfully
acknowledge the Benefit, as coming from God. God himself brought her, whether in
a visi^le shape, as prefiguring Christ's Incarnation, and with what Ceremony he
brought her, since the Holy Ghost has not expressed it, I shall not now
enquire; it is enough that God brought her to give her to him as his
inseparable Companion and meet-Helper. This bringing was the full bestowing her
upon him, that they should live together as Man and Wife.

2. His Institution and Appointment of Marriage, as the means of propagating
Manki^d. God's adduxit is by our Savior's Interpretation, conjunxit; Mark 19.
6. Those whom God has joined together, etc. Otherwise what need this bringing,
for she was created just by him in Paradise, when Adam was fallen into a deep
sleep; not in another place, which shows that Marriage is an honorable
Estate. God was the first Author of it, his Act has the force of an
Institution.

3. For the greater solemnity, and comely order of Marriage. Adam did not take
her of his own head, but God brought her to him; when we dispose of our selves
at our own Wills and Pleasures, being led thereunto by our own choice, without
consulting with God; or upon carnal Reasons, without the conduct of God's
Providence, we transgress the Order which God has set in the first Precedent
of Marriage; and cannot expect that our coming together should be comfortable.
Much more does it condemn the unnatural filthiness of Whoredom, whereby Men and
Women join and mingle themselves together without God, the Devil and their
inordinate Lusts leading them. God would not put Adam and Eve together without
some regard, as he did the brutish and unreasonable Creatures; but does
solemnly, as it were, bring the Manness by the hand to the Man, and deliver her
into his hands, having a more honorable regard and care of them: God cannot
abide that brutish coming together as the Horses do, neighing, in the rage of
unbridled Lusts, upon their Mates, Ier. 5. 8. No, Adam stays till she is
brought to him. This Honor and special Favor God vouchsafes Mankind above
all other Creatures; he himself, in his own Person, makes the Match, and
brings them together.

4. To dispense his Blessing to them. The Woman was created on the sixth day,
as appears Genesis 1. and it is said, that when he had created them Male and
Female, he blessed them, verse. 28. He does enlarge things here, and explaineth
what there he had touched briefly; when he had made the Woman, he brought her
to the Man, and blessed them both together; showing thereby, that when any
enter into this Estate, they should take God's Blessing along with them; upon
whose Favor, the comfort of this Relation does wholly depend. Those whom God
brings into it, are likely to fare best; and they that resign themselves up
into his hands, to be disposed of by him, surely take the readiest way to
obtain the Happiness they expect.

5. For a Pattern of Providence in all Aftertimes. It is worth the observing,
that Christ reasoning against Poligamy, from verse. 24. compared with Mat. 19.
God having abundance of the Spirit, as the Prophet speaks, Mal. 2. 15. brought
the Woman to one Man, tho there was more cause of giving Adam many Wives, for
the speedier peopling of the World, than there could be to any of his
Posterity. As Christ observes the number, so we may observe the thing it self,
it is God's Work still to give every one his Marriage-Companion; he brings
the Woman to the Husband, and every Husband to his Wife, that meet as they
ought to do. His Providence does mightily and evidently govern all
Circumstances that concern this Affair, as we shall show you by and by.

The Point which I shall insist on, is this.

Doct. That Marriages are then holily entered into, when the Parties take one
another out of God's hands.

I. I will show you in what sense they are said to take one another out of
God's hands. II. Why this is so necessary to be ob^observed.
I. For the first; They take one another out of God's hands, Two ways.

1. When his Directions are observed. 2. When his Providence is owned and
acknowledged.
1. When his Directions in his Word are observed. And so,

(1.) As to the choice of Parties. When a Man seeks out a Help-meet for
himself, he should in the first place seek out a Help-meet for himself in the
best things; for in all our deliberate and serious Consultations, Religion must
have the first place. Mat. 6. 37. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and the
Righteousness thereof, etc. A Man's chief End should be discovered in all his
Actions, as it must guide me in my Meat, and Drink, and Recreations, and the
ordinary Refreshments of the natural Life, or else I do not act as a Christian:
So much more in my most important and serious Affairs, such as Marriage is, and
upon which my Content and Welfare so much depends. Certainly he that would
take God's Blessing along with him, should make choice in God's Family of one,
with whom he may converse as an Heir with him of the Grace of Life. A
Christian, says the Apostle, is at liberty to marry, (...), but only in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 7. 39. he is at liberty to rejoice, but in the Lord; to eat, and
drink, and trade, but in the Lord; so to marry, but in the Lord. Religion must
appear uppermost in all his Actions, and guide him throughout. The Mischiefs
that have come by a carnal Choice, should be sufficient warning to Christians.
Genesis 6. 2. The Sons of God went in unto the Daughters of Men, and took them
Wives, because they were fair: they were swayed by carnal Motives, (or because
Rich, or nobly descended, it is all one): And what was the issue of it? there
came of them a mungrel Race of Giants, that rose up against God and his
Interest in the World. Many times by a carnal choice, all the good that is
gotten into a Family is eaten out, and within a little while Religion is cast
out of doors. Psalm. 105. 35. They were mingled among the Heathen, and learned
their Works. Nehem. 13. 25, 26. I contended with them, and made them swear by
God, Ye shall not give your Daughters to their Sons, nor take their Daughters
to your Sons. 2 Kings 8. 18. He walked in the Ways of the Kings of Israel; for
the Daughter of Ahab was his Wife. Valens the Emperor married with an Arrian
Lady, and so was ensnared so far, as to become a Persecutor of the Orthodox.
The Wife of the Bosom has great advantages, either to the perverting, or the
converting a Man's Heart to God: or else if they should not prevail so far,
What dissonancy and jarrings are there in a Family, when People are unequally
yoked, the Wife and Husband drawing several ways?

(2.) As to consent of Parents. God here in the Text, as the common Parent,
takes himself to have the greatest hand in the bestowing of his own Children;
He brought her unto the Man; and ordinary Parents are his Deputies, which must
bring and give us in Marriage, especially when young, and under their Power.
The Scripture is express for this, Exodus 22. 17. If her Father wholly refuse to
give her unto him, etc. 1 Cor. 17. 28. He that gives her in Marriage, etc.

(3.) As to the manner of procuring it; that they labor to gain one another by
warrantable, yea, r^ligious Ways, that we may l^y the Foundation of this
Relation in the Fear of God; not by stealth, or carnal Allurements, or violent
Importunities, or deceitful Proposals, but by such ways and means as will
become the gravity of Religion, that weanedness and sobriety that should be in
the Hearts of Believers; that deliberation which a business of such weight
calls for, and that Reverence of God, and Justice that we owe to all; that
seriousness of Spirit, and that respect to the Glory of God, with which all
such Actions should be underken. Col. 3. 17. Whatsoever we do, in Word or in
Deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father
by him. When this is observed, we are said to take one another out of God's
Hands.

(4.) Especially clearing up our Right and Title by Christ. Meats, Drinks,
Marriage, they are all sanctified by the Word and Prayer, and appointed to be
received by thanksgiving of them that believe and receive the Truth; 1 Timothy 4.
3, 4, 5. There is a twofold Right, Dominium Politicum and Evangelicum.
Dominium Politicum fundatur in Providentia. Evangelicum in Gratia. Political
Right is founded in God's Providence, Evangelical Right in Grace. We have a
Civil Right to all that comes to us by honest Labor, lawful Purchase or
Inheritance, and fair and comely Means used; which gives us a Right, not only
before Men, but before God; not by virtue of their Laws, but his Grant. By a
Providential-Right, all wicked Men possess all outward things, which they enjoy
as the Fruits and Gifts of his common Bounty, it is their Portion; Psalm. 17.
14. Whatever falls to their share in the course of God's Providence, they are
not Usurpers merely for possessing what they have, but for abusing what they
have. They have not only a civil Right to prevent the Encroachments of others,
by the Laws of Men, but a providential Right before God, and are not simply
responsible for the Possession, but the Use. But then there is an Evangelical
or New Covenant Right. So Believers have a Right to their Creature Comforts by
God's special Conveyance, that sweetneth every Mercy, that it comes wrapped in
the Bowels of Christ. The little which the Righteous has, is better than the
Treasures of many wicked; as the mean fair of a poor Subject, is better than
the Dainties of a condemned Traitor. And this we have by Christ, as the Heir of
all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 3. latter end. So all those things do belong
to them that believe, as Gifts of his fatherly Love and Goodness to us in
Christ; as we take our Bread out of Christ's hands, so we must be married to
Christ, before married to one another; the Marriage-Covenant should be begun
and concluded between Christ and you.

(5.) For the End; the general and last End of this, as of every Action, must
be God's Glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31. and Col. 3. 17. A Christian's Second-Table
Duties, and First-Table Duties, should have on them holiness to the Lord. All
the Vessels of Jerusalem must have God's Impress. More particularly our
increase in Godliness, and the propagation of the Holy Seed, must be aimed at.
Where one Person is a Believer, much more where both, they beget Sons and
Daughters to God; But now are they holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. But those out of the
Church, beget Sons and Daughters to Men, merely to people the World. Seth's
Children are called Sons of God, Genesis 6. 1, 2. In the careful Education of
Children, the Church is upheld.

2. When his Providence is owned and acknowledged. It is the Duty of them that
fear God, to own him upon all Occasions, especially in such a Business.
Heathens would not begin such a Business without a Sacrifice. There is a
special Providence about Marriages. God claims the Power of Match-making to
himself, more than he does of ordering any other Affairs of Men: Prove. 19. 14.
Riches and Honors are an Inheritance from our Fathers; but a good Wife is from
the Lord. Inheritances pass by the Laws of Men, though not without the
intervention of God's Providence, who determines to every Man the time of his
Service, and the bounds of his Habitation, where every Man shall live, and what
he shall enjoy. The Land of Canaan was divided by Lot; but Marriage is by the
special Destination of his Providence, either for a Punishment to Men, or for a
Comfort and a Blessing. Here Providence is more immediate, by its influence
upon the Hearts of Men; here Providence is more strange and remarkable, in
casting all Circumstances and Passages that did concern it. Estates fall to us
by more easy and obvious Means; and therefore though nothing be exempted from
the Dominion of Providence; yet a good Wife is especially said to be of the
Lord. So also, Prove. 18. 22. Whosoever finds a Wife, finds a good Thing, and
obtains favor of the Lord. A Wife, that is a Wife indeed, one that deserves
that Name: he that finds her, it is a chance to him, but an ordered thing by
God; he has not only experience of God's Care, but his Goodness and Free Grace
to him in that particular. Well then, God must be owned, sought, glorified in
this particular. The Husband in the Catalogue and Inventory of his Mercies,
must not forget to bless God for this, and the Wife for the Husband; the Lord
was gracious in providing for me a good Companion; I obtained favor from the
Lord. God is concerned in this whole Affair, he brought the Woman to the Man;
he gives the Portion, which is not so much the Dowry given by the Parents,
which is little worth, unless his Blessing be added with it, as all the Graces
and Abilities by which all married Persons are made helpful one to another. He
gives the Children, Psalm. 127. 3. Lo, Children are an Heritage from the Lord;
Their Conception and Formation in the Womb is from God. Parents know not
whether it be Male or Female, beautiful or deformed: They know not the number
of the Bones, and Veins and Arteries. He gives them Life; a Sentence of Death
waylayeth them as soon as they come into the World. He gives them Comfort;
there is a great deal of Pride, and Arrogance, and Self-willedness in all the
Sons and Daughters of Adam, which makes them uncomfortable in their Relations.
A Wife would soon prove a Iezabel, and not an Abigail; and a Husband a Nabal,
and not a David, by Satan's Malice, and our own Corruption; an Help would soon
become a Snare. They that would perform the Duties of this Relation, need
strongly to be supported with the Assistance of God's Spirit. Finally, my
Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might, Ephesians. 6. 10.
So that since God gives all, surely his Providence must be owned and
acknowledged; and you ought to say, This is the Wife God has chosen for me,
and this is the Husband God has chosen for me.

II. Why is this so nec^ss^ry a Duty. It does in a great measure appear, from
what is said already. But farther;

1. It will be a great engagement upon us, to give God all the Glory of the
Comfort we have in such a Relation, when you do more sensibly and explicitly
take one another out of God's Hands. We are apt to look to second Causes; he
that sends the Present is the giver, not he that brings it to us. The
Romans were wont once a Year to cast Garlands into their Fountains, by that
superstition owning the benefit they had by them. However it has a good Moral
to us in the Bosom of it, that we should own the Fountain of our Blessings, and
not ascribe them to our own Wisdom and Foresight, but the Grace and Favor of
God; who in the mere Lottery and Chance of humane Affairs, was pleased to choose
so well for us. Jacob owned his Fountain, when he was become two Bands, Genesis
32. 10. So should we; of him, through him, to him, do mutually infer one
another. What we have from God, must be used for God. God is very jealous that
we will not look to the Original and first cause of our Mercies. Hos. 2. 8. She
did not know that I gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil; and multiplied her Silver
and Gold, and therefore will I return, and take away my Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, and Flax, etc. It is the way to lose our Comforts, when we do not own and
acknowledge God's Hand in them. We are drowned in sense, inured and accustomed
to second Causes; so that God's Hand is invisible and little regarded, we know
it not, or heed it not. Now that we may look up and own the first Cause, and
give him his due Honor, it is good to have explicit and actual thoughts in the
receiving of our Mercies, so as to take them out of God's Hand; to draw aside
the Vail and Covering of the Creature, that you may remember the Giver.

2. That we may carry our selves more holily in our Relations, it is good to
see God's Hand in them. Every Relation is a new Talent wherewith God intrusteth
us to trade for his Glory; and to that end we must make Conscience to use it.
In Mat. 25. the Master delivered to every one his Goods apart, and they that
had the Benefit, received the Charge. We are often pressed to do things, as in
and to the Lord upon religious and gracious Reasons. It has been the credit of
Religion, Dent tales Mercatores, tales Maritos, tales Exactores fisci, etc. Let
History show such Husbands, such Wives, etc. The Christian Religion makes a
Man conscientiously careful and tender of his Duty to Man; not from a natural
Principle, or from our own Ease, Peace, and Credit, but from the Conscience of
our Duty to God. Now it must not lose this Credit by you. God puts us into
Relations, to see how we will glorify him in them; there is something more
required of you then as single Christians. God that puts a Man into the
Ministry, requires that he should honor him, not only as a Christian, but as
a Minister. And God that calls a Man into Magistracy, requires that he
should honor him as a Magistrate. So to be a Master of a Family, and a Wife or
Husband, there is another Talent to be accounted for. An Ambassador that is
sent into a Foreign Country about special Business, must give an account, not
only as a Traveller, but as an Ambassor, of the Business he was entrusted with.
God will have honor by you as a Wife, or as a Husband; you have a new
opportunity to make Religion amiable, that the unbelieving World may see how
profitable the heavenly Life is to humane Society.

3. That we may more patiently bear the Crosses incident to this state of Life,
if God call us to them. They that launch forth into the World, sail in a
troublesome and tempestuous Sea, and cannot expect but to meet with a Storm
before they come to the end of their Voyage. The married Life has its
Comforts, and also its Encumbrances and Sorrows. Now it will sweeten all our
Crosses incident to this Condition, when we remember we did not rashly enter
into it by our own choice, but were led by the fair directure and fair
invitation of God's Providence, we need not much be troubled at what overtaketh
us in the way of our Duty, and the Relations to which we are called; that Hand
that sent the Trouble, will sanctify it; or he will overruled things so, that
they shall work for our good. If God call us into this Estate, ^he will support
us in it. It is a great satisfaction to you, that you are acting that part in
the World, which God would have you act; that you can say, I am there where God
has set me, and therefore will bear the Troubles that attend that state and
condition of Life. If a Man run on his own Head, and Inconveniences arise, they
are more uncomfortably born. It is true, that God does fetch off his People
from the Afflictions they have brought upon themselves by their Sin and Folly,
such is the indulgence of his Grace; yet those Sufferings are the more
uncomfortable that take us out of the way of our Duty; and God has undertaken
only to keep us in all our Ways, but not out of our Duty, Psalm. 91. 11. The
Promises are not to foster Men in their running after Folly, but to encourage
them in their several Callings, and state of Life wherein God has set them;
there we may abide with comfort, and expectation either of God's Blessing, or
his Support. We tempt God, when we venture upon a state of Life which he has
not called us to, and have not his Warrant; but when it is not good for us to
be alone, and the Lord sends an help-meet for us, he will not forsake us.

4. We may with the more confidence apply our s^lves to God, and depend on him
for a Blessing upon a Wife of God's choosing, or an Husband of God's choosing. We
have access to the Throne of Grace with more hope, because we have given up our
selves to his Direction. Prove. 3. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he
shall direct thy Paths. God will order things for the best, when we do not
lead, but follow him, we still co^s^lt with God, and dare not undertake any
thing, but what is agreeable to his Will. And will God mislead us, and direct
us amiss; or turn us into a by-way, or crooked-path? It is said, Psalm. 37. 23,
24. The Steps of a good Man are ordered by the Lord, and he (that is, the Lord)
delights in his way; though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for
the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. It is a blessed thing to be under God's
Conduct, to be led on, or led off by so wise, and powerful, and alsufficient a
Guide; for such, he delights to do them good, and takes pleasure in his
Resolutions, to prosper them. Sometimes they shall have a taste of the Evils of
the World, but they shall not be ruined by them: They may fall, but they shall
not be dashed in pieces; it is an Allusion to a Vessel that gets a knock, but
is not broken by the fall.

5. It is an help to make us more ready to part with one another when God
wills it. All temporal things, we receive them from God, upon this condition,
to yield them up to God again, when he calls for them. The Law concerning all
created Enjoyments, is, The Lord gives, the Lord takes, Job 1. 21. We make a
Snare for our selves, and receive them not in a right Notion, if we do not
receive them as mortal and perishing Comforts, which God may demand at
pleasure, and so keep the Soul loose, and in a posture of submission, if God
should cross us, and disappoint us in them. Thus must we use all outward
Comforts with that weanedness and moderation, as to Children, Estates, and all
temporal Blessings, etc. that will become a sense of the frailty that is in
them, and the wheelings and turnings of an uncertain World. It is the Apostle's
Direction, 1 Cor. 7. 31. The time is short, it remains that those that have
Wives, be as though they had none; not as to be defective in our Love to them,
and care over them; no, there is rather to be an excess, than a defect here;
Prove. 5. 19. Be thou ravished always with her Love. But as to a preparation of
Heart, to keep or lose, if God should see fit, to be contented to part with a
dear Yoke Fellow, or at least with an humble Submission and acquiescence, when
God's Will is declared; and somewhat of this must be mingled with all our
rejoicings, some thoughts of the Vanity of the Creature. Leavened Bread was to
be eaten with the Thank-offerings in the Feast of Tabernacles, when the Barns
were full. Man at his best estate is Vanity, Psalm. 39. 5. Now to help us to do
this, it is good to consider, he that has the right to give, has also the
right of taking away; and as you must not be overjoyed with the receiving, so
not be over-sad with parting.

APPLICATION.
Use 1. Let us seek to God by earnest Prayer, when any such matter is in hand.
Marriages, we say, are made in Heaven before they are made on Earth. `Pagans,
before the awe of Religion was extinguished, would begin with their Gods in any
weighty Enterprise. A Jove principium, was an honest Principle among the
Heathens. Laban consults with his Teraphim; Balak sends for Balaam to give
him Counsel. Heathens had their Sybills and Oracles at Delphos. So far as any
Nation was touched with a sense of a Divine Power, they would never venture
upon any weighty thing, without asking the Leave or the Blessing of what they
supposed to be God. So for God's Children it was their constant practice, they
du^st not resolve upon any course, till they had asked counsel of God. David
always ran to the Oracle of the Ephod; Shall I go up to Hebron? Jacob in his
journey, would neither go to Laban, nor come from him, without a Warrant.
Iehoshaphat, when the business of Ramoth Gilead was afoot, does not lead forth
the Captains of the Army, but he sends for the Prophets of the Lord; 1 Kings
22. 45. Enquire, I pray thee, of the World of the Lord this day. So, Judge. 1^1.
Who shall go up and fight against the Canaanites? It is a contempt of God, and
a kind of laying him aside, when we dare undertake any thing without his Leave,
Counsel, and Blessing; and these are the things we are to seek in Prayer.

1. His Leave. God is the absolute Lord of all things, both in Heaven and
Earth: and whatsoever is possessed by any Creature, is by his Indulgence.
Whatever store and plenty we have by us, our Savior teach^^h us to b^g our
allo^^nce, or leave to use so much as is necessary for us, or the portion of
every day; Give us, (...), this day our daily Bread. It is a piece of Religious
Manners^ to acknowledge God's Right and Sovereignty. It Is robbery to make use of
a Man's goods, and to waste them and consume them without his leave. All that
we have or use is God's, who reserveth the Propriety of all to himself. In
distributing to the Creatures, he never intended to divest himself of his
Right. As an Husbandman, by sowing his Corn in the Field, is not dispossessed
of a Right to it. God has Domini^m, we have Dispensationem of Life, and all
the Comforts that belong to it. Life is his; Man is a ^ustos, a Guardian of it
for God. Gold and Silver is his; Man is a Steward to improve it for God. Adam
had no interest in Eve, till God brought her to him, and bestowed her on him.
Every one of us must get a grant of God of all that he has; the Lord he
poss^sseth the House that we dwell in, the Clothes we wear, the Food we eat:
And so in the use of all other Comforts, we must have a License from God, and
take his Leave. God is said to have given David the Wives that he had into his
Bosom.

2. His Counsel and Direction, when the case is doubtful, and our thoughts are
uncertain. Prove. 3. 5. Lean not to thy own Understanding. We scarce know
Duties, certainly we cannot foresee Events; therefore a Man that makes his
Bosom his Oracle, his Wit his Counselor, will choose a Mischief to himself,
instead of a Comfort and a Blessing. Therefore we ought chiefly, and first of
all, to consult with God, and seek his Direction, for he sees the Heart, and
foreseeth Events. We can only look upon what is present, and there upon the
outward appearance: Therefore God can best direct us in our choice, he knows
the fittest Matches and Consorts for every one; who has a prospect of all
things in one moment of time, and by one act of the Understanding; and so can
best dispose of Humane Affairs, for the profit and comfort of the Creature.
Jer. 10. 23. O Lord, I know that the way of Man is not in himself; nor is it in
the Sons of Men to direct their steps; that is, to order their Affairs so as
they may have felicity and comfort in them. So, Prove. 20. 24. Man's goings are
of the Lord; how can a Man then understand his own way? We cannot foresee the
Event of things, what is expedient, what not. Man would fain work out his
Happiness like a Spider, climb up by a Thread of his own spinning. But alas!
all our Devices and fine Contrivances are gone with the turn of a B^som. He
that will be his own Carver, seldom carveth out a good Portion to himself: They
entrench upon God's Prerogative, and take the Work out of his hands; and
therefore no wonder if their Wisdom be turned into Folly.

3. We ask his Blessing. God does not only foresee the Event, but order it; by
his Wisdom he foreseeth it, and by his powerful Providence he brings it to
pass. Therefore God that has the disposal of all Events, when our D^rection is
over, is to be sought unto for a Blessing; for every Comfort comes the sooner,
when it is ^ought in Prayer; and whatever God's Purposes be, that is our Duty.
Jer. 29. 11, 12. I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord,
thoughts of Peace, and not of Evil, to give you an expected End. Then shall ye
call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you.
Ezekiel. 36. 37. I will for this be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do it
for them. So in this Case, we read, John 2. 2. When there was a Marriage in
Canaan of Galilee, both Jesus was called and his Disciples to the Marriage.
Married Persons do need, and therefore should seek Christ's Presence to their
Marriage, that he would vouchsafe his Presence and Countenance: Be sure to
invite him, and take him along with you, that he may strengthen you by his
Grace, and dispose all Providence about you for your Comfort. He puts the
greatest honor upon the Marriage, when he does enable you to carry your selves
graciously in that Relation, and to God's Glory; and he has the power of all
Providence put into his hand, as well as all Grace.

Use 2. Is Advice to Persons that are entering into this Relation.

1. Negatively. See that God be no loser by the Marriage. 2. Positively. Be
sure that God be a gainer.
These are the two Proffers I have to make to you.

1. Negatively. Let not God be a loser; He never intended to give you Gifts to
his own wrong.

Now that will be;

(1.) If he be not the only One, and the lovely one of your Souls. God must not
have an Image of Jealousy set up; He must still be owned as the chiefest Good.
A Wife is the Delight of the Eyes, but not the Idol of the Heart: Still you
must be sure that his Place be not invaded; that you may say, Psalm. 73. 25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and whom do I desire on Earth in comparison of
thee? Carnal Complacency must not weaken your Delight in God; it is apt to do
so. The excuse of one of those that was invited to the Marriage Feast, was, I
have married a Wife, and I cannot come, Ma^th. 22. Sur^ly Christ would teach us
thereby, that this Relation may become a Snare, and encroach upon the
Prerogatives of God; he may be justled out of the Heart, by the intrusion of
some earthly Comfort.

(2.) If you be diverted from the earnest pursuit of heavenly Things, either by
carnal Complacency, or distracting Cares, and worldly Encumbrances. There will
be a time, when we shall neither Marry, nor be given in Marriage, Luke 20. 35.
And that is our happiest time; present Contentments must not weaken the lively
expectation of it, and steal away the Heart into a mindlesness of it. Would God
bring you to one another? think you, to turn off your Thoughts and Hopes for
this blessed Time, when he shall be All in All? No, your Comforts by the way in
your Pilgrimage, must not hinder your delight in your Comforts at Home, and in
your Country: this would be like a great Heir in Travel, that should gussle in
an Alehouse, and never think of returning to his Inheritance.

(3.) God would be a loser, if you be less resolute in owning God's Truth, than
you were before. Oh take heed of daubing in Religion! we must hate all for
Christ, Luke 14. 26. We must be as true still to make good our Engagement to
him. Wife and Children must be undervalued for the Gospel; we may be put to the
trial, whether we will cleave to them or Christ, who is our choice Husband. The
Bond of Religion is above all Bonds; all Bonds between Husband and Wife, Father
and Children, end in Death; but the Bond of Christ is Eternal; your Children
will not lose by your faithfulness to God.

2. Positively. Let God be a gainer.

(1.) By your daily praises and blessing God for his Providence, that has
brought you into this Relation. I obtained favor from the Lord.

(2.) By living to God in this Relation, performing the Duties thereof, so as
your converse may be some lively resemblance of the Communion between Christ
and his Church; Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Husbands, love your Wives,
even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it: That he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water, by the Word; That he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing: but that it should be holy, and without blemish. So ought Men to
love their Wives, as their own Bodies: he that loves his Wife, loves himself.
For no Man ever yet hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even
as the Lord the Church. For we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of
his Bones.

(3.) By being mutual helps to one another in the best things, by the
advancement of Piety and Godliness. The love of Christ does not only enforce
the Husband's Duty as an Argument, but points forth the right manner of it as a
Pattern: Christ's Love, is sanctifying Love; so should theirs be, such a Love
as shows it self by sincere and real endeavors, to bring about one another
spiritual and eternal Good. Love one another, as Heirs together of the Grace of
Life, 1 Pet. 3. 7.

FINIS.

