THE Traveller's Guide, AND, The Country's Safety.

BEING A Declaration of the Laws of England against High-way-men, or Robbers
upon the Road;

What is necessary and requisite to be done by such persons as are robbed in
order to the recovering their damages;

Against whom they are to bring their Action, and the manner how it ought to be
brought.

Illustrated with variety of Law Cases, Historical Remarks, Customs, Usages,
Antiquities and Authentic Authorities.

By J. M.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins, Esquires, for
Langley Curtis, on Ludgate Hill, and Thomas Simons, at the Prince's Arms in
Ludgate Street, 1683.

TO THE READER.
TO travel the Road in safety is none of the least advantages we receive by the
Laws of England; for by them it is that we are protected from the violence of
those discontented, designing, profligate Wretches, the Robbers upon the
Highway; fellows by their own Heraldry intitling themselves Gentlemen of the
Road, and glory in their invention of the most Gentile Trade of Ruining
Mankind; when, alas, if you look into their Pedigree, you will find them so far
from men of Honor or Virtue, that nothing can be made of them but a pack of
idle dissolute Rascals, the best of them but Cadets, most commonly the spawn of
broken Tradesmen and worst of Debauchees.

But we design not so much by this Treatise to give the Character of these
Disturbers of the Quiet and Repose of Mankind, as to set forth what good and
wholesome Laws have been formerly made by our discerning Ancestors against
them, and how the honest Traveller may obtain a Legal Recompense for the Losses
he sustains by such Cattle; The main scope and intent of this Discourse being
to show,

That, whereas by the Statute of Winton, made in the Thirteenth year of King
Edward the First, If diverse persons had committed a Robbery, the Hundred should
have been amerced, if they had not apprehended all the Felons; and how that by
the Statute of the Seven and Twentieth of Eliz. Chap. 13. a new Law is made in
these points following,

1. None shall have an Action upon the said Statute 13 Ed. 1. except that the
party robbed, does give notice, as soon as he can, of the said Felony, to some
of the Inhabitants of some Town, Village or Hamlet, next to the place where the
Robbery was done. 2. If they in their pursuit apprehend any of the Offenders,
That shall excuse them, although that they do not apprehend them all.
To which is added, for the benefit of Clerks and Attorneys, variety of
Precedents, from the Declaration to the Execution, in all Cases relating to the
prosecuting of the Hundred where the party is robbed, that nothing may be
wanting to complete a Work so profitable both to the Attorney and his Client.

J. M.

THE TABLE.
RObbery, what it is. fol. 1. Where and how the party is to have restitution of
the Goods whereof he was robbed, upon an Appeal or Indictment. fol. 6. Of the
Action upon the Statute of Winton against the Hundred fol. 14. Where and how
notice is to be given of the Robbery. fol. 25. At what time the Robbery must be
committed to charge the Hundred by an Action upon the Statute of Winton. fol.
32. In what place a Robbery must be committed to charge the Hundred: fol. 42.
How one or more against whom Execution is had may have contribution from the
rest of the Inhabitants of the same Hundred. fol. 48. Of Hue and Cry. fol. 66.
Who may raise the Hue and Cry, and for what cause. fol. 68. How and in what
manner the fresh suit and pursuit is to be made upon a Hue and Cry levied. fol.
74. Who are bound to pursue upon the Hue and Cry levied. fol. 81. The Statute
of Westminster 1. Cap. 9. Anno 3 Ed. 1. of Robberies. fol. 86. The Statute of
Winton Anno 13 Ed. 1. of Robberies. fol. 88. The Proclamation or Writ directed
to the Sheriff Anno 21 Ed. 1. to proclaim the Statute of Winton. fol. 91. The
Statute of 28 Ed. 3. Cap. 11. fol. 94. The Statute of 27 Eliz. Cap. 11. Of Hue
and Cry. fol. 97. The Form of an original Writ upon the Statute of Hue and Cry.
fol. 111. The Retorn of the same Writ. fol. 115. A Declaration upon the same.
fol. 116. Aliter in Divisis Hundredorum. fol. 117. General Issue pleaded with
challenge to the Hundred. fol. 118. Bar, that no Hue and Cry was made. fol.
119. Non inform' to a Declaration upon the Statute, with Judgment after a Writ
of Inquiry. fol. 120. Judgment upon the Statute after Verdict. fol. 122. Venire
Facias. fol. 123. Distringas against the Jury, with the Retorn. fol. ibid. Writ
of Inquiry. fol. 124. The Oath to be taken before a Justice of Peace by the
person or persons who are robbed, whereupon the party robbed may ground his
Action according to the Statute of 27 Eliz. fol. 126.
THE Traveller's Guide, AND, The Country's Safety.
What is Robbery.
RObbery is the felonious taking of any thing from the person of another
against his will, whereby the person is put in fear; though the thing taken be
but to the value of a penny, for which the Offender shall be hanged.

Yet in some cases it is not necessary that the thing whereof the party is
robbed be actually taken from his person, for if the Robbers obtain it by force
and menaces, though the owner himself delivers it to them, yet this tantamounts
to a taking from the person; for the Law respects the original cause (viz.) the
threats and menaces which necessitated the Propriator to quit his goods for the
preservation of his life and person; As if one command another presently to
deliver him his purse, or otherwise he will kill him, which he does
accordingly, this is Robbery, for the danger he confessed himself to be in by
reason of those threatenings was the cause and motive of that delivery; So if
two or more take a man and by force compel him to take an Oath to bring them
such a sum of money, and if he does not they threaten to kill him; Though he
brings it in pursuance of his Oath, and delivers it to them and they take it,
yet this is Robbery, notwithstanding that by this enforced Oath he was not
bound in conscience to bring them the money; for he took it for fear of death,
and so not voluntarily; If Felons come in the night to rob me in my house, and
I, fearing lest they should enter the house and rob me, and, to prevent their
entry, I throw money or plate, etc. out at the window to them, 44 Ed. 3.14.
which they take and depart, this is Robbery; for, in construction of Law, it
is the same as if they had taken it from my person.

If Felons take goods openly in a place where the Owner is present, and thereby
put him in fear, or take his horse or drive his cattle out of his pasture or
fold, he standing by and looking on them, 22 Ass p. 39. Fit. Car. 115.
so that he be terrified by their violent carriage, menaces, assaults or
otherwise, this is Robbery in the takers, and the Law supposes it to be done
with such violence that he is not able nor dare not to resist them, and in
privata causa nemo tenetur exponere se periculis.

The putting the party in fear is an especial part of a Robbery, without which,
in estimation of Law, no Robbery can be committed; 5 Eliz. Dier 224.
for if I be traveling upon the road, and one comes by and takes my money from
my pocket, or my sword from my side unknown to me, this is Felony but no
Robbery.

The taking away of something from the person, either in Fact or Law, is as
necessary an ingredient to make a Robbery as the Putting of the party in fear;
As if one lies in wait in the highway to rob passengers, and he bids a
Traveller which comes along to stand and yield him his purse, 9 Ed. 4.26.
if the Traveller upon resistance overcome him, and either apprehends him or
puts him to flight, though there was a design and an attempt to commit a
Robbery, yet, volunt as non reputabitur pro facto, and though the Law adjudges
this intent to be no Robbery, yet it ranks it, and that not undeserved, amongst
the highest of misdemeanors.

So that the difference betwixt Robbery and a Theft is that, That one is done
openly and with force, the other secretly and surreptitiously; And if any thing
be taken from a man openly and in his presence, and his person is not thereby
put in fear, this amounts only to a trespass.

A Traveller may justify the killing of any person who shall attempt to rob or
murder him upon the way, and that without the forfeiture of either lands,
goods or chattels; 22 Ass. 55.26 Ass. p. 23. and 32. Co. li. 5.91. Fit. Coron.
30. and 305.
This point of the forfeiture was somewhat disputable at the Common Law; Some
would have it to be the same with killing of a man by chance-medly, or se
defendendo; but this point has been cleared by an explanatory Act made in the
24 H. 8. cap. 5. where it is declared, That if any person or persons do attempt
feloniously to rob or murder any person or persons in or nigh any common
highway, cart-way, horse-way or foot-way, and if any such evil disposed person
happen to be killed or slain in such attempt, and he that so killed him be
thereof indicted or appealed, That the person or persons so indicted or
appealed, and of the same by verdict so found and tried, shall not forfeit or
lose any lands, tenements, goods or chattels, for the death of any such evil
disposed person in such manner slain, but shall be thereof and for the same
fully acquitted and discharged, in like manner as the same person or persons
should be, if he or they were lawfully acquitted of the death of such evil
disposed person or persons.

Where and how the party is to have restitution of the goods whereof he was
robbed, upon an Appeal or Indictment.
AT the Common Law, before the Statute of Westminster, the person robbed had no
other satisfaction but only restitution of his goods, in case he made fresh
pursuit after the Robber, and convicted him at his own Suit (viz.) by an Appeal
of Robbery. The Law is so eager to have Felons apprehended, that if the party
does not use his utmost endeavors to get the Offender taken, it punishes him
with the loss and forfeiture of the goods stolen; So that if the Malefactor be
convicted at the Suit of the party, yet if the Jury does not find that he had
made fresh suit after the Felon, the goods stolen are forfeited to the King, and
no restitution can be made of them.

As the Law condemns the not pursuing or in slack and faint pursuit of Robbers;
so it rewards diligent endeavors though they meet with no success: for if a
Felon which committed a Robbery be not taken by the space of a year after the
Felony committed, yet if the party that was robbed do his endeavor to
apprehend the Felon, and make diligent and special enquiry for him, and after
he be taken, though not at the suit of the party robbed, yet that shall be
adjudged a sufficient fresh suit, and upon his appeal brought, and the Offender
convicted, he shall have restitution of his goods robbed; and if this fresh
suit was made by a Servant, and not by the party robbed himself, it is
sufficient to procure him restitution.

Conviction without Attainder is sufficient to entitle the Appealant to a
restitution, though in ancient times some opinions have been to the contrary,
and that no restitution could be made until after attainder, and in some cases
where no attainder could be (as where the Felon died in prison before the Owner
had commenced his appeal) though the suit was never so fresh, Fit. Coron. 319.8
E. 3.10. But now it is agreed that if after the appeal commenced the Felon die
in prison or break the prison, the fresh suit shall be enquired, and if found,
the party robbed shall be restored to his goods, Fit. Coron. 379. 26 Ass. p.
32. So if the Malefactor stand mute or challenge peremptorily above the number
which the Law does allow, or demand his Clergy, in every of these cases the
fresh suit being found by inquest, the Appealant shall have restitution of his
goods, for he had done all that he could in order to an attainder.

If an appeal of Robbery be sued against the Principal and Accessory, and the
Principal be attainted and the fresh suit is sound, restitution shall be made
of the stolen goods without prosecuting the suit against the Accessory, and yet
his continuance of the suit against the Accessory shall not hinder his
restitution, for that the principal Felon is attainted by his procurement; and
the Appealant shall have restitution whether the Accessory be attainted or
acquitted; In the same manner the Appealant shall have restitution where he
sues an appeal against two as Principals and one of them is acquitted, 21. Ed.
4.16. 10 H. 4.5. If one man rob diverse men, for which they bring their several
appeals, and the Felon is attainted at the suit of one of them, and the fresh
suit is found, in this case the rest shall not have restitution until the
Offender be convicted at their several suits, and likewise the fresh suit
severally found.

There are some opinions which hold that if the Appealant sue the Robber to the
outlawry that he shall have restitution of his goods without enquiring of the
fresh suit, for that he had prosecuted against the Appealee as far as the Law
gave him way.

An enquiry must be made of the fresh suit before any restitution can be
awarded; and that too before the Justices and not the Sheriff, and by the Jury
that convicted the Defendant of the Robbery: But in case the Defendant does
confess the appeal, then it must be enquired of by a Visne from that County
where the Robbery was committed, and where the appeal is brought, except it be
brought in London; for that the City has a privilege not to be forced to
appear upon Juries out of the City; And it cannot be taken there by Nisi Prius,
because it is but an inquest of Office; Therefore in this case the Visne shall
come from that County where the Robber was taken, and so it shall be enquired
by the people of that County.

In the first place the Court is to ask the Defendant in the appeal if he
claims any property in the goods; which if he says he does not, then it must be
enquired if the goods were the Plaintiff's at the time of the Robbery
committed, and also enquire of the fresh suit.

If the Manner ( viz. the stolen goods) wherewith the Felon is taken be
portable, or that it can be otherwise done with convenience, it ought to be
brought into the Court before the Justices, and if it be in a trunk, box, chest
or cloak-bag, etc. the Appealant must tell particularly what goods there are in
it before it be opened, or that he can have restitution.

The Appealant's fresh suit being found by the Inquest, the Court ought to
award him restitution of all the goods contained in his appeal, which the
King's Officers or any other had seized to the King's use.

Having showed how the party robbed might obtain restitution of his goods by
Appeal, in the next place falls under consideration the case of an Indictment:
At Common Law, if the person robbed had steered his course this way he had
certainly split himself upon the rocks; for restitution could in no case be
awarded upon an Indictment, though the Jury that found the Offender guilty of
the Robbery had likewise found the fresh Suit. To remedy this inconveniency an
Act was made 21 H. 8. cap. 18. whereby it was enacted, That if any Felon or
Felons do rob or take away money, goods or chattels from any of the King's
Subjects, from their person or otherwise within this Realm, and thereof the
said Felon or Felons be indicted, and after arraigned of the same Felony and
found guilty thereof, or otherwise attainted by reason of evidence given by the
party robbedd or owner of the said money, goods and chattels, that as well
Justices of Goal delivery, as other Justices before whom any such Felon or
Felons shall be found guilty or otherwise attainted by reason of evidence given
by the party so robbed or owner, or by any other by their procurement, have
power by this Act to award from time to time Writs of restitution for the said
money, goods or chattels in like manner as though any such Felon or Felons were
attainted at the Suit of the party in appeal: So that by virtue of this Act the
party robbed may have restitution upon evidence given by himself or by any
other by his procurement notwithstanding that he made not any fresh Suit.

If the Servant be robbed of his Master's goods, the Master may give evidence
against the Felon by virtue of these words (the party so robbed or owner) And
if the party robbed does not give evidence himself but procure another to do
it, this is sufficient within the words of the Statute to enable him to obtain
restitution.

If one man do rob goods from three men severally, and he is indicted for the
robbing of one of them, and thereupon arraigned; though the other two would
give evidence against the Malefactor, yet they shall not have restitution of
their goods within the intent and meaning of this Act, for the Felon is not
attainted of any other Robbery but that whereof he is indicted: But if he be
indicted of all the three several Robberies severally, and arraigned upon one
of them, and convicted upon the evidence given by one of the parties robbed,
yet he shall be after arraigned upon the other two Indictments that he may be
also found guilty by the evidence of the other two persons robbed; to the end
they may have restitution of their goods.

Though this Statute speak only of the party robbed, yet his Executors and
Administrators are within the meaning of it: for it is a beneficial Law, and
gives a more speedy remedy to the party robbed than the Common Law gave by way
of Indictment, and therefore ought to be construed beneficially.

Of the Action upon the Statute of Winchester against the Hundred.
HAving showed how and in what cases the party robbed may have restitution of
the stolen goods, both upon an Appeal and an Indictment, now I shall proceed to
show what further remedy the Law gives him for his indemnity. At Common Law,
if a man was robbed, he was presently to use his utmost endeavor to apprehend
the Felon, and if he was found defective or negligent in this particular, the
Law would give him no relief; and though there was no neglect in him, yet for
want of the due and speedy assistance of others, which were obliged to join
with him in the pursuit, perhaps the Robber was not taken until such time as
he had opportunity to make away and imbezle the goods; So that if it chanced
that he was taken afterward, the party was destitute of any sort of
recompense, whereas if the Felon had been freshly and vigorously pursued from
Town to Town, etc. as the Law does direct and require, he might have been taken
with the Manner, and upon an Appeal brought and a conviction thereupon, the
Owner was to have restitution of the goods which were stolen from him. It is
true the Law did punish the Inhabitants of the place where the Robbery was
committed, if, upon notice given to the Constable of the Town, the Huy and Cry
was not raised, and all persons within the Town were bound to follow the
pursuit, which if they did not they were punishable by Fine and Imprisonment,
this Cry was to be carried from Constable to Constable; and if any Town was
indicted for the escape of the Felon, the pursuit with Huy and Cry to the next
Constable was a good excuse, a total neglect or at least the faint and weak
performance of these fresh suits being not duly punished, Robbers did escape
unpunished, and that impunity was an encouragement to others to commit the like
enormities, to the great and manifest danger of the King's Subjects traveling
upon their lawful occasions. For the indemnity of persons who should sustain
any loss by Robberies, and for the more effectual obliging of Cities, Towns and
Villages, and to discharge their duty with great care and diligence in the
pursuing and apprehending of Felons, it was thought fit a Law should be made,
that if the Felons were not taken within such a time, the Hundred where the
Robbery was committed should satisfy the party whatever he was damnified
thereby; to that end there was a Statute made at Winchester, in the 13 E. 1.
whereby, in the preamble thereof, is set forth the principal cause of the
frequent escapes of Felons without being apprehended, and why the Laws which
were then extant proved ineffectual to suppress and extinguish both Felons and
Felonies, and whence the growth of them proceeded, for that Felons could not be
attainted by the Oaths of Jurors, who had rather strangers should be robbed and
the Robbers escape punishment than indict the Offenders, of whom great part
were of the same Country, or at least, if the Offenders were of another
Country, the Refarvors might be of places near; and they did this, because no
Oath was given to the Jurors of the same Country where the Felonies were
committed, and no Law obliged them to restitution of damages, nor any penalty
limited for their concealment and Latches. And for that the fear of a penalty
more than that of an Oath might be a greater engagement upon them not to spare
or conceal Felonies, therefore it was enacted, That if any Robbery, etc. be
committed (if need requires) Inquest shall be made in Towns by him that is Lord
of the Town, and after in the Hundred, and in the Franches and in the County,
and sometimes in two, three or four Counties, in case where Felonies shall be
committed in the Marches of Shires. And it was further enacted, That if the
Country will not answer for the Bodies of such Offenders, the people of every
such Country shall be answerable for the Robberies and also the damages, so
that the whole Hundred, with the Franchises being within the precincts of the
same Hundred, shall be answerable for the Robberies done. And if the Robbery be
done in the divisions of two Hundreds, both the Hundreds and the Franchises
within the same shall be answerable; And after the Robbery be done, the Country
shall have no longer space than half a year, within which time it shall behoove
them to agree for the Robbery or Offense, or else that they shall answer for
the Bodies of the Offenders.

But afterward by another Statute made An. 28 E. 3. cap. 11. it is ordained
That the Country shall have no longer term after the Robbery committed than
forty days, within which time they must make satisfaction for the Robbery or
answer the Bodies of the Felons.

The person robbed shall have an Action upon the Statute of Winchester against
the Hundred, notwithstanding that the Statute does not expressly mention any
Action; for when it says the Hundred shall answer for the Robbery and the
damages; the Hundred within the meaning of the Statute is to be answerable to
the party robbed; for he is the person damnified and intended to be relieved
within this Act; and when the Statute gives him recompense or satisfaction for
the loss he had sustained by the Robbery, the Law by implication gives him the
necessary means whereby he is to attain to it, and that is an Action to be
grounded upon this Statute. Process and Execution against the Hundred, I shall
speak of at large in another place.

By the two aforesaid Statutes of the 13 E. 1. made at Winchester, Co. li. 7.
so. 7.
and the 28 E. 3. the Country, if it did not answer for the Bodies of all the
Offenders, must of necessity have made satisfaction for the Robbery, though (in
case it was done by many) some of the Felons upon pursuit had been taken; but
this is moderated by a Clause in the 27 El. cap. 13. whereby it is enacted, If
any Robbery be committed by two or more, and any one of them be apprehended
upon such pursuit as the Law does require, that no Hundred or Franches shall
incurr the penalty or loss or forfeiture mentioned in this Statute of the 27
El. or any of the two former Statutes, though the rest of the Felons make their
escape.

The party robbed was not limited to any time within which he should bring his
Action before the 27 El. which Act does provide, That no person or persons
robbed shall take advantage by virtue of any fermer Act, to charge any Hundred
where any robbery shall be committed, unless he or they so robbed shall
commence his or their Suit or Action within one year next after such Robbery so
committed; for if the Robbery be committed upon the first of May, and the
original bear test the first of May following the Action does not lie, for it
must of necessity be commenced within the year.

This Statute of the 27 El. does likewise bind the person robbed to the
performance of some conditions before he can be enabled to bring his Action,
for the Act says, That no person or persons robbed, shall maintain any action
of the two forementioned Statutes, except the said person or persons so robbed,
shall, with as much convenient speed as may be, give notice of the same Robbery
so committed unto some of the Inhabitants of some Town, Village or Hamlet near
unto the place where such Robbery was committed; Nor shall by virtue of the
Statutes aforesaid bring any Action unless he or they shall within twenty days
next before such Action to be brought, be examined upon his or their corporal
Oaths to be taken before some one Justice of the Peace of the County where the
Robbery was committed, inhabiting within the Hundred where the said Robbery was
done or near unto the same, whether he or they know the parties that committed
the Robbery or any of them. And if upon examination it be confessed that he or
they do know the parties that did the Robbery, or any of them, then he or they
so confessing, shall, before the said Action be commenced enter into a
Recognizance before the said Justice to prosecute the said person or persons so
known to have committed the Robbery by Indictment or otherwise, according to
the due course of the Laws of this Realm.

So that these four things are absolutely necessary; 1. That notice with all
convenient speed be given to the Inhabitants of the place near where the
Robbery was done. 2. That the said Oath be taken before the Justice of the
Peace within twenty days next before the Action commenced. 3. That he enter
into a Recognizance to prosecute the Felons in case he knows any of them. 4.
That the Action it self be brought within a year after the Robbery committed.


If the Servant be robbed of his Master's goods, the Servant is to give the
notice to the Inhabitants, for he is best able to describe the Felons, and give
information which way they are gone; so that the Country by his directions may
the better pursue and descry the Malefactors, and the Oath required by the
Statute, made by him is sufficient, because the contents of the Oath is,
Whether the party robbed knew any of the Offenders? and a knowledge of the
Robbers (within the meaning of this Act) is expected from none but the person
that was robbed.

The Servant is likewise the person to be bound in the Recognizance, the
Statute requires that, because no person is supposed fitter to give evidence
against the Offenders than he that was robbed by them. But the Action against
the Hundred must be brought by the Master, for he is the Propriator: but if the
Servant refuses to make the Oath, or enter into the Recognizance before the
Justice, Quaere, What remedy the Master has against him?

If a man be robbed in the Hundred of A. in the County of B. and he that was
robbed takes the Oath enjoined by this Act before a Justice of the Peace
inhabiting in or near the Hundred of A. at any place out of the County of B.
the Oath so taken has been adjudged sufficient to entitle him to his Action,
for by virtue of this Act he h^th a special power (which is not confined to any
place) to administer this Oath wherever he be, and it is not like that
authority which he derives from his Commission, which is local, and can be
exercised no where else besides in the County where he is constituted Justice
of the Peace.

If several men be robbed at one time and place, the number of their Actions to
be brought against the Hundred depends upon the quality of the property they
had in the goods whereof they were robbed; for if they had several properties
they must bring several Actions, Dier 370. pl. 59.
but if they be joint Owners or Proprietors then they must all join in one
Action, or so many of them as are so jointly possessed.

Where and how notice is to be given of the Robbery.
IT appears by the Statute of Westminster the 1st, made in the third year of
Edward the First, That at Common Law 'twas the duty of the Inhabitants to keep
and guard the Country from Thefts and Robberies, etc. and in case any Felony
was committed they were to pursue and apprehend the Felons, otherwise they were
punishable for the escape of such Offenders: every Town was obliged at its
peril to take notice of any Robbery committed within its precincts, though done
(if in the day time) in a place never so secret; Dier 210. pl. 25.
as if a man be slain in the Fields or Lane or any other private place
belonging to the Town, if the Murderer escape untaken, the Town was
amerceable, though the Inhabitants thereof had not the least knowledge of it,
for in many cases the Law does presume a knowledge, as the Jury that is to try
an Issue is supposed to have recognizance of the matter of fact in Issue
between the parties; So if one be outlawed of Felony in the County Court, and
afterward is received by any person of the same County, that receipt makes him
accessory to the Felony, for the Law believes no man, residing in the same
County, to be ignorant of what is transacted in that Court; to which generally
every one owes suit and attendance. Likewise if one retain my Servant in the
same County where I live, if I bring an Action against him for so doing, his
ignorance of the fact in this case does not excuse him, for he is bound to take
notice of the first retainder, but if he retains my Servant in another County,
then the Law is otherwise; So also a man is bound to take notice of all Acts
done upon his own freehold. The Statute of Winchester, which give the Action
against the Hundred, is general, and does not specify any time or place when
or where the Robbery is to be done, which makes the Hundred liable, yet the
Sages of the Law have put such a construction upon the general words of that
Statute, that the Robbery, which binds the Country to render satisfaction to
the party robbed, must be committed in the daytime, and not in the night, and
not in a private place as a House, but openly, so that the Country may take
notice of it themselves, Co. li. 7. so. 7.
for it was not necessary for him that was robbed to levy any Huy and Cry, or
give any notice of the Robbery to the Inhabitants of the Country, neither by
the letter of the foresaid Statute of Winchester, or by the meaning of it; for
it may be that the person robbed was bound or maimed, etc. so that he could not
raise any Huy and Cry or give any notice to the Country, and it is a general
Rule in Law, that where the Law appoints no person to give notice, the party
concerned himself is bound to take notice at his peril; as if a Church becomes
void, by virtue of the Statute of the 21st. of Hen. 8. the Patron is bound to
present at his peril within, six months after the institution and induction
into the second Benefice, Cro. par. 1.258.
though all this be done without his having the least knowledge of it. Dier 292.
But if a Church becomes void by sentence of deprivation in the Ecclesiastical
Court, and the six months after which the elapse is to incurr, is to commence
but from the time of such notice given, and the reason of the first case is the
Church being ipso facto void, there being no person whom the Law requires to
give the Patron notice of such avoidance, he is obliged to take notice of it
himself. If a Tenant in Fee-simple convey the Estate to the use of himself for
life, the remainder to his Wife for life, the remainder to his eldest Son in
Fee, and afterward enfeoffs A. with Warranty, and dies, the Wife and the Son
enter upon A. and join in a Feoffment to B. the Heir being barred by the
Warranty, Cro. Car. 393.
this Feoffment is a forfeiture of the Wife's Estate for life; for she was to
take cognizance of the said Feoffment made by her Husband, because the Livery
is a public and notorious Act, and she ought at her peril to take notice of
this Act done upon the Land, none being bound to give her notice of it.

That this matter of the notice is now altered by the Statute of 27 El. whereby
it is provided, That no person shall maintain any Action upon the Statute of
Winchester or any other Statute, except the person robbed, with as much
convenient speed as may be, give notice of the Robbery to some of the
Inhabitants of some Town, Village or Hamlet near the place where such Robbery
shall be committed: yet it is not necessary that notice be given to those of
the Hundred where the Robbery was done, but to the Inhabitants of any Village
near adjoining to the place where the person was robbed, Cro Car. 379.
though in another Hundred, for the Statute does not mention that notice be
given to the Inhabitants of that Hundred where the Robbery was committed, and
also by intendment the person robbed cannot know the divisions of the Hundred;
And though notice be given out of the County, yet it is well enough, provided
he makes it in a Village near adjoining to the place where he was robbed; Cro.
Car. 41.
As in an Action brought against the Hundreds of Dackorum and Cashoe, the
Plaintiff alleged the Robbery to be committed at Shealey and Ridge in divisis
Hundredorum de Dackorum and Cashoe in Com. Hertford, and that he gave notice of
the Robbery at South Mims, in the County of Middlesex, near the Hundreds
aforesaid, in this case the whole Court adjudged the notice given in Middlesex
to be sufficient, and that the party robbed is no more bound to know the
divisions of Counties than he is of Hundreds. And likewise notwithstanding that
the words of the Statute are, that notice be given near the place where the
Robbery was, yet the Court held that this allegation of the notice given at
South Mims, near the Hundreds aforesaid, was well enough, and shall be intended
in the division where the Robbery was done; So if a Robbery be alleged to be
committed in divisis Hundredorum, etc. and notice given at such a place, New
Book of Ent. so 348.
etc. prope divisis Hundredorum praedict. etc. it shall be intended to be given
in the division of the Hundreds where the Robbery was done, and not in the most
remote place thereof, for that should be a foreign intendment, though it be good
either way, yet it is best to allege the notice to have been given at the
place where the Robbery was committed, or at a Village near unto adjoining.

At what time the Robbery must be committed, to charge the Hundred by an Action
upon the Statute of Winchester.
THough the Statute of Winchester, as I have showed you in the foregoing
Chapter, is general, both as to time and place, and that it has been expounded
not to extend to any Robbery, unless the same be committed in the daytime, Co.
li. 7. fo. 7.
for of Felonies done in the night the Country of it self is not bound to take
notice, for they cannot conveniently pursue or make enquiry after the Offenders
in the nightime; And since the Statute makes the Country answerable for the
Robbery, it were too hard to require from them a performance of that which they
are deprived of the ordinary and convenient means to effect. This Statute was
expounded according to the rule and reason of the Common Law (as it may appear
by the case of the 3d. of Ed. 3d. Tit. Coron. 293.) That if a Murder or any
other Felony be done in the night and the Malefactor escaped, the Town was not
to be amerced for it.

In this point of the time there is a difference between a pursuit for the King
and for the party, upon the Statute, as shall be further demonstrated
hereafter, when I come to treat of Huy and Cry; though in neither case the Law
does constrain the Country to take cognizance at their peril of any Felony
acted in the night: 2 Ed. 4.8. B. 9. A
yet in case of a pursuit for the King, upon actual notice given of the Felony,
the Law, upon Huy and Cry levied, expects the readiness and uttermost diligence
of the Inhabitants to follow the Malefactors. As if a man be robbed or
assaulted and offered to be robbed, either in the day or night, if the person
himself or any other resort to the Constable of the Town, and acquaint him with
the cases, describing the person, and giving information which way the Offender
is gone, and require him to raise the Huy and Cry, it is the duty of the
Constable to raise the power of the Town, as well in the night as in the day,
for the prosecution of the Offender, and if he be not found, there to give
warning to the next Constable, and he to the next, until the Offender be taken.

If a Traveller be robbed in the night, and gives notice to the Constable of
the Village as aforesaid, though the Constable is obliged (as I have said
already) to raise the Huy and Cry, yet this at the most is but a pursuit for
the King, and the Traveller shall take no advantage of the negligence thereof,
in case the Felons make their escape, for God has ordained the day for man to
labor and travel, Co. ubi supra.
as a fit time for him to exercise his industry, and the night for his repose
and quietness, being tired and wearied with his daily operation; and
accordingly the Law supposes every person in the night to have retired himself
from his labor to take his natural rest, neither does the Law require his
presence or attendance upon his own private affairs, 12 Ed. 3. tit. Distress
17.11 H. 7. fo. 5. Acc^.
nor allow an occasion to interrupt or disturb him in his sleep. Therefore it
has been adjudged that a man cannot distrain in the night for a rent Service
(because the distress being in it self a demand of the rent, which the Tenant
ought to pay, whenever it is demanded, upon the Land out of which it issues)
for that the Law does not require his being upon the ground, nor his readiness
to tender his rent in the night as it does in the daytime. It is true, 10 Ed.
3. fo. 21.
a man may distrain for damage Feasant in the night, and the Law does allow it
only for the necessity of the case, for if the Owner of the Land should permit
the Cattle to continue there till morning, perhaps by that time they may estray
out of the ground, and so they cannot be distrained at all, for they must be
taken damage feasant (viz.) doing of the trespass upon the ground. Therefore
since none are bound to have an eye in the night upon Thieves and Robbers in
the Country, it is both the interest and safety of our Traveller, that he take
care not to be abroad at unseasonable hours, for then in some respect he is out
of the protection of the Law, which makes no provision for his indemnity in
case he be robbed, and the Poet further warns him of his danger:

Vt jugulent homines surgunt de nocte Latrones.
And whereas it is further provided by the Statute of Winchester, cap. 4. That
in all Cities and great Towns which are walled the Gates be kept shut from
Sunsetting to Sunrising, I conceive that if a man be robbed in such a City or
Town, though it be done in the night, yet the Inhabitants shall answer for the
Robbery, and notwithstanding that at the Common Law no place was punishable for
the escape of any Felon in the night, yet this Statute has changed the reason
and ground of that Law, and ratio Legis est anima Legis and mutata Legis
ratione mutatur and Lex, for if they do not keep their Gates shut according to
the Statute whereby the Felon escapes, there is a default and negligence in
them, which renders them liable to punishment if the Felon be not apprehended
by them, and it was adjudged in the 3d. of Ed. 3d. That where a man being slain
within a walled Town in the night, 3 Ed. 3. tit. Coron. 299.
and the Murderer escaped, that the whole Town should be amerced, Quaere,
Whether the case of the Robbery may not be within the same reason?

It is necessary that the Robbery, for which the County is to answer, be done
in the daytime and out of the night, and if a man be robbed after Sunset and
before it be dark, yet the Hundred is chargeable, as it was resolved in an
Action brought against the Inhabitants of Eveinger, by one Ashpoole, who was
robbed in January after Sunset while it was daylight, and the Court gave
Judgment for the Plaintiff, Co li. 7. fo. 6.
for that it was a time convenient for men to travel and be about their
business.

And in another Action commenced against the Hundred of Dunmore in Essex, it
was resolved that for a Robbery done in the morning ante lucem ( viz. before it
is light) the Hundred is not chargeable, Co. ub. supra.
for that the Robbery is done in the night.

In an Action upon the Statute of Winchester, brought against the Hundred of
Morely, the Jury found that the Robbery was done post lucem ejusdem diei and
ante ortum Solis, that is, after daybreak and before Sunrising, and it was
adjudged the Plaintiff should recover against the Hundred. So also a Robbery
committed post occasum Solis and per diurnam lucem, Cro. Jac. 106.
that is, after Sunset and by daylight, was held good to charge the Country.

The Hundred of Warrington, being sued upon the aforesaid Statute for a Robbery
committed, it was held by Anderson and all the Justices, that if a Robbery be
done in the morning before day or in the evening after the day, Cro. Eli. 270.
in any time of the night in which men use commonly to travel, that the Hundred
is answerable for it. But if it be done at twelve or one of the Clock in the
night, at which time every one is intended to be in bed, the Hundred is not
bound to answer for the Robbery, Quaere of this Case, for it contradicts the
forementioned Authorities, and the reasons of them.

Though in most cases traveling upon the Sunday be prohibited and punishable
by Law, yet if any person so traveling be robbed, the Country is not
excusable, as it was held by three Justices, in the case of one Wait, against
the Hundred of Stoke, That notwithstanding a Robbery be committed upon the
Sunday in the time of Divine Service, yet this is no excuse for the Country,
for it is their charge and duty to provide that Robberies be not done, and if
they be that they suppress them; and the Statute of Winchester is made for the
maintenance of the peace of the Realm and the advancement of Justice, Cro. Jac.
469.
and therefore ought to be liberally and favorably construed, and the persuing
of Felons, who attempt to violate the Sabbath, is no offense but a good work of
Charity and Justice, for if it were otherwise it would prove the occasion and
encouragement of committing Robberies frequently upon that day. And sometimes
diverse persons upon necessity are forced to travel upon the Sunday, as
Physicians, Surgeons and Midwives, and it was judged but reasonable they
should be protected in their Journies.

But this Law is in some sort now altered by a Statute made in the 29th: year
of the Reign of his present Majesty, whereby it is provided, That if any person
or persons whatsoever which shall travel upon the Lord's day shall be then
robbed, That no Hundred nor the Inhabitants thereof shall be charged with it,
or be answerable for any Robbery so committed; but the person or persons so
robbed shall be barred from bringing any Action for the said Robbery, any Law
to the contrary notwithstanding; Nevertheless the Inhabitants of the Counties
and Hundreds (after notice of any such Robberies to them or some of them given,
or after Huy and Cry for the same to be brought) shall make or cause to be made
fresh suit and pursuit after the Offenders with Horsemen and Footmen, according
to the Statute made in the 27th. year of Queen Elizabeth, upon pein of
forfeiting to the King's Majesty his Heirs and Successors, as much money as
might have been recovered against the Hundred by the party robbed if this Law
had not been made.

In what place a Robbery must be committed to charge the Hundred.
THE Statute of Winchester speaks in general as well of the place, as of the
time, yet resolved Co. li. 7. in Sendill's Case, That if a man be robbed in his
House either by day or night, the Hundred in which the House is shall not be
charged to answer for it, and that for three reasons 1. For that every man's
House is his Castle, which he is bound to defend at his peril. 2. It is not
lawful for another to enter into any man's House for the tuition and safeguard
of it. 3. That such a Robbery for which the Country shall answer within this
Act ought to be done openly, so that the Country may take notice of it
themselves.


Though the Law be so in case of a Robbery committed in a House, yet it seems
(that since this Statute is to be expounded by the rules of the Common Law)
that if a Robbery be done in any known place besides, the Country is liable. It
is held in my Lord Dier's Reports, Dier 210. Stam. 34.
That if a man be slain in the daytime that the Township should be amerced for
the escape, though the Murder was done in any Fields or Lane belonging to the
Town; hence I do infer, that if a person be robbed in any open or known place
out of the Highway, that such Robbery is within the Statute: I conceive this
Case may serve as a rule to expound this Statute by in reference to the place
where, as well as that Case of the 3 d. of Ed. the 3 d. did in point of time,
when the Robbery should be committed to charge the Country; for there a Murder
was done vespere, in the evening after Sunset, and the place was amerced for
the escape, and according to the reason of this Case it was adjudged in the
seventh Report in Ashpool's Case, That a Robbery done after Sunset and before
it was dark was sufficient to charge the Hundred; So likewise because an escape
in the night is in no case punishable at Common Law, this Statute has been
expounded by the same rule that the Country should not answer for any Robbery
done in the night.

But there is one Case which seems to confine all Robberies (which are within
the meaning of this Act) to the Common Highway. The Case was this, There was a
way which was dangerous for Travelers to pass through, and very chargea^le to
be kept in repair, and upon an ad quod damnum, it was found accordingly;
thereupon the old way was stopped up and a new one made through the Fields
adjoining, which was more safe and commodious for Passengers, and to an
Information brought for stopping the way this whole matter was pleaded, and
Judgment for the King, 1. For that the Owner of the Land through which the new
way was made might stop it at his pleasure. 2. Because if any Robbery should
happen to be committed upon any person traveling in this new way, the Country
was not liable to make satisfaction for it, for that they were not bound to
keep Watch and Ward there.
To this I answer, That it is a charge and a duty incumbent upon the
Inhabitants of every Country to see that no Robberies be committed in any place
within their respective Precincts, and to use all means to prevent them, and if
they be to suppress them, and it does not follow that the Country is not
answerable for any Robbery unless the Inhabitants be bound to Watch and Ward at
the same time and place where and when the Robbery is committed, for then no
Robbery done after Michaelmas and before the Feast of the Ascension should bind
the Country, nor between the Feast of the Ascension and Michaelmas, unless it
be done after Sunsetting and before Sunrising; for by the Statute, no City,
Town or Village is obliged to keep Watch but from Sunsetting to Sunrising,
and that at no other time of the year but from the Feast of Ascension till
Michaelmas, neither is it to be thought in reason that the number which the
Statute does appoint to Watch ( viz. six at every Gate of a City, twelve to a
Tower, and six more or less according to the proportion of the Inhabitants to
every Village) should guard every particular passage upon the Road: And Watches
are not kept in the night to guard and secure Travelers from Robbers in the
night, for the Country shall not make any satisfaction for a Robbery done at
that time; but their business principally is to examine all Strangers (which
travel in the night) whence they come, whither they go, and what they be, and
of their business, etc. and if they find cause of suspicion they may arrest and
detain them till the morning, and if then no suspicion be found they may let
them go, and if otherwise they ought to deliver them to the Sheriff, or carry
them before a Justice of the Peace, etc. And admitting that the Country is
bound to keep Watch and Ward in the daytime, according to the 5th. of Ed. the
4th. where it was held, That the Inhabitants are not required by Law to Watch
and Ward upon the Sunday, in the time of Divine Service, yet it was resolved in
an Action brought by -- against the Hundred of Stokes, That notwithstanding the
Robbery was done upon the Sunday, and in the time of Divine Service that the
Plaintiff should recover against the Hundred, and I conceive that it may be a
general rule, that in what place soever a Felony be committed, for which the
Town or Hundred were answerable at Common Law for the escape of any such Felon,
that for a Robbery done under the same circumstances the Country shall answer.
I have only offered these reasons and submit unto the Judgment of the Reader.

How one or more against whom Execution is had may have Contribution from the
rest of the Inhabitants of the same Hundred.
BY the Statute of the 13th. of Ed. the 1st. and 28 of Ed. the 3d. the whole
Hundred where the Robbery was committed with the Liberties within the Precincts
thereof, being liable to answer for the Robbery and the damages sustained
thereby, when the party robbed had obtained Judgment against the Hundred, it
was the usual practice to take Execution for the entire damage against one or
very few of the Inhabitants, who being so charged had no remedy to force a
contribution from the residue of the Hundred, which often proved to be the
absolute impoverishment and ruin of such Inhabitants and their Families. To
remedy this great inconveniency, and to lay the burden equally upon the
Inhabitants of the whole Hundred, who were equally chargeable by a Statute made
Anno 27 El. cap. 13. it is enacted, That after Execution of damages so had by
the party against one or few of the Inhabitants, it may be lawful upon
complaint made by the person or persons so charged, for two Justices of the
Peace (whereof one to be of the Quorum) of the same County inhabiting within
the said Hundred or near unto the same where any such Execution shall be had,
to assess and tax ratably and proportionably according to their discretions all
and every the Towns, Parishes, Villages and Hamlets, as well of the said
Hundred where any such Robbery shall be committed as of the Liberties within
the said Hundred to and toward an equal contribution to be had and made for
the relief of the said Inhabitant or Inhabitants against whom the party or
parties robbed had his or their Execution. And after such taxation made, the
Constables, Constable, Headboroughs, or Headborough of every such Town, Parish,
Village and Hamlet, shall by virtue of this Act have full power and authority
within their several limits ratably and proportionably to tax and assess
according to their abilities, every Inhabitant and Dweller in every such Town,
Parish, Village and Hamlet, for and toward the payment of such taxation and
assessment as shall be so made upon every such Town, Parish, Village and
Hamlet, as aforesaid by the said Justices; And if any Inhabitant of any such
Town, Parish, Village or Hamlet shall obstinately refuse and deny to pay the
said taxation and assessment so by the said Constables, Constable, Headboroughs
or Headborough taxed and assessed; Then it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said Constables Headboroughs, and every of them within their several limits
and jurisdictions, to distrain all and every person and persons so refusing or
denying by his and their goods and chattels, and the same distress to sell and
the money thereof coming to retain to the use aforesaid; And if the goods and
chattels so distrained and sold shall be of more value than the said taxation
shall come to, then the residue of the said money over and above the said
taxations shall be delivered unto the person or persons so distrained. All and
every such Constables and Headboroughs after that they have within their
several limits and jurisdictions levied and collected their said rates and sums
of money so taxed, shall within ten days after such Collection pay and deliver
the same unto the said Justices of Peace or one of them to the use and behoof
of the said Inhabitant or Inhabitants for whom such rate, taxation or
assessment shall be had or made as aforesaid, which money so paid shall by the
Justices or Justice so receiving the same be delivered over (upon request made)
unto the said Inhabitant or Inhabitants to whose use the same shall be called.

It was held in one Dean's Case 10 Car. in the Common Pleas, That a person
coming to inhabit in the Hundred after the Robbery, and Judgment given, is not
liable to the Execution at the Suit of the party robbed, but a person coming
after to inhabit is assessable to the Contribution, because the Country is
chargeable at the time of the assessment and not the persons which were there
at the time of the Robbery committed. Vid. Dalton's Justic. 153.

There was another inconveniency (before the making of the aforesaid Statute of
27 El.) which occasioned great remissness and negligence in the pursuing and
apprehending of Robbers, for that by the Statutes of 13 Ed. 1. and 28 Ed. 3.
the Hundred where the Robbery was done stood charged with the penalties therein
contained, notwithstanding their disability to perform what the Law required
from them, and likewise notwithstanding they used their uttermost endeavors in
making of fresh suit and following the Malefactors in order to bring them to
justice; the Inhabitants of other Hundreds and Counties (besides those where
the Robbery was done) knowing that though the Felons escaped that they were not
bound to render satisfaction to the party robbed, were careless in discharging
their duty in prosecuting the Huy and Cry when it was brought to them; And to
the end that the Inhabitants and Resiants of other places might be quickened
and spurred on to use all possible diligence to suppress Robbers, the aforesaid
Statute of 27 El. makes them who shall first make default in the pursuit to
participate of the charge, which before was incumbent only upon that place
where the party was robbed, It is thereby enacted, That the Inhabitants of
every or any such Hundred (with the Liberties within the precinct thereof)
wherein negligence, fault, or defect of pursuit after Huy and Cry made, shall
happen to be, shall answer and satisfy the one moiety or half of all and every
sum or sums of money and damages as shall by force and virtue of the said
Statutes of 13 Ed. 1. and 28 Ed. 3. or either of them be recovered or had
against, or of the same Hundred with the Franchises therein in which any
Robbery or Felony shall at any time hereafter be committed or done, And the
same moiety shall at any time hereafter be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint or Information in any of the King's Courts of Record at Westminster, by
and in the name of the Clerk of the Peace for the time being of every such
County within this Realm where any such Robbery and Recovery by the party or
parties robbed shall be without naming the Christian-name or Surname of the
said Clerk of the Peace, which moiety so recovered shall be to the only use
and behoof of the Inhabitants of the said Hundred where any such Robbery shall
be committed.

And lest the Action, etc. should any way miscarry, either by the death or
removal of the Clerk of the Peace it is further provided by the said Act, That
if any Clerk of the Peace of or in any County within this Realm shall at any
time hereafter commence or prefer any such Suit, Action or Information, and
shall after the same so sued, commenced or preferred happen to die or to be
removed out of his Office before Recovery and Execution had, yet no such
Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit or Information sued, commenced or preferred, shall
by such displacing or death, be abated, discontinued or ended, But it shall and
may be lawful to and for the Clerk of the Peace next succeeding in the said
County to prosecute, pursue and follow all and every such Action, Bill, Plaint,
Suit or Information for the causes aforesaid so hanging and depending in such
manner and form to all intents and purposes as that Clerk of the Peace might
have done which first commenced or preferred the said Suit, Bill, Plaint or
Information.

If the moiety of the penalty be recovered in an Action brought upon the
foresaid branch of this Statute against any Hundred for want of fresh suit and
Execution had thereupon against one or few of the Inhabitants; There shall be
the same course and method observed as is provided by this Statute for relief
of part of the Inhabitants (of that place where the Robbery was done) whose
goods and chattels are taken in Execution for the satisfaction of the person
that is robbed, And the like taxation, assessment, levying by distress and
payment shall be had and done within every Hundred where default and negligence
of pursuit and fresh suit shall be, for and to the benefit of all and every
Inhabitant or Inhabitants of the same Hundred where such default shall be, that
shall at any time hereafter by virtue of this Act have any damages or money
levied of them for the payment of the one moiety of the money recovered against
the said Hundred where the Robbery is committed.



There is a private Act of Parliament made in the 39 El. cap. 25. for the
relief of the Inhabitants of Begnersh alias Benherst in the County of
Berkshire, who in respect of the smalness and poverty of the place were not
able to make satisfaction for the great and frequent Robberies committed within
that Hundred, which has two great Roads in it, the one leading from London to
Henly upon Thames, the other from London to Reading, each of them being at
least three miles in length thorough the woody ground called the Thicket; And
in respect of the thinness of the Inhabitants, and few or none of their
Villages being situated upon either of these Roads; And having seldom any
occasion for themselves or their Servants to be much conversant in or near the
Roads, most part of the Hundred joining to the Highway being woody ground, and
so not fit for Tillage or Pasture, or any other use which may require the
frequent being of the Resiants upon it. And so for these reasons they could not
conveniently of themselves take notice of the Robberies committed upon these
Roads. And therefore to ease them of the inconveniences and of the great
charges that they were equally like to undergo, to their utter impoverishment
and depopulation, it is provided by this Act, That the Inhabitants of the said
Hundred of Benherst shall and may to their own proper use in the name of the
Clerk of the Peace of the said County recover and leavy all such sums of money,
costs and damages as shall hereafter be recovered or levied of or against them
by force of any of the Statutes which concern Robberies, against the
Inhabitants and Resiants of every or any such Hundred with the Franchises
within the precincts thereof, wherein negligence, fault or defect of such
pursuit or fresh suit (as by the said Statute of 27 El. is appointed to be
made) shall happen to be after notice given or Hay and Cry brought to the said
Inhabitants or Resiants or any of them of or upon any Robbery which shall be
committed within the Hundred of Benherst: And this Act shall give full power
and authority in all respects to the Inhabitants of the said Hundred of
Benherst (in the name of the Clerk of the Peace of the said County) for the
recovery and levying of all the said money, costs and damages aforesaid, as the
Statute of 27 El. gave or intends to give for the recovery of a moiety or one
half thereof. Provided always that no such remedy or recovery shall be had by
this Statute for all or the whole sum or sums of money and damages aforesaid,
but only in these two cases (viz.) The one where no such notice or
intelligence (as by the said Statute of the 27 El. was appointed to be given of
every or any Robbery) shall be given to the Inhabitants of the said Hundred of
Benherst; The other where the Inhabitants of the same Hundred (after such
notice of any Robbery to them or some of them given, or after Hay and Cry for
the same to them brought) shall make or cause to be made fresh suit and pursuit
after the Offenders with Horsemen and Footmen, according to the said Statute of
27 El. and where nevertheless the Offenders or any one of them shall not be
apprehended within forty days after the Robbery committed.

One of the chief difficulties that the said Hundred of Benherst labored under
was in regard the Inhabitants thereof for the reasons already showed could not
of themselves take notice of the Robbery that they might make fresh suit after
the Offenders, and nothing could excuse them of the penalty unless they or some
other place answer the Bodies of all or any of the Robbers, and the party
robbed was not obliged to give notice within the Hundred wherein he was robbed,
for notice in another Hundred or County is sufficient, provided it be near the
place where the Robbery was done, as it appears by the preamble of this Statute
of 39 El. That upon a notice given at Maidenhead out of the Hundred of
Benherst, and three miles distant from those thievish places in the Thicket
where the Robbery was committed, recovery and Execution were had against the
said Hundred for above two Hundred and fifty pounds; and you may read in the
Chapter of Notice before, how notice given at South-Mims in Middlesex of a
Robbery done in Hertford-shire was adjudged good. And notwithstanding this Act,
if a Traveller be robbed within the Hundred of Benherst, and gives notice of
the Robbery at another place out of the Hundred as aforesaid, yet the said
Hundred shall answer for the Robbery as formerly, for the meaning of the
Statute is not, that if there be notice at all give to the Inhabitants of the
said Hundred, that for that reason they shall be excused of the penalty, but
that if there be no such notice given to them within the Hundred, and the party
robbed recover against them, they shall recover over against the place where
default of fresh suit shall happen the whole and entire penalty recovered
against them. And in case there be such notice and intelligence given to the
Inhabitants or Resiants of this Hundred as the Statute does require, and the
Offenders escape, yet they shall recover the moiety according to the Statute of
the 27 El. against the Hundred where the fresh suit ceased, etc.

There is another private Act made for the relief of the Inhabitants of the
Town of Tewxbury, 8 H. 6. c. 27.
in the County of Gloucester, against the Commonalty of the Forest Dean, and of
the Hundreds of Bledstow and Westbury, in the said County, for that Sundry
Robberies were usually committed in a riotous manner by a great multitude of
people of the said Commonalty upon the said Inhabitants of the Town of Tewxbury
in their passage from thence upon the River of Severn to the City of Bristol
and in their return back again, therefore to remedy these great enormities, The
Sheriff of the said County or the Bailiffs of the Town of Gloucester for the
time being or one of them, upon pein of forfeiture of 20li. to be levied of
their lands, goods and chattels to the King's use, shall make proclamation at
the said Town of Gloucester within four days next after notification made to
them or any of them by the persons so endamaged, or by any other in their names
of such injuries and trespasses done, and that the said Trespassers and
Offenders shall restore in the same Town of Gloucester within fifteen days after
the said proclamation to the said persons so endamaged their corn and
merchandise, goods and chattels so taken or the very value of the same, with
reasonable amends for the damages sustained by such taking; After which
proclamation if the said Trespassers do not restore the said corn and
merchandise, etc. or the value of them to the party so grieved in form
aforesaid, with reasonable amends for the damages, or that the said Trespassers
be not brought to the King's Prison to the Castle of Gloucester for the said
trespasses, by the Officers of the said Forest and Hundreds, or by the
Commonalties of the same, that then the consideration of the Statute of
Winchester put for the Robbery of any person which gives an Action for him
that is robbed against the Hundred within which the same Robbery is done, after
the form of the same Statute, the said Commonalties shall be charged of the
said corn and merchandise, goods and chattels so taken or of the very value of
the same to the party so grieved, to satisfy them of the damages for the same
taking. And that the said parties so endamaged and grieved may have their
general Actions of Debt against the said Commonalties of the said Forest and
Hundreds of the sum of money, to which the value of the corn, merchandises,
goods and chattels so taken do extend.

And although the said Commonalties be no Commonalties Corporate, yet they
shall have process in such Actions of Debt by Summons, Attachments and
Distress, as if he were to have an Action of Debt at the Common Law; So that if
the said Commonalties make default of the second distress in such Actions, that
then the party which shall sue shall have Judgment to recover his Debt against
the said Commonalties, after the supposal of their goods in the form aforesaid,
with his reasonable damages and expenses; And whatsoever issue triable by
Inquest in the said Forest and Hundreds, shall happen to be taken in such
Actions, it shall be tried by Inquest of the Body of the said County out of the
same Forest and Hundreds; And that the goods and chattels of every singular
person of the said Commonalties for the time being shall be had, taken and
holden in Law convict, as the common goods and chattels of the said
Commonalties touching the return, serving and execution of Writs, Processes and
Judgments in and of the said Actions. And that every singular person of the
said Forest and Commonalties have power by authority of the said Parliament to
attach and arrest the said Trespassers by their Bodies, as well within the said
Forest as without, and so arrested to commit to the said Prison, and that the
Keeper of the same Prison upon pein of 40 li. to be levied of his goods and
chattels, lands and tenements to the King's use, shall safely keep every such
person so committed to his custody till that the King or his Council has
ordained and provided their deliverance upon record, and if the goods or
chattels of any singular person or persons of the said Forest and Hundreds,
being not guilty of the said Robberies happen to be put in Execution by reason
of any such Action and Judgment, that then the said person and persons so being
not guilty may have their special Action of Debt or Trespass upon the case, of
the goods and chattels so upon Execution against the said Trespassers, to
recover their damages as well for the value of the same goods and chattels so
put in Execution, as for the damages and costs which happen to be had by reason
of such Actions of Debt, and they shall have such Processes in the said Actions
of Debt or Trespass as is to be had in the said Actions of Debt for the said
persons so endamaged or spoiled.



Of Huy and Cry.
FElony is so odious in the eye of Law that it punishes the Author thereof
with death, and will in no manner connive at the impunity such heinous
Malefactors, and lest such violators of the peace should escape her Justice,
she commands and requires the aid and assistance of all persons to apprehend
and secure the Offender, and in case he be not taken in the Fact, to give by
degrees a general and universal Alarm throughout the whole Kingdom for all
people to take notice of the Offender; so that they may pursue and follow him
in order to prevent his flight. And this grand Alarm is called in Law A Huy and
Cry.

Huer in French (from whence the Law-Latin word Hutesium is derived) signifies
to hoot or shout, in English to Cry; And the two words Huy and Cry have but one
signification, and as my Lord Cook terms it, the one is but an expression of
the other, and sometimes one is used without the other, as in Westminster. 1. cap. 9.
where all men are commanded to be ready at the Cry of the Country. And the Law
does not require that this Huy and Cry be made only with a vocal sound, but it
may well answer the ends of the Law if it be performed by an Instrument, as a
Horn, a Trumpet, etc. as the Mirour and Briton have it, avec Huy and Cry de
Corn and de Bouche, 2 Inst. 173.
(viz.) with Huy and Cry of Horn and Mouth.

This way of pursuing Felons by Huy and Cry is part of the ancient Common Law
of this Realm, as it appears by those Authors who write of the Laws of England
in use long before the Conquest, yet some have thought that Huy and Cry had its
original from the foresaid Statute of Westminster. 1. but that Statute it self proves
the contrary, for it finds fault that good suit, that is fresh suit was not
duly made.

Who may raise the Huy and Cry, and for what Cause.
THere are two sorts of Huy and Cry, The one by Common Law, the other by
Statute. The Huy and Cry by Common Law may be levied by any person who finds
just cause to do it; neither when a Felony is committed is it necessary for
him to resort to the Constable of the Town where it was done, and acquaint him
with the cause, describing the person, etc. and require him to begin it, but
that either the party grieved or one that is eye Witness to the fact may raise
the Huy and Cry themselves, and the people of the Town are bound to follow it
when it is once so raised, and if the party does not so he incurs the penalty
of the Law. For if a man be present when one is either robbed or murdered, 3
Inst. 117. 8 Ed. 2. Coron. 395.
and does not endeavor to arrest the Offender, he is punishable by Fine and
imprisonment; And so was the Law of old, Siquis aliquem spoliatum viderit,
sontem per acelamationem insequatur, and it is likewise to be found amongst the
Laws of Carnutus that if a man met a Robber in the way, 3 Inst. 116.
and would suffer him to pass without raising the Huy and Cry upon him, he was
to pay the uttermost penny the Felons life should be valued at.

It is not necessary that the Huy and Cry be made by the Constable, the party
grieved, or him that saw the fact committed, nor that it be raised in the Town
where the Felony was done, but that in all cases where every man has authority
by a warrant in Law to arrest an Offender, as a man attainted or indicted of
Treason or Felony, may be apprehended by any person whatsoever, if an attempt
be made to arrest any such person and he disobeys it and flies, the Huy and Cry
may be levied upon him where ever he be.

If a Felony be done, and A. suspects John a-Styles to be the person that
committed it, the suspicion being personal none can attach him besides A. in
this case if A. endeavors to apprehend him and he makes his escape, 2 H. 7.
so. 15.
I conceive A. may raise the Cry after him because he had power to arrest him.

Note the Spectators are not to be Judges of the degree or quality of the
offense; for it one kills another by chance-medly or se defendendo and flies
for it, the Town shall be amerced for the escape, and by the same reason they
may raise the Huy and Cry upon him, because the Inhabitants being bound to
apprehend him, the Law allows them the means to effect it, and one of them is
by Huy and Cry.

Every Justice of the Peace by virtue of his Commission may cause Huy and Cry,
Dal. J. P. cap. 28.
fresh suit and search to be made upon any Murder, Robbery or Theft committed.

The Statute of the 3 d. of Ed. 1. entitled Officium Coronatoris, does ordain,
That upon all Homicides, Burglaries, men slain or put in great danger, the Huy
and Cry shall be levied; though generally a Felony ought to be the ground and
foundation of the Huy and Cry, yet in some cases it may be done though there be
no Felony, 3 Inst. ib. supra.
as if a man be dangerously wounded or assaulted and attempted to be robbed, in
both these cases, though in the one there was but a probability of a Felony,
and in the other only a will (discovered by the attempt) to commit it; So it
seems if a rape be attempted upon a woman, she may justify the levying of the
Huy and Cry though she was not ravished indeed.

The Huy and Cry is appointed to be raised in some particular cases by Acts of
Parliament, as the Statute of Winchester does authorize the Watch to arrest
night walkers, and if they disobey the arrest and fly, the Watchmen may make
Huy and Cry, Stat. Winton cap. 3. 4 H. 7. so. 2.18.
and such person shall be pursued from Town to Town and from Country to Country
in the same manner with the Felon.

It is likewise ordained by a Statute made An. 21 Ed. 1. That if a Forester,
Parker or Warrener, shall find any Malefactors wandering within their respective
precincts, with an intent to commit any trespass or damage there, 3 Inst. 117.
the said Officers may levy the Huy and Cry upon them; and if the Offenders
thereupon will not render themselves to the said Officers, but fly or make
resistance, if any of them be slain by the forementioned Officers, or by any
other coming to their assistance, within their bounds or limits, and for the
killing of such Offenders no person shall be answerable to the Law.

As the Law gives authority to every man to raise the Country when there is a
just and legal cause for it; so it does inflict a punishment upon such as shall
alarm their Country without sufficient grounds to do it; for if any man shall
upon a feigned cause raise a Huy and Cry upon another, 3 Inst. 118. 29 Ed. 3.
Fitz Tresp. 252.
he may be punished by Fine and imprisonment, and likewise may be bound to his
good behavior as a disturber of the public peace.

And to the end that Malefactors should find no shelter or protection under the
wings of any great Men or chief Officers of any Country, and to engage them as
well as other Inhabitants to promote the common Cry, it is ordained by the
Statute of Westminster. 1. Cap. 9. That if default be found in the Lord of a
Franchise the King shall seize the Franchise into his own hands, and if default
be found in his Bailiff he shall suffer one years imprisonment and afterward
make Fine to the King, and if he has not wherewith, he shall be imprisoned for
two years; And if the Sheriff, Coroner, or any Bailiff within such Franchise or
without, for reward, or entreaty, or any affinity conceal, consent or procure
to conceal the Felonies done within their Liberties, or otherwise will not
attach or arrest such Felons (whereas they may) or otherwise will not do their
Offices for favor that they bear to such Offenders, and be thereof convicted,
they shall be imprisoned for one year, and if they have not whereof to make
Fine, they shall have three years imprisonment.

2 Inst. 173
My Lord Cook in his Comment upon this Statute says that the King for such
default shall retain the Franchise to himself for ever as forfeited;And Anno 30
H. 3. before the making of this Statute, W. de Haverhull, the Kings Treasurer,
was commanded to seize the City of London into the King's hand, for that the
Citizens thereof did not levy Huy and Cry for the death of Mr. Guido de Arterio
and others slain there, 3 Inst. 118.
as the Laws and Customs of the Realm did require.

How and in what manner the fresh suit and pursuit is to be made upon a Huy and
Cry levied.
THE Statutes of the 13 of Ed. 1. Cap. 2. 28 Ed. 3. Cap. 11. do command in
general that Huy and Cry be made after Felons from Town to Town and from
Country to Country; But it seems that at Common Law the method of pursuing
Felons was, That the party robbed or otherwise grieved, or some person for him
(though that be not necessary as I have showed before) should repair to the
Constable of the Town, and give him notice of the Felony, etc. and require him
to raise the Huy and Cry, and the Constable ought to raise the power of the
Town, and if the Offender be not found there to carry on the Huy and Cry to the
next Constable, who was to do the like in his Town, and so from Constable to
Constable until the Offender be taken, and this is to be done as well in the
night as by day. Cook 3 Inst. 116. 2 Ed. 4.8, 9.

It seems no Town is bound to pursue any further than to the next Constable,
Co. li. 7. so. 7. Dier 370.
for such a pursuit is a good excuse for them if the Town be endicted at the
King's Suit for the escape of a Felon. And every Town in this respect is a
distinct Body, and ought to aid and assist their Constable (when he requires
them) in the execution of his Office; as the whole County is bound to obey the
Sheriff's command when he has occasion to make use of the Posse Comitatus; And
if the Inhabitants of any Town were obliged to prosecute a Felon further than
to the next Constable, then by the same reason they might be required to go on
from one end of the Kingdom to the other, which is both inconvenient and
unreasonable.

And this seems to be the Law before the Conquest, Mirour cap. 1.
for the Mirour of Justice, treating of the Ordinances of the ancient. Kings,
says, it was Ordained, That every one of the age of fourteen years and upwards
should follow criminal Offenders from Village to Village at the Huy and Cry; it
is said elsewhere that Pervetusta Anglorum Lege sancitum est ut siquis damnum
ex Furto passus, 3 Inst. 172.
aut qui ipsum spoliatum viderit sontem per acclamationem insequatur,
Constabularius ejus Villa cujus opem implorat, auxilia ciere, furemque
perquirexe debet, quod si furem illic non deprenderit in proximam transmigrare,
and Constabulariam ad ferendas suppetias iterum invocare, It is established by
the ancient Law of England, that if any person be robbed, either he himself or
one that sees the Robbery done, may follow the Offender with a Huy and Cry, and
the Constable of that Village whose help he requires, ought to call in aid and
make enquiry after the Felon, and if he cannot find him there he ought to
repair to the next Village and require the Constable of that place to bring in
further aid to pursue the Felon.

If a Huy and Cry be levied, the Officer of the Town where the Felony, etc. is
done, as also the Officers of other Towns whither the Huy and Cry is brought
ought to give notice to all the Towns round about them respectively, and not to
one next Town only, Dal. J. P. cap. 28.
to the end that the Cry may spread it self far and wide into all Countries; So
that it may be in a manner impossible for the Felon to escape, and in such
cases it is requisite to give notice in writing (to the pursuers) of the things
stolen, etc. and of the colors and marks thereof, and likewise to give a
description of the person of the Felon, his Horse and Apparel, etc. and (if it
can be known) to show which way he is gone.

After notice given, St. 3 Fd. 1. de Offic. Cor. Braclon li. 3.10.121.
the pursuit from place to place must be made immediately, with all the haste
and expedition that may be, and that likewise carefully and industriously, and
the pursuers if possible are to find out the Felon's footsteps, and to tract
him all the way he went, and to use all other devices and means which may seem
most conducing and effectual for the apprehending of the Felon, since our Law
of England directs the pursuers to tract the Felon, I cannot pass over in
silence what the learned Sir John Davice mentions in his Preface to his
Reports, That amongst the manifold absurdities of the Brehon's Laws, formerly
in use amongst the Irish, they had one custom that deserves imitation, which
was, That if any cattle were stolen and the Owner followed the tract (wherein,
says the Author, the Irish are incredible cunning, insomuch as they can find
the same by the bruising of a grass in the Summertime) if the person into
whose land the tract is brought cannot make it off into some other land, he is
to answer the stealth to the Owner; and this Law is ratified there as both
useful and necessary for that Kingdom, though the rest of the Brehon's Laws be
abolished.

Sir Nicholas Hide delivered in his Charge at Cambridge Assizes, Anno 1629.
Dal. J. P. cap. 28.
That a Huy and Cry must be made and pursued with Horsemen and Footmen, and
that not only a private search must be made in every Town, but that they must
raise the Country as they go, and all still to follow the Huy and Cry as
against a common Enemy.

Also if a Huy and Cry be brought into a Town the Officers thereof ought
forthwith to search all suspected Houses and places within their limits; And
any person who follows the Huy and Cry (whether he be an Officer or no) may
arrest all such persons as in the search or pursuit shall be found suspicious,
and thereupon he that is so suspected ought to be carried before some Justice
of the Peace of the Country where he is taken to be examined where he was at
the time of the Felony committed.

It is provided by the Statute of the 27 El. That no Huy and Cry made by the
Country or Inhabitants of any Hundred shall be allowed for a lawful Huy and
Cry or pursuit unless the same be done both with Horsemen and Footmen, Quere,
Whether this Statute extends to a pursuit at Common Law or at the suit of the
King, 27 Eliz. cap. 13.
or only to a pursuit to be made at the suit of the party robbed, who is to
recover against the Hundred upon the Statute of Winchester.

Who are bound to pursue upon the Huy and Cry levied.
WHen the Huy and Cry is raised every Inhabitant (whose assistance the Law
requires) ought to follow it, though he receives no command or notice thereof
from any Officer who has authority to demand their aid in this case, for if a
Felony, etc. be committed and a Villor hears the Huy and Cry thereupon levied,
he is not to expect command or notice from any person, but ought immediately to
follow the Cry; for the Law which enjoins this duty upon him gives him a tacit
command to do it, and the Huy and Cry it self (being once heard) is a
sufficient notice; And this Law is as ancient as we are able to trace it by the
light of Letters; for many years before the Conquest it was held for Law,
Canuti Leges.
that if any man heard the Huy and Cry and did not pursue, he was to be
punished as a Contemner of the King's Laws.

The Statute of Westminster. 1. being but in affirmance of the Common Law commands
all persons to be in readiness to arrest Felons when ever the Cry of the
Country summons their attendance, West. 1. cap. 3.
and by another Statute made the next year after it is commanded, That all
persons shall follow the Huy and Cry, and whoever does not and be thereof
convicted shall be attached to answer before the Justices of Gaol delivery, and
for such offense shall be fined and imprisoned. Offic. Cor. 4 Ed. 1.
Bracton li. 3. fo. 118. 3 Ed. 3. Coron* 333.

And Bracton, who writ before any Statute made concerning Huy and Cry, says,
Bracton li. 3. fo. 118.
That all Knights and others under the age of fifteen years, ought to take an
Oath that they will not receive any outlawed persons, Murderers, Robbers, or
such as have committed Burglary, and if at any time they should hear the Huy
and Cry raised they should immediately follow it with their whole Family, and
herewith agrees Briton fo. 15, ^^9 but The Mirour of Justice, Mirour cap. 1.
who was the first Author that writ of the Laws of England, relates it to be a
Law established by the ancient Kings of this Realm, That such as be but of
fourteen years of age are bound to pursue Felons upon the Huy and Cry.

Notwithstanding what is said before be general, and its literal sense
comprehends all persons, yet there are some that may claim an exemption from
this service or duty; As, if a man be sick and not able to travel, the Law will
allow him a privilege in respect of his infirmity, as well in this as in other
cases; for if a Pracipe quod Reddat be brought against John a-Stiles returnable
at such a day, the Tenant may be essoined de mal^ lecto, that is, he may be
excused of his appearance, and thereby prevent his default, because he is sick
a bed and cannot travel; So if the Sheriff arrests a man that is sick and
returns Languidus, this is a good return, and the Sheriff shall not be amerced,
for the Law constrains no man to expose his life to imminent danger, unless it
be in the defense of the Commonweal, wherein the public safety ought to be
dearer to every man than his life.

A man may be exempted in regard of any other corporal infirmity, whereby he is
visibly disabled to effect that which the Law expects to be done, for Lex non
cogit ad impossibilia. The pursuit ought to be made by men that are endued with
strength and agility of Body, so that the pursuer may be in a capacity to
follow the Felon, either by running or riding, etc. with equal speed to that of
the Malefactor, whose fear and the sense of his guilt adds vigor to his
flight, and puts him upon all desperate enterprises in this extremity, and to
oblige a blind or lame person, etc. to the performance of this Office were to
no end, but should be in it self vanus and inutilis labor, and from the same
reason I infer that one overgrown with years may be excused in respect of his
age, as a person superannuated is freed from serving upon Juries. As for age, I
conceive there is no certain term of years limited when any person shall either
begin or cease to pursue upon the Huy and Cry, but in this case the abilities
of the body must be the standing rule, as that of the mind in committing of
Felonies; for though the Law computes fourteen years to be the age of
discretion, yet if one under that age kills another, and it can be discovered
by any circumstance that he had understanding, to discern betwixt good and the
evil he had done, the Law will adjudge it Murder, for in this case malitia
supplet atatem; so that if a person of younger years be of greater strength and
ability of body than one of twice his years, who is weak and infirm and not
able to answer the end of the Law, such person may be required to pursue an
Offender upon the Huy and Cry, (notwithstanding the two aforesaid authorities)
for his capacity of performing the duty, brings him within the reason of the
Law, which being altered alters the Law it self, for ratio Legis est anima
Legis and mutata Legis ratione mutatur and Lex.

The Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 9. Anno 3 E. 1.
Of Robberies.
FOrasmuch as the peace of this Realm has been weakly kept heretofore, for
lack of quick and fresh suit making after Felons in due manner, Fresh suit.
and namely because of Franchises, where the Felons are received: It is
provided, that all generally be ready and apparelled at the commandment and
summons of Sheriffs, Sheriffs.
and at the Cry of the Country, to pursue and arrest Felons, Arrest.
when any need is, as well within Franchises as without; Franchises.
and they that will not so do, Refuse.
and thereof be attainted, shall make a grievous Fine to the King. And if
default be found in the Lord of the Franchise, Fine.
the King shall take him to the same Franchise: Franchises.
and if default be in the Bailiff, Bailiff.
he shall have one years imprisonment, Imprisonment.
and after shall make a grievous Fine, Fine.
and if he have not whereof, he shall have imprisonment of two years: and if
the Sheriff, Sheriff.
Coroner, Coroner.
or other Bailiff within Franchise or without, for Reward or for Prayer, or for
any manner of affinity, conceal, Conceal.
consent or procure to conceal the Felonies done in their Bailiwicks, Attach.
Office.
or otherwise do forbear to attach or arrest such Felons (there as they may) or
otherwise to do their Office for favor born to such misdoers, Favor.
and be attainted thereof, they shall have one years imprisonment, Imprisonment.
and after make a grievous Fine; Fine.
and if they have not whereof to make Fine, they shall have imprisonment of
three years. Westminster. 1. cap. 9. Anno 3 Ed. 1. and after Anno 23 H. 6. cap. 5. it
is enacted that this Statute shall be put in execution.

The Statute of Winton, Anno 13 Ed. 1.
Of Robberies.
FOrasmuch as from day to day Robberies, Murders and burning of Houses be more
often used than they have been heretofore, and Felons cannot be attainted by
the Oath of Jurors, which had rather suffer Felonies done to strangers to pass
without pein, than to indict the Offenders, of whom a great part be folk of the
same Country, or at the least, if the Offenders be of another Country, the
Receivers be of places near; and they do the same, because the Oath is not now
put unto Jurors, nor upon the Country where such Felonies were done, as to the
restitution of damages hitherto no pein has been limited for their concealment
and laches: Our Lord the King, for to abate the power of Felons, has
established a pein in this case, so that from henceforth for fear of the pein
more than for fear of any Oath, they shall not spare any, nor conceal any
Felonies; and commands that Proclamation be solemnly made in all Counties,
Hundreds, Markets, Fairs, and all other places where great Resort of People is,
so that none shall excuse themselves by ignorance, that from henceforth every
Country be so well kept, that immediately upon Felonies and Robberies
committed, such fresh suit be made from Town to Town, and from Country to
Country, likewise when need require, that Inquest be made in Towns by him that
is Lord of the Town, and after in the Hundred, and after in the Franchise, and
in the County, and sometime in two, three or four Counties; in case where
Felonies be committed in the Marches of Shires, so that the Trespassers may be
attainted, and if the Country do not answer for such manner of misdoers, the
pein shall be such, that the Country, that is, the people dwelling in the
Country, shall answer for the. Robberies done, and also for the damages, so
that the whole Hundred where the Robbery happens to be done, with the
Franchises, being within the precinct of the same Hundred, shall answer for the
Robberies done; and if the Robbery chance to be done in the Division of two
Hundreds, in such case both Hundreds together, with the Franchises shall answer
it; and after that the Felony or Robbery is done, the Country shall have no
longer space than forty days, within which it shall behoove them to agree for
the Robbery and Trespass, or else that they answer for the Bodies of the
Offenders; and forasmuch as the King will not that his people shall be suddenly
put in fear of this penalty, which seems very hard to many, the King grants
that they shall not incur it immediately but it shall be respited until the
Easter following, etc.

Claus. Anno 21 Ed. 1. in 4. Dorso.
Proclamatio sive Breve direct' Vic'. De quibusdam Articulis Statuti
proclamand' and publicandis, etc.
REX Vic' Eb^' s' Cum ad majorem tranquilitatem p^^is nostrae tenend' and
depredatorum ac ali^rum malefactorum malitiam reprimendam quosdam articulos ea
occasion per totum Reg^um nostru^ Statu^^imus observera, inter quot
ordin^vimus and mandavimus per singul^e Comitatus infra idem Reg^um quod statim
post Robberias and Polonias fact as fieret recens secta de Villa in Villam and
de Patria in Patrium. Et similiter Inquisitiones fierent si necesse esset in
Villis, Hundredis, Libertatibus, Comitatibus and aliquando in duobus, tribus
vel quatuor Comitatibus in casibus cum Feloniae factae fuissent in Marchia
Comitatuum: Ita quod Malefactores deprehendi possent. Et si Patria de
Corporibus hujusmodi alefactorum non responderet, homines in Patria Commorantes
de Robberiis factis and damnis responderent, ac jam ex plurium insinuatione
acceperimus quod post Statutum and Mandatum praedictum Homicidia, Robberiae,
Incendia and aliae Trangressiones diversae in Regno nostro in defectum
articulorum praedictorum, minus plene observatorum de die in diem plus solite
perpetrantur. Nos hujusmodi damnis and periculis obviare volentes, mittimus
vobis Statutum illud per nos editum sub sigillo nostro Praecipientes and sub
gravi forisfactura nostra firmiter injungentes quod omni dilatione praepositae
Statutum praedictum in pleno Comitatu tuo in singulis Hundredis, Civitatibus,
Burgis, Feriis, Mercatis, and aliis locis solemnibus, quibus omnibus and
singulis de Com' prad' inde major and celerior notitia and evidentia fieri
poterit public lege clamari and firmiter teneri facias and omnibus and
singulis contentis in eodem. Et pro certo scias and universis and singulis de
Ballivae tua ex part nostra scire facias, quod exnunc conditiones and poenas
in dicto Statuto contentas de caetero volumus and praecipimus firmiter teneri
and inviolabiliter observari. Et istud mandatum ita celeriter and diligenter
exequaris quod ad te and tua tanquam ad mandatorum nostrorum contemptorem
graviter capere non debeamus. Test meipso apud Westm' xviij. die Novembris.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vic' per totam Angliam per diversa Mandata
sub tenore istius Literae praecedentis de verbo ad verbum, Test at supra.

The Statute of 28 Ed. 3. Cap. 11.
BEcause that great Clamor and grievous Complaints be made as well by Aliens
as by Denisens, the Merchants and others passing through the Realm of England
with their Merchandises and other goods, be slain and robbed, and namely now
more than they were wont, whereof remedy has not been made to the
Complainants; our Sovereign Lord the King considering the profit which may come
to the said Realm, by coming and abiding of Merchants Aliens in the same Realm,
and the damage and mischief which to them and other is done daily by such
Manslaughters and Robberies, and willing to provide for the surety and
indemnity of Merchants and others aforesaid, Has ordained and established, by
the assent of all his Parliament, to the intent that Merchants Aliens shall
have the greater will and courage to come into the said Realm of England, and
that remedy from henceforth be speedily made to such Merchants and others
robbed, according to the form contained in the Statute late made at Winchester,
that is to say, that solemn Cry be made in all Counties, Hundreds and Markets,
Fairs and all other places where solemn assembly of the people shall be, so
that none by ignorance shall excuse him, that every Country from henceforth be
so kept, that immediately after Felonies and Robberies done fresh suit be made
from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, and Inquests, if need be, shall
be also taken in the Towns by him which it Sovereign of the Town, and after in
Hundreds, Franchises, and in the County, and sometime in two, three or four
Counties, in case when Felonies shall be done in the Marches of the Counties,
so that the Offenders may be attainted; and if the Country does not answer of
such manner of Offenders, the pein shall be such, that every Country, that is
to say, the people dwelling in the Country, shall answer of the Robberies done,
and of the damages, so that all the Hundred where the Robbery shall be done,
with the Franchises which be within the precinct of the same Hundred, shall
answer of the Robbery done; and if the Robbery be done in the Devises of two
Hundreds, both Hundreds shall answer, together with the Franchises; and longer
term shall not the Country have after the Robbery or Felony done than forty
days, within which them behooveth to make gree of the Robbery or of the
Offense, or that they answer of the Bodies of the Offenders.

The Statute of 27 Eliz. Chap. 11.
Of Huy and Cry.
WHereas by two ancient Statutes, the one made in the Parliament holden at
Winchester, in the thirteenth year of the reign of King Edward the First, and
the other in the eight and twentieth year of the reign of King Edward the
Third, it was, for the better suppressing of Robberies and Felonies (amongst
other things) enacted to this effect, That if the Country do not answer for the
bodies of such Malefactors, that then the pein should be such, that is to wit,
That the people dwelling in the Country, shall be answerable for the Robberies
done, and the damages: so that the whole Hundred where the Robbery shall be
done, with the Franchises which are within the precinct of the same Hundred,
shall answer the Robberies done. And if the Robbery chance to be done in the
division of two Hundreds, that then both the Hundreds together, with the
Franchises within the precinct of them, shall be answerable, as in the said two
several Statutes it does more at large appear. Forasmuch as the said parts of
the said several Statutes being of late days more commonly put in execution
than heretofore they have been, are found by experience to be very hard and
extreme to many of the Queens Majesty's good Subjects, because by the same
Statutes they do remain charged with the penalties therein contained,
notwithstanding their unability to satisfy the same, and though they do as
much as in reason might be required in pursuing such Malefactors and
Offenders, whereby both large scope of negligence is given to the Inhabitants
and Resiants in other Hundreds and Counties, not to prosecute the Huy and Cry
made, followed and brought unto them, by reason they are not chargeable for any
portion of the goods robbed, nor with any damages in that behalf given, and
also great encouragement and imboldening is likewise given unto the Offenders
to commit daily more Felonies and Robberies, as seeing it in manner impossible
for the Inhabitants and Resiants of the said Hundred and Franchises wherein the
Robbery is committed, to apprehend them without the aid of the other Hundreds
and Counties adjoining, and for that also that the party robbed having remedy
by the aforesaid Statutes, for the recovering of his goods robbed, and damages
against the Inhabitants and resiants of the Hundred wherein the Robbery was
committed, is many times negligent and careless in prosecuting and pursuing the
said Malefactors and Offenders: Our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, not
willing therefore that her people should be impoverished by any such pein or
penalty, which should be hard or grievous to them, and have special regard to
abate the power of Felons, and to repress Felonies, does for remedy hereof,
with the consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons of
this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same Parliament
establish and enact, That the Inhabitants and Resiants of every or any such
Hundred, Hundred.
(with the Franchises within the precinct thereof) wherein negligence, fault or
defect of pursuit, and fresh suit, Fresh suit. Huy and Cry.
after Huy and Cry made, shall happen to be, from and after forty days next
after the end of this present Session of Parliament, Moiety.
shall answer and satisfy the one moiety or half of all and every such sum and
sums of money and damages, as shall by force or virtue of the said Statutes or
either of them be recovered or had, against or of the said Hundred, with the
Franchises therein, in which any Robbery or Felony shall at any time hereafter
be committed or done. And that the same moiety shall and may be recovered by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any of the Queens Majesty's
Courts of Record at Westminster, by and in the name of the Clerk of the Peace
for the time being, Clerk of the Peace.
of or in any such County within this Realm, where any such Robbery and
recovery by the party or parties robbed shall be, without naming the Christian
name or Surname of the said Clerk of the Peace, which moiety so recovered,
shall be to the only use and behoof of the Inhabitants of the said Hundred,
where any such Robbery or Felony shall be committed or done. And be it further
enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any Clerk of the Peace, of or in
any County within this Realm shall at any time hereafter commence or prefer any
such Suit, Action, or Information, and shall after the same so sued, commenced,
or preferred, happen to die, or to be removed out of his Office, before
recovery and execution had: That yet no such Action; Suit, Bill, Plaint or
Information, sued, commenced, or preferred, shall by such displacing or death,
be abated, discontinued or ended, but that it shall and may be lawful to and
for the Clerk of the Peace next succeeding in the said County, to prosecute,
pursue and follow all and every such Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit and
Information, for the causes aforesaid, so hanging and depending in such manner
and form, and to all intents and purposes, as that Clerk of Peace might have
done which first commenced or preferred the said Suit, Bill, Plaint or
Information. And although the whole Hundred where such Robberies and Felonies
are committed, with the Liberties within the precinct thereof, are by the two
former Statutes charged with the answering to the party robbed his damages: yet
nevertheless the recovery and execution, by and for the party and parties
robbed, is had against one, or a very few persons of the said Inhabitants, and
he and they so charged, have not heretofore by Law had any mean or way to have
any contribution of or from the residue of the said Hundred, Contribution.
where the said Robbery is committed, to the great impoverishing of them
against whom such recovery or execution is had. For remedy whereof, be it
enacted by the authority aforesaid, That after execution of damages by the
party or parties so robbed had, it shall and may be lawful (upon complaint
made by the party or parties so charged) to and for two Justices of the Peace,
Just. of P.
(whereof one to be of the Quorum) of the same County, inhabiting within the
said Hundred, or near unto the same, where any such execution shall be had, to
assess and tax ratably and proportionably, Tax.
according to their discretions, all and every the Towns, Parishes, Villages
and Hamlets, as well of the said Hundred where any such Robbery shall be
committed, as of the Liberties within the said Hundred, to and toward an equal
contribution to be had and made for the relief of the said Inhabitant or
Inhabitants, against whom the party or parties robbed before that time had his
or their execution: And that after such taxation made, the Constables,
Constables. Headboroughs.
Constable, Headboroughs or Headborough of every such Town, Parish, Village and
Hamlet, shall by virtue of this present act, have full power and authority
within their several limits, ratably and proportionably to tax and assess
according to their abilities, Tax.
every Inhabitant and dweller in every such Town, Parish, Village and Hamlet,
for and toward the payment of such taxation and assessment as shall be so
made, upon every such Town, Parish, Village and Hamlet as aforesaid, by the
said Justices: and that if any Inhabitant of any such Town, Parish, Village or
Hamlet, shall obstinately refuse and deny to pay the said taxation and
assessment, Refuse.
so by the said Constables, Constable, Headboroughs or Headborough taxed and
assessed, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Constables
and Headboroughs, and every of them within their several limits and
jurisdictions, Distrein.
to distrein all and every such person and persons so refusing and denying by
his and their goods and chattels, and the same distress to sell, and the money
thereof coming to retain to the use aforesaid. And if the goods and chattels so
distreined and sold, shall be of more value than the said taxation shall come
unto, that then the residue of the said money over and above the said taxation
shall be delivered unto the said person and persons so distreined. And be it
further enacted, that all and every the said Constables and Headboroughs,
Constables. Headboroughs.
after that they have within their several limits and jurisdictions levied and
collected their said rates and sums of money so taxed, shall within ten days
after such collection pay and deliver the same over unto the said Justices of
Peace, or one of them, to the use and behoof of the said Inhabitant or
Inhabitants, for whom such rate, taxation and assessment shall be had or made
as aforesaid: which money so paid, shall by the Justices or Justice so
receiving the same, be delivered over (upon request made) unto the said
Inhabitant or Inhabitants, to whose use the same was collected. And be it
further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the like taxation, assessment,
levying by distress and payment as aforesaid, shall be had and done within
every Hundred where default or negligence of pursuit and fresh fuit shall be,
Hundreds.
for and to the benefit of all and every Inhabitant and Inhabitants of the same
Hundred, where such default shall be, that shall at any time hereafter by
virtue of this present Act, have any damages or money levied of them, for or to
the payment of the one moiety or half of the money recovered against the said
Hundred, where any Robbery shall be hereafter committed. Provided, also, and be
it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that where any Robbery is,
Robbery.
or shall be hereafter committed by two, or a greater number of Malefactors,
and that it happen any one of the said Offenders to be apprehended by pursuit
to be made according to the said former mentioned Laws and Statutes, Offenden
taken.
or according to this present Act, that then and in such case, no Hundred or
Franchise shall in any wise incur, or fall into the penalty, loss or forfeiture
mentioned either in this present Act, or in the said former Statutes, although
the residue of the said Malefactors shall happen to escape, and not to be
apprehended: any thing in this Statute, or in the said former Statute to the
contrary notwithstanding. Provided also, that no person or persons hereafter
robbed shall take any benefit by virtue of any the said former Statutes, to
charge any Hundred where any such Robbery shall be committed, except he or they
so robbed, shall commence his or their Suit or Action within one year next
after such Robbery so to be committed. One year.
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no Huy or Cry, or
pursuit hereafter to be done or made by the Country or Inhabitants of any
Hundred, shall be allowed and taken to be a lawful Huy and Cry, or pursuit,
upon or after any the said Felons or Offenders, except the same Huy and Cry and
pursuit be done and made by Horsemen and Footment, Horsemen. and Footmen.
any usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And be it further also
enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that no person or persons
that shall hereafter happen to be robbed, shall have or maintain any Action, or
take any benefit by virtue of the said two mentioned Statutes, or either of
them, except the said person and persons so robbed, shall with as much
convenient speed as may be, give notice and intelligence of the said Felony or
Robbery so committed, unto some of the Inhabitants of some Town, Village or
Hamlet near unto the place where any such Robbery shall be committed, nor shall
bring or have any Action, upon or by virtue of any the Statutes aforesaid,
except he or they shall first within twenty days next before such Action to be
brought, be examined upon his or their corporal Oath, Oath.
to be taken before some one Justice of the Peace of the County, where the
Robbery was committed, inhabiting within the said Hundred where the Robbery was
committed, or near unto the same, whether he or they do know the parties that
committed the said Robbery, or any of them. And if upon such examination it be
confessed that he or they do know the parties that committed the said Robbery,
or any of them, that then he or they so confessing shall before the said Action
be commenced or brought, enter into sufficient bond by Recognisance before the
said Justice, Recognisance.
before whom the said examination is had, effectually to prosecute the same
person and persons so known to have committed the said Robbery, by Indictment
or otherwise, according to the due course of the Laws of this Realm. Anno 27
Eliz cap. 13.

Judicial proceedings on the Statute of Huy and Cry, or choice Precedents in
all cases therein from the Original to Execution.
Breve originale super Statut' de Hutes' and Clam'.
CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex,
Fidei defensor, etc.
Vic' D. salutem,
si A. B. nuper de C. in Com' tuo gen' fec' te secur' de Clam' suo pros' tunc
Pone per vad' and salvos pleg' Homines Inhabitan' in Hundred' de O. in Com' tuo
quod sint coram, etc. (tali Retorn') ostens' quare cum in Statuto in
Parliamento Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae primi apud Winton' anno regni
sui tertiodecimo tent' edit' (inter caetera) ordinat' sit pro eo quod de die in
diem Roberiae, Homicidia and Incendia plus solito tunc fiebant quam antea
solebant and Felones non potuissent esse attinct' per sacrm' Jur' qui magis
voluntary permittebant Felonias fieri de gentibus extraneis, and Felones
evadere absque poena quam Malefactores indictari, unde magna pars fuerunt
gentes de eadem Patria, vel adminus si Malefactores fuerunt de alia Patria
eorum Receptores fuerunt de Visneto ubi hujusmodi malefacta fiebant. Et hoc
faciebant pro eo quod sacrm' eisdem Juratoribus non ministrabantur nec in
Patria ubi Feloniae illae fiebant and quoad restitutionem damnorum poena
antetunc non fuit provis' pro concelamento and negligentia fuis. Idem nuper Rex
ad debilitand' posse Felonum stabilivit poenam in illo casu. Ita quod pro
timore poenae plusquam pro pavore Sacramenti nullis extunc parcerent nec
aliquas Felonias concelarent. Et mandavit quod Proclamatio solemniter fieret in
omnibus Com' Hundred' Mercat' Feriis and omnibus aliis locis ubi solemnis
assemblaiio gentium foret sic quod nullus pro ignorantia se possit excusare. Et
quod quaelibet Patria extunc sic possit custodiri quod immediate post Roberias
and Felonias factas recens insecutio fieret de Villa in Villam and de Patria in
Patriam ac etiam Inquisitiones fierent (...) necesse foret in Villis per ipsum
qui superior esset de Villa. Et postea in Hundred' Franches' and in Com'. Et
aliquando in duobus, tribus vel quatuor Com' in casu quando Feloniae fact'
fuer' in Marchiis Com' ita quod Malefactores potuissent esse attinct'. Et si
Patria de hujusmodi Malefactoribus non responderet poena talis esset quod
quaelibet Patria scilicet homines in Patria commorantes responderent de
Roberiis factis and damnis sic quod totum Hundredum ubi Roberia illa facta
foret cum Franches' quae essent infra praecinct' ejusdem Hundred' responderent
de Roberiis, factis. Et si Roberia illa facta foret in divisis duorum Hundred'
responderent inde duo Hundred' cum Franches'. Et longiorem terminum non haberet
Patria post Roberiam and Felonias factas quam quadraginta dies infra quos
faceret emendas de Roberia and malefactis vel responderet de corporibus
Malefactorum prout in Statuto before continetur. Ac cum quidam Malefactores
praefat' A. B. ignoti in quodam loco ibidem vocat. B. infra Hundred' de O. in
Com' tuo vi and armis, etc. in ipsum A. B. insultum fecer' and 20li. in
pecuniis numeratis de denariis ipsius A. B. propriis ibidem invent' de codem A.
B. Felonice perceperunt, spoliaverunt and asportaverunt contra pacem nostram.
Idemque A. B. immediate post Feloniam, Roberiam and spoliationem praed' fact'
apud B. praed' infra Hundred' de O. praed' Hutes' and Clam' de Roberia and
Felonia praed' fecit and adtunc notitiam ibidem Inhabitan' ejusdem Villae de O.
praed' de Roberia and Felonia praed' fact' dedit. Et post Roberiam and Feloniam
ill' ac infra 20 dies ante diem impetrationis brevis original' praed'. Idem A.
B. coram E. F. Ar' tunc uno Justic' nostrorum ad pacem in praed' Com' D.
conservand' assign' inhabitan' apud L. prope praed' Hundred' de O. praed. in
Com' tuo examinat' fuit super sacrm' suum corporale juxta formam Statuti apud
Westm' anno regni Dominae Elizabethae nuper Reginae Angliae vicesimo septimo
inde edit' and provis'. Idemque A. B. super sacrm' suum praed' tunc dixit quod
ipse non cognovit parts quae Roberiam illam fecissent nec earum aliquam. Et
post Roberiam illam factam quadraginta dies jam praterierunt. Iidem tamen
homines inhabitants in Hundred' praed' Emendas de Roberia praed' praefat' A.
B. hucusque non fecerunt nec corpora Felonum and Malefactorum praed' nec corpus
eorum alicujus ceperunt nec de corporibus eorum seu de corpore eorum alicujus
hucusque responderunt sed Malefactores and Felones ill' evadere permiserunt in
nostri contemptum and ipsius A. B. grave damnum and contra formam Statuti
praedicti de anno tertiodecimo supradicto. Et habeas ibi nomina Pleg'

and hoc breve Test meipso apud Westm', etc. Plegii de pros' J. Do R. Roo
Sum' infra nominat' Inhabitan' in Hundred' de O. in Com' infrascript. Retorn'
inde.


G. H. Ar' Vic'.
Narr' inde.
Devon' ss.
HOmines inhabitants in Hundredo de O. in Com' praedicto attach' fuer' ad
respondend' A. B. gen' de p'lito quare cum in Statuto in Parliamento, etc. (ut
supra usque) vel responderet de corporibus Malefactorum prout in Statuto
praedicto before continetur: as cum quidam Malefactores praefato A. ignoti
apud O. in Com' praedicto in quodam loco ibidem vocat' B. (ut supra usque) and
contra formam Statuti praedicti, etc. Et unde idem A. per G. F. Attorn' suum
queritur quod cum quidam Malefactores videlicet quatuor Homines eidem A. ignot'
19 die J. anno Regni dict' Domini Regis nunc 33 apud O. in Com' praedicto in
quodam loco ibidem vocat' B. etc. (ut supra usque) Et post Roberiam and
Feloniam ill' fact' and infra 20 dies prox' ante diem impetrationis brevis
originalis praedicti A. scilicet 20 die J. anno Regni Domini Regis nune 33
praedictus A. coram praedicto E. F. Ar. tunc uno Justic', etc. (ut supra usque)
Et post Roberiam illam fact' and ante diem impetrationis brevis originalis
praedicti A. 40 dies jam scilicet die impetrationis brevis originalis ipsius A.
praeterierunt, etc. (ut supra usque) contra formam Statuti praedicti, unde dic'
quod deteriorat' est and damnum habet ad valenc', etc. Et inde produc' sectam,
etc.

Aliter in divisis Hundredorum.
ss. HOmines inhabitan' infra Hundred' de A. and B. in Com' praedicto attach'
fuer' ad respondend' tam Domino Regi nunc quam C. D. gen' de p'lito quare cum
in Statuto (ut in Or' usque) ac cum quidam Malefactores praefat' C. ignot' in
Regia via infra parochiam de B. in Com' praedicto (quae quidem Regia via est in
divisis Hundredorum) vi and armis (ut in Or' usque) Idemque C. immediate post
Feloniam, etc. fact' apud Villam de H. in praedicto com' M. (quae quidem Villa
de H. est prope praedictum locum ubi Roberia praedicta sic ut praefertur facta
fuit) Hutes' and Clam' de Roberia and Felonia praed' fecit. Et adtunc and
ibidem notitiam inhabitantibus ejusdem Villae de H. de Roberia and Felonia
illis dedit, etc. (ut in Or'.)

Barr' sur Statut' de Hutes' and Clam'.
Non cul. ove challenge de Hundred'.
ss. ET praedicti homines inhabitan' in Hundredo praedicto per A. B. Attorn'
suum ven' and defend' vim and injur' and omnem contemptum. Et quicquid, etc. Et
dic' quod ipsi in nullo sunt culpabiles de premissis superius eis impoit'
contra formam Statuti praedicti prout praedictus quer' superius versus eos
queritur. Et de hoc pon' se super Patriam and praedictus quer' similiter. Et
super hoc idem quer' dic' quod praed' homines inhabitan' in praedicto Hundredo
de W. ubi Roberia illa facta fuit sunt parts defendentes versus quos idem
quer' in forma praedicta queritur. Et ea de causa pet' breve Domini Regis Vic'
Com' praed' dirigend' de venire faciend' hic duodecim, etc. de Visn' Hundredi
de O. praed' in Com' praed' (quod quidem Hundredum de O. est prox' Hundredum in
eodem Com' praedict' Hundredo de W. prox' adjacen') ad triand' exitum
praedictum superius in forma praedicta junct'. Et quia homines inhabitan' in
praedicto Hundredo de W. hoc non dedic' ei conceditur, etc. Verdict and
Judgment pur le pl't.
Ideo praecept' est Vic' quod venire fac' hic in Crastino sanctae Trin' de
Visn' de praedicto Hundr' de O. duodecim, etc. per quos, etc. Et qui nec, etc.
ad recogn', etc. quia tam, etc.

Barr' per null Huy and Cry fait.
ss. ET praedicti inhabitants per A. B. attorn' suum ven' and defend' vim and
injur' and omnem contemptum. Et quicquid, etc. Et dic' quod praedictus quer',
etc. Quia protestando quod praedictus quer' non spoliatus fuit Protestandoque
etiam quod praedictus quer' per spoliationem praedictam non perdidit aliqua
bona sive catalla vel pecuniarum summas prout praedictus quer' superius
allegavit. Pro placito iidem inhabitan' dicunt quod praedictus quer' immediate
post Feloniam, Roberiam and spoliationem praedictas superius fieri supposit'
apud A. praedict' non fecit Hutesiam and Clamorem de Roberia praedicta secundum
formam Statuti praedicti prout ipse superius allegavit. Et hoc parati sunt
verificare unde petunt Judicium si praedictus quer' actionem suam praedictam
versus eos habere debeat, etc.

Non inform' sur Star. de Huy and Cry, ove Judgment puis brief de Inquiry.
ss. ET praedicti homines inhabitants in Hundredo praedicto per C. D. attorn'
suum ven' and defend' vim and injur' quando, etc. Et quic-quid, etc. Et idem
attorn' dic' quod ipse non est inform' per eosdem homines inhabitan' in
Hundredo praedicto de aliquo Respons' pro eisdem hominibus inhabitan' in
Hundredo praedicto praefat' quer' in loquela praedicta dand'. Et nihil aliud
inde dic' per quod idem quer' reman' versas praefat' homines inhabitan' in
Hundredo praedicto inde indefens' ob quod praedictus quer' damna sua occasion
praemissa versus praefat' homines inhabitan' in Hundredo praedicto recuperare
debeat, sed quia nescitur quae damna idem quer' sustinuit occasion illa
praeceptum est Vic' quod per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de Com'
praedicto diligenter inquirat quae damna idem quer' sustinuit tam occasion
praemissa quam pro mis' and custagiis suis per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac
part apposit'. Et Inquisitionem quam, etc. Vic' constare fac' hic a die Pasche
in quindecim dies sub sigillo, etc. Et sigillis, etc. Et Vic' videlicet A. B.
Ar' modo mand' hic quandam Inquisitionem coram eo apud Brentford in Com'
praedicto (tali die and Mense) ult' praeterit' per sacrm' duodecim, etc.
virtute brevis praedicti capt' per quam compert' existit quod praedictus quer'
sustinuit damna occasion praemissa ultra mis' and custagia sua per ipsum circa
sectam suam in hac part apposit' ad triginta libras. Et pro mis' and custagiis
illis ad december solid'. Ideo cons' est quod praedictus quer' recuperet versus
praefat' homines inhabitan' in Hundredo praedicto damna sua praedicta ad
triginta libras and december solidos per Inquisitionem praedictam in forma
praedicta compert' necnon duodecim libras eidem quer' ad requisitionem suam pro
misis and custagiis suis praedictis per Cur' hic de inc'ro adjudicat'. Que
quidem damna in toto se attingunt ad quadraginta duas libras and december denar'.
Et praedicti homines inhabitan' in Hundredo praedicto in mia', etc.

Judgment sur Statute de Hue and Cry puis Verdict.
ss. I Deo cons' est quod praedictus quer' recuperet versus praefat' homines
inhabitan' in Hundredo praedicto damna sua praedicta ad, etc. per Jur'
praedictos in forma praedicta assess' necnon, etc. eidem quer' qui tam, etc. ad
requisitionem suam pro mis' and custagiis suis praedictis per Cur' hic de
inc'ro adjudicat'. Que quidem damna in toto se attingunt ad, etc. Et praedicti
homines inhabitan' in mia', etc.

Venire Facias upon the Statute of Huy and Cry.
Ven' Fac'.
ss. PRaecip' tibi quod Ven' Fac' coram, etc. duodecim liberos and legales
homines de Visn' Hundred' de O. in Com' D. quorum quilibet habeat 4li. terr',
etc. per quos, etc. Et qui nec A. B. qui tam pro nobis quam pro seipso sequit'
quer' nec homines inhabitan' in Hundredo de O. in Com' D. aliqua affinitate
attingunt ad faciend' quandam Jur' inter parts praed' de placito transgr' and
contempt' contra formam Stat' de Hutes' and Clam' in hujusmodi casu inde nuper
edit' and provis' quia tam iidem homines inhabitan' in Hundredo praed' quam nos
and praed' R. inter quos inde contentio est posuer' se in jurat' illam. Et
habeas ibi nomina Jur' and hoc breve T. etc.

Distr' Jur'.
ss. PRaecip' tibi quod distr' homines inhabitan' in Hundred' de O. in Com' tuo
per omnes, etc. ita quod habeas corpora eorum coram, etc. ad resp' tam nobis
quam A. B. quare cum in Statuo in Parliamento Domini Edvardi nuper Regis
Angliae, primi (ut in Or' usque) and contra formam Statuti de anno 13. praed'.
Et ad audiend' judicium suum de plur' defalt'. Et habeat, etc.

Retorn'.
Manucapt' infra nominat' hominum inhabitan' in Hundred' de O. infrascript'

J. Do R. Roo Exit' xli.


E. H. Ar' Vic'.

Inquir' de dais in Transgr. and contempt' sur Stat' de Hutes' and Clam'.
SAlutem.
Cum homines inhabitan' in Hundred' de O. in Com' tuo attach' essent essend' in
Cur' nostra coram, etc. ad respondend' tam nob' quam R. B. de placito quare cum
in Statuto in Parliamento Domini Edvardi, etc. Et contra formam Statuti praed'
de anno 13. praed' Taliterque in Cur' nostra coram, etc. process' est quod
praed' R. damna sua occasion praemissa versus praefat' homines inhabitan'
infra praed' Hundred' de O. recuperare debeat. Et quia Cur' nostra incognit'
existit que damna praed' R. tam occasion praemiss' quam pro mis' and custagiis
suis per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac part apposit' sustinuit tibi
praecipimus quod per sacr'm proborum and legalium hominum de balliva tua
diligent' inquiras quae damna praed' R. tam occasion praemiss' quam pro mis'
and custagiis suis praed' sustinuit. Et Inquisitionem ill' sic per te distinct
and aperte capt' Nob' sub sigillo tuo and sigillis eorum per quorum sacr'm
Inquisition' illam feceris in (tali Retorn') ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia
mittas una cum hoc brevi Test, etc.

The Oath to be taken before a Justice of the Peace by the person or persons
who were robbed whereupon the party robbed may ground his Action, according to
the Statute of 27 Eliz.
The 20th day of January, 1681.
Mid' THE day and year abovesaid A. B. of C. in the County of D. Gent. came
before E. F. Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County
of D. and made Oath, That Monday morning, being the 19th day of this instant
January, about 8 of the Clock, the said A. B. and one L. M. of London,
Merchant, came from B. where they lay the night before at the Sign of the
King's Head there, and dined at C. at the Queen's Head there, and about two of
the Clock went from thence toward D. and about five or six miles off from the
Town, there overtook them in the Highway, between a place called Johnson's Oak
and the Park Wall of L. T. Esquire four Horsemen, one whereof, etc. (describing
them by their Persons, Habits and Horses) which said four Horsemen set upon
this Examinant and robbed him, taking from him by force the Sum of, etc. and
the said A. B. being examined whether he knows the said parties or any of
them which so robbed him, he says and deposes that he does not know them or
any of them.

A. B.
Jurat' die and anno supradict'

coram me E. F.



FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books sold by Langley Curtis, at the Sign of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey' s Head in Goat Court on Ludgate Hill.
THE History of the Damnable Popish Plot. Written by the Author of The weekly
Packet of Advice from Rome. The Life and Reign of King Richard the Second. By
a Person of Quality. Popery; or, The Principles and Positions approved by the
Church of Rome (when really believed and practiced) are very dangerous to all,
and to Protestant Kings more especially, and inconsistent with Loyalty. By T.
Lord Bishop of Lincoln. Supplications of Protestants, containing the Life of
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, with Private and Family Devotions; also Prayers against
Popery, with Thanksgivings and Graces. By Henry Godfrey, M. A. A Compendious
Treatise of Recoveries upon Writs of Entry in the Post, and Fines upon Writs of
Covenant, with ample instructions how to draw, acknowledge and levy the same in
all Cases. The Astrological Judgment and Practice of Physic, deduced from the
Position of the Heavens at the Decumbiture of the Sick Person, showing by an
universal Method, not only the Cause, but the Cure and End of all manner of
Diseases incident to humane Bodies: being the thirty years Practice and
Experience of Richard Saunders, Student in Astrology and Physic. England's
Remarques, giving an exact account of the several Shires, Counties and Islands
in England and Wales, how Bounded, their Length, Breadth and Circumference; the
temperature of the Air, and fertility or barrenness of Soil; the Commodities
they afford; the Dioceses, Parishes, Parliament Men, Hundreds and Markets; and
whatever else is remarkable throughout the whole Kingdom. The Protestant
School, or Forms of Prayer, Psalms, Lessons, Thanksgivings and Graces, for the
bringing up and well-grounding Children and elder Persons in the Protestant
Religion. By Bishop Usher. Also a Catalogue of all English Words, from one to
eight Syllables, divided and not divided, teaching the readiest way to Spell,
Read and Write true English. To which is added, an Historical Account of
several Plots and remarkable Passages, lively represented in Copper Plates. By
Moses Lane, Schoolmaster in London. An Alarm for Sinners; or the Confession,
Prayers, Letters and last words of Mr. Foulkes, late Minister of Stanton-Lacy.
The Character of an Ill-Court-Favourite, representing the Michiefs that flow
from Ministers of State when they are more great than good. Translated out of
French. Mr. Turbulent; or, the Melancholicks: a Comedy, as it was acted at the
Duke's Theater. The Medal Reversed; a Satyr against Persecution. By the Author
of Azaria and Hushai. Azaria and Hushai; a Poem. The Clerk's Manual; or, an
exact Collection of the most approved Forms of Declarations, Pleas, general
Issues, Judgments, Demurrers, and most kind of Writs now used in the Court of
Kings Bench, with necessary instructions to all Clerks, Attorneys,
Sollicitours, etc. in the use of the same. The plain Englishman's Historian,
or, a Compendious Chronicle of England, from its first being inhabited to this
present year, 1679. But more especially containing the chief Remarques of all
our Kings and Queens since the Conquest, their Lives and Reigns, Policies,
Wars, Laws, Successes and Troubles: With the most notable Accidents, as
Dearths, Tempests, Monstrous Births, and other Prodigies that happened in each
of their times respectively. A Synopsis of Heraldry; or, The most plain, short
and easy way for the perfect attaining of that Art, containing all necessary
directions in order thereunto: There being about 300 Coats of Arms, and about
50 Crests engraven upon Copper Plates; and the Achievements of the Kings of
England since King Egbert of the Saxon Race. The Paternal Coats of the Nobility
of England [with a List of the Knights of the Garter] The Arms of the
Archiepiscopal and Episcopal Sees, and of the two Universities, and the several
Colleges in them; and of the Inns of Court, and other Houses of Law in London;
with some hundreds of Gentlemen's Coats, all truly Blazoned. To which is added
an Alphabetical Table for the ready finding any name whose Coat is herein
Blazoned.
THE END.

