A SERMON CONCERNING Public Worship, Preached before the QUEEN, ON Wednesday
the 23d of March, 1691/2.

By Thomas Manningham D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's, and Rector
of St. Andrew Holborn.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, and S.
Smith at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1692.

Dr. MANNINGHAM's SERMON Before the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, March the 3d, 1691/2.

Isaiah LVI. and the latter part of the 7th Verse. -- Mine House shall be
called an House of Prayer to all People.


IT may not be improper, for our better understanding of these words, to
reflect upon some few things relating to that Great and Magnificent Temple
which King Solomon built unto the Lord.

1. That although that Temple was erected to serve chiefly for the Ceremonial
Worship among the Jews, yet the building of a Temple to God was no part of
Ceremonial Duty.

There were always, even from the Creation of the World, set and appointed
places for the more Solemn Worship of God: That which was commanded in the
Deuteronomy. xii. 5, 11.
Law concerning this matter, was consonant to the Light of Nature, and the same
that Religion taught all Mankind to observe: for a main part of the External
Acknowledgment of God, is by dedicating of Altars and Temples to him, and by
separating of Places for his peculiar Service.

The Design of Building a Temple to the Almighty, entered first into King
David's 2 Samuel vii. 2.
Heart, from an Instinct and Principle of Natural Religion, and from an ardent
desire of leaving some standing Testimony of the Extraordinary Devotion of his
Soul; but the actual performance of that glorious Design was reserved, by the
V. 13.
immediate Appointment of God, for the more peaceable and quiet Reign of King
Solomon.

2. When Solomon Dedicated that Temple to the Lord, he took especial care to
prevent all unworthy and idolatrous Thoughts concerning God, that the Minds of
the Jews might not be possessed with any such gross Conceptions as the Heathen
entertained concerning their Temples, which they generally esteemed as a sort
of Confinement to their Gods: 1 Kings viii. 27.
whereas Solomon asks, Will God indeed dwell upon the Earth? behold the Heaven,
and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain Thee! how much less this House which I
have builded?

All that he intended and desired, was, That God would have respect unto the
Prayers and Supplications, and the Religious Duties that were performed in that
place, V. 28, 29.
and That his Eyes might be open toward that House day and night.

3. Solomon did not beg That God would regard only the Prayers and
Supplications of the Jewish Nation, when either they Worshipped in or toward
that Temple; but his concern reached further, even to the Stranger V 43.
and to All the People of the Earth.

Accordingly there was a particular place of Worship appointed for the use of
the Strangers amongst them, which was called The Court of the Gentiles: And
this was the place where the Buyers and Sellers, and Money Changers sat, whom
our Savior drove out with an exceeding Transport of Zeal, making use of this
Text, and adding to it another passage out of the Prophet Chap. vii. 11. Matthew.
xxi. 13.
Jeremiah, Mine House shall be called an House of Prayer, but ye have made it a
Den of Thieves.

The Jews were too Zealous a sort of People to suffer any such profanation of
That part of the Temple in which their own Worship was performed; but as to
That, which was allowed to the Strangers, they looked upon It as profaned
already by the very Worshippers themselves, and that nothing could well defile
it more.

But our Savior, to show that the Ceremonial Worship was now to expire, and
that the Nations were to be received into his Kingdom, exercised a most
surprising and extraordinary act of Zeal in Their behalf; and required as much
Reverence for the Court of the Gentiles, as they did for the most Sacred part
of the Temple.

It is here called an House of Prayer and not of Sacrifice; because Prayer is
an Universal Duty, the chief and most eminent part of Religious Worship, and
without which Sacrifice it self was not accepted. An House of Prayer to All
people; whereby the extent of This Duty was signified, and how suitable it was
that God should be worshipped by all people, and all Nations, as The Great Lord
of Heaven and Earth, as The God of the Gentiles, as well as the Jews: that his
Honor should be made known throughout all the world, and that he should be
acknowledged and served in as Public a manner as the Circumstances of Mankind
could admit.

The Text being thus opened and explained, is capable of affording great
variety of Matter; either for justifying the Sacredness of Religious places,
and the Reverence that is due unto them; or for enlarging on the Nature of
Prayer, and showing the Excellency of that Duty: But because by Prayer in this
place we are to understand the whole Body of Religious Duties, consisting of
Prayers, Praises, Thanksgivings, Sacraments, and Dedications of our selves to
God, which altogether make up our Spiritual Sacrifice; and because this Duty is
here extended to All People, to All Nations, to signisie the most public and
solemn performance of it: Therefore the only thing which I shall endeavor from
these words, shall be to lay before you some Considerations in order to raise
your esteem for the public Worship of God, to encourage your Constancy in it,
and to increase your delight and joy in that most acceptable Service. And this
I take to be a very seasonable Subject in this Holy Week which the Church has
thought fit to distinguish from the rest of the Lent, by a peculiar enlargement
of her Public Devotions.

The many unreasonable Exceptions that have been made against our Form of
Worship; The placing the main of Religion in the Hearing of Sermons; and the
fanciful opinion of some, that they can serve God as acceptably at Home, as in
the Church; have very much lessened that Zeal among many, which is due to that
Worship which is performed in the Public Assemblies.

But I shall endeavor to make it appear, That the best Homage, which we can
pay to God, is that which is most Public; and that the best part of Religion
is that, which we exercise in Common with united Hearts and Voices in full and
solemn Congregations.

I. This is the way of giving the greatest Honor to God.

It is but a poor and a very unworthy sort of Honor, which we, the lowest of
all Rational Creatures, such Rational Creatures as are united to corruptible
Bodies, which depress and clog the Soul, are able to pay to our great Creator:
But if we take care to glorify Him according to those Abilities he has given
us, and according to that Manner he has prescribed unto us, he will accept of
our sincere Homage, tho it be but a mean Sacrifice, and will make us capable of
Adoring him hereafter in a more Perfect way.

He has several Orders of Pure and Spiritual Beings to glorify him with the
immediate Adoration of their Minds; but we are confined to Bodies, and must
give him glory, as he has made us capable of giving it: we must declare his
Greatness and his Goodness to one another, and give outward Testimonies of the
inward sense we have of his Perfections, of his Majesty, of his Power, and of
his Mercy. Now to do this in the most Public manner is the way of giving the
greatest Honor to God, and is a Veneration most suitable to the Majesty of him
we Adore.

When a Multitude of People meet together to Worship the Almighty, and to set
forth his Praises; it makes some little Figure of Heaven, it raises our Minds
to more magnificent Conceptions of God, and more fully represents him to us as
the Governor of the World: Whereas, if we look upon him, as only intending our
private Interest, as busied only to serve our present wants, we may be thought
to conceive of him, rather as an Idol, than as that Infinite Being, whose Care
and Providence are extended to the concerns of the whole Creation.

To Worship God truly, is to make him known to be the Lord of the Universe, the
Common Parent, Preserver, and Benefactor of all Mankind; and therefore, Public
Assemblies are the best signification of his glorious Perfections, and vast
Dominion: for They are a Visible expression of the greatness of God, they
enlarge our Idea of him, and make us more sensible of his Majesty, than words
and language can do.

They who cannot use their Minds to any abstracted ways of Thinking, may be
wonderfully confirmed and heightened in their Acknowledgments and Thoughts of a
Deity, when they see how the Learned and the Rich, and the Honorable, and the
greatest Persons upon the Earth, do bow and kneel before their Maker, and
humble themselves in the Dust of the Sanctuary to witness their profound
Veneration of an Infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness.

What becoming Thoughts and Affections toward God must this needs inspire into
the Multitude, when they shall observe those, whose Knowledge and Judgment,
whose Virtues and Excellencies they exceedingly admire, to behave themselves
most Reverently and Devoutly in the Presence of God? What Excuse can they have
to neglect that Religion which they plainly perceive to be in such high esteem
with those of the greatest Place and Dignity, and of the clearest repute for
Wisdom and Piety?

What Desire, what holy Ambition must it raise in the Common People, to appear
often in the Place of Divine Worship, and to make up the great Congregation;
that they may mingle themselves with the Noble and Wise, and be equal
Worshippors with them, of the same God, and the same Mediator?

II. The Nature of Religion is such, that it especially requires a Public
Exercise.

That which makes all our Actions religious, is the performing them in
Obedience to God, and with an Intention of his Glory; whatever the particular
Duties are in which we are engaged, whether they immediately respect our
Neighbors or our selves, if the chief Motive of doing them be derived from the
Will and Pleasure of God they are a Religious Service. But what we more
properly call Religion, is that which has an immediate Respect to God, and is
directly intended for the promoting of his Glory; and the most eminent part of
this Religion, is the Public Service of the Church, which is still more
eminently so, as it is more Public and Solemn, because more becoming the
Honor and Greatness of him we Worship.

This Religious Service is a Natural Debt which we owe to God, as we are his
Creatures; and had we continued Innocent, would have principally consisted in
Praises and Thanksgivings, and high Admirations of God's Power and Wisdom and
Bounty! But since we are in a Fallen Condition, and a State obnoxious to the
displeasure of God, there is a Necessity of glorifying him by an humble
Confession of our Sins, and an earnest Importunity for Pardon and Forgiveness.
And this can never, be so Acceptable, as when it is Public; for by that means
we take more shame to our, selves by making a more Solemn Acknowledgment of our
guilt, and we give more glory to God by our open Confessions and Humiliations.

Most of the Psalms of David were designed to a Public end, and to make up the
Service of the Congregation: and he himself reckons it as one of the more
bitter Afflictions of his Life, that the Troubles of his Kingdom sometimes
banished him from the Public Service of God: For tho we have no reason to
doubt but so Religious a Person maintained a continual intercourse with God by
way of private Prayer; yet the Solemn Service of the Sunctuary was that in
which the Honor of God was so signally acknowledged and displayed, and his
Name so eminently glorified, that nothing else could properly carry the Title
of Divine Worship among the Jews: and therefore in their Captivity, whenever
they made their private Addresses to God, they directed themselves toward
Jerusalem, where the Temple of the Lord was founded.

Our blessed Savior, in the Reformation he made of Religion, was most tender
of the Honor of his Father, and took nothing from the Public Worship that did
any way conduce to his Glory. He put an end to the repeated Sacrifices of
Beasts, by fulfilling what they signified, in offering up his own Body, once
for all, upon the Cross; and leaving to the Church that Alsufficient Sacrifice
of himself for their perpetual Commemoration.

He taught that God was to be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; St. John iv.
24.
not in the least to derogate from the Public Worship of God, but to show that
the Typical Service was within a while to cease, and that the Heart and Inward
Affections were always to accompany the External Worship.

He gave an especial Command for Secret Prayer, St. Matthew. vi. 6.
because there was no need at that time of Exhorting to the Public Worship,
which was then sufficiently frequented, and in which the Hypocrisy, of that Age
did so much Reign. And besides, by that Precept of his, he tacitly reproved the
Ostentation of the Pharisees, which was so notorious in all their Public
Devetions.

Our Savior was so far from Discountenancing the Public Service of Religion,
that he came to remove the Jewish Confinement, and to make way for all the
Nations of the Earth, to come in and glorify God with one Heart, and with one
Voice.

Wherefore our Christianity does consist in serving God as Parts of the Body of
Christ, and in a Joint and Festival Commemorating of the exceeding great
Blessing of our Common Redemption.

Had an Inward Faith, and a Private Devotion been sufficient to have carried
Christians to Heaven, they would never have Assembled together in the hottest
Times of Persecution, when their Meetings exposed them so much to the
Observation and Rage of their Enemies: But they very well knew than Christ had
required an open Confession and Acknowledgment of his Religion from all his
Followers, and had made it their Duty to keep up a constant Communion with him,
and with one another in the Public Offices of Divine Worship; and that to be
excluded that Public Worship, upon the account of any notorious Crime, was so
dreadful a punishment, that it was no less than an Anticipation of the Future
Judgment of the last Day, when the Wicked shall be Eternally separated from all
Communion with the Righteous.

Christians are not to look upon themselves as single Persons, of distinct and
separate Interests; but they are to consider themselves as Members of the same
Mystical Body, as Parts of the same Spiritual Society; that they are Redeemed
as a Church, and are to glorify God as a Church; that their chief, Blessings
are those they enjoy in Common, and that no Private Devotions are acceptable to
^od, when set in opposition to the Public. ^o^ any indeed, say what we can to
the con^^^^, are apt to suppose themselves good Chr^^^ians, barely by Believing
in Christ, and by Praying in private; but they would do well to consider, that
the Carechumens of old, or those, who were but in a preparation for their
Baptism, were accounted Believers, were taught their Creed, and instructed how
to pray, before they were admitted into the Christian Union, or into the
Society of the Church by way of Baptism; and before they were made Partakers of
those Privileges which Christ has purchased for such, who serve him in the
Assembly of the Saints.

Wherefore upon these, and several See Mr. Thorndike of Religious Assemblies,
Bishop Patrick, Dean Sherlock, on the same Argument.
other Accounts which I shall not insist on at present, it may plainly appear,
that the Nature of our Religion is such, that it especially requires a Public
Profession and Exercise.

III. There is nothing that so much promotes a Spirit of Universal Charity, as
a due esteem and practice of the Public Worship.

The best Natural Argument that we have for the loving one another, is the
Consideration that we are Creatures made for Society, that our private welfare
is infinitely advanced by mutual Beneficence, and that our truest Interest is
infolded in the Public Good.

But Christ, who has formed us into a Religious Society, and made us Members of
the same Body by a Mystical and Sacred Union, has laid a Foundation for a
stronger Tie of Friendship, and for more generous Acts of Love.

For how can the things of this World divide us, when we must expect them no
otherwise than as the Effects of our Prayers, and must desire them no further
then as they are serviceable, or at least no Impediment, to our everlasting
good?

What can bring us to a greater concern for one another, and more Unite our
Affections, than a frequent Meeting at the same place of Worship, and joining
together in the same Duties of Religion? If common Conversation has so many
Attractives, so many Charms in it, how must a Sacred Familiarity endear us?
Where we have but one great Business to prosecute, and it is the Interest of us
all to promote that: where we endeavor to appear in the best Temper, the
mildest Disposition, and the most humble frame of Mind: where we lay by the
distinctions of Family, Place, and Title, and all the little Differences that
the order of this Life creates: where we advance no particular ends that are
contrary to the general Good, but rejoice to promote each others Salvation:
where we withdraw our Minds from Earthly things, which occasion so much Passion
in Mankind; and set our Hearts upon that Heaven which is large enough to
receive us all, and to satisfy us with full content.

How can we be angry with those Persons, who meet at the same place of Worship
with our selves, and appear in such Postures of Reverence and Humility, as
plainly signify that they are Repenting of all their Sins, and humbling
themselves for their Infirmities? How can we retain any Enmity against our
Fellow Christians, when the very Duties which we our selves are engaged in,
must needs suggest the many Provocations we have offered to God, the gracious
Pardon we have received from him, and the Condition upon which that Pardon was
dispensed, viz. the Forgiving of one another? Or how can there be any
Entertainment for those narrow and sor did Passions of Malice, and Hatred, and
Revenge in the Breasts of those who are the Worshippers of God in Public, who
cannot but have their Minds raised, their Affections sweetened, and their Hearts
enlarged by the Solemn Praises in the Congregation?

It Is in the Church that we must learn the truest Union of Hearts and
Affections; where we are all concerned for our Common Salvation, and all rely
upon one Common Savior and Redeemer; where all the Girts and Graces of Christ
are bestowed for the Edification of his Body, and all our greatest Benefits are
enjoyed in Common? where we are disposed to pray for one another, to rejoice
with one another, to suffer with one another.

But the greatest part of the Christian World are as yet Strangers to this
Happiness, for they are most divided in that very thing which should pecullarly
Unite them: what Peace therefore can be expected in Temporal Matters, when Men
will not endure a Communion in Holy things? And what more probable Reason can
we assign of the Divisions and Hatreds, and the malicious Oppositions of one
another throughout the Christian World, than that we are unhappily Divided in
the Public Worship of God? That some Men's Devotions are held either Idolatry
or Superstition to others? and that many look upon it as a main part of
Religion to expose and vilify the Worship of others?

O gracious God, the Lord of Peace and Concord, look down in Mercy upon thy
Universal Church; and give us, through the Light of thy Gospel, and the
Influence of thy Spirit, such an understanding of the True Christian Worship,
that we may all come to glorify Thee with one Heart and with one Voice! That
all Factions and Persecutions, and bloody Wars may cease in the Christian
World, and all who call upon thy Name may be at Unity among themselves! That we
may be as tender of other Rights, and as sensible of their Calamities, as if
they were our own! That at length we may become one Holy People, one City of
God, one Body of Christ!

IV. The frequenting the Public Worship, with that Preparation, and with those
Dispositions which it requires, is the best way, whereby we may attain to Solid
Piety.

It is a great Blessing to have a Soul inflamed with the Love of God, and then
to be able to guide that Flame with Discretion; to keep it regular, and within
the compass of the Altar, and not to suffer it to waste away in violent
Agitations, or an Enthusiastical Zeal.

It is much better to be pious in the old way of daily attending upon God in
the Public Service of the Church, than to affect new Ways, and new Liberties,
and such singularities of Holiness, as will make People more Fanciful, but less
Humble and Devout.

What can a Christian want toward the real Edification of his Soul in Faith
and Knowledge, in Virtue and Godliness, who makes a Conscience of Attending the
Public Assemblies, as often as he reasonably can? For there he shall meet with
the pure Word of God, and feel the mighty Efficacy of it on his Heart; his Mind
shall be many times more enlightened by attentively hearing a Chapter read in
the Church, than if he had industriously consulted the best Commentators: The
Majesty of the Place, the Authority of him who Officiates, and the Sense we
have that God is speaking to us, are apt to put our Thoughts into such a
Religious Frame, that we have as it were a New-understanding created in us: And
besides, the Holy Spirit loves to go along with his own Ordinance in some
peculiar Vouchsafements.

The devout Psalm. 73.
Prophet could not well understand some of the Dissibulties about Providence,
'till he went into the Sanctuary of the Lord, but that soon gave him a
sufficient knowledge of them, and what is more, a Contentment under them too.

True Christian Knowledge does not come in so sound and so useful by hand
Study, as by having a Temper fit to receiver it; and we have many times a
Divine Truth more strongly imprinted on our Minds, or more fully confirmed unto
us, when our Hearts are Tender and Devout, then when our Heads are exercised in
the deepest Thinking.

It is further observable, That Men are generally much more subject of
Impressions and Affections, when they are Assembled, then when they are Alone;
and this holds good in relation to Sacred, as well as to Civil Affairs: Thus in
the Church, or in our Public Devotions, besides the direct Influence which we
singly feel, we then receive a Collateral enforcement from that Union of
Consent which we observe in others, and which may be easily and quickly known;
because the very Gestures of the Body, the Tone and Accents of the Voice, and
the different Appearances of the Countenance, are a sort of Universal
Character, which naturally express the more prevailing Passions, and inward
Sentiments of the Soul: and therefore we are encouraged more freely to indulge
those Religious Affections, which we find are no Singularities of our own
particular Complexion, but such as are common to all People, whenever they are
truly sensible of the Majesty of God, and of the power of Religion.

But further, The Public Offices of the Church are such an equal Nourishment,
so well-prepar'd, and so kindly fitted for all the wants of a Devout
Worshipper, that if they be constantly made use of, they will not fail of
bringing us to a strong habit of Piety.

There may be other ways of Devotion more gratifying to the Fancy, but not so
productive of sincere Godliness: They who are content with the wise Methods of
the Church, shall be gradually raised into a Divine Life, as their other Graces
increase, their Humility shall be equally enlarged; and their Zeal shall never
outrun their meek Obedience.

Though they feel no Extraordinary Transports, (for the very Custom of doing
Good things will go near to lessen those) yet they shall not fail of a lasting
and an abiding Comfort; and though they do not rise into Holiness with any
Luxuriant Growth, yet they shall have a sound Proficiency, for they shall
increase, with the Increase of God.

The true Improvement in Christianity does not lie in any singular and affected
Austerity of Life, scrupulousness of Mind, Unquietness of Zeal, separated
Sanctity; or in reaching after such Spiritual Heights as are beyond the
proportion of Humanity: but it lies in a temperate, humble, serious and wise
deportment of our selves, in a Constancy of Duty, a Regular Piety, a
Condescending, Brotherly Mildness of Soul, in an Extensive Charity, and a
Sincere Concern for the welfare of all Mankind: And this is the very
Improvement toward which all the Public Offices of the Church seem to
conspire; for they are apt to fill our Minds with the most Aweful Sense of the
exceeding Majesty of God, and with the most Humbling Thoughts of our own
Unworthiness. They are fitted to work in us the Obedience of Creatures, and the
Humiliation of Sinners; to raise and enlarge our Affections, with proper Forms
of Praises and Thanksgivings, and to extend our Hearts in Supplications and
Intercessions for others.

Add to all this, That our Public Worship is a True Spiritual Sacrifice to
God, which no Private Prayers or Praises can be, though otherwise of Excellent
use; for it is the Nature of all Sacrifice to be an Open, Bishop Laney on Hebr.
xiii. verse. 15.
External and Public Acknowledgment: and therefore the solemn performance of
This, is a distinct Virtue from all other Acts of Obedience, and of a different
Obligation from all other Duties: Those of the most Improved Minds can never be
excused from Offering up this peculiar Sacrifice, and those of the meanest
Seize may comfort themselves in discharging this Necessary Homage to God:
for certainly, it must needs be a wonderful satisfaction to any good Man, when
he reflects that he has done something that is acceptable and well-pleasing to
him, who is able to reward him with endless Glory.

To conclude, Private Prayer is the best Argument of our own Sincerity, but
Public Prayer of our open Confession of God. The first may be performed by the
Heart alone, and the inward Motions of the Soul; but the other requires the
Reverend Deportment of the Body, and the Attestation of the Voice to glorify
our Maker. By the one we best declare the Omniscience and Spiritual Nature of
God; and by the other his Greatness; his Majesty, and his Power.

Let this therefore be our constant Rule in all our Public Devotions, to have
ever an especial regard to the Life and Soul, to the Spirit and Truth of God's
Worship; to enliven all our outward Actions and Demeanor with the holy
Intentions of the Mind, and the devout Affections of the Heart; and to make all
those Ceremonies and Decencies which our Church has either innocently Retained,
or prudently Instituted, to be as Instrumental to our Spiritual Worship, as we
can possibly make them; and not to run into such vain Fancies, as if the Gospel
were an Enemy to Bodily Worship, or that were too gross a way of Honoring God.

Alas! all our most Inward and Refined Worship of Soul and Spirit, can never
reach the Dignity, the Majesty, and the Spirituality of That God we Adore; but
in its highest Exaltation is Unequal, and Imperfect, and can find no Acceptance
with God, but thorough the Infinite Merits of his Son!

What are all the sublimest Acts of the Soul when employed in the Worship of
God, but Ignorance, Blindness, and mere Disparagements of his Glory, when we
consider the Transcendency of the Divine Nature? though as it proceeds from us,
it be an honest and a well-meant Service. And now, since God has given us
Bodies as well as Souls, we have no reason to conceive otherwise, but that he
requires to be Honored by Both, according to that State and Condition of
Nature in which we are Constituted, and that Order of the Creation in which we
are placed: for what can we do more than Glorify the Almighty in those
Capacities he has given us.

Let the Seraphim and Cherubim, and the Angels that are round his Throne, bless
him and praise him in their more Exalted way, and with the pure Emanations of
the Mind; but let us Magnify God with that, with which they cannot, viz. with
the lowest Prostration of our Bodies too.

Accept, most mighty God, that Tribute of Worship which thou have enabled us to
perform; and when thou give us New Powers, they also shall be employed to
magnify thy great and wonderful Name. All the Glory which we can give thee, is
but the Reflection of that Light which thou do first dart on us; and when
thou take us nearer thy Presence, we shall then more perfectly Reflect thy
Image

Since thou have designed a most Glorious Resurrection for our Bodies, we may
conclude that they also shall bear a part in that most spiritual Worship which
shall be paid thee in the highest Heavens to all Eternity; and since thou have
consecrated even these Corruptible Bodies of ours into the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, thou will not disdain that Present Worship which they now can pay.

We will therefore Glorify thee with our Souls and with our Bodies, because
thou have Created and Redeemed them both; we will constantly pay thee an
External Bodily Homage, but such as shall be Animated with the Mind, and the
Spirit, without which we cannot truly Worship Thee, who art an Infinite Mind,
an Infinite Spirit.

Let us always remember what a zealous Concern the Humble and Meek Jesus showed
against the Prophaners of the Temple; and when we enter into the House of
Prayer, let us lay aside all our Worldly Cares, least we make it a House of
Merchandise: let us not come with any Covetous, Unjust, or Malicious Designs,
least we make it a Den of Thieves: But let the Sacredness of the Place, and the
Weightiness of the Business we come about, which is no less, than the
Glorifying of God, and the Saving of our Souls; Let these Considerations fill
us with Holy Thoughts and Affections, and compose us to such a Reverent
Behavior, as may best express the Humility, and Seriousness, the Love, the
Joy, and all the Inward Piety of our Souls.

FINIS.

