THE NATURE and EFFECTS OF Superstition. IN A SERMON Preached before the
Honorable House of Commons, ON Saturday, the Fifth of November, 1692.

By THOMAS MANNYNGHAM, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Braddyll and Robert Everingham, and are to be Sold
at the Seven Stars in Ave-Mary-Lane, MDCXCII.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons.
Acts XVII. 22. Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars-Hill and said, ye Men of
Athens, I percieve that in all things ye are too Superstitious.


THIS is the beginning of that most wise and excellent Speech, which St. Paul
made in the great Court of Athens, where many of the Philosophers and Learned
Men of Greece where Assembled to gratify their Curiosity, and to hear what
that New Doctrine was, which he seemed so desirous of Publishing amongst them.
When St. Paul talked so much of Jesus and the Resurrection, they took him to be
a setter-forth of New Gods, and one who came to increase the Superstition of
the Vulgar; for we cannot well conceive that all the Philosophers of that Age,
especially the Epicureans, which was the most prevailing Sect at that Time, had
any great Opinion of those Devotions and Ways of Worship, of which the Common
People were so Zealous: However, they expected something that was new,
something that might entertain their Inquisitive Minds, and give some Diversion
to their Wit and Parts.

The Religion of the great Men of that Age was wholly turned into curious
Disputes, into elegant Discourses, and a Gentile Way of proposing and answering
some specious Probabilities, and of making their Conversations very easy as to
matter of Opinions. They were sufficiently conscious that some of the
Idolatries of the World were too Gross and Absurd to bear the name of Religion,
and too Inhuman to be practiced by a civilized People. Some Popular Worships
they found it necessary to allow of, such as might give Amusement, and not
prejudice the Commonwealth: They had subtle Distinctions and Evasions for
themselves, and so the Multitude would be but quiet and governable, and not
disturb their soft Tranquillity; They were content that many fanciful Rites and
Dotages should prevail, and be established by their Laws.

It is easy to read this Epicurean Temper in the Behavior of most of those
Roman Magistrates, who were concerned in the Affairs of Judea; and their own
Histories acquaint us that this was the Temper which then generally prevailed
among their Great Men: Their main Business was Empire and Ease, they did not
care to trouble themselves much about the Questions and Zeal of contending
Parties, but suffered all Men to enjoy their particular Persuasions, so they
raised no Tumults, and acted nothing contrary to the Interest of Caesar. This
was the Humor of the Epicurean Party, though others were of somewhat a warmer
Temper.

Now St. Paul, who was not afraid of Socrates his Draught, spoke such Truths
before the Magistrates, and the most captious Sects, and in that City too,
which was the Metropolis of all Idolatry, with that Freedom and Boldness as few
of their wise Men, had they been able, would have ventured to have so publicly
owned; who, though they were conscious of some Truth, yet for the most part
detained it in Unrighteousness: But our Apostle, in an undaunted manner,
declares unto them, the God of the Jews, the God, who made the World and All
Things, the God, whom they themselves did ignorantly Worship; to whom they had
erected an Altar, though they had appointed no Sacrifice.

There were some few of the more Thinking Men, both among the Athenians and the
Romans, who had gone a great way in discovering and confuting the Follies and
Barbarities of the more monstrous Sorts of Superstition; they could, in a great
measure, pull down the old Buildings, but knew not how to erect a new one; they
were vigorous Opposers of some very palpable Falsehoods, but knew not where to
find the Truth: Whereas St. Paul not only discovered the egregious Vanity of
Paganism, but set before them the true and only Religion; the Worship of one
God, v. 23. sincere Repentance, v. 30. steadfast Belief of a Day of Judgment,
and an express and peculiar Faith in that Man whom God had ordained to Judge
the whole World in Righteousness, of which he had given a full assurance and
demonstration, by raising him from the Dead, verse 31.

Now, if we thoroughly consider St. Paul's Arguments against the Superstitions
of the Athenians, we shall find that they have a Foundation in natural
Religion, but their main strength and last Evidence is built upon Revelation:
For he reasons with them, That there is one God the Maker of Heaven and Earth,
and all things therein; that nothing is more absured than to make any material
Representation of the Infinite Being: That Man is but an Offspring of God, and
if no Art can represent Man's Reason and Understanding by any Image in Gold,
Silver or Stone, how much less can it figure out the Incomprehensible Godhead,
of which Man's Soul is but an imperfect Image? That God is not to be worshipped
with any Opinion of Indigency in him, as if he needed any thing, as they
supposed their Demons did, who, as they fancied, were pleased, and, as it
were, fed with the Steams of their Sacrifices; whereas he, who was Lord of
Heaven and Earth, wanted nothing, and would be Worshipped for our Advantage,
not his own: That he was the Creator of all Mankind, having made of one Blood
all Nations of Men. That his Providence was over all, in Sustaining and
Governing all Things: That though he had permitted the ignorant World to try
their own ways, yet now he commanded all Men to Repent: And to confirm the
general apprehension they had of a Day of Judgment, and to make it a certain
Principle of all their Designs and Actions, he appeals to Revelation; tells
them of an Appointed Day, and of the very Person whom God had Ordained to Judge
the World in Righteousness; and least they should think that he intended to
remove one Superstition, only, to bring in another, he appeals to such a
Testimony, to such a miraculous Confirmation, as God would never give to any
thing but Truth, viz. to a Resurrection from the Dead: The Truth of which, if
he himself had not been ready to have Sealed with his own Blood, he would never
have ventured to Preach Jesus and the Resurrection in the midst of Athens.

Now, having enlarged upon this Excellent and most weighty Speech, wherein St.
Paul, with admirable Address, reproved the Athenians for their Superstition,
and took an occasion to insinuate his own Doctrine with less Offense (for if
they were so Hospitable to all Religions, why should they be backward in giving
Entertainment to his) and wherein he confutes the main Body of Heathenism by
Natural Reason, of which they pretended to be the greatest Masters, and by the
Authority of Aratus, an Astronomical Poet of high Repute amongst them; and
lastly, wherein he not only confutes their Errors, but shows them the Truth;
not by subtilty and human Methods, but by having recourse to the Revelation of
God, and that testified, by the greatest of Miracles, the Resurrection of
Christ from the Dead; having thus enlarged upon this Oration of St. Paul, which
he made against the Superstition of the Athenians, in the midst of their great
Court of Judicature, I shall endeavor these three Things in my following
Discourse.

I. To lay down some Considerations that may lead us into a more distinct
Knowledge of the Nature of Superstition. II. To observe some of its more
Barbarous Effects, such as the Occasion and the History of this Day shall
suggest. III. To propose some Directions to preserve us from this Horrible Sin,
and the ill Consequences of it.
I. To lay down some Considerations, etc.

Superstition in its ordinary use, is made a word of Ambiguity, and a common
Term of Disdain, which is mutually cast upon all the Differences in Religion.
The Epicureans counted it Superstition to acknowledge the Providence of God,
and to pay him any Worship besides the bare Esteem of the Mind. The Heathen
Writers, whenever they mention the Jews or the Christians, speak of them as a
most wretchedly-deluded People, given over to an obstinate Superstition: But I
think the Primitive Fathers have sufficiently manifested where Superstition was
to be really charged, by exposing their Absurd, Cruel and Obscene Rites, and by
Baffling all the Arguments which they brought to justify their Follies.

But still, there are vast Bodies of People in the World, who live under
different Persuasions in Religion, as well as under different Governments; who
are mightily satisfied in their own ways of Worship, and commiserate all who
are not of their Opinion, as poor deluded Creatures blinded with Superstition.
Nay, the Profession of Christianity it self, is so filled up with different
Imaginations, Rites and Usages, that almost all distinct Communions are
Impeaching and Abhorring one another, upon the account of Superstition.

They who know the World, know that these are true Observations, and very
deplorable: But sure there is some better Standard of Superstition than the
opprobrious Language and Passions of Mankind, and that is the thing I am now to
enquire after.

1. Therefore, it is well known, that Plutarch has written the most celebrated
Treatise on this Subject, of any among the Ancient Heathen; for that Book of
Seneca concerning Superstition, which St. Austin quotes, is not come down to
our Hands. Now, though this Grave and Ingenious Author has delivered many
excellent Things on that Head, and showed an extraordinary Zeal against those
who painted the Divinity in a Horrid Shape, that they might Worship their own
ill Nature; yet when he defines Superstition by an Astonishing and Dreadful
Apprehension of the Deity, he does not tell us the true Nature of it, but only
points out one Cause, or one Occasion of it: For though Superstition may arise
from Fear, yet it rises also from Ignorance, or a Stupidity of the Mind, from
Love and Fondness, as well as from Fear, from almost any Passion of the Soul,
and any Temper of the Body; for when the Natural Sense of a Deity, and of the
Duty that Man owes him, comes to be vitiated with a mixture of Men's own
Infirmities and Passions, those Infirmities and Passions stand ready to
commence Superstition; there being nothing more required, but an Opinion of
their being well-pleasing to God, which is seldom wanting to Men's own
Imaginations. Besides, to call a Dread of God by the Name of Superstition, is
somewhat a dangerous Expression to Christian Ears, when we consider how the Old
Testament does almost every where represent Religion by the Fear of God; and
that the Prophets conversed with him under great Tremblings and Terror.
Plutarch was a Platonist, and the Platonists were a Sect of People who were
generally of a soft and Amorous Nature, who placed their Happiness in the
Speculation of Ideas; and who rarely considered God, as a Righteous Punisher of
Sin, but chiefly as a most amiable Being for them to contemplate; they usually
entertained very good Opinions of themselves, and of their own Perfections, and
little thought of that Gulf which Sin had made between Man and the Divine
Nature; and therefore they hardly allowed such a just Severity to the Deity, as
was requisite for the wise Government of the World, but made his Goodness to
swallow up his Justice. Whereas God, who knows his own Nature best, has given
us another Character of himself, the Lord, Merciful and Gracious, and forgiving
Iniquity; but will by no means clear the Guilty, visiting the Iniquities of the
Fathers upon the Children, Exodus 34.6, 7. Superstition therefore, though
variable in its Original and Effects, is always founded upon a false
Apprehension of God, and consequently upon a false Apprehension of Religion, by
which he is Served and Worshipped: And as this false Apprehension of God and
Religion arises from several Causes, and produces several Effects, so
accordingly Superstition is varied; It consists both in Opinion and Practice;
and though Practice be most Obvious and Remarkable, and that from which Opinion
is usually gathered; yet it may be defined, with a regard to both, viz. That it
is the Performing of a religious Service, with an Opinion of its being
well-pleasing to God, though it be really unacceptable and unworthy to be
offered to him. So that our next Enquiry will be, to know what Religious
Service is well-pleasing to God, and what is unacceptable to him.

I. Some have thought that the Manners and Customs of the Country, and the
Public Laws are the only Determination in this Matter: So Seneca is
represented by St. Austin, for concluding that those Superstitions which he
could not approve of to his own Mind, were yet to be observed, because the Laws
commanded them: Quae omnia sapiens observabit, tanquam legibus jussa, non
tanquam Diis grata, C. D. l. 6. c. 10.

And not much unlike is, that which the Church of Rome Assigns, when she makes
her Constitutions the only measure of what is, and what is not, Superstition.

But now this is a way of confounding all Truth, or of making it safe, as to
Temporal Interest, for Men to practice the Superstitions of every Country,
where they are publicly allowed; but this gives the Mind no Light, nor enables
it to make a Rational and Certain Distinction between Religion and Superstition.

2. An Appeal to the Principles of Natural Religion, and to the Dictates of
sound Morality, did go a great way among some of the wiser Heathen toward the
Determination of this Thing; and therefore St. Paul insisted so much upon
Natural Principles in his Speech to the Athenians, though he did not ultimately
rest on those: Gross Idolatry could not stand before the Light of Natural
Reason, when it was well displayed; but yet there were many lesser
Extravagances from which the politer Heathen could not free themselves by the
strength of that Principle. Thus Cicero, who was a great Master of Morality,
and deeply engaged in all the Gallantry of Roman Virtue and Heroical Worth,
made a shift, by the Sagacity of his Reason, and the Natural Probity of his
Mind, to confute the more Abominable Opinions and Practices of the
Superstitious in his Time; whatsoever was Barbarous and Inhuman, whatsoever was
Obscene and Filthy, and Egregiously absurd in the Gentile Worship, he perfectly
detested, as directly contrary to the Benignity of God, to the Modesty of Human
Nature, to the Universal Love of Mankind, and the Foundation of all Society:
But when he had worked his Reason to some height, and had proceeded so far as
to give a good blow to all Paganism, by his Rational and Searching Discourses;
yet, at last, he found it necessary to retain some Sacrifices, and some
Ceremonies in the Worship of the Gods; for which he could give no other reason
than the Testimony of the Oracles, and the Tradition of Ancesters. And this
plainly shows, that there is no resting in this Argument, till we come to
Divine Revelation. We may, doubtless, go a great way toward the detecting of
Superstition by the strength of that which Men call Natural Religion and Moral
Principles, and the Eternal Reason of Things; for whatsoever is apparently
repugnant to the Notion of the Godhead, to the Perfection of our own Nature,
and to the best Conceptions of our Minds, can never be the whole, or any part
of the true Worship of God: But though this be freely granted, yet I suppose
that Man would be hard put to it, that should undertake to prove that the
Ceremonial Worship of the Ancient Jews was not Superstition, and be allowed no
Arguments to prove this by, but such as arise from the natural Notions of
Things, and a suitableness to the Divine Nature: Had not God been pleased to
Institute that Worship Himself, and to give Authority to it, by a multitude of
undeniable Miracles, we should never have found any intrinsecal Goodness in it,
by harkening to our own Reason, or by contemplating the Divine Nature. So
likewise, in respect to the two Sacraments of the Christian Religion, what
Congruity can we discover between those material and sensible Ceremonies, and a
pure and infinite Spirit? It Is true, they are admirably suited to the Worship
of a God Incarnate, but then that is matter of Revelation, and is the thing I
contend for; viz. That we can never boldly pronounce concerning what is true
Religion, and what is Superstition, till we fix our selves upon Divine
Revelation: For though, as I have observed, some of the wiser among the
Gentiles were able, by Natural Reason, to discover some of the grosser Parts of
Superstition, yet still they themselves were under the same Bondage, though in
a less Degree; as some Madmen, who are less Raving, will oftentimes speak with
some Judgment and Compassion of the more Extravagant Madness of others, though
all the while they too labor under the same Disease, but their Disease is not
in so high a Ferment.

We must center our selves therefore upon the Revealed Will of God in Matters
of Religion, and not trust too much to our own Reasonings concerning the Divine
Nature and Will, of which we should have known something, but very little, if
God had not been pleased to discover himself to us in his holy Oracles: If Men
shall go to make Religion, or any part of it out of their own Heads, they will
certainly make a Superstition of it: There is not so much as a purely Natural
Religion in the fallen State of Mankind; no Prayers or Praises, or any of those
we call Natural Duties, are acceptable to God without an Expiation, and an
Intercessor; and these Things depending on the Will of God, can be no otherwise
known, than as he has revealed them. Wherefore true Religion is keeping close
to the Revelation of God in all the Essentials, and in all the substantial Acts
of Worship, and Superstition is a departing from it in any of these. All the
use we have of Reason in the Business of Religion, is to lead us to Divine
Relation, and then to assist us in finding out the true Sense and Meaning of
what is there delivered; and when this is done, we are wholly to resign our
selves to the Will of God, and to believe and do as he has Commanded.

To effect this, Reason may proceed in this Method, and by these Fundamental
Maxims.

That God may reveal his Will to Mankind in a Supernatural and Extraordinary
Manner: That he can make use of sufficient means to confirm his Revelations to
us, and to enable us to distinguish between a true Revelation and a pretended
one: That whatever God Reveals is infallibly true: That if we will make a
sincere Use of our Faculties we may so far understand the true Sense of
whatever God has revealed relating to his Worship, as to distinguish his Mind
from false Interpretations, and to be secure, that we have right Objects for
our Faith, and true Rules and Measures for our Obedience: But then farther,
it is as Rational a Conclusion, as any of the foregoing, that God can reveal
more than we can fully comprehend; or, that he can discover to us such sublime
Truths, as we may have sufficient Reason to believe, though we have not
Capacities fully to conceive; and it is here especially, that our Reason is to
stoop, and to yield to Faith; for our Understandings are finite, and not a
proper Measure of all Divine Truth; and what is more to be insisted on, they
have contracted many Weaknesses, and much, Blindness in Spiritual things; and
upon these Accounts, it becomes us to be exceeding cautious, lest we should
take our Baffions and our Prejudices, for plain and evident Reason.

By these steps, together with the Universal Tradition of those Miracles and
Matters of Fact, which are Recorded in the Scriptures, a Man may arrive to a
Rational Faith; and then he may securely pronounce, that there is but one True
Religion, or acceptable Worship, which is the Christian; and that all the rest
are Superstitious, whether Jewish, Pagan, or Mohammedan; for the Jewish
Religion, as it is now professed in opposition to Christ, and as it is stuffed
with modern Dotages, is a poor, wretched Superstition.

As to what concerns the charge of Superstition among Christians, it may now be
dispatched in few words: For I do not see, that it can with any manner of
Truth, be applied to any visible Public Constitution, but that of the Church of
Rome; for I do not concern my self at present, with the multitude of unformed
Sects. It cannot consist, either in the numerousness or oddness of Ceremonies,
when there is no Merit attributed to them, and they are not enjoined as
Substantial Acts of Worship, or as parts of Holiness, in themselves well
pleasing to God.

As to Superstition in Manners, or the bad use which some make of the Externals
of Religion, that cannot be prevented by the most excellent Constitution of a
Church, nor by the best Wisdom of a Nation; for when People are averse to real
Goodness, they will try to go to Heaven by shifts, and place Perfection in
Instrumental Piety; These are abuses which cannot be wholly prevented by any
Public Establishment; but People must be called off from such sort of
Superstition, by frequent Admonitions, and by such Sermons and Discourses, as
shall plainly show, wherein real and substantial Holiness does consist. Whereas
the Church of Rome, has Established Superstition by a Law, and made it the most
Celebrated part of their Worship and Devotion. A great part of their Religion
is founded upon some particulars, which they conjecture, must needs be
Transacted by Souls departed, and in the behalf of Souls, as they are in a
State of Separation, concerning which Revelation has left us in the dark;
wherefore, that must necessarily be a very great Superstition, which obliges
People to receive such practices, as parts of Divine Worship, which have
nothing to support them, but Man's Presumption. The Worshipping of Saints and
Angels, is Superstition in the principal Sense of the Word, (...), the Worship
of Demons; notwithstanding all the fine colors, by which their witty Men try
to disguise this practice; it is hard to propose any two things in the world,
that run in so exact a parallel, as the Worship of Demons among the Gentiles,
and the Worship of Saints among the Papists; a Parallel, not forced and sought
for, nor managed by fancy, but such as obtrudes it self upon the Observation,
and offers it self to our first Reflections. Little did St. Paul think, when he
made his admirable Speech against the Superstition of the Athenians, that he
himself should one day be Worshipped as a sort of Demon in the Christian Church:
But so it is, the Seducer has been too hard for those Christians, who would not
stand to the plain Word of God, but would presume to make Additions to the main
and principal part of all Revelation, the Doctrine of the Mediation of Christ:
He has insinuated a most abominable Idolatry, which is the worst part of
Superstition, under another dress; he has supplied the Papists, with Angels and
Saints, instead of Demons and Hero's, and has sent them Jupiter and Mercury, in
the likeness of Barnabas and Paul.

Having laid down some Considerations, that may lead us into a more distinct
Knowledge of the Nature of Superstition; I proceed in the

Second place, to observe some of its more barbarous Effects, such as the
present Occasion, and the History of this Day shall suggest.

Had we only the Follies and Impieties of Superstition to complain of, it were
a Grievance worthy the Care and Wisdom of a Christian Nation to provide
against; but when we consider, that nothing animates People more to Sedition,
and to an abhorrence of all good Government, than Superstition; that it is the
most fruitful parent of ignorant and bitter Zeal; that the most cruel
Conspiracies, and most mischievous Designs are generally suggested by
Superstitious Councils, and most commonly attempted by Men of Enthusiastic
Tempers, emboldened by false Opinions in Religion; when we consider these
things, and what a peculiar Malignity there is in all Superstition against the
Civil Peace of Kingdoms, and the safety of Public States; there seems to lie a
new Obligation on the Magistracy to hinder the increase of that Distemper in
Religion, which is so apt to turn into the worst Plague of Government, a
Rebellion upon pretense of Conscience. Hist. l. ^. s. 3.
Tacitus observes of the Egyptians of his time, that they would hardly obey any
Magistrates, or hearken to any Laws, upon the account of their numerous
Superstitions. And the History of our own Times may satisfy any reasonable
Person, that when ever People of such Persuasions and Tempers shall be suffered
to come to a Head, there will soon be an end of all just Authority: For what
legal Restraint can be laid upon those, who presume themselves actuated in all
things by a Divine Impulse, and that all the Murders they commit, are but so
many Acceptable Sacrifices to God? and who will be sure to throw off their
Civil Subjection, as soon as ever it shall come into their Fancies, that God
will help them against their Magistrates?

The Conspiracy of this day is Evidence enough, what Cruel and Barbarous
Designs Superstition is always big with, though, God be thanked, it has not
always strength to bring forth: Nothing, it seems, could content those
Superstitious Zealots, but the choicest Sacrifice, made up of the noblest
Blood, and the Flower of Humane Nature gathered into one body: And that there
might be nothing to oppose their hellish Design, they were resolved not to give
the blow, till all the Authority, Wisdom, and Courage of the Nation were met in
one August Assembly; but Providence, which presides over Kingdoms, is
especially watchful over Parliaments, by which Kingdoms are best secured; and
still continues a Succession of Them to withstand all Popish Counsels and
Attempts, and to praise the Lord for that great Deliverance.

But seeing many are not apt to be so very sensibly affected with those
Deliverances, which were conferred on the Generations before them; behold! this
Day has been since enlarged with new Mercies, and therefore requires a double
Gratitude from us. When the Men of the same Superstition had brought another
horrible Design almost to effect, of undermining the Government, and of blowing
up the Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom and Church; even that was as
miraculously prevented by a Divine and seasonable Interposal; and it must needs
raise our Wonder and Joy, when we consider, who that Deliverer was, that
Providence sent us: A Royal Prince out of that very Line, which was on this Day
devoted to an utter Extinction: A Prince born so near this almost fatal Day,
his Birth having an immediate priority to this Anniversary, that Heaven thereby
seems to assure us, that He has an Ascendant over all the Malignant Influences
of Popish Sorcery; and that their Divinations shall never prevail against him;
and that by his very Nativity, he is pointed out to be the Guardian of the
Protestant Cause: And what is another remarkable Circumstance in our Deliverer,
he is a Prince descended from that Noble Ancestor of his, who withstood the
Tyranny and growing Monarchy of Spain, when she thought to have grasped all the
Liberties of Europe; and having drank deep of the Cup of Fornications, had
given her Power and her Strength unto the Beast.

These are Considerations that would tempt any Rational Man, though of no
Prophetical Genius, to conclude, that doubtless, some greater Revolution than
what we have yet experimented, is moving on; unless our Ingratitude stop it.

Besides, the Mercies that we have every Year Commemorated since that happy
Revolution, we are still to bless God, that we have our Established Religion,
and may serve him without a Slavish and Superstitious Fear. That our King is
still Vigorous and Active, to watch and to withstand, a very Subtle, Powerful,
and Implacable Enemy. Little do People think, what an instance it is of God's
especial Goodness toward us, that we are nor given over as a Prey unto his
Teeth, that He can only Attempt and Threaten, and that His terrible fierceness
is still bound up and restrained, though not confounded; That we have struck a
hook into the Jaw of that Leviathan, by our late Victory at Sea, and hope, in a
short time, to take an effectual care, that that Leviathan shall no longer take
his Pastime in the deep. And though it be an Amphibious Creature that we have to
deal with, whose greatest Strength lies on the Land; yet by a prodigious
Gallantry, of some of the Bravest Men that ever gave their Lives for their
Country; He has been lately taught, that it would not be so hard for us to
Conquer, if he had but Courage to give us one fair Battle.

It Is not the Method of Divine Providence, to do all for us at once, but to try
our Gratitude, by several instances of his goodness gradually dispensed, and to
mingle some Hardships with the Deliverances he sends us; to see whether we will
repent and amend, and whether we are worthy of the continuance of his Favor.
If he finds by the daily increase of Wickedness amongst us, that he shall not
be Glorified by our Prosperity, he will change his Method of dealing with us,
and be Glorified in our Oppression. If we grow so nice, as to murmur at his
proceedings, because they do not exactly answer to all our Desires; if we prove
so unreasonable, as to think we are undone, because our Safety puts us to some
Expenses; and if our Condition appear miserable, because our Blessings are
somewhat chargeable to us; then have we Reason to fear, lest our Repining
should provoke God to make us Drink deeper of the Cup of Afflictions, before he
gives us a farther Delivery.

The Ministers of the Gospel have been often put to make Apologies for the
darker Providence of God; but the untoward Temper of this Age puts us upon
making Apologies for his very Mercies too: Men have been so much used to
Infidelity, that they will not believe their own Temporal Happiness, if they
can find the least thing to object against it.

We all understand what Discontents there are in this Kingdom; (and can any of
you remember, when this Nation was without its Complaints?) we know what ill
Representations some are ready to make of every Management, and of every Event;
we grant there are many difficulties under which we lie at present, and that
the carrying on of so Necessary and so Diffusive a War, must needs be our
burden, as well as our Security; but none of these things must put a damp upon
our Spirits, lessen our Gratitude to God, or check our forwardness in
contributing largely toward the Maintaining of that Cause, in which the whole
Protestant Interest is bottomed; and in which his Majesty has been so Nobly
seconded, by the concurrent Assistance, of a Wise, a Sensible, and a Generous
Parliament.

III. I come in the last place, to lay down some Directions, to preserve us
from the Horrible Sin of Superstition, which is one great occasion of all the
Troubles of this Kingdom.

And here I beg leave, to recommend Three Things more especially.

1. The first is, a thorough insight into the Law of Nature, and the obligation
of Moral Actions; an excellent piece of Wisdom, and brought to great Perfection
in some late Writings: The study of this, will render Men's Judgments sound and
masculine, make them less liable to Superstitious Fancies, and consequently
less subject to Atheistical Conceits, which many run into, by an Injudicious
and too hasty abhorrence of the other. Make but a sober Enquiry into the True
Nature of Humane Actions, and that will quickly Teach you, to distinguish
between Moral Duties, and Ritual Performances, and Barbarous Impieties, acted
under the pretense of Religion; and to prefer Obedience, Righteousness,
Temperance, and Mercy, before the Sacrifice of Fools and Madmen; it will bring
you to acknowledge, that your best Actions fall below your Rule, and then the
Defects of Morality, will directly lead you to seek after an Expiation for
those Defects, and that Expiation is Christ our Savior. 2. Do but take a
serious view of the horrible Superstitions of the Ancient and Modern Heathen,
and you will quickly abhor all approaches toward such Degeneracies from common
Reason, and from the first Notions of Religion; and not endure that
Christianity should have any of those sordid mixtures brought into it; which in
time would make that Heavenly Institution an Instrument of the vilest practices
in the World: For when once the Superstitious get a Head, there will be no
stopping of them; they will rage in all manner of bloody and barbarous Effects;
in the destruction of Cities, Families, Provinces, as very acceptable parts of
Devotion; they will proceed, for all that I know, from Plots and Massacres, to
worship God directly by Humane Sacrifices; from the attempting to blow up
Parliaments, to the offering up their own Sons and Daughters unto Devils. 3. Do
but peruse the History of the Church in its first and purest Ages, and you will
wonder how that Grave Matron, the Christian Religion, came to put on such a
meretricious Paint, as it appears with in the Church of Rome; how old plainness
and Sincerity came to be so supplanted by Artifice and Fraud; how Goodness,
Candor, Peaceableness, and lawful Subjection came to be run down by Fury and
Rebellion, and horrid Conspiracies undertaken with Ceremonies of Religion; and
how the most Solemn Worship of one God, through one Mediator, came to be turned
almost into the Worship of one Pope, and all such Saints as he shall please to
Canonize; either for their Holiness, or for their Villainy.
2. For a general Direction to all Christians, who would not be ensnared by
Superstition; I entreat them to stand to the Holy Scriptures, and to well
season their Minds with a due sense of the Christian Religion from those Pure
and Spiritual Discourses which our Savior himself has left us: To consider,
what are the especial Duties to which he has annexed his Blessings, and what is
the Hypocrisy and Formal Worship he has most zealously opposed. It Is
conversing much with the Holy Scriptures, that alone is able to make a Man
Devout and Discreet at the same time; there is no such security against all
Superstition, as a constant recourse to the Word of God, that Crystal Fountain
of all Truth, Holiness, Wisdom, and Love; and when these Graces are well
infused into our Hearts, nothing but what is solid in Religion will be able to
make any strong Impression on our Souls.

To conclude, That which I am willing to leave very affecting and warm upon
your Minds, is this, That I fear our little Differences in Politics, have very
much abated of that just abhorrence which is due to the Abominable
Superstitions of the Church of Rome; and so the last Error may be worse than
the first: But whatever miscarriages we mutually impute to each other, let us
all assure our selves, that Popery is still the same Corruption of Christianity
as before, and that there is no Alteration in the Opinions and Designs of that
Church, whatever there may be in the Piety and Constancy of those who seem to
slacken very much in their Opposition against it. Let us endeavovr to behave
our selves with that Moderation, that all Parties may come into the true
Interest of the Nation, which is the preservation of the Protestant Religion;
that all our Hearts may be united into the same general Policy and Wisdom; that
our Divisions may be no longer a Reproach to our selves, and a Triumph to our
Enemies: And, in a word, that Luxurious Fasts, Murmuring Thanksgivings, and
false Professions of Allegiance may not be the ruin of this Church and Kingdom!
If neither Judgments nor Mercies will do us any good; if we are of too perverse
a Temper, either to be Humbled or Obliged, then our greatest Calamity is not
removed, but only deferred; but if we have Hearts truly thankful for former
Deliverances, and have the Grace and Skill to manage a present Blessing, when
it is put into our Hands, we may still be a Prosperous and a Great People, and
such as the Lord shall delight to visit with Mercies, Deliverances, and a
mighty Salvation: Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant us; through Jesus Christ,
his Son, our Lord.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Glory,
Power, Praise and Thanksgiving, now and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

