The RICH MAN's Bounty, the True Measure of His Wisdom.

A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR, AND Court of Aldermen, AND CITIZENS
of LONDON: AT St. Brides Church, Easter-Wednesday, March, 27. 1695.

By John Mapletoft, D.D. Vicar of St. Lawrence-Jury.

(...),

Demophil. He is a Wise Man, and Dear to God, who takes as much Care for his
Soul, as others do for their Bodies.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1695.

LUKE, Xii. Ver. 21. So is he that lays up Treasure for himself, and is not
Rich toward God.
THese Words are the Result, and Conclusion of a Parable spoken by our Blessed
Lord: The Occasion of which was this. One of his Hearers had Interrupted him,
whilst he was discoursing about some of the great Duties and Rewards of our H.
Religion, with a Request, that he would decide a difference between him and his
Brother, about an Estate fallen to them in common: This our Lord refuses to
do. Man, says he, ver. 14. Who made me a Judge or a Divider over you? For,
coming upon business of a much greater importance, he would not engage himself
in these lesser matters. But from hence he takes occasion to Caution his
Followers, against setting their Hearts too much upon transitory things; and he
said unto them, Take heed and beware of Covetousness, (...) i. e. of having and
desireing more than you need, or more than you ought to have: For by
Covetousness, Christ here plainly designs, and forbids such an over-eager
desire of, and application to the getting, or keeping Wealth as is inconsistent
with Justice or Charity; that care we ought to take of our poor Brethren out of
Love to God above all things, and a settled Resolution to please him in
disposal of our Riches. The Nature, Folly, and Danger of which Crying Sin, our
Lord sets forth and represents for our Instruction, in this following Parable.
A Rich Man in a very Plentiful Year, being at a loss where to bestow all his
Increase, resolves to pull down his Barns, and to build much Larger. And when
all his Goods were safely laid up, he means to spend the rest of his Life in
Ease and Pleasure; to enjoy all he has himself alone, without any regard to
the needs of others, and without making any Reflection, whence that Plenty
came, for what end it was send him, or what account he was to make for it.
Soul, says he ver. 19. Thou have much Goods laid up for many Tears, take thine
Ease, Eat, Drink and be merry, or Feast. We have here the Uncharitable Rich
Man's Character: He is laying up Treasure for himself only, without any
consideration either of God or Man. His Estate is all his own, and he, or his
will enjoy it all themselves. He knows no happiness, nor desires any other,
save only what his Wealth can procure him: And as for the Poor, God can provide
for them without his help. Now in the next words, the Folly and Disappointment,
the Misery and Ruin of this poor Inconsiderate Sensual Wretch, are exposed by
our Savior for a warning to others. But God said unto him, Thou Fool, this
night thy Soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall those things be
which thou have provided? Those many Years he promised himself, are at an end
in one night; the goods he reckons upon are no longer his; and he is called to
give an account of the abuse of his Trust; and must expect the sad doom of an
Unjust Steward, who had either Riotously wasted, or Covetously hoarded up for
himself, what his Lord put into his hands for the Maintenance and Relief of his
Fellow Servants. So is he, says our Lord, that lays up Treasure for himself,
and is not Rich toward God. Such is he in design and practice, and such is the
issue of his ill-natured folly; so very Foolish, so wholly Disappointed, and
Miserable is that Man, who is more concerned about getting or keeping an
Estate, than about employing a good part of it in Works of Mercy.

Having thus set this Text in its true light, and shown its coherence with, and
relation to, the foregoing Precept and Parable of our Lord; and that it is the
Explication of the one, and the Moral of the other. I shall use this Method in
my discourse thereon.

1. I shall a little more fully explain and enlarge upon its true sense and
meaning. 2. I shall propound to your view and consideration that General
Doctrine which seems to be the main Scope and Design of the whole, and make
good the truth of it by proper Arguments. 3. I shall make some Reflections
pertinent to this matter.
First, Then as to the meaning of the phrases here used, Laying up treasure for
a man's self, evidently imports his getting, or keeping, or using superfluous
wealth; what is over and above either the necessities, or true natural, (not
fantastical imaginary) coveniences of life, only for himself, or his own
nearest Relations; or to gratify any inordinate appetites, such as are the too
great love of money, or of sensual pleasures, or vainglorious pride; and this
without taking notice of, and relieving the wants of other men. And, on the
contrary, to be rich toward God, implys our having a due regard to his will
and Laws in the getting, and managing our wealth, and behaving our selves as
STEWARDS, not as LORDS, and absolute Proprietors of those gifts we receive from
GOD. So that, if we join both these expressions together, to Lay up Treasure
for our selves, and not to be RICH toward GOD, will signify, both from the
force of the words, and the whole Scope of the Parable, so to get, or keep, or
use wealth, as not to have due respect to Almighty God, as to the Supreme giver
of disposer of it; and to that end for which it was lent us, and the use we
ought to put some good part of that to, of which we have no true need our
selves; or to place our chief Happiness in our Riches, Soul, take thine ease;
or in those bodily, barely-Animal Pleasures to which they chiefly Minister; or
those empty Titles, Preference, or other Worldly advantages they usually
procure, so as not to employ what we have to spare, at least, a very
considerable part of a large Income, in supplying the wants of the Honest and
Industrious Poor. All this is apparently implied in that preposterous care, and
perverse mis-management of riches here condemned by our Lord under the name of
laying up Treasure for our selves, and not being rich toward God. And the word
So, (...), connecting this verse to the preceding parable, and applying it to
the whole Scheme by way of Accommodation and Resemblance, gives us this general
sense, as the drift and purport of our Lords discourse on this Subject:
Consider how gross the folly, how unreasonable the procedure, and how certain,
and withal, how terrible the defeat of such a Rich Man's hope must soon be, who
had no consideration for other men's needs, no end, no God but himself, when he
is surpised by death; and then, Take heed and beware of such Covetousness, and
irregular self-love as is here Exemplified: Of hoarding up for your selves what
God entrusted you with for the support, and comfort of his Children. So is he,
i. e. such a short-sighted unthinking fool, as this here in the Parable: So
unmindful of God his great Master and Benefactor; So inhuman and regardless of
his poor BRETHREN, who perish for want of those provisions which his barns
could not hold, and might have saved him the labor of building new ones; and
So miserably disappointed at the last; and So lost and So undone for ever is
that wretched man, who spends all his time, and care, and strength in
increasing, or preserving his wealth; or abuses it to Luxury, or to pride and
vanity, without taking care To be Rich toward God, or to lay out a good
proportion of his abundance in those works of mercy which God does require of
him in this, and will reward him for in the next life. So much for the
Explication and Meaning of the Words.

Secondly, The general Doctrine deducible from this Parable, as the main drift
and design of it seems to be this; That, as it is too much the Custom, so it is
both the mighty folly, and error, the disappointment and the ruin of too many
Rich men, that they are more intent upon adding to their heap, and keeping it
together; or in lavishing out their store unduly upon themselves; or on too
carefully laying it up for their posterity, than upon managing their great
affluence so as may turn to their best account in the next life; and may most
comply with that end, for which this Talent was put into their hands. Or, that
he is extremely foolish who sets his heart more upon leaving a great Estate at
his death, than upon doing a great deal of good with it in his life time. And
on the other side, the rich man's diligent study and practice of Beneficence
and Charity, is the true measure of his Wisdom, as well as the proper duty of
his place and station.

Now the truth of this Doctrine will manifestly appear from these four following
considerations. They are extremely foolish, and like to him her mentioned, who
Lay up Treasure for themselves, and are not Rich toward God.

1. Because all those who thirst after wealth immoderately, or use great
portions of it in the service of any vice, mistake the nature and end of Riches.

2. Because they understand not the true use and mighty advantage which may be
made of them, when they are employed so as they ought to be.

3. Because by neglecting, or coming short in their works of mercy, they
deprive themselves of the chief, or only Remedy against the certain danger and
usual mischief of Worldly prosperity, and so make it hard for themselves to be
saved.

4. Because as their Riches make it hard, so their ill, or no use of them, and
total want of Charity make it impossible for them to be saved, if they die in
that state.

1. They who are wholly taken up with the care and thoughts of money, and over
joy'd with great posessions, are very unwise, because they are much mistaken in
the nature and value, and power, and end of that which they make their Capital,
their chief Affair. For they falsely suppose that a great deal of wealth will
furnish all that is needful to make them truly Happy. But now the contrary
Assertion to this too Fatal Error, is laid down by our Blessed Lord as the very
reason why we ought to take heed and beware of Covetousness, or a desire of
having too much, all we can get any way; for, says he, A Man's life consists
not in the abundance of the things which he possesses, i. e. No Man's life can
be either prolonged one moment, or made more truly happy by such a surplusage
of riches as neither the necessities, nor true Conveniences of life demand.

All happiness pretended to beyond this Competency, either in the bare
possessing, or in Luxuriously and vainly expending much wealth, is but a
diseased fancy and illusion of brainsick men. And it is well known that all
such false Appetites and Ill-grounded desires are as unsatiable, as they are
unnatural, and unreasonable. Neither the wealthiest Prince that ever was, nor
the greatest Conqueror, had every Gold, or Empire enough to make him easy and
contented, as long as there was still any more in the world.

And no man can be happy who is not pleased with his present condition.

But besides this, Riches can neither make a man Wise nor Good: which is the
proper felicity of rational, intelligent beings. They rise no higher than to
provide for, and gratify the body which is the husk and shell only, or the
prison, as some call it, of that immortal spirit, which distinguishes us from
the brute Beasts; and so must raise us to another kind, and pitch of Happiness
than what we can have in Common with them.

And this made Socrates suspend his judgment concerning the happiness of the
great King, or Persian Monarch, till he was better informed, how much Wisdom
and Virtue he had. And for the same reason, he refused to say, that another
newly made a mighty rich man was happy, until he saw what use he would make of
his Estate. For by these he rightly measured the felicity of every man; and
affirmed, that all other things which mis-judging vulgar minds dote on, Riches,
and Honors, and Kingdoms, etc. had no great matter in them, were of no
Consequence at all in order to make men happy. And a very Knowing Man of our
Nation (Lord Verulam) assures us, as well from his own, as from the Universal
experience of Mankind, That Great Persons must borrow other Men's opinions to
think themselves Happy: For if they judge by what they feel only, they cannot
find any such thing.

Thus are these fond Admirers of Riches altogether ignorant of the true Nature
and Power, or indeed, Impotency, Inability of Wealth, to procure and to
establish any happiness to Man; and consequently they are miserably fool d and
abused in a False expectation of what it can never perform. Since no Solid
Rational satisfaction of the mind of Man ever was, or can be ever found, either
in those low despicable Pleasures of Sense, in which the Bruits, or rival, or
perhaps excel Man; or in all the Pageantry of Secular Greatness, the empty
Smoke, Dust and Noise of Worldly Pomps and Vanities; to which only, abundance
always can, and commonly does exalt, and then abuse and puss up those weak
untaught minds who know no better things.

Nor do these Men much reflect upon the fleeting fading Nature of these
Transitory things; the great uncertainty there is of their possessing them one
Day; Thou Fool, may God say to every one of them, this night thy Soul shall be
required of thee: Nor upon the as great certainty that they can not long enjoy,
what is the only Good they care to have.

But now, he who understands the true nature of these things, and is too
discerning to be brought by such thin appearances of Happiness into the common
Paradise of Fools, looks upon a mighty Revenue, rather as a great Burden and
Encumbrance, a thoughtful careful Province, and a Busy Steward-ship.

And all that can make it, I say not desirable or valuable, but tolerable to
such a man, is the hopes he has by his wise management of his ten Tallents to
bring Honor to his Great Master, and obtain the Reward promised to the good
and faithful Servant. His being a Large Dispencer, and Instrument of the Divine
Bounty to the Family of God, is both the joy and support of his Spirit, and the
only true advantage of his having more then he needs, or would otherwise have
the trouble of, if it were to be misspent in the too generally received methods
of the World.

Second, The Folly of those who are more intent upon laying up Treasures on
Earth than in Heaven, or upon having a great Estate, than making a due and good
use of what they have, is seen in this; that they do not consider enough, nor
understand what the best and true use of Wealth is, and how it may be most
improved. It were easy for God so to order things here below, that no Man
should need to be Poor; but the Poor and Rich have from this variety and
difference of their outward circumstances, opportunity of exercising several
Graces and Virtues which could not otherwise subsist and have place amongst
Men. The Pious and Industrious Poor, have hereby occasion to exercise their
Patience and Submission to the Will of God, and their dependence on, and trust
in him for a supply to their wants. And the Rich have manifold invitations and
opportunities to show the sincerity of their love to God, and to their
Brethren, by their Liberality; as also to express their thankfulness to God for
these outward Blessings, and that he has put them into that more happy station
of being Givers rather than Receivers; and hereby to own that as all they have
is from God, so it ought to be managed with regard to his will and pleasure,
and for his greater Glory.

Beneficence also gives us a peculiar Title to the Favor and Blessing, and
Protection of God here in this Life; nay, even to more Wealth, if God sees it
to be best for us.

St. Hierom affirms, that he did not remember to have read, that any Person
ever had died an ill Death, who had been a great Alms-giver in his Life time.
And we read, Prove. 11.24, 25. There is that scatters, and yet increases; and
there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to Poverty. The
Liberal Soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be watered also
himself.

But as a large diffusive Charity, and imparting to others in a good proportion
to what Abundance God has blessed us with, is the proper use of a great
Income, so is it the best improvement we can possibly make of it; this is here
styled, Being Rich toward God, and by our Lord, Laying up for our selves
Treasure in Heaven, Mat. 6.20. or having Treasure in Heaven. It Is putting so
much stock into the Hands of God to be there Secured and Improved for us and
ours, upon the best assurance, even his own Word, of having so much of it
repaid to us again, or to ours in this World, as God knows to be best for us or
them. Prove. 19.17. He that has pity upon the Poor, lends unto the Lord, and
that which he has given will he repay him again.

But above all, this is the certain, and perhaps the only way, for Rich Men
both to secure to themselves a Crown of Righteousness through the Mercy of God in
Christ, and to increase the Weight and Glory of that Crown in Gods Kingdom. Our
Blessed Lord promises a Reward to him, who shall give a Cup of cold Water only,
to any of his in the Name of a Disciple, i. e. because they belong to him, Mat.
10.24. And in that description of the Day of Judgment, Mat. 25. he is pleased
to assign no other cause of his putting the Blessed of his Father into
possession of that Kingdom prepared for them from the Foundation of the World,
but only their having Fed and Clothed him when he Hungry and Naked, and taken
him in when he was a Stranger, and visited him when he was Sick and in Prison;
i. e. their having relieved and taken care of his Brethren in their Needs and
Distresses, which he therefore interprets as if done to himself, and
accordingly rewards with everlasting Happiness.

Thirdly, Very Rich men, if they are not given to Charity, and that in a good
proportion to their Superfluous Riches, are very foolish, because by their
failing in this duty, they neglect and deprive themselves of the most
efficacious, if not the only sure remedy, against the danger and mischief of
worldly prosperity; And that great difficulty our Savior has told us there is
for them to enter into the Kingdom of God.

It Is either the too great love, and over value men have for Riches; their
setting their heart upon them, placing their confidence in them; or their abuse
of them, to the support, and gratification of their Ambition and Pride, or
their Sensuality; and their forgetfulness of God, which make it harder for a
Rich Man, as Christ positively affirms, Mat. 19.24. To enter into the Kingdom
of God, than it is for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle. And the only
way that God takes, as far as we can know, to work this Miracle, for those Rich
Men who do enter into his Kingdom, or become true sincere Christians, is by
infusing this Grace of Charity into their Souls; whereby he makes them Willing
and Desirous to part with so much of their Wealth to the Poor, that they may
have good Store of Treasure laid up for them in Heaven; and by this means their
hearts are loosed and dis-entangled from these perishing things, and centred
upon God as their last end, and Supreme Felicity.

It was the want of this Spiritual Wisdom, and disposition to beneficence,
which made that young man who gave occasion to that hard and amazing saying,
forsake Christ. He went away with a sorrow proportionable to the greatness of
his wealth. He was very sorrowful, Luke 18.23. For he was very Rich. And he
fondly chose rather to part with all hopes of that Eternal Life he had been so
earnestly enquiring after, than with the great possessions he was master of.

Certainly did Rich Men consider well the horrible danger they are in, of being
lost forever upon account of their Riches, (if they will believe our LORD and
MASTER,) they would never have St. Paul's charge out of their mind, which he
enjoins Timothy to give them, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. They would neither be
high-minded, insolent, or despisers of others, only for having less money than
they have; nor trust in their uncertain Riches, but in the living God; from
whom they receive them, and whose Stewards they are. They would then make it
their chief business, their Trade or Calling, and look upon it as their
greatest concern, and true interest to do good to those who need them, to be
Rich in good Works; They would esteem these the best and most valuable part of
their wealth, because they will be of use to them in the next life, and
consequently would be ready to distribute and willing to communicate.

The Apostle backs his Exhortation with this irresistible Argument to all who
believe another world, viz. That Rich Men do hereby lay up in Store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on Eternal Life. Since then a studied well-Proportioned bounty to the Poor, is
the most sure preservative against those destructive poisons of Men's Souls,
viz. Covetousness, Pride, Luxury, Intemperance of all sorts; which are so often
the successful Temptations of Wealth, that only the wisest and best Men (which
are not always the greatest number among the Rich,) are able to resist them, it
must needs be the worst Husbandry, and the greatest folly in the world not to
lay out our money upon so great advantage; and not starve our own excesses, and
irregular courses, by making a plentiful provision for our necessitous brethren.

Fourthly, The undoing folly and misery of all Uncharitable Rich Men, is
palpably manifest in this, viz. That by such unfaithfulness to their trust, and
inhumanity toward their brethren, they destroy all hopes of being Happy in the
next State. Wealth, and that power, and interest which it usually makes way
for, and procures, are those particular Talents which God has committed to
their management; and are therefore to be carefully, and diligently improved by
them, to his Honor, and their own Personal good, and advantage in the other
world, by their feeding and clothing, and relieving and assisting all the
distressed afflicted members of their Common Savior. But now, if instead of
giving their Lord's Household meat in due season, they shall be arrogant and
injurious upon the strength of their Riches; and shall Eat and Drink with the
Drunken, if they shall spend in the Entertainment of their own Vices what they
received for the benefit and use of their Fellow Servants, their Lord shall
come in a day when they look not for him, Mat. 24.50. All shall cut them
asunder; (which was the punishment of false Knaves and Cheating Villains) and
shall appoint them their Portion with the Hypocrites, where there shall be
weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, i. e. in the endless Torments of Hell Fire. Thus
now have I made good, I hope, that Proposition which I advanced as the general
Scope of this Parable, viz. That it is a mighty folly, and will prove a terrible
disappointment at the last to all those inconsiderate men who are more
concerned to heap up Riches for themselves, or their Children; or more forward
to mispend their wealth in any unjustifyable way of Sin or Vanity; than to
employ their overplus in such works of Piety and Charity, as make for the
Honor of God, and the succor and relief of his Children, and Servants. Or,
that he is the very Fool, here called so by God himself, who makes it more his
aim and business to be a great, than a Good Man; and to be Rich and High in
this World, than to be for ever happy in that which is to come.

For, So is he; So is every one of these narrow Souls, these self-seeking Rich
Men; 1. So mistaken in the nature of Wealth, and so abused in his Expectation
of Happiness; 2. So ignorant of its true and best use, and of the great
advantage may be made by employing it so as it ought to be; 3. So negligent,
and unwary in obviating, and preventing the danger which all Rich Men are in,
and the harm and mischief which most receive from too great Abundance; 4. So
for ever ruined by the mis-use of his Talent, is that man, who lays up Treasure
for himself, and is not Rich toward God. So Unwise, so Dis-appointed, and so
Finally Undone is that Miserable Man, who having not made himself Friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, (if not unjustly gotten, at least too often
unjustly detained, or unjustly used, as well as) Fading, Unstable, Perishing
Wealth, can have no just or good hopes that he shall ever be received into
Everlasting habitations, Gods Eternal Kingdom of Glory.

Now if want of Beneficence, and of due proportions of Works of Mercy be the
apparent Folly, and Sin, and Ruin of those Rich Men who have no regard to Gods
Laws, and the wants of others, in disposing of their Estates; it hence follows,
That a due care about, and a Conscientious discharge of the obligation they
have thereto, is the wisdom and happiness, of those who use their Wealth to the
glory of God, and the good of Men; or, that a Rich Man's well-proportioned
Charity, is the best mark of his Prudence and Discretion.

For some of the chief Properties and Rules of wisdom are, I think, generally
agreed to be these:

Making a right Judgment of the Nature, and Intrinsic Worth and Value of those
things we are concerned to understand.

Looking to the most distant issues and consequents of them. A wise Man sees as
far before him as he can.

Knowing how to make the true use and best improvement, or advantage of them to
our selves.

Being aware of, and avoiding all inconvenience or harm, we might otherwise
come to suffer by, or from them.

Propounding to our selves in general the Best and Noblest End, i. e. the
Highest degree of Happiness we are made capable of by our Nature, or the Favor
of God.

And then steadily pursuing this end by all requisite, most fit and proper
ways, and means.

Now he who makes it his main design, the affair and business of his Life, to
be Rich toward God; to have his chief Treasure in Heaven, and his Heart there
also, even whilst he is in this Earthly Tabernacle; he understands the nature
and properties of Wealth, and what he may, or may not expect from it. He knows
how little will serve the needs of the Body, and furnish all those conveniences
which a wise and good Man can think worth having: And that whatever is over and
above this, has no other good in it, save what arises from our using it to the
good of others. He reckons so much only of his Estate to be properly his, as he
either uses himself, in compliance with the modest demands of Nature, and the
dictates of sober reason; or as he remits and sends before him into that
Heavenly Country and House of his Father, toward which he is advancing every
day, and where his Treasure will be of the greatest benefit to him; That only
is mine which I either make use of my self, Quello e mio che io godo, and dono
per Dio.
or give for Gods sake.

He prudently considers the few Moments he is to spend here as a point, as
nothing, in comparison with that eternal duration for which he is design'dand
made; and that single thought destroys and annihilates all those false
appearances of happiness which either the gross pleasures of Sense, or the thin
air of Applause, or the noise of secular State and Grandeur, which are usually
founded in and supported by store of Money, can any way pretend to.

He judges of all these things as God does (whose Judgment is the Rule and
Standard of Truth) and who values Men by their true Wisdom and Virtue, their
Piety and Charity, their Meekness and Humility; not by their Birth, or Titles,
or Riches, or any Quality which the weakest and worst of Men may share equally
with the Best and the Wisest.

He knows that the only true use of very great Affluence, is doing a very great
deal of good to very many, to the Honor of God, and out of obedience to his
Commands; that this is the highest improvement of perishable goods, and the
only way to change their nature, and make them durable for ever; since he will
find the Rewards of his Charity, in an Endless state of Felicity.

His neither valuing himself upon his Riches, nor trusting in them; his Poverty
of Spirit, his Humility and Contempt of the World, when he has most of it; and
parting with what others wast in Pride and Luxry, to Feed his poor Brother,
secure him from the danger of Wealth; He has never any thing to spare for any
Vice; and thus does his Wealth make his way to Heaven more Easy and more
Pleasant too: Nor is Poverty it self so safe a Road thither, as Riches are to
such a Mastering Mind.

He proposes to himself the Best and Noblest end, Everlasting Life, or the
enjoyment of that Supreme Good, from whence he came, (and for, as well as by
whom, he was made) to Eternal Ages. This he knows is the only true and proper,
peculiar Happiness of Immortal Spirits. He therefore values all things here
below in proportion to their capacity, and tendency to serve him in order to
his Great, his only Aim and Concern, to live with God for ever. To this end
therefore, he will chiefly use his Wealth, and whatever Power or Interest that
can give him.

And whereas Riches too commonly make Men forget both God and themselves, they
make this Wise Man more mindful of both; since he is always contriving how he
may discharge his Trust to his Lord, and how he may avoid those Temptations and
Snares into which they fall who will be Rich, 1 Timothy 6.9. who set their hearts
upon getting Money, or place their Happiness in it; who love the World, and the
things of this World to that degree, as to stifle the Love of God in their
Souls, and that regard they ought to have to his Law and Will.

I shall conclude with a Reflection or two arising from, or pertinent to this
matter.

1 If we desire rather to be RICH toward GOD, than to lay up Treasure for our
selves, i. e. to exercise the Grace of Charity vigorously, in due measure, from
right Principles, and most to our own advantage; we must endeavor to have our
minds thoroughly possessed with, and influenced by a sincere hearty love to God.
For on this our love to God above all things, we must found all that unfeigned
affection, and good will we bear to Men, which will be a constant spur, and
restless incentive to all good offices they can need, and we perform.

Our Blessed Lord having answered that Question, Which is the great Commandment
of the Law? Mat. 22. in these terms, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, adds of his own
accord, and as a certain consequent of the former, And the 2d. is like unto it,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Now our Lord thus connecting these
together, and making them jointly the sum of the Law and the Prophets; that in
which they all conspire, or the Abridgment, the whole of our duty; does hereby
evidently instruct us; That as the love and kindness we have for our Brethren
is Inseparable from that sincere love we bear to God, so it must be ever
grounded thereon. We must therefore love, be kind and helpful to all Men,
because we love that God whose Image they bear in common with our selves; whose
Children they also are as well as we; who has commanded us to love them as we
do our selves, and as he loved us, when he sent his Son to be the Propitiation
for our Sins, 1 John 4.10, 11. and to reconcile us again to himself by his
death on the Cross. And if we do thus love our Brethren, we shall gladly take
all occasions to assist and relieve them, we shall be as forward to help them,
as we desire they should be to help us, were we in the like distress.

It Is this, this inward affection, and hearty love to others, out of that Love
and Duty we owe to God, which is both a Never-failing Spring, and the very Life
and Soul of all External acts of Charity. And if this be wanting, though we
should bestow all our goods to feed the Poor, 1 Cor. 13.3. if we were never so
Bountiful out of Vainglory, or from any other Carnal Worldly consideration, it
would profit us nothing; it would be no discharge of our obligation, it would
be of no account in the sight of God.

2. Since Works of Mercy are so much every Man's concern in his Station, and so
much every Rich Man's, especial, proper Duty, and mighty, indeed only advantage,
they must be a good part of every Rich Man's business too, of his thought,
contrivance, and especial care. It were therefore very good and advisable, (if
not necessary) that all Men, and particularly all Rich Men, should seriously
and attentively weigh and consider with themselves, what proportion of their
Estates it were fit for them to Allot and Consecrate every Year to Pious uses,
and to lay by such a part as they resolve on, out of every Sum they receive;
which would have this good effect, among many others, that they would generally
be ready for, and glad of all good occasions of distributing to the necessities
of the Poor. And tho God has given us no set Rule whereby to estimate this
proportion, yet we may doubtless make one for our selves; in which our main
care ought to be, that our Rule be not too narrow, that we do not too little. A
defect here may prove our final undoing, whereas an Excess, if such a thing can
be imagined, would besure to increase our reward in the next life. A Learned
and Exemplary Divine of our Church (Dr. Hammond) in a Sermon Preached upon this
very occasion before the then Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City; observes,
that every Jew (not the Rich only) was obliged (besides several other ways of
relieving the Poor mentioned in the Law of Moses) to pay a Tenth part of all
his Increase or Income every Third Year, which is aequivalent to one Thirtieth
part every Year, to the use, and maintenance of the Poor, Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. And
this was Styled their Righteousness, their necessary Obedience to the Law, and
the lowest degree of Charity among them: But the Good and Merciful Men, even of
the Jews, were such as did much out do what this Law exacted. Our Lord
declares, That except our Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, (who practiced such external duties doubtless at an
higher rate than the common Jews) we shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. From all these premises, that Learned Man infers, beyond all color of
contradiction, that the proportion of the Christian Alms-giver, to speak at the
least, must be more than the Thirtieth part of his Yearly Revenue, or Increase.
Now although it be true, that this Law given to the Jews, does not oblige us
Christians in the Letter of it, yet (as he well remarks) Gods Judgment to his
People at that time, and in that State is worth our observing. But then we are
here to remember, that every Jew, who had any Income or Increase, was tied to
pay this Thirtieth part toward the maintenance of the Poor, even those who had
least to spare; so that if Christians in moderate circumstances, who have any
thing to spare, are to exceed this Proportion, as has been showed; those who
are Rich, who have a great deal more than they need, must be worse than Jews,
if they make so low and scanty a Rule for their practice; for none who was
accounted a Good or Merciful Man among them, contented himself with doing so
little. Some considerate Persons being in that mediocrity, or competency of
these outward good things, that neither Poverty nor Riches, which was the Wise
Man's choice, (and would be the choice of all Wise Men, if our Lords Judgment
were thoroughly weighed and believed by them; since the Richer they are, the
more hard still it is for them to be saved) some of these sober and serious
Christians, I say, have thought one Tenth part of their Yearly Revenue, or
Annual Profits arising any other way, a Proportion low enough for them to
bestow in Works of Mercy. But Rich Men, and especially those who are very Rich,
if they were very Wise too, will scarce stint themselves, it is to be hoped,
(in many circumstances at least) to a rate so dis-proportionable to their
abilitys. Zaccheus's Example, who besides restoring four sold, if it should
appear that he had wronged any Man, gave half his goods to the Poor, is a much
fitter Precedent for some of those who have very great Estates, i. e. who have
much more than they can spend every Year in such ways as they will be able to
answer for to God at the last day, that great day of Accounts. Certainly every
Rich Man will do himself great right, in often and seriously reflecting upon
that Parable delivered by our Lord, Luke 16.19. etc. for his particular Caution
and instruction. That Rich man there, has neither impiety, nor rapine, or
injustice, nor any other flagrant Crime laid to his Charge: All we are told of
him is, that he was Clothed in purple and fine linen and fared sumptuously
every day; and that he did not feed the poor beggar with the crumbs which fell
from his table, i. e. He lived very great, maintained his port, and quality in
the world, indulged himself in the excesses of Luxury and Vanity, whilst the
poor starved for want of that which his haughty Pride and Riot made him think
he needed for his own self. And the next thing we hear of him, is, that he is
dead and buried, and in Torments in Hell Fire.

The learned Grotius asks this question from the place, which I fear it will be
hard for many Rich and Great Men satisfactorily to answer; Quomodo igitur
poenam hanc diviti inflictam evadet pars magna Christianorum? How, will so many
Christians, as imitate this Rich man's Example, be able to escape those
Torments in Hell to which he is doomed? For though all the Alms in the world can
never purchase Heaven (for Eternal Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Romans 6.23.) yet want of a competent, proportionable Charity, alone,
and without any other sin? may prove, as sure a way to lose Heaven, as all the
Atheism and Irreligion, all the Lewdness and Wickedness any Man was ever guilty
of.

And since Christ gives no other reason of men's Condemnation at the day of
judgment, but this only, (though others doubtless there will be) we cannot but
conclude, that want of due Charity will be then, though not the only, yet to be
sure a very principal and general Article against those forever unhappy men.
And seeing that a narrow, slender, contracted Charity, altogether
disproportionable to the Rich man's Abilities, will in all reason, be esteemed
by God as no Charity at all; All Rich men are as nearly concerned to Study this
point well, and to practice this duty with care and diligence, as they are not
to perish with their money, and not to come into that place of Torments. And
they ought therefore frequently to have in their thoughts that saying of our
Lord, Luke 12.48. which is equally applicable to all Talents, as well of Riches
as any other; For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required;
and to whom men have Committed much, of him they will ask the more.

3. It would be a great, and worthy effect of a noble and Universal Beneficence
or Charity, in those who have wealth, and power, and credit among us, to use
all the interest they can make in procuring a public National Establishment of
a truly Honorable Society of men, who should make it their business, out of
love to God, and Compassion toward their Brethren, to know among them all, the
number and condition in all particulars, of all the poor in this Kingdom, and
especially in and about this great City: That so all those who are able, might
be forced to maintain themselves by their own labor; and both those whose
labor is not able to provide enough for their great charge, and those who are
unfit for any work at all, (which will be but few,) may be sufficiently and
decently provided for, and maintained as Sons of the same Father, and Brethren
of our common Lord and Savior Christ. If it were seriously considered and laid
to heart how many are starved every year in their own houses, and some too in
the streets, with hunger, or cold, or want of necessaries in one kind or other,
(which amount to some hundreds in and about this City some years, as I have
heard from those who have reason to know) we should look upon this as such a
Disgrace and Contradiction to our Religion, which is the Law of Love, and the
highest obligation thereto on so many accounts; and withal so great a guilt
upon all who had, or might have power to remedy it, (if not on the whole
Nation) that every Man would do his best to promote such a brave design;
without which it is very hard, if at all possible, that so Crying a Sin, and so
Culpable a Neglect, which must lay some where, should be wholly and effectually
prevented.

Now that such wise and good men among us as have Estates, and Souls large
enough to extend their Charitable Provision for the Poor to all after Ages, and
desire to do good with their wealth as long as the world shall last, may have
encouragement from the successful, as well as Pious Examples of their
Predecessors, I shall read to you (as the Custom is) the following account of
the upright and prudent Management of all those public foundations which are
under the care and Government of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of
this Great and Ancient City for the year last past.

A True Report of the great Number of Poor Children, etc.
FRom which Report I shall observe these Two Things only.

First, That Christ's Hospital was not in condition to receive any one Child
this last year into their House; partly, by reason of those great Debts they
still labor under; and partly, by reason of their having taken in so many the
year before that. Secondly, That the Governors of St. Thomas Hospital,
notwithstanding their present necessary, and very chargeable Expense in
Building, have not one bed less in that house, than were before; nor have
denied any one Person who came for Cure, when there was a Vacancy; And that the
Number of those who have been there Cured this year last past exceeds that of
any former year whatever.
So that Generous and well-disposed minds, have here also, as well as among
those great numbers of Poor, who stand in need of present relief, fit objects
for a Magnificent and Over flowing Bounty.

To Conclude all; Let every one of us in the fear of God, and as we tender the
welfare of our own Immortal Souls, take due care to be rightly informed of the
necessity of this Great and Fundamental Duty, and the indispensable obligation
we have thereto, in our measure and capacity. Let us frequently reflect upon
our own Conduct, and consider how we shall be able to Answer our Judge when he
shall proceed to give Sentence upon us, according to our demeanor in relation
to his distressed Members: And in order hereto, let us deeply fix, and often
revolve in our minds these Avowed Maxims of Right Reason, and our Holy
Religion, as so many irresistible motives to do good, and to Communicate.

That the time we have to spend in this World is but a Moment, an indivisible
Point, and next to Nothing, in proportion to that Eternity we are all made for,
and are hastening to apace. That consequently hereto, it is the first, and most
pernicious Error, ((...)) that which leads to all the mistakes and sins Men
commit here, viz.

That they look upon this short span of Frail Mortal Life, (which is but their
first step and entrance into being) as their All, that for which they were
wholly made, and so their Great and Only Concern, Affair, and Business; and do
live, and govern themselves, by this most false and most destructive Principle.

Whereas the Main thing Christ teaches us, is to manage this present Life only
in order to the next; and to esteem nothing to be of any great consequence to
us, but what may secure and promote our Happiness in that endless State which
is before us; and to look upon all things, as mean, low, and scarce worth our
Consideration, which have no tendency to this our Master-design, viz. To be for
ever Happy in the presence and enjoyment of that Sovereign Good, for which we
were made. That every Man is truly Valuable, only as God Values him. Tantus est
quisque quantus apud Deum. That he only is Great indeed, who is Great in the
sight of the Lord, Luk 1.15. who is Holy and Pious, Just and Merciful, who
Loves and Honors God above all things, and makes his Will and Law the Rule of
his Life and Actions.

That nothing is more Reasonable in it self, nothing more agreeable to Humane
Nature, (whence Humanity, which imports all obliging kindness, has its Name)
than that we should assist and relieve others, made in the same Image, and
after the same Likeness of God, our common Father; and who are of his Family
and Household, and his Children, as well as we are, with that overplus which God
bestows upon us for this very end.

That if we do not this in a good proportion to our Abilities, we are
unfaithful Stewards of our Lords Estate; and it will fare accordingly with us
at that great and universal Audit.

That this Duty of Brotherly Love and Beneficence, is more earnestly commanded,
and more frequently insisted upon in the H. Scriptures than any other.

That it is the most natural and irrefragable Proof of our Love to God, and our
Gratitude to our Lord and Savior Christ; and a peculiar Mark of our Election
to Eternal Life, and of our being Gods Children indeed, Col. 3.12.

That want of Bowels of Compassion to our needy Brother, is a demonstration,
That the love of God dwells not in us, 1 John 3.17. And consequently, that all
pretense to Religion and Piety, is Vain, False and Hypocritical, without a
competent Love to, and Practice of this Grace and Virtue, Jam. 1.27.

That doing a great deal of good to others, is the nearest approach which we
can make to the Divine Nature, and Gods imitable perfections; whom we do herein
chiefly resemble.

That it is only such an outrageous, criminal love of the World, as is wholly
incompetible with the love of God, which makes Rich Men such slaves to their
Money; or to such fancied necessities of maintaining their Port, and outward
State and Quality at such an height, and so much to the prejudice of the Poor,
that they are able to return to God, by his Receivers, so little of what he
has entrusted them with: But our Lord gives us no reason to believe, that such
vain ill founded Pleas will avail men any thing at his just Tribunal.

They are only those inordinate desires, and undue gratifications of the senses
of the Body, or vices of the Mind, viz. Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, which
exhaust that Treasure that should be laid up in Heaven, i. e. laid out in
Works of Piety, and Mercy. So that in Conclusion, nothing but Brutish
stupidity, or sensuality; or the improvident thoughtfulness of a Child, or of
an Idiot; or the Pride or Malignity of an Apostate Spirit, can wholly
extinguish the care, and destroy the practice of Beneficence and Charity. For
the poor Covetous wretch is a proud of his large scope of Ground, or his great
Heap of Gold, as the Haughty, Insolent, Ambitious Man is of his Place or Title,
(which perhaps his Wealth purchased him, or his Ancestor) or the Prodigal is,
of his intemperate Luxurious Feasts; or the Vain, Empty and Gay Man is, of the
Fine Show and Figure he thinks he makes in Dress or Equipage. It Is only, I say,
that Spirit and Air of the World which Christianity obliges us to Mortify; that
World, to which we ought to be Crucified, or Dead to, which drowns its Children
in foolish and hurtful Lusts, in forgetfulness of God, of themselves, and of
their Necessitous Brethren; and afterward, through gross neglect of this Duty,
in final perdition and destruction.

That Almsgiving, is Trading with Heaven; that it is the highest improvement,
and best advantage Rich Men can possibly make of their Wealth; and withal a
sure way never to lose any part of it. This is the nature of Riches, says St.
Basil, that if you give it liberally to the indigent, you have it still; it is
your own for ever: If you keep it all to your self, you have it not; to be sure
you cannot have it long, and you will for every repent that you had it at all.
Charity alone can turn this Fading, Perishing Wealth into the true Riches; it
will entitle us to all those Favors and Graces God here bestows upon his
dearest Children, and to that Everlasting Happiness which he reserves for their
Portion in the next World. Since Christ owns what is done to his poor Brethren,
as done to Himself, and will accordingly Reward it in His Heavenly Kingdom.

And that Christ will at the last day (of which we cannot be too often
reminded) have such an especial particular regard to this most important Duty;
and will proceed upon it as one, if not the Main Article, of his enquiry into
our Lives; and that our Final Doom, our Happy or Miserable Estate to all
Eternity, will in so very great measure depend, and turn upon the account we
shall be able to give of our selves with relation hereto.

In a word, Let us consider seriously and often, that Beneficence and Charity,
is the most Natural and Reasonable; The most Commanded; The most Indispensable;
The most Noble; The most Delightful; The most Advantageous; The most Christian:
Nay, the most Divine and God like Grace and Virtue.

And let us all from the Cogency of so many Reasons, out of Love to our Good
God, and our Lord, and Savior Christ; to our Neighbors, and to our own
Immortal Souls, so make it our Care and Study, and Business, to Assist and
Comfort, and Relieve our Blessed Lord in those Poor Needy Persons, who are both
his, and our Brethren; that we also may with them be made Heirs of that Kingdom
God has prepared for all His Children, for all truly Pious, all truly
Charitable and Merciful Men.

To which, God of his Mercy bring us all, through Jesus Christ our Lord; To whom,
etc.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for B. Aylmer.
Forty Two Sermons and Discourses upon several occasions, most at Court; in
Four Volumes, 8 vo.

The Rule of Faith: Or an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. Sergeant, 8 vo.

Six Sermons concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our Blessed Savior: Of
the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ; and of the Unity of the Divine Nature
and the Blessed Trinity; against the Socinians, 8 vo.

Six Sermons (newly Printed): One concerning Resolution and Stedfastness in
Religion; One of Family-Religion; Three of Education of Children; and One of
the Advantages of an Early Piety, in 8 vo. price 3 s. and also in 120. price
bound. 18 d.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, 8 vo.
alone Stitcht price 3 d. or in 120. bound, price 6 d.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation, 8 vo. alone Stitcht price 3 d. All
Published by his Grace, John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Works of the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and Published by his Grace, John Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury; in
Four Volumes in Folio.

A Demonstration of the Messiah, in which the Truth of the Christian Religion
is proved, especially against the Jews.

A Charge of Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, to the Clergy of his
Diocese.

A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor on Easter-Tuesday, on April the 21.
being a Spittle-Sermon. As also Three single Sermons on several occasions. Writ
by Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

A Discourse of the great Disingenuity and Unreasonableness of Repining at
Afflicting Providence; and of the Influence which they ought to have upon us:
On Job. 2.10. Published upon occasion of the Death of our Gracious Sovereign,
Queen MARY, of most Blessed Memory; with a Preface containing some Observations
touching Her Excellent Endowments, and Exemplary Life.

Certain Propositions by which the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity is so
explained, according to the Ancient Fathers, as to speak it not Contradictory
to Natural Reason: Together with a Defense of them, in Answer to the Objections
of a Socinian Writer, in his newly Printed Considerations on the Explications
of the Doctrine of the Trinity; Occasioned by these Propositions among other
Discourses.

A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor, on Easter-Wednesday. As also Three
single Sermons on several occasions: Writ by Edward Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament, and the New, with Annotations
and Parallel Scriptures; to which is Annexed the Harmony of the Gospels: As
also the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to our English
Standard, and a Table of the Promises in Scripture; by Samuel Clark; Printed in
Folio of a very Fair Letter, the like never before, in one Volume.


