Dr. MANNYNGHAM's SERMON Preached at the PARISH CHURCH OF St. ANDREWS HOLBORN.

A SERMON Preached at the PARISH CHURCH OF St. ANDREWS HOLBORN, The 30th of
December, 1694.

ON THE Most Lamented DEATH of our most Gracious Sovereign Queen Mary.

By THO. MANNYNGHAM D.D. Rector of St. Andrew Holborn, and Chaplain in Ordinary
to His MAJESTY.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith and Benj. Walford at the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard; and Eliz. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1695.

TO THE READER.
I Had not published This Sermon, but that I saw Great Leaders before me; and
that it was not possible, when others had broke the way, for me to stand any
longer to my own Judgment in this Matter, without giving some Offense to many
Excellent Persons, who by their Piety and Friendship have great Authority over
me.

I am conscious of the many Defects of This Discourse, which was the Production
only of some few hours; which was written with such a Concern, as would not
allow of much Ornament, and which cost me more Tears, than Invention.

I am also sensible that I have given you here but a very imperfect View of but
some of the many Virtues of our most Dear and Sovereign Queen departed. For
having confined my self in a manner to my own Knowledge and Observation of Her,
I did not take Compass enough to bring in half Her Worth: this forced me to
neglect a main part of her Princely Character, and to speak of Her rather as a
most Pious Lady, than as a most Noble and Illustrious Queen.

However, there is some Advantage in this my low performance, that, that part
of Her Example which you may read in this Sermon, seems most capable of a
General Imitation: which, I assure you, was the chief Aim of this present
Discourse; which, after some Retirement, comes now abroad in the Habit of a
True Mourner, without much Dress or care of Periods; without Flattery, or mean
Designs; without hopes of Applause, or fear of Censure; those little things,
which Sorrow always disregards.

Receive it therefore as it is, a Composure Plain and Serious, and in its
Circumstances, I hope, not Undecent. A Composure, which has nothing to
recommend it, but the Great and Dear Subject of which it Treats, the deep and
sincere Grief of Him who made it, and the many unfeigned Tears of those who
Heard it,

Chapter the VIIIth of the Prophet A MOS, Verse the Ninth, and part of the
Tenth. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord, that I will cause
the Sun to go down at Noon, and I will Darken the Earth in the clear Day.
And I will turn your Feasts into Mourning.
IT would have been proper on this Day, to have entertained you with some
further Enlargements, on the Wonderful Wisdom and Mercy of God, in sending His
own Son into the World, to Complete the Work of our Redemption: from thence, to
have raised your Minds into a joyful Frame, and a becoming Cheerfulness; and to
have laid down some such Rules, as might make your Rejoycings sober and pious,
Moderate and Christian, and suitable to the Mercy, which at this Time, we
Commemorate.

But, als! there is a sad Occasion, which has given a new Turn to our Thoughts,
a sufficient Temper and Solemnity to all our Joys, and has made it seasonable
for me to change my Subject, and to turn my Song into Lamentations.

And it shall come to pass in that Day, says the Lord, etc.
The Prophet here expresses the Greatness, Suddenness, and Unexpectedness of
the Calamities that were coming on the Jews, by Phrases and Similitudes which
are most significant, and apt, both to imprint, and to declare great
Consternation of Mind: For thus he signifies, that God would bring such sudden
Troubles upon them, as should cause as much Terror and Affrightment, as if they
really saw the Sun go down at Noon, and the clearest part of the day
immediately expire into thick and horrid Darkness: or as if in the midst of
their greatest Jollities, and Festival Delights, some should hear of the sudden
Death, of their only Children, and others, of their Dearest Friends.

Now something that comes very near to this most dismal Representation, has
indeed happened to us of this Kingdom: for we have suddenly lost such a Pattern
of Virtue, as did truly shine amongst us in a Meridian Luster; we beheld our
Queen with cheerful Eyes, as She appeared in the very Beauty of Holiness,
rejoicing to run Her Course of pious Duties: and when we expected nothing but a
long and clear Day of Light and good Example; behold! Darkness has overspread
us, all Faces gather Blackness, and our Greatest Festival is turned into a
Season of Mourning!

Now that it may appear, that our sudden loss of so Excellent a Queen, in the
prime of Her years, and in the full brightness of Her Virtues, may very well be
compared to the Sun's going down at Noon, or to the Earth's being Darkened in
the midst of a clear Day; I will endeavor to set before you something of Her
Character, and then consider what reason we have to Mourn, and what is the best
use we are to make of such Dispensations.

As to Her Character, I shall not much meddle with the Reports and Relations of
others; because I think I am able to delineate some very Considerable Branches
of it, from my own Knowledge and Observation: And therein I shall confine my
self to these Three things:

I. I shall Contemplate Her, in the peculiar Sweetness of Her Temper. II. In
Her Continual Concern for, and Encouragement of, the True Religion established
amongst us. III. In the Constant Practice of Her own Devotion.
I. I shall Contemplate Her, in the peculiar Sweetness of Her Temper.

We are apt to think, That Sweetness of Temper, is the Ordinary Constitution of
Princes, and great Persons: that it naturally arises from a Generous Blood, a
Noble Education, Obsequious Attendance, and the easy Accommodations of Life:
but all these are no other than Contingent Causes, and do oftentimes produce
quite contrary Effects; as Pride, Haughtiness, and Cruelty, and such nice and
fastidious Humors, as few can comply with, and none can please.

A Sweet Natural Temper is certainly a great blessing from whatsoever it
arises; but there must be care taken to polish and improve it, or it will not
hold good long; it is very apt to turn into Slothfulness or a Sensual Ease; so
that Virtue alone can give it stability, and a lasting shine. It is the most
proper Soil for Christianity to grow in, and then it has this advantage, that
it receives a New Richness from the very Fruit it bears. It is likewise That,
which best sets off, and recommends a Virtuous Life to others; for who can
resist the Counsels of Wisdom, when they are insinuated by all the Charms of
Love and Good Nature!

Now a peculiar Sweetness of Disposition is ever expected from those who are
Eminently pious; for they are Nobly Descended indeed, being in an especial
manner Born of God; They are Educated under the Highest Institution, the
Dictates and Government of the Holy Spirit, That Spirit of Gentleness,
Meekness, and Love: and thereby their Souls are enlarged into the most generous
Designs of Humanity and Public Good.

And such was the Temper of our most Excellent Queen; a Natural Sweetness of
Mind, heightened by good Principles, and a pious Education, perfected and
brightned by a Constant Exercise in the Duties of Religion.

This made all Her Carriage Gracious, Her Intentions most Sincere, Her
Conversation most Lovely: All who saw Her at a Distance read Kindness in Her
Looks, and all who attended on Her, found its Real effects. She had all that
Majesty, which was needful, Tempered with that Mildness, which made it more
Becoming: She knew not how to maintain a sullen Grandeur among those whom She
ever esteemed more Her Friends, than Her Subjects; and they who censured Her as
too Familiar in Her Conversation for a Queen, may well pardon Her
Condescension, when they consider, that in all Her sweet Behavior, She
endeavored to show that She was Akin to our Nation. Besides, She had spent some
part of Her days in a Country, where it is not the fashion for the Highest
Persons to affect much Distance; but where they choose to Converse more upon a
Level, with more Freedom and Equality, than is usual in the Courts of
Monarchies: and by this Obliging Civility of Hers, She won the Hearts of all
the Considerable Families in the Provinces, and was almost Adored by the Common
People: And had there not been some unhappy Differences in this Kingdom about
her way of Coming to the Throne, which made some People study to be peevish and
censorious, She had been Universally Admired, and would have wanted nothing but
a longer Reign, to have equaled Her, with the most Celebrated of all our
Queens.

Which will further appear, if in the IId place, we consider Her in Her
continual Concern for, and Encouragement of the True Religion established
amongst us.

Her Zeal for the good of the Church, and Her right Sense and Judgment in
Matters of Religion, were so well known to all the Clergy who were about Her,
that She was the very Joy of their Hearts, the Encourager of their Studies, and
their continual Support under all the Reproaches of the Wicked.

She stored Herself with the best choice of good Books written in the way of
Practical Divinity, read them often in Her Retirement, and made them part of
Her Entertainment when She sat at work with Her Maids of Honor; where there
was constant Reading of Good Books, either of History or Divinity, which they
undertook by turns, one always Reading aloud to the rest; and this they did to
carry on a Constant Improvement, to supply their Thoughts with useful Knowledge
or Meditation, and to prevent all unprofitable Discourse.

Now this is a Pattern for all our Ladies to imitate, that they may be able to
give a good account of that Time and Leisure, which their plentiful Fortunes,
and their fairer circumstances of Life allow them: that thereby they may shut
out many Temptations to which they are otherwise most exposed, furnish their
Minds with the best Arguments of Discourse, raise their Conversation into more
degrees of Wisdom, and exchange their Censoriousness of others for a more
frequent Examination of themselves.

It Is to the Queen that we owe many of those Pious Treatises which have been
lately Published amongst us: And that multitude of plain, useful, and Practical
Sermons, which She approved of, and caused to be Printed, are Her Gift to the
Public.

It is hardly to be expressed, with what Delight She came to Her Chapel; what
Attention She gave to the Preacher, and what an Example of Seriousness She was,
during the whole Service of the Church.

She stirred up such an Holy Emulation in all who appeared before Her in the
Pulpit, that it is judiciously concluded by many, that there was no such
Preaching in the whole World besides, as at Whtie-Hall; and never such in
England before.

I do not think that any of Her Sex, (and truly but few of ours) were able to
make a better Judgment of those Performances: She never was affected with fine
sayings, and flowers of Rhetoric; with angry Controversy, or Spiritual
Railing; but where there was sound Divinity, solid Sense, good Rules and
Directions, plain Matter, an Useful Subject, and a vein of Holiness that ran
throughout; there Her Approbation was sure to follow; there She commended; and
there, when seasonable, She placed Her Preferments.

Her Heart was wholly set upon Goodness; and all who were Her Favorites, came
to that Honor under the Character of Good and Pious. We may soon know where
Her Heart was, if in the

IIId place, we contemplate Her in the constant practice of Her own Devotion.

Devotion is usually looked upon as the softest and most delicate exercise of
Religion; where the Affections may have an innocent Enlargement; and the Soul
may safely display it self in all the Ardours of Divine Love.

Upon this account all pious Ladies have laid an especially claim to Devotion,
as their peculiar Province: and though they have yielded to Men in other parts of
Religion, where greater strength of Reasoning is required; yet in this more
Affectionate part, they have always studied, or pretended to Excel.

Let this be granted: But then consider again, how common and how dangerous the
Miscarriages are in those warmer Elevations of the Soul; where the Affections,
which are so apt to Inflame, are most unfit to Guide? for how easy is the
passage from earnest Devotion, to Heats of Enthusiasm, or to weaknesses of
Superstition? How ready are the Humors of the Body to mingle with the Fervours
of the Mind, and to Taint the Sacrifie? nay, how often are the Zealous deceived
with false ways of Worship? and having a strange Impetus of Praying upon them,
are Directing it to every Object, that an Idolatrous Custom shall set before
them? and lastly, How often does it happen, that they, who are most eager in
Raising their Affections in their Closets, do make sad work with their Passions
in their Families, a long time after? Whereas I can say this for the Queen's
Devotion, that it was the most Judicious, the best Tempered, and the most
Constant, that I ever observed in any of Her Sex.

She addressed Her self to God in a most Humble and Aweful Manner, without any
Affectation of odd Motions, Gestures, or Voice: She usually covered Her Face to
keep Her Attention fixed, and to prevent the Wandering of Her Thoughts: She
always seemed to be deeply affected with a due sense of the Divine Majesty, and
of the great Duty She was about: but being of a very Even Temper, She was not
subject to much Transport on one hand, or to much coldness on the other; but
seemed to keep up an Equal Concern, a Continual fire in Her Heart without much
Flame, from the beginning to the end of Her Devotion. In which, Her Constancy,
was very remarkable, which I am sure is the best sign of a solid piety:
whatever Business She had, (which was oftentimes very pressing and weighty in
the absence of the King) She would never miss Her solemn prayers: and if upon
the account of some necessary avocations She found the time would be
unseasonable for Her Chaplains to attend; (such was Her Goodness and
Condescension to the meanest of Her Servants) She would dismiss them; and have
prayers said in Her own Chamber by the Clerk of Her Closet, who was always
ready to assist Her Devotion.

She never missed to Communicate every Month in Her Chapel; and Her preparation
was generally entered upon with some strictness almost a Week before: and those
Innocent Diversions, which Her Station called for, and the Expectation of the
Court required, and some joyful Occasions made seasonable; She always, as far
as lay in Her power, so ordered and contrived; that they might be at the
greatest distance from Her more serious times; and give the least disturbance
to the Devotional frame of Her Soul.

Thus She kept up a Continual Intercourse with Heaven; Her Lamp was always
Burning, always Bright; and She had but little to do when God was pleased to
Confine Her to Her Bed of Sickness: Resignation and Submission was Her whole
Duty then, and with that She meekly complied.

When the Art and Skill of the Physicians failed, and Her Death might be easily
read in the Concern of all who were about Her; She alone was not surpised; She
had a God at hand whom She had faithfully served; and She was well prepared to
commit Her Spirit to him, and to resign Her Earthly Throne, for a share in the
Everlasting Kingdom.

Thus She has had but a short Reign amongst us, and that mixed with Cares,
attended with some hard Circumstances, being often overclouded with the sad
apprehensions of what might befall Her Royal Husband, who was called from Her
every Summer, by the Necessities of a Foreign War: who has escaped many
Dangers abroad, to meet with something more Terrible at Home: for He, who could
have met His own Death in the field, with the clearest Courage and the firmest
Resolution, could not part with His Dearest Queen, without the Expressions of
that Tenderness of Soul, which only True Conjugal Love Could make, and must
Excuse.

She is gone from us in the midst of Her Age, when we might have expected the
Influence of Her Public piety for many years, and when we most wanted it too.

Thus our Sun went down as at Noon, and our Earth was Darkened in the midst of a
clear Day; and when we had lain in Provisions to make this Season cheerful, our
Feasts were suddenly turned into Mourning.

As to the Pious and Charitable Actions usual at this Time, no Afflictions can
make Them unseasonable; they rather call for more of such good actions; but as
to the Feasting and Triffling part, that seems the less proper, under so Great
and so Public a loss.

We have now in the space of a Month or thereabouts, been bereaved of Two of
the greatest Encouragers of Solid Piety in their several ways, that this Age
has for a long time produced! and what Serious Christians can be fond of life,
when so much Goodness and Virtue are departed from us, and so much Iniquity
abounds? For how do the Men of Natural parts favor Atheism, or the Blasphemies
of Socinus? How do multitudes of the young of both Sexes give themselves up to
all manner of Uncleanness! How Intemperate and Riotous are some! How Worldly
and Covetous are others! How Factious and Malicious are many, who pass for
sober People! How few are Truly Devout, Lovers of God, and of Wisdom, acted
with a Spirit of Zeal and Discretion?

When God Almighty makes up His Jewels in haste, and takes away His Chosen
Vessels so suddenly; it is a Terrible sign, that He intends to bring some great
Evil upon us: for when such Supports are removed, what shall hinder the
Overflowings of Ungodliness? and when once a Torrent of Sin breaks in upon us,
it will be soon followed by a Deluge of Judgments.

The Best use we can make of such severe Dispensations, is to turn immediately
from our Sins; to betake our selves to the Strong holds of Religion; to Imitate
the Virtues of those, whose Departure we deplore; and to admire God, and Adore
Him in all His proceedings.

We were certainly most Happy in a Queen, who was an Ornament and Blessing to
this Kingdom: who made such a step to save a Sinking Nation, as Her Tenderness
shrunk from, but Her Wisdom and Conscience saw Necessary to make: And though She
has been Censured in the opinion of some, whose Judgments have been swayed,
either by a False pity, or by Mistaken principles of Government; yet all who
could consider wisely, did not only acquit, but applaud Her; and all who Truly
favored Virtue, and truly Knew Her, Loved Her.

If She had any Real Enemies, they were the Wicked and the Profane, whom She
would never Countenance, however Powerful and Great: and it is no wonder, if
they, who dare to Blaspheme even God Himself, The Fountain of all Goodness;
should likewise endeavor to Defame the Best Created Loveliness: who was Kind
to all, who had any Merit, and not willing to offend those who had None; who
endeavored to make all about Her as Virtuous, and thereby as Lovely as Her
self; and who was always ready to place Her Distinguishing favors, where God
had given any singular Grace.

I find I am entering into Her Character again: But though it be a most Engaging
Theme, I must now try to refrain.

Perhaps I may be thought too forward in meddling at all with so Great a
Subject, but truly, I was of opinion, that any other at this Time, would hardly
have gone down; and that the Public Concern had indisposed my Auditory for any
Common Discourse: I was also persuaded, that I might recommend Piety with some
advantage to you, under so Eminent, and so Affecting an Example.

I have now another Consideration to lay before you, which is a General
Contribution, to Be gathered from your respective Dwellings, for the present
Relief of the Poor; recommended to us by Royal Authority: where our King not
only calls upon us to be Charitable, but goes before us in this Duty, and sets
a Pattern for us to follow.

You are Exhorted to Relieve those who are of the same Household of Faith, who
live in the same City with you, who are Distinguished from you only by their
Misery: who suffer, not for want of Industry, but by reason of a Deadness of
Trade; and whose Poverty, is not their Sin, but their Calamity.

It must be confessed, that Incharitableness, as it relates to the relieving of
the Distressed, is none of our National Sins: for our Nation has been made a
Sanctuary for Exiles, and we have largely contributed to the Support of our
persecuted Brethren, who have fled to us from all Quarters: But that should not
hinder us from being Kind to our own Poor; even they suffer for their Religion
too, though they keep their Dwellings: for whilst we labor under a necessity of
War, there are many hardships and losses, which must necessarily fall heavy
upon many particular Families: but whilst we are able to lessen the Afflictions
of others by an easy Contribution, let us not be backward in Well-doing.

There is some hope, that God will still Support us under all our Calamities,
because there is so much of the true Spirit of Christian Charity remaining
still amongst us: but if this Fountain should once dry up, I fear, we should
scarce have any other Public Virtue left, to plead our Cause with God.

He therefore, who has an Abundance, let him give plentifully; He who has but
little, let him give without distrust, or fear of wanting; for the Especial
Providence of God will not fail to make a suitable return.

Complain not of the Difficulty of the Times, when God allows you many
Enjoyments, and Means of making others happy: Neither be you tired with the
frequency of such occasions as this; for they present you with the best
opportunities of Glorifying God, and will give you a mighty support, when ever
your Day of Calamity comes.

I am sure, our late Gracious Queen gave Her self a Constant employment and
exercise in this Duty: it was Her delight and contrivance how She might spare,
and lay by for Charitable uses. All Her prudent Managements had an Eye to this
Virtue; and she brought a Decent Frugality into fashion among the Chief of Her
Honorable Attendants; who in Imitation of Her, so proportioned their Expenses,
that they might always have a certain Fund for Charity.

When ever any real Necessitious Condition was truly represented at Court, it
seldom failed of some Relief: nay, it was a Common thing, for the Ladies who
were about the Queen, to Contribute freely themselves upon any such just
occasion, and amongst them to make a Purse for distressed Persons: of such
general Influence, is a Great Example! and so largely Beneficial, is a Good one.

Now since God has been pleased to Turn our Feastings into Mourning; let us
turn some part of our Hospitality into acts of Charity: and let us Honor the
Memory of our Dear Departed Queen, by an Immediate Imitation of Her Example in
this particular; and by a present, and cheerful exercise of that Virtue, which
She always practiced and loved: That when God shall please to call us out of
this World, we also may be found Doing of Good, and be received into that Joy
of our Lord and Master, of which all his Good and Faithful Servants shall
partake.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be all Honor,
Glory, Power, Praise and Thanksgiving, now and for evermore. Amen.
FINIS.

