PSALM. LXXIX. v. 8. O Remember not against us former Iniquities! or the
Iniqities of them that were before us!


THE repeated Practices of Rebellion in this our Land, and our continual dread
of Imminent Judgments, do add a new Seasonableness to this days Humiliation.
And let us add a new vigor to our Intercedings with the Almighty, to prevent
those Punishments which we so highly deserve.

For we are this day met to bewail the greatest National sin, except that which
the Jews committed in Crucifying the Lord of Life. A sin which has made us a
Scandal and a Proverb of Reproach to other Kingdoms, a miserable and divided
people within our selves, and a dreadful Theater of the continual Judgments of
God.

There was doubtless a general corruption of Life and Manners that disposed
this Nation to enter into such horrid Counsels, and to engage in such furious
attempts: Luxury, Wantonness, neglect of Religion and wise Discipline, first
forfeited the protection of Providence, and then God delivered up an infatuated
people to their own Passions and false Zeals, and let them follow their own
Imaginations.

It is indeed to no good purpose (at least in this place) to lay the whole
Guilt upon any particular Party amongst us: That may be the business of an
Historian, but not of a Divine: That may serve to awaken Governors, but will
not contribute toward the atonement of our God: That may give Men Rules of
worldly Policy, but will never work in us a true and Spiritul Compunction.

Sharp and eager Reflections may promote Revenge and Malice, but will hardly
produce a general Humiliation and Repentance. Whatever Designs our Adversaries
formed, we may be sure it was our Sins that gave them their Success.

The Tragedy is acted, the Murder completed, the anger of the Almighty is
provoked, the Nation has sinned, and the Nation must repent; or else there is
nothing but a fearful looking for of swift and final Destruction. But O!
Remember not against us, former Iniquities!

It is not requisite at this time to engage in any exact method of Discourse,
the Subject of this days Meditation being somewhat too big for the common Rules
of Art: It Is the property of great Passions to know but little Order.

The sudden effusions of a pious and Loyal Heart, with some general remarks on
the more fatal Springs and Principles of Faction and Rebellion, are more
suitable to this Solemnity, than the smoother compositions of a mind at leisure.

Let such as please, study to be Elegant under the Indignation of God, and the
Infamy of a Kingdom; all that I shall at present attempt, shall be only to
manifest an humble and an Holy concern in every period I pronounce.

The English Nation had been long held in singular repute for their Noble,
their Good-natured, and Loyal Courage; and not only the Neighboring Kingdoms,
but the remoter parts of the Earth, had been Witnesses of their unalterable
Affection to their Kings, whom they cheerfully followed in their Expeditions,
with constant and unwearied Duty.

But the abomination of this day has almost silenced all our former Praise; and
the stain of this days Murder has cast a blemish on our ancient Glory.

How must we blush to think that it shall be always read in story, How that
English men stood round a Scaffold with their Muskets and Javelins to guard and
forward the Murder of their own King.

Surely the strangeness of the Fact will make men suspect the truth of the
History, they will abhor the Record that shows them such a Villainy! But yet
does not this days Assembly, does not this present Generation too truly attest
it? but can they, can all Posterity atone for it?

The favor of Providence, and the Honor of our Country, which we have lost by
our Rebellions, we must recover by our Humiliations: The Victories of the Field
must be turned into the Repentances of the Temple; and the active Nobleness of
Exploits, into meekness and sufferings for Truth and Holiness, if ever we
expect that the Lord should forget the Iniquity of this day.

Pontius Pilate, willing to give some check to the importunate malice of the
Jews, who so tumultuously demanded the Crucifixion of our Lord and Savior, put
this harsh and dishonorable Question to them; Shall I Crucify your King? He
cannot be crucified, but your Name also must be crucified with him, in the
Superscription of his Titles; for he shall be crucified the King of the Jews.

So might it this day have been put to the English Rebels, Will you murder your
King? the Father of your Country, the Vicegerent of God, the Fountain of
Justice, the preserver of your Laws, and the Guardian of your public Peace and
Order? Will you murder your own most just and ^^^^al King? so Wise, so Meek, so
Pious, and so Devout a King? whom Providence and Succ^^sion, your own Laws, and
your Cons^n^^ have established in the Throne, and of which his own Virtues had
made him (...) worthy? Will you murder that King who has parted with so much of
his Prerogative for your satisfaction? who has delivered up a most able
Counselor to your importunate and unjust Petitions, and wounded his Conscience
for your peace and safety? who has undergone the rudeness of your Victories,
your Prisons, and your Mockeries of Justice, with the same mildness and
constancy which he showed in the fullness of his Empire! who has given up every
thing to your implacable demands, but your truest Liberties, your Laws and
Rights, and your established Worship?

But it is too late now to ask the Question, and I shall forbear to continue the
Figure any longer. They have acted the Crime; they have brought an Eternal
Infamy upon the Nation, an indelible blot upon Religion, and I fear an
Hereditary Curse upon this miserable Land.

But why should those be concerned in the trouble and confusion of this day,
who had no share in the guilt of it? for are there not many now living who may
justly boast of their extraordinary service to that Excellent Prince, and of
the honor they had of suffering with him? And were not many of us unborn when
this accursed thing was committed? Yet however this was most properly a
National Guilt, because so many of all Orders, Ranks, and Callings amongst us
were engaged in that Rebellion which brought forth this execrable Fact; and in
sins of this nature the Children must either inherit the Curse, or atone for
the Iniquities of their Fathers.

None of us, how innocent soever, either in our own actions, or those of our
progenitors; None of us, though never so Loyal, either in our Principles or our
Parentage, are above the reach of this days amazement, are beyond the necessity
of this days Humiliation: For public sins, of such example, such scandal and
contagion as this, like the first Rebellion of Man, remain a debt upon
Posterity, and involve more in their unhappy consequences, than the immediate
Instruments themselves, or the Offspring of those who first acted them: For
when God upon such a provocation as this, comes to reckon with a Kingdom, who
can escape the terrible Visitation, who can abide the Almighty Wrath?

They were but few in comparison with the whole Body of the Jewish Nation, that
were immediately concerned in putting our Blessed Savior to death; they were
not many, perhaps only a mercenary Rabble, who petitioned for his Crucifixion,
and undertook to answer all the Appeals of his Blood at their own and their
Childrens peril: Yet when the time of their Visitation came (which was not till
Forty years after the killing of their King, when perhaps most of his Murderers
were dead and rotten) every Age, Sex, and Family that were in Jerusalem, shared
alike in the common Calamity; the Famine, the Pestilence, and the Swords of the
Romans had no commission to distinguish.

When the Divine Vengeance for the Blood of our Martyr will more signally break
out, we know not; and we beseech the infinite Mercy it may never. Our Forty
years have not yet expired, neither have the Romans as yet prevailed against
us, or the Inundation of Sects overwhelmed us: How soon they may, he alone can
tell, who alone can hinder; we have no better security left us, than strong
Cries, deep Repentance, passionate Deprecations, O remember not against us
former iniquities!

But are we fit persons to intercede? are we fit to stand in the gap, to turn
away the anger of the Lord, and to stop the destroying Angel? Do not our
continued provocations, our daily repeated personal sins call for new
Indignation on us? What atonement therefore can we make, or wherewithal shall
we come before the Lord? Can Intemperance satisfy for Hypocrisy, or
Profaneness expiate for Murder? Is Sedition and Rebellion a repenting for the
barbarous outrages of a Civil War, or of this days Crime? Will Oaths, and
Curses, and Blasphemies drown the noise of our crying Sins? Or will the
contempt of the Blood of Christ, be a propitiation for the Blood of the Martyr.

When our late Gracious Sovereign and the Royal Line, were restored by an
extraordinary Providence, by a secret and wonderful hand; was our gratitude
returned to God with that sobriety of Christian Joy as became a redeemed
people? Or were the unquiet Zelots of our Land less obstinate in their
Opinions, more forward to remit their Scruples, or more modest in their
Demands? And have we not already undergone some remarkable instances of Gods
displeasure for the Murder of our King, and the Profanation of his restoring
Mercy? such as a Foreign War, a raging Pestilence, a dreadful Fire, and an
actual Rebellion.

As the Jews were wont to say, that in every Calamity that befell them, there
was an ounce of the Golden Calf in it, of that shameful and Idolatrous revolt;
so may we also affirm, that in every Judgment that o'retakes us, there is an
ounce of the Blood of the Martyr in it: or else why are we like that stubborn
Generation, such a forlorn people, as to be Hardened under every Calamity, and
to turn our most signal Mercies into the greatest Provocations? Why are we
continually murmuring, often Plotting, sometimes Rebelling! Why do we show so
little remorse for our present, for our former Iniquities; for the Iniquities
of this day?

The Lord does often defer and put off the extremity of Temporal Judgments, to
see if the next Generation will amend; but if they go on in the same ways, if
they follow their Fathers steps, imitate their bad Examples, and revive their
sins, then he executes his Vengeance for both together; and most justly
punishes a people for Offenses committed many years ago, because they renew
them, because they act them over again, against greater conviction, and with
more obstinacy and malice; as all must do, who continue Schismatical in the
Church, or Factious in the State, after so great a light and knowledge of Truth
and Duty, and having had so long a time, so merciful a season to understand and
to amend their Errors.

There were three things that were more especially active and fatal in our late
Distractions, concerning which some did wilfully mistake, though others were
undoubtedly deluded.

They were Popery, Zeal, and the extent of Subjection.

The notions of these were strangely disguised both in men's Writings and
Apprehensions, the effects of these most violent and impious: But since our
Restoration and settlement, since men's Spirits have been in some disposition
and capacity to receive a rational instruction; all these things have been so
plainly declared according to their true nature, so fully stated as to their
measure and extent, so frequently inculcated as to their just and sober use,
that there is left no further pretense for Ignorance or Mistake; that the
Seditious have now no cloak for their Rebellion.

For First in respect to Popery. Men have been seriously advised not to measure
the Protestant Religion by any peevish opposition to the Papists; nor to
account every thing Popery that is practiced in the Church of Rome; but to
allow of such a judicious distinction between them, as Wise men may know what
to Write for, and good men may know what to Die for.

Men have been often told, that our Reformation was no new Religion, but only
a necessary and discreet removal of some intolerable corruptions, and an
establishing of the old Christianity taught us plainly in the Scriptures, and
interpreted, where dubious, by the ancient Fathers.

They have been told, that in the Reforming of this Church, all things were
acted not by way of Anabaptistical Tumult and Rebellion, not out of a spirit of
contradiction and furious Zeal, but by the consultation and authority of the
lawful Powers, and according to the just Liberties of a National Church.

What fiery turbulency did men show against the moderate and perpetual
Episcopacy of this Land, as if it had been the principal abomination of
Antichrist? And yet the voting down of that so dreaded Order was received with
a Triumph at Rome.

What Outcries were there made, and with what confidence was it asserted, that
the chief of our Bishops and Clergy were driving on a Popish Interest, when it
was manifest that they were the greatest, nay the only true Champions against
it?

As for some of the more eminent of them, when they could no longer remain with
any safety in this Kingdom, wherever they traveled they gallantly maintained
the fight against the Subtleties and Corruptions of that Church, and like
Hannibal when he was banished from Carthage, where-e're they came, they justly
raised up Enemies to the Romans.

Thus the renowned Brumhall, Cosins, and Morley, etc. carried the War into the
Enemies Country, were victorious abroad, though contemned at home; defended our
Church against the strength and power of Rome, whilst their Adversaries went
destroying of all Christianity here, by contending with the shadow of Error,
by mistaking the Controversy, by showing great violence, little Learning, no
Arguments. By cherishing those Distractions both in Church and State, which
gave the greatest blow to the Protestant Cause, and the surest advantage to the
Popish Interest, which staggered the Religious, confirmed the Atheist, and made
the Enthusiast mad.

Secondly, As to Zeal: That was made such an Engine of War, that Cromwell
thought it the only Expedient by which he could match the bravery and spirit
of the Kings Cavalry; considering with himself, that the Fury of that Principle
would as much inspire the Multitude, as Honor and Loyalty did the Nobles. This
was his peculiar Policy, and to effect this was his singular Art, and this was
the chief Stratagem by which he prevailed and Ruled; for he was forced to make
the Army purely Phanatick, before he could make it truly serviceable to his
purpose, and entirely His; still supplying it with Zealots of an Old
Testament-Valour, and persuading every Captain, that he was a chosen Jehu to
fight the Battles of the Lord.

Sour Passions, Censoriousness, and Malice; Emulations, Wrath, Strife and
Envyings, were the black Ingredients of their Zeal; whereas the true Zeal of
the Gospel is that which is guided by Prudence, sweetened with Charity, tempered
by Meekness.

False Zeal is the very Gall of bitterness; but that which is true, is the very
Top and Flower of Divine Love: The one rages and Rebels; the other suffers and
Dies: The one calls for Fire from Heaven; the other sends up Incense thither:
The one is factiously busy in reforming of the State; the other is humbly
employed in the due regulation of private Life and Manners.

If men would be truly zealous, let them show it for Holiness and
Righteousness, for Humility, and the decency of Public Worship. Let them show
it against Sacrilege, Perjury, Covetousness, Hypocrisy, Rapine, and gross
Superstition: Not by railing against Ceremonies, censuring the Clergy, cursing
the Papists, moving of Sedition, and encouraging Rebellion; but by brotherly
Admonitions, sound Reasonings, excellent Examples, singular Modesty, due
Reverence, and Attention in our public Assemblies, by Praises, Prayers, and
frequent Communions; by Entreaties, Tears, and solemn Humiliations, by
interceding with the Almighty in strict Fastings, and fervency of Devotion, and
by averting public Judgments by an extraordinary Holiness of Life. This is
the Zeal which is kindled from above, which is first Pure, then Peaceable; the
other is kindled from below and is earthly, sensual, devilish.

Thirdly, The last thing I mentioned, was the extent of Subjection. What was
more tampered with in our late times, than the Doctrine of Obedience? What more
disguised? what Proposition was accounted more contemptible than Subjection for
Conscience sake? Every conceited Politician sent forth his new System of Civil
Government: Every illuminated Brother, his new Models of Christ's Kingdom: every
one was for erecting an Empire for himself, and a Platform wherein his own
Imaginations might rule.

Yet when they had tried all the several kinds and species of disorder,
Government would fall back to its old Form; it could no where rest, but upon
the Basis of ancient Monarchy, and primitive Episcopacy.

Surely the Protectors of our Liberties, and the Reformers of our Religion, had
a most wonderful prospect of a lasting Peace in the State, and a Godly
Discipline in the Church; when the ignorance of the Multitude was guided by the
Crafty, their ungovernable Passions inflamed by the Revengeful, and their
intolerable obstinacy permitted to dictate their own Ecclesiastical Censures.

But now the Essential Properties of Sovereign Power, the Fundamental Laws of
the English Monarchy, the unalterable Right of Succession in this Hereditary
Kingdom, and the just Privileges of the Christian Church, have been so clearly
stated by wise and able heads; that they have left no room for Cavil, no plea
for Ignorance, and no pardon for a malicious Opposition.

More especially the unlawfulness of Resistance in any case, and upon any
pretense whatsoever, either Popish or Phanatick, has been so strongly asserted,
and so fully evidenced through all the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
through the Histories, Examples and Apologies of the Primitive times; by
unanswerable positive Reasons, by a removal of all imaginable Objections, and
by the Convictions of former and late Experience; that no man for the future
can be a Rebel in this Nation, without being either an Hypocrite or an Atheist.

Thus you see with what Conscience, Learning, Endustry and Persuasion, the
Church of England has endeavored to dispel all the mists of former Darkness,
to take away all materials for Sedition, and to make all her Members Religious,
Wise, and Peaceable!

Especially Religious, for the truly Pious will undoubtedly be truly Loyal;
they will find sufficient business with their own Souls, to keep them from a
Factious enquiry into the miscarriages of the State; by studying their own
Infirmities, they will be more tenderly sensible of the Temptations of an
higher station; they will weep and mourn for those defects, which God, when we
deserve it, will amend.

The Lord deliver our most Gracious Sovereign and his good Subjects, from that
corrupt Brood of pretended Loyalists, who blaspheme God, swagger for the King,
curse his Enemies, and damn themselves! This is not Loyalty, but frenzy;
either the voice of Flattery high-fed, or the Ravings of a feavered Valor.

Loyalty is a Virtue as calm as any of the Duties of Religion; It Is Brave,
Modest, and Invincible; it is seated more in the Judgment and Conscience, than
in the Imagination and heat of Blood: It Is the highest degree of Humane
gratitude tempered with great awe and reverence: It Is that which would make a
man Pious, Just, and Sober, were it only to bring down a Blessing on his King,
and on his Nation.

Neither is it a Scheme of Policy in the Brain that will make a
Christian-Statesman; but it is the Oracle of Truth and Righteousness in the
Breast, that will make his Counsel prosper and his Wisdom shine. He alone is
best able to give his Prince a sound Advice, and he alone has the best courage
so to do, who has first begged it himself on his Knees of God: He who has lain
prostrate before the Almighty in Humility and Contrition, is the sit to
stand up against the Torrent of a Faction, or the Insinuations of a slier
Party. That Magistrate who converses most with God, will like Moses, have most
Divine Authority in his looks; he will be the most proper person to stand in
the gap, and to turn away the destroying Angel.

But still give me leave to ask that Humbling Question: Is this Nation likely
to atone for former Iniquities, that is scarce sensible of their daily
Transgressions? What solemn Humiliation can be expected from those who confess
their present sins without Contrition? who pray without Devotion? Who praise
God without Affection? And read the Scriptures without Faith and Obedience?

When our sins have separated between us and our God, and our Iniquities have
hid his Face from us that he will not hear, because our hands are defiled with
Blood; then it is not a melancholy look, the abatement of a Meal, and a formal
attendance on divine Offices, that will break our Cords asunder, and appease an
Almighty Revenger. An extraordinary affliction of Soul can only wash out an
extraordinary guilt.

Is not this the Fast which I have chosen? says the Lord by his Prophet
Isaiah, Chap. 58. v. 6, 7. to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? but
that of Government: Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou
bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? When thou see the naked, that
thou cover him; and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Is it not
to bewail those Divisions which this Church lies under, and those continual
Discontents which disorder this State and Government? Is it not to forsake
those reigning Sins which call down heavy Judgments on us; or which perhaps is
worse, withdraw the Mercy of an afflicting Hand, and make us most unworthy of
them! Is it not to practice that sincere Piety toward God, that religious
Loyalty to our King, that Charity to our Neighbor, that Temperance,
Moderation, and Contentedness toward our selves, as alone can make us the
Objects of Gods pardoning Mercy? Is it not that the Priests of the Lord should
weep between the Porch and the Altar, and with incessant Supplications cry,
Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to reproach? Be not wrath
very sore, O Lord, neither remember this days Iniquity for ever!

Behold, see, we beseech thee; we are all thy people! how long will thou be
angry with thy people that prays? We are that ungrateful Remnant which thou
have made remarkable throughout the world by thy Mercies and thy Judgments!

Thou have rescued us from Superstition and Enthusiasm, and have established
the purest part of thy Religion amongst us! thou have confirmed it to us, not
only by the Blood of its first professors, but by that of a most meek and
glorious King.

Behold, O Lord, see, see, how we are this day united to implore thy Mercy; and
not as once to call down thy wrath and Indignation upon us! we are engaged in
no other Conspiracy now, but that of besieging thy Throne of Grace!

Thou had continually a truly Religious and Loyal people in this Land, who
utterly abhorred the bloody Act of this day, and all the accursed tendencies
toward it! And as for the deluded Multitude, O pardon them Lord, pardon them,
for whom our Savior prayed; for whom our Martyr prayed; O pardon them, because
they knew not what they did!

Though our Calendar is red with this days Action, yet our Chronicle shines
with this days Example: there Meekness, Humility, Patience, Charity and
Constancy set triumphant.

It was the honor of Constantine's Reign, that he was converted to the
Christian Faith. Renowned were those Emperors who afterward protected it by
their wholesome Laws and Edicts: Blessed and thrice blessed were those Princes
who gave Authority to it by their admirable Lives and Examples: But for a King
to fall a Sacrifice for it; to Live in all its active Duties, and Die in all
its passive Graces; this is only to be met with in the English Annals; this is
only to be read in the Protestant Dypticks; this is the peculiar Triumph of
our Church, and the Universal glory of Christianity at large.

Let us therefore deeply Repent for this days sad occasion, and then praise the
Almighty for this days glorious Event! Let our Humiliations wear out the black
guilt of this days Crime, and our Lives copy out the Example of this days
Martyr.

Then may we recover the favor of Heaven, and either cancel all the
commissioned Judgments against us, or improve them into Mercies!

Then may we become an united people in Church and State; a Royal Priesthood,
an holy Nation: then may we spread our Fame to the uttermost parts of the
Earth, and the purity of Christ's Religion with it! then may we remain a
standing Bulwork against the Policy of Rome, and teach some Protestant Churches
a Doctrine which they have not yet completely learnt, The true and Catholic
Subjection to the Sovereign Powers.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for W. Crook.
1. LES Reports du tres Erudite Edmund Saunders Chivalier Nadgairs Seigniour
Chief Justice de Bank le Roy, des diverse Pleadings and Cases in le Court del
Bank le Roy en le temps del Reign sa tres excellent Majesty le Roy Charles le 2d
Avec trois Tables; la primer des Nosmes des Cases la second de les Matters
contein les Pleadings; and le teirce de les principal Matters contein en les
Cases. Fol. in 2 Vol.

2. A new Book of Entries of Declarations and other Pleadings General and
Special in the most usual Action in the Court of Kings Bench. Also a choice
Collection of Special Writs and other Returns; together with Observations in
Pleading, instructing the younger Clerks in the practice of that Court from the
original Manuscripts. By John Hansard Gent. late of Clements Inn. To which is
added Appeals of Murder and Mayheme with variety of Pleadings thereon, the like
not printed before in any Book whatsoever. In Fol.

3. Fleta seu Commentarius Juris Anglicanis sic Nuncupatus sub Edwardo Rege
primo, seu circa Annos etc. subjungitur etiam Joani Seldeni ad Fletam
Dissertatio Historica.

4. The History of the Bucaniers of America: being an Account of the most
remarkable Assaults committed of late years upon the Coasts of the West Indies.
In two Volumes in 4o.

5. The Souls Communion with her Savior: or the History of our Lord Jesus
Christ, written by the Four Evangelists, digested into Devotional Meditations.
By Ph. Traherne 12o.

6. A short View of the most Gracious Providence of God in the Restoration and
Succession, May 29. In 4o.

7. Two Discourses: The First showing how the chief Criterions of Philosophical
truth, invented by Speculative men, more eminently serve Divine Revelation,
than either Philosophy or Natural Religion; The Second manifesting how all the
Foundations of the Intellectual World have been undermined by the Popish
Doctrines and Policies. In 8o price 1 s. 6 d.

8. Praise and Adoration: or a Sermon on Trinity-Sunday before the University
of Oxford. By Tho. Maningham, late Fellow of New College Oxford, now Rector of
East-Tysted, and Preacher at the Rolls. In 4o.

9. A Discourse about Conscience, relating to present Differences among us, in
opposition to both Extremes of Popery and Fanaticism. In 4o.

10. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience, in a Sermon preached January 30. By Ja.
Ellesby Vicar of Chiswick.

11. Three Sermons of Greg. Hascard D. D. Rector of St. Clements Danes and Dean
of Windsor. Two of them preached before the Lord Mayor of London, and the other
on the 5th of November at St. Clements Church, 4o.

12. An Introduction to the Sacrament: or a short, plain, and safe way to the
Communion Table, being an Instruction for the worthy receiving of the Lords
Supper. By Dr. Addison Dean of Litchfield, 24o. price bound 6 d. fitted for the
Pocket.

13. Compendium Geographicum: or a more exact, plain, and easy Introduction to
all Geography than yet extant, after the latest Discoveries and Alterations;
with a Dictionary of the Names of Places; the first the Ancient, and the second
the Modern names of all Countries, Cities, etc. In 12o price bound 1 s.

14. The general History of the World, being a complete Body thereof. In two
Volumes, price bound 2 l. 18 s. Fol.

15. Homers Illiads and Odysses translated out of Greek into English, by Tho.
Hobbes of Malmsbury, the third Edition. In 12o.

16. The Tracts of Tho. Hobbes of Malmsbury, viz. First Behemoth, or the Civil
Wars of England from 1640, to 1660. Second Answer to Bishop Bramhall. Third his
Narration of Heresy. Fourth his Problems. 8o. price bound 5 s.


