Of Religious Prudence.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, On Sunday, Sept. 17. 1693.

By Thomas Mannyngham, Rector of St. Andrew-Holborn, and Chaplain in Ordinary
to Their MAJESTY'S.

Publish by her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple-Barr,
1694.

Prove. VIII. Verse 12. former part.
I Wisdom dwell with Prudence.
Although Wisdom be brought in by Solomon in this Chapter, speaking of her self,
as a Person; and upon that account, many of the Ancients in their
Interpretations, have understood it mystically of the Eternal Son of God, the
Wisdom of the Father, from whom all true Wisdom is derived; yet according to
the common Language, and general design of these Proverbial Writings, Wisdom
stands for Religion, and Religion is expressed by the Fear of God.

Prudence is either Universal or Particular: Universal Prudence is the same
with the Doctrine of Morality, the Application of the most proper means, viz.
Virtuous Actions, toward the acquiring the chief End, the Happiness of Man:
And Particular Prudence is distinguished by the different Objects and Ends
about which it is conversant, and is the prosecution of any lawful Design by
such Methods as shall appear to be best, upon a due Consideration of
Circumstances.

That which is immediately signified by the Words of the Text, I Wisdom dwell
with Prudence, is this, That there is an inseparable Connection between Religion
and Prudence; that one cannot be without the other; neither Religion without
Prudence, nor Prudence without Religion.

One would think that this were so plain a Truth, that it could bear no
enlargement, either for the Illustrating or the Confirming of it: But he who
considers what perverseness of Opinions obtains among Mankind, arising from the
corruption of their Manners, and the immoderate love of present Life; will be
ready to acknowledge, that there are those in the World, who frame to
themselves a Notion of Prudence, which has no dependence upon Religion; and
practice it without any regard to the Laws of Justice: And on the other side,
whoever considers what an unaccountable awe Superstition imprints on the Minds
and Consciences of some, and how often it happens that a Zeal without Knowledge
passes for the height of Piety; will readily confess, that there are many who
pretend to be very Devout, but they want that Prudence, which should justify
their Actions, and adorn their Religion.

And now upon this view of things, my Text which asserts a necessary Connection
between Religion and Prudence, will bear an enlargement in these Three respects.

I. That there is no true Political Prudence, but what is founded upon
Religion, or the Fear of God. II. That the Pious Man is in the main, the truly
Prudent and Judicious Person. III. I shall show, what great use there is of a
particular Prudence in the Conduct of a Religious Life.
1. There is no true Political Prudence, but what is founded upon Religion, or
the Fear of God.

God has delivered the World not only to the Enquiries and Disputations of Men,
but in a great measure he has given them the Government of it too; reserving to
himself a Power over Nature, and a Prerogative over all humane Counsels and
Actions. We may study and observe those Laws of Motion which are imprinted on
the Universe, as accurately and as nicely as we can; but we must not exclude
the First Mover; who gave beginning to, and still sustains those Powers which
we call Nature: We may likewise carry on our Public Affairs and Private
Business, by the exactest Rules of honest Management, and wise Dispatch; but
then we must ascribe the success of all to the Providence of God, who overrules
things into what Events he pleases, and brings to pass his own Counsels by
humane endeavors.

The first Corruption in Natural Philosophy consisted in the pretending to give
an account of the World and its Original, without an infinite Understanding and
First Mover: And the main Corruption of Prudence does consist in attempting the
Government of the World by humane Policy, without a due submission to the
Providence of God. But as the most ancient and best Philosophers never
undertook to explain Nature without having recourse to an Infinite Spirit and
Mind; so we find in this Book of Proverbs, that the ancient Political Prudence
was founded on the Fear of God: For so Wisdom speaks in this Chapter, Counsel
is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding, I have strength. By me Kings
reign, and Primes decree justice. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the
Judges of the earth, Prove. VIII. 14, 15, 16.

Because, in the ordinary course of things, the general Influence of a Superior
Being, is collected only by Reason and Inference; and the particular working of
Secondary Causes is conspicuous to Sense, and manifest to common Experience; it
often happens, that the proud Reasoners, and the sensual part of Mankind,
either wholly deny a Providence, or attribute very little to its
Superintendency and Power: But then these are the Persons whose Counsels are
generally blasted, and who are often scattered in their own Imaginations: Though
they prosper in some few Attempts, yet their main Design miscarries; and when
the wise Ends of Providence are seiv'd, their vain Projections are dashed in
pieces. We indeed are desirous of seeing these Disappointments of the Wicked
much sooner than they commonly happen; but we forget how a Providential
Dispensation usually takes a large circuit, and is not so soon finish d as our
Impatience would have it: In these Matters, we are to govern our Persuasions by
what has already been done in other Ages, and if any thing appear very
Irregular to us at present, we may be assured upon the confidence of former
Events, that Divine Wisdom will bring it into its proper Channel again.

The Universal History of the World, and the Particular Histories of Kingdoms,
and of some more Eminent Families, are full of the Tragical Ends of those proud
Politicians, who thought to govern without God, and to be prudent without
Religion: Their unjust Methods succeeded for some time, for the Punishment of a
degenerate People, and then the Executioners themselves receiv*d the like
Chastisement from another set of prospering Sinners, who having scourged their
Generation, fell at last under the same Indignation which they had measured to
others.

The horrible Wickedness of Mankind seems to have made the permission of some
sort of successive Tyranny, almost necessary in the World, from the ancient
Times of Nimrod, through all the Four Great Monarchies: But the exceeding
degeneracy of Christians, seems to have given occasion for the multiplying of
that Evil, and for the erecting many Tyrannies in the World at one time: The
Antichristian Polity, the Turkish Empire, and the French Ambition, do all
contribute to the punishing of wicked Christians; for certainly it is our
Impiety that is the principal Reason why these great Tyrannies are permitted in
the World: Yet even These shall have their signal Judgments, their
Devastations, and Decays; either a total Ruin, or a translation from one
People to another, to make it evident, that the Providence of God is over all,
and disposes things for the best Advantage of the World; that there may be a
Dispensation of Temporal Calamities, for those Kingdoms which are otherwise
incorrigible, who may be sure of Prosperity when they veturn to their Virtue
again.

Most of those Persons, who make use of unjust means, to free themselves from
any present Distress, or to advance themselves to any Eminency in the World,
besides the direct Impiety of their Hearts, have usually such poor and narrow
minds, as cannot contemplate the Providence of God with any due extent of
Thought; nor consider things with those Relations, and with those Consequences,
in the viewing of which the Excellency of Man above other Creatures does
consist, and the proper Wisdom of his Mind is displayed: And shall we allow
those to be Prudent, who neither Reason nor Consider, who never weigh the
Justice and Expediency of an Action, which depends upon Laws and Permissions;
but run from every thing that displeases, and rush upon every thing that they
fancy, without any respect to the Obligations of Honesty and Right? If to avoid
what one dislikes, and to obtain what one desires, by any means whatever, were
all that were required in Prudence, then common Instinct might serve the Turn
as well as Reason; for that supplies some Creatures with Tricks and Shifts
enough to compass and effect their little Ends: But a Natural Sagacity is not
sufficient for Man, who is accountable for his Actions, who must engage on no
Designs but what are Rational, nor pursue them by any means but what are Just
and Lawful.

That Wisdom which degenerates into Craft, is but equivocally called Wisdom,
it is really Folly, a mischievous, shifting, Artificial Folly; that conceals it
self a while, but throws off its disguise at last; that looks like wise and
prosperous Management for some time, but ends in Ignominious Ruin. The Man of
Integrity and Conscience needs no Arts of Dissimulation, the more he appears,
the sooner is he trusted; and the more he depends on God and his own Sincerity,
the better he succeeds. Though Honesty and true Prudence can never be really
separated in the main Actions of Life, yet it is better to live without the
Opinion of Prudence, than without that of Honesty; for do but separate the
Opinion of Integrity from any one, and then the more Intellectual and Subtle he
is, the more he is suspected and avoided; but Men will put a great Confidence
in him, who has an honest Heart and a good Meaning, though he has not so large a
reach of Understanding as the other: There is a Natural Presage that things
will succeed well in the Hands of those who are Virtuous, that a Propitiousness
will attend them in all their Undertakings, that what they want in Contrivance
will be made up by a Felicity of Event.

Whereas it is generally expected that Wickedness should befool the greatest
Parts, give a check to the boldest Spirits, and blast the best Designs:
Wherefore there is no surer way to Honor and Eminence, even in wicked Times,
than to have a general Reputation of being a Person of true Piety and
Conscience: He shall have the Favor of the People, and the Love of his
Country, when the Man of Impiety and ill Morals, though never so extraordinary in
other Respects, shall be secretly despised; and the Hypocrite, though never so
close and specious for a while, shall be detected, and dismissed with Confusion.

An Uprightness of Action, a Constancy in Virtue, and unmovable Frame of Mind
and Resolution, of always pursuing what is Just and Beneficial to the Public,
by right and laudable ways, is that which will make a Man Fortunate, or
deserving to be so in the general Esteem of Mankind; 'twill make him truly
Valuable, even without Riches or Titles; twill make him truly Great and
Reverenced, and fit for the highest Trust, though he be not employed: But, for
the most part, it is the ready and direct Road to all the desirable things of
this Life; Justice being the surest Path to Greatness, honest Dealing the most
provable way of growing Rich; and those being usually the most respected, and
the most beloved, who walk through this World, and its several Stages of Duty,
in the plain Garb of Integrity and Truth.

To separate Political Prudence from Religion, is not only Impiety, but the
extremity of Folly too: For, is Man able to overruled the various Contingencies
of this Life? Can he fix the Thoughts? Can he determine and point the
Affections of others to his particular Designs? And yet a Concurrence of these
is required to every Event; and Mankind in all Ages were so sensible of this,
that in their more considerable Undertakings, they always made an especial
Application to some Superior Power: Liberty of Intention and Design, with the
Care of Preparations, is all that Man can boast of; but the Success of Actions
depends on Circumstances without his reach: Therefore Men were still desirous
of knowing what was the Divine Will, as to those Affairs in which they were
ready to engage. Many of the Eastern Nations attempted to read the Will of
their Gods in the Stars and Constellations; the Grecians consulted their famous
Oracles, and the Romans depended much upon their Auguries; but the Holy
Scriptures are our standing Oracle, where God has delivered his Immutable Will,
that he will destroy the wisdom of the World, scatter the proud in the
imagination of their Hearts; and though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and
his days he prolonged, yet Solomon assures us as of the Decree of God, that it
shall be well with them that fear the Lord, Eccles. 8.12.

2. I shall endeavor to show, that the Pious Person in the main is the truly
Judicious.

If we would speak according to the Accuracy of Moral Writers, Wisdom is the
Knowledge of things Great, Admirable, and Divine, whereby the Mind is raised
and enlarged into delightful Contemplations; and Prudence is a right Practical
Judgment, or the Skill of judging what we are to do, and what not, and of
distinguishing between Good and Evil, and the degrees of each: And though
Prudence in the common acceptance of the World, passes now for any Cunning
Contrivance, for any dextrous Management of an Affair, whatever means are used;
yet the ancient Moralists never allowed a wicked Man to be call*d Prudent: They
readily grant, that such an one may have a subtilty of Judgment, and an
acuteness in speculative Studies, and that he may be well skilled in all the
Mysteries of Craft; but they unanimously declare, that a wicked Life corrupts
the very Principles of true Prudence, and right Reason; which cannot dwell with
Passions, and irregular Desires.

Prudence is that Virtue or Power of the Soul, whereby the Mind deliberates
rightly, and finds out what is best to be done, when all things are considered;
or, it helps us to discover what are the best Means for obtaining a Good End:
Now it is Religion that qualifies the Mind to consider Practical Matters in
their true Nature and Consequences; that purifies the Intention, corrects the
Inclinations, moderates the Affections, and makes our Deliberations calm and
wise: It Is the Fear of God that sets Bounds to Prudence, that shows how far we
are to act in any Undertaking, and where we are to resign things up to a higher
Conduct: It Is Temperance that gives us an Intellectual Vigor, that makes us
Masters of our Reason, that presents a clear Prospect to the Eyes of Wisdom,
void of all the Mists and Colors of Fancy; and frees our Thoughts from the
Contagion of our Temper: It Is the Consideration of another Life, that cools our
Desires after this; and makes us content to let the Advantages of this; World
alone, if they cannot be acquired without Sin, which is the certain destruction
of our best and highest Interests: These and suchlike Virtues are the
Pre-requisites, or the Ingredients of all true Prudence; and therefore it is the
Pious Man, that in the main is the truly Judicious Person.

But then, does not this sound like an uncommon Assertion? And is it not often
made an ordinary Objection, that such an One is very Good and Virtuous, but he
is very Imprudent, and wants a Knowledge of Men and Business? But yet, if
Religion be the highest Prudence, as has been already proved, then this
Assertion must still hold, That the truly Pious Man in the main is, the truly
Judicious Person; and the mistake of the World must lie in this; That either
their Imprudent Person is not truly Pious, but rather Enthusiastic, or
Superstitious, or intemperately Zealous, or the like; or, else they vainly
conceive that there is no true Prudence, but that which tends to make Men Rich
and Great in this World, by any Means, and by any Arts whatever: Now this is so
far from being any part of Prudence, that it is the very Principle which the
Scriptures brand as Folly in the highest degree; such Folly, as does not only,
signify the Weakness of the Judgment, but the Malignity of the Will; which is
not bare Imprudence, but gross Sin and Vice.

There is indeed a very low sort of Prudence, which does consist in being
mighty sedulous and diligent in getting of Wealth, and raising a Fortune, by
such ways as are not unjust in the account of humane Laws, though not so becoming
a Christian, who is to make the Concerns of another World his principal Care
and Business: But why should the heaping up of Riches be looked upon as the
main Evidence and mark of Men's Prudence? Surely there is much more Discretion
required in using of them temperately, and disposing of them wisely to
Charitable uses; and in making them a foundation of present Comfort, and future
Rewards: Why is not the discreet Management of a narrow Fortune, as clear a
sign of Prudence, as the getting a large and ample one? And why is not a good
Reputation an excellent Purchase, as well as a good Estate? The Prudence of
this World is made a Pattern in the Gospel for Christians to imitate in their
pursuit after the Happiness of the next, but as to its own Nature it is always
rejected and condemned: We may borrow something of its Caution and Wariness in
times of Persecution and Danger, but never make use of its base Designs, or of
its unjust and unworthy Methods.

The best way of coming to Riches, and Honor, and of obtaining the Advantages
of this Life, is the being very diligent in procuring the Favor of Him who is
the giver of every good and perfect Gift: And then the Prudence which concerns
us in this case, is a faithful and diligent acting in that Station that is
appointed us, with a due Subordination to God and his Laws; the keeping up a
continual succession of Industry and Prayer, which will be sure to carry us
discreetly through all the necessary Business of Life; and either make us
successful in what we undertake, or support us under disappointments; affording
us this constant satisfaction, that though our particular Designs do not always
prosper, yet our general Desires are always accomplished in the good Providence
of God.

It Is a very imperfect Notion of Prudence, to think that it consists in an
exact Knowledge of the World, or in getting a large share and possession of it:
I should rather define it, a discreet contempt of this World, and an earnest
seeking after such good things as are real and lasting, as are perfective of
our Nature, and more within our Power, than those, which we call the Goods of
Fortune, are. An exact Knowledge in Business, and a long Experience in the
Affairs of humane Life, contribute much to true Prudence, when there is a
Religious Principle at the bottom, and a sober and temperate Mind to make a
good use of that Knowledge; but otherwise it only supplies Men with a more
pernicious Craft, and enables them to lay their Frauds the deeper. That part of
Prudence which serves to keep a Man from being cheated by others, may be best
learned by observing the general Falseness of the World; but that which will
preserve him from being cheated by himself, by his own vain Reasonings, and
foolish Passions; is the looking into his own Heart, and taking a full view of
the deceitfulness of that little World; it is the guarding himself from the
Illusions of his sensual Nature, and the purging his Soul from those
defilements, which put false Colors upon the Mind, that it cannot discern its
truest Interest.

Let the Understanding be clear, the Reason sober, the Will orderly, and the
Passions governable; and then what will there be wanting to make that Man
Prudent? Nothing surely, besides a thorough Acquaintance with, and an actual
Consideration of the particular Business which shall at any time be laid before
him.

They who are subject to an excessive heat and impetuousness of Temper, or are
much given to contemplative and abstracted Studies, are not generally thought
very proper to be employed in Public Affairs, though they be Persons of a good
Life and Meaning: But then, let not Religion be blamed for those Defects which
are no ways owing to Religion, or which arise from the affectation of some
Nicenesses, which Religion does not require: It must be confessed, that much
Retirement, and deep Devotion, will bring some good Men to such an exceeding
tenderness of Conscience in all their Civil as well as Religious Actions; as
Men who are more exercised in the World, and more inured to Public Affairs,
will be apt to Censure as an imprudent, and unnecessary scrupulousness of Mind:
And on the other side, it must be acknowledged, That a Nation may come to be so
generally corrupted, and so divided by Interests and Parties, that a Man shall
be hard put to it, to keep his Integrity, and his Public Station together: And
when things shall at any time come to this desperate State, it will be
impossible for the Man of Conscience, and the Man of Politics, to agree in
their Notion of Prudence.

It is certain, That we are first to serve God, to seek his Kingdom and
Righteousness; and then to secure our Just Interests in this World: But when
our Civil Interests about which we are concerned, are such, as immediately
respect the Peace and Quiet of Government, and are so important a Care, that
the very exercise and establishment of our Religion depends upon it, then
Prudence may be allowed to act in a greater Latitude, and still be within the
bounds of Justice; and the necessary Welfare of a Nation will require some
larger measures of Compliance in extraordinary Cases, which yet shall be no
ways injurious to Religion and a good Conscience. A firmness of Soul, a
solidity of Judgment, and a fixed Resolution in Virtue, are rare and Noble
Qualities; but a very timorous and scrupulous Mind is an Imperfection in any
one, but chiefly in such as sustain a Public Character, and are obliged to act
for the greatest Good and Welfare of others; it is an Infirmity that breeds
Delays, that loses the opportunity of Action, that makes Men inconsistent with
their own Counsels, dubious and inconstant in all their Undertakings; and
Inconstancy does sometimes as much mischief to the Public, as Ignorance and
Malice; it likewise tempts many to speak reproachful things of Probity and
Religion it self, and to call in question the Prudence of those, whose private
Virtues are most deservedly in great esteem. And so I come to the

III. Thing proposed, viz. To speak something concerning that Particular
Prudence which is required in the Conduct of a Religious Life.

No Pious Person can be supposed to be without that which we call Moral
Prudence, for that belongs to the Essence of Virtue, and runs through every
Duty; but, besides this, there are other things required to make a Man perfect
and complete in Prudence; such as good Natural Parts, liberal Education, much
Experience, wise Conversation, and an application to those of greater Ability
than our selves: Some of which, are matter of Advice and Counsel, such as the
conversing with Men of great Knowledge, and excellent Temper; and the applying
our selves to those who are eminent for Wisdom and Virtue. Others are
occasional Advantages, or a Providential Felicity; such as good Natural Parts,
and liberal Education, and much Experience in the World.

Now as it is not indispensably necessary for every one to be Virtuous in the
very same measure and degree; much less is it absolutely required, that every
Religious Person should be Prudent to just such an extent: That which is our
direct Duty in respect to this and all other excellent Seize, is to use
our best Endeavors to acquire them; and the higher we advance in the Rational
and Spiritual Nature, the more happy and secure we are.

There may be much Imprudency mingled with an honest Simplicity of Mind, with
an humble Piety, and an hearty Desire of doing good; but then, that Imprudency
is in small matters, and not in such things as belong to the substance of Duty;
for I cannot conceive how a truly Religious Person can be to seek in any of the
real Parts and Instances of Virtue; in some particular Decencies of it he may:
If he has not the Natural Blessing of a clear Understanding, yet if he has the
Humility of a good Christian, that will direct him in many Cases to make his
application to those, who have that larger measure of Prudence which he wants:
And if this were duly practiced, what a multitude of Irregularities in Religion
might be prevented, which take their rise from an Imprudent Zeal? A Pious
Temper is the first thing we are to labor after, and a Prudent Mind is the
next; by the first we are sincerely disposed to do all the Good we can; and by
the other we are enabled to judge when, and where, and by what means that Good
is to be done; how every Duty may be best performed, how seasonably, and in its
time, and how consistent with other Obligations which must not be neglected.

When sensual and selfish Principles are laid aside, the Mind purified, the
Passions in subjection, and the Glory of God unfeignedly designed in all our
Actions; where there is no spiritual Pride, no vain affectation of seeming more
than ordinary scrupulous even about indifferent Matters; but an humble, modest,
and careful progress in Duty; there Religious Prudence is never wanting: which
is a sagacity of discerning not only the great differences of Good and Evil,
but the various degrees of Goodness, and the peculiar seasons of Pious Actions:
For there is a particular Prudence which ought to accompany every Duty, which
gives it a proper grace and beauty, makes it appear so commendable and lovely
in the Eyes of all who behold it, that they who will not practice it, know not
how to condemn it. Sermons, and Pious Conferences; Cases of Conscience, and
Books of Spiritual Wisdom, do all contribute toward the Improving of People in
this particular Religious Prudence; which being so large and comprehensive a
subject, I shall not undertake to discourse it fully at the latter end of a
Sermon, but only lay down Three or Four Rules for the more prudent Conduct of a
Religious Life.

1. The first Rule is this: Not to engage in things which are above our Sphere.
Most People have a strange affectation of being Public Persons before they are
called to it; they will not rest contented with a private and modest Piety, but
love to do something that is extraordinary, as they think, that they may be
observed and talked of: Though Providence has placed them in that state, wherein
their Eminency is to be shown by their Obedience, yet they are impatient to
censure things which are not of their Level, and were never intended for their
Examination: They think they do not answer the strong Impulse of their
Religion, unless they oppose their Zeal without Knowledge against such Matters
as are wholly Prudential. You are willing to do Good, but must you go out of
your Bounds to do it? You would give faithful Counsel and Advice, but why must
it be immediately directed to your Governors? Are not the Miscarriages of your
own Family, or of your Neighborhood, a more proper Subject for your
Animadversions? Or, are you sure, that your own Innocence will give you the
Authority? Or, that your own Defects will allow you the leisure of Correcting
others? You are desirous of bettering many things which you think amiss; but
must you remove things, which have been found Good upon long trial, to make way
for your Imaginations? You would uphold the tottering Ark, but must you thrust
out a profane Hand to support it? You would have more Purity in Divine
Worship, but must you make a Schism to obtain it?

2. If Men would be Prudently Religious, they must not presently catch at
Perfection, and the highest Instances of Piety. There is an order of Duties,
and a gradual advancement in Religion: They who affect Sublimities, before they
are established in Humility, will never come to any strength and consistency in
Virtue; and will bring but little Honor to the Profession of the Gospel. What
mad work do those poor Enthusiasts make in Religion, who are altogether for the
Raptures of Divine Love and Contemplation, before they have mortifi d their
Affections and Lusts; who pretend to the greatest Perfection, when they want
the first Rudiments of Moral Virtue; and think themselves highly advanced in
Spiritual Wisdom, when they are not so much as under the Conduct of common
Prudence?

3. If we would be Prudently Religious, we must never engage too vehemently in
things of an indifferent Nature. There are substantial Duties enough to take up
all the fervor and vivacity of our Zeal, without wasting its force in things
of a low concern: Humility, Meekness, Self-denial, and Prayer, are Duties for
all to practice, and require our utmost application and vigor; but those things
which are only contingently Good, and have no real excellency in their own
Natures, require but a moderate regard: And it is the chief act and employment
of Prudence, to judge rightly of the different value of things, and to
proportion our concern to the degrees of Goodness, and the measures of
Expediency.

4. Let us take care that we do not spoil a good constitution of Soul, by any
superstitious Fancies, or unnecessary scruples of Conscience. When we plainly
perceive that we are sincerely Religious, and that we have a clear Integrity of
Heart; let us not cloud it by melancholy Surmises: When our Conscience is
right and sound, let us not physic it too much, by needless and perplexing
Doubts and Questions, lest we make it too weak and timorous, and unserviceable
for those noble and rational Ends for which it was designed.

All Imprudencies in Religion are not Sins, but they are Infirmities; they take
off the Luster of Virtuous Actions, and so diminish the Glory of Religion; they
make People in many respects, uncomfortable to themselves, and unprofitable to
others; and next to the Purity of the Heart, there is nothing that can be
compared to the Prudence of the Mind; which I am persuaded many may obtain, by
half that Pains which they take to be Rich and Wealthy. And is it not a plain
argument of an exceeding degeneracy of Manners, when that viler sort of worldly
Prudence, of which the duller part of Mankind are most capable, shall be
generally preferred, before that excellent Prudence of which I have now
discoursed? By which the Throne is established and on the account of which,
they who stand about it, shine with true and solid Honors: Which is the best
Ornament of all our Religious Actions, and the truest Splendour of Humane Life.

To conclude; when Men have wearied themselves in crooked ways, they will
acknowledge, That though Irreligion gives a larger scope of wandering, yet Piety
keeps them in the right, the safe, and pleasant Path; when they have fully
accomplish*d themselves with the studies of History, Policy, Laws, of the
various Humors of Mankind, and the most refined Reasons of State; they will
find at last that the Christian Virtues are the only Arts of Prudence: That
Resolution, Constancy, and Fidelity, with the the fear of God, will make them
esteemed in all Governments; give them a Height and Magnanimity of Wisdom
superior to all the base designs of private Interest, popular Faction, and a
false Greatness: They will find, that it is Religion which perfects the
political Man, which gives a due largeness to his Understanding, justice to his
Designs, calmness to his Counsels, an even Temper under all Events, and a
Virtuous Constancy under all the Reproaches and Violences of the Wicked and
unruly; which generally brings him to great Honors in this Life, but will
infallibly Crown his Wisdom with Everlasting Glory in the World to come.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without
Temple-Barr.
AN Institution of General History: Or, the History of the World: Being a
complete Body thereof, from the beginning of the World, to the Year after
William the Conqueror came into England. By Dr. W. Howell, late Chancellor of
Lincoln. In Fol. In three Volumes.

Nine Sermons on Public Occasions. By Dr. Tho. Mannyngham.

Three Sermons on Public Occasions. By Dr. Hascard.

Two Sermons on Public Occasions. By Dr. Pelling.

Two Sermons, by Mr. Lightonhouse.

Mr. Bynn's Sermon, on Jan. 30, 1692/3. before the House of Commons.

Dr. Budgel's Sermon about Prayer.

Two Sermons of Mr. Ellesby's.

The Christian's Manual. In two Parts. 1. The Catechumen: Or, an Account given
by the Young Person of his Knowledge in Religion, before his Admission to the
Lord's Supper, as a Groundwork for his right understanding of the Sacrament.
2. An Introduction to the Sacrament: Or, a short, safe, and plain Way to the
Communion Table; being an Instruction for the worthy Receiving the Lord's
Supper. To which is added, The Communicant's Assistant; being Devotions to that
purpose; fitted to be used before, at, and after the Receiving of the Blessed
Sacrament. Collected for, and familiarly addressed to every particular
Communicant. By L. Addison, D.D. Dean of Litchfield. The fourth Edition. Price
1 s.

Three Practical Discourses. 1. Upon the Blessed Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper. 2. Upon Prayer. 3. Upon Charity in its several Branches, and of the
Reasonableness and useful Nature of this great Christian Virtue. By E. Pelling,
D.D. Each sold single.

Cicero's Laelius. A Discourse of Friendship. Together with a Pastoral Dialogue
concerning Friendship and Love.

The Case of Resistance of the Supreme Powers stated and resolved, according to
the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures. By William Sherlock, D.D. Dean of Paul's,
and Master of the Temple.

Tracts of Mr. Thomas Hobbes of Malmsbury: Containing, 1. Behemoth, the History
of the Causes of the Civil Wars of England, from 1640 to 1660, printed from the
Author's own Copy. Never printed before but with a thousand faults. 2. An
Answer to Archbishop Bramhall's Book, called, Catching of the Leviathan. 3. An
Historical Narration of Herefie, and the Punishment thereof. 4. Philosophical
Problems, dedicated to the King in 1662. But never printed before.

The Primitive Institution: Or, a Seasonable Discourse of Catechizing: Wherein
is shown the Antiquity, Benefits, and Necessity thereof. Together with its
Suitableness to heal the present Distempers of this National Church. The Second
Edition. By Lancelot Addison, D.D. Dean of Litchfield.


