THE First Volume OF LETTERS Writ by a Turkish Spy, Who lived Five and Forty
Years, Undiscovered, at PARIS: Giving an Impartial Account to the Divan at
Constantinople, of the most Remarkable Transactions of Europe; And discovering
several Intrigues and Secrets of the Christian Courts, (especially of that of
France) from the Year 1637, to the Year 1682.

Written Originally in Arabic, first Translated into Italian, afterward into
French, and now into English.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes, near Bride-Lane, in Fleet Street, 1691.

Mahmut The. Turkish spy. Aetatis suae 72.
F. H. Van. Hove. sculp:


TO THE READER.
I Here offer you a Book written by a Turk, whose Matter is as instructive and
delightful, as the Manner of finding it, was strange and surprising.

I do not doubt, but you would know where 'twas written; and perhaps, whether
the Author be living; and whether you must expect a Romance, or a real History.
Hear then, in short, what will fully satisfy you.

The Curiosity of seeing Paris, made a Man of Letters, leave Italy, in the Year
1682; where being arrived, he found such Diversions, as caused his stay longer
than he intended.

Scarce had he been Two Months in Paris, when, by changing his Lodging, he
discovered by mere Chance, in a Corner of his Chamber, a great heap of Papers;
which seemed more spoiled by Dust, than Time.

He was at first surprised to see nothing but barbarous Characters, and was
upon the Point of leaving them without any further search, if a Latin Sentence,
which he perceived on the top of a Leaf, had not retained him:

Vbi amatur, non laboratur; and si
Laboratur, labor amatur.
The Surprise of the Italian was yet greater, when after having considered
these Characters with more Attention, he found them to be Arabic; which
Language was not altogether unknown to him, which made him look narrowlier into
them; where he found, That they treated of Affairs of State; that they
contained Relations of War and Peace; and discoursed, not only of the Affairs
of France, but of those of all Christendom, till the Year 1682.

The curious Italian was in no small Impatience, to know how, and where these
Memorials had been writ, and by what Adventure they came to lie so neglected in
a Corner of his Chamber. But before he further informed himself, he thought it
expedient to transport these Manuscripts into another House, as a Place of
greater Security.

He afterward questioned his Landlord with great Precaution, concerning the
Papers; and he informed him even to the least Circumstances.

He told him, That a Stranger, who said he was a Native of Moldavia, Habited
like an Ecclesiastic, greatly Studious, of small Stature, of a very course
Countenance, but of surprising Goodness of Life, had lived long at his House.
That he came to lodge there in the Year 1664, and had staid Eighteen Years with
him; that being gone abroad one day, he returned no more, and they had had no
certain News of him since. He was about Seventy Years old, had left Manuscripts
that no Body understood, and some Moneys, which was an Argument, that his
Departure was not premeditated.

He added, That he had always a Lamp Day and Night burning in his Chamber; had
but few Movables, only some Books, a small Tome of St. Austin, Tacitus, and
the Alcoran, with the Picture of Massaniello, whom he praised very much,
calling him the Moses of Naples. He said further, That this Strangers greatest
Friend, and whom he saw often, was a Man which most People took for a Saint,
some for a Jew, and others suspected to be a Turk. According to the Landlord's
Report, he came to Paris in the Year 1637, being then but Twenty Eight Years of
Age. At first he had lodged with a Flemming; he went often to Court, Moneys never
failed him; he had Friends, and passed for very Learned. As for his End, this
Man thinks he died miserably; it being suspected, that he had been thrown into
the River.

The Italian being sufficiently instructed by what he had heard, applied
himself to the Study of the Arabian Language; and as he had already some
Knowledge in it, he quickly learnt enough to Translate these Manuscripts, which
he undertook a while after; and he examined with care the Truth of what the
Moldavian had writ; confronting the Events he met, with the Histories of those
Times; and to succeed the better, searched the most approved Memorials, having
had Access into the Cabinets of Princes and their Ministers.

These Letters contain the most considerable Intrigues of the Court of France,
and the most remarkable Transactions of Christendom, which have been sent to
several Officers of the Ottoman Court.

By these may be known the Perspicacity of this Agent of the Turks; and by him
the Prudence of those that command in that Nation, who chose (the better to
penetrate into the Affairs of Christians) a Man, who could not be suspected by
his Exterior; who was deformed, but prudent and advised; and, for the better
concealing him, destined his ordinary Abode in one of the greatest and most
peopled Cities of Europe.

During his being at Paris, which was Forty Five Years, he has been Eyewitness
of many great Changes; has seen the Death of two great Ministers of State; has
seen that Kingdom involved in War, without and within. He was scarce settled in
Paris, but he was witness to the Birth of a King, who surpasses those that
preceded him; in a time, when the Queen's Barrenness, caused the King, her
Husband, to despair of ever having a Son that should succeed him.

During the Course of so many Years, he has seen Cities revolt, and return
again to the Obedience of their Sovereign; Princes of the Blood, make War
against their King; and Queen Mary de Medicis, Wife, Mother, and Mother-in-Law
to some of the greatest Kings in Europe, die in Exile in Cologne.

He speaks frankly of the Princes of Christendom, and explains his Sentiments
with Liberty. He says, The Emperor commands Princes, the King of Spain Men,
and the King of France sees Men and even Kings obey his Orders. He adds, That
the First commands and prays, the Second sees often times more effected than he
commanded, and that the Third commands many brave Soldiers, and is well nigh
obeyed by Crowned Heads. There appears no Hate or Animosity in him, in what he
writes against the Pope. In Discoursing of the Emperor and King of Spain, he
says, That both of them having Provinces of such vast Extent, they are not much
concerned at the Losses they sustain.

He believed that England was more powerful than the Empire, and Spain [ he
might have added France] at Sea. He apprehended more the Counsels of the
Republic of Venice, than their Arms. He magnifies what passed in the Wars of
Candy, which the Venetians supported with so much Bravery against the Forces of
the Ottoman Empire. The Genoeses with him are perfect Chemists. He speaks of
the last Plague, and last War, that this Commonwealth has been afflicted with;
he touches something of the late Conspiracy against this State by Raggi and
Torn; and to show, that he understood their History; he says somewhat of
Vachero and Balbi.

Thou will see, Reader, by the Progress of the Work, what this secret Envoy of
the Ottoman Port, thought of the other Princes of Italy, and those of the
North: And I have drawn his Picture, because thou may understand better what
I give thee of him.

This Arabian (for he declares himself in his Writings, to have been of that
Nation) having been taken and made a Slave by the Christians, was brought into
Sicily, where he applied himself to Learning. He studied Logic in his
Captivity, and applied himself much to History; he overcame them by suffering
with Patience the Blows of his Master, who often beat him for endeavoring to
acquire those Lights, which this Brute had not. And finally, after much Labor,
great Assiduity and long Watchings, he came, as he writes himself, to
understand Greek and Latin Authors; he had commerce afterward with the best
Masters; and during his sojourning in the French Court, he joined Experience to
the Knowledge he had acquired.

He explains himself neatly, and speaks of Things with great Frankness. His
Style shows a great liberty of Spirit, and never Passion; and if it appear that
he accommodes himself to the Fashion of the Court, one may see that it is not
out of design to please, but that he wisely conforms himself sometimes to the
Genius's of Nations.

Thou will find in his Letters Wit and Learning. If sometimes he appears tart,
it is to show his Vivacity, not disoblige; and he appears all over fully
instructed in Ancient and Modern History. He is very reserved when he blames,
and seems persuaded when he praises. When he speaks to the great Men of the
Port, his Style is very grave; and he changes when he writes to meaner Persons.
He never tells News that he is not assured of, nor thinks of divining Things
that seem obscure to him.

He gives rare Lessons when he writes of the Revolutions of Catalonia, the
Kingdoms of Naples, Portugal and England, which happened in our Days; with
strange Circumstances, terrible Murders, and the Death of a Potent King,
Martyred by his own Subjects upon a Scaffold, before his own Door.

He weighs much the Duke of Guise's hardy Resolution of going to Naples, to
succor the Revolted there; and he reasons not as a Barbarian, but like an able
Statesman, and wise Philosopher, on the Rise and Ruin of States. He always
discourses with Liberty, and what he says, is filled with solid and agreeable
Thoughts. He speaks sometimes of the Cruelty and Tyranny of the Turks, of the
Violence of the Ministers of the Port, and upon the precipated Death which many
of the Sultans, Basha's, and Vizirs are forced to suffer. But, this Language is
only to his Friends and Confidents.

However, though these Letters be neither Greek nor Latin, nor written by a
Christian, they contain nothing of Barbarous; and though the Ignorant be in
great Numbers amongst the Turks, there are yet Men of great Understanding, that
write the Annals of the Ottoman Empire, though they are not easily come by;
for, their Books not being Printed, they scarce ever reach us. We may
notwithstanding believe, That amongst this Nation, that we term Barbarous,
there are great and wise Captains, good Men, and learned Authors; as we have
amongst us Generals without Conduct, Hypocritical Votaries, and ignorant
Fellows that pretend to be Masters.

To justify what I affirm of the Turks, let us but consider their Victories,
which have gained them so many Kingdoms, their Power at Sea, their Exactness to
punish Crimes, and to reward Merit. As for Printing, they would never endure it
amongst them. A Grand Vizir's judgment of it was remarkable, which shows rather
their Prudence than any effect of their Ignorance. A famous Printer of Holland,
by Religion a Jew, came to Constantinople, bringing Presses with him, with
Characters of all Sorts of Idioms, particularly Arabic, Turk, Greek, and
Persian Letters, with design to introduce the use of Printing into that great
City. As soon as the Vizir was informed of it, he caused the Jew to be Hanged,
and broke all his Engines* and Millions of Characters which he had brought;
declaring, it would be a great Cruelty, that One Man should, to enrich himself,
take the Bread out of the Mouths of Eleven Thousand Scribes, who gained their
Livings at Constantinople by their Pens.

Peruse, Gentle Reader, what I offer, without fear of tiring thy self, or being
deceived. As Christian Authors think of nothing ordinarily, but of writing
Panegyricks in hopes of Reward, we have reason to believe not to find all the
Truth in their Works. Interest and Passion do often make good Princes pass for
Tyrants, and unjust and cruel Princes, are sometimes transferred to Posterity
for Models of Justice and Clemency. This occasions Histories which issue from
so corrupt a Source, to serve like a pitched Field for Modern Writers, where
the one and the other combat for the destruction of Truth; the one falsely
reporting what they have heard; and the other, by as badly representing the
things they seem to witness. Most Princes will have their Altars, and then it is
no wonder if there are Priests found to sacrifice to Falsehood, and Idolaters,
to deface the Statue of Truth.

There is no General that will not always seem Conqueror, and Princes never
confess their Losses, which occasions a Confusion, and the Actions of Men do
thereby become doubtful.

How many times have we seen both the Victors and Vanquished make Bonfires for
their Successes? And, in our Days, we have known the French rejoice, and the
Spaniards and Germans sing their Te Deum for the same Thing.

As we are, perhaps, now less just than in Ages past, it is difficult to write
Things as they are, particularly during the Lives of Princes; whose History
cannot be writ without Fear, nar the Truth said without Danger. For these
Reasons, we ought not to question the Credit of our Arabian, who reports with
Liberty what came to his Knowledge: Besides, he being an universal Enemy to
Christianity, and a concealed one, neither disobliged or gained by any, and
religiously true to his Prince, whom he adores as a Divinity; it cannot be
imagined, that he says any thing for Fear or Favor.

As these Relations have been read with Attention and diligently examined, we
may be assured of an exact History, abounding in considerable Events; and this
History being separated into Letters, as the Author writ them, the Reader may
read them without repining. If he will not acknowledge the Translator's Pains,
let him at least receive the Labors of a dead Man with Civility, one that
never dreamt his Memorials would be Printed, and that served his Master
faithfully.

These Sentiments made him exactly follow that Sentence of S. Austin, found in
the Front of his Works:

Where Love is, there is no Labor; and if there be Labor, the Labor is
loved. The Translator has thought fit to retrench some Ceremonies and proud
Titles of the Eastern People. What is represented here, is in a familiar Style,
such as the Ancient Latins used in their Writings to their Consuls, Dictators
and Emperors themselves. And, if the Translation be not Elegant as the Arabic,
do not accuse the Author, seeing it is not possible to reach the Force and
Beauty of the Original.

Have moreover some Respect for the Memory of this Mohammedan; for, living
unknown, he was safe from the Insults of the Great Ones, so that he might write
Truth without Danger, which ordinarily is disguised by Fear or Avarice, having
still reported the Transactions of Christians, with no less Truth than
Eloquence.

If what I have said cannot satisfy the Curious, expect the rest of these
Letters, which will be found full of great Actions, profitable Instructions,
and good Morals. Thank God however, who raises Men that employ themselves in
vanquishing Ignorance and Idleness, and in rendering Justice to Mahmut, a
passionate Slave for the Interest of his Master and the Truth: Have some
Goodness for the Translator; who being born free, acknowledges no Master, but
God, his King, and his Reason.

A TABLE OF THE LETTERS and Matters contained in this Volume.
BOOK I.
LETTER I. MAhmut an Arabian, and the Grand Seignior's Vilest Slave, to
Hasnadarbassy, Chief Treasurer to his Highness, at Constantinople. p 1. Of the
Arrival of Mahmut at Paris. Description of the Place. His Disguisement and
Manner of living amongst the Christians.

II. To the same Hasnadarbassy. 4 Of the Isles of St. Margaret and Honorat,
taken by the Spaniards; and of the Archbishop of Bordeaux.

III. To Darnish Mehemet Bassa. 6 Touching the Te Deum, and the Rejoycings of
the French, for the Victory of Leucate. 8

IV. To Isuf his Kinsman. He exhorts him to love God, his Religion, and the
Grand Seignior.

V. To the Aga of the Janissaries. 9 Of the taking of Breda; of Marquess
Spinola. He exhorts him to read History.

VI. To Mehemet, an Eunuch Page of the Sultan Mother. 11 He recommends to him
his Interests at the Port. Of a Prodigy which happened in Germany; and of an
English Ship.

VII. To the Invincible Vizir Azem. 12 Of the Queen of France's Barrenness. Of
the Court, the Genius of the French, and Affairs of Africa.

VIII. To Muslu Reis Effendi, the Chief Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. 17 Of
his Manner of living, and of the Town of Paris.

IX. To the Mufti, Prince of the Religion of the Turks. 20 Touching Religion.

X. To the Kaimakam. 23 Of the Pictures of the King of France; Cardinal
Richlieu, and Prince of Conde's Son.

XI. To Bedredin, Superior of the Convent of the Dervises, of Cogny in Natolia.
26 Of the Conversation he had with a Jesuit, touching the Mohammedan Religion.

XII. To Chiurgi Muhammet Bassa. 33 Of the Queen of France's being with Child.

XIII. To Carcoa, at Vienna. 36 He sends him Three Pictures, and asks of him
Necessaries.

XIV. To William Vospel, a Christian of Austria. 37 Touching the Death of his
Wife, and on the Design he had of retiring into a Convent of Carmelites.

XV. To Ibrahim, that renounced the Christian Religion. 41 That one should not
write Falsities touching Religion.

XVI. To Dicheu Hussein Bassa. 42 Of the everlasting Wars amongst Christians.
Of Gustavus King of Swedeland, and Weymar's Victories.

XVII. To Ahmet Beig. 45 Of Italy; of the House of Savoy; and of the War which
the Spaniards and French made in Piemont.

XVIII. To Berber Mustapha Aga. 48 Of the Death of Marshal de Crequy; of
Magic, and of the Fort of Breme.

XIX. To Murat Bassa. 53 Of Madam de Savoy; the Cardinal de Valette. Of
Vercelle, and of the Duke of Rohan.

XX. To Dgnet Oglou. 57 Of his Captivity at Palermo, and his Employment.

XXI. To the Kaimakan. 63 Of Piemont; and of a Conspiracy discovered at Genoa.

XXII. To the same. 67 Of the Siege of Fontarabia. Of the Prince of Conde; and
of the Loss of several Spanish Vessels.

XXIII. To Afi^ Bassa 70 Of a Diet held at Stockholm, where 'twas determined to
continue the War with Germany; and the French Design on St. Omers.

XXIV. To the Kaimakam. 71 Of the French Armies; their Progress; and of
Cardinal Richlieu.

XXV. To the same. 73 Of the Queens drawing near her time; of Casimir taken
Prisoner.

XXVI. To the same. 75 Of the King of Poland's Travels into Hungary and Germany.

XXVII. To Kerker Hassan Bassa. 76 Of Amurath's Exploits on the Frontiers of
Persia; and of the Death of Two great Personages.

XXVIII. To the Kaimakan. 79 Of the Birth of the Dauphin.

XXIX. To the Capitan, or Captain Bassa. 82 Of a Sea Fight between the French
and Spaniards.

XXX. To the Captain Bassa. 85 Of the Galleys of Malta.


BOOK II.
LETTER I. TO the Captain Bassa. 87 Mahmut reproaches him with the Intelligence
he held with the Emperor of Germany's Secretary.

II. To the same. 90 Of the Galleys the Barbarians lost.

III. To the same. 94 He discovers the Means of surprising Loretto.

IV. To the Kaimakam. 97 He discourses of the Ministers of Foreign Princes; and
of the Affairs of Vallone and Loretto.

V. To the same. 101 Touching the setting at liberty the old Renegado Durlu.

VI. To the same. 104 Of the War of Piemont; Misfortunes of the House of Savoy;
of the Duke of Saxony; of the taking of Brisac, by the Duke of Wimar.

VII. To the same. 109 Of the Duke of Lorrain; Affairs of Germany, Swedeland,
and Alsatia.

VIII. To Melec Amet. 114 Of the Disgrace of Stridya Bey; and of another
Adventure.

IX. To the same. 118 Of a particular Accident, that happened to a Son that
rejoiced at the News of his Father's Sickness.

X. To Enguruli Emin Cheik, a Man of the Law. 121 Of the King's Goodness to an
ancient Father of a Family, that would needs turn Soldier in his old Age, etc.

XI. To Cara Hali, a Physician. 125 Of the Mountains of Sicily and Naples,
which cast forth perpetual Flames: Of the Nature of these Flames, and of their
Effects.

XII. To the Venerable Mufti, etc. 128 On Religion; on some of his scruples,
and touching the Alcoran.

XIII. To the Kaimakan. 131 Of a Man that was sent as a Spy to the Court of
Rome, by Cardinal Richlieu; and of other Matters.

XIV. To Egry Boynou, the white Eunuch. 135 Touching the Life of Henry IV.

XV. To the Invincible Vizir Azem. 149 Mahmut's Conference with Cardinal
Richlieu, touching the Affairs of Jerusalem.

XVI. To the same. 155 Of the Dauphin of France; and the Sultan's Voyage to
Babylon.

XVII. To Bechir Bassa, Chief Treasurer to the Grand Signior. 156 Of a pleasant
and dangerous Adventure which happened to Mahmut, and of the Jew Eliachim.

XVIII. To Carcoa of Vienna. 160 Mahmut sends word, that he has lost the Money
he sent him, and how.

XIX. To Dgnet Oglou. 161 A Relation of the Life of Birkabeb; and of a Persian
Prince.

XX. To Egry Boynou, an Eunuch. 164 Remains of the Life of Henry the Great.


BOOK III.
LETTER I. TO Muslu Reis Effendi, etc. 193 Of Assam Bassa of Algiers; his
Death, and barbarous Sentiments, in respect of his Slaves.

II. To the Invincible Vizir Azem, at the Camp under Babylon. 195 Of the
Memoirs which Mahmut gave to the Cardinal Richlieu on the Lives of Illustrious
Men.

III. To Lubano Abufei Saad, an Egyptian Knight. 210 What Cardinal Richlieu did
at a Ball.

IV. To Mehmet, an Eunuch Page. 211 Of the beginning of Mahmut's Sickness, and
of the Cruelty of Amurath.

V. To Zelim of Rhodes, Captain of a Galley. 215 That a Man is parted expressly
from Legorn, to Assassinate him at Constantinople.

VI. To the Invincible Vizir Azem, etc. 217 Of the Seige of Babylon.

VII. To the same. 220 Of Brizac, Piemont, Italy, and Brandenburg.

VIII. To Breredin, Superior of the Dervises in Natolia. 224 IX. To Ocoumiche,
his Mother at Scio. 225 Of his Sickness.

X. To Pestely Haly, his Brother. 227 Of his Sickness.

XI. To Dgnet Oglou. 228 Of his Sickness, in a particular Style.

XII. To the Kaimakan. 231 He discourses of the Dexterity of the Dwarf Osmin;
and of the Ambassador of Venice's Solicitations at Court, to induce the King to
make War with the Turks.

XIII. To Isouf, his Kinsman. 235 He speaks of his Sickness; entreats him to
give Alms for his Recovery, and to pray to God for him.

XIV. To the Invincible Vizir Azem, etc. 236 A Relation of his Sickness, and of
the Death of the Duke of Wimar.

XV. To the Kaimakan. 239 Of his Sickness and Cure. Of Germany and Italy; and
of a Sea Fight between the Dutch and French.

XVI. To Dgnet Oglou. 242 Of his perfect Cure; and of Friendship.

XVII. To Adonai, a Jew, at Genoa. 244 He blames him for sending false News
about the Genoeses to the Port.

XVIII. To the Kaimakan. 246 Of Turin; of the new invented Bullets; of the
Affairs of Italy, and Spanish Fleet that was lost.

XIX. To Dgnet Oglou. 250 Of Mahmut's Amors, with a beautiful Greek.

XX. To the Invincible Vizir Azem. 257 Of a Chiaus* from the Port, who came to
Paris; and touching the Affairs of Persia.

XXI. To Cara Hali, the Physician, etc. 260 He gives him an Account of his
Recovery; of the violent Frosts at Paris, and Austerity of the Capuchins.

XXII. To the Kaimakam. 264 Of the Troubles in Spain, Catalonia and Portugal;
and a Description of the Revolt in Barcellona.

XXIII. To Dgnet Oglou. 268 Letter of Consolation, on the Fire at
Constantinople.

XXIV. To the Captain Bassa of the Sea. 273 Of the Vessels of Africa, taken by
the Christians; and of the Knights of Maltha.

XXV. To the Invincible Vizir Azem. 275 A Description of the Revolution of
Portugal.

XXVI. To Enguril Emir Cheik, etc. 287 Of the Death of Amurath IV. of the new
Sultan Ibrahim; and of the Affairs of the Seraglio.


BOOK IV.
LETTER I. TO the Venerable Mufti, etc. 293 Of Cardinal Richlieu, his Craft and
Policy.

II. To the Reis Effendi, etc. 295 Of a Conspiracy discovered at Paris, against
Cardinal Richlieu.

III. To the Kaimakan. 297 Of Julius Mazarin, and his Negotiation in Savoy.

IV. To Dgnet Oglou. 300 A particular Description of the Greatness of the
Spanish Monarchy.

V. To the Invincible Vizir Azem. 303 Of the Battle of Sedan; of Count
Soisson's Death, and Conspiracy against the Cardinal.

VI. To Solomon his Cousin. 309 Mahmut complains of his Perfidiousness.

VII. To Dgnet Oglou. 312 Against the Infidelity and Inconstancy of the
beautiful Greek.

VIII. To Carcoa, at Vienna. 316 He informs him of the Receipt of his Letters,
with the Money and Balm of Mecha.

IX. To Berber Mustapha Aga, etc. 317 Of the Duke of Lorrain; the Loss of his
Country; and of the King of France's Indignation.

X. To Bedredin, Superior of the Dervises, etc. 332 On his own Age; and of a
Man that lived an 129 Years.

XI. To the Redoubtable Vizir Azem. 325 On the Life and Death of General
Bannier; and Imprisonment of Dom Duartus, Brother to the new King of Portugal.

XII. To the Kaimakan. 328 Of the Parliament of Paris; and Affairs of Catalonia.

XIII. To the Venerable Mufti, etc. 331 Of Cardinal Richlieu, and the Calumnies
published against him, touching his Design of making himself Patriarch of
France.

XIV. To Oucoumiche his Mother, etc. 333 Letter of Consolation, on the Death of
her second Husband; that the Countess of Soissons has greater cause of Trouble
for the Death of her Son.

XV. To the Grand Seignior's Chief Treasurer. 338 Of the disgrace of the
Archbishop of Bourdeaux.

XVI. To the Kaimakan. 339 On the Imprisonment of Count Allie, apprehended at
Turin, by Richlieu's Order.

XVII. To the Reis Effendi. 342 Of a Spaniard found dead in Paris, who had in
his Pocket a Catalogue of all the great Lords, whom Cardinal Richlieu caused to
be destroyed.

XVIII. To William Vospel. 343 Of his Retirement from the World; on Thieves,
and the Invention of Keys.

XIX. To the Venerable Mufti. 347 Of Cardinal Richlieu, and what he did in
respect of a General of Dervises, and of the great New^ brought him.

XX. To the Kaimakan. 350 Of the Books of Geber; and of Chemistry.

XXI. To Mehemet, an Eunuch Page. 358 What Cardinal Richlieu did against the
Queen of France, and of his Ambition.

XXII. To the Kaimakam. 360 Of Dom Sebastian, King of Portugal, who died in
Africa; and of him that took on him that Name

XXIII. To the Mufti. 365 Of a Mule laden with Gold, which Cardinal Richlieu
sent to an unknown Person in a Wood.

XIV. To Berber Mustapha Aga. 366 Description of Duels; of a Bill of Defiance
which the Duke de Medina Celi, sent to Dom John of Braganza, the new King of
Portugal.

XXV. To the Invincible Vizir Azem. 37^ Of a new Conspiracy discovered at
Lisbon, against the new King of Portugal.


LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS. VOL. I.
BOOK I.
LETTER I.
Mahmut the Arabian, and Vilest of the Grand Signior's Slaves, to
Hasnadarbassy, Chief Treasurer to his Highness at Constantinople.
I Have at length finished my Journey, after one hundred and forty days March,
arriving at Paris, the 4th. of this present Moon, according to the Christians
Style. I made no stay in Hun^ary, yet sojourned One and forty Days at Vienna;
where I observed all the Motions of that Court, according as I was ordered; of
which I shall not ^ow speak, having given a full Account to the ever ^nvincible
Vizir Azem. Being but newly arrived, scarce know any Body, and am as little
known my self. I have suffered my Hair, to grow a little below my Ears; and as
to my Lodging, it is in the House of an old Flemming, where my Room is so small,
that Jealousy it self can scarce enter. And because I will have no Enemy near
me, I will therefore admit of no Servant.

Being of low Stature, of an ill-favored Countenance, ill shaped, and by
Nature not given to Talkativeness, I shall the better conceal my self. Instead
of my Name, Mahmut the Arabian, I have taken on me, that of Titus the
Moldavian; and, with a little Cassock of black Serge, which is the Habit I have
chosen, I make two Figures; being in Heart what I ought to be; but Outwardly,
and in Appearance, what I never intend.

Carcoa at Vienna, furnishes me with Bread and Water, supplying me with just
enough to Live, and I desire no more. The Eggs here, are dearer than Pullets
with you. It is to him that I will address my Letters.

Eliachim the Jew came to see me, who seems to be sufficiently informed of what
passes in the World, and will be an useful Man to me: Yet I will never trust
him more than I need. Although I have a Dispensation from the Mufti for Lying,
and false Oaths, which I shall be obliged to make; yet, I have still, some
Qualms on my Mind. However, our Sovereign must be served; and, I can commit no
Sin, as long as this is my sole End. A^ for the Intelligence which I shall
send, none shall come from me but what is true, unless I be first deceived my
self.

It will be hard for me, to mention any thing considerable of a City which is
not to be viewed in One day, I having been there but Seven. It Is peopled like
the Borders of the Sea with Sand, the Inhabitants lodging to the very
Cock-lofts; and Houses are built on the Bridges.

This great City is divided by a River, and both ^arts of it are joined by a
great Bridge of Stone, ^ell built and very stately. In the midst of it is ^en,
an Horse of Brass, with the Statue of Henry (...). which bestrides it; whose
Heroic Actions ^ave justly surnamed him The Great, and he seems ^ill to
command this Capital of the Kingdom. ^he other Bridges, being full of Houses,
are not ^en, appearing as if they had been made for the ^ity, not the River.

The King's Palace is an ancient Building, yet re^ains a certain Majesty, which
denotes the Gran^eur of its Master: Within it appears a Desert; ^or the Court
is always abroad, or in the Army.

A Churchman, termed at Rome a Cardinal, is ^he principal Minister of State;
his Name is Ar^and du Plessis, Cardinal of Richlieu. He is esteemed (...) great
Politician, a Man of Wit and Action, and ^very way fitted for the Place he
holds.

All the People make Vows to Heaven, That their King may become a Father; for
the Queen ^as been barren these many Years.

I go into the Churches, as a Christian; and ^hen I seem attentive to their
Mysteries, I hold ^ur sacred Alcoran in my Hands, addressing my ^rayers to our
Holy Prophet; and thus beha^ing my self, I give no Offense. I avoid Disputes,
^ind my own Concerns, and do nothing which ^ay endanger my Salvation.

Preserve thy Health, and expect to hear from ^e as often as the Interest of our
Great and Mighty Monarch requires, who is the Master of my Life and Affections.

I make thee no Present of my Services; for they ^e devoted to that Lord, whose
Slave thou art as well as I. The Letters I write for the future, shall ^e
directed to the Ministers of the Divan.

Live with the Piety of a good Mussulman, and the Prudence of an able Minister,
and preserve the Treasure as thine own Heart, which (thou know) is the last
expiring.

Paris, 11th of the 9th. Moon of the Year 1637, according to the Christian
Style.
LETTER II.
To the same Hasnadarbassy.
I Had too good an Opinion of my self, and did not sufficiently consider to
whom I wrote, when I attempted, in so little a time, to give thee an account of
the Court of France, and how this King lives. An old Arabian was wont to say,
To have a perfect Knowledge of Things, we must know them more than Once, and
forget them Thrice, to the end, that learning them a Fourth time, they may
become perfectly our own. This will instruct me how to write to my Friends
hereafter; not as I understand Affairs, but as they ought to be understood:
For, once well done, is better than twice ill done.

I think I may say, the Spaniards want Ground themselves, by taking an handful
from others. Two and twenty of their Galleys, with some other small Vessels,
have taken two small Islands named St. Margaret's and St. Honorat's, which lie
over against Provence, and are barren and unprofitable Places, and will serve
to little purpose, unless for Ports; and it is also a question, how long they
will hold them.

The War betwixt these two Nations is like to continue, especially from the
death of the two Italian Princes, Victor Amade, Duke of Savoy, and Charles
Gorague, Duke of Mantua.

I believe it an Effect of Providence, that these Two Nations know not their
own Interest, or knowing it neglect it. Heaven is more kind to us; for, as our
Empire transcends all others in Strength and Greatness, so it does in Unity and
Concord, by which means it is in our Power to make War or live in Peace. The
Christians never consider the Advantage they lose, and the Good they may
acquire by attacking of us, whom they yet hate and treat as Barbarians.

The Archbishop of Bordeaux, is at present General of the French Naval Forces;
who, though a Priest, is yet permitted to turn Tarpaulin and Soldier: For my
part, I understand not how a Prelate of his Rank can forsake his Flock, his
Altar and his Function. If what the Christians say be true, but that is nothing
to us; and the King of France being so enlightened a Prince, and employing him,
as he does, he must needs be a good Seaman and Soldier.

To say no more in this Matter. For Princes of what Religion soever they be,
are always sacred, and not to be approached but with Respect, seeing their
Doings lie above the Reach of a common Capacity.

I would fain hear of the Grand Signior's Health; for, when he is well, all the
World is so to me, and without him I am nothing. I will not write so soon to
the Grand Vizir, being desirous to write what passes here with more Exactness.

I am in this Place like a Man lost in Confusion; for, this Town seems rather a
Province than a City. All is Hurry and Noise, every Body brushing about after
Action. The Men for the most part are for Martial Exploits, either at Sea or
Land; and as to the Women, they are not idle, employing themselves as becomes
them, either in the Shops or Kitchins. Yet, they take more care to show
themselves, than ours do to hide themselves. D^ thou be careful of thy Health,
for I shall never b^ Miserable having thee to my Friend.

Paris 25th of the 10th Moon, of the Year 1637.
LETTER III.
To Darnish Mehemet Bassa.
I Have been at a Ceremony which I am willing to see often, to give an Account
of it in my Letters; it is the Te Deum, which Christian Princes cause to be sung
in their Churches, on the gaining any considerable Advantage over their
Enemies; which Te Deum is an Hymn composed by two of their Saints, to wit,
Ambrose and Austin. When the French beat the Spaniards they sing the Te Deum,
and when these vanquish their Enemies they do the same. These Two Nations do
the duty of the Mussulmen, in destroying one another; and when this is done,
they give God Thanks for the Evil they have committed. Whence we may judge of
the Wisdom and Piety of the Mahometans, amongst whom there is seldom seen an
open War, and if it should happen, it is generally Condemned.

The Rejoicing of the French proceeds hence; the Spaniards had besieged
Leucate, a small Peninsula in Languedoc, which is but four Leagues round, with
Two Ports, where a few Galleys, and Four small Vessels may Anchor in safety.
The Place was attacked by the Spaniards with much Heat, but was afterward
given over with as great Loss. The Assailants being obliged to make a Retreat,
not unlike a shameful Flight; quitted their Baggage, their Arms and all their
other Provision.

Count Serbellon offered at first to Barris, who commanded the Place, a great
Sum of Money, which was to be attended with a constant Pension; which refused,
they were necessitated to betake themselves to force, by which, in short, the
Spaniards were entirely defeated. Serbellon withdrew toward Perpignan, with
the Duke of Cardonn's Son, who was Viceroy of Catalonia. He lost all his Tents,
his Plate, and the Moneys designed for Payment of the Army: And I will say yet
more, that he has lost the Reputation of a good Captain and valiant Soldier,
until he can recover an Opportunity to Fight and Vanquish. This Victory must
have been of Consequence, and very Glorious, seeing the King assisted in
Person, together with the Queen, Two Cardinals, the Council of State, and that
of the Finances, and that which they call here, the Courts Sovereign, which are
a Company of Men chosen to judge others. Besides these, there was an
innumerable Concourse of People, who testified their Joy for the Advantage
gained by their King, notwithstanding it be at the Cost of their Brethren of
the same Religion.

Live happily, and conserve thy Honor as thy Life.

Paris, 25th of the 10th Moon, of the Year 1637.
LETTER IV.
To Isouf his Kinsman.
I Tell thee I live, and am well. I have received no News from thee; perhaps
thou thoughtest me Dead. I Salute thee first with my Letters, though thou
ought to have begun. If thou art ashamed of my Kindred, accuse thy Parents,
by whom thou art become of the same Family. But be not ungrateful to them, nor
forgetful of the Good thou have received from me. Thou shall now know where I
am and ought to stay, and may answer me if thou will. Believe in the mean
time the Counsel I give thee, although thou do not demand it. Be devout in
thy Religion without Hypocrifie, and remember there is no more Gods but One; as
also, that the Favorite, and sent of God, is Mahomet, his Prophet. After that,
love thy Master, without desiring any thing more than the Execution of his
Pleasure. Embrace thy Father as from me, and give thy Mother a Kiss, saluting
her as my Sister and Friend, which is the most endearing Title that Antiquity
could invent for Persons, who had the same Sentiments of Affection. Live
happily, and conserve thy Chastity.

Paris, 25th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1637.
LETTER V.
To the Aga of the Janisaries.
I Shall give thee some Pleasure in telling thee, that the Christians lose
easier than they acquire. It seems, the Marquess Ambrose Spinola, whom all the
World took for a great Captain, has lost much of his Reputation; seeing, that a
Place is lost in eleven Weeks, which he had formerly besieged eleven Months,
and where he had expended eleven Millions. If these Circumstances are true,
they are very extraordinary. However, he shall continue a Great Captain in my
Opinion; and it is ordinary enough to see that lost in a little Time, by the
Cowardliness of one, which has not been acquired in a great while by the Valor
of a whole Army.

The Prince of Orange has taken Breda, a Place of great Importance, which had
been surrendered twelve Years and three Months since to the said Spinola, who
commanded the Army of Spain. This Conquest is great; for, 'twas the general
Opinion, the Place could not be taken but by Famine; yet has it been
constrained to yield, by the continual Fire and Valor of the Besiegers.

Had not the Hollanders become Masters of this Place, they had been, as it
were, blocked up on the side of Brabant, and had the Enemy always at their
Gates; whereas, now they are more at large. We ought to rejoice rather at their
acquisitions, than those of the Spaniards, with whom we never have had Peace.

This Place, is fortified with much Regularity. It has fifteen Bastions,
besides some little Forts on the Moat side. There are five Horn-works without.
The Place is considerable for its Greatness. It contains five thousand Houses,
with great Gardens, and there are three principal Gates.

I mention these Particulars, because thou art a Man of War. Receive my Letter
kindly; believe me thy Friend, and do not doubt of my Fidelity. If thou will
add to thy Valor by new Merit, which will heighten the Consideration Men have
for thee, I will teach thee a Secret, which will not be very Expensive, but
very Delightful. Read at Times the Histories of others, and particularly those
of the Greatest and most Fortunate Princes, and their Captains. Imitate rather
the Wise, than those who have only signalized themselves by their Valor. To
conclude, be conversant in Histories, but choose always the best, I mean such
as cannot be suspected for Lies. Thou can not fail of good Books, both Greek
and Arabic, which are Translated into the Turkish and Persian Tongues. Thou will learn to be wise by the Folly of others, and wilt become yet more Prudent,
by observing the sage Conduct of such who performed great Actions: Above all
Things, never neglect to make serious Reflections upon the least Events. It
happens sometimes that passages are found in Books that seem of no Consequence,
which may yet be of Use in important Occasions, for the clearing of
Difficulties. And for Example, learn this from a great King, Henry IV. who
Conquered his Kingdom by the Dint of his Sword.

I will finish with a worthy Saying of Marquess Spinola's, which I think is to
the purpose. He says, That a Captain's Sword must be tied to his Heart, his
Heart fixed to his Head, and Conducted by his Judgment; which ought particularly
to be formed by the reading of Histories. Love me as much as I esteem thee, and
thou will never love me enough.

Paris 25th of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1637.
LETTER VI.
To Mehemet, Page Eunuch to the Sultan Mother.
THou have spent fourteen Years in the Seraglio, and to thy unhappiness, always
been in the Service of Women; serve now a Man, who is certainly somewhat more
than a Woman. Thou know, the Confidence we have in each other is arrived to
that Degree, as to discover our failings to each other, and to suffer them.
Seeing I am at present far off, and by consequence the more exposed to Critics
and ill Offices, do not forget the Interests of thy Friend. Watch Day and Night
for the Advantage of my Life. Observe, search and endeavor to penetrate what
People discourse of me, and what is said concerning me at Court. Our Great
Emperor sent me hither to observe what passes here, and render him an Account.
I know I am where I ought to practice what I am commanded to do, but I do not
yet know whether I shall return to the place where I would willingly end my
Days. Most things are done on that side, but they are not all equally
performed. I have therefore more just Reason to apprehend, that all Men do know
that I shall acquit my self with Fidelity, of the Orders I have received.
Consider how far his Unhappiness does extend, who serves another, who is Master
of so many Millions of Subjects.

I will inform thee of two Things, whereof thou shall tell the first to the
Bassa of the Sea, and the other to the Musti's Vicar. We are told, that the
King of England has set forth a Vessel upon the British Ocean, of such
Prodigious Greatness, that it exceeds all others as well in Force as Vastness.
It is Armed with One hundred and twenty Brass Guns. It draws Unrigg'd,
Seventeen Foot of Water, and its Bulk is Eleven hundred Tun. It Is reported,
that it cost Two Millions of Piasters, and as if it were the King of all other
Ships, it is called The Sovereign. The Second News is, a Prodigy that happened
in Upper Saxony, which finds but a little Credit with the Wise, but is easily
believed by the Women, and the Common People.

They say, That at Dresden, one of the Duke of Saxony's Courtiers having cut a
piece of boiled Beef, there issued so much blood out of it, that the Elector's
Table was wholly covered with it; which extremely troubled this Prince, looking
upon the Adventure as a Presage of Famine and War. Let me hear often from thee,
and of our Friends; but, make no Confidence to any, of that which is betwixt
us. Thou shall learn from me Secrets of great Importance, provided thou be
Faithful and Discreet. God grant thee in an Instant, the Good which I shall
wish to acquire in my whole Lise.

Paris, 15th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1637.
LETTER VII.
To the Invincible Vizir Azem.
SEeing thou have acquired the Knowledge of Things present, by thy Prudence and
rare Understanding, and have desired me to inform thee of those Things which
shall happen in the Places whither thou have sent me; I will endeavor to
penetrate the Affairs the most secret, to the end that nothing in this World
may be hid from thee.

At present, there are but few Actions in Christendom which deserve to be
reported; and, thou art sufficiently instructed in the Affairs of France, and
touching the Person of her King. I expect to inform thee of Events, which at
the same time may divert thee, and instruct thee. This Prince is called Henry
the Just. He cannot be called the Happy; for, having as yet no Son to succeed
him, there will be always Occasions of Trouble in his Kingdom: Nor is there any
Hopes that the Queen may prove with Child, by Reason of her long Barrenness. If
the King will resolve to be divorced from her, and take another, it cannot be
effected without Rome; and Rome, the Mufti, and all their Priests, will,
according to their usual Manner, raise so many Difficulties, and be so long
before they determine, that it will be a hard Matter to extort from them, that
Consent which the Laws of the Christians render necessary for the dissolving a
First Marriage. Certainly, this Slavery which does thus subject the Christian
Princes, is hard; but, it is a Point of their Law, which being of no Importance
to thee, I will trouble thee no more with it. This defect of a Successor in the
King of France, is of great Advantage to the Spaniards, and one would think,
Heaven had created this Nation to be Enemies to the French. It seems moreover,
there is a secret Violence which entertains an Antipathy betwixt the Two
Nations; which enforces a belief, that there can never be a solid Peace betwixt
them.

Thou have already understood from those I writ to, and who dare hide nothing
from thee, what has happened here during the small time of my sojourning in
these Quarters. I will not repeat little Things; the Greatness of thy Genius,
and the Eminency of thy Employment, have put thee far above every Thing that is
not Extraordinary, that we ought to inform the of nothing but transcending
Events.

I will not entertain thee with the taking of the Old Town of Sally, nor of the
Disorders in the New. Thou will have learned more swiftly from the Coasts of
Africa, Advices of the Hostile Acts which the English have committed with their
Ships of War, against that City, which the King of Morocco protects.

The Attempt was great, and is discoursed of here as a hardy Enterprise. The
Vastness of thy Understanding will easily judge of the Consequence.

They say here, that the King of France has writ to Rome, that he will
willingly resolve to make a long Cessation of Arms with his Enemies. If that
happens, this Repose will serve but to increase the Forces of both sides, which
may hereafter render the War more cruel. In the mean time, it is thought they
design a General Peace, but Time will discover to the Politicians, what we
cannot at present divine.

This Court is Great and Magnificent. It stays not long in a Place, and is very
seldom at Paris; being in the Camp amongst the Armies, or for Pleasure in the
Country.

The Genius of the Courtiers is different, but they have an equal Inclination
for two Things very opposite, War and Love; and apply themselves to both with
much Constancy.

The Religion which they call Protestant, and which has been the occasion of so
much Disturbance to the Kingdom, is now low, by the Surrender of Rochell, which
was, as thou know, the principal Bulwark of those of that Party.

It seems, this King will imitate our Mighty and Formidable Emperors, and will
regulate his Conduct by thine, in not suffering within his State two Religions
which are opposite.

The Kingdom is notwithstanding, as yet, full of Trouble. Cardinal Richlieu,
who holds the Helm of Affairs in France, as thou directest that of the Empire
of the World, seems, as may be said, in the midst of a Tempest, and has Reason
enough to apprehend Danger; for there are an infinite number of People who
follow the Standards of Luther and Calvin, who have no other Thoughts but of
his Ruin.

In the mean time, the Power of France seems mighty Great, and it is to be
apprehended, it may in Time augment infinitely.

Thou know, Invincible Bassa, what the Ancient Gauls did in Old Time. They
were called Gallogrecians; for having overrun Italy and sacked Rome, they
settled in the middle of Asia, and could not be overcome but by the Romans:
because the Heavens had ordained that the Romans should subjugate all Nations.
But now that these Gauls are no more, and there are no more of these brave
Romans, we must pray the Infinite Goodness of the most High, that the Power of
these Modern Gauls may be limited. If the French however would do what a
Spaniard, who fled from the Passion of Philip II. counseled Henry IV. their
King, which was, To set himself right with Rome, to have a great Power at Sea,
and a Council composed of Wise, Secret and Faithful Men; by that means he might
one day perhaps equal the Ancient Romans. I think he that gave this Advice was
named Antonio Perez.

I observe every thing with care, but shall observe them nearer for the future.
It appears to me, that the Genius of this Nation is to aggrandize it self, and
extend its Limits.

The French have a common saying, That Kings having nothing above them that may
limit them, God has given the Empire of the Earth to the strongest. They add,
That Adam left no Kingdoms to his Children, but that they made them for
themselves. They glory in certain Prophecies, which promise them the Empire of
the World. In relating this, I tell what they say, not what ought to happen.
They entertain here the same hatred for us, as others do when our Power is
Formidable; but, wise Men who have Knowledge of our History, speak with more
Admiration of the Ottoman Empire, than of that of the Romans; and if these last
were destroyed by the Civil Wars which tore them in pieces, the other will
increase and maintain it self, by the great Pre-cautions used to hinder them,
and by the Union of their Forces.

Thou know more of the Extent of the City of Paris, than I can tell thee. It
appears to me, great and full of People; but, Constantinople is yet Greater,
and more Populous.

Thou will pardon me after all, if I make not a certain Judgment of a Nation,
which I do not yet well comprehend. However, I will assure thee, the French are
no Fools, and I believe never were. They do not love Novelty through Levity,
but for Reason of State; and when they are unconstant, it is not to do Ill, but
to acquire Good. They are Happy and Unfortunate in Wars, like others; but, what
is considerable, They do not combat their Enemies because they hate them, but
in Obedience to their Prince, which occasions the great Discipline which is in
their Armies. And, what seems worthy of Reflection, is, That they love their
King by Inclination; and, this Love produces in them, that which our Attachment
to the Precepts of the Law, does in the Hearts of the best Turks. I use this
Comparison, which I learnt from thee, who art the Wisest Man in the World; from
whose Mouth I have heard, as from an Oracle, That it is not much material,
whether Subjects love their Master by Inclination or Fear, provided they always
faithfully serve him, and are always humble.

If ever it happen I am discovered, thou will do me a great Honor to let me
know, If I ought to avow my self an Agent from the sublime Port; or, whether I
ought to die without confessing any Thing.

I end with my Head in the Dust, without ever ceasing to supplicate the most
High, that he will shower his continued Happiness upon thee and the Empire.

Paris, 15th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1637.
LETTER VIII.
To Muzlu Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
THis is the second Letter which I have writ to thee. My Dispatches hitherto
have not been filled with Things of great Importance, by reason I have not yet
had Time to learn them. I wish greatly to write what may please thee. Receive
therefore what I offer kindly, and be persuaded, That I fear thy Censures, as
much as if I did deserve them.

I live here according to the Instructions which were given me, and live easy
enough. The Country is good and fat, the Men good Companions, are frank and
seem Discreet.

I have not as yet any Acquaintance with Women, and yet it is necessary I find
Means to introduce my self into their Companies. It is a Sex that will not
pardon, when they think themselves neglected. They are proper to discover
Things one would know, and to say them when one would have them published; and
likewise, they as much penetrate into the Secrets of Hearts, as the most
refined and spiritualest Courtiers. Further, there are many of them, that can
conceal nothing, but what they do not know.

I frequent not the Monks but when necessitated. If I see them, it is to seem
Devout, upon Design of being introduced by them into the House of a Minister of
State, when I teach his Son the Greek Language.

We must not expect to find here the great Tranquillity which is at
Constantinople. The Town is so full of Coaches, of Horses and Wagons, that the
Noise surpasses Imagination. Thou will certainly find it strange, that Men who
are in Health, and have no sore Legs, should cause themselves to be drawn in an
Engine with four Wheels; but I more wonder to see, these same Men can resolve
to suffer the Inconveniency of the Noise, and of the Expense which they throw
away out of Vanity. The more moderate French, which do not approve of this
Luxury, say, That in the time of Henry III. there were but three Coaches in
Paris, whereof two were the Kings. But the Number is now so great, that they
are not to be counted.

I can tell thee no more of the Genius of the French, thou know it
perfectly. There is in all their Actions a Spirit very delicate, and an
Activity like that of Fire.

It seems, as if none but they knew the short Duration of Man's Life; they do
every Thing with so much haste, as if they had but one Day to live. If they go
on Foot, they run; if they ride, they fly; and if they speak, they eat up half
their Words. They love new Inventions passionately. I can say nothing certain
of their Fidelity, though methinks we might suspect such, who do not read as
they write, nor write as they speak. They love Moneys, which they look upon as
the first Matter, and second Cause of all Things: They well-nigh adore it, and
that is the Original Sin of all Nations.

Paris ought to be destroyed to enrich many Cities in Europe. Whence thou may
comprehend her Greatness, her Traffic, how Rich she is, and how all Sorts of
Arts do flourish in her.

The French Nobility is always ready to get on Horseback at their King's
Commands: And they love War so well, that it is to be supposed, we should have
enough to do with them, if we were as near them as the Spaniards, and they did
not want Infantry.

I shall hereafter observe every Circumstance with so much Care, as well in
this Kingdom as elsewhere, that nothing shall escape me. In the mean Time, I
shall endeavor to get Acquaintance; but shall want more Moneys than is allowed
me, to answer what is expected from me. Two Chequins A Day, are more than
enough to support a Man that will live like a Cynick, but not sufficient to
introduce me into Houses, to dive into their Secrets, and enable me to discover
the Affairs of most Importance, according to my Commission; so that thou must
assist me to obtain more.

I hope to succeed in my Employment, if thou do not refuse me thy Assistance,
finding no Difficulty in the Execution of my Orders, but the Necessity of
Lying, when I pass for a Christian. I fancy I see Mahomet in a Rage, and
believe my Soul lost; though I am from my Heart more faithful in my Religion,
than all the Mahometans put together. Seeing I am resolved to do a Thing to
which I have so much Aversion, thou may be assured, I will bear all the Evil
imaginable that can happen to me with Firmness, though in all appearance, I
ought to hope nothing but Good.

Deliver, I beseech thee, this enclosed Letter into the Hands of the most
Venerable Mufti, and extort from him, if possible, a Solution of my Doubts.
There is nothing that touches me nearer, than what regards my Religion, and
with my Religion the Service of my Emperor.

Paris, 15th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1637.
LETTER IX.
To the Mufti, Prince of the Religion of the Turks.
I Will die a true Mussulman, though I should see all the Crosses of the
Carthaginians set up for my Punishment, and had before mine Eyes, all the
Instruments of the most Cruel Tortures, that the Enemies of our Holy Religion
could invent. But, seeing there is no Question at present of dying, but of
living to serve my Emperor, I beg of thee, Sovereign Prelate, that thou will be
pleased to conserve my Innocence, in giving me an ample Absolution, or in
imposing a Penance that may cancel all my Crimes.

Paris has always been the Residence of the Kings of France; whence it is,
that the Exercise of no other Religion but the Christian, is suffered there;
and those who acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for their Head, have the principal
Management of the Affairs of Religion; and it is with these that the Rites of
the Latin Church are more strictly observed.

I live here in Appearance, as if I were a Christian and a Catholic. I enter
into their Churches, assist at their Ceremonies, kneel before the Cross; and I
appear with great Devotion and Humility before the Images, which are had here
in Veneration.

I know well enough, if the Life which I lead be not permitted me, as
advantageous to the Affairs of State, and the Person of the Grand Signior, that
I commit Sacrilege, acting as I do, contrary to the Precepts of Mahomet,
expressed in his Alcoran.

I am guilty of violating the Law which is prescribed me, and deserve death, if
thou do not, by approving this Life I am obliged to lead, assure me of both
my Salvation and Life. It Is true, thou have already given me Absolution from
all the false Oaths I shall be necessitated to take, when they are for the
Service of my Master; but, I am not assured this Absolution extends far enough
to secure my Conscience, when I abuse Holy Things.

It Is thy Province to decide this Point which is of such importance to my
Repose, which makes me expect thy Resolves with impatience; if thou think a
Faithful Mussulman, who conserves his Religion in his Heart, and lives, as I
do, amongst the Enemies of the Law, worthy this Grace.

The interest of my Conscience obliges me to demand, after what manner I ought
to govern my self, when I see them, who are effectively what I seem to be,
practice the same Acts of Religion.

The French will in a little Time celebrate their Carnaval or Shrove-tide. As
soon as it is done, the Catholics think of Fasting, having first assisted at a
Ceremony, where Ashes are put upon their Foreheads, to make them remember, they
were formed out of the Dust, and shall return to Dust again. It is at this Time
they go to hear Sermons, their Priests explaining that which they call the
Gospel, and frequent the Church more than ordinary. They apply themselves
oftener to Works of Piety; and having purged their Consciences by Penances and
secret Confessions, which one Man makes to another, they eat of a certain
Bread, which they call The Sacrament of the Eucharist; where, after certain
Words pronounced by their Priest, they will have the Body of their Messiah to
be really present under those Apparent Species.

This Ceremony is an Obligation that good Christians cannot dispense with, it
being ordained by their Law, and by their Great Prelate, the Bishop of Rome.
They commonly call it Confessing, and Communicating, and Keeping Easter. Ought
I hazard my self in committing so horrid a Sacrilege, and tempt, as I may say,
God, by so great a Superstition, and so irritate our Great Prophet? It may be
said, perhaps, that many Jews have done the same Thing, and do it yet every day
to preserve themselves more securely. But how many of them have been chastised
by visible Miracles from Heaven, and undergone terrible Punishments by the
Ordinances of the Judges?

All these Reflections trouble my Spirit, O Holy Primate of the most Divine
Law. I do not think it lawful to mock the Mysteries of any Religion whatsoever.
The God of the Christians, is the same that we adore: but Their Religion is
quite opposite to Ours: There is a great Difference betwixt their JESUS
Crucified, with all the Ignominies possible, as these Infidels do believe, and
a Mahomet Immortal and Triumphant, a great Legislator and the Angular Stone of
the first Empire of the World.

Give me then positive Orders, to the end I may be eased of my Scruples, and
may believe, That what thou permittest me, may be an Effect of thy Justice, and
not of a Toleration which may be pernicious to me.

It is true, I may wave all these things, in feigning to have done them; but it
will be more advantageous for my Affairs, not to exempt my self, if that may be
without a Crime.

Teach then a most Obedient Slave, what thou shall believe most conducible to
the Glory of God, and most profitable for the Service of our Sovereign Lord. I
do not send thee my Doubts to puzzle thee, but to draw from thy great and
sublime Genius, such Lights as may dissipate the Darknesses I live in.

This done, Sovereign Prelate, remember thy Humble Servant, and pray our Holy
Prophet, that he will keep me from perishing.

Paris, 15th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1637.
LETTER X.
To the Kaimakam.
I Received from thy Hand the first Dispatch that has been addressed to me from
the Sublime Port, and I received it at the beginning of the Year, according to
the Moons of these Infidels. The Date is of the Month Mielidge. Thou order'st
me to write to thee of Two Things, and to do Three. Thou will first know, If
this King be Aged, and of perfect Health; and afterward, If there be any Hopes
that the Queen may have Children. Thou would also have me send his Highness
the Pictures of the King, the Cardinal of Richlieu, and the Eldest Son of the
Prince of Conde.

As thou art one of the principal Supports of the Power of the Sublime Port,
elevated above all the Thrones of the World, (after the Vizir Azem, whose
Orders are the Rule of the Universe) Minister and first Slave of the happy
Emperor of the Ottomans; I ought to do what thou command me.

I tell thee then, I have seen this King thrice, nor does he appear by his
Countenance, by his Hair, or by his Shape, to be yet Old; neither would it be
easy to divine the Number of his Years, if we were ignorant of the Day of his
Birth; But, it is known to every Body, That this Prince was born the 27. of the
Ninth Moon of the Year 1601, according to the Style of the Christians.

By this thou may justly calculate the Age of this Monarch, who though he is
in his Flower, seems fading, because he has as yet given no Heir to his
Kingdom; besides, his Years being near Forty, surpass that of a Young Man; and
it is observed, That few Princes arrive to a great Age.

The Queen may still lie in, if she prove with Child; which if it should happen
after Twenty three Years of Barrenness, it is certain, a Fruit which has been
so long in ripening, will give an ample Subject of reasoning to the Astrologers
of Europe.

For my part, I fancy this King will scarce become a Father, unless he
Repudiate this Wife and marry another.

It is not permitted to be inquisitive into the Cause of this Sterility. Hereby
thou see the Weakness of those Christian Princes who are subjected to the
Laws of Rome, which think it a Crime to give themselves Heirs that are not born
of Lawful Wedlock; though it often happens, that when such are wanting, this
Kingdom is exposed to Ruin, by the Dissensions and Civil Wars, which, on these
occasions, are always inevitable.

The Most High, who has always protected the Grandeur of the Ottoman Empire,
has left the Infidels in these Errors; to the End, that he might give our most
Mighty Monarch, who is the Avenger of the Divine Unity, an Eminence Superior to
that of all Kings, who are his Slaves; and at the same Time, made him Holy
above all the Saints in the World; and permitted us to have Children, that may
succeed us, from as many Wives as we can entertain; the Children of True
Believers being always Legitimate.

I humbly beg Pardon; I forgot I spoke to thee, who art Wisdom it self, and to
whom no Secrets of the Law or State are unknown.

I wlll send to Carcoa at Vienna, the Pictures of the King, of the Prince of
Conde's Son, and of the Cardinal Richlieu, according to the Orders I received
from thee, and they shall be dispatched in little Time: I would to Heaven I
could as easily send thee the Originals; I should at one Stroke disarm this
Kingdom, which would thereby be suddenly involved in Fire and Blood.

The Habit I wear, and the Manner after which I live, has already gained me
many Friends. I find Means to go once a week to Court. My Deformity protects me
against the Jealousies of Husbands. Some People take me for a Wise Man, and
discourse confidently in my Presence of Politics and Affairs of State; neither
do I neglect the making Use of every Thing, which may be advantageous to me in
my Ministry. Thus, in doing a Thing for the which I have much Aversion, I
compass all I desire; and I assure thee, upon my Faith, If thou will continue
to protect me and assist me with thy Counsels, I will do somewhat extraordinary.

I supplicate the Great God, to give a perpetual Health to thy Body, and make
thy Soul enjoy, upon Earth and in Heaven, the Felicity of the Blessed.

Paris, 1st. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XI.
To Bedredin, Superior of the Convent of Dervises, of Cogny in Natolia.
I Write to thee, who art Venerable by thy Age, and so many long Voyages, which
thou have made. Thou, who have been so many Times in Pilgrimage to Arabia,
Tartary, Persia, and the Indies, always barefoot, and begging, out of pure
Devotion to the Saint of Saints, our Great Prophet Mahomet.

I address this Letter to thee; Thee, who bear the Scars of five and twenty
Great Wounds; Thee, who have prayed nine and fifty Times in the Sacred Porch,
and adored the Holy Mysteries in the most retired Sanctuary of Mecha, and have
lived more than seventy Years of Religion amongst the Dervises, where thy Merit
caused thee to be elected Superior of the Convent in Natolia.

Thou know well, that I serve him, who is Arbitrator of the Destiny of the
Universe; I mean the Sultan, Sovereign of the World. Learn what I heard here
from the Mouth of Christians, and pardon me, if I have not sufficiently
answered them; but do not accuse me to have deserved Death, for having
seemingly cursed our Holy Law, and Him that gave it us; and, if I have seemed
to reject his Successors, Ali, Osman, and Omar, it was expedient that I should
commit some Evil, not to lose the Opportunity of doing much Good.

Thou know well, I am destined to serve; and, that being absolved from all
the Perjuries I shall commit, I may transgress the Law, by being permitted to
lie. That suffices: Read my Letter, and learn how far their Malice does extend,
who are Enemies to our Religion.

To instruct thee better in what has happened to me, I must tell thee, that
amongst these Infidels, there is an Order of Religious much in Vogue, called
the Company of JESUS: wherein, there is an infinite Company of Men, some more
able than others in all Sorts of Scienes sacred and profane; and, according to
Appearance, ought to be very recommendable for the Holiness of their Manners.

These Religious, who are ordinarily called Jesuits, have the Education of the
Youth almost in all the Cities of Europe, as well as in the Indies; and many
excellent Wits are brought up in the Seminaries they have established* When
they preach, the People crowd to their Sermons. They are the Confessors of
almost all the Princes and Monarchs of Christendom, who discover to them their
Weaknesses, their Sins, and the Vices whereunto they are inclined, and receive
from them, upon their Knees, like Slaves, such Penance as they think fit to
impose on them.

A Man may say of them, That being Dispensers of Penances, they are also the
Masters of Recompenses. They are Habited in a long Vest of black Wool, which
descends to their Heels. They go not barefoot, but their Vestments are simple.
They observe great Modesty in all their Actions; they march with Gravity, never
go alone, and suffer not their Beards to grow. They apply themselves to edify
the Good, and to correct the Bad.

The Founder of this Order was a Soldier, called Ignatius. The Spaniards will
have him to have been of their Nation; and the French affirm, that he is of
that Part of Navarre, which is subject to the Crown of France. If thou would
have me to speak the Truth, I think this Founder was a good Man, seeing all his
Disciples are Men of good Example, of great Modesty in their Actions, and very
Discreet in all their Undertakings.

This Ignatius began to study his Grammar in his seven and thirtieth Year,
which would make one believe, he took less pains to become a Saint than a
Scholar. His Enemies call his Disciples, the Politicians of the Church; and I,
on the contrary, call them the Camels of Esau; because, in bearing the Burden
of the Affairs of their Religion, they are loaded more than others, and forced
to couch under their Burdens. There is one thing seems strange in them, to
wit, That they should name themselves the Religious of the Society of Jesus; as
if they had a design, to distinguish themselves from other Christians; and that
this Title, which is particular to them, ought not only to agree to all the
other Religions, but to all the Followers of the Nazarite.

If they follow the Precepts of their Father Ignatius, thou must needs approve
their Way of living. He has taught no other ^ay than that of Obedience, to
those that profess his Order. He ordains, That those who enter into this
Society, do abandon themselves to the Discretion of their Superiors: And they
affirm, That if the Pope commands them to pass the Sea in a Vessel without
Oars, without Sails, and without a Rudder, they would obey, and must pass. And
some having reproached them, That there was Folly in such blind Obedience: they
answer, That Wisdom ought to be observed in the Commandments, and that it ought
not to be searched in Obedience. Make Reflection upon this Sentence, which is
conformable to our Laws.

To inform thee of the Power and Greatness of this Order, it suffices to tell
thee, That during sixteen Years that this Soldier governed it, he saw an
Hundred Colleges in Italy, in Germany, in France, and in Spain; and that in
Rome, which was founded by Borgia, has been, as may be said, the Parent of all
the rest. Judge hereby the Number of their Houses, and Disciples.

Having one day met with one of this Society, who understood the Oriental
Languages; and who conversing with me, did not believe he discoursed with a
Mussulman, I heard him vomit injurious, and fearful Imprecations against
Mahomet, against his Law, and against all true Believers. I have so much Horror
to write to thee all he said, that I will tell thee but some few of them; and
the rather to divert thee, by the knowledge of the Errors of our Enemies; and
also, that thou may not be afflicted at some things not very reasonable,
which are observed in many of the Precepts of the Law, which we follow. Let
this be said, as if I had not spoken it, seeing I pour frankly the Secrets of
my Heart into thy Bosom: no ways doubting, but thou know to be silent in
what may cause my Death. This Jesuit maintains, That the Mussulmans are not
Wise in following the Precepts of a Drunkard, who forbad drinking of Wine, and
committed Excesses himself, when he thought he was un-observed. He maintains
further, That it is foolish to give Credit to such a Fellow, who makes a
Paradise to consist of Beautiful Women, where one may abandon himself to all
sorts of Pleasure and Debauchery, and that he has not foreseen a Hell, where
he, and all his Followers, ought to suffer the Pains due to their Crimes. He
adds further, That one must be very foolish to adore a Blasphemer, who has
commanded his Law should be maintained by the Sword, when it could not be
supported by Reason.

The Father did not leave off so; he said, That seeing the Alcoran is filled
with Dreams, with Bestialities, with Blasphemies, and Impurities; the Mufti's,
the Doctors, and Interpreters of the Law, must be in a great Blindness, not to
condemn a Possessed, an Enchanter, who gives for the Precepts of his Religion,
the committing of Violences, Robberies, and all that may satisfy the most
Irregular Appetites. What Extravagancy, urged he, to adore the Heel of so vile
a Slave as Mahomet; and to believe, upon his Report, that Jacob's Father was
his Porter, to Deifie his Camel, and to place it in Heaven? He adds further,
That there is nothing so absurd, as to command the Turks to wash their Bodies,
when their Souls are defiled with Filth; to give them at the same time Charity
by Precept, and to command them Robberies by Devotion. It seems also to him
foolish, to believe that Mahomet is the only true Prophet* the only agreeable
Person to God; and to swear afterward by One hundred twenty four thousand
Prophets. He still entertains me with this Sort of Discourse.

But all this (O great Dervis) is nothing; he vomits yet this damnable He esie,
That the wickedest Wretches, and the most detestable that ever lived, were
Judas, Mahoment, and Luther; That these two last, as most impious, are the more
tormented in Hell. Judas, he said, suffered less Pains, because if he betrayed
his Lord, he was one of the Instruments of the Redemption of all Mankind;
whereas the others, in damning themselves, damned also an infinite Number of
other People. This Jesuit would have continued his Blasphemies, if Cardinal
Richlieu, in whose Anti Chamber we were, had not come out of his Closet, to go
to the King.

I had been silent all this while, because he gave me not a Moments liberty to
speak. At length, he asked me at parting, If I was not of his Sentiments; and I
answered precisely thus; My Father, If thou art a good Man, I approve what thou
say, because thou speak out of true Zeal; but, If thou be a Hypocrite,
I disapprove all, because thou shall be damned with Mahomet, and all the
Mussulmans.

The Jesuit smiled, not comprehending the Venom which lay hid in my Answer.
Btu, do thou not believe, thou, who art a Dervis, the most illuminated, That
a Man, of what Religion soever he be, provided he be a Good Man, may be Happy
after his Death? Tell me, I pray thee, thy Opinion herein; it is a Point very
important to be decided.

As for me, I begin really to think, That there may be Saints, even amongst the
Christians, as there are amongst Us. I have seen and understood many Things
that denote true Piety in some of them; and we must acknowledge, That the
Precepts of their Law have somewhat of Just; and if they be well observed, they
seem no less Holy to me than our own. They have one Article that puzzles me.
They affirm, There is but one Truth; so that we are lost, if we are not
Christians, or they are damned, if they are not Mahometans.

And this is what I had to say to thee in this Matter; but, I shall not end
this Discourse, without some violent Scruples of Conscience. Pray the Great God
with me, That he will illuminate my Understanding with Inward Lights, until the
Man promised by our Holy Prophet; the Man, I say, who ought to be born of his
Race, be descended upon the Earth; who is to see all Kings humbled in his
Presence, and to unite with Jesus the Two Religions that they may make but One.

In the mean Time, let us live as honest Men, who have Sin in horror, like the
Plague, which poisons the Soul; and apply our selves, as much as in us lies, to
what is truly Good; and above all things, let us carefully observe this
Precept, writ in the Book of their Law, but is not always imprinted in their
Hearts, Never do to Others, no not thy Enemies, that which thou would not
have done to thy self. A Duke of Guise gave an Example of this to all France;
and it is what thou ought to Preach in the vast Empire of the Mussulmans.
This Prince surprised a Villain that would have Assassinated him, who
confessed, that the Interest of his Religion (which was that of Calvin) had
obliged him to form a Design to take him away, to deliver himself, and those of
his Party from so great an Enemy. The Duke, instead of causing him to suffer
the Pains due to so black an Enterprise, Pardoned him, contenting himself to
tell him, Friend, If thy Religion Obliged thee to Kill me, without hearing me,
my Religion Obliges me to give thee thy Life and Liberty, now I have heard
thee: Go thy ways, and amend thy self. This Prince was then General of Charles
the IX 's Army.

Sage Bedredin, our Mahomet never showed such generous Sentiments, when he
prescribed in his Law this Precept against Christians, that had never Offended
him; When you Encounter the Infidels kill them, and cut off their Heads,
imprison them, and keep them in Chains, until they have paid their Ransoms, or
till you find it requisite to set them at Liberty. Persecute them until they
have all submitted, or are entirely overthrown.

Observe in this Letter, what may be of use to thee. Pardon my Friendship, the
frank Manner of Writing, and remember Mahmut in thy Prayers, who personates a
Christian, and is in his Heart a most faithful Mussulman. If it be in thy Power
to succor me, never do me any Injury. God protect and govern thy great Age to
the last Moment.

Paris, 28th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XII.
To Chiurgi Muhammet Bassa.
THE Queen is with Child, when least expected, which occasions much Joy at
Court, especially to the King; who, after so many Years of Marriage, will
become a Father.

Thou, who have applied thy self so long to the Studies of Astrology in the
Schools of Egypt, yet make Profession of this Divine Art, which discovers
thee Things the most hidden to thee; who read so learnedly in the Book of
Heaven, whatever the Stars have traced there, who have found the Moment of
their Rising and Disappearing, with the Intervals betwixt these two Times, and
the Causes which render their Motion quicker, or slower; thou, who penetratest
into the most hidden Secrets of Men, and know the Seasons of Famine, of
Shipwracks, of Victories, and of loss of Battles: Divine in God's Name, Great
Interpreter of the Secrets of Nature, Wiser than Albumazar and Ptolemy, what
will become of this Impregnation; and whether it be true, That this Child
that is to be Born, has been more than two hundred and seventy Moons in forming.

If thou believe what I writ last to thee to be impossible, say nothing of
it; it would be no Credit to me, to pass for the Author of a Novel, that has no
Grounds of Truth.

The City of Paris, is in an inconceivable Joy; and this Joy is spread all over
France. Thou may perceive by that, the Passion of this People to see their
King a Father. It Is true, they have much to hope by it; but it is as certain,
they have yet much to apprehend, seeing all their Hopes vanish in an instant.

Nature uses all her Power when she forms a Man, the most perfect of all
Creatures. But, there needs but a slight Fall, to destroy this Workmanship
before it is finished, as well as after.

I have heard a great many People question much the Sex, and Life of that which
will be born.

All the Conversation at the Court, at Paris, and in all the Kingdom, is no
more of Wars, of Leagues of Peace, or Naval Preparations; they all roll upon
the bringing to Bed of Women.

There will be other reasoning in some small time in Christendom; and even
amongst us, if the Queen do not miscarry; France being no less considerable
amongst other Kingdoms, than the Bourbone are amongst Men. Harry IV. who
introduced the Crown into this Branch of the Family, was a Prince very Brave;
and if we live long enough to see his Grandchildren, we shall see, whether
they will have as much Courage as the Chief of their Family.

As for thee, thou will have wherewith to divert thee, and exercise thy
Talent, if this Queen be brought to Bed happily of a Prince. I shall in the
mean time be very Exact to mark, not only the Days and Hours, but the least
Minutes; to the End thou may know, by the Situation of the Planets, which
ordinarily regulate the Inclinations of Men, in what manner, a Prince so long
expected, will regulate his Affairs, and consequently those of others.

It is a great while since we have had any Commerce here with the Sun, there
being forty nine Days since this beauteous Planet appeared to us; and the Cold
is so violent, that it has changed (as I may say) the Waters of the Seine, a
large River, into Crystal. Do not look upon these Effects as extraordinary; it
happens here frequent enough; for, when the Days are shortest, the Cold is most
intense. Thou know, that this Climate is very inconstant. I have often seen,
in a little space of Time, Rain, Hail, Snow, and terrible Winds; and presently
after, the Air become Fair and Serene. This inconstancy of the Climate, has its
Advantages; for, if the fair Weather do not last long, the foul is also of less
Duration.

Fail not, upon the Receipt of my Letter, to communicate the News I send thee,
to the Grand Vizir, without telling him the Reflections which I make. They are
of no Use to such great Ministers; particularly by us, who are, in Comparison
of them, but vile Slaves; always subject to the Sentences they pronounce of us.

Love me, and consult the Stars, to know, whether thou will be always Faithful
to me; and, if it be by Force, or Inclination.

As for my self, I assure thee, that following the Inclination of my Heart, I
will conserve thee that Fidelity which I owe by Obligation.

Paris, 28th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XIII.
To Carcoa, at Vienna.
THE Kaimacan commands me forthwith to send the Pictures of the King of France,
the Eldest Son of the Prince of Conde, and of the Cardinal Richlieu. I caused
them suddenly to be Copied from the Originals, by an Italian Painter, who
passes for one of the best of these Times.

These Three Heads, are the principal of France, if not of all Europe: The
First, by Reason of a great and potent Kingdom, which is this Day more
flourishing than all others: The Second by Reason of his Nobility or Royal
Blood, and by his extraordinary Courage: And the Third, by a Wise Conduct in a
Ministry full of Difficulties; being, as it were, the absolute Master of
Disgraces and Recompenses.

As soon as these Pictures are delivered to thee, whole and well conditioned,
pay the Express I dispatched to thee, the Sum contained in the Billet, which he
will present to thee from me. That done, send the Packet to Constantinople,
without loss of time, and address it to the Kaimacan.

I beseech thee, order the business of my Pension so, that I shall not need to
desire the Payment of it. Send me presently what is ordered me for my
Subsistence. Nothing in the World appears so terrible to me, as to be obliged
to ask.

I have only Moneys for Six days, though I should eat nothing but raw Herbs and
Water. Both cost Moneys here, And every Thing is sold very dear, except
Civilities and obliging Terms, which you have for nothing, and whereof they are
very liberal. I must Live, I must have Clothes, and go to Court; for all which
there must be Bread, Cloth or Serges, and Coach-hire.

Thou know at present my Wants, suffer me not to languish with Expectation.
Thou will injure the Emperor and not Mahmut if thou do not readily assist his
Slave.

The Great God preserve thy Life, if thou do not forget me; and give thee
Grace to be Sober, in a Country where People do not always drink Wine to quench
their Thirst.

Paris, 28th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XIV.
To William Vospel, a Christian of Austria.
I Am obliged to thee for the Confidence thou have in me, in declaring to me
thy Losses. Another would have rejoiced in hearing of thy Two Adventures; but,
as I do not believe it is a great Evil to lose a Wife, so I cannot think it is
a considerable-Good to turn Monk. It is impossible for me to forbear telling
thee, That I find thy Resolution too sudden to approve of it. Thou art not the
Cause of the Loss thou have suffered, and yet retirest into a Convent to do
Penance, as if thou had committed a Crime.

Is it necessary thou torment thy Body for the Death of a Wife, if thou have
not Murdered her? If thou did love her, because she was Discreet, it is not
impossible to find another as Prudent. If her Beauty charmed thee, there are
enough that may please; but, if thou were weary of being a Husband, why art
thou then of being a Widower? Tell me, What will thou do at present in the
Convent thou art shut up in? The Carmelites are Wise indeed, but know not all
Things. It is true, they are very Devout, but not exempted from Sin: Finally,
they are Men, and too austere. How can thou so suddenly accustom thy self to
that kind of Life thou have chosen, and become at once Chaste and Sober? As for
me, who am a Christian as thou art, and more restrained in my Pleasures than
thou have hitherto been, I cannot understand what I see in that Order thou art
entered into; neither can I figure to my self, how a Man barefooted, without a
Shirt, covered with a coarse Habit of Wool, who is no Master of Crowns, and
who has no Armies, should absolutely command, not only another Man, but many,
who obey blindly what he requires of them.

To live well in thy Order, thou must Fast; the least Faults are not Pardoned;
thou must receive Offenses with Thanks: Finally, the Combat is assured and
constant, and there is but little Certitude of the Crown which ought to be the
Reward. Thy greatest Friend is obliged to betray thee, and thou will be
deprived (as it may be said) of the Elements, to make thee desire the use of
Water, Air, Earth and Fire. I cannot persuade my self, that there are so many
Things required to make a Saint; for, when thou love God, as much as it is in
thy Power to do, and passest every Day, as if it were thy last, I believe thou will Live and Die a Just Man. Return me an Answer, and let me know, If what I
write to thee be Conformable to right Reason; or, that I am deceived in my
Opinion. The Friendship I have for thee, obliges me to write as I do, and to
tell thee all I think that regards thee; because, after thou have taken thy
last Resolution, I would rather see thee suffer with Constancy, all the Evils
imaginable, than to see thee change with Confusion. There are many, who have
abandoned with Shame, the Places which they entered in Triumph; and, how many
have been pushed by their Despair, to commit Follies which seemed Actions of
Piety, which they had never undertaken in their right Wits?

We see in our Histories, That many Great Men have caused themselves to be
Circumcised, thereby to have Commerce with the Jews, and be Instructed in their
Doctrines, finding their Ancient Temple Magnificent, Venerable, Holy, and full
of Majesty. We also read, That Pythagoras Clothed himself in White, and staid
some time amongst the Solitaries of Mount Carmel, to learn the Mysteries of
their Religion. His Curiosity was the Occasion of this great Man's Voyage, as
their Ignorance had caused the same Design in others. It is not the Desire to
be instructed, which made thee enter into the Convent; the Affliction for the
loss thou have suffered, made thee take this Resolution. Take heed of quitting
it by a Repentance, which would prove an Excess of Folly. The Jews are at
present, Vagabonds without Law, without a Kingdom, without Altars; and,
according to the Alcoran, they will be Metamorphosed into Asses, to carry the
Souls of the Wicked Mahometans into Hell. Who knows what will become of the
Carmelites? They say Elias is not Dead, but is to return to the Earth, to
combat those Men who shall rise to trouble the World about the establishing a
New Religion. Stay still where thou art, or return presently from whence thou
came; lest after too long a stay, to come out in form, thou commit a Fault,
that God will not easily pardon; which will doubtless happen, if thou persuade
thy self, That thou can not find the Way to Heaven, but out of the Noise of
this World.

If thou do not find I advise thee well, do thou better; but, above all
things, govern thy self so, that God may not reproach thee one Day, That a
Moldavian gave thee good Advice, and thou did neglect it. The worst of Turks,
might give the same Advice that I do, as a good Christian; and it would be no
surprising thing, if thou Receivest better from a Mohammedan. These Barbarians
are sufficiently Instructed in Morality, to Teach others that which they do not
always Practice themselves. Virtue and Truth are respected every where. Turn
thee from East to West, from the South to the North, thou will find on all
Sides impious Men who Blaspheme against the Deity; but, true Virtue has that of
singular, That she is always Respected, and even by the most Profligate.

Consult once again thy Forces and thy Courage, and take a better Resolution,
if thou art not yet well fixed in thy first. Titus salutes thee out of this
World; and prays Heaven to give thee the Pleasures of the Happy, in thy
Solitude, if thou be no Hypocrite; and if thou have not yet Repented of the
Resolution thou have taken.

Paris, 28th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XV.
To Ibrahim, who Renounced the Christian Religion.
THou have Renounced thy Religion, either to save thy Life, or for some other
Consideration. I do not say this to make thee Scrupulous, but in Quality of
Resident in this Kingdom, to serve here the Sultan Emperor of both Seas, and of
the Two Parts of the Earth, Distributer of all Crowns; the Grandeur of whose
Majesty, I beg of God, may last till the last Day of Universal Judgment. I
advise thee to take heed, not to solicit those Infidels, whose Religion thou
have abandoned, to run the same Course that thou have done.

Thou have written to thy Brother, that he is become a Beggar, because he
Renounces his God a Thousand Times at Play; and that thou art at present very
Rich, for having Renounced him but Once, and by that thou exhortest him to turn
Mussulman.

I thought good to write to thee, That Souls are not to be gained with a Letter
and a scurvy Jest. Think of becoming a Good Man after thy Change of Religion,
and give no Occasion to the Marsilians, to say, That thou art Infamous because
thou have Renounced thy Faith, and that we are all damned because we are
Mahometans. If thou do not approve the Advice I give, I shall he obliged to
acquaint the Port with what shall come to my Knowledge; which I shall do with
Regret, because thou may suffer by it.

The Great God, make thee rather Wise than Fortunate.

Paris, 28th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XVI.
To Dicheu Hussein Bassa.
AS the Knowledge which I shall have of Affairs will augment daily, so I shall
have the more Matter to write; and will omit no Occasion to remark what occurs,
which I will not fail immediately to communicate. Thou, who with great
Application observest what passest amongst Men, and art desirous of knowing the
most secret Transactions of Potentates; thou may observe, That there are
more violent Enmities betwixt the Christian Princes of Europe, than all the
other Princes of the World.

I cannot comprehend whence it is, that these Infidels cannot live in Peace,
and perhaps they do not comprehend it themselves. It seems a Decree of Heaven,
That Man ought to be contrary to Man, and that whilst there are Kingdoms there
will be Wars and Enmities.

The Wars which are carried on at present in Alsace, look as if they would last
long. The Death of Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, the second Scourge of the
Imperialists, who was slain Six Years since, did not terminate the Differences
of Germany; they are greater than ever; and there appears in the New Generals
of the Armies, vaster Designs than those in their Predecessors. Perhaps they
will revenge the Death of Gustave, who was killed, not as the Christians
affirm; but by one of the Forty Germans, who had bound themselves by Oath,
never to quit their Swords before they had slain him, as the Turkish Historians
do write.

Duke Bernard Weymar, of no less Valor than Gustave, commands the rest of the
Swedish Army, with a good Number of French Troops, and many Christian Heretics
of Germany Victory attends the Arms of this General; and, the Princes which are
united for Defense of the Empire, begin to apprehend a Captain, who observes
less the Rules of War than the Emotions of his Valor, and whom they perceive
seconded by Fortune. But, he does not consider, That in weakening an Emperor,
he does augment the Forces of a King, who will enjoy the Fruits of his Labors,
and suppress him, in Spite of his Bravery, when he pleases. In the mean time, I
am of Opinion, That it is our Interest, that Weymar be always Victorious. It
may be said of him, That he has sold to France, all but his Glory, having
reserved nothing for himself but Hope.

All that this Duke can Conquer from the Germans, is for the French King, who
furnishes him with Troops, with Arms and with Moneys, besides wise Advice.
Cardinal Richlieu, who is an able States man, fails not to persuade his Master,
That the Places, which Weymar shall take in the Empire, with the Army which he
Commands, are the Effects of his Councils, and his Majesty's Moneys. The French
begin to preserve their Conquests, and know how to defend the place which are
subject to their Power.

This Prince makes Acquisitions, which are in truth, of more Importance, than
they seem considerable for their Greatness. He took Rhinfeld almost as soon as
he had Besieged it. The Place was strong, seated near the Black Forest, where
the Garrison was furnished with Abundance of all Sorts of Ammunitions.

John de Were, General of the Imperial Army, had relieved it with Nine
Regiments of Horse, and Five Thousand Foot. He defeated Weymar's Horse, took
part of his Baggage and Artillery. The Duke of Rohan, a great Captain, and
great Statesman, was hurt, and taken Fighting; and the City relieved with Men,
Ammunition, and Victuals, which rendered the taking of it more Glorious.

They write, that Two Imperial Generals, the said John de Were, which had
succored Rhinfeld, Enhenfort, as also Duke Savelli, had been taken in a Combat
which preceded the Rendition of the Place, besides Thirty Eight Cornets and
Nineteen Foot Captains. These Spoils were gained by the Blood of the Swedes,
and sent to the French King; who after he had caused them to march through all
the Streets of this Great City, commanded them to be hung up in the Principal
Church, where I saw and considered them, as Marks of the Triumphs of Policy.
The Siege of this Place lasted but Eightteen Days.

The Duke of Weymar, after this Victory, marched into the Marquisate of
Durlach, where he took the Castle of Rotelen. Defended by the King of Hungary;
in which he found great store of Provisions, and all sorts of Ammunitions,
which served greatly for the refreshing of his then needy Army.

In the mean time, Duke Savelli escaped out of Prison, and retired to Luzerne
in Switzerland. The Officers that guarded him, were accused of Favoring his
Escape, which cost them their Heads.

All I write to thee is most true, and thou may cause my Letters to be
inregister'd. God grant that Brisac, together with all Alsatia, may fall into
the French Hands, and that the Emperor of Germany be subjected to the Laws of
the Osmans. Thou see the Time come, wherein the French make Conquests,
without being present at them. The King of this Nation, appears not only Happy,
but is so in Reality; all Things succeeding that he undertakes. His Queen's
being with Child, and the Cardinals Policy, puzzle the Spaniard, the Empire,
and Italy it self. What will happen none knows, but God and Mahomet. It Is our
Duty to humble our selves, and say what we see, and not be so rash as to
penetrate into the Future.

Do what thou can by thy Intrigues, to augment the Germans Losses, for the
Reasons thou know; and particularly, to facilitate the Sultan's Conquests in
Hungary. Assist, in the mean Time, the poor and faithful Mahmut, not with the
Sword that cuts every Thing; but, by good Counsel, by which we ordinarily
perceive, the Reunion of what the Sword has separated: And I will pray the
most High, that all the Infidels bow the Knee before Amurath, and that all that
breathe, may enjoy their Lives, but by an Effect of his Clemency.

Paris, 20th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XVII.
To Ahmet Beig.
I Receive none of thy Letters; I receive none from the Divan; and I have none
from any of my Friends. Italy, where there are so many People proper for War,
that Province which has Commanded the World, is at this Time troubled by the
Arms of France. The Pope and Venetians, who appear to have the Principal
Interest there, make no Advance to divert the Storm that threatens them.
Piemont, which belongs to the Duke of Savoy, begins to feel the Incommodities
that War draws always with it. That State is in the midst of the Spaniards who
attack it, and the French Ruin it in defending it.

These last cannot abandon the Interest of the House of Savoy, the Duchess
being their King's Sister, and her Children his Nephews. The French are already
strong on that Side, having a great Garrison in Pigneroll, a Place very
considerable, which they call one of the Gates of Italy, whereof they have been
Masters since the Year 1631. and their Power will much increase by the
Accession of the Fort of Breme, which may be termed a Rampart, covering Cazal
and Vercelle, and which also defends both Montferrat and Piemont.

The Marquess of Leganez, Governor of Milan, having rendered himself Master of
the Field, had laid Siege to Breme; and Marshal Crequi, having in the Name of
the King, his Master, undertaken the Defense of the young Duke of Savoy,
opposed the Designs of the Spaniards. It Is believed, the War will be cruel in
this Quarter, being these are very Strong, and the other very Expert.

Thou shall know the Event. In the mean Time, all the Affairs of the French do
not appear so Fortunate in Italy; and, at this Hour that I write to thee, the
Court laments the Loss of the General that Commanded their Armies in that
Country.

There is certain News of the Death of Marshal Crequi, who was shot with a
Cannon-Bullet through the Body, as he was going to view the Spaniards Works
before Breme. This Loss was by so much the more sensible to the French, in that
they saw their Enemies make such great Rejoycings at it.

All men conclude, this Crequi was both a good Soldier, and a good Captain; a
wise man, and of Excellent Conduct. He had acquired great Reputation, for the
King his Master, in Italy. He slew Don Philip, Bastard of Savoy, who challenged
him in the sight of Two Armies. He several Times defeated his Sovereign's
Enemies in Montferrat, and in Piemont, and beat back the Duke of Feria to the
Gates of Milan. There remains no more of this Great Man, who did so many brave
Things, but the bare Remembrance of 'em.

Scarce any thing of his Body, save his Entrails, was left for his Soldiers to
celebrate his Obsequies with. His Soul is before the Throne of God; his Friends
honor his Memory with their Elogies: his Kindred mourn for him, his Sovereign
Praises him, and his Soldiers Crown his Tomb with Herbs and Flowers.

The Italians say highly upon this Occasion, That Italy has been Fatal to the
French, and that it will be so always. They affirm, That the Duke of Savoy will
lose his Estate, if defeated by his Enemies, which he will likewise do by the
Victory of his Friends. But, these are the Conjectures, and ordinary Reasonings
of Men, which I write to thee; to the end thou may not only know what is
done, but also the Discourses which are entertained upon the Events that
happen. We shall shortly have News of the Siege of Bremen; in the mean time, it
imports the French much, to conserve the Opinion had of their Valor and
Goodness.

The Business in hand, is to defend a great and illustrious House, which
moreover pretends to the Sovereignty of the Kingdom of Cyprus, troubled by the
Ambition of Kindred, and the Politics of the Spaniards. These Engagements
import much to Princes, who have as many Maxims as differing Interests; but, we
have nothing to do with the Differences of others.

May it please God, that our Affairs be always attended with an Equality of
good Luck, for the Ruin of these Infidels. Be thou constant in the Friendship
thou promisedst me, and always faithful to thy Friend, who recommends himself
to thee, as the Law obliges thee to be to thy Sovereign.

Paris, 20th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XVIII.
To Berber Mustapha Aga.
I This day entertained a man which came from Italy, and has served in the
French Troops. He gives this account of the Death of Marshal Crequi.

The 17th. of this Mouth, this General having approached the Lines of the
Spaniards, to view their Works, and to Fight them, in case he judged it
Expedient, a Cannon-Bullet separated his Body in two, and the Bullet being
taken up, they were surprised to see a Cross graved upon it, about which were
also engraved Letters, which made these two Words, TO CREQVI. This Bullet, the
Cross, and the Letters, caused no less Astonishment, than the Death of this
Captain did Sorrow, and every Body spoke his Sentiment of it.

Many treat the Spaniards as Magicians and Sorcerers. Those who are persuaded
of the Power of Negromancy, affirm, That the Devil can carry a Bullet to the
Place whither it is designed: others are of a contrary Sentiment, and believe,
there is no Power without the Commandment of the Great God. There are others,
who believe neither Charms, nor Characters, nor Magic; who, despising all
these Superstitions, attribute All to Destiny; and, I believe the same. Ahmet
Celebi explains this perfectly well in his Journal, which begins in the One
thousand twenty sixth Year of our Hegira; when he affirms, That all things,
which pass here below, are effected by the Orders of Heaven. We cannot doubt
(says he) but the Events which we see, are the Effects of the Will of God; yet,
we must believe, he suffers all Things to happen by Second Causes.

Had not Sultan Osman irritated the Janissaries, and Spahi's, by throwing them
into the River alive, when he ran disguised through the Streets of
Constantinople, and found them drinking Wine in Taverns: And, had he not
published his Design of Reforming this Militia, and transporting the Imperial
Seat elsewhere; he had not, perhaps, been murdered with so much Ignominy.

God sent him a terrible Dream before his Death. He thought he saw our Great
Prophet snatching the Alcoran, which he was then reading, out of his Hand; and
taking from him, by Force, his Coat of Arms; and striking him down with such a
great Box on the Ear, that he could not get up again. Thou know, he
consulted the Astrologers, and Interpreters of Dreams thereupon. I will not
report what he, who was his Praeceptor, said, for it was plain Flattery: but we
saw, what was foretold by the Astrologers, came punctually to pass. These had
foretold, That the Emperor should never see the Feast of Ramezan; because the
Star, which presided at his Birth, was much obscured in its Conjunction with
the Planet, that was then predominant; which made 'em affirm, he would die in a
very little Time. The Ignominy wherewith his Death was accompanied, was an
Effect of Destiny; for, never any of the Ozmans suffered so much Shame. He had
several Times seen the fatal Cord about his Neck without dying. A Soldier, in
Charity, lent him his Handkercheif to cover his Head, which was without a
Turbant.

He said, all in Tears, to his Murderers, Ye saw this Morning your Emperor
upon the Throne, and this Evening you are for throwing him into a Dung-Cart,
designed to carry Dirt into the Sea: You cannot live always, and God will
require a Reason for this Cruelty. Thou know, his resisting of those that
strangled him, caused him to suffer much Pain. They took hold of him by the
Secret Parts; and one of his Ears was cut off, and carried to the Valide, who
expected the News of his Death. The Will of God appears in this Adventure; as
also, the Power of Second Causes. Thou may see all this in that Journal of
Ahmet. Had not Marshal Crequi been in the Wars, he had not perhaps ended his
Days by a violent Death; and had he not been so rash as to approach too near to
the Enemies Works, the fatal Bullet had not touched him.

We see hereby an Effect of God's Will, accompanied with our Consent; because
we search by our own Choice, that which we might avoid.

In the mean time, accuse me not of Ignorance, or Superstition, if I have been
long in entertaining thee, upon a Matter in Action, betwixt Man and the Devil.
Thou know, that by Magic Art, we number the Twelve Spirits or Angels, which
preside over each of the Signs of the Zodiac, which govern the Nations,
People, and Cities committed to their Care. In like Manner, in the secret
Cabala of the Jews, by the Twelve Anagrams of the great Name of God; and,
according to the Color of the Stones where these Anagrams were engraved, they
judged of the Future; performing thereby Things very astonishing. They have
subjected our Bodies to these Twelve Signs, and divided them into Twelve
Principal Members. But, how many surprising Things are done with the Number
Seven, to which they have applied the Seven Planets; by Means whereof, they
discover the Secret of the good or evil Fortune of Men? Add to this, the
Invocation of Spirits, and the Power of Figures, of Words, of Herbs, of
Writings, of holy Characters, and so many other Enchantments, wherewith they
consult the Black Angels; and thou will find, that Men do many Wonders by this
Art, which they cannot do without supernatural Assistance.

The little Bits of Paper, cut Triangular-wise, which Tokta Cham. the King of
Persia's Ambassador, caused to be thrown in the Night, round about the Imperial
Tent of the Great Vizir Afis, in (each of which there was a certain Word writ)
wrought more considerable Effects, than the Spaniard's Enchanted Bullet, which
killed Marshal Crequi. The Ottoman Army revolted the Day following, as if
possessed with Furies. The most Seditious took and bound the Vizir, and made
him raise the Siege of Babylon. And the King of Persia, who had already
dismissed Mustapha Aga, our Envoy, with the Treaty whereby he surrendered this
Place, being advertised of the precipitate Retreat of our Army, caused Mustapha
to be called back; tearing the Treaty he had given him, in his Presence; and
bad him tell his General, He could not do so shameful an Action, as to
surrender so important a Place, to an Army that was running away.

Have thou ever heard of any Thing so Strange? Read this Ahmet Celibi's Book,
and thou will see, that all these Prodigies arrived in one Day. The Historian
makes no Judgment upon this Adventure; he only reports it; neither do I believe
it was an Effect of the Enchantment of these Bits of Paper, and the Characters
contained in them; because it is certain, our Army was greatly pressed with
Hunger. But in Effect, when Mustapha, all in Tears, reproached the Vizir, That
if he had gained but two Days Time, he had made a Peace equal to a Victory:
Afis answered him, How could thou with thy Tears, retain an Army possessed
with all the Devils of Hell, and resolved to be gone?

If thou finish the reading of so long a Letter, accuse thy Patience, and
reproach not me with Tediousness for having writ many Things to thee worthy of
being known. After the Death of the French General, Breme was presently
delivered to the Spaniards, by the Cowardliness of the Governor, who incurred,
in time, a rigorous Destiny for it; having his Head cut off at Casal, where
they had imprisoned him.

The Great God preserve thee and thine for ever; and protect thee, against the
ill Will of those that do not love thee.

Paris, 20th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XIX.
To Murat Bassa.
THE Duchess Dowager of Savoy, finds her self extremely pressed by the
continual Incursions which the Spaniards make into Piemont; they having
besieged Vercelle, a Place which covers the Country on the Side of Milan.

She her self appears on Horseback, with great Courage, being resolved to
recover what is lost, as well as to defend the rest, which is in some danger;
having joined her best Troops, with great Diligence, to those of France.

A Cardinal, which they call the Cardinal la Valette, commands, in the Place of
Marshal Crequi, those Troops of France, which consist of Twelve thousand Foot,
and Four thousand Horse.

Thou do not know, perhaps, what these Cardinals are: They be the principal
Priests of the Roman Church. Their Profession is not to command Armies; though
that sometimes happens. either through want of sage Captains, which these
Infidel Kings may sometimes stand in need of; or for other secret Reasons,
which are not always easy to penetrate, and must be of great Importance,
France not wanting fit Seculars. A Roman Mufti, called Innocent IV. gave the
Purple Habit to these Priests; and obliged them to wear red Hats, Caps, and
Bonnets, that this Color might always put them in mind, they ought to shed
their Blood for the Service of their Church and Religion.

I have been told, that formerly there were but Five and twenty, and now their
Number is said to be Seventy two; which is that of the Disciples of the
Christian Messiah; but, they are seldom complete. I was desirous of being
precisely informed, what the Dignity of a Cardinal is; and an old Physician,
that seems an honest Man, instructs me in all things, that regard the Religion,
and Politics of the Christians. He is such an Enemy to the Circumcision, that
he gives often the uncleanest of all Meats to his Patients, such as we think
unwholesome, and cannot be eaten without Sin.

Thou that art a Statesman, and obliged to assist at Council, and in the
Divan, ought to know more Things than others, and those more perfectly.

I will inform my self, with care, of the Life, Actions, and Genius of this
Cardinal la Valette, to know, whether the King, his Master, has any other
reason, than that of his Valor and Experience in War, to make use of a Priest
in his Armies, to shed Blood and ruin People; for, I never heard the
Mussulmans did ever make use of a Cheik, to command the Armies of the Empire:
Besides, they are, without Experience, Fearful and Superstitious.

The Spaniards are more powerful in Infantry, and Cavalry, having Eighteen
thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse; whereby they pretend to render
themselves Masters of Piemont, and drive the French wholly out of Italy. The
Marquess of Leganez, Governor of Milan, affirms, That his King will not suffer
the Children of the late Duke of Savoy, to be under the Protection of
Strangers. He says, That Pignerol, and other Places in the Power of the French,
were usurped upon the House of Savoy, and must be restored. They affirm, That
the House of Austria will hinder the Widow, her Children, and Subjects from
being Oppressed.

Behold here an Example of the singular Piety of the Spainards, in Favor of a
Widow and her Children; and on the other side, admire the Kindness of the
French, who fight against these same Spaniards, for the Conservation of that
which concerns neither of them. It will be difficult to discover these secret
Mysteries. Every Prince puts a value upon his Reasons, as he does upon his
Moneys.

The Duchess of Savoy came accompanied with a great number of Ladies, and the
greatest of her Court. She was on Horseback at the Head of all the Company,
both Horse and Foot, and harangued the Army amidst the Battallions.

She conjured, not only the Captains, but even the Corporals, and private
Soldiers, not to abandon her Defense. She showed all the Sentiments of Grief,
that a Person of Courage could have, in seeing her self exposed to lose her
Estate; or to see her Children, in a manner, Captives; and, upon this Occasion,
she failed not to mingle Torrents of Tears with the most charming Expressions,
which is ordinarily the strongest Eloquence of Women.

The Army being sensible of the Dutchess's Misfortune, which she had
represented with all possible Earnestness; the Cardinal Valette caused it to
discamp to relieve Vercelle. He forced the Spaniards Lines, and put Two
thousand Men into the Place. The besieged, fortified with such Succors, made a
great Sally, and much Infidel-Blood was shed on both Sides. But all that the
Cardinal could do, with his Care, and the Duchess with her Tears, could not
hinder Vercelle to fall into the Hands of the Spaniards. It Is said, that the
Commander o^ this Place, and his Garrison, defended themselves to the last
Extremity; and, having no more Powder, or Lead, they fought at Push of Pike,
with Stones; and finally, when all was gone, with their Fists.

But this is not believed here, it being alleged, that the Governor, or the
General, did not do their Duty. The Cardinal, say they, failed in his Duty
also; for, knowing they wanted Ammunition, yet he did not send it, though he
found Means to put into the Place such a great Number of Men. But the Governor
is blamed yet more, that did not discover this his Necessity to the General.

I tell thee all these Particulars, to inform thee of the Manner how the French
make War; many of whose Over-sights would cost us our ^^^es.

There marched out of Vercelle Four Thousand Men bearing Arms. Thence thou
may judge, that our Generals are not cruel, when they cause the Heads of
Commanders to be taken off, that behave themselves so ill.

The Princess of Mantua, who has lost her Husband, would, they say, marry a
Prince of the House of Austria, called the Cardinal Infant; which is an Effect
of the Policy of the Spaniards, to have a better Pretense to attack Montferrat,
and drive out the French, who entered there by Consent of the Duke of Mantua,
who was Sovereign thereof.

The valiant Duke of Rohan, is at length dead in a Castle near Berne. I think I
writ he was hurt, and taken Prisoner in the Battle fought by the Swedes against
the Germans. He was in the Sixty eighth Year of his Age, and was very
considerable for his Erudition, Valor, and Experience in War. He was bred a
Soldier from his Youth; was always employed in Military Affairs, and had often
commanded Armies. He supported, by his Bravery and Experience, for a long time,
the Remains of a feeble and dying Party, against the Power of the King. He was
illustrious by the Greatness of his House; and his Religion was that of the
Calvinists, called the Reformed. His Body was Embalmed, and afterward brought
to Geneva, with great Magnificence and Warlike Pomp. This City is the Retreat
of such as the Church of Rome calls Heretics, who are all well received here;
which gives great Occasion of Complaint to the Pope's Partisans; how
reasonably, I will not presume to determine; but, there appears to me much more
Splendor in the Ceremonies of those of the Catholic Church, and they pretend
to greater Virtue and Antiquity.

These are the Transactions in Italy which came to my Knowledge. I will not
fail to write, what passed in Germany these last Moons, as soon as I have the
Certainty of them.

Pray God the many Differences and Wars, which are amongst the Infidels, may
never end; that Italy may be humbled even to the Stirrup of the Horse, on which
rides the Great Emperor of the Elect of God, the faithful Mussulmen; and, that
all Germany adore the sacred Porch of Mecha.

I pray God support thee always, that thou never fall; and so conduct thee,
that thou never go astray.

Paris, 20th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XX.
To Dgnet Oglou.
THE Condition I am in at Present, makes me think of those long and tedious
Days we pas^ed together at Palermo, in Slavery. How fruitless ^ere the Tears,
which the Irksomness of our Capti^^ty made us shed? yet nothing befell us, but
what is common to other Men: But, thou were too Young to support it, and I had
not Experience enough of the World, to conceive the Unhappiness whereunto
Fortune had reduced me.

Thou art, at Present, at Constantinople, where thou have all thy Heart can
desire; and I at Paris, where I have a thousand Things to take Care for,
Constantinople and Paris, are, indeed, two of the greatest Cities in the World;
but, much differing in manner of Living, Cloths, Language and Religion. Thou
art at present in the midst of Pleasures, with thy Friends, Children, Wife,
with the Liberty of excercising thy Religion, which is the True one; and that,
in the Mosques, which our Fathers established: moreover, thou art elevated in
Dignity. I, on the contrary, am amongst Infidels, amongst Idolaters and
Heretics; obliged to live with a Nation, much differing from Ours, in their
Inclinations and Customs. Finally, I live amongst the Devil's Peacocks. The
excessive Liberty they give themselves, is not such as is enjoyed with true
Satisfaction of Mind; seeing they do a thousand Things which carry Repentance
along with them.

The Philosophy of the Stoics, which I learned during my Captivity, gave me to
understand, of what ^mportance it is, for a Man to know himself. Thou may
remember, perhaps, in the Beginning of our Slavery, that thy Master and mine,
were no less opposite in their Manner of living, than our Genius's were
differing.

My Enquiry was after Books and Writings; and Watching did not weary me,
provided I employed it in learning somewhat. On the contrary, tho^ being
always employed with different Handiwork (...) did little think, that Heaven
had designed th^^ to wear a Sword, and consequently, to the E^ployments of War.

How many things did we suffer in those Days, whereat we do now laugh? Thou
were always chained; and I in Prison, in a Den; thou were beaten, because thou
would not read; and I was banged to pieces, because I would not embroider.

The reading of Seneca, could not induce me to pardon my Master the Bastinado's
he gave me. That which I endured, was greater than the Pains which thou did
suffer; I was persecuted for the Pleasure I took in Reading; and, they would
oblige thee to study; whereas, thy Inclinations were quite different from mine.

This hardship made me resolve to hide my self in a Cellar, without Bread, and
without Water. I had nothing but my Seneca with me; and I was resolved to
deliver my self from my Servitude by Death; so far had this Stoic persuaded me
not to live. Thou art so near Death (quoth he) and in the mean time art a
Slave. Judge the Force of my Temptation, by the Authority of this Great Man.
Whilst I was thus hid, my Master searched me in vain, in the Garden, the
Stable, the Kitchen, and had no less Pains to find me, than I had to hide my
self from him. But, at length I chose the better Part, which was, to live, and
to forgive.

My Master owes his life to Seneca; he taught me so well, to forget Offenses,
that my Despair changed into Respect. I had no more Mind to die. I felt my
Courage fail, and Fear made me pardon my Master. Thou had no knowledge of
this Adventure, because I went into the Country, and thou wast ransomed, whilst
I was out of Palermo. I was so very intent upon my Studies, that my Master,
vanquished by my Obstinacy, gave me Liberty to apply my self to them, being
himself shamed to continue ignorant, whilst I dreamt of nothing, but of
improving my Mind.

In the Course of four Years and four Months, that my Captivity lasted, Nero's
Master gave me the first Tincture of Morality; and after that, I went into the
Academies, where I writ the Journal of my Life. Plutarch, Livy, and Tacitus,
made me forget the odious Names of Master and Slave.

The Examples of so many great Men, whose Histories we find there; of so many
Emperors, Kings, Captains, Masters or Slaves of their Passions; some dead by
the hands of their Friends, by Poison; others by the Sword and Surprise; others
persecuted by their Fathers or their Sons; sometimes by their Wives, and often
by their Native Country and Slaves, so often saved and defended by themselves;
disposed me to suffer patiently the state whereunto I was reduced; and to
acknowledge, That the honest Man is never a Slave, where ever he is, when he
can find his Master within himself. I had time then to do a thousand good
Things, which I should never have done, if I had not been in the Condition I
then found my self in.

Consider how much we learn by Books, and more yet by the Disgraces that happen
to us. We see the Ill as in a Perspective, and the Good in little. Disgraces
afflict us when they happen, and good Fortune when it leaves us. When I was in
my House, I lived at rest, because I fansied Serving; and now I am in Service,
I am in continual fear of not Pleasing. How many Souls has Amurath sent into
the other World, to expect the Universal Day of Judgment? and how many more
will he send in this Siege of Babylon, whither he goes in Person, carrying
Terror with him, and Forces sufficient to destroy the Empire of the Persians.

He has commanded me to observe the Actions of the Christians, with all
possible Application and Exactness, to give Information of them. He will, in
doubtful Affairs, have me to write to him my own Judgment, and not that of
others. He will have me not to shorten, but extend my Explications, that
nothing may be left that will admit of a double Interpretation, and will rather
have me tedious, than appear eloquent by the Conciseness of my Relations. He
orders me to receive the Advices of Carcoa, who is at Vienna, and to inform
Adonai the Jew, who resides at Genoa, in what is necessary; to the end, that
all that passes in Germany, Italy, and France, may be dispatched to the
Ministers of the Divan.

The Secretary of State, as Master of all that is written, has order to
en-register my Letters, and examine them. He, according to his Capriciousness,
or Ignorance, may render the Exactness wherewith I obey, criminal; by saying, I
am a Fool, or do not write the Truth. This registering puts me in Pain: for, as
many mean Things may appear very good at first Sight; and are often commended,
because of their Novelty; so they may appear also very despicable, when they
come to be examined; and may deserve a Check.

I tell thee what I have reason to fear, without telling thee those Things
which might raise a Belief in thee, that I have reason to hope.

Our Sovereigns are Mighty, and they distinguish themselves from all the
Potentates of the World, by the Impetuousness wherewith they give their Orders;
and, there is no Empire, where the Punishments and Rewards work so great
Effects. Thou know the rest, which is superfluous to tell thee, and which
Princes do not willingly hear.

Explain to me better the News I heard of Mussuladdin Aga, of an Action of
Justice of old Berber.

He writ to me, That a Creditor to whom he owed for a Shirt, being dead, he had
put the Price into the deceased's Hand, and went his ways. This new way of
paying Debts, seems very extraordinary to me. There is an Author, whether Greek
or Latin I have forgot, which tells another Adventure not unlike this, of a Man
who not finding his Shoemaker alive, threw the Price of the Shoes he had
made him into his Shop. If these Actions be not done for Oftentation, they seem
virtuous; but if out of Vanity, I cannot believe, that our Negligence to pay
our Creditors whilst alive, can be excused by the Care we take to pay them
after their Death.

The Dead want nothing in the other World; they are Living that have need of
Supplies in this; and who suffer sometimes very much, when they are not
punctually paid. The Ancients could never sufficiently describe the Excess,
which Men committed by their Passions; and the Moderns do it as little. They
are Just, sometimes even to Superstition, and sometimes Unjust even to Excess.
Sultan Mustaph^^^ Charity for the Poor, was very great. He was not satisfied,
according to the Precepts of Pythagoras, to give Life to Beasts; his Simplicity
went yet farther, not presidented by any Prince or Saint; he threw Pieces of
Gold to the Fishes, in Ponds and Rivers; alleging for his Reason, that the
most Secret Alms were the most agreeable to God; and that these Animals would
never tell of it.

Thou will answer me, when thou have Time and Convenience, God give thee the
Succor which is necessary for thee; and let our Great Prophet be always
favorable to thee.

Paris, 20th of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XXI.
To the Kaimakam.
MY last Letters show what happened in Italy, on the Side of Piemont, which
thou may have seen at the Divan.

I have informed the Council what the Infidels have done there; where three
different Nations, which have but one Religion, fight together: The French make
War upon the Spaniards, to assist the Savoyards; and these latter would drive
the other out of Italy, and reduce Savoy under their Power, which does what it
can to avoid the Yoke of both these Nations.

It is to be feared, that new Troubles may arise from this War; which will
undoubtedly happen, if it be not suddenly terminated by a Peace. (...) will
only write to thee what I know, and, perhaps, what is not come to thy
Knowledge. I will not repeat what I have already written; because my Letters
pass securely, by the good Order which thou have taken.

The different Interest of the Princes of Italy occasion small Intelligence
betwixt them. As their Estates are separated the one from the other, so they
are divided by their Maxims, their Interests, and Pretensions. They have,
however, but one Religion, which they make to serve for a Pretext to their
Desig^s, which are all different; and there is not one of them, which wholly
minds his Religion, which can have but one only End.

There are few that can suffer the Conquests of the French in Italy; because
that Nation seems restless, and Men would not see the Spaniards more powerful
than they are; because they play too much the Masters. But however, as the
least of these Princes have their particular Inclinations and secret Interests
with these two Nations, thou art ignorant of those of the Republic of Genoa
with the Spaniards, with whom they have strong Alliances: But peradventure thou
have not been informed of a Conspiracy, which appears to have been carried on
in the City, to introduce the Spaniards into it, which the Republic will in no
wise suffer.

The said Conspiracy is thus related: The Marquess of Montercy having finished
the time of his Government of Naples, and being embarked with some Galleys, for
his Return into Spain, came incognito into Genoa; having had a Conference in a
Village near the Town, with some of the Conspirators, to render himself Master
of the Port, and afterwa^^ built a Citadel upon the highest Side of the Far.
Some of the most qualified, were to open one of the Gates by Night, and receive
the Troops that should be disbarked out of the Galleys. The Marquess of
Leganez, Governor of Milan, promised to send to Genoa a Chain of Slaves
stronger and more numerous than ordinary, which, instead of consisting of
condemned Criminals, was to be composed of the bravest Officers of Milan; and
some Nobles of the Acomplices, who were to share in the Treaty, were to receive
the Troops and come armed for effecting of the Enterprise.

After a Design so well laid, the Spaniards were ready to execute so hard an
Undertaking; when the Republic, being suddenly advertised of the Plot, caused
it to miscarry, without Noise, by redoubling the Guards, which did not a little
surprise the Conspirators.

Cardinal Richlieu's Creatures give out, That one Doria, called their Prince,
did dissuade, or hinder the Plot, which was profitable for Italy, but contrary
to our Interests; for thence undoubtedly had sprung a War which would never
have had End, whether betwixt the Subjects of this Commonwealth, who would have
ruined each other, or France and Spain; and thou will also find, that in
preferring the Liberty of their Country, and keeping the Spaniards at a
Distance, they will maintain themselves still in a Condition advantageous for
the Commonwealth, and necessary to the Crown of Spain.

They say, That the Constancy of Doria, has acquired the Honor of having
twice saved the Liberty of his Country.

This Doria is descended from Andrew Doria, that great Captain, who did so many
brave Actions against our Nation, commanding the Maritime Armies of Charles V.
Emperor of Germany; and since, those of Philip II. his Son, King of Spain, and
who often combated the Invincible Ariaden.

I do not believe that Adonai, which was at Genoa, has writ this Adventure to
thee; either because it may not be true, or because the thing being very
Secret, it was in a manner stifled as soon as discovered.

If thou will know the particular reasonings, made upon this Occasion, I will
tell thee, That the most advised French believe, that the Spaniards did attempt
so fair a Blow; but that the two Parties in the City, the one to preserve their
Liberty, and the other to maintain their Authority, did both avoid the
Conclusion.

The Discourse is, at Present, various, concerning this Republic; and the
French do as much endeavor to make secret Treaties with it, as the Spaniards
to hinder its change of Master. It being always of great advantage to such who
have Pretenses in Italy, to be in good Correspondence with this Place; which
may be termed the Principal Port.

The French make a great Noise with their Pretenses upon Genoa; and they, at
Present, revive many Ancient Histories. They affirm, That the Genoese, when
they had Differences amongst themselves, have oftentimes changed their Laws
and their Masters; and that they have been subjected to strange Powers: That
Two Charles's, One Lewis, and Francis I. all Kings of France, have taken them
into their Protection, having also subdued them by Force of Arms. They add,
That this Francis I. continued a great while to send them Governors; and, that
it was by the Valor and Resolution of Doria, that this Republic recovered its
first Liberty.

These are the Discourses that People make at Paris, the Entertainment of idle
Persons, as also of our Politicians. It will be a hard Matter to tell what the
King thinks, and what are the Sentiments of his Council.

Consider, in the mean Time, with what Impudence People discourse here; they
presume to dec^^e Affairs of State: they divide, and accommodate Differences;
they support, and ruin Commonwealths and Kingdoms; but, this is no new Thing,
the People in all Times having taken the Liberty to censure the Actions of
Sovereigns.

It is not for enlarging my Letter, That I write these Particulars of the
History of Genoa. But, being an Ancient Nation, which has formerly wearied the
Courage of the Romans by their Enterprises and Opposition, and have performed,
upon our Seas, great and noble Actions. The Osmans have her therefore in
Consideration; and, the rather, because we possess many Countries, and
considerable Places, that were under their Dominion, in Asia minor, upon the
Black Sea, and in the Archipelago.

I shall ever recommend all thy Words and Actions to Almighty God, and pray him
to hinder thee from falling into Error, and prosper all thy Undertakings.

Paris, 24th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XXII.
To the same.
HEnry of Bourbon, First Prince of the Blood of France, marching by Bourdeaux,
came upon the Frontiers of Spain, where he besieged Fontarabia, strongly seated
upon the brink of the Ocean. His Army is made up of Twelve Thousand Foot, and
Twelve Hundred Horse. The two Nations have had several Encounters and
Skirmishings, wherein the Loss and Gain have been equal on Land.

But the Spanish Affairs go so ill at Sea, that thou will wonder at the great
Losses they received there. The French have burnt Two Gallions upon the Stock,
that were a making, and six others entirely finished, which had not been yet at
Sea. They have further, taken Eleven great Ships, whereof Six were richly
laden for the Indies; besides the Equipage and Munitions of War; with Two old
Gallions that were of no great use. They further, took a prodigious number of
Cannons, which lay upon the Shore, One hundred whereof were Brass, all with the
Arms of Austria

If all this I write be true, as I verily believe it is; we may say that this
Prize, where there were more than a Hundred and fifty Pieces of Ordnance, was
no mean Purchase.

I say nothing of the great Quantity of Artillery, mounted upon the Ships and
Gallions, for fear of troubling thee with the News of so great a Victory,
wherein the French gained so many Vessels and such great Riches, as will
suffice to equip a great Fleet.

The Prince besieges the Place and presses it, but the Spaniards defend
themselves bravely; and ^uch Blood will be shed there.

The Priest of Bourdeaux, which these Infidels call the Archbishop, was come
thither with Sixty Sail, whereof Forty two are Men of War, and the rest
Attenders; with some Fireships filled with Bituminous Matter, which inflames
easily to burn the Enemies Ships where they can come at them, so that there is
nothing wanting in the Armies by Sea or Land.

This Archbishop of Bourdeaux, makes more noise at present than the Pope; and,
it is credible, that what he has done, will gain him great Favor with his King.

He has, with as much Courage, invested Fourteen Galleys and Four Frigates,
which came from the Neighboring Ports to the Relief of Fontarabia, with Three
thousand natural Spaniards.

He fought six Hours together with this new Army, which he entirely defeated,
having burnt and sunk all these Ships, except one Galley, which was stranded
and rendered useless. The Admiral of Spain, with Eight hundred Men, was blown
up: which was no small Misfortune to the Spaniards, who lost, upon this
Occasion, a great number of Soldiers and Seamen: And, it is believed, they will
not be able to appear before their Enemies in Sea this great while.

If so many Losses suffered by a Party, are not advantageous to the Grand
Seignior, because the other is grown so much the stronger thereby, he will
however gain this Benefit by it, That the French and Spanish being both Enemies
to our Nation and Religion, our Affairs will be in greater Security, when of
two Enemies we see one suppressed.

The French publish by their Joy and continual Feastings, the Advantage they
receive from these Successes: And, these Infidels have reason to rejoice, their
Victory having all the Agreements possible; it is indeed great, and their Loss
very inconsiderable.

They say, there were but Twelve of the Ships of France disordered, and that
they lost not above a Hundred Seamen, and very few Officers. Here has been
made a large Relation of this Victory; and, it is graved in Copper, to the end
it may be made public in all its particulars, and the Memory of it conserved
to future Ages. Since the Loss of the Armado, surnamed The Invincible, which
Philip II. sent into England, in the Year 1588. to make War upon a Woman, we
have not known that Spain suffered so great a Loss.

This is the only News I can tell thee at present. So many Armies, as are in
continual Action, will furnish Matter enough hereafter to divert thee, by
reciting the Follies of these Infidels. who seem to destroy themselves daily,
and ruin their Affairs to gratify Us by their Defeats, and make Us triumph.

Paris, 17th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XXIII.
To Afis Bassa.
IF thou always followest thy Inclination, and thy natural Honesty, thou will
be indefatigable in faithfully serving the Sultan, and thou will not be averse
to him that esteems thee, and loves thee.

Read what I write to thee, and publish it when thou have read it, that the
Council may know, that it is resolved at the Diet held at Stockholm, the
Residence of the King of Sweden, to continue the War against Austria; and, that
the Duke of Weymar, and the General Banmer, begin already to combat the
Imperialists. Thou will see Spain and Germany attacked on so many Sides, and by
such powerful Enemies, that it is credible there may happen such vast Losses to
all these Christians, that the True Believers will have Occasion to rejoice,
and to hope yet the aggrandizing of the Great and Most Mighty King of Kings,
Sultan Amurath, Master and absolute Sovereign of both Seas, and Vanquisher of
all Nations.

This King has sent an Army into Picardie, under the Command of Marshal
Chatillion, to besiege St. Omer, a very strong Place in Artois, belonging to
the Spaniards; several Villages and Towns of Consideration, being already burnt
and pillaged.

The faithful Slave Mahmut* salutes thee, gives thee a friendly Kiss, and
wishes thee all Sort of Prosperity.

Paris 24th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XXIV.
To the Kaimakam.
THE King of France has sent forth another Army. I have already informed thee,
that this Prince has already Three Armies in Three Parts of Europe, There is
one in Piemont, commanded by Cardinal la Valette; another whereof Prince Henry
of Conde is Generalissimo, which they hope will quickly take Fontarabia; and, a
Third commanded by Marshal Chatillion, which besieges St. Omer.

The Duke of Longueville is at the Head of the Fourth, which is entered into
Burgundy, with design to ruin the French County, defended by Duke Charles of
Lorrain, one of the Emperor's Generals.

So many Armies, and so many Captains march against the Spaniards. This Nation
sufficiently manifests her Force; she is attacked on all Sides, and resists and
defends her self on all Sides. This vast Extent of Countries, which the
Austrians possess, though separated from each other, makes, that they are
always employed in defending themselves; but, they will be eternally exposed to
lose without any Appearance of Gain.

Thou know, that the true Secret of preserving Union amongst the Good, is to
entertain perpetual Differences amongst the Bad; and, thou will see, that all
the Adventures of this Country will render Us Invincible. What I tell thee is a
true Saying. The French, at Present, are too powerful, with so many Troops, so
many Armies by Sea and Land, which are seen in the Provinces of their Enemies.

The other Christians are in continual Apprehensions. The Ambassadors of
Princes, which reside in this Town and Court, observe with great diligence, so
many extraordinary Things, but say nothing; they do like me, they write and
advertise their Masters.

I am afraid thou will take no Pleasure in the Relations I make thee of the
Successes of so great a Power, but I ought to let thee know the Truth. Affairs
are carried on here with much Art. The Ministers serve with great Fidelity, and
are very secret. Cardinal Richlieu has an entire Ascendant over the King's
Spirit; and, to say Truth, is a Person of great Merit. They say, he aspires to
true Glory, and will place the Crown, which Charlemain wore, as Emperor of the
West, upon his Master's Head. If the good Fortune of France marches always at
this Rate, the Misfortunes of its Enemies must be excessive.

The manifold Wars which this Monarch undertakes, and Richlieu counsels him, do
in the mean Time make the People (who bear the Burden, by the Taxes which they
are forced to pay) murmur; besides their Grief for the Loss of their Parents
and Friends, slain in these Wars.

The Cardinal fears Peace, and apprehends his Enemies may destroy him, if they
have leisure to cabal against him. Thus he finds his Interest in the War, and
the Armies support his Authority.

I cannot yet make any certain Judgment of him, nor have a perfect Knowledge of
his Manners, no more than of the Extent of his Genius; because, the Man hides
many Things during his Life with a Dress, which will be discovered when he
dies. We can see which are his good Inclinations; and it is not easy to
penetrate into a Discovery of the Vices which he is inclined to.

In few Words, he has much contributed to the ^eace of France, divided by
Diversity of Religion. ^e has succored Italy, and manifested there the ^ower
of the King his Sovereign; has weakened ^e Empire of Germany, by the War he
has car^^ed into her Bosom, by the joint Forces of the ^rinces of the North,
and them of France, at once; and no less weakened the Power of the King of ^pain.

Thou, that know every thing that passes, and last Intelligence from all the
Parts of the World, can truly judge of Affairs; which makes thee know, and
foresee all that may prejudice the formidable Empire of the Mussulmans.

Paris, 20th. of the 7th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XXV.
To the Kaimakam.
ALL is in Peace here, the War being carried on abroad.

The Court continues to make Vows for the Queen's Health, and happy Delivery.
They seem not so much concerned for the King's Welfare, as the Queen's; every
Body being persuaded, That the Happiness of France depends on her safe Delivery.

I writ to Ghiurdgi Muhamet, that he should mention the Queen's being with
Child, as a doubtful Thing, and which might vanish; but at Present, it is most
certain; for she will shortly be brought to Bed. She lives in great Repose, for
fear of hurting her self; she scarce stirs out of her Bedchamber; and, every
body endeavors to please her.

There is News from Provence, of the arresting of a King's Son, by that
Governor. The Prisoner is Brother to Uladislaus, King of Poland.

It Is said, that the King of Spain had made Prince Casimir Viceroy of
Portugal, in Recompense of the Troops of Cossacks he had formerly raised to
defend the County of Burgundy. They add, that being embarked at Genoa, upon one
of the Galleys of that Republic, for Spain, to take Possession of the said
Charge, with a small Train of Domestics, and Count Konickpolski, who called
himself Uladislaus's Ambassador, with the Marquess of Gonzague, his Kinsman;
being arrived in Provence, and visiting with Care, all the Ports and
Fortresses; this gave no small Cause of Suspicion to the French. He staid four
Days privately in Marseilles; but, his Galley was arrested at Bouc, the last
Port of France, by Orders of this King.

It Is not yet known, what obliged France to make a Person of this Quality,
Prisoner, having nothing to do with Poland; and King Lewis XIII. having no
particular Pique against Prince Casimir: But, the Secrets of State being only
known to them that govern Kingdoms, I pretend to penetrate no further, but
content my self to write what they do, and what they say. Thou, who in the
Absence of the Vizir Hazem, art the Glory of his Highness's Council, art best
able to discover the reason of so extraordinary a Novelty.

The most knowing Persons at Court, say, this Prisoner will suddenly be set at
Liberty; and that, having no War that may authorize his Detention, it would be
unjust to retain him.

The Event will teach me, who am Ignorant, and them that will divine, that
which perhaps no body knows at present. May it please the Great God, Master,
and Sovereign Moderator of all Things, that the Intelligences and Guesses which
I give, may always be profitable and agreeable; and, that thy Life may be of
eternal Duration, for the Happiness of our Great Emperor and his Empire.

Thou shall suddenly know, whether Prince Casimir be retained longer in Prison,
or set at Liberty. I would, that King Uladislaus were in the same misfortune,
in the hands of the Janissaries; and, that he, as well as his Kingdom, were
Slaves to the Invincible Sultan, King of Kings; to whose Power may it please
the divine Goodness, and the wisest of his Prophets, to subject all the
Countries of the Infidels; and then to place him, with his Wives and all the
Prophets, in his Paradise.

Paris, 20th. of the Seventh Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XXVI.
To the Kaimakam.
HAving given thee an Account of the Imprisonment of Casimir, I will relate to
thee the Voyage of King Ulidislaus, his Brother, who is gone a Progress into
Hungary and Germany.

The News here, is, That the King of Poland was gone to make a Visit to the
King of Hungary; who, to do him Honor, sent the chief of his Nobles to receive
him upon the Confines of Moravia.

They write also, That Archduke Leopold went from Vienna to meet him: They
embraced like Brethren; and returned together with the Queen of Poland, and her
Sister, back to Court. It Is added, that the People received this Company with
great Acclamations, with the Noise of the Cannon, and all the small Shot of the
City.

The Day following having dined in the Imperial Palace, they went together to
Luxemburg, to visit the Empress Eleanor, Widow to the late Emperor of Germany.

If Carcoa has not informed thee of these Particulars, thou will receive them
from Mahmut, who watches incessantly to give true Intelligence, and penetrate
as much as may be, into all that occurs, and is done in this great Court, which
gives motion to all the Courts of Europe.

Reprove me, if I do not well; and punish me' if the Emperor be not well
served, and thou satisfied.

Paris, 15th. of the Eighth Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XXVII.
To Kerker Hassan Bassa.
DO not accuse me of being ill advised, or negligent, if I write to thee things
that thou know already. I am only careful in telling thee what happens here;
and my Business is not to enquire, whether thou art better informed another
way. When I am ordered to write all that comes to my Knowledge, I do my Duty in
doing it, and I ought not to be reprehended for it.

I am told, that the Sultan is gone with an Army, more numerous than all the
Leaves on the Trees, to destroy the Persians.
Red-Heads, and conquer Babylon. I know that the Mufti, the Grand Vizir, and
all the Grandees of the Divan followed him; but am ignorant of what he did in
his first Expedition, when he took Revan.

An old English Merchant, who comes from Ispahan, and has served in the Army of
the faithful Mussulmans, passed this Way in his Return to England. He has been
an Eyewitness of the great Actions of Amurath. He says, that this mighty
Emperor after his taking of Revan, left Twelve thousand Soldiers in Garrison
there, with Two hundred thousand Crowns in Silver, besides Copper Moneys to pay
them.

He says also, that our mighty Monarch, being wearied to see so much Blood of
the faithful, yea, of the Heretic Mussulmans, spilt, he had sent the King of
Persia a Challenge; offering to fight singly in Duel with him, but he would not
accept of his Defy.

He tells, how Amurath being fallen in the Water, in passing the River Haret,
was in great hazard of being laid up in Expectation of the last Judgment Day,
in the other World, had it not been for a Young lusty Solack, who took him by
the Arm, and dragged him out of the River. This Accident was the Prelude of a
great good Fortune, which happened to this mighty Prince upon the Bank of
another River, called Mako, where he had the News of the Birth of a Son born to
him in the Seraglio, at Constantinople, whom they call Alaaddin; whose Nativity
has been celebrated with infinite Demonstrations of Joy.

This Englishman tells us further, that Amurath has taken Tauris, and appeared
publicly there with all the Marks of a formidable Power; that he had destroyed
the King of Persia's Seraglio, burnt the public Markets, and caused a Million
of fine Trees, which renders the Loss irreparable, to be cut down.

Let me know, when thou art at leisure, whether this News be true; and do me
the Favor to tell me, our great Emperors Success in the Expedition of Babylon.
The Politicians here, attend the News of it with much Impatience. It Is allowed,
that Amurath is the most Potent of all Princes, the strongest Man alive; and,
that only he can vanquish and ruin the Kings of the Earth.

Two Strangers of differing Nations, and both of Royal Blood, are dead in this
City. The one is Don Christopher, Son of Don Antonio, King of Portugal; who,
after he had lived Sixty six Years, without ever attaining the Crown of his
Father, died in a Convent of Dervises, called Cordeliers, where he was buried,
in the same Place where his Father's Brother had been formerly.

The other Stranger was called Zaga Christos, who was the legitimate Successor
of the Kingdom of Aethiopia; a Young Man of Twenty five Years, Son to the
Empress Nazarenne, Widow of Jacob, Emperor of the Abyssins, who died in a
Village near Paris. He quitted his Kingdom, as thou know, forced by Civil
Wars; he arrived in France in the Year 1635. of the Aegyra of the Christians.
After many Adventures, he composed the History of his Travels, which he
performed with Troubles and Incommodities which seemed insupportable.

What has he not suffered in traversing many Kingdoms, Arabia the Desert,
Egypt, Asia Minor, and Jerusalem, where he ran the Hazard of being arrested by
the Bassa that resides there; whom he escaped by retiring by Night to Nazareth,
amongst the Christian Dervises, where he concealed himself five Months?

He said here, that an Eunuch of the Bassa of Cairo, had much solicited him to
forsake the Christian Religion, to which he would never consent; and refused to
go to Constantinople, to humble himself, by prostrating his Face in the Dust of
the Grand Signior's Feet; although the Bassa extremely pressed him to it, with
very advantageous Offers.

This King has done much Honor to the Manes of the dead Prince, whilst,
perhaps, he suffers everlasting Torments; which neither thou nor I shall
suffer, if we always live like faithful Mussulmans, according to the Precepts
of the Law, ordained by Mahomet, and written in the Alcoran.

I shall gladly hear, that thy Life is safe, and my Friendship agreeable to
thee.

Paris, 20th. of the Eighth Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XXVIII.
To the Kaimakam.
THat which has been so long expected, is at length happened: The Queen is
brought to Bed of a Dauphin; the King is a Father; the Kingdom seems to desire
nothing more, and the People witness their Joy by a Thousand differing
Festivities.

The Men, the Women, the Children, and the Aged, run through the Streets as at
Bacchanals. They rejoice with their Friends, they go to Church. and thank God,
as if a Messiah had been born to them.

All the Priests praise God in their Temples for such a Present; and the Monks,
not so content, deafen the People with the Noise of their Bells, and do more
than the Drums and Trumpets of the Soldiers, and all the Cannon of the
Citadel and Arsenal. I did, in Company of others, what I should not have dared
to perform, if I had been alone, or had not been observed.

Those who affirmed, the Queen would be brought to Bed of a Son, pretend now,
they had been advertised by some Divine Revelation, and will pass for Prophets;
and, amongst these, there are many Religious. Observe how far the^^
Superstition extends.

The Court has dispatched many Expresses into all the Provinces of France; and,
others have been sent to all the Ambassadors, to give Notice of this Birth to
their respective Princes.

A Priest, who is a Bishop, has baptized this Child, without any Ceremony, in
Presence of the Chancellor of France, the Princes, Princesses, and Grandees of
the Kingdom; the further Solemnity being reserved for another time.

The King commanded Te Deum to be publicly sung; being the Hymn which is usual
to all Christians, to thank God for extraordinary Successes.

Nothing is seen in the Streets of Paris, but Bonfires, and Fountains of Wine,
which run Day and Night. The People testify their Joy; and the Fires are so
great on all Sides, that it looks as if the City were to be reduced to Ashes.

Amongst so many Subjects of Joy, the King has wherewith to afflict him, having
been for some Days tormented with a violent Tertian Ague; and, it cannot be but
he must have his Spirits agitated with so many Wars at once. He has Armies
against Spain, in Flanders, Italy, Burgundy, and the Empire in Germany; without
mentioning his Naval Forces, and the Designs and Pretentions which he does not
yet declare. Thou may be confident, that Leagues will be formed against him,
and Conspiracies against his State. The Great Ones of the Kingdom are not
asleep; having long since had Designs to humble the Favorites and Ministers,
whose Deportments displeased them, and to make themselves Masters of Affairs,
and the Government.

I have a Plece of News to tell thee; but receive it as coming from a Woman,
not Mahmut. I seldom send that for assured, which in Appearance is not Truth.
What I am g^ing to say, will undoubtedly seem ridiculous.

The Women give out, that the Dauphin has Teeth, and the Nurses will witness
it. Those who easily believe Wonders, publish this as a most certain Truth. The
People, who add Faith to the most Incredible things, raise Stories upon this,
and are full of pretended Augu^ies.

But there being no Law that obliges us to believe that which we find
Incredible, thou may therefore receive this News as thou please, and look
upon it as useless, and excuse me.

They give the King the Title of Saint, which they add to that of Just, because
of his great Piety, in devoting his Son, before he was born, to the Virgin,
(which the Christians say is the Mother of their Messiah) with his Kingdom,
People and Person, which he has put under the Protection of the Mother of his
God; which he has made appear by Prayers, Processions, and extraordinary Alms.

This Ceremony, is ordinary enough with these Infidels; who, by an inexcusable
Idolatry, devote their Towns, and dedicate their Temples to Men that are dead,
whom they call Saints; worshipping them afterward upon their Altars, and
invoking them in their Distress.

I have nothing more at present to write to thee. God give thee always the
Grace to be just to thy self and others.

Paris, 16th. of the Ninth Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XXIX.
To the Captain Bassa.
THE Birth of the Dauphin of France happened this Month, whereof I forthwith
advertised the Kaimakam. I find my self in a great City, where they feast
continually, to testify the Love they have for the King, the Queen, the Young
Prince and the State.

Joy spreads equally; the most miserable, to whom Fortune has given nothing but
Tears, do now divert themselves.

The Women rejoice yet most; and, it seems, this Adventure regards them
principally. There is not one of 'em that would not lie in; all the Maids would
be Mothers, and the most advanced in Years do not now despair.

It seems here, that God only hears the Prayers of the French; for, they
believe the Queen had never been with Child, if the People were not holy. Thus
all believe, that they owe it to a Miracle of Heaven, not of Nature, that the
Child is born; and for that reason he is called, Given of God.

If this be so, thou must conclude, this Prince will be very Great, and much to
be redoubted, who has God for his Father, and is Heir of a great Kingdom. To
say the truth, France was never so flourishing, besides the great Armies they
entertain by Sea and Land.

But, that which appears most important to me, is, their vanquishing the
Hugonots, and defeating the Rebels. The Birth of a Successor, does much
heighten these Advantages, and causes a great Happiness to this Kingdom. I have
my Share in the Feasting, being obliged to do as others; for, to what purpose
should I appear afflicted?

Before I relate to thee a bloody Combat of Galleys, which was fought in the
Sea of Genoa, I will inform thee of a ludicrous one in that of Marseilles,
which resembled those Spectacles the Ancient Romans exhibited with so much Pomp
and Magnificence, called Naumachies.

The Count of Alais, Governor of Provence, caused four Galleys, two against
two, to combat, first with Cannon, and afterward with Small Shot; and lastly,
to board with Swords and Pikes; which was a fatal Presage for two Nations, who
ran in search of each other through all the Ocean, and exhibited a sad
Spectacle by Battles, where a Number of valiant Men were seen to perish.

Five and twenty Spanish Galleys appeared on the Coasts of Provence, where, it
was said, they were come to surprise some Maritime Place. But, the Count of
Harcour, General of the Armies of the Levant, for the King, having given them
Chase, some of them retired to the Coasts of Genoa; where they were attacked by
a like Number of those of France, which had still followed them since they were
seen before Marseilles.

It was the First of this Month, that they fought. Never appeared more Valor;
never was Combat more terrible; and, it is scarce conceivable what Blood was
shed. Thou, who art a great Captain, and an excellent Seaman, may guess.

These thirty Galleys having began their Combat with their Cannon and Muskers,
the Sea was in a little time colored with Blood, and covered with dead Bodies.
Each Galley having singled out his Enemy, the Fight was the more bloody and
obstinate. It Is said, this Battle was seen from the Walls and Tops of Houses in
Genoa, which were crowded with Spectators; and looked on with the same Concern,
as if they had fought for the Empire of Italy.

The Victory cost much Blood, which the French pretended to; seeing they took
six Galleys from their Enemies, amongst which was The Royal Patron of Spain,
the Captain, and the Patron of Sicily, with Eight hundred Prisoners; having
themselves lost but three Galleys, which were taken by the Spaniards. The
following Night there arose so violent a Tempest, that the Sea had well-nigh
swallowed the Victorious and the Vanquished. The French lost the Royal Patron
of Spain; which breaking loose, retired into a little Port of the River of
Genoa; where the Inhabitants of Arenzano seizing it, restored it to the
Spaniards; which, they say here, the French will not fail to revenge.

I am persuaded, that all I write to thee is true, because I have it from
disinterested Hands, and such as know the Truth of what passes.

They add only, that the Galleys of Spain, having more Slaves and Soldiers,
the Victory of the French was by so much the more glorious; and they affirm,
that the other had Two thousand Foot extraordinary, designed for Milan.

God give thee always Victory over thy Enemies, and make thee feared of all the
World.

Paris, 24th. of the Ninth Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER XXX.
To the same.
THey do here so highly magnify their Successes, as also those of the Allies
of the Crown of France, that I know not what to believe, these Exaggerations
being so contrary to the Glory of the Osmans. Having given thee an Account of
the Fight betwixt the Galleys of France and Spain, I will at present inform
thee, of the Advantage they say the Galleys of Malta have had.

They affirm, that this Squadron has defeated a very great Galley of the Bassa
of Tripoli, laden with great Store of rich Merchandise. We know well, that
this Vessel and her Loading are of good Value; but not so great as the Infidels
publish. They say further, that they took upon the Coast of Calabria, two great
Vessels, and a Polagu, commanded by Bicoce, Admiral of Tripoli, who is a
Renegado of Marseilles. They say, there were Two hundred Turks, Three hundred
and fifty Prisoners taken, and Fifty Christian Slaves set at Liberty. If what
they say is true, there were also a great many Brass Cannon in these Ships.
They confess, that the General of these Galleys, did all that was to be
expected from a Valiant Man, although he had the Gout, and that they lost but
Eight Knights.

Thou who know the truth of this Adventure, punish so great a Lie. It Is
true, that the Christians have taken the Vessels in Question; but, it is not
true, that their Advantage has been so great as they make it, seeing there
were no Brass Cannon, but a few Christians delivered; and, they having lost
much more than they acknowledge.

Thou art Valiant, thy Employment gives thee the command of the Sea; root out
of the World this little Nest of obstinate Pirates, who breath but by the
Goodness of Amurath, whose Clemency hinders their Destruction.

Paris, 4th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year, 1638.
The End of the First Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
BOOK II.
LETTER I.
To the Captain Bassa.
WHY will thou be more cruel than a Serpent; and give me Poison, when I send
thee so good Antidotes, to preserve thee from the Mischiefs, with which thou
may be overwhelmed? If thou be not satisfied with me Friendship, be at
least wise with the Sincerity where with I have given my Advice. Thy
proceeding, I must confess, makes me repent I did not takes another course; I
should thereby, in all Probability, have put a stop to all thy ill Practices.
Had I made known to the Grand Vizir, what I wrote to thee from Vienna, I should
have received Thanks for my Care and Diligence, and thy Chastisement might have
been of good Example: But, I tell thee plainly now, that I shall be obliged to
accuse thee of Treason, in Case thou continuest thy Commerce with the Emperor
of Germany's Secretary.

What Interpretation would thou have me give the Correspondence thou hold
with this Minister; when I discover, that he sends thee continually Presents,
and receives the same from thee? Be persuaded, every time thou appearest
favorable to the Christians, that the Pleasures thou do them, render thee
criminal to the Mussulmans For, in fine, what is the meaning of those Persian
Horses, those Hungarian Slaves which thou sentest, and that Quantity of
Magnificent Vests which thou presentedst to thy Friend? What would thou have
a Man think of that Silver Hercules, and Clock enriched with Pearls, which one
of the Faithful receives from an Enemy of our Holy Law? It signifies nothing to
answer my Letters with Passion, and Raging: Go to the Tribunal, where these
kind of Questions are to be decided; the Judge will tell thee, whether such a
Commerce is lawful, even in Times of Peace Thou much exaggeratest the
Obligations thou have to thy Friend at Vienna, because he used thee well, when
thou were his Prisoner of War. To this it is easy to answer, That if he
behaved himself like a Gentleman, thou ought to imitate him, like a good
Mohammedan. Should he happen to be thy Prisoner, take then thy Revenge, and
endeavor to requite him.

Again, supposing it should be discovered, that this thy Friend has presented
thee with this famous Cipher, composed with such Ingenuity, that it may be
fitly called Arts Masterpiece; what Opinion can the Mussulmans have of thy
Fidelity? It Is known with what Application thou usest it to write into Germany,
and to decypher the Answers which thou receivest. Are not these sufficient
Signs, to show, that the Dispatches thou writest, and their Answers, are like
the Trojan Horse, concealing abominable and dangerous Mysteries? Be persuaded,
that I had not writ to thee from Germany, the Letter which has so greatly
offended thee, on simple Conjectures. The Secretary, thy Friend, said one day,
he must be a Witch or a Devil that can discover the Artifice of these
Characters; That an Italian, who was condemned to perpetual Imprisonment, had
wrought Twenty Years to meliorate this Art, and had brought it to such great
Perfection, that he never saw any body that could understand his Letters, with
the Key it self which he gave them. It Is said, that this Invention is wholly
new; and the more admirable, that a Letter of an ordinary Style, of Domestic
Affairs, of Love and Complements, may contain Secrets of the greatest
Importance; without using equivocal Expressions, particular Characters,
Figures, supposed Names, Hieroglyphics, Juice of Herbs or Liquors; it being
impossible ever to discover what one designs to hide. He adds, that one may
write in Turkish, Arabian, French, or Italian, and conceal a Secret, written in
any Tongue whatever.

Thy Friend carries it yet further, and says, he could make use of Verses to
decypher Prose: And this audacious Man affirmed, one Day, in the Emperor's
Antichamber, that he would put into French this horrible Blasphemy, The Tyrant
Amurath will soon die; which is found in the following Verses of an Italian
Poet, whereof he immediately made a Proof: And these are the Italian Verses:

Giace l'Alta Cartago, a pena i Segni
De l'alte sue ruin il lido serba
Muiono le citta, muiono i Regni
Cuope i fasti, e le pomp arena and herba
Et l'huom di ess^r mortal parche si
O nostra mente cupida, and superba sdegni.
If it appears, that I am too sharp against thee, I will receive thy Curses
without reply: But, if thou know I have had just Reasons to write to thee,
as I have done; why are thy Answers so full of Injury? Think better on thy
Interest, and be always faithful, if thou intendest a long Life.

Paris, 4th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER II.
To the same.
THE small Success which we always meet with at Sea, obliges me to entertain
thee thereon. I shall take no Notice of this to the other Grandees of the Port,
no not to the Kaimakam, to whom I have not written these Three Posts. If thou
have received my Two last Letters, thou ought to be satisfied with the Care,
which the faithful Mahmut takes to give thee sound Advice. Consider well all
the Circumstances, which are related here, concerning the Sea-Affairs.

The Loss of so many Galleys, great Ships, and other Vessels, made this Year,
by the Friends of the Empire, the True Faithful; do much lessen the Reputation
of the Ottoman Greatness.

The Discourses made hereon, by the Christians, are so many Invectives against
the Honor of Amurath, against thine, and that of our Nation. If it be by a
Decree of Heaven, that these Venetian Pirates have taken, this Year, all the
Galleys of Africa; we must then conclude, That God is offended with us, and
does not hear our Prayers. For my part, I believe it; but I should not be a
good Mussulman, should I pretend to understand the Secrets of Providence.

They write from Marseilles, That the People of Tunis, Bizerte, and Algiers,
are greatly dismayed at the Loss of their Fifteen Galleys, which General
Capello has taken from them this Year. Thou know how the Business has
happened; the Infraction of the Treaty is manifest to all the World, as well as
the Insultings over the Fortress of the Grand Signior. I cannot imagine what
Excuses the Senators of this Republic can make, for what their Admiral has
maliciously done against us, when they shall be obliged to give an Account of
their Actions at the Fleet of Amurath. I speak to thee with all possible
Humility, and thou need not doubt but I speak with Zeal. I believe it is time
for thee to oppose, and put a stop, not only to the Pyracies of these People,
but the Incursions and continual Enterprises of the Corsaries of Malta, and so
many Vessels which infest our Seas, under the Banner of the Duke of Tuscany,
and other Infidel Princes. Thou ought to succor those People which are
Friends and Tributaries to the Port, whose Assistance thou have often
advantageously used; neither do thou want means for this, having at thy
disposal the terrible Forces entrusted to thee by Amurath; and, with these, the
magnanimous Courage given to thee by Nature.

The Christians have vowed to pierce, this Year, into the Bosphorus, and put
all to Fire and Sword. Above Sixty French Knights are determined for Malta, to
join themselves with their Comrades, to cruise our Seas with them. And thou
know the Resolution and Courage of this Militia, and the Progress they every
Day make.

Believe what Mahmut tells thee. Thou have Two Seas to keep; and if it be true,
thou have made Ali Piccinino to come from Africa, with so many Galleys,
designed to the keeping of the Coasts of Barbary; it is not to be doubted, but
the Divine Providence has ordered, (it concerning so greatly Amurath's Honor)
that the Guilty be pursued, so that not one of them may escape his Vengeance.

All People say here, that Piccinino has lost his Army for want of good
Conduct. However here are great Rejoycings at our Losses; and, if possible,
more in Italy, where they feel the Advantage of so considerable a Prize at the
same time, together with the Honor of the Victory; and where we are hated more
than in any Place else besides. I beseech God to chastize these People by thy
Hand; and that the Edge of thy Cymiter, in giving Death to our Enemies, may put
an end to Slander and Slanderers.

Here Is an impudent Fellow, who reports he has seen thee several times at
Constantinople. He, with great Confidence, affirms, the Christian Corsaries
will bring thee one Day, laden with Chains, into the Arsenal of Venice, or that
of Malta. He grounds his Prediction on that thou art, says he, furious when
thou command; and that being too forward, thou can not obey the Orders
given thee. He adds, that Tobacco, Love of Boys, Wine, and ^omen drive thee
twice a Day into a Condition incapable of exercising thy Reason. He moreover
says, thou want Courage in a Land-Fight, neither art well skilled in
Sea-Combats. I would not write these Fooleries to thee, were I not persuaded
that they really are so; and that thou want neither Courage nor Experience.
I am moreover persuaded of the Malignity of thy Accusers, touching the
Debaucheries I mentioned; and it appears to me more pertinent to write thee
this, than to the Grand Vizir; though I must confess, I am enjoined to inform
the Ministers of the Port of whatever I hear, without any Reserve.

It Is said, that as to what concerns the Republic of Venice, and Capello who
commands its Navy, that this General will be punished for doing too well; that
this puissant State will be humbled to the kissing the Stirrup of our great
Emperor's Horse; but, it will justify the Lawfulness of the Prize, which this
General made, as being no breach of the Treaty with the Sublime Port, whence
come the Orders by which the World is to be governed; and that, in fine, the
Pirates of Africa are not comprehended in the Treaties of Peace made with his
Highness

And it is moreover alleged, That should this Republic be obliged to restore
these Galleys which she has taken, 'twill appear, they have been lost through
several Accidents.

All Christendom is persuaded, there is no Republic in the World governed with
greater Prudence; which will make her avoid all Occasions of Difference with
the Port, and seek all Ways of Reconcilement with Amurath, to prevent a War
which cannot be for her Interest.

I happened into a Company of discreet Persons, who blame Ali Piccinino's
Conduct; and attribute his Misfortune to his want of Skill, and to his
Rashness. They affirm, That had he had the Courage of a true Soldier, he would
have behaved himself not only in the Archipelago, but in the Adriatic Sea,
like a Captain, and not like a Thief; and, that God has given him this
Mortification, as a Punishment for the Cruelty he showed to the innocent
Vestals, whom he made Slaves at Calabria, together with a great Multitude of
Old Men, and Children; which was an Act no ways suitable to a brave Commander.
And, this is the Discourse, caused by the hatred to our Nation, and especially
to Ali.

The Great God, Sovereign Moderator of all Things, keep thee in perfect
Judgment, and make thy Valor renowned, and thy Glory proclaimed in all Places,
enlightened by the Beams of the Sun.

Paris, 6th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER III.
To the same.
I Wrote to thee Yesterday, what the Sense of the World was of thee; and I
write to thee this Day, what Mine is.

Although thou ask not my Advice, yet I will give thee such, as, perhaps,
thou will approve of, and may be useful to thee in due Season.

Will thou be revenged of the Venetians, and all the Christians at once? Pass
over into the Adriatic Seas, with Twenty small Galleys; draw near at Night to
the Shore at Ancona; and, before the Sun be up, ransack the famous Place of
Loretto; thou may carry away thence as great Booty, as ever the Consuls and
Roman Emperors did elsewhere.

Could thou conceive the immense Riches, shut up in a little Chamber, (where
the Christians affirm, That a Virgin received an Ambassador from Heaven, under
the Form of an Angel; after whose Words she found she had conceived the
Messiah, whom the Christians worship) thou would not defer the executing of
what Mahmut counsels thee.

It Is reported in this Kingdom, as if Piccinin^ had such a Design. Why did not
this brave Spark then execute, what he had so well contrived? When he was in
Africa, he was to ravage all Italy; and he had no sooner come on those Coasts,
but he lost all the true African Courage. He let himself be taken Prisoner; he
suffered a mighty Fleet to be lost, and the Shamefulness of his Defeat will for
ever blast his Name.

If Amurath returns a Conqueror of Babylon, which is very likely to happen, and
thou take Loretto; it may be said, that the Ottoman Empire is arrived at its
full Height; Loretto being the Mecha of the Christians.

There is no Season, wherein one sees not arrive an infinite Number of Pilgrims
from all Parts; who come to offer there their Devotions, with the same Zeal as
the Faithful go and pray at the Tomb of our Holy Prophet; and they often join
with their Prayers, Offerings of considerable Value. A small Number of Priests
of the Roman Church, have such Treasures there in their keeping, as cannot be
fully valued: Vessels of both Gold and Silver, with Vestures, and Ornaments,
and precious Stones, which serve to set forth this Temple, the most magnificent
and famous amongst the Christians; an infinite Number of Lamps, Crowns and
Scepters offered by the greatest Princes of the Christian Belief; and, in fine,
whatever can be imagined most beautiful, most great, and costly. Thou that
know not what Fear is, thou can foresee nothing in this Enterprise which
may deter thee. The Priests of this famous Temple sleep all the Night long, and
spend the Day in chanting their Masses; and the Soldiers designed for the
keeping of this Place, are few in Number, and can make but small Resistance: If
thou be persuaded of the Truth of what I write, do more than Caesar; go,
conquer and repose thy self. I have no more to write to thee: I send the
Kaimakam a Copy of this Letter. I have writ thee whatever has come to my
Knowledge, and thou would further know, What Mahmut, under the Habit of
Titus, has discoursed at Paris. I am willing to inform thee, I have answered
some People, who have had the Boldness to say; That the Ottoman Empire will be
soon ruined, should it receive such another Blow; That, if Trees be not wanting
in Asia, the Mahometans will not want Ships, nor Galleys; and that they will
have as many Soldiers and Seamen, as they please, if the Women do not happen
all of them at once to be Barren. Thou know, that after the Battle of
Lepanto, wherein the Great God, and our Prophet, designed to mortify the
Faithful; that Selim's Favorite maintained the Glory of his Master, in thus
speaking to the Balio of Venice: There is this difference between the Losses,
which thy Republic makes, and the Misfortunes which happen to the Mussulmans;
that when we took from you the Island of Cyprus, we cut off one of your Arms;
and when you defeated us in Battle, 'twas just as if you had cut off our
Beards, which will soon grow up again; and if Women and Trees do not fail us,
we shall soon have Ships and Men; but the Loss of your Arm can never be
repaired.

The Eternal Lord, without whom nothing can subsist, make the Sea always
navigable, and without Tempests, that the Winds may favor thy Designs; and
when thou have finished all thou ought, for the Glory of the Empire, I pray
Heaven make thee Possessor of the Infidel's Countries, which thou shall subdue.

Paris, 7th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER. IV.
To the Kaimakam.
THis Letter will perhaps prove troublesome to thee, wherein thou will find an
odd Mixture; however, thou will have no cause to complain of me; for, whatever
I write to thee, shall be put into such Order, that if the first News be
troublesome to thee, the last will prove otherwise. Thou have received none of
my Letters in the last Pacquets which I sent thee; and, I have found it more to
the Purpose, to make thee know at once, though something later, what I could
not write but at three times; whereby thou will be better informed than others,
to whom I wrote the first Notices I had. There Is nothing like to Patience; as
in all other things, so more especially as to what concerns News; the lame Post
always bringing the best Intelligence.

However, I hope thou will pardon me, if I wrote only to one Person, who is the
Captain Bassa, those disagreeable things which I heard, that I might not make a
new Recital, which would not please; besides, that he is obliged, as well as
the other Ministers of the Port, to impart to thee Advices he receives from me.

Thou will find by the Copy of the Letter which I have written, that it is not
without reason I am angry with him. My Design is not to learn thee, what thou
knew probably before me, but what thou may be ignorant of, and yet
ought to know.

The Christians express continually their Hatred against us, always speaking
ill of our Affairs. Although there he no War declared between these Infidels
and the ever Invincible Sultan; yet they cease not to be our Enemies; and thou
may know by their Discourse, they are ever laying Designs against us. Thou
know, the usual* Way of the World is to discourse first of Affairs, and then
take their Resolutions: The French are generally excepted from this Rule, for
they have executed their Designs before they began to speak of them; so lively
is their Imagination, and so ready are they to take their Resolutions. They do
in Affairs of State, what we are wont to do in those of Religion; they decide
them by the Sword. They affirm that Princes who have Valor have no juster
Tribunal than War; and, that their Soldiers are their Lawyers. What Measures
then, most wise Kaimakam, can be taken with a Nation which is in a continual
Activity? The French cannot remain at Rest; and when they disturb not their
Neighbors, they make War amongst themselves. The Ministers of Foreign Princes,
who do, near the Matter, what I do; although they have a Character which I have
not, are incessantly in Action: They watch, without ceasing, as I do, on what
passes; and thou may assure thy self, that the Divan shall be fully and
certainly advertized of all things.

The Pope keeps here, as his Ambassador, a Prelate, called a Nuncio. The
Emperor of Germany, the King of Spain, those of England, Swedeland, Denmark and
Poland; the Electors, and several other Princes of the Empire, entertain also
Ambassadors, to observe the Motions of this Prince, who often breaks all their
Measures. The States of Italy do also the same; there are, in this Part of
Europe, Princes and Republics: These little Sovereigns, are more jealous than
others, of their Interests; and, do more concern themselves in all Affairs
which pass. The Republics likewise use greater Precautions in their Conduct,
than the Monarchs do.

The Republic of Venice has acquired a great Reputation; France keeps a good
Correspondence with her; the Ambassador of that State, living here with all the
marks of Grandeur, and the same Prerogatives granted to those of Crowned Heads.
Neither Persia nor Moscovia keep any Public Minister here; yet, perhaps, they
may have some that give Private Intelligence to their Masters. As to what
concerns the Princes of the Indies, they seem not to me, to have any Interest
here; so that they have, I believe, no Agent in these Parts, either public or
private. If the name of Spy be mean, or dishonorable, I know no body that is
called one; for I being unknown, my Reputation therefore runs no hazard. I
serve, without being observed. But to speak plainly, What are the Ambassadors
and Agents of Princes, but secret Spies, as I am; who under pretense of keeping
a Correspondence between their Masters, inform them of what they can discover
in the Courts, where they are sent?

Thou shall be sufficiently informed by the Bassa of the Sea, of Piccinino's
Adventure; he will show thee what I have written. However, here are Sixty
Galleys lost; and our greatest Consolation is, that we shall not want means to
be revenged: If the Christians have cut off one of our Fingers, we ought to
pluck out both their Eyes.

It Is said here, that this Admiral is made Prisoner by the Venetians; if this
be true, his Confinement must be very uneasy to him. But, all People are not
agreed, whether he be a Prisoner or no; for, some maintain, he is at
Constantinople, where he justifies himself, with his usual Arrogance; laying
all the Fault on the Renegado, who commanded the Admiral of Algiers.

I have recommended to the Bassa of the Sea, the Enterprise of Loretto. If thou
have leisure to examine the Project, thou will find, though I am no Captain nor
Mariner, what I have hinted is worth regarding. The knowledge which I have of
the World, of the Manner of living of the Christian Princes, and Priests of
Rome; together with the other Notices I have required, by the reading of
Histories, should make me considered, as a Man that is able to offer at great
Things; though I have not yet gained much Credit in the World.

The Ambassador of Venice, residing in this Court, says, That their Republic
will satisfy the Grand Signior; affirming that Ali is a Pyrate; that the
Africans have broken the Peace; and, that the Action of their General Capello,
is just and heroical; and, that Amurath himself will chastise Piccinino. He
moreover pretends, that the Galleys which were taken, will not be restored,
seeing it will be made apparent, they have been lost by different Accidents: I
think he says, they have been all sunk before the Isle of Corfou, by the
Senate's Order, to prevent the Expectation of a Surrender, the Admiral of
Algiers only excepted, which those Infidels have brought in Triumph into their
Arsenal, to preserve the Remembrance of an Event, which they pretend to be very
glorious to them; but these Misfortunes are not extreme* nor past Remedy, if
God continues the Life of our Great Emperor, and thy Health.

Paris, 7th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER V.
To the same.
THey have at length given over talking of our Losses, but I give not over
devising the means to be revenged of the Christians. Remember, that the Grand
Vizir keeps in Prison a Man fit for great Things at this Time, who can do the
Nazarenes considerable Mischiefs, and procure notable Advantage to the
Mussulmen. If the old Renegado of Dalmatia be yet alive, he is capable of
destroying all Places in the Mediterranean-Sea. Advise with him about the
Destruction of Lorerio. There is no Corsary, that has done more bold Exploits.
He has spent Sixty Years in coursing on the Archipelago, and Adriatick-Sea;
where he has made horrid Devastations, with infinite Prizes. He has likewise,
most considerably damnified the Cossacks, on the Black-Sea. He began the Trade
at Nine Years old, in a little Vessel; has been wounded in Twenty, or Twenty
two Oceasions, taken Prisoner Four times by our Pirates, and thrice escaped out
of their Hands. And not being able to fly the Fourth time, nor redeem himself
by Money, he redeemed himself by his Religion, which he quitted to embrace
Ours; and since he has been Circumcized, he has brought to Constantinople above
Thirteen Thousand Slaves in about Thirty Years Space. He has passed full Five
Years in the Cleft of a Rock, along the Banks of the Adriatick-Sea; which by
his Industry he made a sure Place of Retreat. Here 'twas, that he did himself,
with his Men and Vessel, like a wild Beast in his Den; and it is hard to imagine
how many Snares he laid during that Time, for those of his own Religion* He has
been often pursued, but could never be taken; and his Name became so terrible
amongst the Christians, that there was no Place but dreaded him. But, in fine,
having, as it is said, attempted to betray his Master, in delivering into the
Christians Hands, the five Galleys he commanded; he was sent, by Order from the
Grand Vizir, into the Castle of Seven Towers, although his Crime was not
certainly proved. It Is above Two and fifty Moons since he has been there kept
Prisoner; and, he is not only very old, but decrepid. The long Penance which a
Man has undergone, that has done such great Things, and who is accused of
having done one ill one, of which he is not convicted, does plead for some
Indulgence.

I shall never go about to solicit for the Liberty of a Traitor; yet I must
say, That Men who have dared to execute great Crimes, are often capable of
Heroic Actions. This Man was, and is still, at the end of his Life; perhaps if
thou will endeavor to procure him some Advantage, and make him hope still
greater, he may repair his Fault, by performing something for the good of the
Empire; or at least, give some good Advice. Thou know, the Ancient Persians
had a Law, whereby their Kings were obliged, Not to put a Malefactor to death
for one Crime; and private Persons, not to chastise their Domestics or Slaves
for one Fault. Thou know, moreover, that Princes should obseve in the
Chastisement of their Subjects, whether the Services they had rendered, have not
been greater than their present Failings, and pardon them if their good Deeds
surpassed their bad. These Laws, although no longer observed in Persia, yet
cease not to be wise Precepts; to which, if thou have no regard, yet thou will
have some to the Zeal and Affection of Mahmut: And if thou will suffer me to
make here a short Digression, in comparing the State wherein we are, with that
of the Ancients; thou will find, how much our Monarchy surpasses all others.
Do thou believe, Generous Kaimakam, that the Ottoman Empire is equal,
inferior, or superior to that of the Romans in Pompey's time? Let us content
our selves with supposing it equal, to speak without Passion, and cut the
Course of Disputes, which might be made hereupon; and reflect, I pray thee, on
the Conduct which Pompey held in the War he made against those infinite Number
of Pirates, which infested the Seas of Italy, Africa, and Asia. He was made
General of an Army of Five hundred Sail, with absolute Power to do what he
thought sitting, without giving any Account. Thou know his Conduct was so
prudent, and full of Valor, that embarking with Ten thousand and twenty Foot,
and Six thousand Horse, he in Forty days cleared Libia, Sicily, Spain,
Sardinia; and, in a word, all the Seas which depended on the Roman Power, from
an infinite Number of Pirates; who had, as it were, besieged the Capital of the
Empire, by their Incursions, Rapines and Violences.

Now, although the Number of our Enemies be not so great, nor their Strength so
considerable; yet it is to be feared, lest the Infidels be one Day bold enough,
(having joined their Forces, which now lie dispersed,) to fall upon us, and
shake the vast Monarchy of the Ottomans, which they now often disturb by
frequent Enterprises in several Parts:

We have an infinite Number of Places to preserve. We have several Kingdoms,
populous Isles: we command warlike Nations, and the Number of the Empire's
Subjects are innumerable, which ought to encourage us to undertake no less than
Pompey did heretofore, who was called the Agamenon of Italy, because he
commanded a numerous Fleet, as this Hero of the Greeks formerly did. But, it
being already Midnight, I am forced to finish this Letter, lest it should be
too late for the Post.

I shall inform thee by the first Opportunity of what has happened in Italy and
Germany, and of several other things which I thought I ought to give thee
Notice of by this Express; but, accuse me, not of neglect, in not having
wrtiten all to thee in this Letter, and receive my Excuse, which is just and
sincere, and grant me thy Favor.

The Great God increase thy Prosperity, and continue thy Health and Credit, in
the Dominions of the Invincible Sultan, under whose glorious Reign we live.

Paris, 7th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER VI.
To the same.
I Pass immediately into Montferrat without leaving France, to tell thee, That
the Spaniards have there made themselves Masters of a little Town, which the
French could not keep for want of Men; and have also demolished the Fortress
which guarded the Place, that their Enemies might not have any desire after a
Reprisal.

The eldest Son of Amadaeus, Duke of Savoy, is now dead; he was called Lewis
Amadaeus: he was but Seven Years old when declared Sovereign, and was so but
few Moons. He died Four days after the Ceremony of his Baptism. The King of
France and the Queen of Spain were Godfather and God-mother to this Prince.
Thou will ask me, perhaps, how this could be, seeing they could not be there
present? But thou must know, that these Nazarenes, assist often at these
Ceremonies by Procuration. The Duchess of Savoy seems to me worthy of
Compassion having lost in one Year, both her Husband and her Son, and a good
part of her Estate, and sees what remains to her, exposed to the Hazards of
War; but she has ever showed her self a Woman of Courage and Resolution. Her
second Son has been declared his Brother's Heir, and the States have chosen her
Regent, during his Minority.

The reason of the sudden Visit, which the Elector of Saxony gave the King of
Hungary, is not yet known: We have had Advice of his Departure from Dresden,
the Capital Town of his Country, with a great Train of Courtiers, and the Three
Princes his Sons; and that he went to Leutmaritz, where this King expected him;
and it is farther said, That in the small Time they were together, they have had
several Conferences, the Subject of which is not yet discovered. The King has
presented the Duke with a rich Coach, with six stately Horses, sumptuously
harnessed; and given Diamonds and Gold Chains to his Courtiers. But thou being
nearer the Place of this Conference, and the Port having every where subtle
Agents, thou may sooner get this Secret than I: For it is not to be doubted,
but there is something hatching against the Ottoman Empire, whilst Amurath is at
that Distance, and the chief Forces of his Empire employed elsewhere.

As to what concerns the Progress of the Duke of Wimar, who carries on the War
in Alsatia, there are infinitely different News come from thence, since I wrote
to thee, but, this is what is most certain, After the taking of Fribourgh, this
General made himself Master of the Campaign about Brizac; and his Army seizing
on all the Posts thereabouts, the Imperialists put themselves in a Posture of
hindering them; but for three Months Time, they could do nothing but spoil the
Corn, and forage in the Country, whereby they wasted their own Subsistence.
They have also fruitlesly endeavored to break down the Bridge, which Wimer had
built at Newremberg; where they met with such Resistance, that they were forced
to retire with their Army, which was in great Danger. But the Duke also met
with no Success in his Enterprise on Offemburgh, through the Fault of Fifteen
hundred Musketeers, French and Germans, who came not soon enough to plant their
Ladders against the Walls, and surprise this Place; and, he has since made
different Trials, which have proved all in vain. An Officer had already entered
as far as the Ramparts, with a small Party which he commanded by means of a
false Passport; but, being discovered by a Sentinel, he was forced to retreat
in Confusion, with the Loss of some of his Men, Wimar since defeated two
Regiments of Dragoons. and Two other Regiments of Horse, and siezed on the
Castle of Mauberg the Garrison of which Place surrendered at Discretion, to a
Swedish Officer. But I am informed, that the Two Armies come near one another,
on the Banks of the Rhine; of which I shall say no more, than what is necessary.

The Emperor's Troops being discovered by Wimar's Vant-guard, commanded by
Turenne, gained an high Ground; on which, fortifying themselves, they sheltred
behind a Church and some Houses, before which there was a Battery raised of
several Pieces of Cannon, to keep the Swedes at a Distance and hinder them from
encamping too near. Some Franch, imprudently advancing to discover the Enemy's
Posture, within less than Musket Shot, were almost all killed on the Place. By
this time the Duke of Wimar, seeing he could not draw the Imperialists to
fight, and it being impossible to force them on the Mountain, where they were
entrenched, retired under the Castle of Mauberg, with his Rear-guard, commanded
by the Count de Gurbian, a French Gentleman, The next Day he joined the rest of
his Army, and being informed by a Moor that served him, and in whom he put
great Confidence; that the Imperialists began early in the Morning to retire;
he immediately therefore put himself into a Condition to follow them, making
his Army to march in Battle-Array: His Horse consisted of Twenty four
Squadrons, and his Foot of Eight Batalions; besides the Auxiliary Troops, of
which he made a Reserved Body.

The French affirm, the Imperialists were the strongest, as having Four
thousand Men more than the Swedes; of which, it is hard to know the certainty;
but, the Particulars of the Battle, are worth ones writing. 'Twas very bloody,
the Fight being obstinately held by both Parties, and the Victory long
inclining, sometimes to one side, and sometimes to another: So that the
Combatants were ready to retire, weary of striking, and being struck; when
Fortune on a sudden, declared her self for the Duke of Wimar, who behaved
himself in the Fight, like a wise Captain and valiant Soldier. It Is certain,
the Imperialists have lost Two thousand Men in this Occasion, with several of
their principal Officers: And also above Fifteen hundred were made Prisoners,
amongst which there were above Two hundred Persons considerable on the account
of their Birth or Employs. I make no mention of the Number of the Cannon;
neither do I reckon the Hundred Colors or Cornets, nor Three thousand Wagons
laden with all Sorts of Ammunition, which fell to the Conquerors; but, I
greatly value the Box of Writings of two great Commanders, wherein were found
the Instructions and secret Orders of the King of Hungary, and some Treaties
made with the sublime Port: to which all the Potentates of the World should pay
Homage.

It cannot yet be discovered what these Treaties contain, yet I shall do all
that is possible in order to it. The booty has been great, however Wimar seems
not to set much by it, as aiming at something more considerable. He remained
two Days in the Field of Battle, the better to assure his Enemy of his
Conquest: he moreover pretends in his Letters to this Court, that he had not in
this Expedition above Five hundred Foot, and few Cavalry; which out of a
Bravado, he says he will reinforce with his Pages. This is that which our
Emperors, who are the Masters of the World, would scruple to say in the
Presence of their Slaves; so far would they be from speaking so, before an
Army, as this Prince did, in the Presence of a great King. See the Vanity of
one of these Infidels's Generals.

In Obedience to the Orders which I received from thee, I here end my Letter;
so that thou will receive a very imperfect Relation of the Events which I began
to relate to thee; and I shall continue my Dispatch to Morrow, that thou may
the better remember what I have already written to thee, that I may not lose
the Thread of the History.

Paris, 24th. of the last Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER VII.
To the same.
I Find in the Alcoran, the Chapter which speaks of Limbo's, to be very long;
and, I believe I never wrote thee any Letter, wherein there were so many Words:
Thou shall not receive henceforward any from me larger than the Hundred and six
Versicles of this Chapter, seeing thou enjoynest me to be short. I have
therefore divided this Dispatch into two, lest it should prove tiresome to
thee; although I believe thou would have found it when entire, not so long
as the Chapter which treats of Hell.

Wimar lost no time, but went and encamped before Brizac; he caused the
Trenches to be opened with great Diligence, and has so beset the Rhine, that
nothing can pass without his Leave. This River is considerable for its
Largeness, and Length of its Course; carrying Vessels of great Burden, which
makes it much frequented.

This Captain having discovered the Town wanted Provisions of all kinds, used
all imaginable Artifices to surprise it, or carry it away by Assault. It is the
Capital of a great Province, where he is Master of several considerable Places,
and several strong Castles, from whence, one may say, the Place was already
besieged.

Things were in this Condition, and there was no other Discourse in the Swedes
Camp, but of Victories, Losses, and Wounds, when the News of the Birth of the
Dauphin was brought there, which caused another Noise to be heard. The Horse
and Foot, joined their Shouts of Joy to the Sounds of the Drums, Trumpets, and
the Artillery, which was several Times discharged.

The Valor of the Duke of Wimar, and that of the Troops which he commands,
made not the Imperialists to lose their Courage; having recruited their Army
with new Troops. General Lambore, a Man of Courage, and good Conduct, appeared
in the sight of the Swedes, having added to his Army Five Thousand Men, with
the rest of the Troops of Prince Savelly, and wasted the Country which the
Enemy was in possession of. If thou would know the Situation of the Swedes
Camp, and, in what manner they made their Trenches, and Circumvallations, I can
certainly inform thee; having had some time since a very exact Draught of it.
This Camp is Three German Miles in Compass; fortified on each side by a Trench
Sixteen Foot thick, with a large deep Ditch, a double Palisado, and several
Redoubts. The lower as well as upper Parts of the Town, are mightily annoyed by
Two Bridges made on the Rhine. The Abundance of all sorts of Ammunition, does
much hearten the Army. The Commander, although very ill, yet is incessantly
watchful, and seems indefatigable. The Soldiers animated by their past
Successes, think of nothing but new Conquests, and new Booty, imagining
themselves invincible. The Artillery which is in the Camp, is Fifty Pieces of
great Cannon, with which such Batteries have been made, as drive the Besieged
to despair. I mention not to thee several small Skirmishes, which continually
happen; yet this is what is most considerable: Some Troops of young Soldiers of
the Imperial Army, having taken several Cattle from the Swedes, and made some
Prisoners, had notice of the March of Colonel Sillard, who came from France,
and brought a good Sum of Money for the Payment of the Troops. They went to
meet him, and took it, together with several young. Gentlemen Prisoners, all
Men of Note; and, who had also a great deal of Money about them. At the same
time, the Duke of Lorrain, a Prince of great Valor, who serves in the
Imperialist's Party, has undertaken to relieve Brizac, which he knew was
reduced to the utmost Extremity; and, having chosen, for this Design, Forty
Companies of Foot for a Convoy of Provisions; and, being on his March, he met
with the Duke of Wimar. And this is the short of the Story: The Prince was
still indisposed, by reason of his late Sickness; yet, this could not hinder
him from embracing this Occasion, which he believed to be of great Importance
to his Party; he got therefore on horseback, and marched up to the Duke.

The Combat lasted Five Hours, and Lorrain did all that could be expected from
a brave and experienced Commander. But, he was constrained to yield to the
Duke's Fortune, and retire into a wood, with what he could save of his Troops;
and the Swedes Courage was not a little increased by so great an Advantage,
which will certainly be attended with the Surrender of Brizac. The Duke of
Wimar remained Master of the Field, having entirely defeated the Imperialists
Foot, and put the Duke of Lorrain's Horse into a horrid Disorder: There lay
above Twelve Hundred dead on the Place, and all the Baggage, together with the
Ammunition, fell into the Hands of the Conqueror. A Man would think,
Illustrious Kaimakam, that the God Mars has united himself with this Captain:
for, notwithstanding the Weakness of his Body, he performs every Day most
Heroic Actions, with his valiant Soldiers, who are ready to undertake any
Thing, when he is at their Head. Whether this happens from his not valuing of
Life, or his Thirst after Honor; yet, so it is, That That he cannot live
without nourishing himself with Victories; and, he begins already to equal the
famous Gustavus, under whom he has learned his Trade. Yet he has lost,
notwithstanding his Diligence, Two Forts he built on the Rhine; which, if he
retakes, 'twill not be without the Cost of much Blood on both Sides. The
Germans have already lost Sixty Thousand Men there, amongst which there were
Four Hundred drowned.

The Extremities of Brizac, of which we have already private Advices, is at
present known by all the World. The Swedes intercepted, the last Moon of
October, a Letter from the Governor to the King of Hungary, wherein he laid
open his Condition, and told him plainly, That Places which wanted Men,
Victuals, and Ammunition, could not be defended but by a Miracle; adding. That
the best Officers and Soldiers were already dead; and those that were alive
were either sick, or lay wounded, and so greatly tired, that they could do no
Service; and besides, their Victuals would last but Twelve Days. He seemed
afterward to reproach him for letting the Time slip, in which he had promised
him Assistance; and put him in mind, he did not believe he could hold out to
the 4th. of the Moon of September; being reduced to such Extremities, that he
durst not mention Particulars, lest his Letter should fall into other Hands.
Observe the Imprudence of the Expressions; he dares not write all, and yet he
writes more than needs, to discover, that the Place will be infallibly taken.

If thou be impatient to know the Surrender of Brizar, thou shall be
satisfied by this Dispateh. The Post is now come, which brings News of the
taking of this important Place, and he has come hither in Three Days. The Place
was taken according to the Rules of War, surrendering the Ninth of the last Moon
of this Year, according to the Christians Style. The Governor procured very
honorable Terms; and truly, he sustained the Siege, with all the Vigor and
Courage possible, to the last Extremity. He is called the Baron de Reynech: His
Name deserves a Place in the Letters thou enregisters; and, that the Divan
should be informed of a Man, who knows so well to defend what is entrusted to
him, that they may give to Virtue her Due. There went out of Brizac, only Four
Hundred Foot, and Seventy Horse, who were all naked, wounded, and almost dead
with Hunger; they were reduced to those Extremities, that they had already
eaten the Flesh of Horses, Cats, and Dogs; and some were said to have devoured
humane Flesh. As touching the Booty, there are different Discourses; but, it is
certain, the Conqueror found above Two Hundred Pieces of Cannon in the Place.

But, there is a strange Story related of a young Lady, of admirable Beauty,
who falling down at the Duke of Wimar's Feet, thus spoke to him: Sir, I have
but some few moments to live, Hunger having reduced me to the Gates of Death;
but I shall die desperate, if you do not revenge me of a base Fellow, who has
exacted of me a Diamond of great Value, which I have been forced to give him
for a roasted Mouse; I am not angry with him for his taking of me a
Pearl-Necklace during the Siege, for Four Ounces of Flower; but, I confess my
Weakness, I cannot fee my self bereaved of what I most valued, and die without
Satisfaction. It Is said, this Prince could not forbear shedding Tears at so
piteous a Spectacle; this Lady dying almost at the same Instant she had done
speaking; but, it is not known, whether he called this hard-hearted Fellow to an
Account, for what he had detained.

The Siege of Brizac lasted Four Months; almost Fourscore Thousand Men
perishing in the Town, by Sickness, Wounds, and Famine. Bonfires are made at
Paris, for so great an Advantage; and, the Duke of Wimar's Praises, are every
where celebrated; and great Commendations are given him in the Letters from the
Court. Our Empire may have one Day something to fear, from so brave, so
experienced, and ambitious a Captain, were he at leisure. But, Germany is so
large a Country, so full of stout Men, and contains so many great Towns, and
those so well fortified, as will afford him Work enough, without troubling Us.

It Is pleasantly said here, That the Emperors of Germany will no more sleep
quietly, for, in losing Brizac, they have lost their Pillow on which they
rested, and, it is thought, France may one Day unite this Conquest to her Crown.
The great God multiply the Years of thy Life, as the Sand of the Sea; and
increase every Day thy Fortune, and continue thy Health.

Paris, 25th. of the last Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER VIII.
To Melec Amet.
I Have heard h^re^a confused Discourse of the Disgrace of Stridy^ Bey; but,
thy Letters have satisfied me. Thou see, Friend, how Things go. He had the
Prince's Favor, and yet could not save himself. He had moreover great Riches,
and yet was obliged to undergo such great Ignominy. He will be more deformed
than he was, having now left his Nose and Ears in the Hands of the Common
Executioner. Amurath, in condemning him to this Punishment, has done an Act of
Justice worthy of him: For, the honestest Men in the Empire, have ever wished
Ill to this proud and insolent Greek. This Man, who was but a pitiful
Fisherman, and Seller of Oysters, got this intolerable Pride by the prodigious
Riches he acquired in this mean Occupation. His great Wealth, made him find the
Means of obtaining the Favor of the Ministers and Favorites of the Prince;
and his Highness himself honored him with his Friendship, gave him Offices and
heaped up Riches on him. Thou should know all, I say, but I am astonished
thou should write to me, That this Wretch, having been put out from the
Government of Walachia, by reason of his insupportable Pride and extreme
Covetousness, should pretend to re-enter on this Office by means of Money,
trying in some sort to corrupt the Justice of Amurath. Observe how many ways,
he draws on him the Prince's Indignation: The Emperor must have been more
covetous than Stridya, had he favored his Design; but, 'twas the Decree of
Heaven that Stridy^ should be punished, and, that our Master should give a
terrible Example of his Justice, to terrify those who use their Riches to
commit all Sorts of Crimes, and to purchase all manner of infamous Pleasures.

The News of the Fall of this Slave, had in some sort mitigated the great
Melancholy I felt, when I received the Letter: But, the Death of Zagaribasci,
our common Friend, does not a little afflict me; as well as the Marriage of his
Son Caragurli, made the same Day, does astonish me: For, I cannot comprehend,
how there could well be celebrated in the same Day, and at the same House, two
such different Ceremonies, as is a Funeral and a Wedding.

I find this Adventure very strange: and though our Friend indeed was very old;
yet I bewail him, as if he had dyed before his Time. He was an honest Man, of
great Piety, and moderately Rich; and, this is what makes Mortals Happy in this
World, and the other too. But, thou do not inform me, whether the excessive
Joy he had, to see his Son married to a Greek, rich with the Goods of Fortune,
endued with great Virtue, and a Mute, has not caused his Death. I rather think
thou will say, our Friend Zagarabasci is dead by some Excess, than yield to
what we contested about formerly. I always found in this Friend great Marks of
Honesty and Sobriety; and he also appeared to me, to have great Tenderness for
his Son. I cannot, without offending thee, accuse this old Gentleman of want of
Moderation; yet he is dead with a Transport of Joy. Thou see, I affirmed no
impossible thing, when I maintained in my Youth, That an extraordinary and
unfore seen Joy, is more likely to kill, than sudden Grief, though never so
violent. Did thou think it a Matter of small Satisfaction, to a Father, that
is a wise and sober Man, to obtain for his Son a Woman that is a Mure? For,
what greater Pleasure can a Husband have, than to have a Wife that is not
talkative? The Christians understand not the Wisdom of the Turks, when they
laugh at our Sultans, who find the greatest parts of their Pleasures, in the
Conversation of Mutes. Is there any thing more delightful, than to hear a Man,
that does not speak; and to see one reason on all Things, that has no Tongue?
Thou know how many Things these Mutes of the Seraglio, do give one to
understand; and what Eloquence there is in their Signs and Gestures. Thou
remembrest, That when Amurath would give Thanks to the Sovereign Moderator of
all the World, in that he had escaped Death, when the Lightning fell on his
Bed, and burnt to his very Shirt; he seemed to offer him a great Sacrifice, in
putting a Mute out of the Seraglio, which he dearly loved by reason of her
Tricks and Gestures. The Muses were one day ready to fall together a fighting,
because they would not receive amongst them a Tenth Companion, sent them by a
Mandamus from a King of Italy: But when this Tenth Muse signified to them, That
she was Dumb, all the Voices were for her. Dear Melec, it is not without Reason
I write thee this. Thou art still young, and designest for Matrimony: Believe
Mahmut; There are few Women that are Wise; and they say little that is good:
Think then what those say, who know nothing, and whose Number is infinite. When
they have talked a whole Day, believe me, they have said nothing. If thou
marriest, follow my Counsel: Take not a Mute; for then thou will marry a Beast:
Neither choose one that talks; for, thou will be linked with a Monster. As to
our Friend, he died by a particular Grace from Heaven: Yet I cannot but think
still of his Death. How many more extraordinary Accidents will thou see, if
thou live to old Age; and especially, if thou live at Constantinople; where
are continually beheld strange Adventures, and extraordinary Effects, both of
Life and Death, Cruelty and Clemency; as well as of good and bad Fortune? Being
in breath, I could continue still to write to thee; but, I think it is time to
end, lest I prove tiresome. And I end, in praying Heaven to keep thee in
Health, wherever thou art.

Paris, 25th. of the last Moon, of the Year 1638.
LETTER IX.
To the same.
PARIS, where I live, is a very healthful City, and so are all the Places
thereabouts, free from Pestilential Airs; and yet there often happens sudden
Deaths, as well as at Constantinople; and, they die here likewise of Joy. I
will relate to thee what I have partly seen, and not what I have heard, to
happen in London, the most ancient, and chiefest City of the Kingdom of
England: A rich old Man falling sick, and lying on his Deathbed, sent to his
only Son, living at Paris, where he spent his time in Pleasures, to come over,
that he might, with his Estate, give him his Blessing. Think what News this was
to a Young Man, to whom the Life of a Father was troublesome, as being an
Obstacle to his Liberty; and, who waited his Death, to take his Swing of all
the Pleasures, which his corrupt Nature makes him respect as his Sovereign
Good. This Young Man intending to get upon Horseback, to run where he was
called, found himself embarked for a Voyage, which he did not design to make;
he fell dead on the Place, and I saw him in the same Instant, wherein he was
living, and healthful, to expire. Were I of the Sect of our Philosopher
Muslaadin Saadi, I would tell thee, It matters not, whether one dies suddenly,
or languish a long Time; whether a Man dies in his Bed, or at the Gallows. But,
I being none of Zeno's Disciples, and knowing no Peripatetick, or Philosopher,
amongst so many Sects than were in Greece, who disputed, Whether Life or Death
was to be preferred: So, expect not from me any Arguings on the Morals of those
Greeks, nor yet of the Persians. But, if Death be such a terrible Thing,
endeavor to live in such a Manner, that it may never affright thee, when it
shall approach thee, or when thou shall see it invade others; expecting it at
all times, and in all places. Do thou know by what Herb, or by what secret
Magic Charm I do not fear it? It Is by the leading of an Innocent Life. Here is
published, and that with great Reason, the last Words of a Man of great Birth;
who died when he was very Old, by a Wound he receeived. He had served diverse
Kings in Places of the highest Trust; and being mortally wounded in a Battle,
mark what he said to those, that exhorted him to die like a good Christian; and
with the same Courage he had showed in Life: His Reply was, That a Man who had
lived well Fourscore Years, cannot be to seek how to die well for a Quarter of
an Hour. This great Man, who was a famous Soldier, was also a true Philosopher;
and I might say, he was a Saint, had he been of our Religion. I believe, he was
a most edifying Spectacle, and the more considerable, in as much as the Example
he gave of dying well, is more valuable, than that which he gave in so many
Battles of courageous Fighting. He was called Anne de Montmorancy, Constable of
France; whose Life I had the Curiosity of reading; being to be found in the
History of the Civil Wars of that Kingdom.

But, before I end this Letter, let me denote to thee, the Difference there is
between the Effects of Grief and Joy. The Messenger, from England, of whom I
already spoke, finding at his Return, the Old Man, whom he had left dying,
still alive; he gave him such a strange Stroke, by telling to him the Death of
his Son, that Grief having vanquished the Assaults of Death, restored to this
unhappy Old Man, that Strength he had lost in his Health; so that coming
himself, some Days after, to Paris, I saw him bewail the Loss of his only Son.

He that said heretofore, A man should learn all his Life to die well, uttered
no strange Doctrine. Our days will last long enough, if we be ready to say, at
all times, We have lived enough, And, if we love, as we ought, our great
Emperor, who is Invincible, Holy, and the most Just amongst Men: And, if we
observe what a French Peasant said to all those that passed before his Door;
Never deny your Assistance, and never do any Body any Hurt.

Let thou and, I number our Days, (as was preached heretofore in the Seraglio,
to the white Eunuchs, by the Persian, whose Eyes were put out because he saw
too clearly.) He always insisted on the Shortness, Vneertainty, and Vanity of
Humane Life. He said, It Was short, considering what he had to do in it;
uncertain, as to what we shall do in it; and always mixed with what we have
done, and what remains for us to do. Teach not thy Son Mehemet yet, for whom
thou have so much Affection, these Precepts. Children have not that Ripeness of
Judgment, as is necessary, to hear Discourses of Death: They are too hard Bits
for their Stomachs, and which, indeed, Old Men can hardly digest; and which
they swallow not without feeling all the Bitterness of them.

I pray God keep the Imperial City; with those that dwell in it, and shelter it
from the Storms which fall on infamous Cities; and, I beseech him, thou may
live without Offense, that thou may never fear Death.

Paris, 2^th. of the lest Moon of the Year 1638.
LETTER X.
To Enguruli Emin Mehemet Chuk, a Man of the Law.
WHEN I parted from Constantinople, I gave thee a Stone of excellent Virtue
against the Gravel, and thou presented'st me with a Paper, which was to secure
me against all bodily Evils. Time only can decide which of us two made the best
Present to his Friend. Thou have pretended to learn me in few Words, how to
live amongst the Infidels; and I thought in giving thee a Stone, to give thee a
Remedy against the Distemper thou art troubled with. I never turn my self
toward the Place where Mecha lies, but I remember where thy Amity began, and
how far since it has been extended toward me. Absence has not lessened thy
Kindness, nor hindered thee from sending me thy grave Counsels; but I am as yet
too young, to set about the preparing my self for the other World; and too
vigorous and healthful, to hearken to thy serious and melancholy Discourses.

I wish thou were but at Paris, where thou would see a great Number of
People, who sell a most precious Thing, to purchase a vain and fantastic
Title: How many with great Earnestness sue for Placeat's from the King, that
they may seek their Deaths? Perhaps thou never thoughtest there were any such
kind of People. What do thou think then of the Soldiery in General; are they
any others than Martyrs of Ambition, to whom one would think Life is a Burden?
It Is a sad Spectacle, to see how many Dead lie in the Streets; or carried on
the Shoulders of their Friends or Kinsmen to their Graves: Yet this is so
common a thing in Paris, that the People make no Wonder of it.

This way of Living, obliges me to do as the rest. I begin to consider, That
what happens to another, may happen to me; there is no avoiding ones Destiny.
This Preface is only to bring in a Story of this King's Goodness, which ought
to be an Example to all Princes. The French have need of fresh Soldiers to
fill up so many Troops as they continually entertain: Not long since then,
there came a Man, full of Years, and overwhelmed with Despair, who desired to
be Listed in this Princes Service. To obtain what he desired, he told the King,
That he was the Father of Twelve Children, Seven of which were Daughters, who
were Marriagable; that he could no longer live, being not able to maintain such
a great Family; and, that being ignorant, as yet how to die, he would learn it
in the King's Service. The Prince having appointed him to wait upon him one Day
privately in his Closet, thus spoke to him: Thy Despair makes thee desirous to
be listed amongst my Soldiers; and Charity obliges me to retain thee amongst
the Citizens. Those that are Fools when they enter into Troops, commonly come
out wiser; because they learn several things of which they were before
ignorant: but as to thy part, what Time have thou to learn, who art ready to
fall dead at the same moment thou enterest into the School? Yet I receive thee;
take this Sword; go and combat thy Folly; and take this Purse to succor thy
Family, and be cured; but if thou art wise, say not from whom thou have
received thy Cure. I know not what Sum was in the Purse, no more than I do of
what Mettle the Sword was. But I have this Story from an Officer of the King's
Closet; with whom I have that strict Converse, that he told me this Passage as
soon as ever it happened.

I Will tell thee if thou will, some of the principal Passages of my Life; for I
conceal nothing from the Ministers, and the most venerable Mufti, who knows all
that I do: I adore the Sovereign Master of the Universe; and have a great
Veneration for his holy Prophet: I never defiled my Hands in Blood, neither
have I ever violated any Man's Bed: I easily forgive my Enemies, and hate above
all things the Crime of Slandering. If this be not sufficient to merit
Salvation, I do not know what is. These are all my Virtues; as to other
Qualifications, I have none. I have no Knack at Thieving; my Talents lie not
that way; were I qualified, I might, as most do, devise means to put my Art in
Practice. But living according to these aforementioned Maxims, I doubt not but
I shall find Entrance into that Paradise, where faithful Souls will enjoy a
perfect Happiness, and set their Feet on the Necks of the Enemies of our Holy
Law; where, they shall suffer neither Hunger, Thirst, or Nakedness; free from
the parching Heats of the Sun, and the pinching Sharpness of the Colds, caused
by the Moon; where, under the agreeable Shade of Trees, they shall gather the
preciousest Fruit, standing, sitting, or lying; and drink in Cups of Gold or
Emerald, the most delicious Liquors, which spring from a clear Fountain; and be
served with inconceivable Magnificence. In this divine Place, they shall be
more beautiful and shining than the Stars in the Firmament, whose brightness
enlightens the darkest Night; their Robes shall be of finest Silk, of a Color
more green and pleasing to the Eye, than the Herbs which spring up in May; and
shall further receive from the Hands of God, a Potion, more sweet and
delicious, than can be imagined, as a Recompense for the Good they have done,
during their Abode amongst Men. Thou know, it is impossible for me to go on
Pilgrimage to Mecha, seeing I am obliged to abide at Paris. Thou know also,
I cannot give my self to Contemplation, being forced to lead an active Life;
for I must not remain among the Dervises, who pass their Days in Solitude;
serving in France, as I must do, our Puissant and Invincible Emperor. Thou
see here what my Condition will bear; accuse me not therefore for neglecting
the pious Advices thou give me. I forget not so much Death, as I forget that
I must die.

Be informed of this from me, There Is not a Town in the World, where People do
learn better to live ill, than at Paris; neither is there any Place, where they
are better taught to die. I need not tell thee, here are public Academies (as
were heretofore amongst the Egyptians) wherein dead Bodies lie exposed to
public View, to make Men remember the indispensable Necessity of dying. But I
may tell thee, there is no Day, wherein in this great Town, a great quantity of
Fools do not teach wiser than themselves, things they have been ever ignorant
of; for the Gibbets and Scaffolds, set up for the Punishment of the Guilty,
hinder the Destruction of a great many People, whose Innocence is preserved by
these kind of Spectacles. Here the Poor who had heretofore plentiful
Subsistences, teach good Husbandry; the Proud, Humility; the debauched with
Women, Chastity.

I believe, there is no Part of the World, where there are more Thieves and
Pick-pockets, and who do their Work with greater Art and Subtilty; they
exercise their Craft in all Places, in the Churches, as well as the Streets,
Markets, and Bridges; so that our People of the Morea, who are thought by us to
be such great Masters in this Science, are mere Asses to them. Adieu.

Paris, 10th. of the First Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER XI.
To Cara Hali, the Physician.
I Know not whether what I thought I saw last Night in my Bed, be the effect of
a Dream, or of a real Vision. I was awakned by a great Earthquake, and which
made me rise afrighted out of my Bed. But informing my self by some People, I
found 'twas but a Dream.

My Adventure, has renewed the Remembrance of one, which proved of sad
Consequence to one Part of Italy. Physicians are at a loss to find out the
Causes of these horrible Fires, which are vomited up at certain times by Mount
Gibel, Stromboli, and Vesuvius; Mountains in Sicily, not far from Naples, whose
Roots seem to spring from Hell; whence arise often filthy Exhalations, Smoaks
and Sulphur, with Flames which cast up Stones and Ashes to the Clouds.

It Is known, I believe, at Constantinople, That toward the Beginning of the
Moon of February, there was lost near Naples a little Island, that had Four
Miles in Compass. It Is related as a Thing certain, That after this Isle was
suddenly swallowed down into the Sea, the Fire which it included not finding
its usual Vent, there was opened some Days after, a new Way along the Coasts of
Calabria, near Messina. There did it appear, having first caused an horrible
Earthquake, which overthrew a great Pile of Building, which the Christians
call a Steeple, that belonged to a principal Church; which buried under its
Ruins a vast Number of People, whose Devotion had at that Time brought hither.
Some Towns of the Kingdom of Naples suffered by this Earthquake, with great
Multitudes of People, and Herds of Cattle, which were miserably lost in the
Fire, by the Smoke and heaps of Ashes. And amongst those that have been
smothered to death, are reckoned several Lords of those Countries, who are
Masters but of few Subjects, and yet bear the Title of Princes.

My dear Friend, Cara Hali, These are dreadful Effects of Nature, whose Causes
will not be sound out by us. Certainly, these Countries of Italy, must be far
from Paradise, seeing these Mouths of Hell (if it he true, as many People say,
they are in these Mountains) do frequently ruin by these Irruptions Calabria
and Sicily. Naturalists affirm, That these Mountains nourish Sulphurous Matter
in their Bowels, which is easily inflamed, and issues out with more or less
Vehemence, and more or less Frequency, according as the Matter is more or less
disposed; and the Subterranean Winds kindle and eject these Fires, and open the
Mass of Earth under which they are shut up. But the Opinion of certain
Philosophers, who maintain, That mere Chance produces these extraordinary
Events, appears to me very ridiculous; affirming, that one Stone striking
another, produces a Spark, whence happen these great Inflammations: Nay, they
proceed farther, and would persuade us, That a lighted Lamp, left by Chance, by
those who searched into the Bowels of these Mountains, to discover the Secrets
of Nature, might make these Flames; which lighting on a combustible Matter, and
meeting with no hing that is contrary to 'em to extinguish them, do cause these
surprising Effects. They also say, That Lightning striking fiercely on some one
of the Coasts of these Mountains, may do the same thing; as the Stones striking
one against another, or the Lamp left lighted.

These Opinions would not appear so ridiculous, were it possible to make any
Demonstration of 'em: But these Events being all extraordinary, and in a manner
prodigious, I shall willingly suffer thee to believe, that it is a Work of
Nature, or Hell, or Chance alone, which causes the perpetual Motions of these
Fires; which are so terrible, and so greatly damnify one of the finest
Countries in the World, as Greece is, and this Island which is the Delight and
Nurse of almost all the Provinces situated on the Banks of the
Mediterranean-Sea.

We find also in Ireland these Mountains of Fire, yet with this Difference,
that their Flames do no Hurt, which make 'em no ways dreadful to the
Inhabitants. I think too I have heard my Father say, That being in Company with
certain Arabians in our Lycia, he saw these kind of Fires come out of the
Earth, but they broke out gently and caused no Damage.

I am now persuaded of one Thing, which I would never believe before; which is,
That Old Pliny, intending to relate to the Emperor Titus, and leave to
Posterity a Relation of the Effects of Vesuvius, and a perfect Discovery of the
Causes of so many prodigious Effects, he therefore went himself on the Place;
because that in his Time, this famous Mountain had cast out an horrible
Quantity of Fire, Stones, and Ashes, with so great Violence, and such terrible
Noise, that the Effects of it were selt in Syria, Africa, and especially in
Egypt. But the Curiosity of this wretched Philosopher having cost him his Life,
the Romans expect still with his Return, the Discovery of the secret Causes of
so many prodigious Effects. Take care of thine own Health, and let not any of
thy Patients miscarry through thy Neglect, or Rashness. Continue to love me,
though I am at a great Distance from thee: Write to me sometimes; and believe,
that I am not able to conform my self to the way of Living of Strangers amongst
whom I reside. I shall be always a good Mussul man, and a Faithful Friend.

Paris, 10th. of the First Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER XII.
To the Venerable Mufti, Prince of the Religion of the Turks.
THY Decree is very cruel, to separate me, without having committed any Crime,
from the Communion of the Faithful.

I have read the Holy Answer thou have made me, with great Veneration; but this
has not been without many Tears. Thou have not untyed the Knot of the
Difficulties which perplex me, but made it indissoluble. So that I only live in
the Certainty of having no Certitude, and my Soul, which is encompassed with
Fear, will be in Dread till Death.

If I do what thou proposest, how shall I be sure of not failing, seeing I do
not understand what I ought to do? I am so dull, that I cannot distinguish,
Whether thou exhortest me to do what I have ever done, or whether thou
forbiddest me what I asked of thee.

I entreated thee to let me know, Whether I might live amongst the Christians,
and do in Appearance, what they do effectually in the Observance of the
Ceremonies of their Religion: And thou answerest me, That the Circumcised, or
Faithful should have no Doubt in his Law, and needs no other Precepts to
observe it, than the Law it self: Moreover, That the true Mussulman must be
willing to lose his Estate, his Life, and Honor in the Sultan's Service; That
the Christians are Enemies to the True God, the Emperor, and Religion; and,
that, in fine, one ought to sacrifice all Things not to betray this God, who is
our chief Master. Tell me, I entreat thee on my bended Knees, Cannot a Man be a
True Mohammedan, without hating eternally the Followers of Jesus? And in living
amongst them secretly a true Mussulman, must one show ones self to be of
another Religion, or pretend to be of theirs? Thou will tell me, the Alcoran
speaks with great Clearness, yet how many obscure Passages do we find in the
Words of our holy Prophet, wherein we need thy Expositions?

I have no Belief for Tagot, neither will I give Credit to the Devil; my Law
expressly forbids it, for I believe in one only True God, who knew the Intention
of our holy Lawgiver, and sees what we cannot discover. And the Prophet cries
out, That he that has such Principles, leans on the strongest Prop he can ever
meet with; there being nothing which is able to overthrow it.

Disperse, Reverend Sir, as much as thou can, the Darkness of my Spirit. I
conjure thee by the Almighty Father, who can make live Flesh come on the dry
Bones of the Ass, which dyed an hundred Years past.

I do not discontinue here my usual Prayers, which I make in the Manner they
are prescribed me by the Law, with my Face always turned to the Side of Mecha.
When I fast, I eat only at Night, and I continue my Repast till Aurora
advancing the Day, gives me Light enough to distinguish black Thread from
white. And I pass over the Day without taking any Nourishment, till the
Darkness be so great, that I cannot see the Eye of a Needle. It Is true, I give
no Alms to the Poor, because I doubt, Whether it be lawful to do good to those
who continually move Heaven against us.

The Bishops here are in great Veneration; they have not an absolute Authority,
because they depend on the Roman Prelate, and the King: Yet their Jurisdiction
is very large, the Kingdom being full of Churches, and these Churches
frequented by Millions of People. They wear about their Necks a Golden Cross.
They live, in public, good Lives; are obliged to know all the Points of their
Law, they must be Doctors, are obliged to Gelibacy, to be Sober, Hospitable,
Prudent, Irreprehensible, without coveting others Goods; they must never be
drunk, or shed Human Blood. Their Habit is a long Vest reaching to the Ground,
of black Silk or Violet. They go little on Foot, but are carried in Coaches, to
avoid the Wearisomness which would oppress them, in a Town which seems the
greatest in the World; which thou would do too perhaps, were thou designed
to be their Sovereign Prelate.

The great Arbiter of the World, favor by his Mercy, or by an Effect of his
Justice, the inconceivable Honor of suffering thee to sweep during thy Life,
his most Holy and only Temple of Mecha, in the Company of Ismael, and Abraham,
that thou may keep it clean, without any Filth of what Kind soever.

Paris, 10th. of the first Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER XIII.
To the Kaimakam.
THE French Armies are at present in Winter Quarters, and the Court is busied
in contriving what they shall do in the Spring. I do not believe I writ thee
any false News; for it is to be believed that the Sharpness of the Winter will
hinder any Thing from being undertaken before that time.

The Eyes of all the Court are fixed on Three Objects, the King, the Dauphin
his Son, and Cardinal Richlieu; but they more carefully observe the latter,
than the former. This Man has made himself Creatures by his Benefits; the
Thankfulness for which, and the Hopes of new ones, has bound them to his
Interests. Yet it is to be believed, he has more Enemies by means of the great
Credit he is in with his Prince, and the Occasions he finds to increase it. His
Antichamber is always full of Attendants, who aspire to Employs, of such as
are in Offices, and several other Persons who are desirous to be Witnesses of
his Actions. Those who threaten him in secret, do but increase his Courage, and
make him more carefully stand on his Guard; and those who have most Experience
of the World, affirm, this Cardinal knows too much to be surprised. Hear the
Recital of one of the least of his Actions, whereby thou may figure the
greatest, and give them the due Price they deserve. For Three Years together
was observed in this Cardinal's Antichamber, a Man who was ^ot far advanced in
Years, and as assiduous to make his Court, as he was modest in his Discourse;
very reserved and patient; and, which is very rare at Court, was never heard to
complain. The Cardinal who pretends to read the Souls of Men, and who is
inferior to none perhaps in this Art, caused this Person who had so long
attended, to be called to him, and thus spoke to him: I know who thou art, and
how long time thou have spent in observing me; although thou outwardly
appearest a Frenchman, thy great Patience assures me thou art of another
Climate; get thee to Rome, and wait but half the time in the Pope 's
Antichamber as thou have done in mine, and I doubt not but thou will penetrate
into the most hidden Secrets. Part then immediately for Italy, and observe the
Actions and Motions of the Wisest and most Dissimulative Court in the Universe;
discover not thy self to any body; send me an Account every Week what thou
can discover; and in this manner thou will be useful to me, and avoid
Idleness. My Secretary will give thee a Cipher, and my Treasurer has order to
give thee what is necessary for thy Voyage, as well as to keep thee when thou
art at Rome.

The Cardinal studies to extend the Bounds of the Kingdom, and for that purpose
consults those who can any ways advance his Projects; especially, the King
being now certain of a Successor, by the Birth of the Dauphin, who seems very
likely to live long. All Hands are employed at Toulon and Marseilles for the
fitting out of Galleys and other Vessels; and it is thought the chief Designs of
this Minister, are on the Coasts of Italy. I am told, he was heard to say, That
the Romans could never have conquered all the World, as they did, had they not
before been Masters of Italy; That Hannibal had the same Design, and after
Hannibal, Pope Alexander VI. intended to see whether such a Design would take
Effect; but his Pride and Cruelty made all his Projects prove abortive, and
that he could meet with greater Success than Hannibal, could he be so happy as
to obtain one Thing. And here he ended his Discourse.

He so greatly minds whatever passes in the Royal Family and Kingdom, that he
can discover, as he pretends, all the Thoughts, yea and the very Dreams of the
Grandees, Governors of Provinces, and those that command in Places.

He says, he has learnt several useful Things in the Relation given us of the
Government of the Chinese, having from them the Way of discovering the most
difficult Matters, without its appearing he does any Thing for this Purpose.
And this is the Method of governing he observes in this Kingdom, wherein are so
many restless Spirits.

He maintains, near all People who are in any considerable Offices, Persons
that depend only on him, and who are known to no body else; who in all Places
wear mean Clothes, and incessantly watch over the Actions of the Officers, and
give him notice of whatever passes. He makes use of these kind of People about
his Master's Ambassadors in foreign Courts. He always carries a Book about with
him, which he calls Richlieu's Soul; which Book contains the Designs, the
Interests, the secret Practices, and Inclinations of all the Princes, who hold
a Correspondence, and have any Ties with France, and on whom France has any
Pretensions. The most skilful Astrologers in Europe, have also sent him the
Horoscopes of all the Kings, and great Men, with their Judgments touching the
Term of their Lives, and what they may probably undertake in all Times. This
Cardinal said on another Time, That he kept a great many Couriers, yet he could
well enough spare them; That he knew what passed in remote Places, as soon as
what was done near him: He once affirmed, he knew in less than Two Hours, That
the King of England had signed the Warrant for the Execution of...... If this
Particular be true, this Minister must be more than a Man. Those who are his
most devoted Creatures, affirm he has in a private place in his Closet, a
certain Mathematical Figure, in the Circumference of which, are written all the
Letters of the Alphabet, armed with a Dart, which marks the Letters, which are
also marked by their Correspondents: And it appears, that this Dart ripens by
the Sympathy of a Stone, which those who give and receive his Advices, keep
always at hand, which has been separated from another, which the Cardinal has
always by him; and it is affirmed, that with such an Instrument, he gives and
receives immediately Advices. This great Man, who knows all these reports, only
laughs at them; yet he says with a serious Air, That God has given him Two
Angels, one White and another Black, to inform him of both good and bad
Matters, and that with their Assistance he shall overthrow the Cabals of his
Enemies. He sent some Days past a Man to the Galleys, that was accused for
cutting in pieces the King's Picture; but having been better informed, and
knowing it was his, he told those about him, That this Man should be pardoned,
because he had done no Hurt to the Original. Here are Theaters and Feasts
preparing to entertain the People, in Honor of the King and Cardinal; and it is
whispered, that the Queen is again with Child.

Heaven preserve thee ever from the Sultan's Anger, and all other Misfortunes
which may sour the Comforts of thy Life.

Paris, 25th. of the first Moon, of the Year, 1639.
LETTER XIV.
To Egri Boynou, the white Eunuch.
IF thou go into Prussia in Bithynin, as thou writest, above all Things
remember to prepare thy self not to live long, and never to inform the young
Sultan Mustapha of the Misfortune of the Grandson to Solomon the Great, and Son
to poor Bajazet, whom his Grandfather caused to be strangled in his Infancy.
This unhappy place makes me fearful of thy Life, as well as that of the
Prince's, the Care of whose Education is committed to thee. I cannot forbear
weeping, every time I call to mind what passed between the Victim and the
Executioner. Thou thy self toldest me, That this unhappy Child embraced and
kissed several times him that was to give the Fatal Stroke, even in the Moment
when he was putting about his Neck the Silken String which was to strangle him.
All Asia is informed of the rest of the History; and it is known, That this
Child although strang^ed, yet triumphed at his Death over his Murderer: For being
softened by the Caresses of this Infant, whom he was about destroying, he dropped
down in a Swoon; and Bajazet's Son had by this Occasion escaped Death, had not
the other Executioner, more cruel than the former, done the Work.

Although thou do not, certainly know, who is Mustapha's Father; yet thou may
well presume he is the Emperor's Son. Thy Age and Prudence so long experienced,
and the-Office of Chief of all the Eunuchs of the Empire, which thou have so
long enjoyed, leaves no place of doubting, but that thy Pupil is of Royal
Blood. Arm thy self then with Courage and study to perform well thy Duty in
this solitary Place: Nothing is so troublesome as the instructing of Children,
when they will be taught as Masters by their Slaves, and will not submit to
Rules, like private Persons.

Thou may be sure, I shall render thee all the Service I am able, seeing I
consider thee as a Friend that is extreme dear to me: But why do thou seek
amongst the Christians, an illustrious Subject, which may serve for a Model to
form a Child born in the Religion of the Mussulmen?

Did I not know thy Wisdom, I should think thou art very simple, in searching
after Examples amongst the Enemies of our holy Law, to propose them to be
followed by the Ottoman Children. Thou have chosen for this Purpose Henry of
France, termed the Great; and art thou ignorant, that this so famous a King was
the most implacable Enemy of the Empire? Be it known to thee, That this Prince
undertook the boldest and dangerousest Design as was ever imagined, to destroy
the Monarchy of the Mussulmen; and might probably have succeeded, had not
Heaven, by an unforeseen Stroke, snatched him from the Earth, to appear before
the Tribunal of the True God, who judges Kings as well as other Men. But lest
thou should imgin, I make this a Pretense to excuse my self from satisfying
thee in what thou desire, receive at least one Part of what thou expectest:
Thou would have me send thee the History of this Prince; content thy self
with a short Extract of it, otherwise I must be forced to send thee a large
Volume. However, make not use of his Example in all Things; the Way of Living,
the Laws and Customs of the French, do not suit with the Turkish Way of
Regiment. If thou will make thy Pupil accomplished, form him on the Model of
some one of those Hero's which the East has given us. Mustapha will read with
greater Profit, the History of Alexander and Pyrrhus, than that of Charlemain
and Henry; and should one wonder at the Defaults of the King of Macedonia's
Son, and at the small Fortune of the other? Pray show me what Men there ever
were, who had at the same time the Frailties of human Nature, and the
Perfections of the Divinity.

And if thou will search into Persia and Egypt, thou will find a Cyrus, and an
Artaxerxes, Ptolemy, Psammeticus, Campson, and Tomombeis, all great Princes,
whose Actions honor Antiquity. And how many Heroes will thou find in our
Greece, if thou will take no Notice of those whom Rome has sent into the World?
But not to go out of the Ortoman Family, thou know very well, that we Turks,
have for Proverbial Speeches, The Modesty of Solomon; The good Mien of Alis;
The Justice of Nonquirevan; The Majesty of Osman; The Gravity of Humer; and the
Justice of Abubekir; not to mention the Courage and Magnanimity of Amurath, who
is, at this Day, more valorous than any of his common Soldiers; whether he be
in his Seraglio of Constantinople, or in his Tents before Babylon.

Ten Days ago I received thy Letter, and I have employed a great deal of that
Time, in collecting what thou have desired of me; and to speak truly, thy
Commands have supplied me with matter wherewithal to divert me. Thou will be
without doubt surprised, that Two Men who long served this King in mean
Employs, have discovered several Particulars of his Life, with which the French
themselves, perhaps, are not acquainted. My Sentiment has ever been, That it is
more necessary to know the Manners and Customs of Men, than to know the Number
of Places they have besieged or taken; and to be informed of their good
Qualities and bad ones, than to learn the Manner of their Encampments, and the
Number of the Battles which they have won or lost. All Histories contain the
Actions of Men, and the Principal is, to know these Men, to instruct others;
for Histories do generally rather divert, than instruct Men. These will teach
thee better what thou art to learn, than the Historians themselves. Christian
Authors are, at present, like the Elements; always in War, and ever contrary to
one another, and never agreeing.

These Two abovementioned Friends, who are now very old Men, have served King
Henry above Thirty Years, and ever held a strict Correspondency with one
another. One was his Barber; and the other's Business was to divert him with
reading to him, when he was going to Rest.

That which is related of Henry's coming into the World without weeping, is
certainly a Fable; but it is certain, the Queen of Navarr, his Mother, sung a
French Song, in the Time of his Birth; whereby this Princess seemed to show
other Women, that it is possible to be brought to Bed without Crying out. The
first Milk which this Royal Babe drank, was an Ambrosia, which the Gods of our
Friend, the Poet Oglou, never tasted. His Father made him drink in a Golden
Cup, of the strongest Wine that could be gotten; wherein he put and squeezed a
Clove of Garlic, which he thought proper to strengthen his Temperament, and
render him more vigorous. He was afterward bred up like Cyrus; spending his
first Days in Woods, and oftentimes in the Company of Sheepherds. He went
always with his Head bare, whether exposed to the scorching Heats of the
Summers Sun; or during Winter, to the Rain, and most rigorous Frosts, Snow and
Hail. It seems as if he had began his Life in Prison; being confined to the
Fields, distant from all Converse, clad in coarse Hair-cloth, to accustom his
Body to Fatigues, and souple his Spirit to the Accidents of Fortune.

He was but Nine Years old, when he lost his Father Anthony, King of Navarr.
The Death of this Prince may serve for a Lesson to Mustapha; for, having
received his Death's Wound, at the Siege of a considerable Place, he made the
Wall of the Chamber, where he lay, to be broken down, that he might be carried
into his own Bed, dying as it were in Triumph, into the Town: miserable
Ambition of Great Men, who strip not themselves of it, till Death strips them
of their Lives. Seven Years after the Death of Anthony, the Young Henry was
declared Head, and Defender of the Hugonot Party; and when Eighteen Years old,
he was in a considerable Fight; but it is not well known, whether he himself was
engaged. Fortune was so contrary to him in the Beginning, that having lost a
Battle, he was obliged to fly for Six Months, together with the rest of his
Army; and to traverse almost throughout all the Provinces of the Kingdom,
without taking any Rest, for Fear of being surprised. Thou have never read, I
believe, of any Captain, that made a Flight of that durance, before him. The
Queen his Mother, being a Woman of a masculine Courage, and Firmness of Mind,
dyed poisoned by a pair of Gloves. At Nineteen Years of Age, he married the
King's Sister, who then Reigned, named Charles IX. and never any Wedding was
solemnized with such bloody Tragedies. It Is hard to believe what an infinite
Number of Hugonots was then massacred; the Design was secretly laid, during the
Celebration of the Wedding, and executed Six Days after, at full Noon. It Is
said, that in one Day, all France was died with the Blood of these poor People;
there being at least an Hundred thousand of them slain; amongst which were
Twenty Lords of great Consideration, with the Great Admiral of the Kingdom; and
at the fewest Four thousand Soldiers massacred in Paris. Henry did not perish
on that unhappy Day, but he was very near Death; and the King having called
him, thus spoke to him, with an angry Tone, and fierce Countenance: Henry, thou
art alive, because I would spare thee; but I will not spare thee, if thou
persistest in thy Heresy: Choose one of these two things; either the Mass, or
Death. If thou know not what the Mass is, I will show thee in another
Letter. This Prince chose to go to Mass, rather than to lose his Life; and
therefore publicly abjured the Religion he professed. These two old Men
affirm, That Nero or Caligula's Court, were never corrupted as that of France
was then. No People were more in Fashion, than Buffoons, and never did the
worst sort of Debaucheries so abound; Sorceries, Empoysonings, Assassinations,
and all other Sorts of Crimes, were permitted in such a Manner, that all the
Laws and good Order seemed to be overthrown. It Is not known, whether the King
of Navarr took up his former Religion through Policy, or some Corruption he saw
amongst the Catholics; however, he returned some Time after to Calvinism,
whereunto he was so obstinately addicted, that having lived several Years in
this Sect, he was forced to offer great Violence to himself, to enjoy peaceably
the Kingdom of France, and accommodate himself with the Pope of Rome, and to
make again public Profession of the Roman Religion.

Never any Prince more loved Women than he did. This Passion prevailed over him
all the Days of his Life, and there were Two different Natures observable in
his Person; An Invincible Courage in the Field; and such a Passion for Women,
as made him be often seen to Weep amongst them. He has had greater Weaknesses
than Hercules, and he gloried in them. He challenged the bravest Man in all
France, the Duke of Guise to a single Fight; but the King interposed his
Authority to hinder the Combat.

This King performed an Action during his Youth, which our Dervises would have
certainly set down in their Registers as greatly remarkable. On a certain Day
wherein he was to fight a pitched Battle, being on Horseback in the midst of
his Army, he made public Reparation to a young Woman whom he had deflowred,
and spoke in these Terms: I have forced this Woman you see here; and used
Threats, when Entreaties would not bring her to my Lust. Let all that hear me,
detest the bad Example I have given. And as for your part whom I have thus
wronged, choose an Husband, and receive from me such a Portion, as may seem in
some sort, an Amends for the Injury I have done you.

It seems as if this so laudable an Action was approved of by Heaven; for
having immediately hereupon given Battle, he overthrew a mighty Army with a few
Troops.

The Ladies who bore Henry no Ill Will, for his Tenderness to their Sex,
greatly interessed themselves in the Affairs of War, wherein this Prince was
always Head of the Hugonot Party; and they gave Occasion to a Proverb which
lasted a great while. There being some, who were for making a Peace, and others
for War; This War was called The Ladies War. This Prince had been in so many
Fights, that I believe one may truly say in this particular, never any Prince
came near him: For, who ever in one Day was in two Battles, and came off
victorious?

King Charles IX. dying during this Time, the Queen Mother sent for her other
Son in great Diligence, who had been elected some Months before King of Poland,
by the Death of Sigismond Augustus. It Is said, that Charles's Successor having
been advertised of the Death of the King his Brother, fled in the Night from
Cracovia, only with Two Persons who were his Confidents, and retired to Venice;
and it is said, That the Courtisans of this famous City, having assured the
Crown to our Henry, for having been infected with this Distemper, which the
French call the Neapolitan Disease, and other Nations the French Pox; he became
incapable of having Children, to perpetuate the Crown in the Branch of Valois.

After his Death, which was violent, and perpetrated by a Christian Dervise,
Henry III. dying without an Heir, and his Throne being sought by different
Pretenders; Henry, to whom alone his Birth had given Right, became Master of it
by his Patience; his Fatigues in War, and his Courage made him vanquish all
Obstacles. He maintained his Right with an unparalled Valor, and carried
himself with the greatest Prudence; yet his greatest Successes, are owing to
the Greatness of his Heart. He met sometimes with Disadvantage, but oftener came
out Conqueror from all Engagements; and it is observable, he was the prouder
after the Battles won, because he had before appeared extraordinary familiar
with the Soldiers who had helped him to win them. He was wont to be often in
his Stables to see his Horses, and often slept amongst these Creatures, whom he
termed his most faithful Courtiers. How difficult soever the way was which was
to lead him to the Throne, he would not be disheartened; these Difficulties
serving only to increase his Courage. He saw the Spaniards confederated with
his Enemies; yet he alone, without any other Assistance, but of some few
faithful Troops, sat down before Paris, which was the most famous Siege since
that of Jerusalem by Titus. He reduced the Inhabitants of this Capital of the
Kingdom, to live on the most abject Meats one can imagine, after they had
consumed the Rats, Mice, Dogs, and Cats, which were for some time the richest
Delicacies the best People of the Town could meet with. But he was for all this
(after he had given several Assaults) forced to raise the Siege, and
accommodate himself with the Prince who commands all the Priests amongst the
Catholics; and he again renounced Calvinism wherewith he was infected, and
which served as a Pretense to his Enemies. He was crowned in the same manner
his other Predecessors had been before him. He began to govern his Kingdom,
ruined by so many Wars, Pillages and Concussions made by all sorts of People,
and so repaired it by his good Government, that he was soon in a Condition to
embellish it. He built several magnisicent Bridges, raised stately Edifices,
and forgot nothing which might re-establish those good Orders which the
Licentiousness of the Times had overthrown.

But what this King designed against us, as soon as he was settled on the
Throne, will appear at the same time to thee both dreadful and admirable. As
soon as ever he had made a general Peace with his Enemies, he laid the
Foundations of the most Heroic Design that ever Man invented, wherein he
showed himself not inferior to the first of the Caesar's, nor the Conqueror of
Asia.

He undertook to overthrow all the Monarchies of the World, to give a new Face
to all the Affairs of it, and to destroy in a short time the Empire of the
Ottomans. But before he began such a great Enterprise, he was for paying all
the Debts of the Crown, and his own in particular, which amounted all together
to near an Hundred Millions; and 'twas a prodigious thing to find so much
Money, without selling the Kingdom, or engaging the People; yet it is true,
that he got this Money, and paid those Debts with it.

He was for dividing Christendom into Fifteen equal Dominations, Five of which
should obey Kings that were so by Succession, and Six to be subject to Kings
that were Elective, and the Four remaining should be Republics.

By this Division he left the Pope the Countries belonging to the Church, and
added thereunto the Kingdom of Naples, with the Homage of Sicily, and the
greatest part of Italy modelled into a Republic; with Obligation to give the
Pope every Year a golden Crucifix, and Four Thousand Sequins. Only Venice was
left in the Condition 'twas in, with its Laws and Customs. But there were
allotted to this Republic, Kingdoms and Isles, which were to be taken from us
in the Archipelago, with an Homage to the Roman Prelate of an Embassy to kis
his Feet, and at the End of every Twenty five Years, a small Statue of Gold,
representing St. Peter, whom they term God's Vicar on Earth.

Flanders should make a Republic with therest of the Low Countries, which
would be a Loss for the Spaniards; and to this Republic, should be added some
of the neighboring States.

The Franche County, Alsatia, Tirol and Trante, were added to the Democratical
State of the Swisses, with the Homage every Fifteen Years of an Hunting Dog,
with a golden Collar about his Neck, fastened to a Chain of Gold, which this
Republic should present to the Emperor of Germany.

This Emperor should be obliged to renounce the aggrandizing of his Family, and
only dispose of vacant Fiefs, the Investiture of which he should not bestow on
any of his Kindred; and there should be a Law inviolably observed in the
Empire, That never Two Princes of the same Race, should enjoy successively the
Imperial Crown.

The Duchy of Milan should be added to the other. Provinces belonging to the
Duke of Savoy, together with the Title of King of Lombardy.

The Kingdom of Hungary should be enlarged with the Principalities of
Transylvania, Walachia and Moldavia: And the King who was to be Elective,
should be chosen by the Suffrages of the Pope, the Emperor of Germany, the King
of France, England, Spain, Swedeland, Poland and Denmark; and Bohemia should be
submitted to the same Laws.

France, England, Spain, Poland, Swedeland and Denmark should not change their
Form of Government, when for the general Affairs, these Kingdoms were to be
subject to the Universal Republic, of which the Pope was to be the Head.

Things thus established, Henry was to be the Umpire of all Christendom, to
decide all Differences which might happen between the aforesaid Princes and
States, with Fifteen Persons chosen from amongst the most famous for Learning
and Arms, which could be found among these Fifteen Dominations; and besides
these, there was to be established a great Council, consisting of Sixty other
Persons, for all the Differences which might happen in all the Kingdoms and
Republics, between those who governed them; and this great Assembly should
make their Residence in the Capital City, Rome.

Every State was to be obliged to furnish a certain Number of Troops, and Sum
of Money to make War against the Turks; and the Business of Poland and Swedeland
should be, to make War together against the Moscovites and Tartars. There were
afterward Three Generals to be chosen by common Consent for the conquering of
Asia, one for the Sea, and Two for the Land; and Three hundred Thousand Foot
entertained, with One hundred and fifty Thousand Horse, and Four hundred Pieces
of Canon; and the Naval Army was to consist of an Hundred and fifty Vessels,
and one Hundred Galleys; and a Fund was to be raised for this, of an Hundred
Millions of Gold.

This Treasure was to be put into the Pope's Hands; the Isle of Malta was to be
the Storehouse of all things belonging to the Sea, the Port of Messina the
Arsenal for the Galleys, and the City of Metz one of the principal Magazins for
the Land Forces.

All the Christian Princes were to be obliged to lessen their ordinary
Expenses, and to contribute to this great Design according to their Ability.

There were to have been several Spies in Constantinople in the Habit of
Greeks, who were persectly skilled in the Eastern Languages, to observe the
Motions of our Empire: And besides these, Forty resolute Men, who were at a
certain Time and Signal to set Fire to the Seraglio and Arsenal, and several
other Quarters of the Town.

There was found in this Hero's Closet after his Death, a Memorial written with
his own Hand, wherein he had already marked Twelve Ambassadors for several
Places in Christendom, for the negotiating of so great an Affair; and the Pope
and Republic of Venice and Duke of Savoy had been already acquainted with it.

In the mean time, this King had an Army already of Forty thousand Foot, with
Eight thousand Horse; and he was, under Petence of visiting the Frontiers of
Flanders, thence to begin the Execution of his Project; affirming, That as to
his own part, he had no other Pretension but the Glory of delivering
Christianity from the Tyranny of these Barbarians.

It Is said, he applied himself for Ten Years together, in searching the Means
to make his Project take; he gave great Pensions to the Cardinals at Rome, and
in Germany to several Officers: and he had in France, besides the Troops I have
already mentioned, Four thousand Gentlemen, who were so devoted to him, that
they were ready to mount on Horseback on the least Order from him.

He had already Fifteen Millions in the Bastil; and he that had the
Superintendancy of his Treasure, promised to add thereunto in less than Three
Years Forty other Millions, without touching the ordinary Revenues.

I have no knowledge of the Manner how he would divide the Estates of the
Sultan. But Henry was assassinated, just as he was ready to leave Paris, to
begin so great a Work; being killed in his Coach in the Arms of his most
faithful Courtiers: And the Fatal Stroke which carried him out of the World,
delivered the Empire of the true believers; This Empire whose Throne is so
high, that it reaches up to the First Heaven, whence it scares the Infidels,
and secures the good Mussulmen from the Insults of the Christians.

One of these old Men I mentioned, has assured me, he had heard the King speak
these following Words, some Days before his Death: I shall never go out of this
Town; I know not what with-helds me; I shall never accomplish what I design,
never see the Destructiou of Constantinople; for I am to^d by Astrologers, I
shall be killed in a Coach. I must then always go on Foot, and never stir out
of Paris.

Such was the End of this Prince, so highly venerated by the French. He was
really a Man of great Courage, and great Penetration; and so much the greater,
in that he regarded the Destruction of the Ottoman Empire, as one of the
difficultiest Things in the World. And truly, no other Prince did that Honor
to Mahomet, nor his Successors. But yet not finding his own Forces sufficient
to invade and destroy the Turkish Empire, he invented a Chymerical Project to
find Possibility in a Thing which ever appeared impossible.

In the very Moment I am Writing, I have received certain News of my Ruin. If I
be not taken off this Time at Paris, I shall be perhaps more fortunate than
ever, and more successfully and fully serve our great Emperor, whose Clemency
is equal to his Grandeur, and who is above all the Powers on Earth. Cardinal
Richlieu has sent for me to come to him; I therefore finish this Letter in
have, which perhaps will be the last I write, being greatly afraid I am
discovered. If my Fear be vain, I shall learn thee in another Letter, the most
remarkable Events of Henry's Life. In the mean time, I am resolved, and
disposed, to suffer the Martyrdom. If I dye, my dear Egry, we shall see one
another in the other World; if it be true, that we shall have Eyes there, and
remember what has past here below. Pray the great God for Mahumet, and take
Care of thy Health.

Paris, 25th, of the first Moon, of the Year, 1639.
LETTER XV.
To the Invincible Vizir Azem, at the Camp under Babylon.
CArdinal Richlieu made me come in his Presence, and yet I am alive; he has not
attempted any thing against either Life or Liberty; but has done me the same
Honor, as to other foreign Churchmen; for he believes I am of Moldavia,
calling me Titus, not knowing any more of me than what I told him. It seems on
the contrary, as if he intended me Kindnesses, supposing me a bitter Enemy to
the Turks; and perhaps, I shall receive some Present from him; for, having
served him already as an Interpreter, I shall tell thee, Invincible Vizier,
what has past between him and me, without any Fear of being tedious to thee. I
serve thee faithfully, and write to thee as often as my Duty requires.

As soon as I was in his Closet, he thus spoke to me; Titus, What do thou do
in Paris; what Business have thou in this Town; and what is really thy Country?
I answered him, That I was a poor Clerk of Moldavia, and came to study Divinity
and be a Priest; that I knew no better Place to become Wise and Learned, and
that I would willingly sacrifice all Things to render him Service. He
afterward asked me, Whether I was acquainted with any of the Eastern Languages,
and, Whether I had ever been at Constontinople? I have been, replied I, in this
great Town when I was a Child, and, that my Father and Mother were then in
Slavery. My Father is dead, and my Mother is Married again to a Christian
Greek; I understand Arabic and Turkish, and am perfectly skilled in the
School-Greek. What do you mean by School-Greek? replied the Cardinal: It is
different from the Vulgar-Greek, answered I, which is so corrupted, that
learned People will not give themselves the Trouble to understand it. He
afterward bade me go into a little Closet, where I should find one of his
Secretaries, who would need my Help; where I had no sooner entered, but the
Secretary presented me with a Turkish Manuscript, to turn into Latin or
Italian, if I could not do it into French. I immediately translated it into
Latin, and will now inform thee (wise Minister, and Governor of the great
Empire of the true Faithful) of the Contents of it.

The Christian Dervises, called in France Cordeliers, keep, as thou know, in
Jerusalem, the Sepulcher of their Messiah, by a Privilege which Zelim the
Conqueror of Palestine granted them. These Religious, have neither Peace nor
Truce with the Greek Christians, and they have such Difference together, as are
of ill Consequences to all; they persecute one another without ceasing, and
spread abroad most bitter Satyrs against each other. Each Party makes ill
Reports to his Superior of that which is opposite, and mixes among some Truths,
a great many Lies and absurd Stories. But it appears to me, That the Greeks,
who naturally love Cabals, and have the Reputation of great Romancers, are more
dexterous than their adverse Party to do Mischief.

The Christian Dervises have represented a great many things to this Cardinal,
to authorize their Pretensions against the Greeks, by Means of the French
Ambassador. They not only reproach the Greeks with several Injustices and
Violences, but accuse the Cadi's of Cruelty and Tyranny, and the Soldiers
which guard Jerusalem of insupportable Exactions. Thou should be thoroughly
informed whether these Complaints be on just Grounds; for, they affirm, their
Patience is beyond the Cruelty of the Officers thou employest; yet, that they
can no longer suffer the insolences which are now put on them, and are on the
Point of hazarding all by a Stroke of Despair. It does not belong to me, to be
Advocate in the Behalf of those who are submitted to thy Authority, and
especially of those who ought to bear the Yoke of the Mahometans; but, it is the
Duty of Mahmut, thy Creature, to inform thee of the true Circumstances of
Affairs which come to his Knowledge. Yet, if the Oppression of the Dervises be
so great as they make it, thou that art the true Light which enlightens the
Empire of the Faithful, and scatterest the Darkness of it; thou will not permit
those that live under the Public Faith to be oppressed; and that Four wretched
Greeks shall be the Cause of such Disorders as may happen in Palestine, the
Complaints of which have reached the Ears of the greatest Princes in Europe;
and to whom such things may give false Idea's of the Government of those who
are chosen by God to command all the World. Invincible Bassa, I have discovered
the true Circumstances of this Affair, in the Turkish Manuscript which Cardinal
Richlieu's Secretary has put into my Hands. I have fully discovered the false
Reasonings of the Armenians and Greeks, who by common Consent, have offered
several Things to the most Venerable Mufti, which I am sure thou will not
approve of; for they make most wretched Excuses, to color over their
Perfidiousness. They say, the Romanists ought to be ill used, on purpose to get
rid of them from Palestine, being, like the Jews, bitter Enemies in their
Hearts to the Welfare of the Empire; That the Time of the Privileges granted by
Zelim and his Successors is expired, and that moreover, it is a great Imprudence
to suffer Pilgrims to come over from distant Countries, who under Pretense of
visiting the Holy Sepulcher, and other Places, which Superstition has
consecrated in Palestine, come to espy the Actions of the Turks, examine the
Form of their Government, visit their Places, and measure the Roads and Ports
which they possess on the Seas, which may prove of dismal consequence to the
Honor and Interest of the Ottoman Empire. I cannot inform thee, how this
Memoir came into Richlieu's Hands, but it was either sold or intercepted at
Constantinople, where it was addressed. However, I must not forget to tell thee
one Remark which this Minister made, whence thou may guess, whether he
reasoned like a wise and prudent Man: Were I, says he the Sultan's chief
Minister, I should have added Privilege to Privilege, to the Monks Cordeliers,
not only because Justice requires it, but by reason of the Advantage which
might redound thereby to the Turks. I would make the Ways to Jerusalem easy to
all People; I would lessen the Tribute; the Pilgrims should be well used; the
Christians in general, as well as the Cordeliers; and I would severely punish
the Officers and Soldiers who guard Palestine, and the sacred Places, if they
did otherwise. And then turning himself toward me, Does it not appear to thee,
says he, that the best way to enlarge a Kingdom, is, to procure it an Advantage
which increases the Number of its Subjects? It Is not enough that the Prince
shows the Ornaments of his Principality, he must show also the Prince,
otherwise he will be like the Philosopher who was brought into Herod 's
Presence. I do not see, says the King, any Thing else but the Beard and Cloak
of a Philosopher. If the Turks do as the Scythians. When they made themselves
Masters of Athens, they will do better; for they would not burn the Books which
were gathered together in this Famous Town, alleging, that those who applied
themselves to Study, were not wont to do any great Hurt. If the Christians
meditate on Death, in visiting and honoring the Sepulchers; the Mussulmen
should consider, that if they make War against them, they have only to do with
contrite and penitent Persons who will therefore be the more easily defeated.

And this is a Faithful and exact Account of the Conversation I had with this
chief Minister of State. Suffer now that I add, as a Note of the Justice of the
Christians Pretensions, what some Particulars of this Kingdom have given me to
understand, touching the Justice and Antiquity of the Privileges of the
Religious Christians at Jerusalem. They make appear, That for above Three
hundred Years these Places do belong to the Roman Catholics; That, Robert d'
Anjou bought them of the Sultan of Egypt, and made thereof a Present to the
Roman Church, and put them in Possession, not only of the Holy Sepulcher, but
of Calvary, of Bethlchem, and their Dependancies; which Settlement lasted till
Zelim I who therein confirmed the Religious Christians, with an Augmentation of
Privileges, as soon as ever he had conquered Egypt and Palestine.

Francis I. King of France, having made an Alliance with Solomon II. he
inserted in his Treaty an Article which confirmed the aforesaid Privileges,
which were since solemnly renewed, till Amurath's Time, who is now on the
Throne of the Mussulmen (an happy Emperor, and Master of the Universe, for
whose Sake alone the Sun enlightens the Earth) and confirms what his
Predecessors had done in favor of the Christian Roman Dervises, whom he has
maintained, without any regard to the vain Pretension of the Greeks and
Armenians, in their lawful Possession of Calvary, the Grotto of B^thlehem, and
the Two little Mountains thereunto belonging, and granted to them the keeping
of the Stone on which their Savior Christ was embalmed, as well as that of the
Two small Domes covered with Lead, under which is the Holy Sepulcher.

Thy humble Slave Mahmut, has an unpleasant Task imposed on him by this French
Minister. He desired me to give him some Memoir in general of what I know, and
bad me not wonder at his Curiosity; it being his Maxim, to make Friendship with
all Strangers of Merit, whereby he has learnt several important Matters, and
discovered Secrets of great Importance; and, that it lay in my power to oblige
him greatly, in giving him an exact Account of the Forces of the Ottoman
Empire, and where they lay most open to be attackt. I answered him very
modestly, That my Business being only to say my Breviary, he could not expect
any great Capacity from me in these Matters. He smilingly bade me try what I
could do in that Matter; yet however, he would not lay any Thing upon me which
might make me uneasy; adding, That tho he were a Cardinal and a Priest, yet he
knew something more than Divinity, and that several Roman Prelates had made War
with great Success from St. Peter's Chair. In fine, I could not but promise to
gratify him; and thou shall know, in due time, how I discharged my self, for I
shall rather part with my Life, than act contrary to my Allegiance; however, I
must avoid giving him Cause to suspect me, and acquaint thee alone with the
Conferences I have had with him.

The Holy Prophet multiply thy Line, that the Empire may not want Ministers of
thy Lineage; and, the Great God so assist thy Valor, that thou may see the
Empire of Amurath without Bounds.

Paris, 25th. of the Second Moon, of the Year, 1639.
LETTER XVI.
To the same.
THE Winter is so far advanced, that the King's Armies lie quiet. It Is no
Fable, That the Dauphin was born with some Teeth, and that no Nurse dare
present him the Teat, for fear of being bit with them. It Is said also, That
there being no Woman to be found about the Court which can endure the suckling
of him, there is a certain Peasant, a very healthful and hardy Woman* that has
undertaken that Employment.

Here are Four Posts arrived at the same Time; one comes from Rome, the rest
from the Armies; but, what News they bring, is not yet known; it is thought,
that he which comes from Germany, brings News of Alsatia and Brisac. The King
of France is very well; here are great Preparations at Court for the Carnival,
in which Time the Christians play a Thousand mad Pranks.

It Is commonly said, the Queen is with Child again. Here are also many Reports
of the Grand Seignior's Expedition, both in Prints and News-Letters; and
several Prognostics are made on his Enterprise on Babylon.

I shall inform thee by the first Opportunity, what is said here further of our
ever victorious Emperor; and of Thee also, who art his Chief Minister, and the
Right Arm of his Empire; and at the same time tell thee, what News come from
the Northern Parts, of which I suppose the Kaimakan has given thee some Notice,
as well as of the most considerable Events of the War of Alsatia. The Immortal
Being accord thee the taking of Babylon, and all Persia, as a Reward of thy
Fidelity and Valor, and Pains thou have taken in serving faithfully thy
Master; and give thee the Good Fortune, of leading triumphantly in Chains the
Sovereign of this Empire, that he may be humbled to the kissing of the Stirrup
of the Invincible Amurath's Horse.

Paris, 16th. of the Second Moon, of the Year, 1639.
LETTER XVII.
To Bekir Bassa, Chief Treasurer to the Grand Seignior.
ELiachim the Jew, whom thou thoughtest so wise, and virtuous a Man, concealed
his ill Qualities at Constantinople, to discover 'em more advantageously at
Paris. It was not his fault, that my Affairs were not entirely ruined. The
Villain gave Marks of his Treachery, in the very Moment he saw me receive the
Money from Carcon of Vienna, upon thy Order. I wrote to thee, I thought this Man
would be faithful in instructing me in the Things which were necessary for me
to know, and that I would be upon my Guard in those Things wherein he might do
me Mischief. Thou may easily imagine, how I am vexed at present; for I can
neither accuse him, nor draw from him a just Revenge. He made me believe, That
a Lawyer's Son at Paris, a young Man of great Hopes, having received some
Displeasure from his Relations, was resolved to be Circumcised, and embrace the
Mohammedan Religion; and that he would not lose so happy an Occasion of doing me
Service; and therefore had contrived to hide this young Man, in a close Cellar,
underneath the House where I lodge, without discovering to him the Place where
he should be. He added, he had promised him Money, and to procure him a
considerable Employ in Constantinople; and that he had in fine, filled him with
all the Hopes which are wont to be given to those that through Fickleness, or
temporal Advantages, forsake the Religion of their Fathers, to profess another.
He also assured me, I should have no trouble by this Business, having taken all
necessary Care to transport his Convert immediately to Tunis or Algiers, and
from thence to Constantinople. I yielded to the Reasons he alleged, and this
young Man was brought in the Night to the House where I lay, and hid without my
seeing him. But the next Day was not opened without a strange Scene in the
House. I was astonished to see a Woman in a great Rage stand before me,
demanding Satisfaction for violating her Daughter, and taking away her Life;
charging me, with having forcibly carried her away, and then Murdered her; and
she made me all these Reproaches, in the Company of a great many Officers of
Justice.

Think then the Confusion I was in; the more I denied the Crime, the more
fiercely they charged it on me. I was threatened with Death, if I did not
confess it, and give the Satisfaction required of me; and at the same time,
this sly Jezabel gave a Sign to one of the Rogues her Companions, to go down to
such a Place, and bring up her Daughter, who was found alive, in Man's Clothes,
and melted into Tears. It signified nothing, to allege Reasons, to prove my
Innocence; so that I was forced at last to throw out to these hungry Wretches,
all the Money I had; and they withdrew not, till they had abused and reviled me,
in a most bitter manner. They got from me about an Hundred and Eighty four
Sequins of Gold, and about an Hundred Piasters of Silver. Eliachim has the
Confidence to affirm, he knew nothing of the Cheat; and thinks to justify
himself in saying, That if he who is a Jew was deceived by this young Man, who
pretended to become a Turk; there were a Thousand French People, who had been
cheated in like manner. I shall not here mention what I alleged to him to make
him own his Perfidiousness, this being fruitless. On the other Hand, reflecting
on the Employ I had, and my present Circumstances; it appeared to me necessary,
to dissemble this truth; and to wait for some favorable Occasion, to send this
Villain out of Paris; and to lay some Snare for him at Constantinople. I give
thee notice of this Event, for Two Reasons; that I may have more Money, and
provide for my Safety; believing my self in great Danger, as long as I live
where such a Fellow comes. I shall not mention the Interests of Mahmut's Life;
for I shall ever think it well spent, should it be lost in the Sultan's
Service, who is the only Prop of the Universe.

Thou will not want Opportunities, wherein thou may draw out of Eliachim's
Purse the Money he has robbed me of; neither will thou want Means to remove from
me so dangerous a Companion. Thou should know, what the Christians, who are
always irreconciliable Enemies to the Jews, say of them. They affirm, That
these infamous Wretches, are the Slaves of all Nations, excepting Turkey, and
especially in Constantinople, where they are Masters; they are at the same,
caressed and cursed; in the midst of Abundance, they appear always miserable;
and yet they lay Hands on all others Properties. They add, that they be
Vagabonds like Ulysses, yet in whatever Place they are, they find a Country
like Homer; That they are all perfidious, and, in Public, affect to appear
religious, but live in grievous Disorder and Luxury in their own Houses,
sticking at no sort of Crimes; bragging, that tho it be not permitted them to
purchase Lands, yet they have found means to get into their Hands, a great part
of the Gold in Europe. The Christians also say, their Number must needs be
great, seeing they never go to War; and there are none amongst them that do not
marry. They are, say they, ever Cowards and Paltroons where there is any Danger
or Pains; but bold, when they foresee any certain Gain in the Markets they
make. They never speak the Truth, but when it is to deceive; they are ever
Liars, and there is no Impiety or Sacrilege at which they will scruple; and
these same Christians affirm, they will commit one time or other, some horrid
Crime in our great Imperial City; being the Turks concealed Enemies, though
they put great Confidence in them; and that we are willing to be deceived by
them. I have written to Carcoa, to send me speedily some Assistance; and I have
been forced to borrow Money of this same Eliachim, that Traitor who has brought
me into the Condition I am in; he could not deny me, tho he pleads (like a
Rogue as he is) extreme Poverty.

This Trick which has been put upon me, will oblige me henceforward to keep a
Vallet, but I will take one so little, that no Man shall reproach me with
choosing much of an ill Thing. Abandon not the poor Mahmut, who prays God that
he would give thee all sorts of Prosperities, and make thee live in perfect
Health; and wishes, that all the Monarchs of the Infidel Nations, may become
Slaves to the Sultan, who shall be ever Invincible; and that their Riches may
increase the Treasure thou guardest.

Paris, 15th. of the Second Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER XVIII.
To Carcoa, at Vienna.
I Have received the Money thou did send me and immediately lost it; yet
without my Fault* Bekir the Treasurer, has been informed by my Letters, of the
Loss I sustained, and of another Affair which is not necessary for thee to
know: I also writ to him, I expected a speedy* Supply from thee; for I should
demand it of thee. The Grand Seignior's Interest requires, that thou do not
oblige me to give thee any other Reason, and that thou deferrest not to send
me, as soon as may be, a sufficient Sum of Money. I can only inform thee, that
in the Attempt which was made on me, I lost only what I can recover. My Life is
in Safety, and by a Miracle my Affairs are in the same Condition; for, no body
has, as yet, discovered who I am. If thou writest any thing to Eliachim the
Jew, be sure be careful, and do not trust him more than needs.

Send without loss of Time to the Port the Packet I addressed to thee, and let
me not languish in Paris in the Expectation of Money. It Is true, Gold is a rare
Commodity, because every Body desires it. In this great Town of Paris, one may
sooner find an hundred Saints, than one liberal Person. The French say, it
belongs only to Sots to be free of their Money; that a Man should succor his
Friend with good Counsel, and there is no need of anything else. Learn, Carcoa,
to have no need of other Peoples Help, and have a care of being too free. Men
that are accustomed to receive good Turns, are generally wont to reckon them as
Debts.

The Vanity of that Philosopher, who dyed with Misery, is a great Example of
Men's Insolency. When Pericles would give him some Succor, to prolong his Life;
he had the Audaciousness to say to him, Thou carriest Oil, O Pericles, because
thou have need of a Lamp.

The Sovereign Moderator of all Things, keep thee from falling into Necessity;
this is the best Wish the poor Mahmut can make for thee, in the low Estate he
finds himself.

Paris, 15th. of the First Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER XIX.
To Dgnet Oglou.
BIrkabeb's Father, was a Rich Man in Arabia, and his Virtue was equal to his
Riches. He had Nineteen Children, who all dyed of the same Distemper, when they
arrived to some Years. Never Family was more united, and regular. Birkabeb was
naturally of a quiet, soft Temper, but so holy a Man, and at last dyed so poor,
that a Thief coming into his Chamber one Night to steal, and finding nothing,
he called him to him, whilst he was going away, and gave him his Bed, as not
being willing he should depart empty handed, and lose his Labor. Being forced
after this to lie on the Floor, he received Assistance from Heaven by the Hands
of his Wife; and scarce were Twenty Moons past since this Adventure, but there
happened another more strange than the former; for he became on a sudden very
Rich; and at the same Instant ceased to be wise. He had a Wife of as haughty a
Disposition, and noisy Humor, as his was quiet and humble. This Woman kept the
Flocks, and with a florid Youthfulness, was endued with great Beauty; and it is
not known by what Accident a Prince of the Race of the Sophy of Pirsia, who
fled from his Sovereigns-Displeasure, met with her. It Is certain, that having
recommended himself to her, and entreated her to save his Life, and not
discover him, she led him into a very thick Wood, which was never frequented;
where the Prince lived for Fourteen Years concealed; but growing at length
tired with this sort of Life, he persuaded this Woman to go to Ispahan
disguised in Man's Apparel, and find Arsamus, who had been his Covernor, and was
a faithful and wise Man; who would give her Money and Jewels, and a Water, which
would so disguise his Countenance, that his nearest Friends could not know him;
by which means he might hold on his Way to Rhodes, as he had determined. This
Woman soon arrived at Ispahan, with the Princes Tokens; which were some strange
Characters, and a Ring, which he usually wore; which Arsamus knowing, he
entrusted her with a considerable Sum, and several Diamonds, together with a
little Golden Pot, wherein was this Water before mentioned. This Messenger
returning in less than Forty Days Time, found the Prince dead in the Grotto
where he withdrew, with a Paper in his Hand, wherein he entreated the first
which Chance should bring thither, to bury his Body at the Foot of a fair Oak
near by; and also entreated the Party which had his Ring, to carry it to the
Sophy, and beg Pardon for the Offense he had given him. Birkabeb's Wife then
discovered to him all that had happened; led him into the Wood; showed him the
dead Prince, the Letter, the Ring and the precious* Stones; and only reserved
to herself the Secret of the Water, which she would not entrust him with.
Having after this resolved to go to the Sophy, they went together, by whom they
were well received, and laden with Riches. Birkabeb took up his Abode at
Ispahan, tarrying there Four Years, and there led a voluptuous and dishonest
Life. Whilst his Wife leaving him, ran away with a Young Persian, and made
several different Voyages into Asia, under several Figures; and by means of the
Water which she had received of Arsamus, she deceived her Husband, and as many
Lovers as she pleased.

The unhappy Birkabeb being by his Wife's Lewdness become again Poor, resolved
at last to return into his own Country, where he died in his House full of
Years, and in such Repute for Holiness, that the common Report is, he wrought
diverse Miracles. He left Four Sons, of which I knew only Ababer, who is he thou
mentionest in thy Letter. And this is all I can tell thee of Birkabeb, of his
Son, and Grandson Ababer, whom I look upon as a very honest Man, and in whom I
believe thou may put Confidence; yet with this Reflection, That he which is
Honest now, may cease to be so. Salute this Person from me, and continue to
love me; answer my first Letter, if thou have not done it; and this last also,
if it be not too troublesome to thee. Farewell.

Paris, 15th. of the Second Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER XX.
To Egry Boynou, the white Eunuch.
I Am still alive, and in Health; my Fear has proved vain, and I have escaped
the Cardinals Hands without any Danger; which will make me hope the same good
Fortune, should he ever send for me again. But thou shall not know his Business
with me, that being a Secret I am obliged to conceal.

Thou have, I hope, received the long Letter I wrote thee, containing several
Particulars of Henry IV's Life. I send thee now several of his Sayings, which
may be termed Sentences. Read them with Attention, they are as pleasant as
profitable for Mustapha's Use; who will find this great King, to have had an
Invincible Courage in Adversity, and great Clemency and Generosity, when he was
in his Prosperity; he was Valor it self amongst the Soldiers, Wife and
Pleasant amongst his Courtiers, terrible in Battles, easy and free amongst the
Ladies, full of Heat when any Action offered it self, and Courteous and Affable
to all sorts of Reople.

Henry dyed in the same Manner as most of our Sultans, that is to say, a
Violent Death. He had lived Fifty Seven Years and some Months, and reigned
about Twenty Years. Several of his Courtiers named him, like the First Caesar,
All Women's Husband; because 'twas believed he never saw any that he fancied,
but he obtained her. He had Fourteen Children, Six by the Queen, and the others
by Four of his Mistrisses. She who was called the beautiful Gabrielle, of the
Family of Estree, seemed to have more Power on his Heart than all others; he
often carried her about with him in his Army, and to the Places he besieged in
Person. Henry was wont to say, 'Twas as difficult to know how to Love well, to
prepare a Feast, and to dance at the same time agreeably, as to draw up an Army
for Battle, consisting of several Nations.

And when he was more advanced in Years, he said, He loved Dancing, for it made
him appear Young. He loved Play, for it showed he could be angry; and Ladies,
because he said he believed a Man ought to love all the Days of his Life.

He was so impatient at Play, when he lost, that he seemed to be as much
concerned at the Loss of an Hundred Crowns, as at the taking of a City from him.

He often disguised himself like a Peasant, to approach his Mistrisses, without
being known; and he has often carried on this Humor to that Degree, as to
drive Asses laden with Fruit, and sometimes carry a Truss of Hay on his
Shoulders.

When he was peaceably settled in his Kingdom, he said to those who were his
greatest Intimates, That he that grew weary at Difficulties, did not deserve
those Things which might be acquired without Trouble. I saw my self a King,
said he, without having a Kingdom, an Husband without a Wife, a Captain without
Soldiers, and Liberal without having any thing to give. I have had in fine, a
Kingdom, Children in lawful Marriage, my Troops are numerous, and I can dispose
of several Millions.

This Prince has been wounded several Times, has received Three Wounds in the
Wars, and Three others on his Throne, in the Calms of Peace. The Actions which
have gained him most Glory, have been, the winning of Four Battles whence he
came out Conqueror, having very few Troops, and his Enemy having very numerous
Armies; the general Peace he gave to Europe; the Reconciliation of the
Venetians with the Latin Church, which had excommunicated them; and the great
Project I spoke to thee about in my foregoing Letter.

The Pope's Nuncio having one Day asked him, How long he had made War; his
Answer was, All the Days of his Life; and my Armies have never had any other
General, but my self. He was seen once for Forty Hours together on Horseback,
and he led at that Time an unhappy Life, yet he bore up with invincible
Courage, which made his Soldiers call him the King of Iron. At the same time
he held a Morsel of course Bread in one Hand, he would with the other form on
the Ground the Design of an Entrenchment; and when he would show his Friends
the finest Gallery of his Palace, he would at the same time, lead them down
into his Stables to see his Horses. He was wont to say, That a King who would
reign happily, must not do all things which he may. He had such a Greatness of
Mind, and was so merciful, That he pardoned those who conspired against his
Life. He showed often to those that were about him, a Soldier that was a
Stranger, and had wounded him in a Battle; whom he recompensed for doing his
Duty, and made him one of his Guards.

Tho he was not Learned, yet he read Books of his Religion, and took a singular
Pleasure in History, and conversing with learned Men. Hearing one Night the
Annals of France, and being almost half asleep in his Bed; he bade his Reader
continue his Reading, for he would sleep no more that Night.

Having laid Siege to a most important Place, in a most cold Season, he slipped
one Night wrapped up in his Cloak to the Places where the Laborers were at Work,
and heard a Soldier there cursing both God and him; yet without concerning
himself any further, he whispered in this Soldier's Ear, God hears thee, and
the King too, for all thou know; if thou can not Work, hold thy Peace, and
be gone. The Night following, the King setting to work himself, to excite
others; he caused this Soldier to be called to him, and thus spoke to him,
Help me to remove this Earth, and do not swear, for now the King hears thee.

To correct the Vices, the Injustices and Violences of others, he did not use
Lessons, but gave Examples. And one day, that he heard one of his Captains in a
Rage, for that his Creditors had seized on all he had, to his Horse and Sword;
he thus spoke to him: I that am thy Sovereign have paid my Debts, and sold all
that I am worth for that End; and thou that art my Subject, ought to do the
same thing, without murmuring: And then taking him apart, he gave him some
Jewels to help him out.

He often showed the Marshal de Biron to his Friends, and thus spoke to them
about this Captain; This Man knows to Act, as well as Talk; and I have a great
Love for him. Yet he sometime after caused him to be put to Death, having Three
times pardoned his Disloyalty: This Captain having continued his Plots against
his Life, and against the State; yet remembering he had loved him, he would
spare one part of the shame of his Punishment, and therefore ordered he should
be executed in Prison.

A Scholar, Two Monks, and a Fool, attempted at several times to kill him; and,
as I have already told thee, he was several times wounded, and at last,
received a Mortal Stroke. A Woman that had undertaken to Poison him, was burnt
alive; and this foolish Creature said at her Death, thinking to lessen her
Crime; That having foreseen the King was to have been Stabbed to Death by the
Hand of a Ruffian, she would therefore procure him a more easy and honorable
Death.

Henry extremely loved Hunting, and one day being in pursuit of a Stag, and far
distant from his Company, a great Spectrum appeared to him with a black and
terrible Countenance, with all the Equipage of a Hunter, having a Lease of
Dogs, and said these words to him in a dismal Tone; Expect me, and hear me,
repent and amend thy Life; do thou understand me? Thou may easily believe,
this Vision did not a little disturb him. Yet he was more troubled, at what a
Peasant one day told him, who spoke to him with great Freedom; and his
Discourse gave him that Disturbance, which he could never get rid of. This Man
talked to the Prince often with great Familiarity, when he found him in the
Field; and one day held this Discourse to him: We are here Two Men; thou art a
great King, and I a poor Peasant; yet I am perhaps a better Man, because I am
more Innocent; I have said all the good I can of thy Person to my Friends,
being sensible of thy Justice, thy Bounty and Liberality. But all these Virtues
are horribly soiled by a grievous Vice, which God will never forgive thee
unless thou leavest it off; thou committest great Prince, continual Adulteries.

It Is certain, this Prince acknowledged to some of his Confidents, That he had
that day heard in particular a Preacher, who without any skill in Theology and
Rhetoric, had more moved him, than all the Doctors of the Sorbon put together
could do. This Sorbon is a College at Paris, famous for Learned Divines.

This Prince put a pleasant Trick on his Confessor, who often urged him to
forsake his Mistrisses, and content himself with the Embraces of his Wife: He
ordered a Cook, who was wont to dress this Doctor's Victuals, to give him
nothing every Meal but Partridges; which so greatly tired him, that he could
not forbear complaining to the King himself, that this Cook was so wilful and
humoursom, that he would let him have nothing but Partridges; so that he grew
so weary with that kind of Food, as made him sick at the Thoughts of it; the
Prince only answered him; Always the Queen, always Partridges.

He loved Learned Men, and was a great Patron of them; yet he said, that
Necessity obliged him to follow Arms, but had he been left to his own
Inclination, he should have chosen to have been a Scholar.

He had no great Esteem for Physicians, as believing these Kind of People wish
ill to Men; being of Tiberius's Mind, who thought that a Man of Thirty Years of
Age, needed them not.

But on the contrary, he most esteemed Historians, and gave Pensions to several
of them in Germany, Italy, and other Places; saying often, That if any one could
find the Books of Titus Livy, which are wanting, and those of Tacitus, that he
would willingly bestow on him the same Gift of Three Cities, which Xerxes made
to a Greek Captain, the one for Bread, the Second for Wine, and the Third for
Clothing. And therefore there are above Fifty Authors, who have written his
History. He envied Augustus, by reason of the Happiness of having so many
Learned Men in his Reign; and, that he more esteemed Mecaenas, living a
peaceable Citizen at Rome, than Alexander, triumphing over all Asia; and, That
Mecaenas's patronizing and recompensing Illustrious Men that excelled in Rome
in all Arts, had rendered his Name Immortal, together with that of his Sovereign.

He bewailed the great Pains he had taken, to obtain the Command of others, and
for his having learnt nothing himself; affirming, It had been better for him to
have learnt to command himself. He was also wont to say, That a Wise Prince
ought never to refuse a Peace, unless it be found more prejudicial than War.

Being one Day conversing with the Spanish Ambassador, he began to walk very
fast; and perceiving the Astonishment of this Minister; You see, says he, that
I can still mount on Horseback, and march on Foot too if it be necessary, and
that the Gout has not deprived me of the use of my Legs. His Valor was so
admirable, that a Grandee of Spain, being at a Ceremony, wherein the Sword of
this Prince was carried naked before him, he stopped openly him that carried it,
and kissed it, saying, He did this Honor to the Sword of the first and chiefest
Captain of the World.

A Chemist, one Day presented him with a Receipt to change Lead into Gold; to
whom he answered, in making a great empty Coffer to be brought to him; When
thou have filled this Coffer with the Metal thou talkest of, come to me, and I
will give thee as much Lead as thou will have.

Being at Fountain-Bleau, a Place famous since several Ages, and showing all
the Buildings there to a foreign Prince, who told him, when he had showed him
the Chapel, That he had lodged God in too narrow a Compass: He answered, That
God was better lodged in the Heart, than in great Edifices of Stone.

When he drew the Designs against the Mussulmans, which I mentioned in my other
Letter, he did an Action of Generosity very beneficial to the Moors, who were
driven out of Spain; permitting above Fifty thousand Men, who had past the
Pirenees, to embark themselves in the Ports of Provence, and Languedoc, to
retire into Africa. I cannot call to mind that Time, without bewailing the Loss
of a Million of Persons, who perished by diverse Accidents and Miseries.

After a Battle, wherein Henry ran a great Hazard; he said, He had often fought
for Victory, but at this Time he fought for his Life.

He had used more Boots thon Shoes, and he vaunted he had been less Time in
Bed, than the Duke of Magenne had been at Table; this latter commanding then
the Army of the League.

This King desired to be thought a real Father to his Subjects; he therefore
applied himself in searching the Means of redressing the infamous Abuses of the
Bar; but, he advanced not much in the Business, whatever Care he used; it
being impossible for him to bridle the Covetousness of the Lawyers, and to
hinder the Length of Suits, or correct the Injustice of Judges, to leave
nothing to be done by his Successors. He seemed to be much troubled many times,
when he spoke of these kind of Things, in that there were in Paris more Courts
and Lawyers than in all the vast Empire of the Turks; his Design being, after
the Example of the Mussulmans, to make all Suits, which were everlasting, by
the Knavery of the Lawyers, to be decided in Three Days. And he therefore
designed also to burn the Books of all those, who had written infinite
Commentaries on this Subject; which served only to ruin the People, and caused
often Times amongst Relations, Friends, and Neighbors, such Broils, as may be
said to do more Mischief than a Civil War. He affirmed, That in imitating
herein the Turks, he should use his Subjects as his real Children, and hinder
them from devouring one another; That he would cause sharp Nails and Rasors to
be fastened to the Seats where the Judges sat, that those who suffered
themselves to be corrupted, might sit thereon; and indeed, in this particular,
I cannot but wonder at the Christians Blindness.

We see oftentimes decided in one only Campaign, the Differences of Two great
States; but a Suit in Law for Twenty Sequins shall often last a Man's whole
Life, and perhaps be entailed on his Heirs.

But hear a remarkable Example of the Sincerity of this Sovereign. There were
who would have persuaded him to have apprehended the Duke of Savoy, who came to
Paris, to terminate some Differences he had with him. He answered those that
advised him with this, That Francis I. one of his Predecessors, had learnt him,
A Prince was more obliged to do what he had promised, than to obtain what he
desired; that 'twas in his Power to have apprehended a Prince far more
considerable, but would not do it, suffering the Emperor Charles V. to pass out
of his Kingdom, who had come therein on his Word; after this, added he, shall
Henry give such an Example to Princes? If the Duke of Savoy has often broke his
Word with me, it does not therefore follow I must imitate him; Crimes can never
be authorized by Examples. The same Duke of Savoy having asked him, What
Revenue he drew from his Kingdom? He answered him in these Terms, I draw as
much as I will, because I make my self beloved; whence it is, that my Subjects
count all our Estates are common.

He answered very pleasantly, to a Prince's Envoy, who came with a Complement
of Condoleance for the Death of his Son, who had been dead near a Year; That he
was no longer grieved at that Loss, seeing God had given him Two more since.

A Captain of great Reputation having said, That the Kings Liberalities, tho
several Times reiterated, could not oblige him to love him; Henry sent him
Word, He would heap so many Favors on him, that he would force him at last.

He often used this Proverb, That more Flies are taken with a Drop of Honey, than
a Tun of Vinegar.

A Monk entertaining him one Day about Military Affairs; Open your Breviary,
Father, said he, and show me, where you learnt these fine Lessons.

One Day a Tailor presenting him with a Book of Politics, he said to the
Chancellor, who was there present; Monsieur Chancellor, cut me out a Suit of
Cloths, here is a Tailor who understands your Trade, and tells me how I shall
govern my Kingdom.

One Day when the Pope's Nuncio, was at a great Feast, where there were between
Twenty and Thirty Ladies of great Beauty, he told this Prelate, He had been in
several Battles; but never found himself in so great Danger before.

Nothing seems more agreeable, than the Answer he made to the Provost of the
Merchants of Paris, who was urgent with him to consent to an Impost, which was
to be laid on the Fountains of the Town, to furnish the Expense of Forty
Deputies of the Switzers, who came into France to renew their ancient Alliance
with this Kingdom; and his Answer was, That this Magistrate should find some
other Expedient, than to change Water into Wine; which was a Miracle that never
any Body wrought but Jesus Christ, who is, as thou know, the Christian's
Savior; and for thy further Instruction, it is necessary for thee to know, The
Switzers love Wine above all Things in the World, and that not without Reason.

This Prince went to the Wars at the Age of Fifteen, and at Seventeen killed an
Enemy; and in the Year following, he saved the Life of one of his Captains, and
had his Horse killed under him. He was in Five Battles, and in more than an
hundred Combats, and at the Siege of above Two hundred Places. He sustained
Seven different Wars, in which his Enemies aknowledged, that he had Fifty five
Armies upon him at several Times, and in different Places; and always obtained
some considerable Advantage.

Those that have given him the Term of Great, have given him his true Name. He
was highly esteemed by all Nations, and thou know very well, that our
Sultans, tho the mightiest Monarchs in the Universe, have admired this great
Prince's Fortune and Valor.

Above Fifty Historians have written his Life; above Five hundred Poets have
published his Praises.

I will leave thee at present, the Liberty of comparing this King with those,
whom thou will choose from amongst the Hero's.

If Mahomet XI. has not done more than him, he may be compared to him in
Warlike Actions, with this Difference, That King Henry conquered the Gauls who
were of his Patrimony, and Mahomet conquered Twelve Kingdoms and an Empire,
because he was persuaded, that all the Earth belonged to him. Henry subdued the
City of Paris, and Mahomet made himself Master of Constantinople.

The King of France left an infinite Number of Marks behind him of his
Grandeur, on Marble, and in the Writings of famous Authors; and Mahomet left
only on his Tomb, those which showed what he had designed to execute, but never
could do it; which was, to take Rhodes, and subdue proud Italy.

We must also acknowledge, there was never found in any Mohammedan Prince, the
admirable Clemency of Henry; showing himself herein greater, than in
vanquishing his Enemies. Contrary to Mahomet, who showed only great Kindness to
an Ox, whom he caused to be carefully fed, because he would never forsake the
Tomb of his Master, whom this Prince had killed; abiding always by it, and
expressing his Sorrow by horrible Bellowings. In all other Occasions, he was
very cruel; far from the Humor of this French King, who heapt Benefits on
those, who drew Blood of him. Mahomet, by a barbarous Cruelty, caused the
Bellies of Twenty of his innocent Pages to be ripped open, to discover him that
had eaten a Melon in his Garden.

Henry was a great Lover of Ladies, and an extreme Admirer of that Sex; and
Mahomet jealous of the too great Beauty of his Mistress, cut off her Head
himself in a full Divan. And farther, if Mahomet gave in the East a great
Example of Justice, in putting his own Son to Death, for deflowring the
Daughter of the Bassa Achmet in a Bath; Henry gave a greater in his own Person,
in repairing at the Head of his Army, the Outrage offered to a young Girl, from
whom he could not fear any vexatious Consequences.

Be sure, however, be silent in these Judgments I make; and, show thy self
discreet, if thou intendest to hold any Correspondence with me.

Imitate the Bees; gather from so many Flowers presented thee, what appears to
thee sweetest, and most proper to form Mustapha's Mind, and supple his Spirit
like Wax.

I could relate to thee more Things touching this Henry; but there is no
Necessity of writing all; that thou may have space to imagine, what such a
Prince might have done, who had re-established his Fortune by his Valor alone.

Let me know of thy Departure; and when thou shall arrive at the Place of thy
Retreat, forget not thy faithful Friend Mahmut, who wishes thou may prove an
happpy Tutor to the Son of a Prince, and a faithful Minister of a wise Emperor.

Paris, 18th. of the Second Moon, of the Year 1639.
The End of the Second Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
BOOK III.
LETTER I.
To Muslu Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
SCARCE had I finished my Letter to Egri Boynou, when News came from the Coasts
of Provence, of so extraordinary and scandalous an Event, that I cannot but
inform thee, who art a wise and experienced Person, of it; and because I would
have thee set it down in the Sacred Register-Books of the Empire, of which thou
have the Charge.

Assam Bassa, a Corsary of Algiers, dyed at the Age of 40 Years, the Relation
of whose Death was attended with such horrid Circumstances, that even the
Enemies of the Alcoran do detest them.

It Is said, That being sensible he was near his End, he caused two young
Christian Slaves to be strangled, who were nobly descended, and for whose
Ransom great Sums of Money might have been expected, without alleging any
reason for his Cruelty; nay, after he had confessed he had no cause of
Complaint against them, having observed from certain Tokens in their
Countenances, that they were of a sweet Disposition, and inclined by Nature to
be Faithful. When he was laying out, there was found a kind of fine Scarf about
him, with these Words embroidered on it in Letters of Gold; Asam Bassa will
have the handsomest of his Slaves to be buried alive with him, being desirous
of good Company in his Voyage into the other World.

The Report of so terrible an Adventure, has increased the hatred of the French
against us, and that in so excessive a manner, that I am forced to keep my self
concealed, lest I should by my Zeal discover my self, being not able to endure
the Blasphemies of our Enemies. There Is no question, but this cruel Monster is
kept by the Black Angels in the other World.

God grant, that so horrid a Crime may not corrupt the rest of Africa. However,
may I be so free as to counsel you, Let the Body of this Impious Wretch Assam
be dug up, and burnt, and his Ashes thrown into the Sea, to drown the Memory of
him.

Mahmut salutes thee from the Town of the Universe the fullest of Noise, and
wishes thee at Constantinople, or wherever else thou art, a long sequel of
happy Years, and after Death the enjoyment of the bliss of our hundred twenty
four thousand Prophets.

Paris, 18th. of the Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER II.
To the Invincible Vizir Azem, at the Camp under Babylon.
BEfore I give thee an Account, Great and Magnanimous Vizir, of whatever I have
done to satisfy the Curiosity of Cardinal Richlieu, I am obliged to tell thee
how I spend my leisure Hours.

It Is impossible I should observe exactly the Motions of this Court, without
following it, and holding a Correspondence with People of all sorts, as
Tradesmen, Soldiers, Scholars, Seamen, Politicians, and even Musicians.

The Court consists of all these Professions, and there are some particular
Persons who are Masters of all these Sciences, of which number is Cardinal
Richlieu. He is not content with this his Knowledge, but seeks still for
further Light in the Commerce of all Persons of Merit, who arrive here;
neglecting nothing which may enrich this Kingdom with new discoveries in Arts
and Sciences, out of love to his Country, and desire to render his Ministry
more famous.

Thou see by this, Invincible Bassa, that to keep company with Courtiers, who
have so many different* Qualities, a Man must have some for his share, that he
may say something in his Turn, and not be always a bare Hearer of other
People's Discourse.

For this purpose, the particular Study to which I applied my self, whilst I
was a Slave in Sicily, does much help me, though not sufficiently. 'Twas Books
I read in this Island, not Men. Now, knowing my Business required much
Dissimulation, an Awakened Mind, an Especial Prudence, Eloquence and Learning
to speak properly in Occasions, great Reading to obtain the Knowledge of
Ancient and Modern Things, a Refined Policy to discover or conceal ones self,
and to counterfeit sometimes a mighty honest Man; nothing, I say, appeared to
me more conducing to this purpose, than the turning over Histories. And
therefore I have earnestly applied my self to this Work. And, because few Books
are not sufficient, and a great many breeds confusion, I have happily got
Admission into the Acquaintance of an Ancient Learned Man, whose Study consists
of none but choice Books, and has traveled over most Parts of the World, not
like Apollonius, to learn the Language of Birds and Beasts, but to know the
Customs, Laws, Virtues and Defects of Nations. I was first for informing my
self of all the Prodigies, which the God of the Jews has done, in favor of
that ungrateful People. I afterward enquired into the Life and Doctrine of the
Messiah, whom the Christians Worship. I also looked into what had been done
considerable at Athens and Sparta, Thebes, Rome and Carthage, and carefully
remarkt what Divinities were adored in those so famous Places, and found that
the Great Philosophers and Captains, who made such a Noise about their
Religions, had at Bottom none at all. Having run over what the Christians call
the Old and New Testament, the Histories of Josephus, Xenophon, Polybius,
Thucydides, Livius and Tacitus; my greatest Application has been, and shall be
for the future, to read and meditate on the Works of the Great Plutarch,
especially his Lives of Illustrious Greeks and Romans, related by him with so
great Exactness. And thus far have I arrived in this short space, and here I
have stopped. I have learnt by the reading of Plutarch, to amuse the Cardinal
Richlieu, to whom I offered my self two days ago; and have put into his Hands
the following Discourse made after the manner of Christians, and have stripped my
self, if a man may so speak, of the Manner and Style of the Turks, as I have
done of their Habits, the better to disguise Titus, the Faithful Slave of the
Great Amurath.

Great Cardinal, and most Sage Minister of the greatest Christian Kings.
Titus of Moldavia is come to wait on you according to your Commands, not to
entertain you with the Riches of Asia, nor in what manner by the Wisdom of your
Counsels, and Forces of the King your Sovereign, you may destroy the mighty
Turkish Empire, of whom you have no reason to complain; but to tell you, what
seems most agreeable to the Greatness of your Genius. Know then, Sage Moderator
of the French Monarch, that I shall not offer any thing which may make you hate
me, and repent of believing me, seeing, what I propose, is an easy Enterprise,
and full of Glory. Thy King has a Son, who will one day inherit the Greatness
and Authority of his Father; you know not the Temper and Dispositions which
this Heir may have, being as yet so much a Child, that a man cannot gather any
thing certain of this matter. But, a Prince that has been so long looked for,
requires extraordinary Designs to be laid for him, and great Preparations made
betimes, to raise a Palace that may be worthy to entertain him. I would propose
to you a Palace, I say, of miraculous Architecture, the like was never seen or
imagined, and which you may with your own hands rear up in Paris, which must be
of a square Form, whose Corners shall regard Europe, Asia, Africa and America,
and whose Richness shall draw all Nations to it. You will not need Stone, Sand,
Wood nor Iron for this Work. The Architects which you shall employ, shall have
the Secret, with their Pen, Ink, and Paper to raise this Edifice, which shall
be of a more lasting Durance than the Pancteon of Agrippa, and whereon, as on
the Temple of Solomon, there should be no noise of Hammers.

Think not, Wise Minister, they are Chimera's which Titus has in his Head. Hear
then the Design of this Majestical Palace, whose Foundations are already laid
by Plutarch, with Materials more precious than Gold or Rubies. Thou know the
Happiness this Philosopher had, of rendering immortal the Actions of so many
Great Men, of whom perhaps there might have been no Mention, had Plutarch lay
silent. Men now read in the most remote Provinces of the Indies, written on
Leaves and Barks of Trees, the Lives of Alexander, Caesar, Scipio, Pompey, and
Xerxes. Amongst the Solitary's of the most Desert Parts of Arabia, and amongst
the Dervises, who dwell at Medina, are found written in Arabian Characters, the
Histories of Numa, Aristides, Cato, Lycurgus, and Epaminondas. The Spaniards
and Portugueses have rendered this Author so famous in China and Japan, that
these Barbarians not contented with having translated into their Languages, all
the Lives of the Greeks and Romans, they have ordered (if I mistake not) that
every Five Years new Copies be made, to the end they may be eternally
preserved. I have seen my self at Constantinople above an hundred Volumes in
Silken Paper, wherein the Works of this Famous Greek are read with Veneration
by the greatest Captains, Lawyers, and Divines; and these Works are enriched
with most curious Notes in Arabic, in Persian, and the Turkish Language, by
the express Orders of the Sultans, who make them be preserved as Illustrious
Monuments of the Ancient Greek Eloquence. You are not ignorant of the Esteem
which Solomon the Great had of Pompey, Caesar, Pyrrhus, and Alexander, and that
he never undertook any Military Enterprise, till he had consulted these great
Masters in the Art of War; being wont to say, he knew not whether Alexander or
Pyrrhus, had showed more Valor in Engagements, than Plutarch had showed Wit
and Judgment in describing them. But in a Voyage I made into Germany, what did
not an old Rabin tell me, in showing me the Lives of Illustrious Men of this
Incomparable Author translated into Hebrew, which he carried ever about with
him? he assured me that the Curious of his Religion set such a value on them,
that there are above Ten Thousand Manuscript Copies dispersed in the
Synagogues, both in the Eastern and Western Parts.

Men, Women and Children know of what Account this Famous Author is, in all our
Europe. He now speaks all Languages: The English, the Spaniards, Italians,
Germans, Polanders and Hollanders have naturalized him among them. And you know
very well, Sir, that in this Kingdom of France, the Learned not content with
having him Translated into their Idiom, they carefully adorn their Libraries
with this Author in his own natural Tongue, and have Collected the Latin,
Italian, and Spanish Versions of him.

But it is now Sixteen Hundred Years since Plutarch keeps silence; so many Men
Famous for their Knowledge, and so many great Captains who have lived since,
are unknown to the World, because they have met with no Plutarch to know them.
And this is the stately Building which I offer you to finish, who are so great
a Lover of Glory; for God has given you a Mind with a necessary Power to finish
what Plutarch has so profitably begun. Raise up immediately by your Authority,
on the precious Foundation, which this Incomparable Philosopher has laid, the
Walls and Roof of this vast Building. Order Lodgings to be made ready for all
the Hero's, who could not enter into this first Edifice; I mean, those
Illustrious Dead, whose Lives have not been carefully Collected, and who should
honor Europe, Asia, and Africa where they were born, and the New World will
yield you wherewith to fill this Palace with Atabalippa's and Montezuma's.

Hereby will thou be the Restorer of those Ruins, which Time has made; and in
raising the Statues of so many Excellent Persons in Civil Administrations, in
War and in good Letters, you will raise up an infinite Number throughout the
World, as the first Emperor of the Romans did. It Is to no purpose to say, there
are a great many Authors that have written, since Plutarch, the Actions of
several Great Commanders, Kings and Great Ministers, whose Virtues were
eminently conspicuous, both in Peace and War. I hope I shall not give just
offense in saying, That few of these Writers have observed Plutarch's excellent
Method; for, either they appear obscure by reason of their great Conciseness,
or the Facts are ordinarily confounded in General Histories, or Written by
interessed or passionate Pens, who disguise the Truth, and impose Fabulous
Relations on the World. For a Proof of this, be pleased to examine particular
Events, related in the Lives of Francis I. King of France, and of the Emperor
Charles V. and you will find there are those who assure us, that Charles dyed a
Saint, and that scarcely was he expired, when Flowerde-Luces were seen to
spring up in his Chamber, which yielded a most admirable Scent: Whilst others
affirm, that this Hero dyed an Heretic, by the Assistance of his Confessor,
who had embraced the Lutheran Doctrine. And, how many Romances are made of
Francis I? Has it not been said, That he fought a Duel with this Emperor, and
that this Prince passing through France, the King by a Motive of Generosity
(beyond any Precedent) offered him his Kingdom? That Charles had one day sat on
Francis's Throne, and condemned a Malefactor, and afterward reprieved him, as
a Mark of his Authority? And has it not been moreover said, That Francis took
Charles in a Battle? How many false Relations have been made of Andrew Doria,
and Barbarossa, Two famous Sea-Captains, the one a Christian, and the other a
Mussulman, and both of them Chief Admirals of Two mighty Emperors, Charles V.
and Solomon? Has it not been confidently affirmed, That Barbarossa being in the
Archipelago, gave a Visit in the Disguise of a Monk to Doria? That in an Island
where this Interview was made, they had sworn, one on the Gospel, the other on
the Alcoran, to help one another to conserve their Authority which their
Employs gave them at Sea; and, to make themselves more necessary to their
Sovereigns, they were always to avoid a decisive Combat, that they might not
ruin one another? That they had moreover both signed this Treaty with their own
Blood? Has there not been added to this Fable, That the Turkish Admiral sent to
Doria a Moor; who pretended to be a Fugitive from the Ottoman Army, and wore
two Pearls of an inestimable Price in his Ears; and, that in Exchange, Doria
had assured Barbarossa not to interrupt him, whenever he pleased to invade any
of the Coasts of Italy?

It is time, that under thy Auspicious Conduct, the Lives of Great Personages
be cleared from those false Relations which corrupt them, and be orderly
inserted into the Books of the most excellent Plutarch, which such a kind of
Title:

Here Is the Rest of the Lives of Illustrious Men, from the Emperor Trajan, to
Lewis the Just; of those that have excelled in Arms, Learning, Affairs of
State, and of those who have held the first Rank in the Church in all Parts of
the World; and these Histories have been Collected by a College of the
Learnedest Men in Europe, consisting of Spaniards, French, Italians and
Germans, under the Auspicious Conduct of his Eminency, Cardinal Richlieu.

I would have three Persons of each Nation to attend this Work, and who should
make their Abode in Paris, as being the principal City in France. And, I
propose Spaniards, Italians, Germans and French, as the most polished Nations,
and who have furnished the World with the most able Men. Now, every Nation
having its particular Way of Speaking and Acting, the Edifice will be the more
agreeable, and each Architect will have greater Room to show his Skill. Those
who shall read these Works, will find in the Softness of the French Style
wherewithal to mollify the too severe Gravity of the Spanish Eloquence. The
Sincerity of the Germans ever attended with some kind of Dryness, will appear
without Rudeness with the Flowers and good Sense of the Italian Writers. And,
as all the World will be interessed in this magnificent Design, so we must not
doubt but the wisest of all these States will take care in the choice of the
Subjects which they will propose. And, in fine, if thou will have the chief Men
in the World, thou need not want the secret of raising up Plutarch's. Be not
weary of giving Marks of thy Liberality; for, if thou will have Titus Livy's,
become Maecenas.

It does not belong to me, to say in what manner it is necessary in this
occasion, to separate them of several Nations, and to distribute these Employs:
Thou art equitable and prudent, so that this Work being begun, the End will
have a Success answerable to its Beginning. I shall only put thee in Mind, that
thou will not a little contribute to render thy Immortality more Glorious; if
thou remembrest the Turks, thy sworn Enemies, being persuaded thou may find
amongst the Ottoman Emperors, Bassa's and Vizirs wherewithal to enrich the New
Plutarch. Let not the Greatness of the Work discourage thee; how great soever
it be, thy Wit and Courage are above it, and thou will not want Ancient and
Modern Authors to assist thee. Suetonius will furnish thee with the Lives of
the Caesar's, which may be left entire as they are. Diogenes Laertius gives as
good an account of many of the Philosophers. You Will receive Advantage from the
Works of Aemilius Probus, Paul Jovius, and several others, who have acquired
Immortal Reputation by the Books which they have given the Public. You will
find a Draught already made of the History of Two Hundred and Twenty Eight
Emperors, from Julius Caesar to Ferdinand III. and Ibrahim I. the one Emperor
of Germany, and the other of Turkey; which thou shall cause to be carefully
examined by the College, to clear up such things as are obscure, adding what
is wanting, and retrenching Events of which there is no sufficient proof, and
which seem fabulous; and, in a Word, for drawing up particular Lives which are
to be met with in general Histories, which have been the Method of most Writers
of late Ages.

I would have also Plutarch's Manner followed, of comparing the Illustrious Men
of one Nation with those of another; where the discreet Writer having weighed
the Reasons which make for the one and the other, pronounces a Sentence which
does both delight and instruct the Reader.

The most important Instruction then which can be given, being the Secret of
knowing Men perfectly, who seek with so great Care to hide themselves; the true
means for this, is the choice of Matter, that the Reader may not lose his Time,
study in vain, but gather the Fruit which all Men of Sense search for, which
is, to know what is Good, that they may follow it, and Evil to avoid it. On
this ground you will be easily persuaded, there is greater Pleasure to behold
the Firmness of Scipio, who passes with one only Gally to find out Sifax, than
there is in considering him, when he gives Battle to Hannibal in the Plains of
Rama. We are more edifi'd in seeing this young General a Conqueror, and yet so
continent, as to send the finest Woman in the World, who was his Prisoner, to
Lucius the Spanish Prince her Husband, without touching her; than in the
Relation of an hundred Sieges of Places, where, the Effects which the Soldiers
Fury produces, Hunger and Thirst, and the effusion of human Blood, yields
Horror instead of Diversion. In like manner, Sir, you will acknowledge, That a
Prince or Captain will be more instructed by seeing Francis, who lived like a
King, though in Prison at Madrid, who caresses and recompenses Learned Men all
the World over; and in seeing Fabricius, who refuses and despises the greatest
Honors which are offered him with immense Riches, and who snatches away the
Poison from the Mouth of the greatest Enemy of the Roman People; than all the
Combats and most bloody Battles fought by Pyrrhus, Charles V. and the great
Tamerlane.

I have made you this long Discourse, as a Mark of my Obedience; and Titus of
Moldavia at the Feet of your Eminency, supplicates you to consider, That when
by your Negotiations, Councils and Armies which receive your Orders, you shall
have added new Kingdoms to that which your Master holds; when for the benefit
of Trade and Navigation, you shall have joined all the Seas together; and when,
in a Word, you shall raise Bridges in Paris, Pyramids with more Palaces than
were built by the Caesar's, and all the Kings of Egypt: These Pyles will not be
Immortal, but subject to the Injuries of Time; whereas, on the contrary, if you
send for the Twelve Architects which I mentioned to raise the stately Palace
afore-cited, all the World will bless the Name of Armand Cardinal de Richlieu,
Restorer of the Republic of Learning almost ruined; and who, like another
Archimedes, has known by the Examples of the Virtue of Illustrious Men,
snatched away by Death out of the World, to combat and destroy the Vices and
Ignorances of the Living.

If thou approvest not, Magnanimous Vizir, what I offered to the King of France
's Minister, punish me not for a Fault which was not designed, having on the
contrary imagined to do thee a very agreeable piece of Service. I thought I
could not take a better course to conceal thy Slave Mahmut, and to divert this
Cardinal from some Projects, which I am informed he designs against the Turkish
Empire. Should he undertake the Great Work I set before him, thou feast the
Sultans will have some share in it; and he will, I say again, have by this
means not to mention any thing else, his Hands so full of Business, that he
will not have the least Time or Ability to molest us.

I supplicate thee, prostrate at thy Feet, to call to mind, the general Dislike
of what happened to Athens, when 'twas sacked and taken, such prodigious
numbers of Books being burnt, in all Arts and Sciences, which had been a
collecting several Ages, and preserved with such great Care; and so much the
more, in as much as one may be assured, there is nothing to be feared from those
that make Learning their whole Business, who are always averse to War, as
finding their reckoning only in the Tranquillity of a well established Peace.

Thou shall receive by the first Opportunity, whatever I can discover of
Importance for thee to know, either for the Good of the Empire in which thou
hold so great a Rank, or to satisfy thy Curiosity, provided the Frosts
hinder not the passage of Couriers, as they will assuredly retard the Progress
of the Armies, which are constrained to lie still during this rigorous Season.

God give thee an entire Victory over the Enemies of the Mighty Amurath, and
make thee the Conqueror of all Nations.

Paris, 28th. of the Third Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER III.
To Lubano Abufei-Saad, an Egyptian Knight.
THe King, some days past, was present at a Ball, where there was a great
number of Persons of Quality of both Sexes. Cardinal Richlieu, who never loses
the sight of this Prince, was there also. 'Twas observed, That at the end of
this Divertisment, the Cardinal would have went out before every Body, but
dared not; and indeed, could not get through the Crowd, which made him so
impatient, as was remarkt by all, even the King himself, who taking him a
little apart, very seriously bid him pass on, seeing he was Master. Now, what
did this Minister do in this Astonishment, but answer nothing; and taking a
Flambeau out of the Hands of one of the Pages, he carried it himself before the
King, with a Countenance that showed neither Despite nor Confusion. Those that
took notice of the Name of Master, which the King had given him, interpreted it
in his Favor; and there were them who thought, that in abasing himself so low,
he plainly showed the design he had of raising himself the higher; however,
every one thereupon, spoke what he thought most proper.

I gave thee an Account of this Passage, remembering what thou did in the
presence of thy Master, throwing thy self out at a Window, to take up a little
Note, which Amurath had by chance let fall; which Action of thine, being known
in this Country, this of the Cardinal was compared with it; yet with this
difference, That the Cardinal without rising from the Ground, has made a
greater leap than thou. God preserve thee from falling into a Praecipice, if
thou be Fool enough, to leap a second Time.

Paris, 28th. of the Third Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER IV.
To Mehemet, Page-Eunuch.
THou have gotten up from a great Sickness, and I expect one. I have had, for
some Days, a Faintness, which does extremely depress me, but by the Grace of
God, I need not yet the Physician. The Letter which I received from thee this
Moon, has given me some ease in my Indisposedness, which is no new Thing with
me, being necessitated to live so far from my Friends, Country, yea, and
Religion too. And though it may seem difficult to be a Saint, in passing ones
days in a Profane Place, yet think not my Piety grows lukewarm, or my
Friendship diminished; seeing I have made a Mosque of my Heart, where Friends
are ever present. Be then persuaded, it is impossible for Mahmut to become
unfaithful, and lose the Affection he has for his Friends; for he never ceases
to love, where he has once begun. It Is true indeed, that I call my self Titus
at present, and am clothed in an odd sort of Dress; yet that is no Hindrance
of my Affections to my Religion, my Country, and my Friends.

The Ancient Greeks have written a great deal about Friendship, and the Duties
of a Friend; but there remains still behind, more than what they have said, as
there remains more to do than they have done. The Word Friend is a common Name,
and appropriated by most People; but where will thou find a Man that gives
Proofs of a true and unfeigned Friendship? I think I am no Hypocrite; be thou
as true to me at Constantinople, and inform me what passes in the Seraglio, and
how it goes with our Friends and Relations in all Parts.

I shall give thee no Account of the Transactions of the Infidels, amongst
which I live, being tired with writing them to the Grand Vizir and the
Kaimacan. Imitate me not herein, for thou aboundest with Leisure; let me then
hear from thee every Moon.

I have had several Fits of Laughter, at the pleasant Adventure of the
Chambermaid to the old Slave, with the Eunuch Melec-Aubi. Blessings on the
Heart of Mahomet, I believe the Holy Prophet will laugh himself in his
Paradise, when the Angel his Messenger, who brings him News from this World,
shall give him an Account of what these two Persons have ridiculously done in
Honor of him. Could there ever be a greater Simplicity, than to eat every
Night a Versicle of the Alcoran written on a piece of China Satin? Whence did
this Eunuch, thy Camrade, learn this strange Superstition? and by what Spirit
did he authorize that of this Slave, in taking the Pains to write these
Versicles with his own Hand? And when could they imagine both of them, they
should make an end of this Feast, seeing the whole Alcoran could not be eaten
in less than Six Thousand Forty three Days, the Book containing so many
Versicles? Pray let me know what is done to them. They deserve not, in my poor
Judgment, an over rigorous Punishment, their Crime being only a ridiculous
Devotion. The Great and Venerable Mufti will soon decide the Business; yet I
would fain know the Manner.

I shall now impart to thee an Account of a Visit which I gave a Solitary in my
Travels into Germany, who spent his Days far from the Commerce of the World, in
a little Hermitage, about fifteen Miles distance from Vienna. This man, who is
now very Old, has past forty Years of his Life in great Austerity, doing every
thing our Famous Santons are celebrated for; and thou shall know what moved him
to this severe Penance, and to retire after this manner. It Is said, That in his
Youth, having been threatened for some Misdemeanour with Imprisonment, he hid
himself in the House of a Faithful Friend, lying in a Barrel covered over with
Straw, where was brought him privately his Diet. Whilst he thus lay concealed
in the Vessel, a certain Person went up into the Garret, his Prison, with his
Hosts Sister; when these two Persons thinking themselves alone, came to such
Familiarities as much scandalized this new Diogenes, who saw all that past,
through the Crevices of this Tub; and being not able to contain his
Resentments, he thus passionately brake out, God sees you, you Wretches, and
Man too. In a Word, his Indignation was so great, that the Tub or Barrel was
overthrown; with the Noise of which, and his scrambling up, the Two Lovers were
so afrighted, that the Gallant for haste broke his Neck down Stairs, and the
Nymph lay dead in a Swoon on the place. This strange Surprise to all,
especially the Sight of so Filthy and Tragical a Spectacle, so affected this
young Man, as made him retire from the World into the Solitude, where he now
remains. He lives only on Bread and Water; and the Aversion which he has
conceived on this occasion, to Women, is so great, that there is none dares
appear before him. There were two who had the Curiosity of seeing this Hermit,
in Men's Clothes, but they soon repented of their Visit; for this Solitary full
of Rage and Indignation, thus welcomed them; Get you gone, you Demons, fallen
from Heaven for Men's Destruction; I know very well what you are, and cannot
behold you without Horror. He makes excellent Exhortations to young Men who
visit him, and having showed them the Care they ought to take to live with
Purity, and rule their Passions, to which corrupt Nature renders them subject;
he also exhorts them to hold a Glass before their Faces when seized with Anger,
or when carried forth to the Commission of any Brutish or unseemly Action.

My Letter is longer than I intended; receive, as a Mark of my Friendship, the
long time I have entertained my self with thee, when I thought at first to
speak all in two Words. Give this Letter, directed to thee, into Zelim's own
Hands; it contains things which concern his Life. As to what remains, Love ever
thy Faithful Mahmut, whilst I shall pray the Sovereign of the greatest
Monarchs, as well as other Men, that he would, after this Life give us Eternal
Felicity, and the Grace to appear Innocent before his dreadful Tribunal, at
which all Men shall be Judged.

Paris, 28th. of the Third Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER V.
To Zelim of Rhodes, Captain of a Gally.
MEhemet, Page of the Seraglio, will deliver, or cause to be delivered to thee,
this Letter, which is written to thee by Mahmut, Slave and Faithful Minister of
the Great Sultan, the Invincible and Happy Amurath, who commands me to serve
him in these Parts. There is no necessity of my sending the Picture of a Man,
who sets forth from Leghorn for Constantinople, with a design to kill thee.
Thou may easily know him, seeing he has been Six Years a Slave in thy Gally.
Adonai the Jew sent me this Advice from Genoa, so important for thy Life;
adding, he set out with his Brother, being resolved to perish, or be revenged
of a great Injury which thou have done him.

He has filled Italy with Discourses of thy Cruelties. He affirms, That having
tried all Ways to make him a Turk, seeing neither Presents not Promises could
persuade him, thou have made him suffer the most cruel Torments a Man can
undergo; and, that being laid fast asleep, by a Potion which thou causedst him
to take, thou have made him be castrated. The Weapons he bears to rid himself
of thee, will strike thee without Noise, so that thou need be much on thy
Guard. He hides that which is to do the Business, in a little Prayer Book.
Revenge, which does usually make Men industrious, has put him upon concealing
in this Manual, a little poisoned Steel Dart, which is enclosed with such great
Art in the Leather that covers it, that it is shot thence as from a Bow, and
strikes with such Violence and Swiftness, that the Stroke cannot be avoided, nor
scarcely felt by him that receives it, it causing not one drop of Blood to
follow, nor Wound to be seen; so delicately tempered is the Mortal Weapon, that
the Man must unavoidably dye, whom it hits.

I do not doubt, but this revengeful Spirit, will cunningly conceal himself, so
that 'twill be hard to discover him. But having had this Advice, it belongs to
thee to take care of thy self. And in the mean time, correct this cruel and
severe Temper of thine. Thou command a Gally manned with Slaves, who live at
thy Charge; thou reckonest amongst thy Riches Three Hundred Christians, who
dress thy Gardens, and serve thee at Sea; and thou have never remembered, they
are Men which may save, or take away thy Life; and that ranging the Seas as
thou do, it is possible thou may meet with the same Fortune, and be made a
Slave thy self. Thou have never considered, that Death is more supportable than
Slavery, and that those that despise their own Lives, are Masters of thine. God
preserve thee, and incline thine Heart to use gently thy Slaves, who are so
useful to thee. Follow my Advice; thou have Three Hundred Enemies in thine
House, do what in thee lies to gain their Love. Learn this of a Famous Roman,
who made his Slaves born in his House, to be nursed with the same Milk his
Children were. If thou art not for such an Indulgence, at least cease to be
Cruel, otherwise thou will be more a Slave than those that serve thee. If thou will not spare these People in Love to them, pity their Condition, and spare
them in Love to thy self; whereby thou will live in so great Tranquillity, as
cannot be imagined. The Holy Prophet guard thee from the Danger threatened thee,
and destroy this rash Christian, who would assassinate thee.

Paris, 28th. of the 3d Moon, of the Year. 1639.
LETTER VI.
To the Invincible Vizir Azim, at the Camp before Babylon.
THere are various Discourses here of the Grand Seignior's Warlike
Preparations. And it is common for People to confound here, the Ancient Babylon,
with Susa and Bagdet; but this is no great matter. It Is certain, all the
Infidels Wishes are in thy Favor; for they desire to see thee Conqueror, not
only of Babylon, but all the East; that Amurath may be the longer in his Return
to Greece, and choose a place far distant from the Seat of his Empire. It Is
discoursed in this Court, as if the Invincible Sultan carries along with him to
this War, Four Hundred Thousand Foot, an Hundred and Fifty Thousand Horse, and
Two Hundred Bassa's, and moreover Twelve Princes Tributary to the Port. It Is
also said, Bagdet is a Place not to be won by Force; that a River, the swiftest
in the World, runs through the midst of it; and, that the place has an Hundred
Gates of Brass, and its Walls, which are very high, be defended by three
Hundred Pieces of Cannon; That the Persian Forces are great enough to tire out
the Ottoman Army, and that the example of Cha Abbas, Father to the Sophy, who
now reigns over the Persians, will increase their Valor and Obstinacy, to
suffer the greatest Extremities, rather than to think of a Surrender. The rash
Resolution of this King Abbas, in the last Siege of this Great City, is so
cried up, and magnifyed here, that scarce is there any Room left for the
Praises of Amurath. This Prince's passing and repassing more than once, in a
Bark, in the Sight of Two Hundred Thousand Turks, to advertize in Person, the
besieged of the condition of Affairs, and to give them a fresh Courage,
assuring them they should be soon succored, and having at the same time about
him wherewith to hinder him from falling alive or dead into the Hands of his
Enemies; was an Action which they think is above all Elogium's, and appears to
them greater than Story could ever parallel. It Is said, That this King carried
in his Bark two great Stones fastened to one and the same Cord, to put them on
his Neck to sink himself into the River, which was of an unfathomable Depth, in
case he was discovered. To which they add, That Amurath, who can never have his
Fill of Blood, will recompense thy Services in the same manner he did thy
Predecessors.

These Infidels, hold moreover other Discourses, which are very impertinent,
confounding such things as are true, with false; as they do the Justice and
Liberality of the Generous and ever Invincible Sultan, with the Cruelty and
Avarice wherewith they reproach him. It Is said likewise, That the Sequins which
he distributed the Day whereon he was proclaimed Emperor, were not by one half
of the value which was set upon them; That he caused Mehemet, Bassa of Caire to
be strangled, for no other Reason but to become Master of his Wealth. It Is
further added, That this Prince having had advice that a Gally was taken,
having Seventy Five considerable. Officers belonging to the Port on Board,
whilst he was diverting himself in a Pleasure-House at the Entrance into Asia;
he said by way of Jest, Let Us drink the Health of these Stout Blades. It Is
moreover said, That having given his Word, and promised a secure Passage to the
brave Facardin, an Arabian Prince, he caused him to be stabbed in a thousand
places in his Sight. But what do not they say of his destroying the Mufti, and
Cyril, the Greek Patriarch? In fine, they set forth Amurath as a Sacrilegious
Wretch, that despises his own Religion, an Heretic and Enemy to our Holy
Prophet. They relate the particulars of Cyril's Death, which makes me doubt
there be Traitors at the Port, who advertise the Infidels of the most secret
Matters which pass there. Some say, his Eloquence rendered him suspected to
Amurath, and that he said these Words when he was led to the Castle of Seven
Towers, Could I speak but once to our great Emperor, he will be forced to love
me, or repent. And it is said, That having voyaged into England, he had learnt
Magic there. Many People believed he would introduce Novelties in Religion,
and for this End held strict Correspondences with the Latinised Monks; and it is
known here, that when his Sentence was pronounced, he said, He would rise again
to torment the Emperor, and perplex his Affairs. The French haivng blamed what
I now mentioned, do extremely praise the Moderation of Amurath, when he took
the Persian Spy, who slid into his Camp in Turkish Habit, and crowded amongst
the True Faithful; for he caressed him, and sent him back with Rich Presents.
They also admire the Patience of this Prince, in only condemning to the Galleys
the Thirty Indian Pilgrims, who occasioned his Fall from his Horse in the
Capital City of his Kingdom: For the Horse was affrighted at the Apparel of
these Men, and the strange Figure they made, when they threw themselves on the
Ground to beg Money of him; but they at the same time charge this Emperor with
Brutishness, for killing with his own hand immediately the Horse that threw him
down. The Discourses of this Nature, however injurious they are, be not of
great Importance. But if I be not mistaken, there is something carrying on
against us with the Republic of Venice. I observe, its Ambassador since the
Loss we have made of Fifteen Galleys at Valentia, has frequent and secret
Conferences with the King and Cardinal de Richlieu. As it is not doubted but
that the Ottoman Empire will be revenged of so deep an Injury, so it is also
judged, that the Venetians will use their utmost Endeavors to unite into a
Confederacy the Christian Princes, and it is to be feared lest they take the
Time, when the Emperor is employed in the Seige of Babylon, to form some
Enterprise, or put themselves into a Condition wherein they cannot be attacked.
I shall carefully observe all the Motions of the Venetian Ambassador, and if
need requires, dispatch an express Messenger to the Kaimakan. I adore thy
Grandeur, buried in the Dust of thy Feet.

Paris, 10th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER VII.
To the same.
THe Courier not parting till the Morrow, I make use of this short Time to
write again to thee. Brizac, as I have already given Advice, was taken by the
Forces of France and Swedeland; and the Duke of Wimar, who commands the Army,
brags, that being become Master of this Place, which has always been besieged
in Vain, he shall take several others, there being none which henceforward can
resist him.

The Marshall de Bannier, one of the Generals of the Swedish Armies, wearied
out the Imperialists in Pomerania with continual Alarms. He took Gratz, a
considerable place, and has beaten Galas, one of the Emperor of Germany's
Generals. But Fortune having changed her Countenance, has favored the Emperor
against the Troops of the Palatin, who is taken Prisoner with Prince Robert his
Brother, having been like to be drowned in the River of Wezer, whereinto he was
drawn in his Coach by his Horses, who took Fright at the noise of the Cannon:
And these unfortunate Princes, have lost in this occasion, with their Liberty,
whatever was most precious to them. The Swedes have in the mean time increased
their Strength, by the Conjunction of new Troops. They make frequent Incursions
on the Imperialists, and it is thought this War will last a considerable Time,
by the great Preparations which are made on all Hands, and especially by the
French, to whom it seems important that it should not end speedily.

There is News from Italy, That a Discovery has been made in Piemont, of new
Cabals of the Princes of the House of Savoy, who designed to put by the
Duchess from her Regency, and make themselves Master of the Government, during
the Minority of the young Duke. There is a Cardinal of this Name, an ambitious
Man, a great Lover of War, and given to Liberality. He would fain have the
chief Share in the Government, and be the Master of his Nephews Fortune. This
Cardinal lay concealed in the State of Genoa, being clothed in an Habit little
becoming his Character, and whence he sent his Orders, for the Execution of
whatever he had concerted with his Partisans; but the Conspiracy got Wind, and
proved a Bloody Tragedy to his Accomplices. It Is said, that this Prince having
twice disguised himself in the Habit of a Peasant, had entered with a Bag of
Fruit on his Back, into one of the most considerable Towns of Piemont, to give
by his Presence more Heat to his Party; and that with a greater Boldness he had
entered into Turin, in the Habit of a Capuchin, with a long thick Beard, and
abode there two Days; not in design of ridding himself of the Prince, or his
Mother, but to become Master both of one and the other, to govern the State
alone. But the Conspiracy having been discovered, and the Accomplices seized;
Fourscore of them were put to Death by the Common Hangman, and he escaped by a
new Stratagem. A Secretary of State of Savoy is to be reckoned amongst this
Number. Another Cardinal, who commands the Army of France, sent to the
Assistance of the Duke and Duchess, had also put to Death the Governor of
Cazal, accused of Treason, though he was not fully convicted of it.

It Is Written from Rome, That two Ambassadors from the King of Hungary, who is
lately Elected Emperor of Germany, had made a magnificent Entrance into that
great City, clad after the Hungarian manner with Vests, called here a la
barbaresque; That, they had above an Hundred Horse, whose Harness were of Gold,
and their Shoes of Silver, and 'twas especially observed, that all the Foreign
Ministers in that Court, had sent their Retinue to accompany them in their
Entrance, that it might appear more Magnificent; and, that these two
Ambassadors of the new Emperor, being arrived in the Presence of the
Infidel's Mufti, whom they call the Pope, they told him, their Prince would
continue to render him the Obedience which his Father Ferdinand, now deceased,
paid him, and that he recommended to his Holiness his Person, his House, and
his State, as a new Emperor, elected by the Suffrages of the Princes Electors
of the Empire.

Observe, Magnanimous Vizir, the Authority of this Mufti: those who are so
audacious, as to resist the Mussulmen, will yet abase themselves at his Feet,
which they really kiss before they open their Mouths to speak to him. The
greatest Christian Princes are wont to choose from amongst the most
considerable Persons of their State, the Ambassadors which they send with great
Expense, to pay their Homage to this Supreme Head of their Church. Moreover,
these Ambassadors of the New Caesar, have assured the Pope, as from him, that
he will never cease to make War with the Enemies of the Christian Faith; and
it is said, they received this Answer:

That, he ever respected the King of Hungary, the late Elected Emperor, as his
Son, to whom he would never be wanting in Council, and all other necessary
Assistances; and exhorted him, to employ his Victorious Arms against the
Enemies of the Cross; and that; on his side, he would employ the Succors of his
Prayers, that the Church should open her Treasures by granting Indulgences; and
that, he would besides this, give Supplies of Men and Money.

People who are idle, amuse themselves with Discourses on future Events, and
those that consult the Stars to penetrate into what is to come, have made a
Marriage between the Dauphin of France, a Prince born some Months since, and
the Infanta of Spain, lately come into the World. It Is true, that at the moment
this Princess saw the Light, the King of Spain and the Grandees of the Kingdom,
tried who should outdo one another in Feastings, to solemnize this Birth: And
the like was done in France, for that of the Dauphin; both being accompanied
with extraordiary Magnificence, and prodigious Liberalities.

The Catholic King has given the Quality of Grandee to the Duke of Modena, who
was Godfather to the Infanta, and has declared him Generalissimo of the Four
Seas, with a Pension of Twenty Thousand Sequins of Gold. He has moreover made
magnificent Presents to the Duchess his Wife, esteemed at an Hundred Thousand
Crowns; and besides, made Knights of the Order of St. James, several Gentlemen
of this Princes Court.

The Elector of Brandenburg, has also given several splendid Entertainments in
his House and State for the Marriage consummated with the Duke of Saxony's Son;
and whilst I am writing, I am told, there is a Son born to this King of
Hungary, now Emperor of Germany. But whilst these Rejoycings are in several
parts of Europe, an unforeseen Tempest has ruined whole Countries in Germany;
the Damage done thereby in Franconia, and near Francfort, is incredible: And it
lackt but little, but this same King of Hungary, now mentioned, being at the
hunting of a Boar, had been slain through a Whirlwind; which having pulled up a
great Oak by the Roots, of prodigious Greatness, fell so near this Prince, that
he received some slight Hurt by a Branch of it.

I pray Heavens, that all the Wisdom of our Holy Prophet, and the Blessing of
the Great God be always upon thee, and in thee, and ever augment thy Strength
and good Fortune, to the Ruin of these Persian Heretics, whose Country I hope
will be subjected by thy Sword to our Dread Emperor.

Paris, 10th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year, 1639.
LETTER VIII.
To Breredin, Superior of the Dervices, in the Convent of Cogny in Natolia.
THou art happy in living long and holily too; I cannot choose but reflect with
Regret on thy great Age, considering how infirm I am. After Fifteen Days
Illness, my Strength quite failed me, so that necessitated I was to look out
for a Physician; for I cannot easily commit my self to the hands of those of
this Country, who kill such as trust them, in the same manner as if they were
their Enemies. When I discourse these Doctors about the State of my Health,
they tell me I am in eminent Danger, and that my Cure is hazardous. In writing
thus, think not I rave, for I speak the pure Truth. They will certainly kill
me, should I discover to them under what Climat I am born; whereas, if I tell
them I am of Moldavia, they may chance to do me good; though that Country Air
is very different from that of Arabia, where I first drew my Breath. To how
many Miseries is the Life of Man subject, especially mine, when I cannot speak
the Truth, though it be to save my Life? Pray for me, Holy Dervis; and if you
hear no more from me, believe Mahmut is dead. Pardon likewise the Offenses I
have given thee, which yet have been against my Will. Adieu; we shall see one
another in God, with God, and in the Bosom of God.

Paris, 12th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER IX.
To Ocumiche his Mother at Scios.
PArdon me my dear Mother, if I write last to thee; pardon me moreover, if I
have not written to thee, to pay thee the marks of my Duty, whilst I was in
Health; and let me seek after thee, when perhaps in seeking for me, thou will
no longer find me. I am ready to dye; afflict not thy self, if God calls me to
him; though I am amongst Infidels, yet Death holds his Empire here, as in other
places. The worst News I can tell thee is, That commonly those who desire to
live longest, are soonest taken away; and I am not ashamed to tell thee, I am
one of that Number. I cannot willingly, as yet, leave this lower World. O
unhappy Life! O unwelcom Death! What Apprehensions have I not? And with what
Terrors am I not struck, since I have lived amongst the Christians? They preach
against our Alcoran, and we declaim against their Gospel. They affirm that
Mahomet was a great Impostor; and we worship him. They believe they only know
the Truth, that they be the only Saints, the Elect, and chosen of God; what
then will become of us, if we be wedded to Errors, and our Alcoran be only a
parcel of Lies?

I have neither good nor bad News of thee, no more than of thy new Spouse: God
grant the merry Greek thou art married to, have the Vices of thy first Husband,
my Father. Thou know my meaning. He called himself Vicious, because he hated
the Virtues of the Vulgar.

I thank thee not for my Life, for that is what thou least thought of, when
thou becamest big with me. But if thou expectest some Recompense for suckling
me at thy own Breasts, expect only Words of Thanks from a poor Slave who
possesses nothing. Love and Hate, all the Time of thy Life; this is the
greatest Inheritance can be expected, from a Son who is just a dying. Engrave
these Words in thy Heart: Love ever what is honest, and hate always what is
contrary to it. Thus will these different Passions be settled on their proper
Objects.

If my Brother Pesteli be still alive, give him my Love with an innocent Kiss,
and a Touch in the Hand. Our Great Prophet protect and sustain thy Age with the
Staff of Mount Liban, and obtain for thee from the Mercy of the most High, That
thou may enjoy thy Senses to the last Hour of thy Life. Adieu.

LETTER X.
To Pestelihali, his Brother.
BElieving my Life is near its End, I therefore with all imaginable Eagerness
write to thee, in the third place, although indeed thou hold the first in my
Heart. We shall see one another, Dear Pesteli, in that World, where every one
receives according to his Deserts. When I arrived in this great Town, I was
astonished at the Confusion I met there, but I received no other Hurt. Although
the Weather be very inconstant, yet the Air is good, and Provisions are
wholesome, and agreeable to the Taste; the Water of the Seine is sweet and clear;
the Men are good Company, and the Women have done me no Harm; the King has not
ill used me; Cardinal Richlieu, his chief Minister, does not hinder me from
living after my own Fashion; our Great Emperor is not displeased with me, yet
my Distemper is impetuous; a sad Faintness has seized my Heart, and I begin to
fall into such a languishing Condition, as makes me despair of Health. If thou
still conservest any Affection for me, read this Letter with Compassion: Forget
the ill Offices I may have done thee; and if I parted without discovering to
thee the Occasion, give God Thanks for the Ability he has given me, of
sacrificing the Tenderness which I have for so good a Brother, to the Obedience
which I owe to the Emperors Commands.

Our Mother will salute thee as from me, in giving thee a Kiss; receive it as
coming from me Keep thy Gravity, and be honest in Asia as well as Europe; and
if thou go to Africa; suffer not thy self to be corrupted by ill Examples.
It Is not without Tears I write thee this Letter; but lament not if I dye,
neither rejoice if I escape; for I shall be thereby no less mortal; and that
Tribute which I do not pay to day, we both shall pay, with all other Men, on a
certain time. Prepare to part willingly; study more how thou shall dye, than
how thou shall live; and if thou would live till thou art Old, live as if
thou were to dye when thou art Young.

The Great God preserve thee in the perfect Use of thy Understanding, and guide
thee into all Truth; and if thou desire to be the best Captain and Commander
in the World, learn to conquer thy self. Adieu.

Paris, 12th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year, 1639.
LETTER XI.
To Dgnet Oglou.
SHould I tell thee I am in Health, I shall write an untruth; for I am really
out of order, and expect a Fit of Sickness; which I wish 'twere in my Power to
avoid, though it may prove short and mortal. An Hectic Fever puts me often in
mind, how frail and brittle a thing is Man; and that he ought in Multiplicity
of Business, in Times of Prosperity as well as Adversity, to think of
dislodging hence. The Bread I eat has no Relish; Solitude appears dismal to me,
and Company wearies me; for I cannot attend to what is discoursed, and yet I do
not like they should say nothing; there is nothing pleases me but Drink, yet all
the Sea will not quench my Thirst. I am restless in Bed, and find my self more
tired thereby, than if I sat up; and that which I loved Yesterday, I hate to
day. Thou know how I loved Books, this Humor is quite changed. If the Sun
shines into my Chamber, I as soon shut my Windows, being not able to endure it;
and having remained a Minute in Obscurity, I am impatient for the Light. Paris,
where one may say Strangers come from all parts, to see the Varieties and
Diversions there to be met with, appears to me now an Hospital of Fools: I long
for nothing more than Constantinople, and to be with my Friends, imagining I
shall find ease in their Company. And this is the unhappy Condition of thy
Friend, without hope of seeing any more Turbans and Musselmen. I loath as much
the sight of an ignorant Physician, as the Emperor Severus did a corrupt Judge,
and I look on a little Valet that serves me, as a necessary Evil: Yet I Will a
little divert thee, maugre the Illness which has seized me. It Is not above Six
Months since I entertained this Enemy in my House, which is a French Valet, who
makes himself a Fool; of a Pigmy's Stature, yet a Giant in Roguery; he is clad
like the Graces, being half naked, and wears Buskins like the Poetical
Divinities; his ordinary Function is to sweep every day my Chamber, which yet
is as nasty as Augis his Stable; when I am awake he is asleep, and he is always
awake when I am asleep; for this Thirteen Years that he has seen the Light, he
cannot remember he has been two Hours without eating: When he eats not openly
and before Folks, lest he should shame me; he will yet be sure to keep his
Chaps a going, on something in Corners. When I went abroad, I was forced to
follow him; and now that I keep my Bed, it is hard to judge which of us two is
the Master, for he never parts with his Hat from his Head. He Is more ready to
pull off my Clothes, than to put them on; which makes me chiefly careful of him
at such times, that he leaves me not stark naked. He Is moreover a Politician,
as much as any Florentin: When he is to do any good Office, he falls into the
Spanish Pace, but to perfect a bad one, he is as nimble as Caesar was in the
quickest of his Expeditions; whence it is that I am a Debtor to my own Arm and
Hand for the Service I draw from him, being like certain Drugs which never
yield an Odor till well beaten: As to his Religion, a Man would imagine he held
the Metempsycosis, so carefully does he preserve the Lice that eat him, lest in
killing them he act contrary to the Precepts of Pythagoras. He is moreover
besides an irreconcilable Enemy to all Neatness, to Water, and to Truth; and he
is more stinking than a Synagogue, drunker than a Swiss, and a greater Liar
than any Oracle. In the mean time my Illness increases, and my Domestic Enemy
is so well, that he assuredly waits my Death, to live more Honorably on my
Spoils. I differ much this Day from what I was Yesterday; and I know not
whether I shall not to morrow go to my long Home. Pray the Immortal for me, and
remember we were once in Slavery together. Should I escape, I shall have the
Joy of never seeing thee in the sad condition I am; and if cannot escape Death
at this time, I shall have the satisfaction of suffering it before thee.
However, believe I do not despair, though I much complain. I cease writing to
thee, but I Will never cease loving thee. Mahmut embraces thee in this Country of
Infid^ls, having thee always in his Heart, and praying for thee continually.

Paris, 12th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year, 1639.
LETTER XII.
To the Kaimakan.
THe King of France has a Dwarf called Osmin, born in a Village of the Morea,
and carried away in his Infancy into Italy by Pirates. He was bought by a
Spanish- Lord, who afterward made a Present of him to this King, with such a
boon Grace, as entitles Magnificence to the smallest things, after the manner
of that Nation. The Spaniard having presented his Dwarf, said no more, the
Dwarf making this following Discourse:

Sir, I am a Christian, although my Parents be Turks. If thou willingly
receivest me for thy Slave, I receive thee yet more willingly for my Master,
being a just and merciful Prince: But I am obliged to tell thee, That if thou will behave thy self like a Master, whose Liberality is guided by Prudence,
thou will never do me any Hurt, nor ever do me any great Good. Should thou
give me Opportunities of acquiring Riches, and throw open the Gate of Honors
to me: I shall thereby, perhaps, become vicious and insolent. Bestow only one
thing on me, which will not be afterward in thy Power to take away; Give me
good Education, and let a Man of Learning take the Charge of me, by which means
I shall be revenged of Nature, in making me but an Atome of a Man; and perhaps
make thy Courtiers, one day, repent of their present Laughter at me.

Osmin has behaved himself so well, and gained such Credit, by the Subtilty of
his Wit, and Readiness of his Answers, that he is at present one of the Courts
choicest Entertainments, and the Scourge of Debauched People. Coming one day to
divert and comfort me in my Illness, he told me, That being in private
Discourse, with one of the Women belonging to a Lady of the first Rank; he was
forced to conceal himself speedily behind the Hanging, to prevent being
surprised in the Chamber, where this Lady unexpectedly entered with the Venetian
Ambassador, who ordinarily resides in this Court, and where he heard the
following Discourse from this Ministers own Mouth:

Madam, I shall willingly discover to you now that we are alone, the Intentions
of the Republic I serve, touching the Turkish Affairs, provided you promise me
to do me two different good Turns. It Is absolutely necessary, we make War with
these Barbarians, before they declare it against us. The Ottoman Family is like
the Mathematical Compass, which enlarges its self the more it is pressed. You
are not to be informed of the famous Victory gained by our General Capello, who
has led in Triumph all the Galleys of Africa; but though Amurath be employed on
the Frontiers of Persia, in the Siege of a most important Place, yet does he
already threaten to be revenged for the Defeat of these Barbarians. The
Ministers of the Port do also press him to show his Resentment; and we
certainly know by secret Relations from the Turkish Camp lying before Babylon,
that the Grand Seignior has said in full Council, That he will himself throw
the first Fire-ball into our Arsenal. That, Madam, which lies in your Power,
is, to persuade the King to engage in the Common Cause, and for this End make
up a Peace with his Enemies, that he may join his Naval Forces with Ours. On
the other Hand, we could wish you would offer the Contrary to the Cardinal
Richlieu; because this Minister usually slighting Women's Counsels, ^ill come to
our Purpose, through his obstinate Humor ^f contradicting you: And I do not
doubt but this Ar^^fice will succeed, if you persuade him; the King is re^^lved
not to give us any Assistance. There runs a Re^^rt, as if our Bailio has been
laid hold on at Con^^antinople, and retained Prisoner in the Castle of
Se^en-Towers, by the Order of the Kaimacan. And it is ^dded, that the Grand
Seignior offers a Peace to ^he Persians, to return speedily into Europe; that
^aving no Diversion on that side, he may turn all his ^orces against the
Republic.

The Pope promises much, and we need not fear but ^e will keep his Word, being
the Person most interessed ^n our Affairs. He will furnish Money, join his
Gal^^ys to those of the Republic, and moreover send us ^^veral stout Men. The
King of Spain promises us ^orty Galleys, with all Necessaries, together with
Fifty ^essels of War. The Great Duke of Tuscany, will ^ssist us with eight
Vessels well set out, and six Galleys ^ell Armed. The King of Poland promises
to send unto the Infidels Country, an Army of fifty Thousand Cossacks; and
others shall cruise about the Levantine ^eas with their Brigantins, and
especially the Archi^elago. As to what respects the Republic, the chief
^amilies in Venice have already proffered to set out, and entertain at their
own Charge a Vessel, till the War be ended; and all the great Castles and Towns
on ^he firm Land, freely offer to furnish the Republic ^ith Fifty Thousand
Ducats a Month. This Kingdom which is so full of Men, amongst which there are
so many good Officers, which are rich in Money, and at ^resent so considerable
at Sea) must not only not trou^le so noble and necessary a Project, in
continuing a War with Spain; but also gives its assistance, by Sup^lies of Men,
Money, and Vessels. If you can, Madam, ^blige the King to enter into this
League, you will me^it an Everlasting Remembrance, and have an hundred thousand
Crown, which lie ready for you at Venice, to be paid when and where you please.

This is God's Cause, the Occasion is favorable, an^ all things seem in a
readiness. You may immortaliz^ your Name, and with your Beauty, your Credit an^
Eloquence, give good grounds of Hope to Christendom of Success, by obtaining
the Assistance of the most puissant of the Christian Monarchs.

This is what the Dwarf heard, and what he entrusted me with since; were I in a
condition, Illustrious Kaimakan, to relate particularly the Li^^ of Osmin, I am
persuaded thou would give entir^ Credit, to the Discourse he made me.

Osmin is born a Turk, he loves me dearly, an^ has a certain Sympathy with me,
which obliges hi^ to seek me often, and entrust me with all the Adventures of
his Life; treating me not only as (...) Friend, but living with me, as if I
were his Brother.

There being some days, since I languished in Bed* tormented with a Distemper,
which at its Beginning threatened me with vexatious Consequence^ and which
causes me to droop and languish; tho^ wilt pardon me, if I reason not much on
an Adventure so extraordinary. Should God restore m^ to my Health, I shall
double my Care and Diligence, in observing the Measures of this Cour^ Order by
thy Prudence and Valor, that the Preparations of these Infidels against the
formidable Monarchy of the true Believers, may vanish into Smoke: And the great
Sovereign of the Lower an^ Upper World grant thee perfect Health; which (...)
sought in vain by his Highnesses Slave, and the Servant Mahmut.

Paris, 12th. of the Fourth Moon, of the Year 1639.
LETTER XIII.
To Isouf his Kinsman.
Notwithstanding my Weakness, I force my self to write thee this Letter, to
thee with whom (...) am engaged by Interest, as well as by Blood. My Distemper
lies so heavy upon me, that there remains only the time to speak two Words of
Devo^ion to thee. Isouf, thou oughtst toward the End of ^he Moon in May, to go
to Mecha; carry me along with thee, though I am at this distance. I entreat
^hee, when thou shall arrive with the Caravan of Pilgrims, at the Mountain of
Arafat, to offer there (...) Sacrifice in my Name; immolate a Sheep in
commemoration of Abraham: And if thou ar^ivest in Health at the Holy Mosque,
and in full ^trength, offer devoutly my Prayers to our Great Prophet. I ask not
Honors of Mahomet, no more ^han Riches; I only beg, that Heaven would re^tore
me what I have lost; it is Health I desire, whereby I may serve our great
Emperor, and live more Holy than I have done. But before thy Departure,
distribute a good Dole to the Poor, and if ^hou want Money, go and find Dgnet
Oglou; borrow of him in my Name seven hundred and fifty Aspers, which thou
shall immediately deal out to those that have most need.

Thou know how greatly the Works of Charity are recommended to us; they
multiply the Bedictions of Heaven, and increase our Wealth. I neither do, nor
can do this in the infidels Country; thou know my Inability, speedily succor
me in the Necessity I am of doing Good, and let nothing hinder thee, no
Argument of good Husbandry nor Superstition. If thou neglect my Prayer, the
Shame of the Fault will lie at thy Door; and thou alone shall bear the
Iniquity, if thou executest not the Will of a dying Man, especially having the
Power. I forgot what I had of greatest Importance to tell thee, and which is
the most Holy, and aimed at to obtain with the greatest Earnestness. Endeavor
to get for me a little Piece of the Cloth, wherewith the Temple of Mecha is
every year hung, and which the Pilgrims tear in pieces to have each of them a
part; and send as soon as thou can this Holy Relick in a little Silver Box to
Carcoa at Vienna, who will take care I receive it. If thou be a good
Mussulman, give speedy Help to a Disciple of the same Law; and if thou be a
real Kinsman, assist me, love me, and take on thee my Defense when necessary. I
embrace thee with all my Heart, and Strength; and though I believe my self very
near Death, yet I wish thee a long and happy Life.

Paris, 12th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year, 1639.
LETTER XIV.
To the Invincible Vizir Azem, at Constantinople.
IF thou be the same that commanded the Army of the true Believers before
Babylon, I write to thee without congratulating thy Resurrection. The People at
Paris have killed thee by their Discourses because they wished thy Death, and
it is generally said thou wast strangled by four Mutes. But if (...) write to
another, raised to the chief Dignity of the Empire, I pray the Great God who
will one da^ judge all Men, that he will long continue thee in Amurath's
Service, ever happy, and always attended with Victory; and give thee better
Fortune than all the other Vizirs, who have governed in the vast Empire of the
Mussulmen.

I have been sick during the space of Eighteen Moons, and my Health is not yet
fully restored: I have lived all that time, in continual expectation of Death,
and so many odd things have happened in my Sickness, that I should fall into it
again, should thou oblige me to make the Recital of them.

The Charity of the Christian Dervices has been very great toward me, having
neglected nothing which might be any ways serviceable to my happy Departure.
The gravest of them have often attended me with Discourses of the Immortality
of the Soul, of Hell, their Purgatory, Paradise, and the Merits and Indulgences
of the Church. Several Physicians have come to see me, and used their utmost
Skill to keep me alive, and imagine I owe my Life to them; but if it be so, they
have paid themselves for their Care, by drawing so much Blood out of me,
having, I think, quite emptyed my Veins, to resist, said they, the several
Distempers which assaulted me, and to take from me the Turkish Fever which I
nourished; for I assuredly brought it from Constantinople.

The greatest Sin I committed during the Course of so long a Sickness, was the
pretending to confess my self to a Captain Dervis, as the Christians do in the
principal Feasts, and when they are ready to dye. I used this Ceremony but
once, and I do not think I have committed Sacrilege, for I have told no Truth;
and if I may speak freely to thee, Invincible Vizir, hear what a pleasant
Penance was enjoined me, for an imaginary Crime of which I accused my self. I
confessed I hindered, by an Apology I had made, a Mohammedan from embracing the
Law of Jesus; and the Dervis said to me in a Passion, You are not then a
Catholic: I am, answered I, and only dissuaded this Barbarian on Account, I
had observed it seldom happened, That a Turk wh^^ changed his Law, came to a
good End; and that those who cease to be Musselmen, seldom prove any other^ but
bad Christians. Your Reasoning is also as false, replied sharply the Monk, as
the Design you have had is bad; for you never ought to hinder any thing which
is good, for the fear you may have that in the End it may cease to be so. And I
enjoin you for P^nance, to scrape out with such Exactness, all the Characters
of your Apology, that there remain no mark of it, so that the Paper become as
clean and fair, as if there had been nothing written on it, that so black and
detestable a Discourse be entirely defaced by the Pain^ which you shall take to
hinder the remaining of any Trace or Mark: After which, you shall pray to God
as long as you live, that he would destroy the Temple at Mecha, so famous by
the Impieties committed there, and enlighten the Eyes of the blind Mahometans.
But I am constrained to stop here, being so feeble, and indisposed, that I have
not the Strength to write that I am now recovering.

The Mars which has made Germany tremble, I mean the Duke of Wimar, is in fine
dead at 36 Years of Age, and buried in the same Field wherein he gathered his
last Laurels, that is to say, at Brizac. I shall distinctly inform the Kaimakan
of whatever has happened during my Sickness, that I may not give thee the trouble
to read the Relation of several Adventures, which have been already published
in the World, whilst thou art employed in the great Affairs of the Empire. As
soon as I am able, I shall, if possible, do with greater Diligence the Offices
of my Place, and henceforward punctually advertise thee of the Cabals,
Intrigues and Designs of the Nazareens, that thou may not be unprovided
against all the Attempts of the Infidels.

I entreat the Being of Beings, to accompany thy Life with all the Happiness
thou can desire on Earth, and that thou may never undertake any thing for
the good of the Empire, and its Religion, without Success.

Paris, 15th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year, 1640.
LETTER XV.
To the Kaimakan.
THou were but little mistaken when thou thoughtest I was dead. I have been so
near the Grave, that I may have received four of thy Letters, without being
able to read them; so far was I from the power of answering them. I have been
sick a whole year and six months, out of the Commerce of the Living, and
without receiving any Consolation from any one; abandoned to Physic, and become
the Prey of the Physicians, and in short, out of hope of ever recovering; but
the day wherein I am to be judged is not yet come. I am, in fine, still alive,
and shall soon, I hope, be well again, if thou to o'rewhelm me, chargest not my
long Malady as a Crime upon me, and suspectest me not guilty of Infidelty.

I have informed my self within these few days, of several Events which have
happened during the Course of several Moons, which I shall relate to thee, if I
can, in this Letter, to make amends for the time I have lost. But in so few
words, as will occasion thee to think, I am still sick; for which thou must not
blame me, seeing thou love Brevity.

France, during the time I have not writ to thee* has given me marks of its
Power and Policy. Fou^ places have been besieged in the year 1639. whos^
Success have not been equal. The French have me with disadvantage before
Thionville, by the Valou^ and Conduct of Picolomini, one of the Empero^
Generals, who was born in Italy, and brought up from a Child in the Trade of
Arms, It Is said, he has attackt and vanquished his Masters Enemies, with such
speed, that one may compare his Action with that of Claudius Nero, when he
defeated Asdrub^^ who had entered Italy; He has broken the Enemie^ Army, routed
the Horse, took the Canon, kill'^ the French General, and immediately raised the
Siege; but in revenge, the same French, who were beaten before Thionville, have
made themselves Masters of Hedin, Salins, and Salse; which last was taken by
the Young Prince of Conde, who giver the marks of an extraordinary Valor, but
the Spaniards have re taken these Places, which have cost them dear. It Is said,
that the Governor left by the Prince of Conde^ here, being pressed by the
Spaniards to surrender the Place, threw out to 'em an hot white Loaf, saying,
That those who eat of this Bread, would not surrender themselves, before the
Enemies came to the time, wherein they might eat Ice.

Yet the Place was surrendered, before the Spring time was come to change the
Face of the Earth, so far were they from holding out till 'twas covered with
Snow or Ice.

This King immediately appeased the Insurrections which were made in Normandy.
But what will thou say of Casimir, the King of Poland's Brother, who being
returned a second time into France alone and disguised, was discovered and
carried Prisoner to the Castle in the Wood of Vincennes near Paris, where he is
carefully guarded.

The War has been very cruel in Italy, between the three Parties, who are
extremely animated against one another. Prince Thomas of the House of Savoy,
drove out by surprise the French from Turin; but thou will soon understand that
our Capital Enemies the Spaniards, have been beaten and entirely defeated under
Cazal, by the Count Harcourt, of the House of Lorrain.

The Spaniards and Dutch have made a great Noise in the Ocean with their
Fleets; the former came with Fourscore Vessels of War to land Fifteen Thousand
Men in Flanders; but having been met by Van Tromp, a Commander of great Courage
and Experience, there was a bloody Battle fought, which lasted long, but at
length ended in the Defeat of the Spaniards.

The Dutch have taken Thirteen Ships, and about Twenty of them have been driven
by the Weather on the Coasts of England, where they are lost, and eight others
have had the good Fortune to get into Dunkirk.

The Victory of the Dutch is complete, having lost but one Ship in the whole
Engagement, against so puissant an Enemy, and whose Subjects they were formerly.

Bear with me, Illustrious and happy Kaimakan, wanting strength to contine on
writing, though it were the Victories of Amurath which I were to relate.

I shall make known to thee on the first Opportunity, whatever shall come to my
Knowledge. In the mean time, the Creator of all thing direct thee in all thy
Ways, and prosper all thy undertakings.

Paris, 15th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year, 1640.
LETTER XVI.
To Dgnet Oglou.
I Am in a manner raised from the Dead, by reading thy Letter; there is not a
Line or Syllable, but shows the Marks of a true Heart, and a tender and real
Sympathy with my Condition: I pray Heaven, we may do nothing either of us to
lessen this Affection.

Thou informest me in thy Letter of the Departure of Isouf for Mecha: I give
thee a Thousand Thanks for the Money thou have given him, for the offering of a
Sacrifice in my Name on the Sacred Mountain, and to distribute here below the
Alms which I enjoined him. I admire thy Bounty, and the Charitable Care thou
have had of the Salvation of thy Friend Mahmut, in sending one of our Devotes
to Medina, to go the Pilgrimage, and say the Prayers for me. In a Word, I see
thy Kindness makes thee foresee and provide against all my Wants; there is no
Place or Time, wherein I receive not Marks of thy Favor.

Seeing I am so dear to thee, and loving thee so greatly as I do, let not
distance of Place, Poverty, Disgrace, Imprisonment; or any other Misfortune
extinguish, or so much as damp our mutual Affection.

I have in a manner, stole the time I write to thee: for I have nothing which
is truly mine, and I make thee a Present of a thing which I owed the Kaimakan,
for whom I ought to employ more time in writing. But let us lay aside all these
troublesome Affairs, and entertain one another with an entire Confidence and
Familiarity. Thou want not Wit, employ it in the Study of History, after
sufficient Instruction in the Matters which concern Religion. If thou will be a
Prince among other Men, separate thy self from the Crowd, by thy application to
good Authors; read much, and yet read little; read ever good Books, there being
few of them, and thus thou will read much. If thou can attain to the Knowledge
of whatever is known of Men, thou will be a kind of God amongst them; whereas
thou will be of the number of Beasts, if thou failest of acquiring the Notices
thou ought to have. I wish thou would mind more for thy Friends sake, what
passes in the Seraglio, in the Divan, and in the Prince's most secret Councils,
to know what is said there against me and for me: Good and seasonable Advice
does oftentimes hinder much Mischief, and does a great deal of good. Friendship
makes those things which are otherwise hard, very easy: He that is not ready
(says an Holy Man amongst the Christians) to suffer all things, and to lose
all, and his very Will too, for the sake of him that he loves, deserves not the
Name of a Friend.

Let us ever forget the Words mine and thine: Thy good Fortune is mine, even as
thy Disgraces are: If we thus establish our Friendship, why may we not, though
Modern Turks, compare our selves to those Ancient Greeks, who have given such
glorious Marks to the World of their Friendship? Why may we not be the
Imitators of Pelopidas and Epaminondas, who contracted so strict an Union, that
nothing could change it? Although we were not born the same Day, in the same
Climat, and in the same Town as Polistratus and Hypoclides, who were born in
the same House, at the same Hour, and lived always together, and fell sick at
the same Time, and loved equally; yet let us surpass them in Affection. Love we
one another more than Theseus and Piritohus; more than Damon and Pithias; the
former of which contracted in Arms, and the other in Studies, that strict Amity
that has rendered them so recommendable to Posterity. If thou know any Secret
whereby to restore my Appetite which I have lost, send it me. I am here
Spectator of a Million of Mouths, who eat four times a day, and consume 15000
Oxen every Week, and 15000 other Pieces of Animals, besides Mutton, Veal, Hogs,
not to reckon all sorts of Fowl, and Fruits produced by the Earth, and the
Fishes from the Seas and Rivers.

I am forced to dye with Hunger with my Meat in my Hands; and in a Town where
there is an Abundance of all sorts of things, I want all things. Bread which is
so pleasant to the Eye, and so savoury in the Taste, to all other People, is
nauseated by me. Wine only, because it is forbidden by our Law, rejoices the
sight of me, and stirs up a desire of drinking. Let me hear often from thee; let
thy Letters be instructive, and be levelled against my melancholy Temper. The
God of Mahmut keep thee ever in Health, and make thee love me, as thou do,
continually.

Paris, 15th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year, 1640.
LETTER XVII.
To Adonai the Jew at Genoa.
THou art as lazy in writing, as inconsiderable in thy Judgment of things. Thou
have written to the Grand Vizir, That this Republic is disposed to join its
Forces to that of Venice, for its Assistance in the War against the Port; but
what Ground have thou for this Advice? And if the Grand Vizir should oblige
thee to give a Reason for this, how can thou satisfy his Curiosity and
hinder him from accusing thee of great Lightness?

I now received a Copy of the Letter thou did write to Constantinople, for
which I thank thee: 'Twould have been better I had received the Original; for I
would not have sent it. There Is no likelihood that a Republic, so desirous of
establishing a Peace in her Dominions, will disturb her own Quiet, for the
Service of a State with which she is always at War.

Had the Genoeses any Cause of Complaint against Amurath, they would want
neither Soldiers, nor Arms, nor Vessels, nor Money to raise Enemies against him.
But at present, whilst their Affairs are in a full Calm, both Abroad and at
Home; they make (with greater Prudence than the Venetians*) War in the Spanish
Indies with their Registers, and Arithmetic; and they have always the
Advantage in this kind of Combat, wherein there is no Example they ever lost:
Let this Nation alone in Peace. Write rather to the Port, That the Genoeses,
condemned by Nature to dwell in the Rocks and Desert Mountains; have found the
means of making these, the most dilicious Abodes in Europe.

Tell the Grand Vizir, That so many extravagant Philosohers, who continually
search for what they will never find, have at length showed, That there is no
other Place where are more perfect Chemists to be found, having converted into
Gold almost all the Stones of their Country, changed the Horror of their
Deserts into most pleasant Gardens; and the Cottages of the ancient Ligurians
are transformed into Palaces, enriched with Marble and Porphyry, with so great
Magnificence and Propriety, that no Houses are comparable to theirs. To which
thou may add, That the Inheritance of the poorest Genoese, does at this time
much surpass those of their Predecessors. Show him, they have begun to give
considerable Succors to great and puissant Monarchs by immense Sums; and that,
in fine, in the Registers of particular Traders, one may see the Names of the
greatest Monarchs on Earth, to whom they are become Creditors.

Be more careful of what thou writest for the Future; and when thou give
Advice, set down what thou know without Exaggeratings, and be reserved in
what is doubtful: Never write Falsehoods in thy Dispatches. Be also never the
Author of vulgar Rumors, and Stories made by People at leisure, who abound with
Extravagancies. God help thy Understanding, and heal thy Distempers if thou
have any.

Paris, 10th. of the 11th. Moon, of the Year 1640.
LETTER XVIII.
To the Kaimakan.
THE Christians are become Magicians, or to speak better, the Spaniards who
make War in Piemont, have filled the World with Astonishment by an
extraordinary and new Enchantment. I wrote to thee, there were two great Armies
before Turin, one to take it, and the other to succor it; but I have not yet
made known to thee, that the Canon of the Spaniards are become Couriers, who
carry their Dispatches in the Air, into the besieged Cities; and moreover,
Ammunition, Powder, Saltpeter, and Money; a mavelous Invention, which fills
me with Admiration in writing it. There is a Man in the Camp of General
Leganez, who makes brass Bullets so artificially, that having shot them into
the Ditch of the Place, they have for a long time succored the Besieged. It Is
said, that being made in a Vice, and hollowed within, they have served for two
Uses, to convey into Turin what was wanting, and to bring back into the
Spaniards Camp the things they most needed. But this Industry proved in the end
useless; for after several Conflicts, Turin has fallen again into the Hands of
King Lewis, who has therein restablished the Duchess of Savoy, to the great
satisfaction of her People, who have thereupon showed the Signs of the greatest
Joy. This Restablishment is owing to the Valor and Conduct of Count Harcourt,
who has sustained and repelled the Assaults of two Armies, stronger in number
than his own. This Captain, has made his Name as famous in Italy, as were
heretofore those of the Hero's of Rome and Athens. The Marquess of Leganez
undertook the Siege of Cazal, an important Place belonging to the Duke of
Mantoa, situated on the famous River of Po in Italy. Count Harcourt being not
able with all his Army to put Succors into the place, he took the Party of
forcing himself the Besieged, entering on Horseback into the Lines with his
Sword in his Hand, where he was followed by some of his Gentlemen. The
Spaniards being surprised and astonished, found no Safety but in Retreat, which
they made disorderly; and the French under such a Captain, bore away that day,
the greatest and most glorious Victory they ever won in Italy.

If thou requirest an Account of me of what has past in Germany, I can tell
thee, that the War has been carried on there this Year with equal Success and
Losses to both Parties, to whom Fortune has been sometimes favorable, and
otherwhiles contrary.

But I am informed, there is a design of making a great Assembly at Cologn, to
restablish a Peace between all the Christian Princes; and that the King of
France has named for his Plenipotentiary there, the Cardinal Julius Mazarin, an
Italian by Nation, a Man of great Parts, and Experience in Business.

Prince Casimir is set at Liberty, at the Entreaty of the King of Poland his
Brother, and been since well received by the King, who made him Dine at his
Table, and presented him with a rich Diamond. The Town of Arras, which the
French have taken in the Spanish Netherlands, is of great Importance, and is a
considerable loss to the Catholic King, who will give great Reputation to his
Enemies, that have taken the Place in the sight of a great Army, commanded by
the Cardinal Infant, Governor of the Low Countries; which Conquest has
mightily raised the French Courage, and increased the Glory of their Prince.

The Queen is brought to Bed of a Second Son, who was born the 21st of
September, and he is named the Duke of Anjou.

The Spaniards are as unfortunate on the Sea, as at Land. Their Fleet, which
returned from the West Indies, richly laden with Commodities of all sorts, have
been most of them dispersed by the French Naval Army, commanded by the Duke of
Breze. The Spaniards truly fought with much Valor, but Fifteen Thousand of
their Men were slain, and Two Hundred taken Prisoners, together with Five great
Vessels richly laden. One of their great Gallions was burnt, and it is said,
the other Ships were saved, having first thrown the best part of their Lading
overboard, which they had brought with such great Care and Pains from the other
World.

That which has past on the Ocean, has not hindered the Archbishop of Bordeaux
from showing the Strength of the King his Master on the Mediterranean; where he
has fought an Occasion, of fighting the Spaniards with a lighter Army,
consisting for the most part of Galleys. He had sent a Defiance to the Duke de
Ferrandine, General of the Spanish Galleys; who being unwilling to accept of
the Challenge, this Prelate advanced toward the Coasts of Naples, where he did
some Mischief.

One may say, That the Misfortunes of Philip King of Spain are as great this
Year, as his Power is. But it is said, these Losses are not comparable to what
he is threatened with, if Portugal and Catalonia shake off the Yoke of his
Domination, as the common report runs.

I have heard much talk in General, on these considerable Affairs, without
being however informed of any certain Particulars. But henceforward, when I
shall be able to leave my Chamber, to go into the Churches, Walks and Gardens
about the City and the Court, I shall let nothing pass without a strict
Enquiry, and give a Faithful Account of whatever deserves thy Notice; and
should thou desire any particular thing of thy Slave Mahmut, it is but
mentioning it, and thou shall not want an exact and humble Answer.

It makes me tremble in telling thee, that a Report runs here of the Death of
the Invincible Prop of the World, the Mighty of Mighties; in fine, of the
Glorious Amurath. It Is false News, I hope, yet however asserted with great
Confidence. The Arbiter of Heaven and Earth confound all our Enemies, and give
the Grand Seignior, and thy self, a Life which knows no End, and attended with
a Happiness which cannot be increased.

Paris, 7th. of the last Moon, of the Year 1640.
LETTER XIX.
To Dgnet Oglou.
THe Lovely Greek, after whom thou inquire so earnestly, is long since
retired into France, and has been married Eighty Moons to a great French
Merchant, with whom I am not acquainted, but am informed is very rich, and
fortunate in his Dealings; but infinitely more fortunate in being the Husband
of Daria Lena Maani, by whom he has several fine Children.

This charming Greek does now profess the Romnn Religion, which is the only
Fault I find in her; I never knew Woman, whose whole Carriage is so graceful,
who does all things with such a careless exactness, and whose Virtue is less
morose. Mere Chance brought me acquainted with her, whom I no sooner saw, but
was struck with Admiration. She came to Paris the last Year, to solicit a
Lawsuit against a Stranger about an Estate. It was at Court, and in the
presence of the King himself that I first saw Daria; she spoke to him so
sweetly, that she soon obtained what she desired; and at the same instant I
felt such inexpressible Passions and Longings after her Acquaintance -- Suffer
me, my dear Dgnet, to tell thee, that never any Creature made such deep
Impressions in the Heart of a Man, as this charming Greek did in mine.

I drew near to her as soon as I could; I spoke to her in her own Language,
telling her, I was an Arabian; and she answered me, with as great Modesty as
Benignity. I went the day following to give her a Visit in her own Lodgings;
where this adorable Person, received me with the greatest Civility, not
forbidding me a Return; being pleased perhaps to meet with one, that could
speak her own Language, which is very rare in these Parts.

Since then, I could not for my Life forget her; I have served her with the
greatest Diligence, and so doted on her, that I forgot my self and thee, and if
I may dare to say so, the Grand Seignior too. Pardon this Infidelity on the
account of a Passion, which knows no Moderation, being not able to withstand
the Force of so invincible an Enemy.

Daria is young, of a generous Temper, and in whose whole Deportment, there is
no Grace wanting. Her Virtue is far above Lucretia's, for this Roman Lady
killed her self, having first endured the violences of a Tyrant; whereas she
would dye before she would come to such a Trial. If you have seen her at
Constantinople, you must have known her Perfections: I, for my part, who only
knew her at Paris, have remark four Beauties in her Person, which I believe is
not to be found in any of those Ladies kept in the Seraglio. Her Eyes, her
Mouth, her Teeth, and her Hands, seem to have been made only to furnish the God
of Love with Darts. She is sure to strike where she will, with her fine black
Eyes full of Fire: and she has also the Secret of healing the Wounds she makes,
when she pleases. As soon as ever she opens her Mouth, the three Graces are
seen to sit sporting in her Countenance; and her Body is moreover so
proportioned in all its parts, that had she lived in the time of Phidias, he
had certainly taken her for the Model of his Venus, which was the Admiration of
all the World.

I have plied this fair Greek with Visits, loved her even to Idolatry; my
Respect has been ever equal to her Virtue; and the greatest Favor I obtained
from her, was to suffer me thus to speak to her; I love you, Daria; Daria, I
adore you; but she would never suffer the least Expression which might make her
understand any thing else.

This incomparable Beauty often said to me; Mahmut; I have a great Respect for
thee, because thou art discreet and virtuous, and should also love thee, were
thou not a Man. Live on still as thou have done, and thou will thereby oblige
me to respect thee yet more; but think not to obtain from Daria any more than
an innocent Affection; I owe all to my Husband, and I will never be unfaithful
to him. If I ever attempted to snatch any small Favor, it was always in vain,
having ever repelled me in such a manner as made me lose all Hope, and at the
same time feel a new increase of Passion. Consider, Dear Oglou, what past then
in my Heart, and what a War I was to sustain.

In my great Inquietudes, and sharpest and cruellest Pains, Philosophy supplied
me with no other Remedies but Patience; she set before me the Examples of the
Esteem which the Ancients had for Pudicity; but she hindered me not from also
remembering, that we find in History almost all the Philosophers more
transported with Venereal Pleasures, than retained by the Precepts of Wisdom:
Diogenes and Aristotle, became they not Fools hereby? And Seneca, whose Morals
are the Rules of the Wisest, was not he driven out of Rome for his Adulteries?
I tell thee plainly, the Precepts of Philosophy have influenced me not a whit;
I derided them, and was resolved to love on, and that more excessively than all
the Philosophers together. Daria's soft Severity has laid on me stronger Laws
than all the Dogms of the Stoics, so that nothing can make me change my
Resolution of loving her eternally. If it be true that Love is a Weakness, only
Men, who are noble Creatures, are thereunto subject; it being certain, that
mean Souls cannot love, because they have no Heart: Natures Original is far
higher than Reasons; one is the Work of God, whereas the other comes from Man.
Be not then astonished if Reason does so often yield to Nature.

Daria had a mind to learn Italian, which she thought a better Language than
others. I taught her a great deal of it in a little time, but business quickly
deprived an unhappy Master, of the most perfect of Scholars. She said once to
me, Mahmut, let us have a perpetual Amity for one another, but let us love and
esteem Virtue far before Friendship. Teach me History and Geography, to the end
that knowing Kingdoms, Towns, and Provinces, and those that govern them; I may
know into how many Parts, this Earth which appears so admirable, is divided; I
may now learn the Forces, Methods of Government, Manners, Religions of Nations,
the difference of Seas and of Mountains, of Lakes and Rivers, of inhabited
Places, Islands and Deserts, that I may not confound the barbarous with the
civilized Nations, and Republics with Monarchies.

My worthy Friend, so noble an Inclination joined with a singular Grace, and
attended with so many rare Qualities, as well Spiritual as Corporal, have
reduced the poor Mahmut to a Slavery, more rigorous than that which he suffered
with thee in Sicily. How many Nights have I past in horrible Restlesness; and
how many times have I vainly believed I was with Daria, whom I sought in my
Chamber; when Sleep succeeding long Watchings, represented her to me in a Dream
more complaisant than ordinary? In a Word, Daria so filled my Thoughts, that I
forgot my Books, and avoided also the Company of my Friends; she alone was my
daily Study, and I renounced all other Divertisements; the finest Ladies were
nauseous to me; the finest Gardens seemed horrible Forests, which serve for a
Retreat to Savage Beasts. In fine, my Passion (Friend Oglou) comes to that
Excess, that I can find no Remedy. My Tears were of none effect to soften
Daria, and I have cast my self a Thousand times in vain at her Feet; all my
Cares and Respects have served only to give me Proofs of her Virtue. Receive as
thou ought the Confidence I put in thee, and if thou have not an Heart that
can love so ardently, at least have some complacency toward a man whose
Passion has no Bounds, and reproach me not with having had too much Weakness
for having been vanquished by a Woman. It Is Women that have always won the
greatest Victories; it is their Trade to conquer, and even those too, who
subdue all things. It is impossible for me to comprehend how I could love so
strongly without dying, neither can I imagine how I shall live, if I be long
deprived of the Sight of her I love. Daria has left Paris, and is distant
thence above Three Hundred Miles; consider then the condition I am in. I reckon
my self in a solitary place, although there be above a Million of Inhabitants
in the Town where I dwell. I stir not out of my Chamber; and as to my Books,
they will yield me no Comfort. My only Care is to nourish my Distemper; whereby
I study to make my self more miserable, because it is not in my power so much
as to seek the way to the only Happiness I wish for. Mahmut may be said to be
the Son of Sorrow; my Beard is nasty and overgrown; I am out of love with my
self, comfortless, avoiding all Society, and am become invisible to all People.
I have no Hope amongst so many Causes of Despair, but the Assurance which Daria
has given me, that I possess a place in her Heart, and I believe it, because
she says so. Heaven has given her a frank and generous Soul, and promises her
great things in the course of her Life. I have secretly drawn her Horoscope, as
as far as I could find, all the Planets are favorable to her; she is to live a
great while; Fortune will second her Intentions; she will enjoy an
uninterrupted Health; and this lovely Person will ever gain the Advantage on
all that shall oppose her. Happy is he that shall be of the number of her
Friends, but more happy is he that shall be beloved of her, for he may assure
himself of being beloved of the handsomest and most deserving Lady in the World.

Read my Follies with some Indulgence, and be not angry with me when thou
know, I was ready to renounce my Religion for that of Daria's; she began to
convince me, and I began to believe that the Religion of the most perfect and
most virtuous of Women was the best. If thou have Interest enough in the Grand
Visir, or the Kaimakan, obtain for me the Permission of leaving Paris for Six.
Months only, but by no means let them know the Occasion. I love much, absent
from Daria, but it seems to me I do not yet love enough: I would have more
violent Transports, during her Absence, than those I suffer whilst I see her;
to the end I may say, that at all times, and in all places, never any body
loved so much. I have discovered to thee my whole Heart, excuse my Passion, if
thou will not excuse thy Friend so horridly tormented with it; and remember
what the Beautiful Roxalana said to the great Solomon, That the Pleasure of
commanding and making one's self obeyed, is to bereckoned but in the second
Rank of Pleasures, whereas that of loving and being beloved is the first.

Henry IV. was one of the greatest Kings of France, than whom no man ever more
greatly loved. When he reproached the Duke de Biron with the Love he had for a
Lady, mark what this Cavilier told him; Great King, how is it possible thou
should not be indulgent to Lovers, who have so often said when thou wast in
love, thou forgattest thy self, thy Kingdom and Subjects? And this, dear Oglou,
is what has happened to me at Paris with this admirable Person whom thou
could no longer find at Constantinople. But alas, I should be an unhappy
Friend, if with such a Love a mine I should prove thy Rival. I will not imagine
it; yet I must tell thee, that rather than yield thee Daria, I will sacrifice
to thee all the time I have to live. I have given my Picture to this charming
Greek, who has received it very courteously, yet rather as the Work of an
excellent Painter, than the Picture of a Lover.

But being full of Goodness, and perfectly discreet, she said thus to me, when
I gave it her: Mahmut, thank Heaven thou art not handsome; such sort of Men have
not ordinarily all the success they pretend to in their Amors. Wise Ladies
think these kind of People dote too much on themselves; and those that are
disdainful, find them not submissive enough and respectful; and such as fear
evil Tongues, dare not look on them; and also these Gentlemen imagine Ladies
Favors are granted them, because they cannot withstand them, and they expect
oftentimes to be entreated to receive them: Whereas those to whom Nature has
not been so liberal of her Favors, do more than bare love; they adore their
Mistresses, they are always humble, and know how to gain the coyest Beauty by
their Respectfulness. As to thy part, who art none of the fairest, thou will be
happy, if thou changest not thy manner of living with me.

It is impossible for me to say, whether Daria has any considerable
Imperfections, being too greatly prepossessed by my Passion, to discover
Defects in a Person, whom I regard as an Angel. Time and her Promises, will one
day show me, whether she has the Vices usual to those of her Nation, which are
commonly an Infidelity, covered over with the most specious Pretenses, and a
continued Dissimulation.

However, send me a Cask of the white Balm of Mecha, and of the best sort for
Scent thou can get; and at the same time, send me also some of that precious
Eastern Wood, whose Scent is admirable to perfume the Body. I have promised the
fair Daria this Present; let me soon have it, to the end I may accustom Daria
to the Neatness and Delicacies of the Mahometans. Preserve also thy Health, and
if thou enviest me, love as much as I do: but love with Continency, if thou will love long, and be long beloved.

The Great God preserve thee from loving however, so excessively as thy Friend
Mahmut does; the Dolors being therein always certain, and the Fruition
uncertain.

Paris, 10th. of the ^st. Moon, of the Yeay 1641.
LETTER XX.
To the Invincible Vizir Azem.
THE Chiaus arrived here this same Moon in which I write to thee, and is in
perfect Health, with all his Attendants.

I do not tell thee in what manner he was received by the People at Paris, it
being of small Importance; seeing they have no other part in the Government of
the Kingdom, than that of Obeying.

The Populacy curiously observed his Habit, his Beard, and his Gate, all as
extraordinary. It Is certain (Invincible Leader of his Armies, in whom God has
placed his Authority of governing the Earth,) our Envoys are not esteemed
where-eve^ they come, unless amongst the most Rational, an^ Honest part of
Mankind; which are always the leaf Number.

Not only the Common Sort run to see our Ambassadors, for the Vestments they
wear, to which their Eyes are not accustomed; but, even considerable Persons,
have the same Curiosity. Some silently approve, others lift up their Hands, to
note their Astonishment; and others, by an insolen^ Murmur, discover their
Contempt, not understanding the Justice due to Strangers, whose Manners and
Fashions ought never to be blamed; it being impossible, but whole Nations must
have good Reasons for their Customs and Practices since so many Ages.

But he was not thus received at Court, where the King and his Ministers do all
things with great Prudence; being respected as a Man that brought good News,
and sent by the greatest and most puissant Emperor in the World. As to the
Subject of his coming, every body speaks diversely. The Ministers of Foreign
Princes are fearful, left the new Sultan should attempt the entire Ruin of
Christendom, and prove more terrible than Amurath. In the mean time, this
Heathenish People show incredible Joy at the burning of the Imperial City of
Constantinople. But, the King has no part in the Sentiments of his Subjects.

Many say, that the King of Red Heads will renew the War with the Empire, and
is persuaded to this by the Great Mogol; and there are some who affirm, he has
already laid Siego to Babylon. But those who speak with more Sense, and less
Hatred, affirm, that all the Port's Enemies are like Reeds exposed to the Wind,
which will be easily overthrown, if the French take not part with them; and, it
is the Folly of this Nation, (who believes it self superior to all others, and
the Arbiter of the World,) to think too well of its self, because she is
respected as a Friend to the faithful Mussulmans.

The Jews (Invincible Vizir, principal Minister of the Empire, favored of
God,) are the cursed'st Race of all Nations; the Christians accuse them of
having set Constantinople on Fire; and greatly praise the Greeks for quenching
it; to which, say they, they have no less contributed by their Hands, than by
the Fervency of their Prayers; and that Heaven has preserved it from a total
Ruin, because of the Sacred Relics of so many Christians, whose Bodies lie
buried in our Mosques.

The News which comes from Foreign Countries, does every day denote the
Disorder there is in all parts; there being nothing heard from the side of
Spain, but secret Conspiracies, and public Revolts.

The People of Catalonia are in a continual commotion, and so irritated, that
they give no farther Quarter to the Spaniards. And, from Portugal, there comes
more surprising News.

London is as full of Disquiet, new Parties every day forming themselves
against their Sovereign Charles, Master of those Three so famous Islands;
whence it appears, that the God of the Nazarenes is angry with these
unbelieving People.

I shall not fail to inform thee in due time, of such Events as deserve thy
knowledge. For if things do not soon, change their Posture, these Countries,
forsaken of Heaven, (seeing the true Law established by our Prophet is not
received here,) will soon change their Masters, their Manners, and Religion.

I adore with the profoundest Humility, and with my Head lying at thy
invincible Feet, the Authority which the Sultan has entrusted thee with; and
which thou deservest, as well for thy Faithfulness, as the Greatness of thy
Actions.

Paris, 20th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER XXI.
To Cara Haly the Physician, at Constantinople.
SInce I received thy Letter, and the marks of thy Remembrance, I imagine my
self much better. I make two Meals a day, I walk about in the Morning, my
Appetite increases, I have no more of those nauseous Belches, I can read
longer, and I sleep a-nights more soundly. Yet I cannot say I am in perfect
Health; so long an Illness has deprived me of that which I do not find return.
There Is wanting to my Intellectual Faculties a certain kind of Vivacity, and
Readiness in their Operations, which is extremely abated; but I know not
whether this be an Effect of the Pain I suffered, or whether it comes not from
Nature weakened; as fast as our Life advances to throw it self, as it were, into
the Arms of Death, which is what is most certain for me. I would willingly
entertain thee on the Condition wherein I find my self, could I overcome the
Weakness of my Disposition, and the Coldness of the Season, which pierces me,
maugre all my care to prevent it in this Icy Climate. The Ink I write with
freezes on my Pen, and a Body may say, the Fire freezes too, wanting, as it
does, its usual activity; the Cold being so sharp, that it extinguishes the
natural Heat. The City where I dwell, appears on a sudden transformed into
Crystal; the Northern Wind has in one night frozen the River; and all the
Fountains, which were wont to quench the Thirst of a Million of People, are
dried up. All Trade seems to have ceased, the Rich are retired to their Fires,
and the Poor are creeping about the Streets; where, notwithstanding the
Exercises they use to oppose the Cold, they seem already starved. The Bread is
become like Marble, or an hard Stone; all things are frozen, and ancient People
affirm, never the like has happened in their Days, or in the Times of their
Fathers. There has been found some few Miles from Paris, in the great Road, two
Men clad in very course Stuff, without Shifts, their Legs naked, Heads shaved,
and Cords about their middle, dead with Cold. They were found embracing one
another, thinking thereby to communicate mutual Heat, to keep off, or at least,
retard their Deaths. These People are Dervises of the Latin Church, which are
called Capucins; whose Life is a continual Penance; they rise in the Night to
their Devotions, and spend their time in Contemplation. They live upon Alms
which they receive of the Christians, which consist of Bread, Roots, and Herbs;
and if the Charity of these Nazarenes extends to the giving any thing more,
they use it with Sobriety. They sleep on Straw, and are obliged to wear the
Habit Night and Day, which is dreadful to look on, and in which they are buried
when they die. When their Occasions require them to travel, they are not
permitted to go on Horseback, in a Coach, or Chair, but only in Vessels when
they go by Sea, or on Rivers; so that they have only that granted them, which
Cato was so afraid of, and every body else but Fools; which is, To Travel by
Water.

In fine, their Life is accounted a continual Hell; and they will be finely
choused, if they find not a Heaven, when stripped of their Mortality.

These Religious are under the direction of one General; observe a long
Silence, which is a great Virtue amongst them; and with this are so exactly
obedient to their Head, that they have no Will left.

They have very obscure Prisons under Ground, wherein they thrust those who
scandalize their Order by their Crimes: For, notwithstanding the Holiness of
their Rule, and the Vigilance of their Superiors, to make it observed; there is
never wanting some who wander from the right way, and often make use of the
Esteem which Men have of their Piety, to commit such Enormities as would be
soundly punished by the Men of the World. These kind of Dervises cannot handle
Money without being guilty of a mortal Sin. Notwithstanding this Profession of
Poverty, I have seen these Dervises dressed up with greater magnificence than our
M^fti, in the time when they celebrate their M^sses, ascending up to the Great
Altar, covered with the finest Linen, and thereon Vests embroidered with Gold,
the most delicately wrought as can be imagined, and often enriched with Pearls,
and precious Stones. In their Sacrifice, they eat the consecrated Bread, which
they call the Messiah his Body; which they are wont to place on a Plate of fine
Gold; and they also put into Cups of the same Metal a Liquor, which they say is
changed into the Blood of their God, as the Bread into the Body, as soon as they
have pronounced certain Words, which they secretly mutter.

The Sacrifice is offered every day, and not only the People are present at it,
but the greatest of the Kingdom, with their Monarch on his Knees, and in a
supplicating posture. There stand about the Altar several stately Candlesticks,
wherein burn white Wax Candles, which renders the Sacrifice still more solemn.

I relate to thee what I have often seen; for I choose to be frequently in
these Infidels Churches, and at their solemn Festivals, the better to conceal
who I am.

Yet happy is he that lives satisfied with himself, assured he serves God in
the manner he will be served. Thou have this good Fortune, and that of being in
thy House at thine Ease; when thou go out, thou wearest a long Vest down to
thy Heels, lined with soft and warm Furrs; whilst I am obliged to cover my self
barely with a blackshort Cloak, which scarcely reaches below my Knees, and is
too thin to resist the piercing Northern Blasts; and is in truth, a very
ridiculous Habit; yet which I am obliged to wear, for the service of him whose
Slave I am, which cannot cover my Bandy-Legs, and illshap'd Body. I expect,
with great impatience, the Season which o'respreads the Gardens with Flowers,
the Fields with Grass, and crowns the Trees with Blossoms, and brings back the
pretty Birds, who publish the joyful News of the Spring's approach; that being
the Time wherein I may expect my Health.

As to what remains, thou will oblige me in making Trial of my Friendship, that
thou may know, there is not in all the Empire of the true Believers, a more
faithful Friend, and one that loves thee more cordially. Adieu.

Paris, 10th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER XXII.
To the Kaimakan.
THE Court of France is an Assembly of Politicians who discover, or hide
themselves according to their Interests; and are more wont to hold their peace,
than to talk. They explain themselves in more than one manner, on the things
which they cannot conceal; and, I draw from them what is necessary for my
Instruction, and thy Information. There have happened such sudden and
surprising Motions in Spain, as cause considerable Advantages to be hoped for
by France, which seems to have had a great hand in them; on which thou may
make what Reflections thou think convenient.

The Mountains which divide France from Spain, are called the Pirenees.
Catalonia is a Province watered on one hand by the Mediterranean Sea, and
bounded by Navarr; it lies situated at the Foot of these Mountains: The People
have taken up Arms, and vigorously opposed the Catholic King's Ministers; and
the Portugueses have done the same thing, but with different Success. This
Kingdom is comprised within the States of Spain, and the richest under her
Dominion. Her Situation is advantageous, lying between Galicia and Castile, and
watered with the Ocean, which brings her immense Riches.

The principal Town of Catalonia is Barcellona; and Lisbon is the chief Town of
Portugal. The first has taken for the pretense of its Insurrection, the
Insolences committed by the Protestant Troops, which served the Catholic
King, and were quartered in this Province. And the other, having long concealed
its Design, has at length shaked off the Spanish Yoke, and set up a King of
their own Royal Race.

It Is said, that Count Olivarez, the King of Spain's Chief Minister, and
Favorite, designing to mortify the Catalonians, horribly charged that Country
with Soldiers, and sent thither the most licentious Troops to Quarter;
imagining to chastise the Pride of this People in this manner, without any Form
of Process.

This Minister's Design has had so far its End, the Province being full of
Divisions and Slaughters, there wanting nothing to complete their Miseries. The
Soldiers exercise unheard of Cruelties, they shed indifferently the Blood of
Infants, Old Men, and Women; overthrowing Altars, and ruining Temples. The most
courageous Peasants gather together to repel Force with Force, and revenge
themselves most cruelly on as many of the Castilians as they can light of,
without sparing the King's Ministers; killing all they meet, seeking those who
are hid, to punish them with the greatest rigor, running after those who seek
their Safety by flight, not pardoning the very Priests, if never so little
suspected.

The Count of St. Colomme, commanded not long since in Catalonia, with the
Title of Viceroy; which poor Man is now before God, where he receives the
Recompenses or Chastisements he has deserved, being the first Victim sacrificed
to the Peasants Fury: His Blood was the Prologue of a dismal Tragedy, which
will not end without more dismal Events to the Spanish Monarchy, and the
Catalonians themselves.

The Viceroy withdrew himself into the Arsenal of Barcellona at the first
Insurrection of the Peasants, where he was besieged by a great Multitude of
these Seditious People; and seeing he could not remain there in Safety, he went
out to go on board the Galleys; but the Grossness of his Body hindering him from
hastening as fast as those who accompanied him in his Flight, he remained alone;
and being tired, fell into a Swoon, and lay dead for some time on the Sand
between the Rocks which lie upon the Sea. His Servant, the only one that
remained with him, brought him again to himself, by casting the Seawater on
his Face; but he opened his eyes, only to see his own Departure more nearly. He
was set upon in this Condition, wherein he could not stir himself, by a crew of
Bloodhounds, who first shot at him, and then hacked him in pieces, having
first stabbed him in a thousand places. His Servant defended him as well as he
could, in covering him with his Body, but his Zeal was fruitless; and all the
Wounds he received, saved not one from his Master. He was an African, and had
been his Slave. The Courage and Fidelity of a Man of so mean Birth, deserves at
least, that it should be said of him, That he died in imitating the Virtues of
those Ancient Romans, which are at this day praised and admired by all the
World.

The Viceroy's Death stopped not the Peasants; they proceeded to Excesses
scarcely imaginable; and their Barbarity made them commit such horrible,
together with such ridiculous Actions, as can hardly be expressed.

These Wretches went to the Palace of the Marquess de Ville Franche, General of
the Galleys; where having cut the Throats of as many as they met with, they
burnt and battered all the Household Stuff, and carried in Procession on the top
of a Pike, a little Brass-Figure, which they thought a black Angel; which
Figure was only that of a Man, wherein a Clock was included, whose ingenious
Springs made him move his Eyes; which Sight so surprised these Peasants, who
had never seen or heard of such a Machine, that they remained in such a
Stupidity, as retarded for some time the Effects of their Fury. But there was
one more bold than the rest, who approaching to the Piece, cried out, 'Twas the
Familiar Spirit of the Marquess de Ville Franche, and ought to be seized on,
and thrown into Prison, to take away its Power. Which he had no sooner said,
but laid Hands on it, and tied and bound it fast on the top of a Spear, and
with great Shouts, walked it about the Town. The ignorant People, capable of
any ridiculous impressions, as well as the Women, who are not hard to be
deluded, followed them, convinced that the Marquiss's Devil was carried
triumphantly along the Streets. Having ran through all the Town of Barcellona,
this Rabble gave the Clock into the Hands of the Bishop and Inquisitors, to
exorcise it, and drive out the Devil, whom they thought capable of destroying
their whole Province.

Affairs are carried on more seriously in Portugal, and at a more moderate
rate; the Inhabitants of Lisbon, as well as the Nobility, have treated the
Castilians with more Humanity: They immediately elected a King, who reigns
peaceably, as Heir of the Crown, and thereby ascertained of being maintained by
the Affection and Fidelity of the People. There is already News of his
Coronation; the Ceremony of which was performed with great Pomp and
Magnificence. The People, as a Mark of their Affection, have presented a
Million of Gold to their new Lord; the Clergy Sixty Thousand Crowns; and the
Nobility Four Hundred; and the new King has taken on him the Name of John IV,
King of Portugal, instead of that of Don John, Duke de Braganza.

Never any Plot better succeeded: The Portuguezes have driven out from them a
puissant and politic Nation without Bloodshed, saving that of a Villain; but
of that thou shall hear more the next opportunity; for I shall carefully inform
my self of the Particulars of so extraordinary an Event, to give an exact
Account to the Vizir. It Is said, King Philip is the most unfortunate Prince
that ever ascended the Throne, committing his Affairs to the management of
another; so that it may be said, The Duke who reigns as Sovereign in Madrid,
has chosen Philip IV. for his Favorite. The Minister commands, and the King
obeys; the Master's Weakness, authorizes the Servant's Power; the Confusion of
that Nation being so great, that those made by Heaven to receive Orders, are
the only Persons who give them.

I kiss the Hem of thy Garment, with all the Submission possible to a poor and
humble Slave.

Paris, 10th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER XXIII.
To Dgnet Oglou.
TO what purpose do thou bewail the Ruins which the Fire has caused in
Constantinople, if there be no Remedy for the Losses thou have suffered? Not
all the Vizirs together, nor the Prince himself, whose Authority knows no
Bounds, could resist the Fury of this Element. What then can we do, Wretches as
we are, liable to all Injuries and Disgraces? Art thou the first honest man
that has been ruined? It Is true, Heaven had enriched thee; thy Chambers were
hung with the finest Persian Tapestry; thou have a great number of Slaves, fine
Gardens, and bathing-places, beset with delicate Fountains; must thou despair
for the Loss of the greatest part of these? Comfort thy self, seeing thou art
not in a Fault, nor have contributed to thine own Misfortune.

Thou tellest me, that the burning of the chief City of the Universe, has
deprived thee in one day of all the Commodities and Conveniences thou have
labored for many Years: And, I answer thee, That he which gave thee these
Goods, expects Thanks from thee, in that having enriched thee with what thou
had not, he did not take from thee thy Life at the same time.

Have thou so soon forgotten Seneca's Demetrius? Have thou lost any thing,
which thou did not receive from the Liberality of Fortune? And, if whatever
thou had was given thee, wherefore do thou afflict thy self, as if thou
could not obtain again as much? Stretch out thy Hand toward Heaven; pray and
beseech: He that has given thee once, is not impoverished by the Liberalities
he has showed; but, rather ask of him Spiritual, than these Temporal Gifts,
which do all wither and dye.

If thou live, thou will see thy self in the same Condition again; I cannot
give thee a better Consolation, I will not lament with thee, it seeming to me a
fruitless thing. If thou be desirous to forget the Losses thou have
suffered, consider the great Damages the same Fire has caused to so many
Believers, in the same City where thou bewailest thy Misfortunes. How many
People that had less than thee, have lost more? And, how many better People
than thy self, as more submitting to the Will of Heaven, have suffered Miseries
infinitely greater than thine?

So great a Conflagration, wherein the Chief City of the World saw it self near
reduced to Ashes, must needs have been a very dismal spectacle. When I read the
Relation which thou have made me, I tremble with Horror, to see so many
magnificent Houses, and stately Mosques devoured by the Flames, and reduced to
nothing; with such Riches, Goods, Housl old-stuff, and inestimable.
Merchandises, public Registers, and choice Manuscripts, whose Loss can never
be repaired, being become the Prey of this Element which devours all things.
But thou and I are not the first, neither shall be the last, who bewail the
Ruins of our Country. How many Towns in Asia, how many in Greece, have been
swallowed up in an instant by dreadful Earthquakes? And, how many Ruins are to
be found in the famous Cities of Syria and Macedonia? And, how many times have
the Isles of Cyprus and Paphos, been entirely depopulated? We see not only the
most solid Edifices perish, which are the Works of Men, but even Mountains
annihilated. There are whole Countries, which have (as it were) vanished; the
Sea has covered such spaces of Land as might have made whole Provinces, and
which were extreme populous. How many Promontories do we see, which were
heretofore certain Guides to Pilots, but are now buried in the Sand, and cause
oftentimes Shipwracks? And, if the Works of Nature be exposed to such great
Ruins, what may not mortal Men expect to suffer? But, I spend time in relating
ordinary Accidents, when I might remember thee of greater Ruins which the Fire
made in the same Imperial City, after it had been built by the Great
Constantine, to whom she owed all her Splendour, before the Mighty and
Successful Emperors of the Mussulmans had therein established the Seat of their
Empire.

Under the Reign of the Emperor Leo, if I be not mistaken, the whole Continent
lying along the Bosphorus, between both the Seas, was entirely ruined by Fire.
And Twelve Years after, under the Reign of Basil, the famous Library, so
carefully collected, and with that extreme Charge and Trouble, and which
consisted of above Two hundred thousand Manuscripts: with the Skin of a Serpent
220 Foot long, whereon were written the entire Works of Homer, was consumed.
The Fire which happened in the Time of Justinian, might make one forget others;
the famous Temple of St. Sophia, which is at this day our chief Mosque, could
not be preserved from the fury of the Flames, being almost wholly consumed by
it. I shall not mention the Ruins which have happened by Earthquakes, under
the Reign of the Emperor Zeno Izoria. There was a far greater under Bajazet II.
for, in Pruzia an entire City, with its Houses, Walls, and Three Thousand
Inhabitants, were buried in the Entrails of the Earth: Which must convince us,
there have been in all Ages such Events, as may instruct us to bear our
Misfortunes with Patience, and to believe a Providence, and submit our selves
wholly to it.

Let us (my dear Friend) for once rejoice, in an Occasion wherein all others
mourn; in that we are able to persuade our selves, There Is nothing here below
deserves our Care. I do not say, we should laugh like Nero, when he saw Rome
burning, which he himself had fired, and sang the Passage in Homer, wherein the
Conflagration of Troy is described: Rather do as Aeneas, who having saved from
the Flames, which devoured his Country and Estate, his Tutelar Gods, his
Father Anchises, his Family and himself, became an Hero that served for an
Example to Posterity. He did not spend his time in bewailing the Goods he had
lost, but always kept an undaunted Courage in the midst of the Tempest which
threatened to overwhelm him, as soon as he was on the Sea, and which forced him
to wander from Port to Port, void of all Help, persecuted by a Goddess, and
other Gods who were of her Party; and having gallantly endured so many
Disgraces, he became the Founder of the bravest and famousest nation of the
Universe. Aeneas, in saving his Gods and his Father, who were the Companions of
his Fortune, drew down the Graces of Heaven, which put an end to his Miseries,
in settling him in a Country, where he laid the first Foundations of an Empire,
which since has given Laws to all the World.

Our sins have kindled the Fire at Constantinople; the Debaucheries, Impieties,
Hypocrisies, and continual Rapins which remain unpunished, are the Causes of
the Destruction of the famous City of the Universe.

Can we imagine, when God sends his Judgments down upon us, that we can be
able to resist them? Amend thy Life, if thou desire to be revenged of
Fortune, and be Proof against all her Darts. Increase in Virtue, if thou
would be invulnerable; be as good in Prosperity as in Adversity. Nothing but
good Works can make thee happy in this World, and live when this World shall be
no more.

If Reason cannot stop our Tears, Fortune I am sure will never do it. We seem
herein very unreasonable; for, when we first see the Light, we weep; and when
we leave it, we groan.

Live ever with me more nearly than an intimate Friend, and imitate (if a man
may so express himself) the Fire, which (according to what appears to us)
consumes all things, and converts them into its own proper Substance; but which
yet, according to the Rules prescribed by its Creator, burns not the Air, nor
the other Elements; but keeps them united, warms and conserves them. God has
endued them with an Instinct which ought to do the same thing; he has fastened
them one to another, with such Bonds as nothing can break; I mean the Interest,
and mutual Needs which they have of one another. There being no body that can
be happy, and become Rich of himself; there must he Dependencies and Commerce,
without which it is impossible to have that is most necessary. There is also a
more refined Commerce, to wit, the Marks of Esteem which men give one another;
Succors in cases of Need, whether of Money or good Counsel; the latter of
which, is all that can be expected from thy faithful Mahmut.

Paris, 10th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER XXIV.
To the Bassa of the Sea.
THe Vessels of Africa have again been worsted by the Infidels, the Particulars
of which must needs be known to thee before they could come here, where there
is much Discourse of the Accident at Goulette, and the Battle of Caraoge, to
the great Disadvantage and Prejudice of the Mohammedan Name. These Heathenish
People, make public Rejoicings for the Victories obtained by another Nation.
It Is said, that of Five Galleys, and three other great Vessels, only one Ship
saved it self by Flight; several being sunk to the Bottom, together with the
Admiral of Caraoge, the rest having been brought into Malta; and that there
were Six Hundred Mussulmen killed; in whose Death, our only Consolation is,
that they died Martyrs, and their Blood will cry for Vengeance against the
Infidels that have shed it.

It Is hard to find the Isle of Malta in the Chart, and yet harder in the Sea;
it being a mere Atom of invisible Earth: But, it is not so with the Knights, who
are the Masters of it, they being a Hundred, often seen and felt by us.

Malta is a Seminary, wherein are brought up the bravest Sparks in Christendom,
picked out from amongst the most Illustrious Families. These Persons, know not
what Fear is; they have imposed on themselves the necessity of vanquishing* or
dying; and therefore they get the Mastery of whatever they attempt; and with
those few Vessels they have, they make the Ottoman Fleets tremble. They wear a
Golden Cross on their Stomachs, which is always dipped in the Blood of the
faithful Mussulmen. Eclipse this impious Order, by opposing the Sacred Silver
of the Ottoman Moon, against the Force of so small a number of Knights. My Zeal
obliges me to say such things, as may be troublesome to thee; and which,
perhaps, thou know as well as I; which is, That I am persuaded thou will be
the Conqueror of these Pirates, provided thou once resolvedst to draw out in
good earnest thy Cymiter, and cast its Sheath away.

The King here is very well; he said publicly, when he heard the Victory of
the Malteses, That if he were not a King, he should choose to be one of the
Knights of that Place. Thou will gain greater Honor, and more Trophies will be
raised to thee, than was to Ariademus and Cigala, if thou undertakest
effectually the Destruction of this People. Thou have my Prayers, That our Holy
Prophet would strengthen thy Arm; and, that God would give thee still Favor in
the Sight of our most puissant Emperor, chosen to be the chief Commander of the
World.

Paris. 15th. of the 3d. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER XXV.
To the Invincible Vizir Azem.
AN Illustrious Woman of the House of Savoy, governed not long since in
Portugal, in the Name of Philip IV. King of Spain. Her Name is Margarita, and
commonly resides at Lisbon; but this Princess, with the Title of Vice-Queen,
had not the Credit or Authority necessary to sustain the Dignity; though she
had otherwise all the Prudence, and Courage requisite thereunto.

Michael Vasconcelli, her chief Secretary, having usurped all the Authority,
carried all things with a high Hand; to which he added a most griping
Covetousness, which was no less disadvantageous to his Mistress's Reputatior.
And, the Marquis de la Puebla, a Castilian Minister, an Accomplice of
Vasconcelii, had established himself in this Court, as a rigid Censurer of all
the Vice-Queen's Actions.

The Christians call these Two Men Two Pedants, set over the Princess, as if
she had been still in her Minority, to correct and regulate her Actions.

The too great Authority of these Two Ministers, became at length a kind of
Tyranny. The Nobility complained for the loss of their Privileges, and the
People at their being oppressed with Taxes; which made the Ministry of
Vasconcelli seem insupportable, in which 'was seen the Vice-Queen had no part.
This Princess not having the Power to stop the course of the Mischiefs which
began to spring up, gave Advice of it to the Court of Spain, and expected
thence the Remedy: But, whether the King was not in a Condition to give any, or
his Ministers concealed from him the state of things; the Mischiefs increased,
and Vasconcelli's Friends, by excusing him, made it almost impossible to avoid
them.

When Margarita represented the Danger wherein Portugal lay, she was heard as a
weak and credulous Woman, and was often accused of being over timorous; which
caused a general Revolt in this Kingdom, which was few days in contriving, and
as few hours in executing.

If thou will hear thy humble Slave, I Will relate to thee all the Circumstances,
of so great an Event; which will seem a Fable, should we refer our selves to
only Reason; but which however is a real History, as is now well known
throughout all Europe.

Never was there a greater Hatred between Two Nations, than that which was
between the Spaniards, and the Portugueses: And, though they had one and the
same Religion, and almost the same Humor; yet it is not to be imagined, how far
their mutual Aversions carried them.

The Portugueses have a common Proverb, which says, That a Man is obliged to
treat and love another Man as his Brother, whether he be a Turk, a Jew, a
Pagan, or a Moor, without excepting the most Barbarous of Mankind; yea, though
he were a Spaniard.

They have lived with great Patience, under the Domination of Philip II. and
his Successors, (since the Death of their King D. Sebastian, who was killed in
Africa in a Battle against the Moors,) whilst they were suffered to enjoy the
Privileges which were granted them. Moreover, they still expected the Return of
their Sovereign; who was said not to have dyed in the Field, but having long
wandered about in strange Countries, was in fine about to return. But the
Example of the Catalonians, made them at length resolve upon what they now
executed. The Nobility were the first that began the Revolt, and past over
those Bounds, which Respect does ordinarily place between the Sovereign and his
Subjects. They alleged several Pretenses for their Rebellion; but the most
specious was, their unwillingness to be sacrificed in unjust Wars, wherein the
most dangerous Posts were committed to them, as they several times reproached
the Duke, Favorite and Minister of King Philip IV.

They immediately carried on their Intelligences with great Secrecy; and when
they came to declare themselves, the greatest Persons consented to the
Conspiracy, and the boldest amongst them have executed it with great Valor.

Dom Juan, Duke of Braganza, is the greatest Nobleman in this Kingdom, and
perhaps in all Spain, and already of the Age wherein men are wont to have
Wisdom, together with Strength of Body. He wants not for Ingenuity and
Svveetness of Temper. He received the Crown, after long pressings and
refusals; and indeed, is the more worthy of it, as being the lawful Heir to it.

The Favorite Duke, was well enough informed of the Reputation and Authority
of the Duke of Braganza; and considering him as a Prince who might lawfully
pretend to the Crown, he made use of several Artifices to drive him out of
Portugal, or seize him Prisoner. But having always tried this in vain, whether
by reason of the extraordinary watchfulness of Dom Juan, or that the Heavens,
on which depend the things here below, had otherwise ordered it, 'twas
impossible for this Minister to get so good a Prey into his Hands.

This crafty Minister has tried all Ways, and sometimes made use of the Fox's
Skin, and otherwhiles of the Lyon's Voice, to bring about his Ends. Sometimes
he tried to draw him to Court, offering him the most honorable Employs there,
persuading him to accompany the Catholic King in his Voyage into Catalonia.
But, the Duke knew how to defend himself against the Snare, and timely withdrew
to Villa Viciosa, the ordinary place of his Abode, and whence he excused
himself from going to Madrid; sometimes, for that he had not sufficient to bear
his Charges according to his Quality in such a Journey; and otherwhiles, on
other Pretenses, with which the Favorite Duke was obliged to seem contented.
Though he was not, yet he feigned himself to be satisfied, to put in practice
the most exquisite piece of Policy he ever made use of.

He sent him Forty Thousand Pistols, to buy Necessaries, and at the same time
sent him also the General Command of the Troops in Portugal; with Order to come
to Lisbon, and as High-Constable of the Kingdom, to observe the Motions of the
United Provinces, which threatened Spain and Portugal with a powerful Fleet.
But he had sent the following Order to D. Lopes d' Ossio: Thou have the Command
of the Naval Army, get immediately before Lisbon. Dom Juan de Braganza has
Orders to visit the Vessels; as soon as he shall enter the first Gally, clap
him in Irons, and immediately depart with this Prisoner to Cadis, where I have
appointed People to convey him to Madrid.

Dom Lopes could not execute his Commission; his Army was lost on the English
Seas, and 'twas written in Heaven, That Dom Juan should live, and be a King.
This Artifice having failed, the Duke had recourse to another; which was to
send an Order to the Duke of Braganza, to visit all the Forts on the Frontiers;
where there were strict Injunctions, to detain him. But, he perceiving the
Project of this Spanish Minister, knew so well to excuse himself from
undertaking this Business, that he made the Designs of his Enemy to vanish this
time also, and got leave to retire to Villa Viciosa. Those who penetrated not
the Artifices of the Court of Spain, were astonished at the Accumulation of so
many Favors and Honors on the Person of the Duke, affirming, the Court had
Intentions of raising him to the Throne, or bringing him to the Scaffold; in
which last they were not mistaken.

Olivarez, who let slip no Occasion of laying Snares for Braganza, grew the
more obstinate by the Difficulties he met with. He sent him a new Order to
raise Troops, and to lead them himself into Catalonia, for the Chastisement of
the Rebels; this being of absolute Necessity, said he in his Letters, for the
upholding of the Spanish Monarchy, to which the Revolt of this Province caused
great Mischiefs.

The Duke obeyed in part; he raised a considerable number of Troops, at his own
Charge; but he took care of his own Person. He wrote to the Court to excuse him
from that Voyage, and added to his excuses most earnest Prayers; representing,
That being sick of the World, he had retired into his own Estate, to lead there
a quiet Life, free from the Vexations of Business; which obliged him to entreat
his Catholic Majesty, to grant him that Rest, which was the only thing he
desired. The Duke de Braganza's Letter drew no Answer from the Spanish
Minister; but his Designs were discovered, and the Nobility foreseeing how
likely they were to be brought under a more strict Subjection, began to murmur,
saying, 'Twas their Duty to rid themselves of those Oppressors, who had so long
peeled them, and set up a New Form of Government. The Poor, who suffered most
by the Taxes, were the boldest, and encouraged the rest. Some were for setting
up an Elective King, others proposed the raising to this Honor the Family of
Braganza, who alone seemed worthy of it. Some there were, who were for putting
themselves under the Domination of France; and other persons of Credit amongst
the People, were for a Democratical Government; and others again, were for
turning the Kingdom into a Republic.

The Nobility were in great Perplexity in the Choice they should make; for
'twas not known whether the Duke of Braganza would receive the Crown, in case
it was offered him again; for the most qualified Persons of the Kingdom had
proposed it to him.

There was none but D. Gaston Cattique, a Gentleman as Eloquent as Stout, whom
Heaven designed for the persuading of this Prince, that could accomplish it. He
pretended to fight a Duel with a Nephew he had; whom having slightly wounded,
he left Lisbon, as a man that had brought himself into danger; and wandering
about from thence, uncertain, as it were, of the place of Retreat he would
choose, he went at length to Villa-Viciosa; where having found Braganza in his
Solitude, he thus spoke to him:

I bring this day a Crown, which the Nobility of Portugal presents thee; and if
thou have the Courage to receive it, we are ready to put it on thine Head. This
Kingdom belongs to thee as the undoubted Heir of our Natural and Lawful
Princes. If thou acceptest of the Crown, the Kingdom justly belongs to thee;
and if thou dare not receive it, we will choose another Sovereign, of greater
Resolution, and who is willing to command us. The Scepter shakes in King Philip
's Hand, by reason of the Wars made against him from all parts. Consider, if
thou receivest not at present what Fortune presents thee, thou will be obliged
against thy Will to obey another: Neither the Nobility, the Clergy, nor the
People will any longer suffer the Arrogance of the Castilians. It belongs to
thee at present to declare, whether thou will reign, and be a happy Prince. All
the faithful Portugueses breath after thee, and desire thee for their
Sovereign. Resolve to accept of what is so advantageous, and let us alone for
the executing of our parts.

Dom Juan answered coldly, to such a bold Proposition; more affrighted at the
Peril there was in such an Enterprise, than flattered with the Hopes of
possessing a Kingdom.

But, in another Conference, wherein the Duke was told, the Conspirators were
resolved to raise on the Throne another King, if he came not to a speedy
Resolution: the Duchess his Wife, who has a Man's Heart, and is more
courageous than her Husband, coming into the Conversation thus spoke to him
with great Assurance:

My Lord, the Catholic King has sent for thee again to Court; at Madrid thou will certainly meet with thy Death, and in receiving the Crown which is offered
thee, thou art still in danger of it: but if thou must perish, which way soever
thou turnest thy self, is it not more honorable to dye a King in thine own
Country, than to dye with Chains in a Prison by the hands of thine Enemy?

So courageous a Discourse brought Dom Juan to a Resolution; wherefore he sent
Word to the Nobility, of his Readiness to comply with them.

The Conspirators were ready at the hour appointed, for the Execution of their
Design. Being well armed, and each of them accompanied with a good Number of
Young Men, who were to follow them, although they knew not the Design. As soon
as ever the Signal was given, they all set forth from the Places where they
were assembled; and those that were farthest distant, joined the nearest, and
all together soon possessed themselves of the Palace of the Vice-Queen; they
immediately made themselves Masters of the Guard, finding no resistance from
them, and this without spilling a Drop of Blood, or doing any Violence. They
afterward cried out altogether, Long live the new King, D. Juan de Braganza,
and let them dye that govern ill. They siezed on the Vice-Queen, and entreated
her to retire into an Apartment, where she should be treated with the Respect
due to a Princess, but not obeyed as having Authority to command them.

Vasconcelli, who knew himself faulty, and to whom his Conscience reproached
his Crimes, in this moment hid himself in a great Press, under an heap of
Papers; where, having been discovered by an old Woman, he had immediately his
Throat cut, and his Body thrown out at a Window; where he served for some time
a May Game to the People, who left not one part of his Body free from some Mark
of their Indignation.

One of this Minister's Domestics, threw himself out at the same Window his
Master was thrown; not in a design of following his Fate, but of saving
himself; and he dyed without its being known, whether 'twas by his Fall, or the
Musket Shot which he received.

The Confederates, with as little trouble, seized on the Galleys and other
Vessels in the Ports, whence they drove the Spaniards; they afterward
commanded the Vice-Queen to retire. This Princess thought she ought in this
occasion, to insist on the Greatness of her Birth; she threatened the
Conspirators, and afterward flattered them, assuring them of the Clemency of
King Philip. She set before them the Greatness of his Power, and forgot not to
speak of the Authority of his Favorite, who must needs be much offended in
this Occasion; exaggerating the Offense commitred against her, both as a
Princess, and Depository of the Catholic King's Power. But, as well her
Promises as her Threats were in vain; and she her self was at length glad to
accept Conditions from them, who a while before, by Connivance from the Prince,
might have executed an absolute Power.

In Eight days time, all the Castilians were subdued, or driven out of the
Kingdom. All the Forts were rendered, without any trouble, to the new King,
except the Castle of St. John; which having made some slight Resistance, was
sold for Forty Thousand Crowns by the Governor.

The Duke of Braganza appeared immediately afterward in the City of Lisbon,
where the People soon showed the Affection they had for him; the Prison-Doors
were set open, and all poor Debtors freed, and a great part of the Taxes taken
off. Such an astonishing Success, was attended with what ever might set forth
the Joy of the People, who solemnized the Festival with the Sound of Trumpets,
and the Noise of the Cannon, and by Shouts and Acclamations, which reached up
to Heaven, whom the Portugueses thanked for the Liberty which they believed
they had recovered. This Event was accompanied with so many miraculous things,
that the Wisest as well as the Vulgar, were persuaded, 'twas marked in Heaven
from all Eternity by the Finger of God. The Clergy, the Nobility, the Citizens
and Peasants, were profuse in their Liberalities on this Occasion, to give
their new Sovereign ample Marks of their Affection, and even the Poor hid their
Misery, that they might not lessen the Public Joy.

The Spanish Vessels which returned from the New World, which then entered into
the Ports of Portugal, remained at the Disposal of the new King, the Pilots not
knowing what had happened; so that the Coffers of the Prince were filled thereby
(as it is said) with some Millions.

This King was exalted to the Throne in the last Moon of the last Year; and
wise People do hope he will reign very happily, all the Planets being too well
disposed, not to make him finish his Reign with the same Fortune as he began it.

The vigilant Portugueses, have ordered out several Vessels, filled with good
Soldiers, and necessary Provisions, to sieze of Places and Ports, which this
Nation possesses in the New World, and in the East Indies; and it is to be
supposed, they will meet with good Success, if Fortune prove as favorable to
them in America and the Indies, as she was to them in Europe.

As soon as the Duke of Braganza was proclaimed King, he sent Manifesto's into
all Parts, and dispatched Couriers and Ambassadors, to give Advice of his
Promotion in the Courts of France, England, Holland, Swedeland and Denmark.
It Is not to be imagined the Joy which this Adventure gave to the Catalonians.
The King imparting to them what had happened, offered them also his Assistance;
and these People answered him with the same Offers. And this is the end of
Sixty Three Years of the Despotick Authority, which the Spaniards have
exercised on the Portugueses.

The News of so strange a Revolution having been carried unto Madrid, hear, and
consider well the unhappy Condition of the Catholic King, to whom his
Favorite declared this News.

Sir, (said he,) I come to rejoice with your Majesty at the good News I bring.
Your Majesty is now become Master of a considerable Duchy. Dom Juan de
Braganza, has had the boldness to make himself be proclaimed King of Portugal;
has thereby fallen into the Crime of Laesae Majestatis; All his Estate belongs to
you, and is devolved to the Crown, and his Person will soon be in your Power.

Dom Juan was Son to Theodosius, Duke of Braganza, Grandchild to Donna
Katharina, who was the Daughter of Dom Duarte, Brother to Henry King of
Portugal; and Philip II. King of Spain took away the Crown from this Katharine,
to whom it is said it did rightly belong.

The Titles he assumes are, King of Portugal, of Algraves, Africa on both sides
of the Sea, Lord of Guinea, of the Navigation and Commerce of Aethiopia,
Arabia, Persia, and the Indies.

This new King is not above 37 Years Old; of a middle Stature, but well
proportioned; his Face marked with the Small Pox, his Hair enclining to Yellow,
an Aquiline Nose, high Forehead, lively Eyes, his Mouth indifferent great, and
a Masculine Voice. His Carriage is grave, affects great Modesty in his Clothes,
is temperate in his Diet, affable to all sorts of People, unless Slaves, and
such as he believes are Hypocrites, and his common Word is, That mean Clothes
will keep out the Cold, and ordinary Meats satisfy Hunger.

This Prince is not much versed in Books, is of an healthful Constitution,
loves laborious Exercises, especially Hunting, wherein he is never tired. He Is
also Musically given, and so light of Heel, that there are few People can
out-walk him. He is wont to go to Bed late, and rise early, as knowing that
Sleep does take off much from Man's Life; and to complete his Happiness, he has
Children of both Sexes. His Wife is a Spanish Lady, of extraordinary Merit, to
whose mavelous Courage and good Qualities he owes his Crown.

The Kingdom of Portugal contains 120 Leagues in Length, 40 in Breadth, and has
several Millions of Subjects, comprehending those in the Two Indies. It has
Three Archbishopricks, and Eight Bishoprics, keeping ordinarily Forty Vessels,
which find Ports in Eight places of the Country. They can maintain Thirty
Thousand Foot, and several Regiments of Horse. The Revenue of this Kingdom may
amount to Twenty Millions of Gold, reckoning in the Riches which come from the
Indies Brasil, Angola, and several other Islands.

The French Monarch, will hold a good Intelligence with the House of Braganza.
England will enter into an Alliance with her; the Pope will concern himself on
neither side; the Emperor united by Blood and Interest to the Spaniards, will
be an irreconcilable Enemy, but unable to do them any Hurt; and, the States of
Holland will find greater Advantage than all others in this strange Revolution.
These are the Sentiments of those that pretend to penetrate into the Future,
and to know more than others. And if it be true, that this new Sovereign has
had, as all men in his place would have had, a secret desire of being King; he
has so well concealed his Ambition, that it is to be supposed he will prove a
most Judicious Prince, that will uphold his Authority more by his Wisdom and
Prudence, than by Force. The Just God cut short the Course of his ill Designs,
should he have the Courage and Desire of revenging one Day the Death of his
Predecessor, Dom Sebastian, on the Faithful Mussulmen of Africa.

Thou will find, invincible Vizier, the faithful and respectful Mahmut always
ready to execute the Orders which thou shall send him for the Emperor's
Service; and ready to obey the least Signs of thy Victorious Hand, to Death,
whether Natural or Violent.

LETTER XXVI.
To Enguril Emir Mehemet Cheik, a man of the Law.
TEll me this once, whether thou be alive, and at Liberty; and whether thou
do really love me, or only pretend it. My Friends return no answers to my
Letters, which makes me strangely ignorant of all things; I know only by
Conjecture, that which is never so little doubtful; and that which is certain,
cannot be known here truly as it falls out, as being related according to
peoples Passions and Interests. There Is no body dares write to me freely what
he thinks; and there are few that will inform me of what is come to their
knowledge, left their Letters should be intercepted.

I know very well we have a new Master, but I know not whether he be thought a
more able Prince than Amurath, and has the same Courage and Fancy for War. The
Chiaus that lately arrived in this Court of France, is very reserved to me, and
makes a Mystery of every thing.

Armurath is dead; those who say he was Cruel, yet declare him to be the most
dexterous, Valiant and Compleatest Man in his Empire. The Christians are Fools,
who will not hence gather, That our Monarchs most certain Maxim, to reign with
Authority and perfect Security, is, To make themselves be feared, and not to be
shy of spilling the Blood of those who serve them ill; who are suspected by
them, or may prove troublesome to them. Those Troops of Mutes, which abide
always in the Seraglio ready to obey the least Sign of those who give them
Orders; maintain, increase and render Formidable the Ottoman Power: For, the
Empire would never be at Peace, but in continual Trouble, should all the Sons
and Nephews of our Sultans be suffered to live: and we should have a whole
Nation of Princes who would be always a biting, and tearing, and ruining one
another by Civil Wars, as is often seen to happen amongst the Christians.
Whence this certain Maxim is practiced, That it is better it should cost
innocent persons their Lives, than ot to destroy those who may be Faulty.

Indeed, I must confess I knew not, that Amurath himself killed, with his own
Hands, his own Sister. Thou that know the secret of this Tragedy, can tell
whether he was transported to that Excess, because she answered with great
Haughtiness to the Sultaness her Mother, who reprehended her on some Secret
Love she entertained: If this be the case, she dyed not innocent, and I have a
great Curiosity to know the Particulars of it.

But do not relate to me the unhappy end of his Two Brothers, Bajazet and
Orcan, lest thou make an old Wound bleed afresh. Poor Princes, what Crime have
they committed, if their Brother reigns? Cruel King! how great was thy
Inhumanity, seeing they obeyed without murmuring?

But Amurath was a dreadful Lover, who tamed his Passions with a Poignard; he
stabbed the most beautiful of his Sultanesses; and for what Reason? The
Christians pardon him the Blood of his Brethren which he spilt of his Sister,
and of the brave Fracardin, several Visirs of his Friends, and so many brave
Commanders, and illustrious Persons; but they will not pardon him the Death of
a Mistress: for, they cannot conceive how a Prince, a Mussulman, can play the
Hangman, in such a delicious place, where he has nothing to do, but to think of
giving his Love agreeable Marks of his Passion. But, you will tell me perhaps
she was so bold as to wear in his Sight, Flowers and Perfumes which came from
his Brother: It is certainly a great Crime, not to obey those who have all
power to command us; but it is a greater Crime to lay on Commands, to have an
occasion for Cruelty. They say, a man which does such an Action, is a Monster;
but I do not say so.

Inform me, what the new Sultan Ibrahim does, of his Humor and Inclination. It
appears, he is still infirm, and stupefied with his long Imprisonment. What
Alterations has his Entrance into the Empire produced? Will he be Sanguinary,
as his Brother was, or gracious and merciful?

Speak to me once, my dear Friend, with all Freedom, void of Disguise; Is he
amorously inclined? I much value such Princes, for they are generally mild; and
this Passion softens them, how cruel soever they may be; makes them liberal,
and Strangers to Covetousness, that cruel Monster, which clouds and sullies the
brightest Virtues. How many persons are employed to choose fine Women for the
Seraglio, to contribute to Ibrahim's Pleasure? Happy will the handsomest Woman
of Asia be. But the Eyes of this Monarch will be made like other men's, which
are not allways allured with the greatest Beauties. Hence it is, That we have
seen in our Emperor's Seraglio, Ladies which surpassed in Charms all others,
and yet dyed Virgins, and neglected by them to whose Pleasures they were
consecrated.

The Chiaus has only informed me, that Ibrahim appears often on Horseback in
the City, and seems a just and merciful Prince, and designs to make the
Shepherd Hassein, Prime Vizir; he that was so long the Companion of his Prison.
It Is said, he often made it his Employment to divert Ibrahim, in his
Confinement, by playing on his Pipe, and making him Discourses without Art and
extreme innocent, of what he did when he kept Sheep. He told me also, that he
often went for his Diversion on the Black Sea, to take the Air, and enjoy that
Liberty of which he was lo long deprived; That he is also much delighted with
the reading of Greek Books, especially Xenophon and Plutarch; That he is very
devout, though not superstitious, according to the Humor of the Devotees of
our Law, who will have our Sovereigns be implacable Enemies to the Christians.
If this be necessary to Salvation, to persecute a Religion contrary to Ours,
what will become of all those who are dead and never did it? I am of Opinion,
That true Holiness, consists in doing Good, and living in Charity with all Men.

The Infidels, with whom I live at present, for the Emperor's Service, whose
Subject I am, do glory in their strict Observance of this Precept which is in
their Religion, and they are happy if they keep it. But tell me, Do thou
think our Emperor is like to have Children, as is already reported, and that
he cannot live long? They are not only the idle People that talk at this rate,
but those whose Interest obliges them to know, who is to be the Successor; and
many of the solidest think, it will be the King of the Tartars, and that those
of the Race of Mula Honkiar will be excluded.

This Race is really Illustrious, but every body knows not the Rise of it. The
Head of this Family, descends from Tamerlane; thou know the rest, and I will
not dispute with thee about Genealogies.

Whatever passes here below is so uncertain, that thou may accuse me of
Imprudence in discoursing of things at this distance; for, in Effect, Ibrahim
may be a Father by this time. Pray to God, who disposes of Thrones, makes Races
endure, or decay; merit from him, by Fastings and Prayers, and beg of him, that
he would give me the Grace to live blameless, and die innocent; that I may
enter with thee into Heaven, and there enjoy those unspeakable good things,
which are reserved for the Faithful.

Love me, though distant from thee; and let me have Tokens of thy Friendship,
by stealing some Moments of Leisure from thy ordinary Business to write to me.

Paris, 25th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1641.
The End of the Third Book.
LETTERS Writ by A Spy at PARIS.
BOOK IV.
LETTER I.
To the Venerable Mufti, Prince of the Religion of the Mussulmans.
THere is now found in one man alone, what ever several Persons of great
Ingenuity could acquire by long Experience; and, this man is Cardinal de
Richlieu, to whose Reputation thou art no Stranger. He was designed, like thee,
for the Affairs of his Church, and dedicated to Religion; but, he is not so
much employed about them, but that he applies himself with as great Care to the
Affairs of the World; and it is he, who under the Authority of the King his
Master, governs the Affairs of the French. I obey thee, Venerable Mufti; thou
have enjoined me to inform thee of the particular Actions of this famous
Prelate; but I shall not say much of him, it being impossible to fathom him. He
is the most dexterous and subtle Politician, that lives in all the Countries of
the Unbelievers. The famous Greek Lisander, was never so cunning; neither did
Tiberius show half so much Dissimulation at Rome, nor Judgment in Affairs, as
he; no not in the time when he set himself to remove his Rivals, and take away
all Obstacles, which might hinder his obtaining the Empire. He interprets all
the Doubts which arise in his Religion; he is the Arbiter of Rewards and
Punishments: and the King, who knows his Zeal and Ability, leaves to him the
Direction of his Kingdom and People, which he governs and leads as Jacob led
the Flocks of Laban. This Cardinal wants only the Art, which this great
Patriarch had, to make Men be born as he pleased, as this Holy Israelite made
the Sheep.

There came some days since a Person from Germany, who went immediately to the
Palace of this Minister, and sent him word by his Captain of the Guards, that
the Letter B was come. The Officer was unwilling to deliver this kind of
Message to his Master, and therefore desired the German to explain this Riddle:
but he only told him laughing, That the Cardinal's Alphabet was like the famous
Knife of Delph, which served to all purposes; so that he needed only to mention
the Arrival of the Letter B, and he would be understood; which was no sooner
done, but the German was privately introduced into this Minister's Closet,
where he had a long Conference: but I could never hear the Subject of it.

He that by his Word created all things, increase thy Health; and make thy
Authority ever adored, and feared even in Rome it self.

Paris, 25th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER II.
To the Reis Effendi, Principal Secretary of the Ottoman Empire.
I Come but now from learning an Adventure, which yet happened some days since;
but all things are carried on with such Secrecy in France, that it is almost
impossible to know any thing before it is made public.

There were apprehended here, in the last Moon of January, certain Ruffians, in
the Habit of Hermits, who were to assassinate Cardinal Richlieu.

These Wretches confessed before the Judges, as soon as they were put on the
Wrack, their Intention of killing the King's Favorite, because he was no
Friend to the Duke de Vandome, who is Natural Son to the deceased King, Henry
the Great. This Adventure has greatly surpised the Court; each man speaking of
it according as his Interest, or Affection inclines him. The Duke of Vandome's
Friends have declared themselves against the Cardinal: and this Minister's
Creatures have much aggravated this Attempt, to render this Prince's Family
more odious, and heighten the Cardinal's Reputation. But, the Duke de Mercaeur,
the Duke of Vandome's Son, rode immediately to Paris, with the Duke de Beaufort
his Brother: the first, incognito, to consult his Friends, and the other, to
present himself to the Cardinal, to obtain that their Father might justify
himself before the King, from the Accusation laid against him.

The Grandchild of Henry the Great, has since desired to he confronted with
the Hermits, and has obtained it; but his Departure at the same time into
England, has wrought much amazement.

Some say, he has taken an unwise Course; and others say no; because he could
not prudently expose himself of the Testimony of such Wretches, who would not
matter what they said.

However, these Hermits were publicly executed, and their Accomplices are not
yet discovered; neither is it yet known whether any persons of Quality have had
a part in the Conspiracy; which is not the first that has been carried on
against this Favorite, and it is believed will not be the last. He has a great
many Enemies; and the absolute Authority with which he governs, by the favor
of his Prince, will always raise him such Adversaries, as will either ruin his
Fortune, or take away his Life.

If I write not oftener to thee, thou ought not to think my Affection ever
the less. Set down in thy Register what I inform thee. Let me have thy
Friendship, and Protection in things which are just, and change not thy Opinion
of me, till I am changed my self.

Paris, 15th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER III.
To the Kaimakan.
JVlius Mazarin, a Man about 45 Years of Age, of a solid Judgment, and
incredible Perspicacity; of whose Family I know no more, but that he is
originally from Sicily, and born in Italy, in the chief City of it, Rome; is
lately introduced into this Court. He has by his ingenious Carriage, gained the
Favor and Confidence of Cardinal Richlieu; and he begins already to be
employed in the most important Business. Those who make Reflections on the
Affairs of the World, and carefully examine the extraordinary Talents of this
Italian, are persuaded one may expect great things from him; yet however, the
best way is not to be hasty in judging of the good or bad Qualities of a Man.
He has already been employed in Quality of Plenipotentiary for the King of
France in Piedmont, to negotiate an Accommodation between all the Princes of
the House of Savoy. And he has labored so fortunately, that every body is
astonished, that his first Undertakings should meet with such happy Success;
especially considering the Hatreds and Pretensions between the Duchess of
Savoy, and her Brothers-in-law. Thou may remember that I wrote to thee, that
the Differences of this Family were like to last, and unlikely to be determined
without great Bloodshed, both of the French and Spaniards. But Mazarin, who is
a most expert Courtier, and dexterous Agitant, has ended this Affair, much to
his Master's Honor to the Satisfaction of the Parties interessed, and the
Cardinal who procured him this Commission. He established the Peace in
Piedmont, and an Union betwixt the Parties, by bringing over to the French
Interest Two Men who were Enemies to it; who were, Prince Thomas, a Captain of
great Reputation, and the Cardinal of Savoy his Brother, a Person of a
consummate Policy, and an excellent Soldier, though a Churchman.

It is mentioned in the Treaty, That these Two Princes shall be received into
the King of France's Protection: That if the young Duke dies without Children,
and the Cardinal marries, his Children shall be the Heirs of the Estates of
Savoy, and in defect of those, Prince Thomas's.

It Is moreover declared in the same Treaty, That the King of Spain shall be
sought to, touching the Liberty of the Wise and Children of Prince Thomas, who
are detained Prisoners at Madrid: And he shall be also solicited, to surrender
the places he holds belonging to the Duke of Savoy. And in case the Catholic
King shall not restore them, and set at Liberty the Wife and Children of this
Prince, he shall be obliged to serve against the said King in the Army of
France. It Is moreover inserted amongst these Articles, That the most Christian
King shall procure a Marriage to be made between one of the Children of the
said Prince, with the Duke of Longuevil's Daughter, who is a rich Heiress; and
that France shall never make any Treaty with Spain, without comprehending the
Liberty of the Princess, and the foresaid Princes.

Prince Thomas is now expected here; and it is said, he will command the Army
of France in Italy, against the Spaniards; it being certain, they will never
restore what they have once taken, neither will they set their Prisoners at
liberty.

The King entertaining himself some days past, with the Ambassador of a Foreign
Prince, said to him these Words: When the Spaniards shall restore to the Duke
of Savoy, the Places they keep from him, I shall willingly discharge my self of
the Burden of the Government of those I keep. And the Cardinal has publicly
expressed himself to this purpose: That his Master's Design was only to humble
the Pride of the House of Austria, and reduce it to such a Condition, as that
its Neighbors might have no such great cause of fear from them; seeing the
least Motion of theirs, raised Alarms among them: That his Endeavors were not
laid out in aggrandizing the Dominion of France, seeing the Bounds of it were
large enough already; his Intentions being only to give his Sovereign the last
Proof of his Zeal and Affection, by leaving the Kingdom in a profound Peace,
which might make his Majesty beloved of his Neighbors, and feared by those who
are jealous of his Greatness and Power; he being hereby the Arbiter of Europe,
and reigning more absolutely by this means, than if all the Estates belonged
unto him. What I have written to thee, happened some time since; but what I am
now to inform thee of, is quite new.

We have an Account, That the Princes of Savoy have not kept their Word with
the King, Cardinal Richlieu, and Mazarin; and Designs are now taking in hand,
to punish so great an Affront; and these are busied, in thoughts of revenging a
Widow-Princess, who has been so long forced to behold bloody Tragedies in her
House, by the Wars which the Princes of the Blood make continually; wherein
Strangers do interest themselves, who ruin the Estates, and keep them up in
perpetual Discord.

This Business will cause new Troubles in Italy, and thou shall therefore not
fail of Intelligence of the Particulars. However, the Princes of Savoy are
blamed by all the World, and charged with want of Sincerity. But, this being
almost a Rule amongst the Christians, To observe their Word no longer than they
find their Advantage in it; thou need not therefore much wonder at what
these Princes have done: Whereby thou will know, That a mean Interest being the
Motive that sets them at work, and which is all their Reason of State; he that
will one day equally judge all the World, and can overturn all the Universe in
less time than he created it, will destroy the little Powers of these weak
Politicians, who acknowledge the Law of the Nazarite, to the immortal Glory of
the Venerable and Holy Name of the faithful Mussulmans.

Paris, 15th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER IV.
To Dgnet Oglou.
I Must forget my self, if I forget thee; but thinking often on my self, I
cannot forget thee; because thou art my second self. Be persuaded I speak my
Heart, and that I have no other design, but that of loving thee, that thou
may answer me with the same Affection: for, I desire thy Happiness as I do my
own.

I am endeavoring to procure thee the Confidence of the Invincible Vizir Azem,
without his perceiving my Design; and this is the best manner I could devise of
doing it. Thou shall pretend to receive from some Friend which thou shall leave
at Palermo, the Memoirs which I send thee with this Letter; and it will not be
difficult to make it be believed, thou hold a Correspondence in this Town of
Sicily, considering the time we have lived there together, during our Slavery.

The August Vizir, who rules and governs the Empire, under the Orders of the
most Mighty and Dreadful Potentates of the Earth, will receive by this
Ordinary, an ample Information of extraordinary Events which have happened in
Portugal: And I have also informed him of the strange Revolutions of Catalonia,
which do much weaken the Strength of Spain, and notably mortify the Pride of
this haughty Nation. I have made known to him, that Portugal has already made
choice of a King, and that Catalonia is departing from her Allegiance. But, I
have given him no Account of the choice Memoirs, which I send thee; with which
thou may make Advantage, if thereby thou can find the way of introducing
thy self to the Grand Vizir.

Thou may then say to this great Minister, That thou have received the
Memoirs thou presentest him with, and assure him thou have translated them out
of Italian into Arabic; and thou must transcribe them with thine own Hand,
that they may not appear to come from me.

The King of Spain, Philip II. died of a shameful Disease, which happens only
to base People; which appeared a Chastisement from Heaven, for having, like
David, numbered the People which dwell in the Countries subject to him, to make
known to all Nations the Greatness of his Power.

It Is certain, this Monarch reckoned as far as 750 Cities, erected into
Bishoprics; therein comprehending 60 Arch-bishopricks: that he had Abbeys
11400, Chapters 9230, as many Collegiate Cathedrals; Parish-Churches 127000,
Hospitals 4000, Confraternities 23000, Congregations of Seculars 2300, Houses
of Entertainment for Pilgrims 3000, 46000 Convents of Religious People; and of
Virgins 13500, with 15200 Chapels, wherein Mass is said, as well as in public
Churches, as particular Houses and Prisons.

And after an exact search, this King found, that to serve so great a number of
Churches, Monasteries, Convents, Hospitals and Chapels, there were 12900
Religious, Monks, Priests, or Clerks; amongst whom there might be found 12400
Priests, which celebrate what the Christians call the Mass. And, to maintain so
many People, 'twas computed that the Revenue for this amounted to 3000000 of
Roman Crowns, without reckoning the Alms which were distributed every day,
which amount to the Sum of 4000000 of Gold.

The curiosity of this Prince went farther; he would know the Number of all his
Royal Officers, Governors of Provinces, Towns, Castles and Cittadels; and, in
fine, of all Officers as well of Sea as Land, Judges, Justiciaries of all
kinds, and of all those who had Patents from him or his Viceroys. And he found
they were 83000 who were employed under Letters sealed with his Hand, and
360000 who had them signed under his principal Ministers.

He would not know the Number of Persons that lived in his States, lest he
should become too proud; and to prevent his fall, said he, into the Sin of
David. Which he yet could not avoid in his own Person, as I have already said;
God having spared his Subjects, who had otherwise sufficiently suffered.

One may now say, that this puissant Monarchy begins to be dismembered by the
loss of so many Provinces, Kingdoms, and Places; and that Philip II. knew not
the full Extent of his Power: Philip III. knew not the Greatness of his Forces,
nor the Riches which he possesses, because his Ministers governed him: and
Philip IV. not seeing when he might see, could not see at last when he would.

I think I have said enough to thee to be understood. Do now what thou can,
to make thy self understood by Persons to whom these Advices may be agreeable
or profitable: And if thou believe, the Knowledge of these things may be
acceptable to the Invincible Vizir, who is one of the Lights of the World.
Endeavor to procure the Favor of this great Man, who governs all the
Faithful, and to whom the Divine Alcoran serves for a Law. I embrace thee, and
cordially kiss thee, with the Lips of my Soul, if a man may so express himself.
Adieu.

Paris, 4th. of 7th. Moon. of the Year 1641.
LETTER V.
To the Invincible Vizir Azem.
THe Posts which came some few days past here, have brought ill News. One of
the King's Armies has been defeated by an Army composed of Foreigners; at the
Head of whom was a Prince of France, and several Malecontent Lords, who
followed him. This Loss has much afflicted the Court, and Paris ^^^ms to be
Thunderstruck. The People discourse and argue hereupon according to their
different Humors, most making the Loss greater than 'twas. But those who have
lost their Kinsfolks, threaten Revenge; and only those that have heard of the
Death of their Friends are silent, because their Grief is above Expression. But
all in general, appear in such Consternation, as would make a man imagine this
Stroke is irreparable; so true is it, that Losses are insufferable to those
that are not accustomed to lose.

One would think, to hear the French talk* that the Spaniards are already at
the Walls of Paris, and that these rebellious Princes are ready to give an
Assault to this great Town. They have retired into a place which they say is
impregnable, and which belongs to a French Lord; which Place is called Sedan,
and it is not far hence where this Bloody Battle was fought, wherein the King's
Party were worsted; but the Malcontents are much afflicted at the loss of
their General, who was killed in the heat of the Fight. Some say, he dyed by
Treachery, others by the Enemy; and there are who affirm, That Cardinal
Richlieu, got rid of him by means of an Assassin, whom he entertained in his
Troops; others also say, he killed himself by lifting up the Visir of his
Helmet with his Pistol, which discharged it self; however, there is dead in the
Person of this Prince, a Prince of great Valor.

I shall make thee a Recital of this Adventure; I shall learn thee Motives of
this War; inform thee who were the Malcontents, and their Qualities; and, in
fine, by what Cabals this Tempest is raised; that thou may know, great and
principal Prop of the Ottaman Empire, that Ambition and Jealousy cause
Disorders in France, as well as in other Countries.

Lewis de Bourbon, Count de Soissons, was a Prince of the Blood; he had such a
fierceness in his Youth, as drove away all from him, who once came near him;
but having got over this Humor which disobliged every body, he became popular,
and so courteous, that he was now followed as much as he was shunned before. He
used the Nobility as became their Quality; had acquired the Friendship of other
Princes, and those of inferior Rank could not enough admire him. He was adored
by the Soldiery, beloved and esteemed by the People; and he had, in a word, so
behaved himself that he had gotten the general Applause.

Cardinal Richlieu has a Niece named Madam de Combalet, who having been married
to a Gentleman, aspired to an higher Match, seeing all things to give place and
humble themselves before her Uncle.

The Cardinal designed by the Marriage of this Niece, to procure himself such a
puissant Prop, that nothing should be able to overthrow his Fortune, or oppose
his Authority: He pretended also, his Life would be more in safety; and that
such an Alliance, with those he already had, would put him out of a Capacity of
being ever attackt by any Enemies, secret or declared, whose Number increased
as fast as his Authority.

Several Affirm, this Priest had Ambition enough to give an Heir, who might one
day ascend the Throne; when it appeared by the Queen's Barrenness, the King
could have no Child to succeed him.

But the State of Affairs being changed, he took other measures; and thinking
of having the Count in his Alliance, he caused the Proposals of this Marriage
of his Niece to be offered the Prince, by one of his most intimate Confidents;
who offered him at the same time considerable Sums of Money, and Dignities, to
make him Heir of all his vast Estates* and to procure him the greatest Office
in the Kingdom, which is that of Constable.

The Count of Soisson's Answer to him that made the Proposal, was a Box on the
Ear; being in an extreme Passion, at any one's daring to offer him a Match so
greatly beneath him, when Madam de Combalet was the Widow of a Gentleman of a
mean condition, and Niece to a Cardinal whom he hated, and himself a Prince of
the Blood.

The Cardinal's Messenger, desirous his Negotiation should succeed, was not
repelled by this Affront. He insisted on the Virtue of the Cardinal's Niece,
saying she would be courted by the greatest of France: and added farther in
Commendation of this Lady. That she was a Virgin, although married; because her
Husband out of respect, dared not approach her; and that Heaven had so ordered
it, that this Adventure should be found written in the Anagram of her Name,

This Minister could not dissemble his Vexation at the Refusal; his Choler
became excessive, and he resolved to practice his usual Maxim, of violently
persecuting those, whose Friendship he had sought with most Eagerness. He
therefore wholly set himself against this Prince, spoke all the Ill he could of
him, publicly threatened his Enemy; but he valued him not, looking on the
Cardinal as beneath his Notice.

In the mean time, the Cardinal plotted to put his Threats into Execution, and
brought the King in to countenance him by his Authority; which obliged the
Count to absent himself, and make a Voyage into Italy, to avoid the Storm he
was threatened with. Yet his Voyage lasted not long, and at his Return the
Cardinal did all he could no^ to win him; he procured him suitable Employs in
the Armies, and made him at length be declared General of that which the King
sent on the Frontiers of Picardy. Yet this haughty Prince, received all with
Indifferency, saying openly, That a Captain was given to the Army, and not an
Army to a Captain.

The Grandees of the Court, who observed afar off what past in this Intrigue,
instead of mollifying the Count's Humor, did all they could to sharpe^ it. The
Duke of Orleans, the King's Brother; wh^ was always this Minister's Enemy,
linkt himself with Soissans, exhorting him not to yield to the Cardinal's
Pursuits; and it is said, he drew a Promise from him under his Hand, that he
would never accept of the Marriage proposed, and they afterward swore Fidelity
to one another; and tha^ they would join together for the Destruction of the
common Enemy; and for this effect, they took measures with Prince Thomas, of
the House of Savoy, who is at present General of the Spanish Army in Flanders:
They also brought the Duke de Valette, and several Lords of the Kingdom, into
their Party. Almost all the Conspirators were for killing the Cardinal, and the
time of the Stroke should be, when he visited the Quarters of the Army which
besieged Corbie; but the Count alone would not consent to dip his Hands in the
Blood of a Priest.

But the Duke de Vallette, who saw the Danger wherein he was, when the
Conspiracy came to be discovered, resolved to shelter himself by the blackest
Treachery that could be imagined; he discovered to the Cardinal all the
Accomplices, of which the Count de Soissans having Notice, he speedily withdrew
to Sedan. I shall not make thee (Inincible Leader) a Description of this Place,
which regards on one side Luxemburg, and on the other France; it not lying in
my way to make Draughts of Fortifications like an Engineer, but to give thee a
full Account of what the Infidels do, and discover their Designs, whereby thou
may gather what may make for the Advantage of our great Monarch; whose Power
cannot be shaken, but by the entire overthrow of the Universe.

Sedan is a Dominion which formerly belonged to the Dukes of Cleves, who were
Sovereigns of it, and at the same time Dukes de Bouillon. When the Count was in
this place, he thought himself safe; the Marshall de Bouillon, who was the
Master of it by the Testament of the last of this Family, declared himself of
his Party, either to make War together against the Cardinal by open Force* or
drive him out of this Kingdom, or to get rid of him by Death. Here it was they
made their secret Treaties with those who commanded for the Spaniards in the
Low Countries, and a Prince of the House of Lorrain entered into their Cabal.
He bear^ the Cardinal as much as ill will, and appears as resolute as the rest
for his Destruction: he is called the Duke of Guise.

There wanted only to this Party the Duke of Orleans, the King's only Brother,
and therefore the Duke of Guise dispatched a Messenger to him, who sold in one
day both his Master, and all the re^^ that were of the Conspiracy. He
discovered a^ the Secrets of the Cabal; and the better to carry on his Deceit,
he caused himself to be apprehended and thrown into Prison, having given his
Dispatches to the King's Brother, which he had before showed the Cardinal. This
Traitor was no^ contented with revealing these Gentlemen's Secrets who had sent
him, but also made it appear, That the Prince, the King's Brother, was guilty
as an Accomplice of the others Rebellion. Thu^ these great men grown desperate
at the Discovery of their Projects, which were indeed contrary to their
Sovereign's Interests and the Kingdoms, were forced to throw themselves into
the Arms of the Spaniards, and to join with them.

They have raised Troops amongst their Vassals and Friends, and openly declared
themselves; and fought with great Valor, as I have already mentioned in the
beginning or my Letter. The King's Army has been very ill handled, and it
appear^ that the Advantage was wholly on the Confederate^ side; but it has cost
the Count of Soissons his Life who was General, and Chief of the Party; and it
is at present disputed, to whom is due the Honor of the Victory.

I prostrate my self continually at thy Feet, to kiss, with all Humility, the
Dust of them; assuring thee, thou have in me a most faithful Slave, that will
never change.

Paris, 15th. of the 8th. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER VI.
To Solomon his Cousin, at Constantinople.
POntius Pilate was an honester man than thou. He, although a Pagan, excused
himself of the false Sentences he should pronounce on the Christion's Messiah,
by washing his Hands before the Jews, who sought his Death: And, thou that art
a Maho^etan as I am, and washest thy whole Body in the Baths at Constantinople,
in the Presence of our Friends, accusest and condemnest me rashly without any
scruple. Thou usest me like a Rogue; so maliciously art thou set against me,
who am of the same Religion which thou professest. How can thou justify the
Hatred thou bear me, in endeavoring to make the Kaimacam believe, I have
been corrupted by the Cardinal, who is the King of France's Chief Minister?
Adding, that he ought no more to heed my Letters, and Relations sent to the
sublime Port, (where lie prostrate all the Powers of the World,) as not written
by an Arabian, but by a Sacrilegious Heretic; That I deceive the Mufti, so
venerable for the Authority which he has in such an holy Religion, of which he
is the worthy Head; and that I amuse him by my Letters, the better to conceal
my Change, seeing I adore in my Heart, and publicly profess an entire
Submission to the Decrees of the Roman Prelate.

The Quality of thy Cousin, which I have whether I will or no, is so far from
withholding thee, that it is made use of to carry on thy pernicious Designs. O
unworthy Kinsman! Infamous Hypocrite! Thou will discredit me, and break off the
course of my Employment, because I serve effectually the greatest Prince of the
Universe. Thou approvedst not only my Conduct when I began my Endeavors,
under the Orders of the Ministers of the Divan; but, thou applaudest me, gave
me Praises. And now, when all the Ministers ar^ satisfied with me, and approved
of my Behavior, and gave me their Commendations; thou art the only Man who
thinks it fitting to traverse me to obscure my Reputation, and blacken my
Actions. Is this the Fruit of thy Studies with Hippo at Athens, to whom thou
owe thy Knowledge of Greek Authors, which thou so greatly braggest of? Answer
me, unjust Cousin, what is thy design o^ having me called away by thy base
Defamations? When did I offend thee, and wherein I pray? But thy Artifices, how
great and malicious soever they be, will not prevail over the sincerity of my
Heart; and, as I shall always exactly perform my Duty, so I fear not the Loss
of my Prince's Favor; he will approve of what I do, and thou will dye with
Envy and Despite.

I needed not have been mistaken: I might have seen the Falseness of thine
Heart by thy Countenance. Thou art an Heraclitus, always melancholy, and out of
Humor, that cannot rejoice, should Heaven favor our Invincible Monarch's
Projects Thou art a false Zeno, who under the affected Appearances of a Stoic,
conceals a Cynical Heart, whose Critical Humor is always biting on the Actions
of others. Nature has covered thy Face with Sadness, mixed with a deadly
Paleness, because thou art always busied about some doleful matter. In like
manner it appears, That Pythagoras has instructed thee to speak little, as
knowing thou art not fit to say or do any thing but what is hurtful. I know not
what is become of Isouf, having no Account of him. I am afraid thou have
corrupted this my Kinsman, that I might have no Ally or faithful Friend. Thou
have not failed to instruct him well, having given him so good an Example; and
he has, without doubt, been so ungrateful, as to imitate thee. He is returned
from Mecha, and makes me no Answer, giving me no Account whether he has made
the Offering for me on the Mountain, whether he has sacrificed the Sheep,
whether he has distributed the Alms I enjoined him, and whether he will send
me, as I entreated him, a small piece of the old Hangings of the sacred Mosque.
But I will not concern my self as much at what others do, my Intention being to
complain only of thee, because others offenses are not comparable to thine,
thou having left no Stone unturned to ruin me.

Continue then in thine ill Nature; I write only to acquaint thee, that I am
not ignorant of whatever thou have done against me. There Is no body but old
Baba thine Uncle, who can work a change in thee; go to him, be not ashamed to
see a man who is employed in the meanest Works, to have more Judgment than
thee: Show him the Infirmities of thy Soul; or, to speak better, confess to him
all the ill things thou have done, if thou have any Intention of becoming an
honest man; although he be but a Carpenter he knows better than thee, to form the
Mind; he can teach thee how to polish and square thy Soul, as he polishes a
piece of Oak, though never so hard and knotty.

He is pefectly instructed in the Law; he is brought up in the Principles of
Religion; he will guide thee, if thou will suffer him, in the way which leads
to Perfection; he will not permit thee to lie; he will put thee on making
Restitutions to those whose good Name thou have unjustly taken; and he will
comfort thee, if thou be really sorrowful for the ill thou have done, and if
thou show any Regret at thy former purposes, of destroying a Kinsman that
loved thee, and still wishes thee all kinds of Happiness; if thou repentest of
thy unjust Persecutions, and if of a bad Cousin, which thou have been, thou will become a sincere and hearty Friend.

Paris, 25th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER VII.
To Dgnet Oglou.
I Say not that those are Fools who are in Love, but I must needs think, that
those who believe lightly, are not overladen with Discretion. It Is hard for a
Man always to keep himself from falling into a Passion; but it is not so hard
for a man to keep himself from believing things with too great Facility, and
from being caught with Falsehoods, which are the most constant Attendants of
Women.

Thou have spoke the Truth to me, in sending me the Balm and Aloes I wrote for;
and I shall not answer thee with Lies, in speaking of Daria, who is the Subject
of the Letter which I received from thee. Let me thank thee, without saying any
thing of the Present thou made me, which is very magnificent and acceptable;
and suffer me to complain to thee freely of the Hurt which another has done me.
I need not consult my Register, to remember whatever I wrote to thee about this
Greek, my Heart which is yet full of it, reproaches me every Moment, for having
said too much to thee on that Subject.

Never any thing appeared to me so desirable, as that Herb which Homer called
Nepente, to cure me of the cruel Distemper, with which I am tormented. This
Prince of Poets makes a Queen of our Egypt, to present this admirable Simple
to Helena, which has the Virtue of appeasing immediately all Dolours, and makes
us forget the Vexations and Offenses offered us. But thou will not understand
me, unless I tell thee clearly, That Daria has forgotten all the Promises she
made me, as soon as ever she was from me; not remembering in any sort my Love.
It Is true, she wrote twice to me since her Departure, but in so cold a Style,
that it is plainly seen, her Heart is as cold as Ice to me. As soon as ever she
saw her self in the Arms of her Husband, she made him a Sacrifice of my
Passion; and, the better to make her Court to him, and persuade him of her
Fidelity, she delivered to him my Letters. The Husband laughed in reading them,
and said to her, in a jear to me: A man then, so desperately in love, has only
sighed and wrote? He has done something more (replied this Dissembling Woman)
having promised to send me a Box of white Balm of Mecha, and Aloes-Wood, to
perfume me, which yet I do not expect to receive so soon, and perhaps never:
For, if Mahmut be not become a Fool, he will as soon forget me, as I shall
certainly forget him. And what! have thou promised, this Barbarian? replied
immediately the Husband. I promised, replied Daria, to send with my Picture,
that of the most chaste of all Women; which yet I do not pretend to do, without
your Consent, nay, and Command.

What I now inform thee, comes from a place which makes me not at all doubt the
certainty of it. But having learnt by what I related, the Virtue of this Woman,
now hear what the Hushand's was; who having seen my Picture, and commended the
Painter that drew it, embraced tenderly his Wife, whom he respected as a most
singular Example of Conjugal Fidelity. Thou will wonder at Daria's Weakness, in
showing him my Picture; she did do it, and her Confidence has turned to
Account, she having received a Thousand chaste Embraces for a Recompense. Thou
see here the Happiness of the Christian Women, who have Husbands who take so
favorably the Offenses done them during their Absence.

In the mean time, Daria's Picture does not come; she returns no more Answers
to my Letters, which has discouraged me to write to her for some time. My
Passion begins not to be so violent; and, this great Fire which consumed me,
will soon turn into Ashes. I have been mightily mistaken; for, it is only
amongst Persons of an equal Condition, where true and lasting Friendships are
to be found. Let us love, my dear Dgnet; let the Bonds of our Friendship be
such, as will never break nor be dissolved. Daria is really a great Example of
Fidelity to her Husband; but, she is also an Example of Inconftancy and
Treachery, to a Lover who had sacrificed all to her.

I am resolved henceforward, to love no Woman; and, I am certain, my dear
Friend, that my Resolution shall hold. Rejoice with me at my Cure, and believe,
that if a fine and charming Woman disordered my Brains, the good Humor and
Patience of her Husband, has brought me again to my Senses. My Adventure should
make thee careful, to avoid the Inconveniences; but, thou can not run that
Risque, being happy with the other Mussulmen of Constantinople, who have Laws
which retain and hinder them from falling into the like Irregularities.

I hope also thou will give over being my Rival, if thou have ever had any
kindness for this ungrateful Greek. If men must love once in their Lives, let
them have a care of falling into those Excesses which dep^ive them of their
Reason, and make them repent of their Love all the days of their Lives. My
Repentance is great; and though my Passion be not wholly extinct, yet I feel a
Joy which makes me know, I shall by degrees lose my Passion for her.

Thou may well be tired with this long Discourse; but I shall end it, in
sending thee a Description which one of the greatest Wits in Spain has made of
Women,

He says, They be the Sources of Life and Death; that they are to be considered
as Fire, because they use all that come near them as that Element does, yet
they give Men a certain necessary Heat: They are fine things; bring Joy to
Families and whole Towns; but are dangerous to keep, enflaming all that comes
near them, and reducing them commonly into Ashes. They usually give a great
Luster, but this Luster is never without such a Smoke, as darkens the
Understanding, and makes, them often shed Tears who only behold them. He that
has no Commerce with Women, spends his Life in Melancholy, and yet they are
seldom seen without Danger. The way to manage them, is not to do excessive
things for them, no more than wholly to neglect them, A man often obtains them
easily, and commonly loses them more easily. Fire and a Woman, are exactly the
same; and, be that said, Women are Fires which burn all things, has said
likewife, That Fire is like Women, which consumes all things.

But our Re^gious Arabians have spoken yet more Elegantly, when they wrote,
that God made a particular Paradise for them; because, say they, should they
enter into that of Men, they would soon change it into a Hell.

Eve played her part so well, when she was seduced by the Serpent in the
Terrestrial Paradise, that she deceived her Spouse also, that he might lie
under the like Condemnation. But however, this Sex having amongst so many
Defects something that is amiable; let us love them at least, because of their
Usefulness for continuing the Species, but not for their Beauty; whose
Enchantments corrupt the Mind, and hinder all the excellent Operations of it:
For Men perhaps would be Angels, were there no Women; I mean, bad ones; for
good Women, as well as good Men, can do no Hurt. Adieu.

Paris, 20th. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER VIII.
To Carcoa at Vienna.
THe Courier which is now arrived, has brought me Letters and Money from thee.
I shall receive the Money upon the Bill of Exchange, when it is due, under the
name of Titus. I am extremely obliged to thee for the Care thou have taken in
procuring it me, being in a Country where good Words are of no Credit. I have
received also the Box, wherein is the Balm and Aloes sent me by my Friend
Oglou, all in good Condition, and come in good time. I want only to know, how
it is with Isouf; for he writes no more to me. I am informed, he is returned
from his Pilgrimage, and yet has not sent to thee what I desired him to bring
from Mecha.

I will not complain of any body; if I do, it shall be of my self. Take care of
the Letters I send thee and let me know, whether we may hope well from the
Grand Seignior, and what is reported at the Court where thou art, and if there
be any likelihood of making War afresh against the Infidels.

My Health is indifferent. I live here without Suspicion; and though Cardinal
Richlieu be an Argus, he is blind as to what concerns me; for the knows nothing
of my Business, or feigns so at least; neither do I do, or say any thing which
may make me suspected for an Enemy.

I assure thee, I love God, have a great Respect for his Law, and follow my
Business with great Fidelity. If thou will have me do more, advertise the
Friend of it, whom thou know; show me the Example, and live happily.

Paris, 22d. of the 10th. Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER IX.
To Berber Mustapha Aga at Constantinople.
WE are arrived to the End of the Year, which the Infidels solemnize by
Bonfires, and which I mark by an extraordinary Sadness. I complain not, in that
Time making it self the Master of my Heart, will soon begin to weaken it. I
understand the Folly of those Vows, which are made to Heaven for the obtaining
of a long Life, Those that desire it, are wont to make contrary ones, when they
become overwhelmed with the Infirmities which attend for the most part old Age.
The Occas^o^ of my Complaints, is of another Nature; I am troubled at the being
so far from my Friends and Country, and at my being banished into an Enemy's
Country, where I must live like a Man, that is in continual Fear, amongst
People who seem to matter nothing.

Thou art now above 50 Years of Age, and I not above 32, and yet I know thou
reflectest not much hereupon, thinking thou have still a long time to live.
Thou art of a strong Constitution, art a lover of Pleasures, searching them
every where, without any thoughts of Death, who will spare thee no more than
others, whose Health is decayed; for he comes taking great strides toward us
all. Thou art very fortunate, I must needs say, ^n conserving in a Body so near
Old Age, a young Man's Spirit; which is far from my Disposition: For when thou
art in pursuit of Divertisements, I am continually thinking of Death; because I
believe I have lived too long.

Should the King, or Cardinal, near whom I live, know this Night, that Mahmut,
who writes to thee, is one of the Grand Seignior's Spies, I should lose my
Life, perhaps, before the next Light; yet, the fear of such an Adventure, gives
me no Disquiet; having entirely sacrificed my self to the Master I serve, who
commands all Men on the Earth. Should these Barbarians put me to Death, I shall
only finish a little sooner that course, which I must certainly one day put an
end to; and if I live, I shall have neither Recompense to expect, nor Pain to
apprehend.

Here is much talk about the Duke of Lorrain; yet, there has been more done
against him, than said. The French affirm, that in stripping this Prince of his
Countries, he has been very mercifully dealt with; for, Justice required more.
There are, on the contrary, other People, who do not believe it is possible to
do a greater plece of Injustice. In fine, every man speaks after his manner.

It Is said moreover, that this Sovereign being come again into the King's
Favor, who had given him a Thousand Testimonies of good Will, after what had
passed in 1634, when this Court had great reasons to complain of his Conduct;
he drew down again afresh the Indignation of France upon him, by a Fault which
cannot be excused. I think, this Duke had concluded two Treaties that Year,
promising a Submission and eternal Obedience. He had the Honor to dine with
the King; and having rendered him Homage for the Duchy of Bar, he again threw
himself into the Arms of the Austrians; although he had sworn on the Gospels,
(a Book as much respected amongst the Christians, as the Alcoran is among the
True Faithful,) That he would never forsake the Interests of France, what Wars
soever she might find; that he would be perpetually fixed to the Interests of
that Crown, and never hold any Correspondence with the House of Austria. In
consideration of which, Lewis should re-establish this Prince in his Estates,
which he was to surrender entirely, bating some Places, and the Capital, called
Nanci, which he would retain during the War, as a Pledge for the performance of
what he had sworn to; and, which yet was to be given up, after the Conclusion
of the Peace. It Is added, That this Sovereign, having occasion to complain of
the Spanish Ministers, and the Grandees of this Nation, who carry on the War in
Flanders; he had written to the Cardinal Infant, Governor of the Low Countries,
a Letter to this purpose, and very near in these Words:

The King of Frante having required me, to join my self with my Troops to his
Army near Sedan; I would not obey this puissant King, much less your Higness;
seeing the Towns subject to the Spaniards, treat me as if I were an Enemy.

The Ladies have had a great part in this Accommodation of the Duke of Lorrain;
which has had, like all the Works of Women, a direful Event. This Prince being
become amorous of a French Lady, was for repudiating his lawful Princess, to
whom he owes all his Estate; beginning to separate from her, that he might give
himself entirely to the Countess of Cantecroix, whom he used as his real Wife.

Good People are sorry for this Prince's Disgrace, as believing his Condition
to be past Remedy. The devout part say, That having been unjustly deprived of
his Estates, God will work Miracles in his Favor; considering, no less than
Three Hundred Saints; as they say, have been of his Family, which must needs
reconcile him to the Favor of Heaven; amongst which, is the famons Godfrey of
Bullen, who won Jerusalem, and all Palestine from the Saracens; whom we must
own to have been a great Man, whether we consider his Courage, or Zeal for his
Religion, which ought to make his Memory famous to all Ages.

I can tell thee nothing more certain on this Subject, having endeavored to be
informed of what I write to thee, to satisfy thy Curiosity: and, whatever I
now recite, has past in France with little Noise, or rather with great Silence,
as to me; for indeed, I must with shame confess, that I have scarce heard in
Paris this Event, so famous throughout all Europe.

Man has nothing but what comes from Heaven; and commonly the strongest, when
he has Right on his side, subdues the weak, and enriches himself with his
Spoils.

By the Law of Nature, every one has Right of judging his own Necessities, and
the Greatness of the Danger wherein he finds himself; and, if it be contrary to
Reason, I should be Judge of my own Danger, it is reasonable another should be
so. But, the same Reason which establishes another Judge of what concerns me,
has made me, his Judge; and consequently, gives me Authority to judge of the
Sentence which he shall give against me; and to decide, whether it be just,
when it is favorable to me, or unjust, if it be contrary to my Interests.

Nature has given all to Men, and thou and I, and all men have an equal Right
to all things, and hence we have Power to do whatever we will, to possess and
enjoy what we think is fitting; and yet, such an extensive Right, is just as if
we had Right to nothing; For, at the same time I have Right to a thing which
pleases me, another stronger than my self, by virtue of the same Right, takes
it from me, and enjoys it in spite of me. Hence it is, that one man invades
another with the same Right with which he defends himself, whence do, and will
spring up always, the occasions of Jealousies and Discords which are amongst
men; which make them at continual Defiance with one another, and keeps them in
a continual Watchfulness over their Neighbors.

It Is this Liberty founded in Nature, which makes it lawful in time of War, to
resist and invade not only by open Force, but with all the secret Arts and
Stratagems as can be devised; and, when a man would avoid the Danger he is in
in fighting, and has his Enemy in his hands, he has right to use all means to
avoid him, and secure himself from him.

Thou will approve of these Reflections, which show thee the Natural Right thou
have of commanding me, as being thy Inferior; and, I hope, by what I have
written, to have satisfied thy Curiosity; and, by my Submission and Obedience,
to have given thee a Proof of my profound Respects to thee.

Paris, 24th. of the last Moon, of the Year 1641.
LETTER X.
To Bedredin, Superior of the Dervises of Cogni in Natolia.
LET me, most holy and patient Dervis, salute thee with my Head bowed down to
the ground, with the greatest Humility I am able. I now write to thee with my
Feet naked, without either Hose or Shoes, as a Mark of my Respect and
Veneration, which I have for thy Old Age, and the Admiration I have at thy
incorruptible Innocence.

The kindness thou show me by the long Letter I have received, has given me
such joy as I cannot express; as makes me forget my past Pains, and hinders me
from thinking of those which are to happen to me; for, I can now willingly
leave this World, having had such Testimonies of thy Affection. Thy great Age
does not astonish me seeing thy Father, who is yet alive, is 107 years old, and
thou not above 82; which makes me hope to see a great while yet, both one and
the other, draw down by their Prayers, and Merit of their good Actions, the
Blessings of Heaven on the glorious Empire of the Ottomans, to whom all the
Empires and Monarchies of the World ought to submit. The Thirty Brethren who
presented themselves to Selim, to be enrolled in the Troops which were to serve
against the Persians, made the Father, who had them all by one Woman, to pass
for the happiest of all the Mussulmans, in having the good Fortune to beget
such a number of the most noble Species in Nature. But thou and thy Father,
must needs be more happy than this fertile Parent. Thy Father has fought, and
come out victorious from the Perversity of the Age, full of Scars and
Sufferings, through the Force of his Courage, the Innccency of his Manners, and
his great Sobriety: And, as to thy part, what have not thou done, to make thy
self the worthy Son of so glorious a Father? Thou have not only done, what thy
Father did before thee; thou have acquired the same Virtues, and have so far
outdone them, that one may say, thou have surpassed Virtue it self. Thy
Strength is admirable, in the midst of Abstinencies, and other Austerities
which thou undergoest; in which, it is certain, thou can not be imitated. But
Heaven, to whom only thou live, will recompense in this World thy pure Faith,
which the Enemy of Mankind can never weaken.

The Christians say, When God gave them the Commandments, he promised only long
Life to such who perfectly honored those, who, under God, brought them into
the Light. If this be true, as it is very likely; it is not to be doubted, but
that a Long Life is the Recompense which God gives those who live well: And the
Nazarenes, who are Critics, affirm, That Sin alone is the cause, that men do
not live so long as they did before the Deluge; for, then they remained such a
while in Life, as would tempt one to think, they were to have been Immortal.
They say, That after the Deluge, God changed the Nature of Men; and instead of
these great number of Years, which made up the Course of so long a Life, they
cannot live at farthest above 120 years, and that there are few which arrive at
80; and whatever is beyond this, is Misery and Torment; or a kind of
Senselesness, which makes Men like Beasts.

I know few People but what are agreed, One may cure or mitigate the
Inconveniences which happen to us; but, few are of Opinion, That Life can be
lengthened; yet, if this be possible, we may then believe a Story which is
believed here, and which happened the year past in Paris.

An Ancient Man, went to a Dervise of this great Town, and thus accosted him; I
am come, Reverend Father, to know of you, whether I may in good Conscience
determine to live no longer, being quite aweary of living. I have already
arrived to the 129th. year of my Age, by means of a Liquor which Chemistry has
taught me, whereby I did scarce perceive from any thing I felt, that I was
going down; yet however, this long Life appears at present to me irksome and
intolerable. My Blood is so purified in my Veins that I have remained without
any of those Passions whereunto Mankind is generally. Subject. My Taste, serves
me no longer to discover the Delicacy of Meats, My Ears, although they be not
deaf, yet will not let me distinguish true Harmony from what is only a
Confusion of Sounds. Mine Eyes are open to see, but are not cleared with any
Object. My Faculty of Smelling, is struck with Scents, yet they make no
Impressions on it. I touch, but I feel not what I touch; and I touch all things
indifferently. Mine Heart is no longer sensible, nor affected with Tenderness,
and Passion for my Friends. Bile in me has no longer its usual Heat. Joy and
Sorrow, Anger, Desire of having, Hope and Hatred, are extinguished in me;
whereby I am become insensible in conserving, if I may so say, all my Senses. I
am resolved therefore to let my self dye, provided you can assure me I may do
it without Sin; for should I remain two days without taking this precious
Elixir, I am certain I shall soon expire, and so be delivered from the Vexation
which overwhelms me. It Is said* that the Dervise answered this Philosopher;
That he might not desire Death, but on the contrary, preserve his Life; and
supposing he made use of no Secret of Magic to prolong his Days, he should
believe, that the mavelous Potion, of which he had found the Secret by his
Study and Travel, was a Present from Heaven: That it is true, he would be rid of
a troublesome Life, but he could not procure the End of it without a Crime; and
that he was obliged to preserve it, to suffer with greater Submission the Pains
he complained of, which could not be comparable to the Pleasures he had
received, by enjoying the Gift which God had bestowed on him.

The Grear God preserve thy Days beyond those of this Philosopher; and,
accompany them with whatever may give thee Satisfaction: But, I beseech him
above all things, that he never let slip out of thy Memory the Promise thou
have made me, of having always a particular Respect to thy Servant Mahmut, who
reverences thy Holiness.

Paris, 15th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER XI.
To the Redoubtable Vizir Azem.
I Make thee an Answer, invincible Warrior, by whose Counsels the formidable
Empire of the Ottomans is governed, under the Orders of the most mighty of the
Princes of the Earth; and, whose Arm is terrible to all the Potentates of the
World. I have read thy Letter, with which thou honor the most submissive of
thy Slaves, with all the Humility which is due to thy sublime Grandeur,
whereunto thy Merit has raised thee. And, having cast my self at thy Feet in
Spirit, seeing I cannot really kiss them, I obey the Orders thou sendest me,
which are to me inviolable Laws.

Banniere, the Swedish General, is dead; when Picolicomini, one of the
Generals, of the Emperor's Army, lay just by him. In half an hours time, he
saved himself, the Army, all the Baggage, and Cannon, and retired with
incredible Swiftness over Mountains and Forests, where the Beasts alone could
make Passages, having continually the Emperor's Army at his back. He was a Man
of great Valor, had been highly serviceable to the Crown of Swedeland, and
acquired the Reputation of an excellent Commander. The Emperor had offered him
some time before great Recompenses, and the Dignity of Prince of the Empire, if
he would change his Master, and forsake the Confederates Party. He had also
offered, thinking this might more move him, to make him General of his Army
against the Grand Signior: but he refused all these Offers, his Fidelity being
unmovable.

This great Captain was born in Swedeland, and when a Child, he fell down from
a high Window, without receiving any Hurt; which made the King imagine, Heaven
designed him for some thing extraordinary. He traveled much in his Youth, and
he was seen never tired in running to all places where there was any War;
sometimes in Poland, and otherwhiles in Muscovia: And being become General of
his King's Army, he soon acquired the Reputation of one of the greatest
Captains of the Northern Part. He was perfectly skilled in the Art of
Encamping, and no body could ever better draw up an Army for Battle. His way of
Retreat from before an Army stronger than his, must needs be admired by all the
World. He ever chose good Posts; and when once he was possessed of them, he
knew well how to keep them; so that he was never defeated, whatever Forces his
Enemy might bring against him. He has destroyed Fourscore Thousand Men, in
different Rencounters; and, Swedeland glories in having above Six hundred
Standards. He was so like King Gustovus, tha^ they have been often taken for
one another. He was never covetous; but was observed to be a good Husband.
Among so many Occasions wherein he signalized himself, what he did when the
Swedish Army was worsted at Norlinge, is most remarkable; he preserved the
Rest, though wholly forsaken by the Allies; and so ordered the Matter, that he
raised fresh Troops almost in an instant, and gave his Party Time and Courage
to rise up: And, this is all I could learn of this great Captain, whose
Reputation has given thee Curiosity.

Although Don Duarte de Braganza, the new King of Portugal's Brother, served
with great Reputation in the Emperor's Army; yet it is said, the Spaniards had
been very urgent with this Monarch to make him be apprehended, as soon as ever
they heard the King, his Brother, was raised to the Throne. But it is said, the
Emperor was scandalized with such a Proposition, alleging, this would be
against the Rules of Hospitality: But the Empress's Confessor found such
Reasons in his Divinity, as brought over the Emperor to yield, he should be
delivered into the Spanish Minister's Hands, who conducted him with a very
strong Party to the Castle of Milan; whence he is not like to stir out, till
his Brother shall restore the Crown of Portugal to Philip IV. of Spain.

I shall write what remains behind, to the Kaimakan, who has the Honor of
being thy Lieutenant; that I may not the thee, who art to be reverenced as the
instrument of the Wills of the Master of Lights, and all whose Hours are
destined to the Government of the World.

May it please him, who of nothing has created all things, that thou may lay
one day at the Feet of the Grand Signior, the Crowns of all the Monarchs who
command in the Infidels Countries, and become thereby the Arbiter of the
Universe.

Paris, 18th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER XII.
To the Kaimakam at Constantinople.
THis King here has mortified his Parliament, by the Advice of Cardinal
Richlieu. The Parliaments are Bodies of Learned Men, who decide all Affairs in
the Kingdom, as well Civil, as Criminal, and the Parliament of Paris, has a
larger Jurisdiction than all others, and as considerable Prerogatives. What I
have to say on this Subject, has happened from the beginning of the last Year;
and I now relate it, because I forgot to do it when the thing happened: And I
will inform thee, before I enter on the Matter, what obliged heretofore the
Kings of France to set up this great Seat of justice.

The ancient Kings of France, gave it Authority of approving and verifying the
Edicts and Declarations which they should make, which was a Bar which these
wise Princes would fix between the People and the Sovereign Authority. Whence
it appeared, that Monarchy was mixed with Aristocracy; without which the Wise
have thought, that States could not long subsist. And the Princes of this Age
have submitted to a Tribunal re-established by themselves, the Resolutions they
take; to the end they may discharge themselves toward God, to whom they are
accountable, as well as other Men; and, to obtain Confidence from their
Subjects, in taking from amongst them Arbiters to regulate them. Yet, they have
ever reserved the Liberty of making use of their Absolute Power, as is seen in
their Letters Patents, where they forget not to insert these Words, [For such
is our Will and Pleasure.]

These Monarchs also thought hereby to have found out a way to defend
themselves from the Importunities of the Grandees, who often demanded such
things which could not be granted without Prejudice to the whole Kingdom.

The Authority of the now reigning King being out of danger of being shaken or
destroyed, this Monarch having his Exchequer well stored, has valiant and
experienced Captains, stout Soldiers, and numerous Armies, and good Fleets of
Ships at Sea; whereby he would make known to this puissant Tribunal, That if it
had been set up to assist the Kings by its Counsels when required, yet it must
not pretend, that its Decrees should become Laws to their Sovereigns. He went
to the Parliament with all the Marks of Grandeur with which he is usually
attended on these Days of Ceremony, and with such a great Company of Lords, as
made the Power of this Monarch easily discerned. He gave these Gentlemen to
understand, he would have them ratify, without more ado, the Orders he would
send them, which they term Edicts, requiring them to be immediately
enregistred. He afterward gave them an express Charge, not to concern
themselves henceforwards in Affairs of State; and to humble them the more, he
declared to them, That he would be henceforward the Disposer of Graces, and
Offices, and bestow Recompenses to such as deserved them. He added hereunto an
Order of giving an account every Year to his Chancellor of their Deportments
and to come and receive every year his Majesty's Approbation to continue them
in their Offices. And, as a Mark of his Indignation and Authority, he put by
the President and some Counselors from their Places.

This bold and politic Action was done (as I may say) in the midst of Dancings
and Divertisements, the more to denote the Monarch's Authority; and, in the
time of such Magnificent Feastings, as became the Pomp of the greatest Emperors
in the Palace of the Cardinal, for the Marriage of his Niece Mademoisselle de
Breze with the Prince of Conde's Eldest Son, called the Duke D' Anguien; a
Prince from whom the World expects great things, and whom all France believes
will prove one of the Famousest Princes in Christendom.

The Catalonians are obstinate in their Revolt; their Deputies have been
already seen in this Court, to entreat a good Supply from this King; and, it is
not to be doubted, but they will earnestly sue for his Protection: And, France
has already sent Troops near those Parts, and its Fleet appears on the Coasts,
to encourage this Nation, and mortify the Spaniards. There are a great many
Troops raised here; and, this Monarch will have in the Spring eight Armies,
commanded by Generals of great Valor and Experience, besides these two Fleets;
so that Germany, Lorrain, the Low Countries, Catalonia and Italy, are like to
be Exposed to the Miseries of an impoverishing War. Only Germany seems to me
able to defend it self.

The vast Genius of the French-Minister, astonishes all the Princes of Europe;
he breaks all their Measures, and makes a secret War against them in their own
Courts. Nothing can escape his vigilant Care; he keeps his own Secrets so
strictly, that his nearest Friends cannot discover them. His Power and
Authority are so great, that the Princes of the Blood are nothing in comparison
of him, and his Fame makes him as much respected Abroad as at Home.

His Friends affirm, He is ignorant of nothing which is projected in Europe.
England is the Place which he has last attackt, its Civil Wars owing their
Original to his Designs.

I pray Heavens favor thy just Pretensions, and every day increase thy Heroic
Virtues.

Paris, 15th. of the 1st. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER XIII.
To the most Excellent and most Venerable Mufti, Sovereign Prelate of the Holy
Religion of the Faithful Mussulmen.
HE of whom I wrote so many particulars, some Moons ago, to obey, as I ought,
the express Command thou laidst upon me; not only is still living, but is more
absolute than ever, in what concerns his Ministry, Yet is it false, that this
Cardinal finding nothing more (as thou writest to me, it is talked of in
Constantinople) to satisfy his Ambition, (which puts him still upon desiring
something farther, being become the absolute Master of what depends on the
Kingdom of Lewis XIII.) had designs of making himself absolute Master of what
concerns Religion. But, he was too knowing a Man, to design the being the
Superior General of all the French Dervises; a thing which neither the King of
France, nor the Pope would permit. I rather think, this Minister's Design has
been, to subject all the Christian Princes to his Master's Interests.

The Ottoman Empire would have some reason to be afraid, were all the Roman
Prelates wise enough to choose this Man for their Pope. We should see in a short
time, all Asia agitated by his Intrigues, against the Followers of the great
Mahomet; and those that follow Ali, would not enjoy a much greater Security.
Thou know, that the greatest Marks which the Popes can give of their Piety
during their Pontificat, is to stir up Wars, and make Leagues against us to
overthrow our Empire. Think then what this great Man would do, were he the Head
of the Christians, with those Abilities, and great Intelligences which he every
where keeps; seeing, that being only a Subject, and Minister of one Prince, he
so governs himself, that there is no Nation how far so ever distant, but holds
its Eyes open on his Conduct: And a Pope being always chosen from amongst the
Cardinals, and the Pope now reigning being very old, it may happen that this
dangerous man shall be chosen.

Thou then, whose pure Life makes us believe thou art a Saint, pray the great
God to hinder such an Event, which will without question disturb the Empire of
him whom he has chosen to humble all other Potentates, and show on Earth the
Greatness of his power; and, rather than such a Misfortune should befall us,
pray Him that has created all things, that this man's Eyes be opened to know
and embrace the true Faith: For, it were better, (if I may say so without
displeasing thee) that this Cardinal should be a bad Mufti at Constantinople,
than a good Pope at Rome, at the Head of all the Nazarenes.

It Is said, that a Foreign King consulted this Oracle, (for he is held in as
great Veneration as if he was one,) what Conduct he should hold to live
securely: And it is said, the Cardinal made this Answer: That Kings should live
in Fear, and then they would live in Safety; it being certain, they would
receive no Poison from the Hands of those who do not present them their Drink,
no more than they can receive Wounds from those, whom they keep at a great
Distance from them. Those who will not flatter them, will not deceive them; and
where they shall think themselves in greatest Safety, that will always be the
place of greatest Danger.

I am persuaded, grave and wise Prelate, thou will approve of the Answer of
this Minister. Julius Caesar lived in the midst of Combats, but dyed in the
midst of the Senate.

Next after God, it is before thee, great Minister of Heaven, that I humble my
self, entreating thee to receive graciously the profound Respects of thy Slave
Mahmut.

Paris, 25th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER XIV.
To his Mother Ocoumiche, at Constantinople.
IT may be said, I have escaped from a mortal Sickness, and remain in Life,
only to hear the Complaints of my Friends, who recite to me their Misfortunes;
and of my Kindred, who entertain me with the Losses they have sustained. Thou
addest, my dear Mother, a new Torment to the Pains I already suffer, by
shedding so many fruitless Tears, O! how cruel is my Country, that gives so
many Occasions of Affliction to those to whom she has given their Birth! Thou
have lost the greatest part of thine Estate, in the Fire of Constantinople, and
Death has deprived thee of thy second Husband. I was but a Child when my Father
dyed, so that I could not judge then of thy Grief; neither was I sensible of my
own Loss. Now that I am a Man, I enter into thy Sentiments, I share in thy
Grief, and shall do all I can to comfort thee.

Thou have lost thy first and second Husband, and thou have reason to afflict
thy self. If the first was an honest man, it is certain the other loved thee
extremely: And the Charms of thy Countenance have not a little served thee to
acquire the Affection of these Two Husbands, which thou knew how to keep by
thy Complacencies and blind Obedience to their Wills; and by such a prudent
Carriage, as, one may say, thou would force them to love thee, had thou not
done it by the Charms of thy Beauty.

But, what shall we do in this thy Extreme Affliction, and in the troublesome
Condition I am for the Grief thou endurest, which mingles my Ink with my Tears?
Yet we must endeavor to be comforted with a firm Resolution, not to afflict
our selves but at the Loss of such things which will never be in our power to
recover. Thou, at the loss of the Reputation which thou have acquired of a
Virtuous Woman; and I, at that of an Honest Man.

When my Father dyed, 'twas not all the Philosophy nor Eloquence of the Greeks
which could comfort thee, thy Affliction was stronger than all their Reasons:
and, when those officious Comforters had forsaken thee, thou soughtest Ease to
thy Trouble in a new Spouse. Him now thou have lost, but now thou art still in
a Condition of hindering this Loss from being irreparable. Thy Virtue has never
been questioned, and thou art not as yet so old, but thou may think of
another Husband. Seek a Third, which may make thee forget thy Sorrow for the
second. And if thou find him not immediately, or if thou had some trouble
in seeking a like Comfort to thy Affliction, receive in this Letter the Tears
of another Mother, which will show thee there is a Woman of a far higher
Condition, that is more afflicted than thou art.

Paris is still full of the Cries and Sighs which come from a Princess of the
First Rank. She has now lost a great Prince, her Son, who is slain in a Battle
which he had won by a strong Army, of which he was General. Read in my Letter
the lively and tender Expressions of the Grief of this illustrious Mother,
which draw Compassion from his Enemies, who are forced by the Rules of Civility
to make her Visits. Thus does she speak every day and hour, to Persons who come
to visit her; and when there is no body, she thus speaks to her self.

This unfortunate Woman is not a Moment without sighing; and one would think by
her Language, she intended to recall the Soul which has quitted the Body of her
Son, the unhappy Count of Soissons. Poor Count, a Son so tenderly loved, and so
greatly deserved it; where is thy Body now to be found, dyed in blood, and in
that of the Enemies? What Victory? Where are those Glorious Marks, that should
give me so great Joy, and which give me such Cause of Despair? Why did I bring
thee forth into the World, unfortunate Son, if I must so soon lose thee?
Miserable Mother, Unhappy Son! How art thou a Conqueror, when I see no other
Trophy of thy Victory, than thy Death? I hear from all Parts that the Count is
Victorious and yet I hear every where that his Enemies rejoice. I see, dear
Son, all thy Domestics that followed thee, return without Wounds, and yet I do
not see their Master. None of them can tell me where he is, and in what place
their General lies, who fought with so great Valor, and Success to his Party.
But, they are all agreed, the Battle was won, that my Son is a Conqueror, and
that he has lost his Life. Unfortunate Fight, which has made equally bewailed,
the Death of the Victorious General by his Mother, and the Defeat by the
vanquished. Would to God thou had been vanquished, thou might have lived,
I should not have bin in this condition of following thee. 'Twould have been no
Shame to have been defeated, it would have been only a Misfortune, which would
have been common to thee with Pompey and Hannibal, to whom Antiquity had
nothing to impute, but their ill Fortune. A sincere Reconciliation, a Pardon,
or a Peace, might make all that is past forgotten. A voluntary Exile might have
appeased the King's Anger, and perhaps disarmed the Cardinal; my Son might have
lived, France would not have been troubled, a Mother would not have been at
this day comfortless, and the Count 's Enemies would not have rejoiced at his
Loss. But to my Grief nothing of this has happened. Alas! the Stay of a^
Illustrious Family is dead; unhappy Mother, how are all thy Hopes vanished?
but, good God, how was this my dear Son taken out of the World? I know but too
well, that his Enemies laid continually Snares for him. Methinks I see my Son's
Murderers give him the deadly stroke in the Heat of the Fight, and in the
instant he was going to enjoy his Victory. Ah! my dear Son, Ah! unfortunate
Mother! why did not I breath out my last on the dead body of this Son, so
worthy the Esteem of all the World, and whom I so dearly loved? Why did not
thou, too powerful Minister, give me the Mortal Blow, rather than let me see so
sad a Tragedy? Do you kill me that hear me; or thou, my Son, give me thy Hand
to descend into the Grave, where thou art to be buried.

But my Reason fails me, I must for my Son's Honor stifle these Motions of
Weakness; it is true he lives no longer; but he dyed in the Bed of Honor with
his Sword in his Hand; he dyed full of Glory; he dyed Victorious, and even in
dying vanquished his Enemies.

Let us cease from shedding Tears; but what do I say? he dyed assassinated, a
Victim sacrificed to the Vengeance of his Enemies, by the blackest Treason,
it is clear. and yet I would live: No, I must dye; let us imitate the Greatness
and Courage of those illustrious Women, who threw themselves on the Pile
whereon their Hus^ands were burnt: My Son is more dear to me; let ^s then dye,
and weep no more; These Tears are fruit^ess; but let us live, seeing Heaven
ordains it, and ^et us live to dye every day: I shall have ever present before
mine Eyes, the Death of my Son; I shall see every day his bloody Body; I shall
continually remember his ^espects, his Tenderness for me; and I shall never
forget ^he tender and violate Passion which I had for this Son, for whom alone
I lived: but at least, cruel Cardinal, restore me his dead Body; thou have thy
Revenge, he is no longer alive; give this sad Consolation to a desolate Mother:
perhaps this Sight will work the Effect thou desire, cruel Wretch as thou
^rt; it will unite my Soul to that of my Son.

Dear Mother, if thou can not comfort thy self by so great an Example of
Misfortune to this Princess, it will be hard for thy Son to say any thing which
can diminish thy Grief. Imitate this illustrious Woman, who having suffered
whatever Sorrow and Despair can do to a Mother who loves vehemently, and with
Reason suffers her self to be persuaded, not to give en entire Victory to her
Enemies, who triumph still over her Son, by the Grief which they see his Death
has caused. She has been ruled by the Advice of her Friends, and received great
Comfort from a Letter sent her by the King, written with his own Hands:

Cousin, The Grief which you show at your late Loss, obliges me to testify the
Share which I have in it, and the Displeasure I conceive at the fault of him
which has caused it. And though I ought not to be sorry by reason of the
Conjuncture wherein it has happened, yet I must heartily condole with you, and
contribute what I am able to your Consolation. I can say nothing more to thee,
my most honored mother, unless it be, that thou shall always have in me a most
obedient Son; and if thou take a Third Husband, thou will be perhaps less
unfortunate; but please thy self.

The great God, who has created all Things, and provides for their Necessities
by his Infinite Goodness, comfort and fill thee with his Blessings.

Paris, 25th. of the 2d. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER XV.
To the Grand Signior 's Treasurer.
THE Priest which played the Tarpaulin, whom the French call the Archbishop of
Bordeaux, of whom I believe I have given thee some Account the 10th. Moon of
the year 1637. has lost the Credit which he had with the King, and is at
present disgraced. The Opinion of his Valor at Court is much lessened, by his
not hindering, with the Fleet he commanded, the Spaniards from putting Succors
into Tarragone, a famous Seaport near Barcellona. They lost the last year,
twelve Galleys in Fight against the French Naval Forces; but having fitted a
mightier Fleet, they have put into this Place the Succors they intended. The
Archbishop could not, or would not hinder them; which will be the cause, that
this Place will not come so soon under the Power of the French.

It Is said, that this Prelate was banished France, and was retired into a City
situated on the Rhosne, named Avignon, and belongs to the Roman Prelate.

It being a thing very usual to run down the Unfortunate, all the World blames
this Prelate, having not always met with equal Success on the Sea in the
Employs he sought, and which did not at all agree with his Function of
Archbishop; which he might have performed with Applause, in imitating his
Predecessor who was his Brother, the Cardinal de Sourdis; and who had left him
a Diocese well regulated, rich, furnished with great store of Churches well
served, Pastors of great Piety and Learning, whom this man had procured and
settled in his Diocese with great Care, which made his Death extremely lamented.

The Catalonions are at length become this King's Subjects; they maintain their
Revolt with the French Forces, and strengthen themselves after the Example of
the Portugueses. They fight with such Courage, that they come off continually
Conquerors; but, I shall make no Relation of their Fights, nor of the Blood
which is spilt on either side, which are Matters I do not care to treat of.

God give thee a continual Tranquillity of Mind, make thee in love with Peace,
and preserve in thee that vigilant Spirit, so necessary for the keeping the
Treasure entrusted to thee.

LETTER XVI.
To the Kaimakam.
THe Cardinal Favorite of France, has such long Hands, that he makes Seizures
in those places which are not subject to his Jurisdiction; and when he has made
them, he keeps them without any thoughts of restoring them. There Is no
probability at present, That this bold Politician will lay hands on what
belongs to the Grand Signior: However, I have some Reason to write this:

There has been carried some days since an illustrious Prisoner into the Castle
of the Wood of Vincennes; and, thou shall hear this new way of apprehending a
great Man in another's House, and in the Court of a Foreign Sovereign, who is
absolute in his own Estates. This Prisoner was apprehended in the midst of the
finest Ladies in the Court of Turin, at a magnificent Ball which the Duchess
Regent of this Estate gave in her Palace. It was this Princess whom I mentioned
to thee, who was Widow to Victor Amadaeus Duke of Savoy, and Sister to the King
which now so happily reigns over the French.

The Duchess, who had a particular Considerasion for this Prisoner, could not
behold this Exploit of the Cardinal's without extreme Vexation. His Name is, if
I be not mistaken, Count Philip a' Aglie, a Person of great Quality; and, whose
excellent Parts and Courage, do yet render him more illustrious than his Birth.

It Is not yet known, why the Cardinal undertook such a bold Stroke; though it is
said, the Council of France has had great reasons to secure the person of this
Favorite. The chief Motive, they say, was, That he was caarying on some
Designs against the Interests of this Crown with the Cardinal of Savoy; whom
it is thought, he would have married to the Widow of Amadaeus his Brother.

Richlieu attempted not to carry off Count Philip, till having made several
Trials to remove him from the Court of Turin, under the pretense of some
Embassy, to which he would never consent; so that his Obstinacy cost him his
Liberty.

The Duchess greatly complains, and reproaches the King her Brother with the
Violation of the Right of Nations and Sovereignty; but only her own Court are
sensible to these Complaints, they being not heard in that of France; and her
Ambassador has been seen there, in a supplicant Posture, humbly suing for the
Count's Liberty; or that he might be sent on an Embassy to Rome; or at
leastwise, That in leaving the Castle of Vincennes, he might be imprisoned
somewhere in Paris.

The Cardinal answered the Supplications of the Ambassador of Savoy, That the
King, his Master, did not apprehend Philip, and bring him into France, but out
of regard to the Interests of his Sister of Savoy; and that she might be
assured, that for her sake he should be well used.

Thou may see by this Answer a great Haughtiness, and frivolous Reasonings,
which sufficiently denote, that this great Minister does not love to be
contradicted, or opposed in the Resolutions he takes; and if an Account of
what is done in the World, must be given to any one man alone, he would take it
very ill, if it were to any body but himself.

I shall not fail to send thee the Books thou requir'st, and inform thee the
best I can of the false or true D. Sebastian, King of Portugal, whom his
Subjects do believe to be still alive, when I have made sufficient Enquiries
into the Truth of the Matter. I kiss, with a profound Humility, the Hem of thy
rich Vest, on which I fasten the Lips of a Respectful and Obedient Slave.

Paris, 21st. of the 3d. Moon of the Year 1642.
LETTER XVII.
To the Reis Effendy, Secretary of the Empire.
THere was found last Night, a Man dead in the Streets of Paris, who seems not
to be above 30 Years old; he is a Spaniard, and had about him a Letter, or
Memoir, which it seems he had written to some Confident at Madrid, in these
Terms:

Cardinal Richlieu told me, he did not know the Hand nor Signature of Count
Olivarez's Secretary; and that when he should fill up his signed Blank; which I
presented him, and let fall the pretended Letter of this Secretary into the
King of Spain's Hands, he saw not what Advantage could result hence to the King
of France, his Master. I am very willing added he, that the King of Spain
should suspect the Count, or Secretary, of Infidelity, and of having some
Commerce with me; but, it would not be advantageous to us, he should be plainly
convinced of it, seeing the greatest happiness France could have, is, that
Count Olivarez his Ministry should be perpetual: For, being the most unhappy of
all the Favorites that have ever been in the place he possesses, all good
Frenchmen are obliged to pray to God to give him a long Life, and to continue
him ever in the King his Master's Favor, to perpetuate by his Counsels the
Disgraces of Spain.

He pursued his point of Raillery, in this manner:

Of a Duke of Braganza, Olivarez has made a King of Portugal; Of a King of
France, a Count of Barcellona; Of a Sovereign Duke of Lorain, a Vassal; Of a
Prince Cardinal, a Knight Errant; Of a Lord of Monacho, a Duke and Peer of
France; and, in fine, of Philip IV. King of Spain, he has made a Count, Duke d'
Olivarez.

This is all I could get from so great and illustrious a Genius.

The just God, who has sent us his Prophet, ever direct thy Actions, that thou
may enjoy an happy Eternity, and give thee Opportunities of doing Good.

Paris, 24th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER XVIII.
To William Vospel, a Christian of Austria:
GOD be praised, thy Patriarch Elias, and his Companion; forasmuch, as I see
thou art a Saint, and content in the Religion of the Barefooted Friars which
thou have embraced. Thou stirrest me up to do Good, and encouragest me to
suffer, and become serious enough to renounce the Pleasures of the World,
seeing thou tracest me a Way so necessary to walk in, in order to arrive at
Heaven. I did not believe indeed, I confess it, thou were endued with that
Constancy; and was afraid, thou would change; but, seeing thou have the
courage of keeping thy Resolution, and enduring all the Incommodiousness which
is to be met with in that kind of Life which thou have embraced; I am sorry for
my Suspicions, and profess I have all due Esteem for thee. I love thee as much
as one honest Man ought to love another, who, having found out the True Good,
has ran impetuously after it; and who has past immediately from a soft and
voluptuous Life, to the Severities of an austere Religion, in search of an
assured Port, which is more usually found in Sufferings and Macerations, than
in Delights and Pleasures. There is one thing amongst others, which extremely
pleases me, in the Order thou have entered; All things are in Common amongst
you; one Key opens an hundred Doors; you have no Meum and Tuum; all clad in the
same Fashion, and all go barefooted; you eat at the same Table, and no body
has better or worse Fare than another. In fine, your Prayers are the same, and
so are your Vows of Poverty,

But, prithee tell me, What would a Thief have found in thy Cell, whom I saw
yesterday hanged with a Key about his Neck? He had the Dexterity of opening
with this Key all sorts of Locks, and has done a Thousand Roguish Exploits,
which have at length brought him to the Gallows. He told the People, he died a
most happy Man, as having practiced with great Success, an Art inferior to
none; That the only Crime he thought he had been guilty of for this 30 Years,
was his committing but small Thefts; That had he found the Doors always open,
he had never entered into any House; and he exhorted Magistrates to chastise
only those, who suffered themselves to be robbed.

Spanish Authors have written, There Is no Law which allots Penalties to those
that rob with Prudence and Ingenuity; thus call they those who steal
wherewithal to appease the Envious, who would accuse them, the Witnesses which
might serve to convict them, and the Magistrates by whom they are to be judged:
So that the Thief that shall have stolen for himself, and for all others I now
mentioned, shall be ever sent away absolved. Which makes me think, that Theft
is of the Nature of Women; for, both one, and the other seem at this day to be
necessary Evils, just as Keys seem only good now adays to preserve what may be
stolen, and not to hinder it from being so.

How many things has the Injustice of some People authorized for the Safeguard
of a Town? It Is not enough to have a strong Garrison of Soldiers; Three
Elements are not sufficient to defend it against a greater Power that would
oppress it. The Earth is raised, to make thereof Trenches; the deepest Ditches
are dried up, whatever quantity of Water may be in them; and, Fire is enclosed
in Cannons; the Effects of which are terrible. If thou surveyest Italy, thou will find in several Towns, Palaces which have more Gates than Thebes had
heretofore: And, if thou countest the Keys which serve to open them, thou will
find the Iron they are made of, to cost more than the Doors themselves.

Men are not contented to use these Keys, according to the common Use they seem
to be designed for; their Ambition makes them serve for Marks of Honor in
several Princes Courts, where they be Recompenses for Services, for Virtue and
Valor. The Golden Key in Spain, which the great Lords wear, denotes, That they
know how to open the Gate of Favor. And, it is the same in Germany, and
especially in the Emperor's Court.

Happy was Ancient Rome, whose Citizens were so wise, that being advised to
turn the Front of their Houses on that side where they could not be observed by
their Neighbors, they answered the Architect; We rather desire our Houses may
be overlooked into, because we do nothing wherein we fear a Surprise. Whereas
Modern Rome, on the contrary, may be termed unhappy, wherein there are not
enough Gates, and Porters of them, to conceal what is done in the most retired
places of their Palaces.

It is in this City, where Luxury grew to that height under the first Emperors;
that all Men's Studies were to find out new Pleasures.

But, I must end this Discourse of Keys, of Doors, and Door-keepers; I must not
expect to reform the World, nor would I weary thy Patience. Pardon me my
passing from the Cell, to the Story of the Thief whom I saw executed; and from
the Thief, to a Discourse of Keys, and other things with which I have
entertained thee. I was so full of it, that I could not forbear the Discourse,
no more than I can now to speak of the Subtilty of the Spaniards, who have
vaunted of the Worth of their Escurial, by the great Number of the Keys which
belong to it; like that foolish Emperor, who valued the Greatness of Rome, by
the great weight of Spiders Webs which were there: The Spaniards affirm, There
are so many Doors to this Stately Edifice, that the Keys which serve to open
them, weigh above Ten Thousand Weight.

But, it is time to end this tiresome Letter. Let me then counsel thee, to watch
over thy Conscience, as the Parisians do over their Shops, to prevent
Violences. Here are so many great and small Thieves, that should they be
punished, as they were chastised in Syria, where the same Punishment is imposed
on him that is robbed, as him that robs; this great Town would ho^^^^ (...)
peopled, or become a Prison to an infinite ^^mber of People who would be found
faulty.

May it please the Great God, who should be adored by all Creatures, to incline
the Great Prelate (after thou art delivered from the Burden of the Flesh,) to
place thee amongst the Number of those, for whom the Church has a pious
Veneration; and, respect thy Ashes in such a manner, as, I hope, thy holy and
exemplary Life will deserve.

Paris, 24th. of 4th. Moon. of the Year 1642.
LETTER XIX.
To the Venerable Mufti.
Thou will not think me troublesome, if thou remembrest the Order thou haft
given me; and sought rather to hazard the tiring thee by frequent Letters, than
be accused of Neglect for not obeying thee. Obedience must needs be agreeable,
where the Command is made with Wisdom. When I write to the Grand Vizir, it is in
trembling; and, if I write to the Kaimakam, I am not without Hope; and, I send
no Letter to the other Bassa's, without Inquietude, and great Trouble. As to
what concerns my Friends, I divert my self in writing to them. But, when it is
to thee that I write, I may say it is, that I may hope, live, and obtain in the
other World, that happy State spoken of by our Holy Prophet; that Life which is
to be the Recompense of all those, who shall perform good Actions, whilst they
dwell among Men.

Cardinal Richlieu would willingly be absolute in Matters of Religion, as thou
art; he would also be thought a Saint; but he knows not how to be one: And,
indeed, he would be every thing. However, he does abundance of things which
thou do not, and pretends to be above thee, because he does not live as thou
do. This Man, whose Head is full of the Affairs of the World, concerns
himself in whatever passes in Europe; one only Employ cannot satisfy him; he
is not contented with being the Favorite of a great King, under whose
Authority he governs all things: Some time ago, 'twas reported he would make
himself a Patriarch. He aspires extreme high, undertakes the most difficult
Matters, and takes a singular Pleasure in making use of extraordinary Means for
the Execution of his Projects, that Posterity, and Historians may write, That
being come into the World with a small Fortune, he died Rich; and being born in
the Condition of a private Man, he lived in the State of a great Prince:
Observe ( Venerable Prince of that Religion, which can alone be approved of by
him who drew the World out of Nothing.) two remarkable Strokes of this French
Tiberius, which I have learned but lately.

This Cardinal sent to Madrid, incognito, a General of certain Dervises; a Man
of a fit Genius to second his own, of a piercing and subtle Wit, and very
understanding in Secular Affairs; after having given him express Order, that
as soon as ever he should be in Spain; he should do such and such a thing, and,
that at his return into France, he should remit into his Hands alone the
Memoirs of what he had transacted. This Monk succeeded very well in the Employ
he undertook; but, in his Return, the Cardinal sent an express Command to him,
to deliver, before he entered into France, all his Papers, into the Hands of a
Gentleman who brought him his Letter. This Dervis obeyed; but he was disgraced,
and the Cardinal maintained; 'twas a Crime to obey in this Occasion; for,
having once received an Order to entrust no body with these Papers but himself,
he could not be excused for delivering them to others; and, for this Reason, he
forbad him to set Foot within the Kingdom. This poor Religious died some time
after, desperate at this Usage; and perhaps, this is the first time a man has
been punished, for too punctual Obedience.

It Is not many Moons, since there came Post a Person of Quality from Italy, who
brought considerable News to the Cardinal. It Is impossile for me, to express
the Caresses this Favorite made him. And, to denote his Joy, he immediately
presented him with a rich Diamond, and made him hope for still greater
Recompenses; yet, this same Person that had brought this so good News, was
carried to the Bastile as soon as he came out of the Cardinal's Closet, where he
remained for some Months without seeing any Body; so, that he imagined himself
all that while in a Dream; but, at length, his Prison-Doors were set open, and
the Cardinal would see him, and made him be given as many Hundred Crowns as he
had past over Days in his Solitude. He accompanied this Present he made him,
with all the Civilities imaginable, and said these Words to him: Thou art not
to blame, and yet I could not but punish thee for my Fault, when I made thee
enter into my Closet as soon as thou came from Italy, to bring me so
advantageous News. The great Desire I had to know the Parriculars of the
Business, made me forget to take off from my Table a Writing of great
Importance, which thou might have read entire; which contained the Revolt of
Catalonia, the Demands of this Province, and the Intrigues of France, which
caused this Insurrection: And the Knowledge of so important a Mystery, might
make my Prince lose the Acquisition of so Rich a Province; so that I could not
imagine a more safe and speedy Remedy, than to shut thee up in a Place, where
it was impossible for thee to make any use of the Notices thou did get, by my
Imprudence. But, things being at present in such a Condition, wherein it is
impossible France should receive any prejudice; I restore thee thy Liberty, and
entreat thee to forget the Severity which Reasons of State have put me upon.
Receive from my Hands, the Present which the King my Master makes thee; and be
pleased to reckon me, amongst the Number of thy particular Friends.

I prostrate my self again at thy Feet, Holy Prelate, entreating thy
Benediction, and that thou will look on me as one of thy most obedient
Children; having such a Respect to thy Holiness, as is due to the greatest
Minister of Heaven, that ever interpreted the Holy Alcoran in the Empire of the
Faithful.

I also entreat thy Prayers, that God having regard to the Supplications which
thou shall offer him, would give me the Grace to live honestly, and serve the
Sultan faithfully, and that I may die in the Religion of my Fathers.

Paris, 24th. of the 4th. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER XX.
To the Kaimakam.
THE Books of the Arabian, Geber, are not to be found in that Language which
thou desire them in; I have sought for them, I believe, in above Two Hundred
Booksellers Shops, and there is not one of them knows, they were ever translated
into the Tongue in which thou would have them.

It Is now some time since these Books have been common in France; and there are
several persons who apply themselves to Dr. Geber's Science; but there is no
Translation of them into any of the Common Languages of Europe. When I enquired
for this Book, the Booksellers asked me several different Questions; and
especially, Whether I sought for Receipts to prolong Life. Some there were, who
asked me grinning, Whether my Design was to fix some volatile Deity; and others
answered the Question I made them on the Book of the learned Geber, only by a
Silence, accompanied with some Smiles; and at the same time putting into my
hands a Book, and saying to me, Here Is what you look for; This is what you
want, Monsieur Abbot: And this Book treated of Impossible Things; Of the
Quadrature of the Circle in Geometry, of the Philosophers Stone in Chemistry,
of the Perfection of the Orator in Rhetoric, of a Republic, such a one as
Plato would have in his Politics, and of the Perperpetual Motion in the
Mathematics.

I did not seem to be much moved at these Merchants Dealings with me; but, I
found a very honest Capucin, who put me in hopes of recovering the Geber thou
seek; for, he assured me he saw it in Caldee, or in the Egyptian Language
in a learned Man's Library, without giving me any Encouragement to think it may
be purchased, because he that possesses it is not needy of Money.

Thou will not perhaps, be displeased to know what this Religious told me
concerning Chemistry; and he appeared to me, not only to have Learning, but
Experience. He assured me, there were in Paris alone, several Thousands of Men
that applied themselves to this Exercise; and, that there are above Four
Thousand Authors who treat of this Science: that King Geber was the most
knowing and clearest in his Expressions; and yet there are none but such as are
real Philosophers, and wholly bent to the Study of Nature, that can easily
understand him. Whereunto he added, there were several people who labored with
great Patience, but few with those Qualifications which are necessary to find
Success: He affirmed, that speculative Knowledge is fruitless; that one must
have a long Practice, and continual Exercise; that most People labor to no
purpose, because they do not take Nature for their guide, no more than the
Operations she makes in Minerals; because, according to Geber, the Principles
of the Art, should be those of Nature it self; and that it is only in Metals,
we can find Metals, and that it is, in fine, by Metals one can succeed in the
making of perfect Metals.

This good Dervis maintained, That the true way to proceed to the Perfection of
this great Work, consists in the Union of the Mineral-Spirits purified by Art,
with the perfect Metallic Bodies, having first volatilized them, and then
fixed them, in conserving all the Radical Humidity, and in augmenting the
Natural Heat, by a discreet Coction of the Composition; which comes by this
mavelous Ferment, which makes all this Mass boil, and puts it into a
Fermentation: So that this mavelous Composition, insinuating it self by
Penetration into the most subtle parts of the melted Metal, by the external
Fire, and radically dissolving it, it ripens it, and purges it from whatever is
not of the Essence of Gold, and of Mercury, till the whole be driven out to an
entire Perfection: Which made the Master of Masters; the Learned Geber say,
That this perfect Elixir being the pure Substance of Metals, it seeks in the
melted Metals that which is of the same Nature with it self and perfects it.

Now, as it is impossible for the Artist to produce any thing that is new
according to his Fancy, but only to join or separate what Nature has produced;
Raymond Lully would have us understand, that the Body in this Art is the
Mettallick Being, in which lies the Mineral Spirit, because the Metals are
nothing else but this Spirit, of which consists the Philosophers Stone; and
this Spirit is properly the Virtue of Minerals, in which is contained the
Spring of Metals. But the famous Geber has clearly showed, that this Stone is
wholly created and formed by Nature, to which the Artist neither adds or
diminishes any thing, but only makes it change its place by his Preparation,
which in every other respect is useless.

This Friar affirms, This Mineral Body, entirely Spirituous as it is, has yet
four sorts of Superfluities, of which it must be purged by the Hand of the
Artist, viz. a great Humidity, the Earth which is found therein; the ordinary,
Sulphur which burns, and the Salt which is corrosive: and it must be purified
by Calcination, Dissolution, Sublimation, and Fixation, that there may alone
remain the Radical Humidity fixed and permanent; which being afterward united
in a indissolvible manner to the perfect Body, composes this incomparable Body,
which is so much sought and so seldom found, and which is an hot Elixir,
powerful to ripen and purify all imperfect Metals, and convert them into Gold
or Silver.

There is afterward given an Activity to the Gold, in refining it by new
Degrees of Fire, added to that which it already had.

Thus far went our Conversation, when an old Woman came unhappily upon us, and
bereaved me of the Satisfaction of learning of this Religious, some important
Secret which ^he seemed inclinable to entrust me with. This indiscreet and
impertinent Woman, using the Liberty ordinary with the People of this Country,
cruelly interrupted our Conversation; and I remained struck, as it were, with a
Flash of Lightning, when this knowing Friar told me, That the Arrival of this
Woman forced him to take his leave of me; and he prepared to be gone, like a
man that was expected for some weighty Affair; when casting his Eyes on my
Countenance, he perceived the Perplexity and Confusion which this Separation
caused in me; and to comfort me, he said thus in my Ear: I know very well,
Friend, thou have an inquisitive Soul, and designest great things; meet me at
my Cell, and in the mean time, I Will tell thee, for thy Consolation, in plain
Terms, That it has always been, and ever shall be my Opinion, that to labor
profitably, one must follow Raymund Lully's Rules. This great Philosopher
affirms, and I am of his Mind, That to make Gold, one must have Gold and
Mercury, and Mercury and Silver to make Silver; but, I understand by Mercury,
that Mineral Spirit so refined and purified, that it aurifies the very Seed of
Gold, and argentises that of Silver. These are the very Words he spoke to me.

But, in leaving me, I entreated him to tell me, Whether it was easy to attain
to the Accomplishment of this great Work, and what was necessary for that great
End.

He answered me, 'Twas very hard, which made almost all People despair of
compassing it; there being very few People, on whom Heaven bestowed the
necessary Qualifications to acquire this precious Art; that these
Qualifications consisted in being a true Philosopher, and in being perfectly
skilled in Naure, in having a Patience Proof against all Disappointments; and,
that a Man should be in the Flower of his Age, strong, and vigorous, to endure
Labor, well furnished with Wealth, and indefatigable. Whereunto he added, That
if any of these Qualities were wanting, one might be certain, that the others
would be so also; That a Man who is unacquainted with Nature, works lik a blind
Man; And, that should one fail of Success, the first, second, third, fourth,
nay, fifth, or sixth time in the Operation, he is a Fool that then grows weary,
and does not again begin to set at work, with the same Earnestness, and Hopes
of Success; and that should a Man want a vigorous Health. Labor would weaken
and make him faint; and that, in fine, if one be without sufficient Estate,
it is impossible the Work should succeed; which demands an entire Man, and such
a one as minds nothing else.

This Dervise moreover told me, as a thing certain, That several Persons had
attained to the Perfection of this Undertaking; which employs so great a Number
of Virtuoso's, in all Parts of the World: For, were it not so, there would not
be that Quantity of Gold there is; for, all that of the Indies was not
sufficient to satisfy so many People, who mind nothing else but gaining of it;
and that, in fine, such great Treasures which are heaped up, and the Gold that
runs in Traffic, never came out of the Mines which are in the Mountains, but
that a great part has been made by Artists. He moreover assured me, That the
Overseers of the Mint in France affirmed, as a thing beyond all Question, That
there was more Gold brought to them, than ever came from Foreign Parts; which
made him conclude, that the Art is true, and that no man need doubt that there
is such a thing as the Philosopher's Stone.

This Conversation, although interrupted, made me cease being incredulous; and
if I were an Heretic in this Matter yesterday, I begin now to have Faith, and
believe, only it is a Work extreme difficult; and I do no longer wonder, there
are so many People who deceive others, without any Design of doing it; and am
not surprised, they should apply themselves to all sorts of Persons, not
excepting Princes: For they believe still, they shall meet with Success; and
not being able to furnish the Charges they must be at, they use all sorts of
Tricks to move those whom Covetousness renders, in this Occasion, very easy to
be persuaded; and all in general meet in their Operations, with great Hunger,
Cold, Lobour, and Smoke.

It seems, as if that which hindered those who have been fortunate enough to
attain the Perfection of this Work, from communicating their Knowledge in this
Matter, was the dread of their Prince's Power; as having often experienced, that
they are jealous at the Riches of a private Person. Sovereigns cannot endure,
that a mean Wretch, born amongst the Dregs of the People, should have in his
Power wherewithal to make himself happy and several others; which obliges them
to deprive these Philosophers of the means of working; and makes them labor in
secret, and conceal themselves with more care, when they have finished their
Work. Great Men cannot easily suffer private People to become Masters, by
virtue of this Art, and to do all those Wonders which by this mavelous Metal
may be wrought in their Closets, without going to Peru, and ransacking there
the Bowels of the Earth, They know very well, that this longed for Gold,
produces every thing; gives Reputation; makes them fol'ow one, who fled from a
Man before, corrupts those who appear the most incorruptible, opens the
strongest Doors, overthrows whole Armies, causes a Man to change his Mind in a
moment, makes him that was a poor Man, presently talk Sentences. Nay, many
Christians affirm this Metal to be so efficacious, that it draws the Souls out
of a doleful Abode, called Purgatory; so that it seems, as if it appeased God's
Wrath, and brings Men to Heaven.

These aforementioned Reasons, obliged the cruel Diocletian to put to Death as
many Chemists as could be found in Egypt; and at the same time to cause their
Books to be burnt, lest the People, who were naturally ingenious, being become
too powerful by the Art of making Gold, should undertake a War against the
Roman Empire. But we find, in the ancient Writings of the Arabians, that Moses
having learned of God himself, the Art of perfectly knowing Nature, and that of
the Conversion of Metals, and making Gold, to write in Letters formed of this
Metal, the Law he prescribed the Israelites: He taught it to Carun, a poor Man,
but his intimate Friend, and near Kinsman; who being become very rich by means
of this Science, had heaped up immense Treasures, and built himself forty
houses, which were filled with Gold, but were all swallowed up, and buried in
the Earth, by the Virtue of Moses's Rod, with the Master of them, whom so great
Riches had rendered proud, and made him think of withdrawing himself from
obeying this great Servant of God; having falsely accused him before the People
of diverse Crimes, and especially of having abused a Virgin.

The last thing which was discovered in the Vene^ian Territories, was a great
Urn, found in an hollow Cave. In this Urn, which was considerably large, there
was another less, and in it two Pots, one full of Gold reduced into Liquor, and
the other of Silver, of the same Fashion, and a Lamp which seemed to have burnt
for many Ages. 'Twas known by the Characters on this Urn, that they were
consetrated to the God Pluto; and there were on them Catin Verses, which
showed, That Maximus Olibous ^ad been the Author of them. Those then who say
this Art is false, that the Beginning of it is a Lie, the Middle of the Work
mere Fatigue, and ^he End Beggary, have not said true themselves; and yet one
cannot accuse them, as having not, in some sort, spoke the Truth.

I beseech the Sovereign Creator of all things, from whom alone we hold what we
know, as being ^he great and wise Architect of Nature, that he ^ould bestow on
thee the Science of the learned ^eber; that thou may be as rich as Solomon:
but ^bove all, that he would grant thee the Spirit of Aglaus, who was ever seen
to live content.

Paris, 20th. of the 5th. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER X.
To Mehemet, an Eunuch-Page to the Sultaness.
THE Adventure which thou relatedst happened in the Seraglio, shows, that Women
are exposed to great Accidents. Their Condition is unhappy when they are
handsome, but more when they are homely and deformed. The Fathers, Brethren,
and Husbands guard the former, as Cerberus guarded the Gates of Hell; and the
others guard themselves, and look on all things with Eyes of Envy and
Discontent, which makes them empoyson every thing. But that which happens
amongst us, is very different from what is in France, where Women enjoy almost a
Liberty equal to that of Men. Not but that we see notable Adventures happen
there; witness the Queen, who is Mother to a great King now reigning, and yet
lives in Exile, and as a Fugitive, amongst Strangers, through the Credit of
Cardinal Richlieu, for whom she has not all the Deference he expected. And an
ancient Lady, (I may call her so, now she does not hear me,) told me such
things some days past, on this occasion, which I can scarce believe my self,
did I not know them to be true from elsewhere.

I am farther told, that this Cardinal, not having succeeded in the design he
had of marrying his Niece with a Prince of the Blood, intended (if he could) to
marry her to the King's Brother: But there is no great likelihood, but so able a
Minister must see into the mischievous Consequences into which this Promotion
would bring him; for, it would undoubtedly draw on him the Hatred of all the
great People in the Kingdom. And, I would not be mentioned at Constantinople,
for the Author of all the News talked of at Paris.

But it is certain, this Priest sent the Chancellor, a venerable Person, and by
his Office a man of great Authority, to seize on this Princess's Papers, in
hopes he might meet with some Letter which might favor that Design. The
Chancellor executed the Order he had received, but found nothing of what the
Cardinal pretended; so that this Persecution served only to manifest this
Princess's Virtue, who lives in such a manner, as may not only serve as an
Example to all Queens, but all the Women in the World.

Some time after, this same Chancellor being come to compliment the Queen on
the Birth of the Dauphin, she told him in a composed manner, but very
pleasantly, That this Visit was very different from that she had received from
him about a Year past.

If Persons that are seated in the highest degrees, be not secure from the bold
Attempts of those who are infinitely below them, and who are born to serve
them; the beautiful Ci^c^ssian should comfort her self in the Misfortune she
had of being accused. If her Innocence be well proved, she will be the more
pleasing to Ibrahim, and the false Accusation laid against her, will be a new
Charm to him: whereas, should she be found guilty, we must grant she deserves
the most dreadful Punishments; for having violated, if I may so express my
self, the Sacred Nights of the Seraglio.

However, the young Persian was found disguised in Woman's Apparel in some of
the neighboring Stables: And though he, in the midst of the Torments he
suffered, died without confessing any thing; yet it cannot be said, he died
innocent, after such an Attempt.

I hope thou will inform me what has happened since thy last Letter, and in
what manner the Adventure of this beautiful Slave shall be ended. I shall be
much troubled for her if she be innocent, and cannot be wholly free from
Compassion for her, if she prove guilty.

Leave not off writing to me, and if it be possible, be not weary of loving me.
I speak in the Presence of our holy Prophet, I love thee with the same
Affection as ever, and I dare not utter an Untruth before him.

Paris, 20th. of the 5 th. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER XXII.
To the Kaimakam.
IT IS about 60 years, since D. Sebastian King of Portugal, died in Africa, by
the Hands of the Moors; and yet his Subjects will believe him still living.

He parted from Lisbon in the Year 1578. in the Design of re-establishing on
his Throne Muley Mehemet, Cheriff of Africa, whom his Uncle Muley Abdelemelech
would bereave of his Kingdom; but in effect, to endeavor at the making himself
Master of Barbary.

His Army consisted of a Thousand Sail, well furnished with Provisions, few
Soldiers, but a great many Nobility. This Prince was not above 25 years of Age,
when he formed this Enterprise; he was a strong bodied Man, of a moderate
Stature, but well set; his Hair was yellow, his Eyes great, and full of Fire,
his Courage was not inferior to his Strength, and he had no violent
Inclination to Pleasures, which generally take Men's Minds off from gallant
Actions; he was temperate in all things; yet very forward in Undertakings, and
always firm and unmovable in greatest Dangers. He was a great Husband of his
Revenues, employing them in his Subjects Defense, or to the Increase of his own
Power. He was agreeable to all those that waited on him; and in the freest
Conversations, he took care not to disoblige any one by sharp Raillery, or
distastful Sayings; and so merciful was he, that he avoided all Occasions of
condemning his Subjects to Death. He passionately loved War; but it is thought,
the Expedition into Africa, wherein he perished, came from Spanish Counsels.

D. Sebastian was killed in fighting with an Invincible Courage. The Moors say,
That his Enemies were so charmed with his Courage, that his Death drew Tears
from their Eyes.

He was forsaken by his own; mortally wounded near the right Eye-brow; and
pierced with Darts in several Parts of his Body. He had no Wound in his Head,
because he was armed; but he had a great one in his Arm, which seemed to come
from a Musket-Bullet. It Is said, he was buried in the Field, near a Moor,
without any Ceremony, Prayers, or Company of his Relations, or Subjects. And,
this was the End of this Great King, who made all Africa at first to tremble.

Although the Moors rejoiced at the Death of so puissant an Enemy; that his
Friends bewailed his Misfortune: The Kingdom of Portugal celebrated his Funeral
in a magnificent manner; and, the King of Spain proffered several thousand
Crowns for his Body, to bury him in a manner answerable to the Dignity of his
Birth and Merit; and that Four Kings have since supplied his Throne; yet was
there found a Man bold enough to maintain in the Face of all Italy, that he was
really D. Sebastian, King of Portugal. He presented himself at Venice in an
Assembly of the wisest Magistrates in Europe; he recited to them the Accidents
of his Life; the History of his Predecessors; the Misfortunes he met with in
Africa, whence he retired into Calabria. He did more; for he stripped himself
before this Illustrious Assembly; he showed them Seventeen Marks on his Body,
which were acknowledged with Astonishment by the Portugueses themselves, to be
at least very like those which they knew their Sovereign had on his Body; and
he also showed, that he had one Hand greater than the other, and a Lip
disproportionable in the same manner, which were the well-known Marks in the
Person of D. Sebastian. He talks of Ambassadors, which he sent to the
Republic; he cites the Answers he had received; and all he says, is found
conformable to the Truth: He answers without Hesitation, to all that is
objected; which makes several of the Senate believe him to be really the King,
and others take him for a Witch.

But in fine, this Prince, right or wrong, is led away to Prison at the
Solicitation of the Spanish Ambassador; where having long lain, he is set at
Liberty, under an Obligation to leave the Venetian Countries in Three Days time.

Some Portugueses, moved with Compassion, disguised him in a Dervise's Habit,
and conducted him secretly to Florence, to transport him afterward to Rome;
but the great Duke of Tuscany caused him to be apprehended, and sent him to the
Viceroy of Naples. He presented himself before him with his usual Confidence*
and surprised all that saw him, and heard him speak; and seeing the Viceroy
uncovered, he said to him with great Assurance, and Gravity, Be covered, Count
de Lemnos; which obliged this Minister to ask him, By what Authority he took on
him this Boldness? To which, he answered, That his Authority was born with him;
and, that he feigned not to know him; and yet he ought to remember, that King
Philip, his Uncle, had sent him twice to him, and that the Sword which he then
wore by his Side, was that which he then gave him.

The Sentence which the Viceroy gave of him, was, That he was an Impostor, who
deserved to be sent to the Galleys, and should not long be from them; and
wherein, it is said, he died some time after.

Yet the Portugueses have been persuaded, he was their real King; and do still
continue of that Opin^on, there being nothing which is able to make them change
it. Some Persons in the World will have him to be a Magician, others an
Impostor, and the most ignorant will have him to be a Devil, or really the King
himself.

This is not the first Example of the Boldness of an Impostor; Rome saw
heretofore a Man, that had the Audaciousness to publish he was the real Pompey,
who was killed in Egypt, by the Cruelty of the young Ptolemy. The Queen
Artemisa found one Artemius, who had so great a Resemblance with Antiochus her
Husband, whom she had caused to be murdered, that he was not known, when he
put himself into the Bed of the dead King, pretending to be this Prince sick;
he recommended Artemisa to his Subjects, and did several things in favor of
this Princess. Under the Reign of Tiberius, was there not Occasion to be
surprised at the bold Answer which a Slave made to this Emperor, who
questioning him, How he made himself A grippa? answered without Hesitation; in
the same manner thou have made thy self Caesar.

The D. Sebastian I mentioned, has not been the only one in the World; there
have been two others; one of which departing out of the Isle of Terceres, who
had great Resemblance with this Prince, went into Portugal, where he said he
had miraculously escaped from the Battle he lost in Africa; that he saved
himself in Woods, and returned into his Kingdom to give Peace to his People,
and deliver them from the Tyranny of Strangers; but having been convicted of
Imposture, he was put to Death.

It Is said, that another being come disguised in the Habit of a Pilgrim, to
Madrid it self, and having had a long and secret Conference with King Philip
II. (by whom it is suspected he was known for this unhappy Prince,) was, by
this King's Order, said to be poisoned, in a Banquet given him by Antonio Peers,

I shall write several Things to the Invincible Vizir, of which I deferred to
give him Notice, because I would be certain of them, they being of Importance;
and it would have been great Lightness in me, to have written them on the first
Reports spread amongst the People.

Receive always with the same Goodness, the Marks I give thee of my Obedience;
send me thy Orders and Counsels, which I pray him that has created all Things,
may be good and profitable to the Empire of those Precious Ones, which he has
enlightened with his Truth? to the end they may arrive at the Eternal Glory and
Pleasures promised, as from his part, by his Holy Prophet; and I also pray him,
to preserve thy Life and Authority.

Paris, 24th. of the 6th. Moon of the Year 1642.
LETTER XXIII.
To the Venerable Mufti, Prince of the Religion of the Turks.
It Is not known, whether it be the Recompense of a good or bad Action, which
Cardinal Richlieu has sent with so great Secrecy. Those that give an ill
Interpretation to the best Things, say it is not to be supposed, there could be
sent in a dark Night, a Mule laden with Gold, to an unknown Person; but this
must denote something very extraordinary, and those who pretend to know more
than others, are sometimes more ignorant than those who pretend to know
nothing. For, who can penetrate into what so crafty a Minister does, in the
most retired Places of his Closet? His Actions are so mysterious, that when he
looks toward the East, his Designs lie a direct contrary Way. He deceives
those who watch him most narrowly. I cannot inform thee then of any thing
certain, The Matter is variously related; but thus I think it was: The Cardinal
caused some Days past, to be loaded on a Mule, a great Sum of Money; he
ordered him to whom he entrusted the Conduct of him, to go into a Wood, at such
an Hour; telling him, he should find a Man of such a Stature, such a colored
Hair, and in such a Habit, who was to say certain Words to him; whereupon he
was to deliver the Mule with his Lading into his Custody. It is said, this
Person found the Party described, who would not receive the Present, it being
not the full Sum agreed upon; That this being related to the Cardinal, he sent
the same Person with the Supplement of what was wanting to the Sum promised,
the Night following, where the unknown Person received the full Payment. If
this Story be true, as it is affirmed here to be, this is an odd kind of Way of
making Presents, or paying Debts.

But thou may be assured, this is not the first time the Cardinal has paid
his Creditors in this Sort.

I have been told for certain, that there being arrived at Paris a Stranger ill
clad, of small Stature, and without any Attendance, he made him be paid down
immediately upon his Arrival, Six Hundred Thousand Crowns; without any bodies
knowing what became of so happy a Creditor, nor from what Merit proceeded so
high a Recompense; though some People affirm, that so great a Sum is fallen
into the Coffers of the Swedish General.

Receive charitably, the Marks I give thee of my Obedience, and Desire, which I
have of giving thee Satisfaction; and, entreat our Great Prophet, that I may be
worthy in the other World to kiss thy Feet, and be acknowledged to be of the
number of those, for whom he has written his Holy Alcoran.

Paris, 25th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER XXIV.
To Berber Mustapha Aga at Constantinople.
I Cannot tell whether thou have Knowledge of the Use of Defiances, which are
made amongst the Christians, when they be dissatisfied or offended with one
another; which they term Acts of Honor, or the Marks of a gallant Spirit.

This Custom of Duels, is become so common in Italy, and especially in the
Kingdom of Naples, that the greatest Affairs, as well as the smallest, are
therein decided by the Sword; and the Gentry affirm this, to be the best way of
terminating their Disputes and Quarrels; which belonging only to them, cannot
be referred, nor so well determined, by the grave and cool proceedings of
Courts of Justice.

This Invention of deciding these Differences by Arms, either with the Sword or
Pistol alone, in a close or open Field, naked in their Shirts, so that one has
no Treachery to fear; is a Way of drawing Satisfaction for the Injuries
received, found out by Men of great Courage, who more esteem their Honor than
their Lives. The offended Person, sends a Challenge to him from whom he has
received the Injury; this note of Defiance, is expressed in choice and elegant
Words, which invite and press the Offender to fight, in such a Place, on
Horseback or on Foot, clothed or in their Shirts, single or attended by an
equal Number of Friends, which they call Seconds, with Sword and Dagger, or
Sword alone, or pistol. If the Challenge be received, he is civilly treated who
brings it, and, it may be, has rich Presents given him. But before they sight,
the Enemies embrace, as if they were reconciled; and then in an Instant,
following the Inclinations of their Hatred and Revenge, they would one another,
they spill each others Blood, and oftentimes their Souls go out furious,
through the Wounds they have made.

Those that have the Honor of dying in these Combats, do often refuse their
Lives, which a generous Enemy would give them, believing they cannot live
without Shame, should they receive them from an Enemy.

But, the Roman Church, as a note of the Horror she conceives at these Combats,
shuts Heaven's Doors against the Souls of those who leave this Life without
doing Penance, denying Burial to those who dye in the Field of Battle; or,
yield them only that, which is granted in some Parts of the East Indies to
certain Women, who prostitue themselves, whose Corpse are thrown a Prey to the
Birds of the Field, and other Animals, who live on Carrion.

It is not only in Italy People kill one another in single Combats; it is the
same in France, amongst the Nobility, who manage these Combats in a different
Sort. The best Friends tear one another on the smallest occasion, and they
prepare for a Duel in such a manner, as will appear to thee without doubt
ridiculous.

These Enemies sup together the Night before the Combat, and often lie together
in the same Bed. The Friends which serve as Seconds, do the same; and when they
are come to the Place where they be to fight, a Friend is forced by the Maxims
of Honor, to cut his own Throat, with the Man's he perhaps most loves. Nothing
happens more frequently in Paris, than these Kind of Combats; and, they produce
several Adventures, of which I would give thee an Account, had I not a
particular Story to tell thee on this Subject. It is of a Challenge of a
Spanish Prince, sent to a King, whose Crown could not exempt him from a Letter
of Defiance.

Thou have without doubt heard of what has happened in Lisbon, where D. John de
Braganza has been elected and proclaimed King of Portugal, as the true Heir of
the Royal Race. Thou know also, he drove the Spaniards out of his Kingdom,
The Duke of Medina Sedonia, a Grandee of Spain, and this new King's
Brother-in-law could not hinder himself from being suspected, of having
underhand assisted this Prince to ascend the Throne; whether it be true, or an
Artifice of his Enemies, God only knows: But however it is certain, that the
Count Duke d' Olivarez, the King of Spain's chief Minister, sent an order to
him to appear at Court, to justify himself from this Suspicion; he thought to
clear himself perfectly from the Jealousies of the Catholic King, by sending a
Challenge to D. John of Braganza, to oblige him to fight with him; which Letter
of Defiance was conceived in these Terms:

D. Gaspar Alonzo Peers Gusman the Good, Duke of the Town of Medina Sedonia,
Marquis, Count, and Lord of the Town of St. Lucar of Barameda, Captain General
of the Ocean, and Gentleman of his Catholic Majesty's Chamber. I say, that
John of Braganza, who was never but a Duke, calls himself King of Portugal;
that his Treason, known to all the World, is detestable, and in Abomination,
for having thrown a Stain on the Faithful House of Gusman, which has never
failed in any Duty to her Sovereign; and, for this reason defy, and challenge
to a single Combat Body to Body, with Seconds or without Seconds, this Don
John, heretofore Duke of Braganza, leaving all this to his Choice, as also the
Arms or Weapons and Place of Combat. Written near Valentia d' Alcantara, where
I shall expect fourscore days News of him, and the last twenty Days, I shall
transport my self into the Place he shall appoint accompanied, or alone, with
such Arms as he shall prescribe.

Not only the Tyrant of Portugal shall be advertised of my Challenge, but all
Europe, and the whole World. I pretend to make known in this Combat, the
infamous Action of D. John, and in Case he does not accept of this Defiance,
and fails in the Duty of one who is born a Gentleman; I desire this King, who
is only a Phantasm, may perish in some sort or other: I promise to give my Town
of St. Lucar, the principle Seat of the Dukes of Medina, to him that shall kill
him.

In the mean time, I entreat my Lord the King of Spain, to give me no Command
in his Armies, but to grant I may only serve him as a Volunteer, with a
Thousand Horse, which I will maintain at my own Charge, till that serving him
in this manner, I may help to recover the Kingdom of Portugal, and may bring
along with me, and cast at his Majesty's Fleet, the Duke of Braganza, if he
will not fight with me in the Manner I proposed.

If thou show this Letter of Defiance to the Janissaries, that Militia which
is terrible to all Nations, whom nothing can resist, when they execute the
Grand Seignor's Orders, they will tell thee what such a Challenge requires from
Men of Courage, and explain to thee the Laws which People of Valor prescribe
to themselves: For my part, who am ignorant of the Art of War, and the Maxims
of such as make Profession of Arms, I shall not make any Judgment hereupon;
only take the Liberty to ask of thee, If the King of Portugal accepted the
Combat, and killed the Duke of Medina, which of the two would have been
declared Infamous? Whether there be any Certainty in the Decisions made by
Arms? I am willing to think, Justice is on the Side of the Conqueror: But, if
on the contrary, the Event of the Duel be uncertain, I take it to be a foolish
thing for the Duke to expose himself, and thus Affront the King his Brother-in
law. In short, the Duke's Prudence is not to be admired in this Occasion, and
Braganza has had the Advantage on his Side, seeing he has showed by his
Conduct, that he is effectually King of Portugal.

I cannot but call these Christians Fools, who suffer such Customs among them,
and yet adore a Messiah, who is a God of Peace, and who calls us Barbarians,
when they are the only People that teach us, and all other Nations, the Arts of
single Combats, which is the most pernicious Custom that can be introduced
amongst Men, who cut one another Throats oftentimes on slight Occasions, and
become Prodigals of that Treasure with which the Immortal has entrusted them.
Neither can I any more approve of Kings and Princes of the same Beliefs, making
War with one another, as we see every Day amongst those who profess the
Christian Religion; which yet, as far as I can find, scarcely permits any Wars,
but such as are Defensive.

Pardon this tedious Letter, excuse my Conjectures in it, and honor me with
thy Commands, which will be respected by me as so many Obligations.

Paris, 25th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1642.
LETTER XXV.
To the Invincible Vizir Azem at Constantinople.
WE hear of nothing nowadays but Wars and Conspiracies, Seditions, Treasons,
Infidelities, and Revolutions of State, and it is in the Kingdoms of Vice,
wherein these Plagues of Heaven make these Disorders, I mean, in the Christians
Countries. Infidelity reigns amongst the People of Catalonia, England and
Portugal; the Revolutions which have happened in Barcellona have no Example; the
Defiance or the Challenge of a Subject to a King, as is that of the Duke of
Sidonia to the King of Portugal, as his Brother-in-law and his Enemy, does
equally surprise all the World. We have reason to think, that God is angry with
the Christians, when we consider Flanders, Germany, Italy, and the Frontiers of
Spain pestered with Wars, which they make one against another. The Animosity of
most of the great People of France against the Cardinal Favorite, enduces them
to lay Plots against his Life; whence we may see, that great Places are good
for nothing, but to expose men to great Dangers. The last Conspiracy discovered
against the Life of D. John IV. of Portugal, raised to the Throne by the
Nobility, and betrayed by the same Nobility, not by the whole Body of them but
by a small Number of those who had taken an Oath of Fidelity to him as well as
the rest, does plainly show us, That there is nothing in this World whereon a
Man may rely with any Certainty; and that here are many People who undertake
just Actions, by the Motions of an unjust and turbulent Spirit, which cannot
suffer Things to remain long in a quiet State, and aspire continually after
Change, and to whom every Thing is good, that is new. I shall relate to thee,
in few Words, this last Event. Thou have been informed of the others, by the
Letters I have written to thee (Invincible General of the Ottamon Armies, and
Steward of the Emperor's Laws, who is the Sovereign of Sovereigns). and by
those which the Kaimacam and the Bassas have received from me, who are obliged
to give thee an Account of whatever comes to their Knowledge.

Several of the great ones in Portugal, and amongst them, some of the new
King's Kindred, hatched a Conspiracy against him, and resolved to put the
Kingdom again into the Spaniard's Hands, and entirely ruin the Family of
Braganza. The principal Author of the Conspiracy, was D. Sebastian de Mattos,
Archbishop of Brague, the Count Duke d' Olivarez's Creature, to whom he owed
his Fortune. The chief who conspired with this Seditious Priest, were the
Marquis de Ville Reale, and the Count d' Armamar; these two Men of great Birth
and Credit, soon drew several others into their Party, some by the Hope of
Recompenses, and others through Weariness of obeying their new Sovereign, or
weary with the new Form of State which they thought might change to their
Advantage. They long held a secret Intelligence with the Catholic King's
Council who promised them all possible Assistance for the Execution of their
Design, and after that infinite Recompenses.

This Conspiracy was to produce a dreadful Tragedy, wherein all the Blood of
the Royal House and Family of Braganza was to be spilt. The King was to be the
first Victim, with his Children and the Queen his Wife. D. Duart also was to be
put to Death, who was kept close Prisoner in the Castle of Milain. A Domestic,
affectioned to his Master, and who was attentive to what past, delivered the
King and Family of Braganza out of this Danger. He was ordinarily employed in
secret Intrigues, and made frequent Courses into Spain to discover the Designs
of the Court of Madrid. He met by chance in an Inn, a man who seemed of a mean
Condition, born in the Kingdom of Bohemia, with whom having entered into a
strict Friendship, as it happens usually amongst Travelers, he came to
discover he was often dispatched by the Catholic King's principal Minister, on
Affairs of great Weight; and that he expected in a short Time to raise his
Fortune to a considerable Pitch, being entrusted with Packets of Letters,
containing Things of the highest Importance to the State. The crafty
Portuguese, soon discerning he might get out Secrets of great Concernment from
this imprudent Man, for the good of his Master, resolved to kill him in a
desert Place. where they were to pass; which he did, having first made him
drunk with strong Wine. As Soon as he had done his Work, he stripped him, and
found Letters and Instructions to the Conspirators, which he speedily carried
to D. John, who thereby discovered the whole Conspiracy.

Others say, that D. Alphonso of Portugal, Count de Vermissa (having been
solicited by the Achbishop of Brague, who thought he could easily bring him
into the Conspiracy, being discontented at the King, for taking away from him a
great Office) went to his Sovereign, and freely discovered to him the
Conspiracy which had been made, to deprive him both of his Crown and Life: And
it is added, That this Count appeared since, one of the hottest of the
Accomplices, till the very Instant wherein they were to execute their Project;
at which Time they were apprehended, and punished as they deserved

Others say, the Duke of Medina Sidonia, the King's Brother-in-law, who
appeared to the Accomplices to be of the Plot, gave notice of it to the King
his Brother. In fine the Conspirators were executed in several Places after
different Manners, where the People assembled, detesting their Crime, showed
great satisfaction in their Deaths, and blessed Heaven for preserving their
Sovereign.

They were apprehended one Day, wherein the King declared he would appear in
public; and all the Nobility being met, he caused the Guilty to be called one
after another, who were all made Prisoners without any Disturbance. In the mean
time, as many Troops as were near Li^bon were in Arms; and the People also took
Arms to defend their Prince, if need required. The Inquisitor-General was
treated as guilty, for knowing of the Conspiracy, and not discovering it. The
Great Treasurer Lawrence Pides, who kept the Keys of the first Court of the
Palace was to enter in the Night with an hundred men well armed, and begin the
Tragedy. The Naval Army which rode at Anchor in the Port of Beleem, was to be
burnt; and there were them in each Vessel, who were to set them on fire. The
four Corners of the City were also to be fired; to the end, that the People,
the Soldiers, and Guards, of the Palace being busied in putting it out,
nothing might hinder the Execution of their Design; and the good Archbishop was
in the mean time to appear in Public, bearing about in his Hand what they call
the Holy Sacrament, crying with a loud Voice, Let the Law of Jesus flourish,
and that of Moses die, and come to an End.

The Marquis de Ville Reale, and the Duke de Camine his Son, near of Kin to the
King, have lost their Heads on a Scaffold, with the Count d' Armamar, and D.
Augustine Manuel; and the People beheld their Death without any Compassion,
only showed some Regret at the Loss of the young Duke of Camine, who passing
before the Body of his Father, all bloody, threw himself on the Ground to kiss
his Feet; asking him a thousand times Pardon, though he was the Author of this
Misfortune. There were others, who suffered a more Ignominious Death; who were
not only hanged, but quartered, and those Parts of their Bodies set up in
several Places for an Example, and to put the people in Mind, that such
Attempts seldom escape unpunished.

As to the Archbishop of Brague, and other Ecclesiastics his Accomplices; they
are kept with great Care in Prisons, in Expectation of Commissioners from Rome,
without which Prelate's Consent, they can do nothing farther to them. The King
wore Mourning four Hours for the Marquis de Ville Reale, and the Duke de Camine
his Son; according to the Custom of the Christians, who are wont to Apparel
themselves in Black for the Death of their Kindred, to denote the Sorrow they
conceive at their Loss; and this Ceremony is termed Mourning which sometimes
lasts a whole Year. I will write to thee the Particulars of what may happen in
the War which is now carrying on between the Spaniards and Portugueses, who
perceive already on their Frontiers Castilian Troops; and I shall not be
wanting in any Thing, which may mark my Zeal and Exactness.

An happy Slave will Mahmut think himself, if he can acceptably serve the
Invincible Vizir, by whom the great Emperor of the Faithful, discovers his Will
to all the People of the Universe, whom God has created to obey him.

Paris, 25th. of the 6th. Moon, of the Year 1642.
The END of the First Volume.
Advertisement.
THE Present State of Europe: Or, The Historical and Political Monthly Mercury;
containing, all the public and private Occurrences, Civil, Ecclesiastical and
Military, that are most considerable in every Court: The various Interests of
Princes, their several Claims, Disputes and Intrigues, etc. For the Month of
February, 1691. With curiou^ Reflections upon every State. The Second Volume To
be continued Monthly from the Original published at the Hague, by the Authority
of the States of Holland, and West-Friesland. Printed for H. Rhodes, near
Bride-lane in Fleet Street. Whereare to be had the first Volume, beginning with
July, 1690. and ending with December following: or single Ones to this time.


