CHRIST'S ETERNAL EXISTENCE, AND THE DIGNITY OF HIS PERSON Asserted and Proved.
IN OPPOSITION To the Doctrine of the SOCINIANS. In several SERMONS on Col.
1.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. verses

By the Reverend THO. MANTON, D. D.

London, Printed in the Year, 1685.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
HEre are presented to thy view, some of the further profitable and pious
Labors of that eminent Divine Dr. Manton; (now with God): who though like a
Tree full of fruit, he has already yielded much fruit, yet still more and more
falls from him. Since his much to be lamented Death, two very large Volumes
(with some lesser) of his Sermons, have been published; which give a clear
discovery to the World of his great Abilities for, and great diligence in, the
Office and Work of the Ministry. Now this small piece succeeds; which in
comparison of the former, is but a poor Stripling, but as the shaking of an
Olive Tree, as the gleaning Grapes when the Vintage is over. Yet let it not be
rejected or slighted upon that account; for though it is not so bulky as they,
yet (according to its proportion) it is of equal value, and shows the same Head
and Heart which they do.

My Pen, (upon this opportunity,) would fain be launching forth into the
commendation of the worthy Author, but I will not suffer it; considering, how
little he needs that from any, and how much he is above it as from me. Neither
will I suffer it to run out in the commending of these Sermons; for I hope, to
impartial and judicious Readers they will commend themselves, (the best way of
commending.) I only recommend them, as judging them worthy of the perusal of
all who are desirous of a fuller knowledge of our Lord Jesus.

For he is the grand subject treated of in them. His Person, Offices, Works,
Blesssings, are here described, asserted, vindicated, and improved. Our
Redemption by his blood; his being the Image of the invisible God, the
Firstborn of every Creature; his Creating and Sustaining all things; his
Headship over the Church, Prae-existence before all Created Beings, his being
the Firstborn from the Dead, the Union of the two Natures in his Person; his
Reconciling of Sinners to God through the blood of his Cross, these are the
Heads insisted upon in these Sermons, (the Author following the Apostle, Col.
1.14. ad 20.)

And are not these great Points? of a very sublime nature? containing the very
vitals of Gospel Revelation? can Ministers Preach, Print, too much of them? can
private Christian Hear, Read, Meditate too much of them? Oh they are the (...)
the deep things of God! in which is manisfested the (...), the manifold Wisdom
of God; which the Angels desire to look into: which are the wonder and
astonishment of Heaven, which put such a transcendent excellency upon the
knowledge of Christ. Should we not therefore thankfully receive and diligently
peruse all discourses, that may clear up our light in and about these profound
Mysteries. I hope the consideration hereof will make these Sermons acceptable
to many gracious Souls. They all hanging upon this string, and pointing to this
Argument (of what Christ is, has done, suffered and procured for Believers,)
they are not unfitly put together, and printed by themselves, in this small
volume.

Several of the Points mentioned are Controversial; for a long tract of time
there has been hot disputes about them; what Volumes pro and con have been
written, both by Ancient and Modern Divines about them! but our Reverend Author
does not so much concern himself in what is Polemical and Controversial, but
chose rather in a plainer way (as best suiting with Sermon-work), to assert and
prove the Truth by Scriptural Testimonies and Arguments: and that he has done
to the full.

Reader, whoever thou art into whose hands these Sermons shall come, let me
assure thee, they are the genuine Work of the person whose name they bear. They
were copyed out from and according to his own Notes, by one who I am sure would
be as exact therein as possibly he could. But how earnestly could I wish, if
God had not seen it good to order it otherwise, that the Author himself might
have lived to have reviewed and polished them! (for what hand so fit to polish
the Stone as that which cuts it:) but now what is amiss, must be left to the
understanding Reader to discover, and to the candid Reader to pardon.

Christian, I commit thee to God; he bless thee, and all the Labors of his
Faithful Servants (whether living or dead) to the promoting of thy Spiritual
and Eternal good. Which he ardently desires who is,

Thine to serve thee in our Lord Jesus, Tho. Iacomb.

REDEMPTION BY CHRIST.
SERMON. I.
COL. 1.14. In whom we have redemption through his blood even the forgiveness
of sins.


THE Apostle in the former verse, had spoken of our slavery and bondage to
Satan, from which Christ came to deliver us; now because sin is the cause of
it, he comes to speak of our Redemption from sin: In whom we have redemption
through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. Here is I. The Author. II. The
Benefit. III. The Price.


The Point is this.

Doct. That one Principal part of our Redemption by Christ is remission of
sins. Here I shall show you,

1. What remission of sins is. 2. The Nature of Redemption. 3. That Remission
of Sins is a part, and a principal part of it.
1. What Remission of Sins is. Both terms must be explained, what sin is, and
what is the forgiveness of sin.

For the first. Sin is a violation of the Law of the Eternal and Living God. 1
Ioh. 3.4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the law, for sin is the
transgression of the law. God is the Lawgiver, who has given a righteous Law
to his Subjects, under the dreadful penalty of a Curse. In his Law there are
two things; the Precept and the Sanction: The precept is the Rule of our duty,
which shows what we must do, or not do. The Sanction or penalty shows what
God will do, or might justly do, if he should deal with us according to the
Merit of our Actions: Accordingly in sin, there is the Fault and the Guilt.

(1.) The Fault. That man who is Gods subject, and so many ways obliged to him
by his benefits, instead of keeping this Law should break it upon light Terms,
and swerve from the Rule of his duty, being carried away by his own ill
disposed will, and base Lusts. It is a great and heinous offense, for which he
becomes obnoxious to the Judgment of God.

(2.) The Guilt: which is a liableness to punishment, and that not ordinary
punishment, but the vengeance of the eternal God, who every moment may break in
upon us. Where there is sin, there will be guilt; and where there is guilt,
there will be punishment, unless we be pardoned and God looseneth the Chains
wherewith we be bound.

Secondly, Forgiveness of Sin, is a dissolving the obligation to punishment, or
a freedom in Gods way and method, from all the sad and woeful Consequences of
sin. Understand it rightly.

1. It Is not a disanulling the Act, as it is a natural Action; such a fact we
did, or omitted to do; Factum, infactum fieri nequit: That which is done,
cannot be undone. And therefore though it be said, Ier. 50.20. The iniquity of
Jacob shall be sought after, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be
found; for I will pardon them whom I reserve. Yet that must not be understood
as if God would abolish the Action, and make it, as if it had never been, for
that is impossible. But he would pass by, and overlook it as to punishment.

2. Nor is it abolished as a faulty or criminal Action, contrary to the Law of
God, the sins we have committed are sins still, such actions as the Law
condemns. Forgiveness is not the making of a fault to be no fault; an accused
person may be vindicated as Innocent, but if he be pardoned, he is pardoned as
an offender. He is not reputed as one that never culpably omitted any duty, or
committed any sin, but his fault is forgiven upon such terms as our offended
Governor pleases. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and forgive
all their sins, Heb. 8.12. They are pardoned as sins.

3. Nor is the merit of the sinful Act lessened: In it self it deserves
condemnation to punishment. Merito operis, it is in its self damnable, but
quoad eventum, Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, etc. Because the grace of the Gospel discharges us from it, we must
still own our selves deserving the wrath of God, which makes for our constant
Humiliation and admiration of grace: So that he that is pardoned, still
deserves punishment.

4. It remains therefore that forgiveness of sin, is a dissolving the
obligation to punishment, or passing by the fault, so as it shall not rise up
in Judgment against us to our confusion or destruction: The fault is the
sinners Act, the punishment the Judges, which he may forbear on certain Terms
stated in the Law of Grace. He passes by the fault so far, that it shall not
be a ground of punishment to us. I prove it

1. From the nature of the thing: For there is such a Relation between the
fault and the guilt, the sin and the punishment, that the one cannot be without
the other: There can be no punishment without a preceding fault and crime:
Therefore if the Judge will not impute the fault, there must needs be an
immunity from punishment, for the cause being taken away, the effect cease;
and the sin committed by us, is the Meritorious cause of punishment. If God
will cover that, and overlook it, then forgiveness is a dissolving the
obligation to punishment.

2. From the common Rule of speaking used among men; for surely the Scripture
speaks intelligibly. Now in the common way of speaking, he cannot be said to
forgive or remit a fault, that exacteth the whole punishment of it. How can a
Magistrate be said to forgive an offender, when the offender bears the
punishment, which the Law determines? And what do men pray for to God, when
they pray for the forgiveness of sins, but that they may be exempted from the
punishment which they have deserved.

3. It would seem to impeach the Justice and Mercy of God, if he should exact
the punishment where he has pardoned the offense. His Justice, to flatter men
with hopes of remitting the Debt, where he requires the payment. His Mercy, in
making such fair offers of Reconciliation, when still liable to his vindictive
Justice; there may be indeed effects of his Fatherly Anger, but not of his
vindictive wrath.

4. The Phrases, and way of speaking in Scripture by which forgiveness of sin
is set forth, show, God does blot out our sins; Psalm. 51.2. Wash me thoroughly
from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. And cover them; Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. To cast
them behind his back; Isa. 38.17. Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.
And cast them into the bottom of the Sea; Micah 7.19. Thou will cast all their
sins into the depth of the Sea. To remember them no more; Ier. 31.34. I ^ill
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember the^r sin no more. By such
emphatical Metaphors does it express Gods free and full forgiveness, if we
seriously enter into his Peace: And do clearly show, that if God punishes
sins, he does remember them; if he avenge them, he imputes them; if they are
brought into the Judgment against us, they are not covered; if he searches
after them, he does not cast them behind his back: If he brings them into
light, he does not cast them into the depths of the Sea: Much more if he punish
us for them.

Secondly, The Nature of Redemption.

What is Redemption by the blood of Christ?

In opening it to you, I shall prove six things.

1. A Captivity or Bondage. 2. That from thence we are freed by a Ransom, or
Price paid. 3. That none but Christ was fit to give this Ransom. 4. That
nothing performed by Christ was sufficient, till he laid down his life. 5.
That thence there is a liberty resulting to us. 6. That we do not actually
partake of the benefit of this Ransom, till we be in Christ.
1. Our being Redeemed, supposes a Captivity and Bondage: All men in their
unrenewed Estate are slaves to sin and Satan, and subject to the Wrath of God:
That we are slaves to Sin, appears by Scripture and Experience; Titus 3.3.
Serving diverse lusts and pleasures. Ioh. 8.34. Whosoever commits sin, is the
servant of sin. Men imagine a life spent in vanity and pleasure, to be a very
good life; it were so, if Liberty were to be determined by doing what we list,
rather than what we ought. But since it is not, Experience shows that they
are convinced of their brutish satisfactions as mean and base, yet they cannot
leave them, for that true, and solid happiness offered by Christ: Now as they
are under sin, so they are under Satan, who works in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. and has a great power over wicked men in the world,
who fall to his share, as the Executioner of Gods Curse, and are taken captive
by him at his Will and Pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26. This is the woeful captivity and
servitude of carnal men, that they fall as a ready prey into the mouth of the
roaring Lion: Now for this they are liable to the Curse and Wrath of God:
Therefore called children of wrath even as others, Ephesians. 2.3. that is, obnoxious
to his righteous displeasure and punishment: Thus were we lost in our selves
under Sin, Satan, and the Wrath of God, from which we could no way free our
selves, and if Grace had not opened a way for us to escape what should we have
done?

2. To recover us, there was a price to be paid by way of Ransom to God. We are
not delivered from this bondage by prayer or entreaty, nor by strong hand or
mere force, nor yet by the sole condescension and pity of the injured party,
without seeking reparation of the wrong done; but by the payment of a
sufficient price, and just satisfaction to provoked Justice. This Price was not
paid indeed to Satan who detaineth souls in slavery as a rigid usurping
Tyrant, or merciless Jailer; (from him indeed we are delivered by force) but
the price was paid to God. Man had not sinned against Satan, but against God,
to whom it belongs to condemn or absolve: And God being satisfied, Satan has
no power over us, but is put out of office. As the Executioner has nothing to
do, when the Judge and Law is satisfied. Now that Redemption implies the
paying of a price is clear, because the word imports it, and the Scripture
often uses this Metaphor, Matthew. 20.28. The son of man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister; and to give his life a ransom for many. 1 Timothy 2: 6. Who
gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. Redemption in the
general, is a recovery out of our lost estate. God could have saved men by the
Grace of Confirmation, but he chose rather by the Grace of Redemption. This
recovery was not by a forcible rescue, but by a Ransom. Christ in recovering
his people out of their lost estate, is sometimes set forth as a Lamb,
sometimes as a Lion: In dealing with God, we consider him as the Lamb slain,
Rev. 5.5, 6. In dealing with Satan, and the Enemies of our salvation, he does
as a Lion recover the Prey. But why was a Ransom necessary? Because God had
made a former Covenant, which was not to be quit and wholly made void, but upon
valuable consideration, least his Justice, Wisdom, Holiness, Veracity,
Authority should fall to the ground.

1. The Honor of his governing Justice was to be secured and freed from any
blemish, that the awe of God might be kept up in the World; Romans 3.5, 6. And
Genesis 18.25. That be far from thee, to do after this manner, to slay the
righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that
be far from thee: shall not the judge of all the earth do right? If God should
absolutely pardon without satisfaction equivalent for the wrong done, how
should God else be known and reverenced as the Just and Holy Governor of the
World? Therefore, Romans 3.25, 26. it is said, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God: To declare I
say at this time his righteousness; that he might be just, and the justifier of
him which believes in Jesus.

2. His Wisdom: The Law was not given by God in jest, but in the greatest
earnest that ever Law was given: Now if the Law should be recalled without any
more ado, the Lawgiver would run the hazard of Levity, Mutability and
Imprudence in constituting so solemn a Transaction to no purpose. Paul was
troubled when forced to retract his Word, 2 Cor. 1.17, 18. that his word should
be yea to day, and nay to Morrow: Therefore when God had said, Thus I will
govern the World, he was not to part with the Law upon light Terms.

3. His Holy Nature would not permit it. There needed some way to be found out,
to signify his purest Holiness, his hatred and detestation of sin, and that it
should not be pardoned without some marks of his displeasure. His soul hates
the wicked, and the righteous God loves Righteousness, Psalm. 11.6.

4. His Authority. It would be a derogation from the Authority of his Law, if
it might be broken, and there be no more ado about it. Now that all the World
might know, that it is a dangerous thing to transgress his Laws and might hear
and fear, and do no more presumptuously, God appointed this course, that the
penalty of his Law should be executed upon our surety, when he undertook our
Reconciliation with God, Gal. 4.4.

5. The Veracity and Truth of God. It binds the Truth of God which sinners
are apt to question; Genesis 3.5. Has God said? And Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. We look upon
the Threatenings of the Law as a vain Scarecrow, therefore for the Terror and
warning of sinners for the future, God would not release his Wrath, nor release
us from the power of Sin and Satan, which was the consequent of it, without a
price and valuable compensation.

Thirdly, None was sit to give this ransom but Jesus Christ, who was God man:
he was man to undertake it in our name, and God to perform it in his own
strength: a man that he might be made under the Law, and humbled even to the
death of the Cross for our sakes, and all this was elevated beyond the worth of
created actions and sufferings by the divine nature which was in him, which
perfumed his humanity and all done by it, and in it. This put the stamp upon
the metal, and made it current Coin, imposed an infinite value upon his finite
obedience and sufferings. By taking humane Nature a price was put into his
hands to lay down for us, Heb. 10.15. and His divine Nature made it sufficient
and responsible, for it was the Blood of God, Acts 20.28. Feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own Blood. And Heb. 9.13. For if the
Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifyeth to the purifying of the Flesh; how much more shall the Blood of
Christ who through the spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your
Conscience from dead works to serve the Living God. It was that Flesh and Blood
which was assumed into the unity of his person; as a slip or branch grafted
into a stock is the branch of the stock, and the fruit of it is the fruit of
the stock. A naked Creature without this Union, could not have satisfied the
Justice of God for us: This made his blood a precious blood, and his obedience
a precious obedience. In short God-man the Son of God, and the Son of Adam, was
he that Redeemed us. So in short there were different parties to be dealt with
before the fruit of Redemption could be obtained. God, Satan, Man; God was an
Enemy that could not be overcome but must be reconciled; Satan was a usurper
and was to be vanquished with a strong hand; Man was unable and unwilling to
look after the fruits of Redemption, and our obstinacy and unbelief could only
be overcome by the Spirit of Christ.

Fourthly, Nothing performed by Christ could be a sufficient ransom for this
end unless he had crowned all his other actions and sufferings, by laying down
his life and undergoing a bloody and violent death. This was the completing
and crowning act. Partly to answer the Types of the Law, wherein no Remission
was represented without a bloody sacrifice. Partly from the nature of the
thing, and the fullness of the satisfaction required until all that was
finished, John 8.20. death was that which was threatened to sin, death was that
which was feared by the sinner. Many ignorant people will say the least drop of
Christ's blood was enough to save a thousand Worlds, if so his circumcision had
been enough without his death, but Christ is not glorified but lessened by such
expressions. Surely his death was necessary or God would never have appointed
it, his bloody death suited with Gods design. Gods design was to carry on our
recovery in such a way as might make sin more hateful, and obedience more
acceptable to us. 1. Sin more hateful by his Agonies, Blood, Shame, death, no
less remedy would serve the turn, to procure the pardon and destruction of it,
Romans 8.3. By sin he condemned sin in the flesh, that is by a sin offering. God
showed a great example of his wrath against all sin by punishing sin in the
flesh of Christ, his design was for ever to leave a brand upon it, and to
furnish us with a powerful mortifying argument against it, by the sin-offering
and ransom for souls. Surely it is no small matter for which the Son of God
must dye! At Golgotha, sin was seen in its own colors. There he showed how
much he hates it, and loves purity.

Secondly, To commend obedience: Christ's suffering death for the sin of man at
the command of his Father, was the noblest piece of Service, and the highest
degree of Obedience that ever could be performed to God; beyond any thing that
can be done by Men or Angels. There was in it so much love to God, Pity to Man,
so much Self-denial, so much Humility and Patience, and so much Resignation of
himself to God, who appointed him to be the Redeemer and Surety of Man, to do
this office for him, as cannot be paralleled. The great thing in it was
obedience; Romans 5.14. By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. So
'Phil. 2.7. God was not delighted in mere blood, but in blood offered in
obedience. All his former actions together with his Death and Sufferings make
but one entire Act of eminent obedience; but his painful and cursed death so
willingly and readily undergone, was the crowning Act. The formal reason of the
merit, was that Christ came to fulfill the will of God; by which will we are
sanctified. Heb. 10.10. therefore his death was necessary.

Fifthly, From this Ransom and act of Obedience, there is a Liberty resulting
unto us, for the redeemed are let go, when the ransom is paid. Now this Liberty
is a freedom from sin that we may become the Servants of God, Romans 6.22. Being
made free from sin ye became servants of righteousness. Christ came not to free
us from the duty of the Law, but the penalty and Curse thereof; to free us from
the duty of the Law, is to promote the Devils Interest. No, he freed us from
the Wrath of God that we may serve him cheerfully, to establish Gods Interest
upon surer and more comfortable Terms, to restore us to Gods favor and
service: To Gods favor by the pardon of sin, to his service by writing his
Laws on our Hearts and Minds. Sometimes our Redemption from the Curse is spoken
of, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law being made a
curse for us. Sometimes our Redemption from Sin. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself
for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity. And so by consequence from
the power of the devil, which is built on the curse of the Law, and reign of
Sin. Satan's power over us does flow from the sentence of the condemnation
pronounced by the Law against sinners, and consists in that dominion sin has
obtained over them: If the curse of the Law be disanulled, and the power of sin
broken, he is spoiled of his Power, Col. 2.14, 15. Blotting out the
handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and
took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross. And having spoiled
principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly triumphing over them.

Sixthly, That we are not partakers of this Liberty, nor of the benefit of this
Ransom, till we are in him, and united to him by Faith; for the Text says, in
whom we have redemption by his blood. Certainly we must be turned from Satan to
God, before we are capable of receiving the forgiveness of sins; Acts 26.18. We
do not actually partake of the privileges of Christ's Kingdom, till we be first
his Subjects: Who has delivered us from the power of Satan, and has
translated us in the kingdom of his dear Son; in whom we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins. Christ and his people are an
opposite state to the Devil and his Instruments: while we are under the
opposite power, we belong not to Christ; and the privileges of his Kingdom
belong not to us: but as soon as we are translated, and put into another
estate, then we have the first privilege, remission of sins. Look as in the
fall, there was sin before guilt; so in our reparation, there must be
conversion, Renovation, or Repentance, before Remission: We are first
effectually called or sanctified, and then justified and glorified. Man's
recovery to God is in the same method in which he fell from him. It is first
brought about by a new nature, and communication of life from Christ. He
regenerateth, that he may pardon, and he pardons that he may farther
sanctify, and make us everlastingly happy.

Thirdly, That remission of sins is a part, and a principal part of Redemption.

I. How is it a part or fruit of Redemption?

I Answer, Redemption is taken either for the Impetration, or Application.

1. The Impetration or laying down the price, that was done by Christ upon the
Cross. So it is said, Heb. 9.12. Christ by his own blood obtained eternal
redemption for us. Then was God propitiated, the deadly blow given to the
Kingdom and Power of the Devil, and the Merit and Ransom interposed, by the
virtue of which we are pardoned; the obtained redemption and remission of sins
is a fruit flowing from it, and depending upon it as an effect upon the cause.

2. The Scripture considers Redemption in its Application. Besides laying down
the price there is an actual deliverance and freedom by virtue of that price.
This is either begun or complete: The complete redemption, or freedom from sin
and misery is that which the Godly shall enjoy at the last day. Romans 8.23. We
which have the first fruits of the spirit, even we our selves groan within our
selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. Ephesians.
4.30. Grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. Ephesians. 1.14. In whom also after ye believed ye were sealed with that
spirit of promise which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption
of the purchased possession. The inchoate, or begun deliverance, is that
measure of deliverance, which believers enjoy now by Faith; which consists of
two parts; Justification and Sanctification. Sanctification, 1. Pet. 1.18. Tit.
2.14. Who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity and
purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. When we are free
from the power and weight of sin. Justification; so it is in the Text, and Ephesians.
1.7. When sin is freely pardoned, and our debt cancelled, and we are delivered
from evil and wrath to come.

II. As it is a part, so it is a principal part. This will appear, if you
consider the evil we are freed from.

As 1. The power of the Devil is destroyed: All the advantage which he has
against us is as we are sinners, guilty sinners before God: For we are put into
his hands when we have forfeited the protection of our righteous Lord; but
forgiveness of sins gives us a release from him, Acts 26.18. When Christ came
to procure it, he destroyed the devils Power; when we are converted we are
interessed in the privilege.

2. The reign of sin is broken: for sanctifying Grace is inseparable from
pardoning Grace; yea, I will venture to say, that the gift of the sanctifying
Spirit is a part of our pardon, executed and applied for a part of the
punishment of sin was spiritual death, or the loss of Gods Image; Col. 2.13. He
has quickened you together with Christ having forgiven all your trespasses.
When God pardons, he sanctifies and creates us anew, that we may be fit for
his service; so that we are renewed by the Spirit, as well as recovered out of
the s^ares of the devil.

3. We are eased of tormenting fears in a great measure. Man can have no firm
peace and comfort in his own soul, while sin remains upon him, our case is
dangerous, whether we be sensible of it or no; because our condition is not to
be valued by our sense and feeling, but by the sentence of the Law of God,
which we have broken and violated; if there be any difference in the case, the
more insensible we are, the more miserable: The generality of men indeed are
senseless and careless, put far away the evil day from them, and so make light
work of reconciling themselves to God, but are they the more safe for this? No,
if they will dance about the brink of Hell, and go merrily to their execution,
it argues not their safety, but their stupidness: The thoughts of danger is put
off when the thing it self is not put away; but if they be serious they cannot
be without trouble. Romans 1.32. Knowing the judgment of God, they conclude that
they that do such things are worthy of death. The very light of Nature will
revive many unquiet thoughts within them. The justice of the supreme Governor
of the World will still be dreadful to them, whose law they have broken, and
whose wrath they have justly deserved. They may lull the soul asleep by the
stupifying potion of carnal Delights, and while Conscience is asleep, please
themselves with stolen waters, and bread eaten in secret, which is soon
disturbed by a few serious and sober thoughts of the world to come. God is
offended, and what peace can they have?

4. Death is unstinged. That Is the usual time when Convictions grow to the
height, and the stings of an awakened Conscience begin to be felt, 1 Cor.
15.28. Then the thoughts of Death and Judgment to come, are very terrible to
them: and men begin to see what it is to bear their own sins, and how happy
they are, who are sure of a pardon.

5. The obligation to Eternal punishment ceases: Pardon is dissolving and
loosing that obligation. Now the punishment is exceeding great; Hell and
damnation are no vain Scare-crows. Eternity makes every thing truly great! the
poena damni, an everlasting separation from the comfortable presence of the
Lord, Matthew. 25.41. Go ye cursed. Luke 13.27. Depart ye workers of iniquity.
When God turned Adam out of Paradise his case was very sad, but God took care
of him in his Exile, made him Coats of skin, gave him a day of Patience,
afterward promised the seed of the woman, who should recover the lapsed estate
of mankind, intimated hopes of a better Paradise. That estate therefore is
nothing comparable to this, for now man is stripped of all his comforts, sent
into an endless state of Misery, whence there is no hopes of ever changing his
condition. So for the poena sensus, the pain, Mark 9.44. Where their worm never
dies and their fire is never quenched. The worm, is the worm of Conscience,
reflecting on past folly and disobedience. See here a man may run away from the
rebukes of Conscience by many shifts; sleeping, sporting, distracting his Mind
with a clutter of business; but there, not a thought free, but is always
thinking of slighted means, abused mercies, wasted time, the offenses done to a
merciful God, and the curse wherein they have involved themselves: the fire is
the wrath of God, or these unknown pains that shall be inflicted on body and
soul, which must needs be great when we fall into the hands of the living God!
If a little mitigation, a drop to cool your Tongue, be thought a great matter,
oh what a blessedness is it, to be freed from so great an evil! Perhaps you
coldly entertain the offer of a pardon now, but then to be freed from wrath to
come, oh blessed Jesus! 1 These. 1.10.

2. The good depending on it, Luke 1.77. To give us the knowledge of salvation
by the remission of sins. Eternal life depends on it, for you are not capable
of enjoying God, till his wrath be appeased. As all evil was introduced by sin,
so all happiness by pardon. This is an initial blessing, which makes way for
the rest.

USE.
Of Exhortation: To persuade you to seek after this benefit: All of us once
needed it, and the best of us till we are wholly freed from sin, still need it.

1. We all of us once needed it; for we are not only criminal persons liable
to condemnation, but actually condemned in the sentence of Gods law, Ioh. 3.18.
He that believes not is condemned already. Now should not a condemned man make
means to be pardoned, and should not we accept of Gods terms especially when
there is but the slender thread of a frail life between us and execution? He
that securely continues in his sins, despises both the curse of the Law, and
the grace of the Gospel. Oh consider, nothing but a pardon will serve the turn,
not forbearance on Gods part, not forgetfulness on yours.

1. Not forbearance of the punishment on Gods part: God may be angry with us,
while he does not actually strike, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 7.11, 12, 13.
God is angry with the wicked every day, if he turn not, he will whet his sword.
He has bent his bow and will make it ready. God who is a righteous Judge, will
not dispense with the offenses of wicked men, by which he is continually
affronted and provoked: though in the day of his patience he does for a while
spare, yet he is ready to deal with them cominus, hand to hand; for he is
sharpening his sword, eminus at a distance, for he is bending his bow. The
Arrow is upon the string, and how soon he may let it fly we cannot tell. We are
never safe till we turn to him, and enter into his Peace, and so the obligation
to punishment be dissolved.

2. On our part; our senseless forgetfulness will do us no good. Carnal men
mind not things which relate to God, or the happiness of their immortal Souls,
but they are not happy that feel least troubles, but they that have least
cause. A benumbed Conscience cannot challenge this blessedness, they put off
the thoughts of that which God has neither forgiven nor covered; and so do but
skin the wound, till it festers and rancle into a dangerous sore; our best
course is to see we be justified and pardoned.

2. The best of us still need it, partly because though we be justified, and
our state be changed, yet renewed sins need a new pardon. We are still sinning
against God, either we are omiting good, or committing evil, what will we do if
we be not forgiven? renewed sins call for renewed repentance: We do not need
another Redeemer, or another Covenant, or another Conversion, yet we do need
renewed Pardon. Partly, because our final sentence of pardon is not yet passed,
nor shall be passed till the last Judgment, Act. 3.19. Repent ye therefore and
be converted, that your sins maybe blotted out, when the times of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord. We are now pardoned and justified
constitutively by the tenor of the New Covenant, and there by description. The
sincerity of our Faith and Repentance is not presently evident; it is possible,
but difficult to know that we are sincere penitent Believers; but at last when
our pardon is actually pronounced by our Judges mouth sitting on the Throne,
then all is clear, evident, plain and open. And partly because daily
infirmities call for daily repentance. We do not carry our selves with that
gravity and watchfulness, but that we need to cry for pardon every day.

SERMON. II.
COL. 1.15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born of every
creature.


THE Apostle having mentioned our Redemption, does now fall upon a Description
of the Redeemer. He is set forth by two things:

First, His Internal Relation to God. Secondly, By his External relation to the
Creature.
Doct. It is a great part of a Believers work to have a deep sense of the
Redeemers excellency imprinted upon his Mind and heart.

Here I shall show, I. How it is set forth in this verse.

II. Why this should be much upon our minds and hearts?

I. How it is set forth in this Scripture.

1. That he is the Image of the invisible God. 2. The firstborn of every
Creature.
For the first Expression, there I shall consider, 1. What belongs to an Image.
2. In what respects Christ is the Image of God. 3. How he differs from other
persons.


1. What belongs to an Image, and that all this is in Christ. In an Image
there are two things, impression and representation; both are in Christ. There
is a divine impression upon him, and he does represent God to us.

1. For impression: There is

(1.) Likeness; for an Image must be like him whom it represents. An
artificial Image of God, or such as may be made by us, is forbidden upon this
account, Isa. 40.18. To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye
compare unto him? what is there among all the Creatures that can be like such
an infinite and almighty essense? or by what visible shape or figure would they
represent or resemble God.

(2.) Deduction and derivation: The Image is taken from him whom it is intended
to represent, it is not some casual similitude between two men that have no
reference or dependence one upon another; but such as is between a father and
his only begotten Son; as it is said of Adam, Genesis 5.1. He begat a son in his
own Image, and so it is verified in Christ because of his Eternal Generation.
Like him, because begotten of him.

(3.) There is not a likeness in a few things, but a complete and exact
likeness, so Christ as the second person is called, Heb. 1.3. The express image
of his person. There is not only likeness but equality. God cannot make a
creature equal to himself, nor beget a Son unequal to himself.

2. Representation: For an Image it serves to make known and declare that
thing whose Image it is: If light produce light, the light produced does
represent the light and glory producing; and the more perfect and immediate the
production is, the more perfect is the resemblance; a lively expression of the
pattern and exemplar. And this is the reason why the word (invisible) is added,
because God who in his own Nature is invisible, and incomprehensible to man,
reveals himself so far as is necessary to Salvation, to us by Christ: Visible
things are known by their visible Images with more delight, but not with more
accuracie. The Image is not necessary to know the thing; but here it is
otherwise, we cannot know God but by Christ, Ioh. 1.18. No man has seen God at
anytime, the only begotten son which is in the bosom of the father he has
declared him. God is invisible, and incomprehensible by any but Jesus Christ,
who being his only Son, and one in essence with the Father, he does perfectly
know him, and reveal unto mankind all that they know of him. Thus you see what
belongs to an Image.

2. In what respects Christ is the Image of God.

(1.) In respect of his Eternal Generation. So, Christ is the express Image of
his 'Person: not substance, but subsistence: We do not say that Milk is like
Milk, nor one Egg like another, because they are of the same substance; so
Christ is not said to be of the same substance, but of the same subsistence. He
is indeed of the same substance with him whom he does resemble, but the Image
is with respect to the subsistence; so he resembles the father fully and
perfectly. there is no perfection in the Father, but the same is in the Son
also; he is Eternal, Omnipotent, Infinite, in Wisdom, Goodness and Power.

(2.) As God Incarnate, or manifested in our flesh: so the perfections of the
Godhead shine forth in the Man Christ Jesus, in his Person, Word and Works.

1. In his person: They that had a discerning eye might see something divine in
Christ, John 1.14. We beheld his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of
the Father. There is the as of similitude, and the as of congruity, as if a
mean man takes state upon him, we say he behaveth himself as a King, but if we
say the same of a King indeed, we mean he behaveth himself Kinglike, that is
becoming the Majesty of his High calling. So we beheld his glory as, etc. that
is such a glory as was suitable and becoming Gods only Son: So Christ was angry
with his Disciples because they were too importunate to see the Father, though
they saw him ordinarily, conversing with him: John 14.7. If ye had known me ye
should have known my Father also, and from henceforth ye know him and have seen
him. The F^ther is no otherwise to be known, but as he has revealed himself in
Christ, and having seen and known Christ, who was his Image, they might both
see and know him: and when Philip says, show us the Father and it suffices
us; this will convince us all without farther argument; Christ answers, verse
9. He that has seen me has seen the Father. They might see the Fathers
infinite power acting in him, his wisdom teaching by him, his goodness in the
whole strain of his life: so that in Christ becoming Man, God does in and by
him, represent all his own Attributes and Properties; his Wisdom, Goodness and
Power.

2. In his Word: where God is revealed to us savingly, so as we may be brought
into Communion with him, so it is said, least the light of the glorious Gospel
of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4. As God
shines forth in Christ, so does Christ shine forth in the Gospel: there we
have the Record of his Doctrine, Miracles, and the end for which he came into
the World; and this is the great instrument by which the virtue and power of
God is conveyed to us, for the changing of our hearts and lives, 2 Cor. 3.18.
'Beholding the glory of the Lord as in a glass, we are changed into his Image
and likeness from glory to glory. Some sight of God we must have, or else we
cannot be like him: the knowledge or sight of God, with mortal or bodily eyes
is impossible, the external manifestations and representations in the creature
is imperfect, and suffices rather for Conviction, then Coversion, or to leave
us without excuse, then to save the soul, Romans 12.1. (they have not the excuse
of faultless ignorance.) To know him in the Law, or Covenant of works does but
work wrath, Romans 4.15. or revive in us a stinging sense of our hopeless
condition. To know him in Person, or to see his glorious works, or hear his
glorious words, was a privilege vouchsafed but to few, and to many that made
no good use of it; therefore there is only reserved his Word, to bring us into
Communion with God. Or the glass of the Gospel to represent the glory of the
Lord, that we may be changed into his likeness from glory to glory. There the
knowledge of God is held out powerfully in order to our Salvation.

3. His Works: All which in their whole tenure and contexture showed him to be
God man. If at any time there appeared any evidence of humane weakness, least
the World should be offended and stumble thereat, he did at the same time give
out some notable demonstrations of his divine power: when he lay in a manger at
his birth a Star appeared, and Angels proclaimed his birth to the Shepherds:
When he was swadled as an Infant, the Wise men came and Worshipped him: When he
was in danger of suffering Shipwreck, he commanded the Winds and the Waves, and
they obeyed him: When he was tempted by Satan he was Ministered unto by Angels:
Matthew. 4.11. When they demanded Tribute for the Temple, a Fish brought it to
him, Matthew. 17.26. When he was deceived in the Fig Tree, (which was an
infirmity of humane ignorance) he suddenly blasted it, discovering the glory
of a divine power: When he hanged dying on the Cross, the Rocks were rent, the
Graves opened, the Sun darkened, and all nature put into a rout. Though he
humbled himself to purchase our Mercies, yet he assured our Faith by some
emissions and breakings forth of his divine power: Well then, though it be our
duty to seek and find out Gods track and foot print in the whole Creation, and
to observe the impressions of his Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, in all the
Saints; especially this is our duty to admire his Image in Jesus Christ; for
his humanity, the perfections of the Godhead shine forth in the highest luster.
What ever perfection we conceive to be in his Person, Word or Works, the same
may we conclude to be in the Father also. Did the Winds and Seas obey Christ?
The whole Creation is at the beck of God, did Christ show himself to be the
wisdom, goodness and power of God, surely God is infinitely Wise! Was Christ
Holy and undefiled, surely so is God, light in whom is no darkness at all: Was
Christ Loving, Pityful, and Compassionate, not abhorring the most vile and
miserable, whether in Soul or Body, that came to him for relief, surely God is
Love, and he will not be strange to those that seek him in Christ.

3. How he differs from other persons: For the Saints also are made after the
Image of God, Col. 3.10. And have put on the New Man which is renewed in
knowledge after the Image of him that created him, Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put
on the New man which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness? I
answer, There is a great difference between the Image of God in Man, and the
Image of God in Christ.

1. Man resembles God but imperfectly, Man was made, and is new made after the
Image of God, but with much abatement of this high perfection which is in
Christ, for he has all the substantial perfection which his Father has. In
other Creatures, there is some resemblance but no equality, other Creatures are
made like God, but he is begotten like God.

2. It is derivative from Christ: God would recover man out of his lapsed
estate, by setting up a pattern of Holiness in our Nature, Romans 8.29. Whom he
did foreknow he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son,
that he might be the firstborn among many Brethren. None was fit to restore
this Image of God that was lost, but God Incarnate, for thereby the glory of
God was again visible in our Nature; God is a pure Spirit, and we are
Creatures, that have indeed an immortal Soul, but it dwells in Flesh,
therefore to make us like God, the Word was made flesh, that he might represent
the perfections of God to us, and commend holiness by his own example.

Secondly, The next thing ascribed to Christ is, that he is the first born of
every Creature, that is, born of God before any Creature had a being; or
begotten of the Father of his own proper Essence, and equal with him before any
thing was created: and brought forth out of nothing. But here, the Adversaries
of the Eternal Godhead of Christ, triumph, and say, the first born of the
Creatures is a Creature, one of the same kind. I Answer, if we grant this that
they allege they gain nothing, for Christ had two Natures, he was God, Man, as
God he is the Creator, not a Creature; for the Apostle proves, that by him all
things were made: but as Man so he is indeed a Creature: This double
consideration must not be forgotten, Rom, 1.3, 4. Our Lord Jesus Christ was
made of the Seed of David according to the Flesh, but declared to be the Son of
God, with power according to the Spirit; therefore we must distinguish between
Christ and Christ, what he is according to the Spirit, and what he is a
according to the flesh.

2. I answer, That Metaphors must be taken in the sense in which they are
intended; now what is the Apostles intention in giving Christ the Appellation
of the Firstborn.

Four things are employed by this Metaphor.

1. Identity of Nature. 2. Likeness of Original. 3. Antiquity. 4. Dignity.
Nothing else can be insinuated into the mind of man by such a form of speech,
but Identity and sameness of nature between the brethren which is true as to
Christ's humanity, Heb. 2.14. For ^smuch then as the children are partakers of
Flesh, and blood, he also took part of the same, or else sameness of stock,
which is true also; for the same reason, Heb. 2.11. For both he that
sanctifies, and they who are sunctified are all of one, for which cause he is
not ashamed to call them Brethren, or priority of time, for the first born is
before all the rest, or else, dignity authority and pre-eminence: Now which of
these does the Apostle intend, the two last: The preexistence of Christ before
any thing was made as appears by this reason, v. 16. For by him all things
were made, whether they be in heaven or in earth; And also his Dignity and
Authority above them, as appears by the frequent use of the word. For the
firstborn in Families had Authority over the rest: When Jacob had got the
Birthright this was a part of Isaacs blessing, Genesis 27.29. Let people serve
thee and Nations bow down to thee, be Lord over thy brethren, and let thy
mothers sons bow down to thee. Sovereignty was employed in the Birthright, so
David is called the firstborn of the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 19.27. as the
most glorious amongst them. So here nothing else is intended but that Christ is
in time and dignity before all Creatures.

Thirdly, Though Christ be called the firstborn of every Creature, it does not
imply that he is to be reckoned as one of them, or accounted a Creature. It is
true, when he is said Romans 8.29. That he is the firstborn among many brethren,
it implies that he is head of the renewed estate, that he and all new
creatures are of the same kind, allowing him the dignity of his rank and
degree, for God is his God, and their God, his Father and their Father: but
here it is not the firstborn amongst the creatures, but the firstborn of
every creature. And for farther confirmation, here is not Identity of Nature,
for he is not at all of the same nature with the Angels, those Principalities
and Thrones, Dominions and Powers spoken of in the next verse, nor issued of
the same stock with any of them: mark, he is called the firstborn, not first
created, which must be understood of his divine nature, and eternal Generation
of the Father before all creatures. The creatures are not begotten and born of
God* ^ut made by him: so Christ is primogenitus, that unigenitus the
firstborn, that only begotten. In the following verse he is brought in not as
a creature, but the Creator of all things. The firstborn is not the cause of
the rest of the Children: Peter was the firstborn, yet may be a Brother to
James and John, but not a Father to them. Now all the rest of the creatures are
created, and produced by him: he is not reckoned among them as one of them, he
is the Image of the invisible God.

2d. Why this Excellency of our Redeemer should be so deeply impressed upon our
minds and hearts? for many reasons.

1. This is needful to show his sufficiency to Redeem the world, the party
offended is God, who is of infinite Majesty, the favor to be purchased is the
Everlasting fruition of God, and the sentence to be reversed, is the sentence
of Everlasting punishment. Therefore there needed some valuable satisfaction to
be given to reconcile these things to our thoughts; that we may be confident
that we shall have Redemption by his blood, even the Remission of sins: there
are three things that commend the value of Christ's sacrifice, the dignity of
his Person, the greatness of his sufferings, and the merit of his obedience.
But the two latter without the former will little quiet the heart of scrupulous
men: His sufferings were great but temporary and finite, the merit of his
obedience much, but how shall the virtue of it reach all the World: And if he
be but a mere creature, he has done what he ought to do. I confess a fourth
thing may be added Gods institution, which avails to the end for which God
has appointed it; but the Scripture insists most on the first, the dignity of
his person, which puts a value on his sacrifice, Act. 20, 18. Heb. 9.13, 14.
at lest there is an intrinsic worth, this answers all objections. His
sufferings were temporary and finite, but it is the blood of God; he has
offered up himself through the Eternal Spirit.

2. To work upon our love, that Christ may have the chief room in our hearts:
there is no such argument to work upon our love, as that God over all blessed
for ever, should come to relieve man in such a condescending way, 1 John 3.16.
Hereby we perceive the love which God has to us in that he laid down his life
for us, that very person that dyed for us was God. There was power discovered
in the creation, when God made us like himself out of the dust of the ground,
but love in our Redemption, when he made himself like us. The person that was
to work out our deliverance was the Eternal Son of God. That God that owes
nothing to man, and was so much offended by man, and that stood in no need of
man, having infinite happiness and contentment in himself; that he should come
and dye for us! hereby perceive we the love of God. When we consider what
Christ is, we shall most admire what he has done for us.

Thirdly, That we may give Christ his due honor. For God will have all men to
honor the Son, as they honor the Father, John 5.23. he being equal in power
and glory: the setting forth of his glory, is a rent due to him, from all
creatures: We are to praise him both in word and deed: in mind, and heart, and
practice, which we can never do, unless we understand the dignity of his
person: We are apt to have low thoughts of Christ, therefore we should often
revive the considerations, that may represent his worth and excellency.

Fourthly, That we may place all hope of Salvation in him, and may make use of
him, to the ends which he came to accomplish: We can hardly consider the work
of Redemption, but some base thoughts arise in our minds, nor entertain this
mystery with due respects to the truth and greatness, and admirableness of it,
whithout raising our thoughts to the consideration of the dignity of the person
who is to accomplish it, Heb. 3.1. Therefore brethren, consider the Lord Jesus
the great High Priest and Apostle of our profession.

Fifthly, That we may the better understand two things. 1. The Humiliation of
the Son of God. 2. The way how we may recover the lost Image of God.


1. The humiliation of the Son of God: certainly he that came to Redeem us, was
the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of this Person; now
how did he humble himself? was he not still the Image of God in our nature?
yes, but the divine glory and Majesty was hidden under the vail of our flesh,
little of it did appear, and that only to those who narrowly did observe him;
the brightness of his glory did not conspicuously shine forth: was this all?
no, his dignity was lessened, there was capitis diminutio, the lessening of a
man's estate or condition. As of a man degraded from the Senatorian Order to the
Degree of Knight, thence to the Plebian. Thus was the Eternal Son of God
lessened, less then God, as Mediator, John 14.28. My Father is greater then I.
As God incarnate he took an office designed to him by God, and obeyed him in
all things: They were one in essence, John 10.30. yet with respect to his
Office to save Souls, he was lessened: nay not only less than God, but lesser
than the Angels, Heb. 2.7. He was made a little lower then the Angels. Not born
so, but made so. Man is inferior to an Angel as a Man in the rank and order of
beings; the Angels dye not, therefore his Incarnation and liableness to death,
is a great lessening of his dignity; so not in respect of Office only, but
humane nature assumed.

2. It shows us how the Image of God may be recovered: If we be changed into
the likeness of Christ, for he is the Image of God; his merit should not only
be precious to us, but his example; it is a great advantage not only to have a
rule, but an example: because man is so prone to imitate, that an example in
our nature makes it the more operative: his execuse is ready at hand, we are
Flesh and Blood what would you have us do? therefore Christ came incarnate to
be an example of Holiness: he had the interests of Flesh and Blood to mind, as
well as we; and so would show that a holy Life is possible to those that are
renewed by his Grace: he obeyed God in our nature, therefore in the same nature
we may obey, please and glorify God, though still in a self-denying manner:
the foundation of it is laid in the new birth: the Spirit that formed Christ
out of the substance of the virgin, the same Spirit is ready to form Christ in
you: he makes new creatures, so that there is not only Christ's example, but
Christ's power. Use 1. then let the excellency and dignity of Christ's Person be
more upon your minds and hearts, think often of those two notions in the Text;
that he is the Image of the invisible God, that therein you may be like him.
You cannot be the Image of God so as he was, but you must be in your measure,
the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, but you must be partakers of
the divine nature. He showed himself to be the Son of God by his works, when
the Jews said he blasphemed, when he said he was the Son of God, Ioh. 10.27. If
I do not the works of my Father believe me not, he allowed them to doubt of
them, if he did not those works which were proper to one sent from God,
certainly this is the glory of man, to be the Image of God: there is no greater
perfection then to live in the nearest resemblance to his Creator: Christ is
more excellent because he has more of the Image of God upon him.

2. Consider again that he is Lord of the whole creation, and therefore calle^
the firstborn of every creature. Well th^n we should he subject to him, and
with greater diligence apply our selves to the obedience of his Holy Laws, and
use the means appointed by him to obtain the blessedness offered to us. There
is in us a natural sentiment of the authority of God, and we have a dread upon
our hearts if we do what he has forbidden, but we have not so deep a sense of
the authority of Christ, and play fast and loose with Religion, as fancy, and
humor and interest lead us: Now from this argument you see we should honor
the Son, as we honor the Father, and be as tender of his Institutions, as we
are of the Commandments evident by natural light; for he is not only the
messenger of God, but his express Image, and the firstborn of every creature:
Not to believe him, and obey him, and love him is to sin not only against our
duty, but our remedy, and the Law of our recovery.

SERMON III.
COL. 1. 16. For by him were all things created that are in heaven and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones or dominions or
principalities or powers, all things were created by him and for him.


THE Apostle had told us in the former Verse, that Jesus Christ is the
firstborn of every Creature: The Arrians thence concluded that he himself was
created out of nothing in order of time before the World: But it is not the
first created of any creature, but the firstborn, which notes a precedence,
not only in point of Antiquity, but Dignity; and is as much as to say, Lord of
every creature. For the firstborn was the Lord of the rest, and the Title may
be given either Relatively or comparatively.

1. Relatively; when the rest are of the same stock, or have the relation of
Brethren to him that has the pre-eminence. So it is given to Christ with
respect to new Creatures, Romans 8.29, That he might be the firstborn among many
brethren.

2. Comparatively only: When several persons or things be compared, though
there be no relation between them; So David is called the firstborn of the
Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. That is superior in Dignity and Honor. So
here it is taken not relatively, for so Christ is primogenitus, the firstborn;
that he is also unigenitus, the only begotten: none went before, or come after
him, that are so begotten of God. What he asserteth in that verse, he now
proves by the creation of all things, in this 16th. verse, and the
conservation of all things, verse 17. We are now upon the first proof: Surely
he that created all things, is supreme Lord of all things; or has the right of
the firstborn over them. Two ways is Christ said to have a right to the
Creatures: As God, and as Mediator. His Right as God, is natural and perpetual;
his Right as Mediator is by grant and donation. It is a power acquired and
obtained; his natural right is Antecedent to his actual susception of the
office of Mediator; for it comes to him by Creation. He made all, and it is fit
that he should be sovereign and Lord of all; but the other power and soverainty
is granted to him, as a part of his Reward, and recompense for the sorrows of
his Humiliation; Phil. 2.9, 10. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and
given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should
bow of things in heaven and things in earth and things under the earth. The
Apostle speaks not of this latter now, but of the former; his right as the
only begotten Son of God; he is the firstborn, that is, Lord of the whole
Creation. And good reason, for by him were all things created that are in
heaven, and that are in Earth, etc. In the words, the Creation of the World is
ascribed to Christ: Take notice 1. Of the Object of this Creation. 2. Christ's
Efficiency about it.


1. The Object of Creation, is spoken Collectively and Distributively.

1 Collectively; By him were all things created.

2 Distributively: They are many ways distinguished.

(1.) By their place: Things in heaven, and things in earth.

(2.) By their Nature: Things visible and invisible.

(3.) By their Dignity and Office: Thrones, dominions, principalities and
powers: Words often used in Scripture to signify the Angels whether good or
bad. The good Angels; Ephesians. 1.21. Far above all principality and power, and
might and dominion: Ep^. 3.10. That unto principalities and powers in heavenly
places might be known by the church, the manifold wisdom of God. Sometimes this
Term is given to the bad Angels: We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities and powers, Ephesians. 6.12. And Romans 8.38, Nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers. So that the meaning is, the Angelical Creatures
together with their degree and dignity as well among themselves as over the
lower World, of what rank and degree soever they are, they are all created by
him: he insisteth more on them then on the other branches, because some cried
up the dignity of the Angels, to the lessening of the Honor and office of
Christ; and because they were the noblest and most powerful Creatures; and if
the most glorious Creatures were created by him, surely all others had their
being and life from him. Well then, there is a gradation notable, in setting
forth the object of the Creation. Christ made not only things in Earth, but
things in Heaven; not only the visible things of heaven, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars; but the invisible, the Angels: Not the lower sort of Angels only, but
the most noble and most potent Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers.

2. Christ's Efficiency about them; in these words, they were created by him and
for him.

1 By him; as an equal cooperating cause, or co-worker with God the Father:
Ioh. 5.19. Whatsoever things the f^ther does, those does the son likewise. To
bring a thing out of nothing, belongs unto God: The distance of the Terms is
Infinite, so must the Agent be: Creation is an act of Divine Power.

2 They are for him: They are by him as their first cause, they are for him as
their last end. God is often represented in Scripture as first and last; Isa.
41.4. I the Lord the first and the last, I am ^e. Isa. 44.6. I am the first and
the last, there is no God besides me, So Isa. 48.2. I am the first, I am also
the last. Now all this is repeated and applied to Christ; Rev. 1.17. He said
unto me, fear not, I am the first and the last, I have the keys of death and
hell. Rev. 2.8. These things says the first and the last, which was dead and
is alive. Rev. 22.13. I am alpha and omega, the beginning and the end, the
first and the last. Now these Expressions do imply his Eternal Power and
Godhead: He has been before all things were made, and shall be when all things
in the world are ended: He is the first Being, from whom all things are, and
the last end to whom all things are to be referred. He is the Efficient and
final cause of all the creatures.

Doct. That all Creatures, Angels not excepted, o^e their very Being to Christ
the Son of God, our Blessed and Glorious Redeemer.

I shall take the method offered in the Text, and show you,

First, That all things were created by him.

Secondly, Why the Creation of Angels is so particularly mentioned and insisted
upon?

Thirdly, That all things were created for him.

First, For Creation by him: This is often asserted in Scripture, Ioh. 1.3. All
things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made.
John begins his Gospel with the dignity of Christ's Person, and how does he set
it forth? by the Creation of the World, by the Eternal Word; and what he says,
is an answer to these questions, When was the Word? In the beginning; where was
the Word? with God; what was the Word? He was God: What did he then do? All
things were made by him: What, all without exception? Yes, Without him nothing
was made that was made: be it never so small, never so great, from the highest
Angel to the smallest worm, they had all their Being from him. Two things are
to be explained; 1. How he made all things? 2. When he made the Angels?


1. How he made all things? Freely, and of his own will: Rev. 4.11. Thou art
worthy, O Lord to receive honor and glory and power for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. They use three words to
set forth the honor that is due to Christ for creating the World; Glory,
because of his Excellencies discovered; Honor, which is the ascription or
acknowledgement of those Excellencies; and Power, because the invisible things
of his Godhead and power are seen by the things that are made, Romans 1.20. For
in the creating of the World, he exercised his Omnipotency, and this they do
not express their Affection but his own due desert: Thou art worthy O Lord: The
reason they give, is because he has created all things for his own pleasure,
or according to his own Will, not out of necessity, there was no tie upon him
to make them, but only he of his good pleasure thought fit to do so. He might
have done it in another manner, or at another time, or in another order. There
is nothing in the World that has a necessary connection with the Divine
Essence, so as if God be, that must be; nothing external comes from God by
necessity of Nature, but all is done according to the Counsel of his own Will.
Some thought all created things did come forth from the Creator, by way of
emanation, as Rivers flow out of their Fountain, but there is no stream flows
out of any fountain, but it was before a part of that fountain while it was in
it; but that cannot be said of any Creature in respect of God, that it was any
part of God before it came out from him: Others say the Creatures came out from
God by way of representation, as an Image in the glass from him that passes by
or looks on it; b^t before the world was made, there was no such glass to
represent God: others would express it thus, that the world comes out from God
as a shadow from the body, but yet this will not fit the turn neither; for the
shadow does not come out from the body, but follows it: because of the
deprivation of light from the interposition of another body. Others say, all
comes from God as a foot-print, or tract in Clay or Sand, from one that
passes over it; but there was nothing on which God by passing might make such
an impression: What ever good intention they might have by setting forth the
Creation by these expressions, yet you see they are not proper and accurate.
These expressions may have their use to raise man's understanding to contemplate
the excellency and Majesty of the Creator; for they all show his incomparable
Excellency and Perfection, together with the vanity, nothingness, or smallness
of the Creature, if compared with him, as great a bulk as it bears in our
eye. They are but as a Ray from the Sun, a stream from the fountain, or a drop
to the Ocean; an Image in the Glass, or a shadow to the substance, or like a
foot-print of a man in the Clay or Sand; and so are but certain signs leading
up to the thing signified; or Letters and Syllables out of which we may spell
God. As the streams lead us to the fountain, the image to the man, the shadow
to the body, or the track to the foot that made it. But the Scripture leaving
those comparisons, shows us that the World came out from the Creator, as the
Workmanship from the Artificer, the building from the Architect, Heb. 11.10.
Now every Artificer and builder works merely out of the Counsel of his own
Will, and herein they resemble God, but only what they do with great labor,
God does with the beck of his own Will and Word: Psalm. 33.6. By the word of the
Lord the heavens were made, and all the host of them by the breath of his
mouth. A bare word of his immediately created all the World; the Heavens and
Earth and all that is in them.

2. When did he make the angels? For in the History of Moses, there seems to
be a great silence of it.

I Answer, We read Genesis 1.1. that in the beginning, that is, when God did first
set himself to create, that then he created the Heaven and the Earth; but we
read again in the 20th. Verse, that in six days the Lord made heaven and earth
and the sea, and all that in them is. I argue that if within that compass of
time, the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and all things that are in them, Angels
are included in that number; being the inhabitants of Heaven, as Men and Beasts
are of the Earth, and Fishes of the Sea: As here by things in Heaven the
Apostle principally understands the Angels, and by things on earth Men:
Therefore as things on earth were not made, but after the earth; so things in
heaven were not created but after the heavens were created: The heavens were
not created till the second day, nor perfected and fitted till the fourth.
Therefore as God did furnish the Earth with Plants and Beasts before men, so
did he adorn the Heaven with stars, before he filled it with Angels: for he
first framed the House and adorned it, before he brought in the inhabitants.
Therefore probably they were made the fourth day. Is this seems too short a
time before the fall of the Apostate Angels, you must remember how soon man
degenerated: some think he did not sleep in innocence quoting that Psalm. 49.12.
Man being in honor abides not, but is like the bea^ts that perish. The word
signifies a nights Lodging in an Inn; shall no^ Lodge or stay a Night: others
make his fall on the next day, the Sabbath: For at the end of the sixth day,
all was good, very good. The Angels fell from their first state as soon as they
were Created: so short and uncertain is all created Glory.

Secondly, All things were created for him; that is, for the honor of the Son,
as well as for the honor of the Father, and the Holy Ghost: Now this is
necessary to be thought of by us, because there is a Justice in the case that
we should return and employ all in his service, from whom we have received all,
even though it be with the denial of our nearest and dearest Inte^est. He is
worthy of this Glory and Honor from us, and that we should trust upon him as a
faithful Creator, in the midst of all dangers.

1. I will prove, that the gre^t^st Glory the Creature is capable of, is to
serve the Will, and set forth the Praise of its Creator: for every thing that
attaineth not its end is vain. What matter is it whether I be a Dog or a Man, a
Beast or an Angel, if I serve not the end for which I was made? and that is not
the personal and particular benefit of any Creature, but the glory of the
Creator: for God made all things for himself; Prove. 16.4. whether he made
Beasts or Man or Angels, it was still with a respect to his own glory and
service. God is independent, and self-sufficient of himself, and for himself.
Self-seeking in the creature is monstrous and incongruous: It Is as absurd, and
unb^seeming, to seek its own Glory, as to attribute to its self its own being;
Romans 11.36. Of him and through him, and to him are all things. Gods glory is
the end of our being, and doing; for being and doing are both from him, and
therefore for him alone. Above all it concerns man to consider this, who can
glorify God not only objectively, by the impressions of God upon him, and
passively as God will overule all his actions to his own Glory, but actively as
he is the mouth of the Creation, not only to honor God himself, but to give
him the praise which resulteth from all his works: It was well s^id of a
Heathen, si essem lus^inia; If I were a Nightingal, I would sing as a
Nightingal, si alauda: If I were a Lark, I would pere as a Lark. When I am a
man, what should I do but know, love and praise God without ceasing and
glorify my Creator. Things are unprofitable, or mis-placed, when they do not
seek or serve their end; therefore for what use are we meet, who are so unmeet
for our proper end? Like the wood of the vine that is good for nothing, not so
much as to make a pin whereon to hang any thing, Ier. 20.15. Good for nothing
but to be cast into the fire, unless it be fruitful. What are we good for, if
we be not serviceable to the ends for which we were created.

2. The design of God was, that the whole Creation should be put in subjection
to the word Incarnate: Not only this lower world, wherein man is concerned,
but the upper World also. Our R^^eemer who has bought us, has an Interest in
all things that may concern us; that they may be disposed of to his own glory,
and our good and advantage: All are at the making and at the disposal of our
Lord Jesus Christ: Therefore it is said, Heb. 2.10. For whom are all things,
and by whom are all things. God that frames all things, orders all things to
their proper end. His works are many, and some are more excellent and glorious
than others, and one of the chief of them, is the salvation of man by Jesus
Christ. Therefore all things are subordinated thereunto, to the Glory of the
Mediator, by whom this is accomplished; 1 Cor. 8.6. But to us there is but one
God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

Thirdly, Why the Creation of Angels is so particularly and expressly mentioned?
I Answer, for three Reasons:

1. To show the Glory and Majesty of the Redeemer. The Angels are said to excel
in strength; Psalm. 103.20. and elsewhere they are called Mighty Angels: This
potency they have from their Creator, who gives power and strength to all his
Creatures as it pleases him; their strength may be conceived by that instance,
that one Angel in a night slew one hundred and eighty five Thousand in
Senacheribs Camp. Now these potent Creatures, are infinitely inferior to our
Redeemer, by whom, and (...) whom they were made: Though they are the most
excellent of all the Creatures, yet they are his Subjects, and Ministers at his
beck and command; both by the Law of their Creation, as Christ is God: and also
by the fathers donation, as he is mediator and God Incarnate: 1 Pet. 3.25 He is
set down on the right hand of God, Angels, Authorities and Powers being made
subject to him. And again, Ephesians. 1.22. He has set him far above all
principality and power and might and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world, but in that which is to come. They have a great name,
but Christ has a more excellent name than they, Heb. 1.5. for they are all
bound to worship him, ver. 6. and serve him; for he employeth them for the
defense and comfort of the meanest of his people: They are subject not only to
God, but to Christ, or God incarnate. Look, as it is the glory of Earthly Kings
to command mighty and powerful subjects; are not my princes altogether Kings,
Isa. 10.8. that so many Princes held under him as their Sovereign, and served
him as their Commander; and when God speaks of the Assyrian, he calls him a
King of Princes, Hos. 8.10. Namely, as he had many Kings Subject and Tributary
to him, so is this the Majesty of our Redeemer, that he has these powerful
Creatures the mighty Angels in his Train and retinue: These heavenly hosts make
up a part of that Army which is commanded by the Captain of our Salvation.

2. This is mentioned to obviate the Errors of that Age: Both the Jews and the
Gentiles had an high opinion of Spirits and Angels, as Gods Ministers and
Messengers. For he does not always immediately administer the affairs of
Mankind. Now as they were right in the main, as to their service, so they added
much of curiosity and superstition to the Doctrine of Angels, and by their vain
speculations infected the minds of many in the Christian Church, who were but
newly come out from among them, insomuch that they fell to the worshipping of
Angels as mediators to God. As the Apostle intimates, col. 2.18. Now because
this was to the disparagement of Christ, the Apostles did set themselves to
check this curiosity of dogmatizing about Angels, and the superstition or
Idolatry of Angel-worship, thence growing apace. Now this they did, by
asserting the dignity of Christ's Person and Office: As Paul, Col. 2. and the
Author to the Hebrews, chap. 1.2, 3. Has in these last days spoken unto us by
his son, whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the
worlds, who being the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his
person, and upholding all thing by the word of his power, when he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high. It
is true, Christ was sent from Heaven as the Angels are, and he came in a
despicable way of appearance, to promote our Salvation and recovery, as they
assumed bodies suitable to their Message; yet his superiority and pre-eminence
above the Angels is clear and manifest: He was not only equal to them, but far
above them, Heb. 1.3. Seven things are observable in that verse,

1. Christ came as the Eternal Son of God; He has spoken unto us by his Son.
When he comes to the Angels, he says, they as servants and ministering
spirits. For a short while he ministered in the form of a servant in the days of
his Flesh, they continue to be so from the beginning to the end of the World.

2. He was heir of all things: That is, Lord of the whole creation: They only
Principalities and Powers, (...) certain ends, to such Persons and Places, over
which Christ sets them.

3. He was the Creator of the World: By whom also he made the worlds, says the
Apostle, they are noble and divine creatures indeed, but the work of Christ's
hands.

4. He is the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his
person: that is, the essential Image of God. They only have some strictures of
the Divine Majesty.

5. The upholding all things by the word of his power; that is, the conserving
cause of all that Life and Being that is in the creature. The Angels live in a
continual dependence upon Christ as their Creator, and without his supporting
influence, would be soon annihilated.

6. By himself he purged our sins. He was sent into the world for that great
and glorious work of Mediation, which none of them was worthy to undertake,
none able to go through withal, but himself alone. They are sent about the
ordinary concernments of the Saints, or the particular affairs of the World; he
is the Author of the whole work of Redemption and Salvation, and they but
subordinate Assistants in the particular promotion of it.

7. He sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. They are Spirits near
the Throne of God, ever in his Presence, attending on him like Princes. God
never made any of them universal and eternal King for he set Christ at his
right hand, not the Angels. To sit at Gods right hand, is not only to be
blessed and happy in enjoying those pleasures which are there for evermore, not
only to be advanced to the highest place of Dignity and Honor next to God;
but to be invested with a supreme and universal Power above all Men and Angels.
Take these, or any one of these, and he is above the Angels, though they be the
most noble and excellent creatures that ever God made.

3. Because Christ has a ministry and service to do by them. He makes use of
them partly to exercise their obedience, without which they forsake the Law of
their creation and swerve from the end for which they were made; Psalm. 103.20.
They do his commandments, hearkening to the voice of his word. They do
whatsoever he commands them, with all readiness and speed immaginable, and
therein they are an example to us. Matthew. 6.10. Thy will be done in earth as it
is in heaven. They are our fellow servants now in the Work, hereafter in the
Recompense; when we are admitted into one Society, under one common Head and
Lord, Heb. 12.27. who shall for ever rejoice in the contemplation of Gods
infinite Excellencies. Well then, if these Excellent creatures, so great in
power, be always so ready and watchful to do the Will of God and count it
their honor to assist in so glorious a work as the saving of Souls, or do any
other business he sends them about; how should we that hope to be like the
Angels in happiness, be like them in obedience also.

2. Because the Churches safety depends upon it. We stand in need of this
Ministry of Angels. The service of the Angels is protection to the people of
God, vengeance on their Enemies.

1. For protection; Christ has the heavenly host at his command, and sends
them forth for the good of his People, Psalm. 68.17. The chariots of the Lord
are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, the Lord is among them in Sinai
in the holy place. Mark, that thousands of Angels are his Chariots, conveying
him from Heaven to Earth, and from Earth to Heaven; and mark, the Lord is among
them; that is, God incarnate; for he presently speaks of his ascending up on
high. Thou have ascended up on high, and led captivity captive, thou have
received gifts for men, ver. 18. Among them in his Holy place, that is, in
heaven: It is added as in Mount Sinai; that is, as at the giving of the Law,
they were then there, and still attend on the propagation of the Gospel. For
more particular Cases, see Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering spirits sent
forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation. So Psalm. 34.7. The
angel of the Lord incampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. All that obediently serve and wait on God, have the promise of his
protection.

2. The other part of this Ministry and Service, is to restrain and destroy the
Devil and his Instruments. The Scripture often speaks of Gods executing
Judgments by the Angels: Their influence does not always personally appear,
yet it is great and powerful. Though the Powers and Authorities on Earth, and
their Messengers and Forces be often employed against the Saints, yet the
Captain of our Salvation is in Heaven, and all the mighty Angels are subject to
him, and at his disposal. By this means the Prophet Elisha confirmed himself
and his servant, when the King of Syria sent Chariots and Horses a great host
to attacque him in Dothan, ^ King. 6.14, 15. And when his serva^t saw it early
in the morning, he said, Alas my master! what shall we do? The Prophet
answered, Verse 16. They that ^e with us, are more than they that be against
us. And then Verse 17. he prayed, Lord open his eyes that he may see. And the
Lord opened his eyes, and behold the mountain was full of chariots and ^orses
of fire, round about Elisha. These fiery Horses and Chariots were nothing else
but the Angels of God. Here is force against force, chariots against chariots,
horse against horse, if we could open the eye of Faith, and shut that of Sense.
We read Acts 12.23. that an Angel smote Herod in the midst of his Pride and
Persecution: The Angel of the Lord smote him.

USES.
I. Let us more deeply be possessed with the Majesty of our Redeemer: He is the
Creator of all things, of Angels as well as Men, and so more excellent than all
the Men in the World, whether they excel in power or holiness, which the
Psalmist expresses thus, fairer than the children of men, Psalm. 45.29. But
also then the most excellent and glorious Angels, he is their Creator as well
as ours, head of principalities and powers, as well as of poor worms here upon
Earth. Surely the representing and apprehending of Christ in his glorious
Majesty, is a point of great consequence.

1. Partly, to give us matter for praise and admiration, that we may not have
mean thoughts of his Person and Office; he is a most glorious Lord and King,
that holds the most powerful Creatures in subjection to himself. If
Christians did know and consider how much of true Religion consists in admiring
and praising their Redeemer, they would more busy their minds in this work.

2. Partly, To strengthen our Trust, and to fortify us against all fears and
discouragements in our service. When we think of the great Creator of Heaven
and Earth, and all things visible and invisible, Angels, Men, Principalities,
etc. Surely the brightness of all creature-glory should wax dim in our eyes;
Our God is able to deliver us, Dan. 18. and will, as he did by his Angel. This
was that which fortified Stephen, Acts 5.55, 56. He saw Jesus standing at the
right hand of God. It is easy for him who made all things out of nothing to
help us. See Psalm. 121.2. My help stands in the name of the Lord who made
heaven and earth. The Almighty Creator, Ruler and Governor of the World, what
cannot he do! As long as I see those glorious monuments of his power standing,
I will not distrust he can afford me seasonable help by his Holy Angels through
the intercession of his Son who has assumed my Nature.

3. Partly, To bind our duty; all Creatures were made by him and for him,
therefore we should give up our selves to him, and say with Paul, Acts 27.23.
His I am and him I serve. His by Creation and redemption, therefore every thing
we have and do, ought to have a respect to his glory and service. There is ^
variety of Creatures in the World, of different kinds and different
excellencies: In the whole and every kind there is somewhat of the glory of God
and Christ set forth. Now this should strike our hearts? shall we only who are
the persons most obliged, be a disgrace to our Lord both Creator and Redeemer,
when the good Angels are so ready to attend him at his beck and command, and
that in the meanest services and ministries. Shall poor worms make bold with
his Laws, slight his doctrine, despise his benefits? Heb. 2.2, 3. If the word
spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so
great salvation.

4. And lastly, to make us more reverend in our approaches to him, for he sits
in the Assembly of the Gods, the holy Angels are round about him. Psalm. 138.1.
Before the Gods will I sing praise to thee: That is, in the presence of the
holy Angels; 1 Cor. 10.10. Eccl. 5.6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh
to sin, neither say thou before the angel that it was an Error. The Angels in
heaven observe our behavior in Gods worship; what vows we make to God, what
promises of obedience. But above all, there is our glorious Redeemer himself,
Heb. 12.28, 29. with what reverence and godly fear should we approach his Holy
Presence.

II. Use. Is to quicken us to Thankfulness for our Redemption; that our Creator
is our Redeemer. None of the Angels did humble himself as Christ did do, to do
so great a piece of service, and yet he is far above them. There is a congruity
in it, that we should be restored by him, by whom we were made: but he made the
Angels as well as men, but he did not restore them. No, they were not so much
as in a condition of forbearance and respite: he assumed not their nature, he
created all things, but he redeemed mankind. His delights were with the sons of
men; he assumed our nature, and for a while was made a little lower then the
Angels, Heb. 2.9. We cannot sufficiently bless God for the Honor done to our
Nature in the person of Christ, for it is God incarnate that is made head of
Angels, Principalities and Powers. God in our nature, whom all the Angels are
called upon to adore and worship. The devil sought to dishonor God, as if he
were envious of man's happiness, Genesis 3.8. God does know that in the day that ye
^at thereof ye shall be a^ Gods. And he fought to depress the nature of man,
which in innocence stood so near to God, now that his humane nature should be
set so far above the Evangelical, in the person of Christ, and be admitted to
dwell with God in a personal Union; this calls for our highest love and
thankfulness.

III. Use. Is an encouragement to come to Christ for sanctifying and renewing
Grace. I have three Arguments.

1. The Person to whom we come: To whom should we come, but to our Creator, God
infinitely Good, Wise and Powerful. The creation shows him good, and whatever
is good in the Creatures, is wholly derived from his goodness: It is but like
the odor of the sweet Ointments, or the perfume that he leaves behind him
where he has been, Iam. 1.19. He is infinitely wise when he created and settled
the World. He did not jumble things in a Chaos and confusion, but settled them
in a most perfect order and proportion. Which may be seen, not only in the
Fabric of the World, but in the disposition of the parts of Man's Body; yea or
in any Gnat or Fly. Now cannot he put our disordered souls in frame again? If
the Fear of God be true Wisdom, to whom should we seek for it, but from the
Wise God? His Infinite Power is seen also in the Creation, in raising all
things out of nothing. And if a Divine Power be necessary to our Conversion, to
whom should we go, but to him who calls the things that are not, as though
they were, Romans 4.17. According as his divine power has given unto us all
things that pertain unto life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.7.

2. From the work it self, which is a new Creation, which carries much
resemblance with the old; Ephesians. 2.10. For we are his workmanship created in
Christ Jesus unto good works. 2 Cor. 4.6. For God who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. It is such an effect
as comes from a Being of Infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness; that man may be
in a capacity to love, please and serve God. What was lost in Adam, can only
be recovered by Christ.

3. From the relation of the Party that seeks it. Psalm. 119.73. Thine hands
have made me, and fashioned me, give me understanding that I may learn thy
commandments. We go to him as his own Creatures. This plea has great force
because of Gods goodness to all his Creatures. Not only the Angels, but every
worm and fly, had their being from Christ; there is a great variety of living
things in the World, but they are all fed from the common fountain: therefore
we may comfortably come to him for life and quickening, Ioh. 1.4. We need not be
discouraged by our baseness and vileness, for the basest worm had what it has
from him. 2. That Christ as Creator bears such Affection to man as the work
of his hands: Is it good unto thee that thou should despise the work of thy
hands? Job 10.3. Artificers when they have made an excellent work are very
chary of it, and will not destroy it, and break it in pieces, Job 14.15. Thou will have a desire to the work of thine hands. As Creatures, beg relief and
help; if you cannot plead the covenant of Abraham, plead the covenant of Noah.
3. God forsakes none of the fallen creatures, but those that forsake him first; 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you while you be with him, and if ye seek him he
will be found of you, but if ye forsake him he will forsake you. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
If thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake ^im he will
cast thee off for ever. 4. Especially will Christ be good to man seeking after
him for Grace, that we may serve and obey him. For he is no Pharaoh, to require
brick, and give no straw. Creating Grace laid the debt upon us, and his
redeeming Grace provideth the power and help that we may discharge it. Now when
we acknowledge the debt, and confess our impotency to pay it, and our
willingness to return to our duty. Will Christ fail us? A conscienc^ of our
duty is a great matter, but a desire of grace to perform it is more: Therefore
come as creatures earnestly desiring to do their Creators will, and to promote
his Glory. God will not refuse the soul that lies so submissively at his feet.

SERMON. IV.
COL. 1.17. And he is before all things and by him all things consist.


THE Apostle had asserted the dignity of Christ's Person, by ascribing the work
of Creation to him: now the work of Conservation and Providence: By the same
divine power by which Christ made all things, he does preserve and sustain all
things.

In this verse two things are ascribed to Christ.

First, His precedence in point of Time, or his Antiquity before all creatures:
And he is before all things, that is he had an Eternal being before any thing
that now is Created.

Secondly, His sustaining all things by his Almighty Power, and by him all
things do consist. All creatures owe their continuance and preservation to him.

The first point is his Precedence and Pre-existence before all creatures
whatsoever.

Doct. That Jesus Christ had a being before any of the creatures were made.

1. That he had a being long before he was born of the Virgin, for he was in
the time of the Patriarchs, as Ioh. 8.48. Before Abraham was I am, to say
nothing of that Godlike way speaking I am; not I was but I am, that which I now
plead for, is that he was before Abraham: the words are occasioned by Christ's
saying that Abraham saw his day and was glad: which the Jews understood not of
a Prophetical, but of a real vision, and therefore objected the impossibility,
that he was not yet fifty years old and how could he see Abraham? or Abraham
see him? Christ does not answer to their ill interpretation, but shows that
their very objection contained no absurdity, if taken in their own sense; for
he was not only in the time of Abraham, but long before, and so affirms more
then that objection required: The Jews thought it absurd that Christ should be
in the time of Abraham, but Christ affirms more, and that with a strong
asseveration; he was not only by the constitution of God, but really existing
before Abraham: For the Predestination not only of Christ but of Abraham and
all the Elect was before the foundation of the World. If in respect of special
prediction, mark then what must follow, then Cyrus must be in the time of
Isaiah, Josiah must be in the time of Jeroboam. The calling of the Gentiles
must be in the time of Moses, for they Prophesied of these things.

2. That he had a being at the time of the creation that is also clear: for it
is said in the beginning was the word, John 1.1. that is when Christ set
himself to create all things, the word beginning signifies many things; but
chiefly the beginning of all time, especially when it is put absolutely without
any limitation to the matter in hand. So John 8.44. The Devil was a murderer
from the beginning, that is almost as soon as created, Matthew. 19.4. He that
made them at the beginning made them male and female. So Heb. 1.10. And, Thou
in the beginning have laid the foundations of the Earth, and in many other
places. Therefore Christ had a being when the World and all creatures were
made, visible and invisible: So Prove. 8.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
The Lord p^ssessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old. I
was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the Earth was. When
there was no depths, I was brought forth: when there were no fountains
abounding with water. Before the mountains were settled; before the hills was I
brought forth: While as yet he had not made the Earth, nor the fields, nor the
highest part of the dust of the World. When he prepared the heavens I was
there: when he set a compass upon the face of the depth: When he established
the clouds above: when he strengthened the foun^ains of the deep: When he gave
to the Sea his degree, that the waters should not pass his commandment: when
he appointed the foundation of the earth: Then I was by him, as one brought up
with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him: Rejoicing
in the habitable parts of his earth, and my delights were with the sons of men.
There the wisdom of God or the eternal Word describes the Antiquity of his
person, all the question is what this wisdom is, that is there spoken of.

1. It is not humane but divine: for the wisdom there spoken of was before the
World was.

2. Whatever it be it is not a divine attribute, but a divine person: for those
things which are there ascribed to wisdom cannot properly belong to an
Attribute, to be begotten, brought forth, verse 23, 24. To have the affections
of love, verse 27. Delight, verse 31. all along the expressions agree only to
a person. That wisdom which inviteth sinners, promises the Spirit, threatens
eternal destruction to those which hearken not to him, commends not the Laws
of Moses, but requires obedience to his own Laws, what can this wisdom be but
a person: If the intent were only to express that God is wise, what strange
expressions would the^e be, to what purpose were it to give us notice that he
was wise from the beginning, if there were no other mystery in it.

3. This person was Christ who is the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. And in whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. ^.5.

Thirdly, That Christ was before the World was, from all eternity: Micah 5.2.
His goings forth are from everlasting. The Prophet there speaks of his birth
at Bethlehem: and his eternal Generation, and distinguishes the one from the
other, but thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the many
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall come forth to me he that is to be
Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from old, from Everlasting, or
from the days of Eternity. This last clause is added least any should look
upon this Ruler as only man, and begin^ing to be at his Incarnation, he that
was born at Bethlehem was also true God, begotten of the Father from all
Eternity.

Fourthly, That Christ was God s^bsisting in the divine Nature, I shall bring
two places to prove that, the first, Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but empted himself and made himself
of no reputation, he was first in the form of God before he appeared in the
form of a Servant, the form of God is his divine glory and blessedness, every
way equal to God. The form of a Servant is either his coming in the similitude
of sinful flesh. or his subjecting himself to the curse of the Law, or his
humble and mean condition while he lived among men, it consists in one of these
or in all three, now before he submitted to this he existed in the form of God,
that is, was clothed with divine Majesty and in all things equal with God the
Father, his being and existence which he then had was truly divine. The form of
God is the very divine essence, as clothed with Glory and Majesty, this did
justly and naturally belong to him, and was not usurped by him: the other place
is Christ's prayer, John 17.5. And now O Father glorify thou me with thy own
self, with the glory which I had with thee before the World was. God is said to
glorify any person when he gives him glorious qualities and powers; or by
revealing and manifesting those glorious qualities which he has; or when he
does receive him and treat him agreeably to his Glory. The meaning of Christ's
prayer then must be of one or other of all these senses: when he prays that
the father would glorify him with that glory that he had with him before the
world was, if you take it in the first sense, he d^sireth that God would bestow
upon him as Mediator or God Incarnate a Glory suitable to that Glory he had with
him from all Eternity. If in the second sense, he desires his Glory may be
revealed, or become conspicucus in his humane nature. If in the third, that God
would receive him honorably and agreeably to that Glory, which sense is the
chiefest, for it contains the other two. The meaning then in short is, that
he might be received to the full enjoyment of that glory which he had before
the World was. Christ was from all Eternity the glorious God, this Glory of his
Godhead by his humiliation was not diminished and lessened, but obscured and
hidden: and therefore prays that he may be received by the Father, and openly
declared to the World to be the Son of God. Or that the Glory of his Godhead
might shine forth in the person of Christ God-man. Well then before any
creature was Christ had a divine Glory, how had it he? The enemies of this
Truth say by decree, or designation not by possession, but that cannot be, he
that is not has nothing: if he had not a divine being, how could he have
divine Glory before the World? None can say Paul was an Apostle of Christ
before the World was, because he was appointed or designed to this work, yea
none can say he had Faith and brotherly love when he was yet an unbeliever and
persecutor, yet it pleased God to separate him from his Mothers Womb, and
predestined him to have these things. Again, then all true believers may thus
pray to God, glorify me with, etc. for they are thereunto appointed, but this
is absurd. Besides, if he had it then how could he want it now? The decree is
the same, it remains then that Christ had a being and substance in the
Godhead before any of the Creatures were made.

USE.
1. This serves for the confutation of those Atheists that say, Christ took
upon him the appellation of a God to make his Doctrine more authentic and
effectual; they confess the morals of Christianity are most excellent for the
establishment of Piety and Honesty, but men's inclination carrying them more
powerfully to vice then virtue, this doctrine would not be received with any
reverence if it came recommended to them by a mere man, and therefore Christ
assumed the glorious appellation of the Son of God, or pretended to be God: A
blasphemy very derogatory both to the honor of Christ and Christianity: and
quite contrary to the drift of the Scriptures, both of the Old and New
Testament. The Messiah promised in the Old Testament was to be God all the
Prophets agree, in that Jesus Christ proved himself to be God both by his Word
and Works: and the Apostles still assert it: Could they that lived in so many
several Ages, as the Prophets and Apostles did, lay their heads together and
have intelligence one with another, to convey this Imposture to the World?
Surely if Christ be the Messiah promised in the Old Testament as clearly he is,
then he is God, for that describes him to be such: and if Christ usurped this
honor, how did God so highly favor him with such ex^raordinary Graces, by
i^spiring him with the knowledge of the best Religion in the World, to
authorize him with miracles, to raise him from the dead. And must this Religion
that condemns all frauds, and doing evil that good may come of it be
supported by a lie? or cannot God govern the World without countenancing such a
deceit? or is it possible that such Holy persons as our Lord Jesus and his
Apostles were, could be guilty of such an Imposture? Did they do this by
command of God? No surely, for God which is the God of Truth would not command
them to teach a lie, or to make use of one: He has power enough to cause the
Truth to be embraced by some other means; and a greater injury cannot be done
him, then to go about to gratify him with what he hates, much less would God
have commanded a mere man to call himself his Eternal Son, and God equal to
him, which is a blasphemy and sacrilege as well as a lie, the greatest of the
kind, for mortal man to take upon himself to be the eternal God. If it were not
by his express commandment, would he suffer such an attempt to go unpunished?
would he witness from Heaven this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased?
would he have raised him from the dead, and so engaged the World to believe in
him and adore him, Acts 17.31.

2. If Christ were before all things, let us prefer him above all things: This
consideration is of great use to draw off our hearts from all created things,
and to lessen our respects to wordly vanities, that they may be more earnestly
fixed on what is eternal and glorious. He that was before the world was, will
be when the world shall be no more: Christ is from Everlasting to Everlasting,
Psalm. 90.2. to him should we look, after him should we seek, he is first and
last, the beginning and ending. It is for an Everlasting blessedness, for the
enjoyment of an eternal God that our souls were made. He that was from the
beginning, and will be when all things shall have an end; it is he that should
take up our minds and thoughts: How can we have room for so many thoughts about
fading glories, when we have an Eternal God and Christ to think of? What light
can we see in a Candle when the Sun shines in his full strength? All things in
the World serve only for a season, and then wither; and that season is but a
short one. You glory in your Riches, and preeminence now, but how long will you
do so? To day that House and Lands is thine, but thou can not say it will be
thine tomorrow: but a believer can say my God, my Christ, is mine to day, and
will be mine to all eternity. Death takes all from us honors and riches, and
strength and life, but it cannot take God and Christ from us, they are ours and
everlastingly ours.

Secondly, We come now to the second point, his sustaining all things by his
Almighty power, and by ^im all things consist.

Doct. II. That as Christ made all things, so he does sustain them in being and
working.

Let me explain this how the creatures are preserved by Christ.

1. This is to be understood not only meritoriously as a moral cause, but
efficiently as a natural cause of the creatures sustentation: for the Apostle
does not consider here so much what Christ does as a Mediator, as what de does
as God. It is true Christ as Mediator has reprieved the World from that ruin*
which might come upon it for man's sin, but here his merit is not considered,
but his power, Heb. 1.3. He upholdeth all things by the word of his power. The
weight of the whole creation lies upon his hands, as Daniel tells
Belshazzar, that his breath and his ways were in the hand of God, Dan. 5.23.
so is the being, life, and operation of all the creatures* If he should
withdraw his withholding hand, they would quickly return to their first
nothing, which shows the great power of our Redeemer. Moses complains,
Numb. 11.11, 12. Thou have laid the burden of all this people upon me, have I
conceived this people? have I begotten them that thou should say unto me,
carry them in thy bosom, but Christ has the care and charge of all the world,
not to rule them only, but to sustain them. A King or a Governor has a moral
rule over his subjects, but Christ gives them being and existence; and does
preserve and keep them in their present state and condition from dissolution.

2. Not only indirectly but directly: Indirectly Christ may be said to sustain
and preserve the creatures, as he keeps off evil or removes those things
that may be destructive to them: As he preserves a Town that repelleth their
enemies, but directly he preserves them as he continues his providential
influence, Acts 17.28. For in him we live, and move, and have our being. As the
root feeds the fruit, or the breath of the musician maintains the sound,
Psalm. 104.29. Thou take away thy breath and they dye, and return to their
du^t. Life and all the joys and comforts of it every minute depend upon God.
It is by his providential influence and supportation we subsist. The greatest
creature cannot preserve it self by its power and greatness, and the lest is
not neglected, both would sink into nothing without this continued influence.

Thirdly, He does this not only mediately by means appointed, but immediately
as his efficacy pierces through all. God preserves the creatures by means,
for he gives them those supplies, which are proper for them: as to man food
and raiment: for other creatures what may relieve them. And the wise dispensing
these supplies without any care and solicitude of the creatures, is a notable
part of his Providence. But here we consider his intimate presence with all
things by which he upholdeth their beings; which all the means of the World
cannot do without him. God does as it were hold the creatures in his own hand,
that it may not sink into its old nothing, as a man holds a weighty thing.
This is supposed to be alluded unto, Job 6.9. Let him loose his hand and cut me
off. If he does but loose his Almighty grasp, all the creatures fall down.

Fourthly, Christ does this so, as that he does not overturn their nature: he
works by natural and necessary causes necessarily, with voluntary causes
voluntarily: he that inlightneth the World by the Sun, causes man to discourse
and reason; the Sun would not shine if Christ were not the light of it, nor man
discourse if he did not continue the faculty, Ioh. 1.4. In him was Life, and
this Life was the light of man. It is man sees, man hears, man talks, man
acts, but yet the seeing eye, and hearing ear, is of the Lord, Prove. 20.12.
as God has made both, so he sustaineth both in their operation and exercise:
All that we do naturally and spiritually we have from Christ.

Fifthly, He is not the bare instrument of God in sustaining the creature, but
as a coequal Agent. As he made the World, and with the father created all
things, so he does support and order all things. It is as well the work of the
Son as of the Father; for he is God equal with him in glory and power, John
5.17. My Father works hitherto and I work, and he has a command of all the
creatures, that they can do nothing without him, how much soever they attempt
to do against him.

2. Let me give you the reasons of this, why all things must subsist by him.

1. Because preservation is but a kind of continued creation, or a continuance
of the being which God has caused: Gods will in creation makes a thing to be,
his will in preservation makes it continue to be: the same omnipotency and
efficacy of God is necessary to sustain our beings, as at first to create them.
Therefore it is said Psalm. 104.2. Thou stretchest out the Heavens like a
curtain, which notes a continued act, God erected them at first and still
sustaineth them by his secret power in this posture: so that with respect to
God it is the same action to conserve as to create. That the creature may have
a being the influence of God is necessary to produce it, that the creature may
continue its being, it is necessary that God should not break off that
influence, or forsake the creature so made: for the being of the creature does
so wholly depend on the will of God, that it cannot subsist without him.
Nothing can be without the will of God, which is the cause both of the being
and existence of all creatures: Therefore their being cannot be continued
unless God will: therefore it belongs to the same power to make any thing out
of nothing, and to keep any thing that is made from returning to its first
nothing.

2. It is impossible to cut off the dependence of the creature upon the first
cause, for no creature has a self sufficiency to maintain and support it self.
Things of Art may subsist without the Artificer, as a Carpenter makes a House
and then leaves it to stand of it self; the Shipwright makes a Ship, and then
leaves it to the Pilot to guide it: but all things of Nature depend upon God
that made them, because they have their whole being from him, matter, and form:
which be continues no longer then he pleases, whether they be things in
Earth, or things in Heaven, visible or invisible. No impression of the Agent
remains in the effect when his action cease; when the effect wholly
depends on the cause: as when the Air is enlightened which receives light
from the Sun, but when the Sun is gone the light ceases: So when God withdraws
the creature vanishes: for they have no other being then God is pleased to
bestow upon them.

3. If it were not so many absurdities would follow, as for instance

1. If things do subsist by themselves then they would always be: for nothing
would destroy it self. 2. Then the creature would be independent, and whether
God will or no they would conserve their being, and then how should God Govern
the World? therefore it undenyably follows, thou have made all things, and
thou preservest them all.
4. It would destroy all Worship, and our Piety and respect to God would be
cold and languid. The service we owe to God is reducible to these Four heads.

1. Adoration of his excellent nature above all other things. 2. Affiance in
his goodness, with expectation of relief from him. 3. Thankfulness for his
benefits. 4. Obedience to his Precepts and Commands.
Now unless we acknowledge his intimate presence with, and preservation of all
things; these necessary duties will either be quite abolished or degenerate
into a vain and needless superstition.

1. The Adoration we owe to his excellent nature above all other things in the
universe, alas, we see how little reverence and respect we have for the great
Potentates of the Earth whose fame we hear of indeed, but are not concerned in
their favor or frowns, or have no dependence on them at all: the least Justice
of Peace or Constable in our Neighborhood is more to us then all these mighty
foreign Princes, with whom we have nothing to do but only to hear and read
the reports of their greatness, when we have no other business to divert us. So
cold and careless would be our respect to God if we did not depend on him every
moment, and were neither concerned in his wrath nor love: those practical
Atheists that were settled on their Lees, and lived in a secure neglect of God,
they sos^ered it by this presumption, tush he will neither do good nor evil,
Zeph. 1.13. Fine things may be told us of the Excellency of his Nature, but
what is that to us, he has so shut up himself within the curtain of the
Heavens, that he takes no notice or care of things here below. How soon would
such a conceit dispirit all Religion, and take away the life and vigor of it;
but if you would plant a reverence and due veneration of God you must do it by
this principle, In his hands is the soul of every living thing, and the breath
of all mankind. No Creature can subsist without him for a moment: now this
respect is due not only to God the Father, but our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. As to Trust and dependence on his goodness for relief in all our streights
and necessities: This is the grand principle that keeps up an acknowledgment
of God in the World, by Prayers and Supplications, Psalm. 62.8. Trust in the
Lord at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before him. When you retire
your souls from all secular considences, and repose all you trust in him, you
will be instant in Prayer, and earnestly beg his relief: you see all things
subsist by him, and it is in vain to expect any real assistance from the
creatures, but what God will communicate to us by it; Now if it be not so, but
the creatures could stand of themselves, and live of themselves: this would
blast all devotion, and prayer be withered and dried up at the root, humbling
our selves to God in our streights and necessities would look like dejection or
poorness of Spirit, whining to no purpose.

3. For Thank fullness for benefits received, which is the great means to knit
the hearts of men to God, and the bellows which blows up the fire of love,
and Religion in our hearts: how can we ascribe our deliverances to God, if he
has not a hand in all things, but when we acknowledge his sustaining and
governing power, we see God in the face of the creature, and every benefit we
receive represents his goodness to us. But alas, they have no thought or
care of Praise and Thanksgiving that think not themselves obliged to God for
the least hair of their heads: God is banished out of their sight, because they
look for all from the creature; but they cannot enough Praise and bless God who
is the strength of their lives, and the length of their days: They acknowledge
that every good gift comes from him, that he hears their Prayers, relieveth
their necessities, continues their lives to them every moment; therefore God is
all in all with them, but to others he is a shadow or nothing. His memory is
kept up in the World by his benefits, Acts 14.17.

4. For Obedience and Service to him: certainly dependence begets Allegiance
and observance. We are obsequious to those from whom we expect our dole and
portion, Psalm. 131.2. as the eyes of Servants look to the hand of their
Masters, and the eyes of a maiden unto the hands of her Mistress, so do our
eyes wait on the Lord our God. The Masters give the Menservants their portion
and allowance; and the Mistress to the Maidservants, they looked for all from
their hands, and therefore to them they performed their service, so do the
people of God. What reverence do we owe to him who is our Creator and Preserver
as well as Redeemer? as he made all things so he supporteth all things. Did we
see God in us and in all things round about us, these thoughts would be more
frequent in us, and we will still be considering what we shall render unto the
Lord for all his benefits toward us? but obedience soon languisheth where men
think they subsist of themselves without God, Psalm. 55.19. Because they have no
changes, therefore they fear not God. They are not interrupted in their sinful
course, and therefore have no reverence and respect to God.

USE.
This does strengthen our dependence and reliance on our blessed Redeemer, by
him all things do subsist, therefore he can hear all Prayers, relieve us in all
our straits, supply us in all wants, preserve us in all dangers. All nations
are in his hands, our whole Life is in his keeping and upheld by his intimate
presence with us, our days cannot be longer nor shorter then he pleases, if
he were absent from us he might forget us or neglect us, but he is within us,
and round about us in the effects of his power and goodness; since he is so
near us, why should we doubt of his particular care and providence. All Nations
are in his hands, the lives and hearts of Friends and Enemies, therefore our
eyes should be upon him, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me, he
is at my right hand, I shall not be moved, we set the Lord before us both in
point of reverence and dependence, for fear and trust agree in their common
nature, and so it may note our care to please him or our trust and quietness in
him, all means are nothing to us, can do nothing for us without him.

2. It teaches us a lesson of humility. We depend on him every moment, can do
nothing without him, either in a way of Nature or Grace; not in a way of
nature, for God has not left us to stand by our selves on the first foundation
of our Creation, the Creatures are not capable of subsistence without
dependence on the first cause, but merely live and act by his power, In him we
live and move and have our being, Psalm. 104.29. Thou take away their breath
and they dye, and return to their dust, the withdrawing his concurrence and
supportation is the cause of all our misery, when he sees fit all the Creatures
soon return to the Elements of which they are compounded; all the strokes and
judgments which light upon them are dispensed according to his pleasure. In a
way of Grace we are nothing, can do nothing without him, John 15.5. He must
have all the praise, Luke 16.14.1 Cor. 15.10. Gal. 2.20. The more perfections
we have, the more prone we are to fall if he sustain us not: witness the fallen
Angels, and Adam in innocence.

3. It teaches us a lesson of reverence and Obedience, if God be so near let us
observe him, and take notice of his presence: He knows what he does, when he
sustaineth such a creature as thou art. This thought should continually affect
us, that God is with us, still by us, not only without us, but within us,
preserving our Life, upholding our Being. It should be a check to our
sluggishness, and mispense of Time: does God now continue me? to what end and
purpose? If God were absent or gone, it were more justifiable to loiter, or
indulge the ease of the flesh; but to spend my time vainly and foolishly, which
he continues for service, what have we to say?

SERMON. V.
COL. 1.18. And he is the Head of the Body the Church, who is the beginning,
the firstborn from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.


THE Context is spent in representing the Dignity and Excellency of Christ: He
is set forth by three things.

1. By the excellency of the Benefits we have by him: the greatest the fallen
Creature is capable of for the present, verse 14.

2. By the excellency of his Person: so he is set forth as the eternal and only
begotten Son of God, verse 15. and proved by his being the Creator and
Preserver of all things: The Creator, verse 16. The Preserver, verse 17. Now
the Apostle comes to the third thing.

3. The excellency of his Office: This is done in the Text; where observe that
next after the Son of God, there is nothing more venerable and August then
Christ's being Head of the Church: And again that Christ has another title to
us then that of Creator, he is Redeemer also: the same God that created us by
his power has Redeemed us by his Mercy. By the one he drew us out of nothing,
by the other he recovered us out of Sin: Therefore after he had declared what
Christ is to the World, and the Church too; he shows what Christ is
particularly to the Church. He has a superiority over Angels and all
creatures, but he is our head, Ephesians. 1.22. He has put all things under his
feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the Church. Christ is the
Sovereign of the World, but by a special relation to his people, he is the Head
of the Body the Church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, etc.

In which words Observe, 1. The Titles which are given to Christ with respect
to the Church, he is the Head, the Beginning, The Firstborn from the dead. 2.
The consequence of it: That in all things he might have the Pre-eminence.


1. The Titles ascribed to Christ, they are three.

The first is, the Head of the Body the Church: Where observe two correlates,
the Head, and the Body; the head is Christ, the Body is the Church: the Head is
the most eminent part of the Body, the noblest both as to nature, and place, or
situation: As to nature, the Head is the most illustrious Throne of the Soul,
as being the seat not only of the Nerves and Senses, but of the Memory and
Understanding: In place, as nearest Heaven: The very situation does in a manner
oblige the other parts to respect it, these things agree to Christ who as to
his essence is infinitely of much more worth then the Church, as being the only
begotten Son of God: As to Office, in him there is a fullness of perfection to
perform the Office of an Head, to such a crasie and necessitous body as the
Church is. All the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are in our head for the
use of the body, Col. 2.3. and he is also the fountain of Life, and Grace to
every particular member, Ioh. 1.16. and for place he Reigns in Heaven with
his Father, and from thence he vieweth all the necessities of the Body, and
sends forth such influences of Grace as are needful to every particular
member.

2. For the other correlate, The Church is the Body: by the Church is meant the
Church Mystical, or all such as are called out of the World to be a peculiar
people unto God. Now these considered collectively, or together they are a
body, but singlely and separately every Believer is a member of that body, 1
Cor. 12.29. Now ye are the body of Christ and members in particular, all the
parts and members joined together are a spiritual body, but the several Persons
are members of that Body. Yea though there be many particular Churches, yet
they are not many bodies, but one body, so it is said 1 Cor. 12.12. As the body
is one and has many members, and all the members of that body being many are
one body, so also is Christ. He is the Head, and the many and diverse members of
the universal Christian Church are but one Body. The universal invisible Church
of real Believers is one Mystical Body knit by Faith, to Christ their Head; and
by love among themselves: And the visible universal Church is one politic Body
conjoined with Christ their Head, and among themselves by an external entering
into Covenant with God, and the serious profession of all saving Truths. They
have all the same King and Head: the same Laws the Word of God, the same
Sacraments of admission and nutrition, which visibly at least they subject
themselves unto: and have a grant of the same common privileges in the Gospel,
but of this more anon.

2. The next Title is (...) the Beginning; I understand it that he is the root
and the beginning of the renewed estate, the same degree which Christ has in
the order of nature, he has in the order of grace also: he is the beginning
both of Creation, so also of Redemption; he is origo mundi melioris: still the
beginning and ending of the New creature as well as the old, Rev. 1.8. He is
called in short the beginning, with respect to the Life of Grace, as in the
next Title, the Firstborn from the dead, with respect to the Life of Glory.

3. The third Title is, the Firstborn from the dead: he had before called him
the firstborn of every Creature, now the firstborn from the dead, Rev. 1.5.
The first begotten from the dead, because those that arise from the dead are as
it were newborn, whence also the Resurrection from the dead is called a
Regeneration, Matthew. 19.20. And St. Paul refers that Prophecy, Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee. In Acts 13.33. To the
Resurrection of Christ. Things are said to be when they are manifested to be,
compare Romans 1.4. Declared to be the Son of God with power according to the
Spirit of Holiness by the Resurrection from the dead: He was declared to be the
true and Everlasting Son of God and Head of the Church: so the Adoption of
Believers shall appear by their Resurrection, Romans 8.19. and 23. The earnest
expectation of the Creature waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God,
verse 23. We our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to
wit, the redemption of the body.

2. The sequel and consequent of these things, That in all things he might have
the pre-eminence, that is as well in the Spiritual estate of the Church, as in
the creation and natural estate of the World, Romans 8.29. That he might be the
firstborn among many Brethren.

I begin with the first.

Doct. I. That this is the honor appropriate and peculiar to Jesus Christ, to
be head of the Church.

1. Here I shall show what the Church is, to which Christ is an Head. 2. How is
he an Head to this body. 3. The Reasons why this body must have such an Head.
1. What the Church is: A Society of men called out of the World by Gods
effectual Grace, according to the purpose of his Election, and united to Christ
by Faith and the participation of his Spirit, and to one another by the band of
Charity, that after Remission of sins obtained in this World, together with
Regenerating grace, they may at length be brought to eternal Life. Let us a
little open this description, by Effectual Calling God works Faith, which
uniteth us to Christ, and that Effectual calling is the fruit of Election, and
the effect of this union is Remission of sins, and the necessary consequence of
this Communion is Salvation or Eternal Life: This Society of Men is called a
Church in the Text: The word Church is taken in diverse acceptations.

First and most properly, it signifies these whom I have now described, the
universal collection of all, and every one of those, who according to the good
pleasure of God, are or may be called out of a state of Sin into a state of
grace to obtain eternal Glory by our Lord Jesus Christ. This is the Church of
the Firstborn, whose names are written in heaven, Heb. 12.22. That chosen
Generation, that Royal Priesthood, that Holy Nation, that peculiar People, whom
to show forth his praises, God has called out of darkness into his marvelous
light: 1 Pet. 2.9. This Church most generally and properly taken, is the
Kingdom of God, the Body and Spouse of Christ, Cant. 6.9. My dove, my undefiled
one, is but one. This is that one fold under one Shepherd, Ioh. 10.16. And it
was Prophesied of Christ that he should dye to gather together in one the
Children of God that were scattered abroad, John 11.5.

Secondly, Of this universal Church there are two parts, one of Travelers, the
other of Comprehensors: or the Church Militant, and Triumphant: they both
belong to Gods Family, Ephesians. 3.15. Of whom the whole Family whether in Heaven
and Earth is named, so Col. 1.10. That part of the Family which is in Heaven
triumphs with God there, that which is in Earth is yet Warring against sin,
satan, and the World.

Thirdly, This part which is the Military comes in the 2d. place, to be called
by the name of the universal Church; because being scattered and dispersed
throughout the whole World, it comprehends all and every one that belongs
to Christ's flock, which are found in several Folds: known to God they are, and
to themselves, and do indeed belong to Christ's Body and his Kingdom, this is
often and not undeservedly called the invisible Church: because so far as it is
the Church of God their reality and sincerity is rather believed by Faith, then
seen by the eyes of the body. This Church, This Kingdom of God, though it be
yet in this World, yet it is not of the World, neither does it come with
observation: for the Faithful have this Kingdom of God within them; Luke 17.20.
The World knows them not, other believers know them not, but God knows those
that are his, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Fourthly, The universal visible Church, While they are in the way, and in the
midst of their conflicts it is possible many hypocrites may take up the
profession; as in the great house are many vessels, some to honor, some to
dishonor; from these arises an external promiscuous multitude, who also are
called the Catholic Church for the sake, and with respect to those Holy ones
among them who truly belong to Christ's Mystical Body. We read often the Kingdom
is like to a net wherein are good and bad Fishes, Matthew. 13. To a Threshing
floor wherein is chaff and Wheat. To a Field wherein grows good Corn and also
Tares, Matthew. 13.24, 25. Now all these ways is the universal Church taken.

Fifthly. There are particular Churches wherein the Ordinances and means of
Grace are dispensed as the Church of Corinth, Cenchrea, Galatia, Greek, Roman:
None of these particular Churches contain all believers or the Elect of God,
that out of them or any of them there should be no Salvation: Again the
universal Church may remain in the World total and entire though these
particular Churches are, or other of them may successively be destroyed, as it
has often fallen out. And it is a great sin so to cry up a particular Church, as
to exclude all the rest from saving Communion with Christ; and for any one
particular Church to arrogate power over the others, they being but members.

2. This Church is called a Body in two respects.

1. In regard of the union of all the parts. 2. Dependence upon one and the
same head.
1. With respect to union, as in man all the members make but one Body,
quickened by the same soul, so in the Mystical body of Christ all the parts make
up but one body, animated by the same vital principle which is the spirit of
Christ, and are joined together by certain bonds and ligaments, Faith and Love,
and all is covered with the same skin, the profession of the Faith of Christ.
Look what the soul is in man, the form in the subject, life in the body, and
proportion in the building; that in the universal Church of God is the Union
and Communion of the several and single parts, with the head among themselves.
Take away the Soul from man, the form from the subject, life from the body,
proportion and conjunction from the parts of the building, and what will man be
but a Carcass, and the building but ruin and confusion? So take away union and
communion from the universal Church, then Jerusalem will become a Babel, and
Bethel a Be^haven, and for Life there will be death, and for Salvation eternal
destruction. How else shall all that come out from one, return again to one,
and all and every one have all things in one; that at length they may acquiesce
in the enjoyment of one, that is God, as their chiefest good. Alas, without
this union with the head, and among themselves in necessary things, what can
they expect but wrath and the curse, and Everlasting destruction.

2. With respect to dependence on one head, Romans 12.5. We being many are one
body in Christ, and every one members of one another, that is, all things make
up one body of which Christ is the Head; and are fellow members in respect of
one another. As necessary and as desirable as it is to be united to God, to
Life and Glory Everlasting, so necessary and desirable it is to depend upon
Christ the Head: for no man after the entrance of sin can return to God, or
enjoy God, without Christ the Mediator, John 14.6. I am the way, the truth and
the life; no man comes to the Father but by me, Acts 4.12. There is no other
name under Heaven by which we can be saved but only Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11.
Other foundation can no man lay but that which is laid Jesus Christ, 1 John
5.12. He that has the son has Life, and he that has not the son has not
Life. God proclaimed from Heaven, Matthew. 3.17. This is my beloved son in whom I
am well pleased, he being one God with the Father and the Spirit, of the same
substance and essence, he only can procure, merit, and effect our union with
God: He first assumed our nature, and united it to his own Person, and so
became one flesh with us, but then all those that belong to that nature, if
they believe in him, and enter into his Covenant, are not only literally one
flesh, but Mystically one body, and so also one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. That is,
by the bond of the spirit he has brought them into the state and relation of a
body to himself. To gather up all: Man's return to God is necessary to his
blessedness, that he may be inseparably conjoined to him as his chiefest good,
to this purpose the son of God assumed our nature in the unity of his person,
and thereby brings about the union of the Church with himself as our Head,
and our communion with one another in Faith and charity, if we desire to be
blessed, and so is according to Christ's Prayer, John 17.21. That they may be
all one, as thou Father art in me and I in thee, that they also may be one in
us, verse 23. I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one,
so that as there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, and one
Church united to Christ as his body; to this Church we must every one of us be
united if we mean to be saved, and in the Church with Christ, and by Christ
with God, therefore out of this Mystical body there is no Salvation.

2. How is Christ an Head to this Body? This must be explained by answering two
question.

1. What are the parts of his headship? 2. According to what nature does this
office belong to him, divine or humane.
1. The parts and branches of this headship: he is our head with respect to
Government and sovereignty; and in regard of causality and influence: he
governs, he quickneth.

1. It implies his Authority to Govern as is manifest, by Ephesians. 5.22, 23. Wives
submit your selves to your own husbands as unto the Lord, for the husband is
the head of the Wife even as Christ is the head of the Church. So that to be
the Churches Head, implies superiority or right to govern.

2. For the other notion in regard of influence, that is evident in Scripture
also, Col. 2.19. Not holding the head from which all the body by joints and
bands, having nourishment ministered and knit together increases with the
increase of God, the head is the root from whence the vital faculty is disfused
to all the members. We use to say (...) arbor inversa, a Tree turned upsided
(...) if this be so, the Head is the (...) Tree. So does Life flow from (...)
the Church, the spirit is from (...) begin the union or to con^^nue the (...)
But let us speak of these branches apart.

1. His Authority and power to govern: his excellency gives him fitness, but
his Office right to rule and govern the Church: When he sent abroad his
Officers and Ambassadors to Proselyte the World in his name, he pleads his
right, Math. 28.18. All power is given to me both in heaven and in Earth. Now
the acts which belong to Christ as a Governor may be reduced to these heads.

1. To make Laws that shall universally bind all his people. 2. To institute
Ordinances for Worship. 3. To appoint Officers. 4. To maintain them in the
exercise of these things.
1. The first power that belongs to a governing head, is Legislation or
making Laws: now Christ's Headship and Empire being novum jus Imperii, a new
right which he has as Mediator for the recovery of lapsed mankind, his Law is
accordingly: It is lex remedians a Law of grace which is given us in the Gospel
of our Salvation. The sum of his own proper remedial Laws are Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ, and Repentance toward God, Acts 20.21. Without Repentance our
case is not compassionable, without Faith we do not own our Redeemer, by whom
we have so great a benefit: yet because this new right of Empire is
accumulative not privative, beneficial to us indeed, but not destructive of our
duty to God: therefore the whole Law of God as purely moral has still a
binding force, upon the consciences, as it is explained in the Word of God. Now
to these Laws of Christ none can add, none diminish, and therefore Christ will
take an account of our fidelity at the last day, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

2. He has instituted Ordinances, for the continual exercise and regulation of
our worship, and the Government of his people that they may be kept in the due
acknowledgement and obedience to him: such as the preaching of the Word,
Sacraments, and the exercise of some Government: now all the Rules and Statutes
which Christ has made for the ordering of his people must be kept pure until
his coming: his institutions do best preserve his honor in the World: great
charges are left, 1 Timothy 5.21. I charge thee before God and our Lord Jesus
Christ and his Elect Angels that thou observe these things, where he speaks
of Ecclesiastical Censures and Disciplines he conjureth him by all that is
sacred and holy, that it be rightly used; 1 Timothy 6.14. Keep this commandment
without spot and unrebuka^le unto the appearing of Jesus Christ. The Doctrines
are so determined by Christ, that they cannot be changed, the Worship not
corrupted, the Discipline not abused to serve partial Humors and private or
worldly Interests.

3. God has appointed Officers who have all their ministries and services
under Christ and for Christ; Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some apostles, some prophets,
and some evangelists and some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the
saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.
Mark there, he does not describe all the Officers, for the Deacon is not
mentioned, but only such as labor in the Word and Sacraments; and observe, he
mentions ordinary and extraordinary; Apostles to write Scripture, Prophets to
attest it, Pastors and Teachers to explain and apply it. And mark, [ Christ
gave some] it is his Prerogative as Head of the Church to appoint the several
sorts of offices and officers. He gave them at first, and will raise up some
still, according as the exigence of the times requires it. The end why, to
perfect the saints; that is, to help them on to their final perfection, and for
the work of the ministry. All Offices under Christ are a ministry, not a power;
and imply Service, not Lordship or Domination over the Flock of Christ. Lastly,
The great end is to prepare and fit men more and more to become true members of
Christ's mystical Body.

4. To maintain and defend his people in the exercise of these things, to
preserve the verity of Doctrine and purity of Worship: Alas, many times where
neither Worship nor Government is corrupted, yet the Church may be in danger to
be dissipated by the violence of persecutions: Now therefore it is a part of
Christ's office as Head of the Church, to maintain verity of Doctrine, purity of
Worship and a lawful order of Government, for all which he has plenty of
Spirit. The Papists think this cannot be without some universal visible head to
supply Christ's Office in his absence; and so are like the Israelites, Exodus
31.1. Make us Gods that shall go before us. They would have a visible head that
should supply Christ's room in his absence, an external infallible Head, but
that is a vain conceit, for since the Pope has his residence in Rome, and
cannot perform these functions but by the intervention of ordaining Pastors,
why should it be more difficult for Christ in heaven to Govern the Church, than
for the Pope in Rome? when he sits at the right hand of God, till he has
made his ^oes his Footstool? Is he less powerful to Govern the Church, and to
preserve and defend his People against the violence of those that would root
out the memorial of Religion in the World? Who is more powerful than Jesus
Christ, who has all Judgment put into his hands, 1 Job. 4.4.

2. In regard of influence. So Christ is an head to the Church as he gives us
his Spirit: That Spirit which gives Life to Believers is often called Christ's
Spirit, Gal. 4.6. God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts.
It is purchased by his Merit, Tit. 3.6. conveyed to us by his Power, Ioh.
15.26. I will send the comforter from the father. The communication is by his
Ordinances: The Word, 2 Cor. 3.18. Beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, we are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the
spirit of the Lord. Sacraments: 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one spirit are we all
baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or
free, and ^^ve all been made to drink into one spirit. To ^^omote the Religion
which he has est^^^^^hed, Ioh. 16.13, 14. When the spirit (...) truth is come,
he will guide you into all tr^^ (...) for he shall not speak of himself, but
wh^^ (...) ever he shall hear that he shall speak. And he will show you things
to come and he shall glori^ie me, for he shall receive of mine and shall show
it unto you. He comes to us as his Members, and by influence from him, as in
the natural body the animal spirits are from the head, are by the members
conveyed to all the parts of the body; so Christ in this spiritual Union
works in us a quickening Spirit; Ephesians. 4.15, 16. We grow up to him in all
things which is the head even Christ: From whom the whole body joined together
makes increase, etc. The spirit is not given to any one Believer, but
derivatively from Christ to us. First it is given to Christ as Mediator, and
to us only by virtue of our union with him. He is in Christ as radically
inherent, but in us operatively, to accomplish certain effects; or he dwells
in our Head by way of radication, in us by way of influence and operation.

2. According to what nature does this office belong to Christ, Divine or
Humane?

I answer, both; for it belongs to him as God incarnate.

1. He must be man that there may be a conformity of nature between the head
and the rest of the Members; therefore Christ and the Church have one common
nature between them; he was man as we are men; bone of our bone, and flesh of
our flesh; Ephesians. 5.30. We read of a monstrous Image that was represented to
Nebuchadnezzar in a dream, where the head was Gold, the breast and arms of
Silver, the belly and thighs of Brass, and the Legs and feet part of Iron, and
part of Clay, Dan. 2. All the parts of a different nature. In every regular
body there is a proportion and conformity, so it is in the Mystical body of
Christ; because the brethren took part of flesh and blood he also took part of
the same. The Godhead which was at such a distance from us, is brought down in
the person of Christ in our nature, that it might be nearer at hand, and within
the reach of our commerce; and we might have more encouragement to expect pity
and relief from him.

2. God, he also must be. None was sit to be head of the Church but God,
whether you respect Government or Influence.

1. For Government; to attend all cases, to hear all Prayers, to supply all
wants: defend us against all Enemies, to require an absolute and total
submission to his Laws, Ordinances and Institutions, so as we may venture our
Eternal Interests upon his Word, Psalm. 95.11. He is thy God worship thou him.

2. For Influence; none else has power to convey the spirit, and to become a
vital principle to us, for that is proper to God to have life in himself, and
to communicate it to others, 1 Timothy 6.13. I charge thee in the sight of God who
quickneth all things, etc. Whatever men may think of the life of Grace, yet
surely as to the life of Glory he is the only life-making Spirit; 1 Cor.
15.45. Now this honor is not given to the Angels, much less is it due to any
man, nor can it be imagined by him, for none can influence the heart of Man but
God.

3. The Reasons why this body must have such an Head.

1. Every society must be under some Government, without which they would soon
dissolve and come to nothing: Much more the Church, which because of its
manifold necessities, and the high ends unto which it is designed, more needs
it than any other Society

2. The Privileges are so great which are these; Pardon of sins, and (...)
Grace, and at length Eternal Glo^^.

(1) Pardon of Sins. By this Union with him, he is made sin for us that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. A sacrifice for
sin, that we might be justified and accepted with God.

(2.) Sanctifying Grace by the communication of his Spirit. We not only agree
with him in the same common humane Nature, but the same holy Nature may be in
us that was in Christ, Heb. 2.11. We are doubly akin, ratione incarnationis
suae, and regenerationis nostrae.

(3) At length Eternal Glory follows; for what is the condition of the Head,
that is also the condition of the Members; first Christ, then they that are
Christ's. And also Christ is set up as a pattern, to which the Church must be
conformed, Romans 8.29. Bating the pre-eminence due to the Head, we are to be
Glorious as he is Glorious.

2. The Duties are far above bare humane power and strength; therefore we need
the influence of our Head, Ioh. 15.5. To obey God, to believe in his name, to
deny our selves in what is most dear and precious to us in the world, to be
fortified against all Temptations, are duties not so easily done as said.

2. We have so foully miscarried already that he will no more trust his honor
in our hands; but has put the whole treasure of Grace into the hands of Christ
for our use, Ioh. 1.16 So Ioh. 3.35, 36. The father has put all things into
his hands: He that believes on the son has overlasting life, and he that
believes not the son has not seen life. God would not leave us to our selves
to live apart from him, but has put all things that belong to our happiness
into his hands, that being united to him virtue might be communicated to us,
even all the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit. They are not entrusted with us,
but with him; and we shall have no more of Pardon, Grace and Glory, but what we
have in and from the Son of God.

USES.
Use I. Is Information: To show how much we are bound to God for putting this
honor upon us, that Christ should be our head. Christ is over the Angels in
point of Superiority and Government, but not properly said to be an head to
them, in that strict notion which implies relation to the Church: As to
influence, he is not an head to them: You will say they are confirmed by him;
but the Mediation of Christ presupposes the Fall of Adam, for Christ had not
been Mediator, if Adam had never fallen. Now if Christ should come to confirm
Angels, if this had not been, is groundless; besides Christ merited for those
that have benefit by him, and the consummate act of his Merit is his Death; but
where is it said that he died for Angels.

II. It informs us of the shameless Usurpation abetted by the Papists, who call
the Pope head of the Church. None can be a Head of the Church, to whom the
Church is not a Body; but it would be strange to say the Church is the Popes
body. None can be a governing head of the Church but he who is a Mediatorial
Head of Vital influence. The Papists indeed distinguish these things, ascribe
the one to the Pope, the other to Christ, but the Scripture allows not this
Writ of Partition; None can be the one but he must also be the other. But they
say he is a ministerial head; but a ministerial Universal Head, that shall give
law to other Churches and christian societies, and if they depend not on him,
shall be excluded from the Privileges of a Christian Church, this is, as to
matter of Right, Sacrilege; for this honor is too great for any man, and
Christ has appointed no such head, and therefore it is a manifest Usurpation
of his Royal Prerogative without his leave and consent. And as to matter of
Fact, it is impossible the Church being scattered throughout all parts of the
World, which can have no commerce with such an head in matters essential to its
Government and Edification. They that first instituted such an universal Head,
besides that they had no Authority or Commission so to do, were extremely
imprudent, and perverters of Christianity. Therefore let us consider how it
came up at first, and how it has been exercised: It came up at first for the
prevention of schisms and divisions among Christians, they thought fit the
Church should be divided into certain Dioces^es, according to the secular
division of the Empire, which at first were thirteen in number under the names
of Patriarchs and Bishops of the first See, who should join in common care and
counsel for the good of the christian commonwealth: Among these, some, who in
regard of the cities wherein they resided, were more eminent than the rest, and
began to incroach upon the others Jurisdiction, till at length they were
reduced to four. The Bishop of Rome being the Imperial City, had the
precedence, not of Authority super reliqous, but of place and order inter
reliquos. It was potestas honoraria, a difference or authority by courtesy,
afterward ordinaria, an ordinary power, then what was de facto given, was
afterward challenged de jure.

2. Let us consider how this power has been exercised to the Introduction of
Idolatry, and diverse corruptions and superstitions, to the destruction of
Kingdoms, the blood of the Martyrs, and tumults and confusions, too long to
relate.

II. Use. To persuade you to accept Christ as your head, we are to preach him
as Lord, 2 Cor. 4.5. you are to receive him as Lord, Col. 2.6. our consent is
necessary. God has appointed him, and the Church appoints him: God by
authority, the Church by consent. We voluntarily acknowledge his dignity and
submit unto him, both with a consent of dependence and subjection. Some God
draws to Christ and gives them to him, and him to them; Ioh. 6.44. All that
live within hearing, have means to seek this Grace, and if they so do, they
shall not lose their labor. Gods set not men about unprofitable work, mind but
the duties of the baptismal covenant, and the business is at an end, Acts 2.39.

III. Use. To put us upon self-reflection. If Christ be your head,

1. You must stand under a correspondent Relation to Christ; be members of his
mystical body, which is done by faith and repentance.

2. None can be a true Members of Christ body who does not receive vital
Influence from him; Romans 8.9. It is not enough to be members of some visible
church, they that are united to him, have life; there is an influence of common
Gifts according to the part we sustain in the body. A common Christian has
common Graces, those gifts of the spirit which God gives not to the Heathen
World; as knowledge of the Mysteries of Godliness, ability of utterance about
heavenly things, Heb. 6.4.

3. If Christ be our head, we must make conscience of the Duties which this
Relation binds us unto: As obedience, and self-denial.

1. Obedience to his Laws, and the motions of his Spirit. His Laws; Luke 6.46.
Why call you me Lord, Lord and do not the things which I say. The motions of
his Spirit, Romans 8.14. As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the
sons of God.

2. Self-denial. Christ spared not his natural body to promote the good of his
mystical Body, he exposed his life for our Salvation, we should hazard all for
his Glory. Nature teaches us to lift up the hands to save the head.

4. There must be sutableness and imitation, 1 Ioh. 2.6. He that abides in
him, ought to walk as he walks.

5. If you be planted into his Mystical body, you will make conscience of Love
and Tenderness.

IV. Use. Let us Triumph in this Head, depend on him. There are two Arguments,
his Ability, and his Sympathy.

1. His Ability: He can give us Life, Strength, Health, Ephesians. 3.16. That he
would grant you according to the riches of his glory to be strengthened with
might by his spirit in the inner man. Col. 1.15. Strengthened with all might,
according to his glorious power unto all patience and long-suffering with
joyfulness.

2. His Sympathy: He is touched with the feeling of our Infirmities: Heb. 4.15.
We have not an high priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities; but was in all points ^empted like as we are, yet without sin. The
Head is concerned for the Members.

SERMON VI.
COL. 1.18. Who is the beginning, the first born from the dead.


I Come now to consider the first particular Title which is given to Christ:
There are two other Titles given to Christ; the one respects the state of
Grace, the other the state of Glory: And

First, With respect to the state of Grace, he is called (...), the beginning;
that is, Origo mundi meli^ris, the beginning of the new Creature, as well as
the Old; for the same place and dignity which Christ has in the order of
Nature, he has in the order of Grace also. Therefore he is called the
beginning of the creation of God, Rev. 3.14. The word (...) is not taken there
passively, as if it were the first thing that was created, but actively, that
he gives a being and beginuing to all things that are created; and by the
Creation of God is meant the new Creation. So that the Point is.

Doctrine. That Jesus Christ is the Author and beginning of the new Creati^^.

I shall briefly explain this, and pass to the next branch. Christ is the
beginning two ways:

I. In a way of Order and Dignity. II. In a way of Causality.
1. In a way of Order. As first and chief of the renewed state. This is many
ways set forth in Scripture. Two things I shall take notice of.

1. That he is the builder of the Church. 2. The Lord and Governor of it.
1. As Founder and Builder of the Church, Matthew. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock will I build my Church. Christ challenges it to himself as his
own peculiar prerogative to build the Church. More fully the Apostle, Heb. 3.3,
4, 5. For this man was ^^unted worthy of more glory than Moses, in as much as
he that builded the house, has more honor than the house, for every house is
built by some man, but he that builds all things is God. And again Moses was
faithful in all his house as a servant, but Christ as a Son over his own house.
The scope of the Apostle is to prove that Christ must have the pre-eminence
above all others that have been employed in and about Gods House: Moses was one
of the chief of that sort, that had greater familiarity with God than others,
and entrusted by him in very great and weighty matters; yet Christ was not
only equal to Moses, but far above him: he proves it by a comparison taken
from a Builder, and an House; and from a Lord of the House, and a Servant in
the House; but Christ is the builder of the House, and Moses but a part of the
House: Christ is the Lord, and Moses but the servant; therefore Christ is more
excellent and worthy of greater honor. One of the Nobl^st works of God is the
Church of the Firstborn; none could build, frame and constitute this but the
Son of God coming down in our flesh, and so recovering the lost world into an
holy society, which might be dedicated to God. For the materials of this house
are men sinful and guilty; neither Men nor Angels could raise them up into an
holy Temple to God; none but the Eternal word, or the Son of God Incarnate, ^e
that builds all things is God: (...), all these things; the things treated
of, he does not speak of the first creation, but the second; the restoring of
the lapsed World to God.

2. The other Honor is, that Christ is Lord of the new creation, as well as
the founder and builder of it; for the World to come is put in subjection to
him, not to the Angels, Heb. 2.7. By the World to come is not meant the state
of Glory, but the state of the Church under the times of the Gospel. It is made
subject to God, the Redeemer, it is solely and immediately in his Power, and
under his Authority, and cast into a dependence upon him.

II. In a way of Causality. So he is the beginning, either as a Moral, or
efficient cause.

1. As a moral Meritorious cause: We are renewed by Gods creating power, but
through the intervening Mediation of Christ: Or Gods creating power is put
forth with respect to his Merit. The life of Grace, is purchased by his death:
1 Ioh. 4.9. God sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might live
by him. Here spiritually, hereafter eternally. For life is opposite to death
incurred by sin. We were dead legally, as sentenced to death by the Law; and
spiritually, as disabled for the service of our Creator. And how by him? that
he speaks of verse 10. by his being a propitiation. We were in the state of
death, when the doors of Mercy were first opened to us, under the guilt and
power of sin; but we live, when the guilt of sin is pardoned, and the power of
sin broken; but this life we have not without Christ's being a propitiation for
our sins, or doing that which was necessary, whereby God without impeachment of
honor might show himself placable and propitious to Mankind.

2. As an efficient cause by the efficacy of his Spirit, who works in us as
Members of Christ's Mystical Body. Wherefore it is said, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man
be in Christ he is a new creature. And Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship
created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Whatever Grace we have, comes from
God, through Christ as Mediator, and from him we have it by virtue of our union
with him. It is first applied by the converting Grace, and then continually
supplied by the confirming Grace of the Spirit. The influence we have from him
as our head, is life and likeness.

1. Life: Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, etc.
Christ is the beginning of the new life; therefore he is called the Prince or
Author of Life. All life is derived from the head to the body, so we derive
life from Christ, Ioh. 6.57. As I live by the father, so he that eats me
shall live by me. We derive life from Christ as he from the Father.

2. Likeness: Gal. 4.19. My little children of whom I travel in birth till
Christ be formed in you. And 2 Cor. 3.18. It is for the honor of Christ that
his Image and superscription should be upon his Members to distinguish them
from others. In short, as to Life he is the Root: Ioh. 15.1, 2. I am the true
vine, and etc. As to Likeness, he is the pattern, Romans 8.29. Whom he did
foreknow, he also did predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of his son,
that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.

Secondly, The Reasons of this.

1. It is for the honor of the Son of God that he should be head of the New
World. In the Kingdom of Christ all things are new. There is a new covenant
which is the Gospel, a new Paradise; not that where Adam enjoyed God among the
Beasts and Trees of the Garden, but where the Blessed enjoy God amongst the
Angels. A new Ministry, not the Family of Aaron, or Tribe of Levi, but the
Ministry of Reconciliation whom God has qualified and fitted to be dispensers
of these holy Mysteries. New ordinances, we serve God not in the oldness of the
Letter, but the newness of the Spirit; new Members, or new creatures, that are
made partakers of the benefits; therefore also a new head, or a second Adam
that must be the beginning of this new Creation; and that is the Lord Jesus
Christ who is made a quickening spirit to all his members, 1 Cor 15.45. The
first Adam was made a living soul, the second a quickening Spirit. Adam
communicated natural life to his posterity, but from Christ we have the spirit.

2. It is suited to our lost estate. We were in a state of Apostasy and
defection from God, averse from all good, prone to all evil: Now that we might
have a new being and life, the Son of God came in our Nature to rectify the
disordered creation: The scripture represents man as blind in his Mind,
perverse in his Will, rebellions in his Affections, having no sound part left
in him to mend the rest; therefore we must be changed; but by whom? who shall
make us of unclean to become pure and holy? Not one amongst all the bare
natural sons of Men, Job 14.4. of carnal to become spiritual. We must be new
made and new born, Ioh. 3.6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is born of the spirit is spirit. That we may mind the things of the
spirit, and not of the flesh; of worldly to become heavenly: he that forms us
for this very thing is God, 2 Cor. 5.5. He that is the framer and maker of all
things; a God of infinite Wisdom, Power, and Love, he frames and creates us
anew.

USES.
I. To show us the Necessity of Regeneration. II. The Excellency of it.
I. The Necessity. We must have another beginning, than we had as bare
creatures; it is one thing to make us men, another to make us Saints or
Christians. We have Understanding, Will, Affections and Senses as Men, but we
have these san^^^^d as Christians: The World thinks Christianity puts strange
names upon ordinary things, but is it an ordinary thing, to row against the
stream of flesh and blood? and to raise men to those inclinations, and
affections to which nature is an utter stranger? to have a Divine Nature put
into us? 2 Pet. 1.4. the necessity is more bound upon us, if we look upon our
selves not only as Men, but Christians: for whosoever is in Christ is a New
Creature. Some are in Christ by external Profession, de jure, they are bound to
be new Creatures, that they may not dishonor their Head. Others by real
internal Union; they not only ought to be, but de facto are, new creatures,
because they are made partakers of his Spirit, and by that Spirit are renewed
and sanctified. Little can they make out their recovery to God and interest in
Christ, who are not sensible of any change wrought in them, who have the old
thoughts, the old discourses, the old passions, and the old affections, and
their old conversations still: The same deadness to holy things, the same
proneness to please the flesh, the same carelessness to please or honor God;
and the drift and bent of their lives is as much for the world, and as little
for God and heaven as before.

II. The Excellency of Regeneration, or renewing Grace. What a benefit it is,
it appears in two things.

1. That it is the fruit of Reconciling Grace; 2 Cor. 5.18. All things are of
God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us
the ministry of reconciliation. God gives Grace, only as the God of Peace, as
pacified by the death of Christ, the holy Spirit is the gift of his Love, and
the fruit of this Peace and Reconciliation which Christ made for us. Our Lord
Jesus Christ merited this Grace by the value of his sacrifice and bloody
sufferings, Tit. 3.5, 6.

2. It is applied to us by the Almighty power of his Spirit. Christ is first
the Ransom for, then the fountain of Life to our souls, and so the honor of
our entire and whole recovery is to be ascribed only to our Redeemer, who as
he satisfied the Justice of God for our sins, so he also purchased a power to
change our hearts, and he purchased this power into his own hands, not into
another, and therefore does accomplish it by his Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.18. We
should often think what a foundation God has laid for the dispensation of his
grace and how he would demonstrate his infinite love in giving us his son to be
a propitiation for us, and at the same time shows forth his infinite power in
renewing and changing the heart of man, and all to bring us back to him to make
us capable of serving and pleasing him.

I come now to the other Title which respects the life of Glory: The firstborn
from the dead. The same appellation almost is given to Christ when he is
called, Rev. 1.5. The first begotten from the dead. The reason of both is
because those that arise from the dead are as it were new born, and therefore
the Resurrection from the dead is called a Regeneration, Matthew. 19.28. And as
to Christ in particular, the Grave, when he was in it, is represented as being
under the pains and throws of a woman in Travel, Acts 2.24. (...), God having
loosed the pains of death, for it was not possible that he should be holden of
it. But which is not only a Metaphor, but an higher Mystery, St. Paul
refers that Prophecy, Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my son, this day have I begotten
thee; in Acts 13.33. to the Resurrection of Christ: God has raised up Jesus
from the dead, as it is also written, thou art my son, this day have I begotten
thee. Things are said to be done, when they are manifested to be done. Compare,
Romans 1.4. Declared to be the son of God with power, according to the spirit of
holiness, by the resurrection from the dead. So the Adoption of Believers shall
appear by their Resurrection; Romans 8.19. The earnest expectation of the
creature waits for the manifestation of the sons of God. Verse 23. And not
only they, but our selves also, which have the first fruits of the spirit,
even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit
the redemption of our body. 1 John 3.2. It does not yet appear what we shall
be, but we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is. This for the Title of Firstborn from the dead.

Doctrine. That Christ's rising from the dead is the evidence and assurance of a
Christians happy Resurrection.

1. Let me open the Terms. 2. Vindicate the Notion. 3. Show you how this is an
Evidence and Assurance to all good Christians of their happy and joyful
Resurrection.
1. For the Terms. He is here called The firstborn from the dead. If the Grave
was as the Womb to him, and his Resurrection as a Birth, then Christ was in a
manner born when he rose again. Only he has the precedence, he is the
firstborn, he rises first, and surely others will follow after him. So we
read, Acts 26.23. That he should be the firstborn that should rise from the
dead; as he says elsewhere, first Christ, then they that are Christ's. Christ
has the primacy of Order, and the principality of influence. So again, he is
said to be the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. As in the
consecrating of the first fruits, the whole harvest is also consecrated; so
Christ by rising himself, raises all others with him to Eternal Glory and
Happiness. And so his Resurrection is a certain proof that others shall have a
Resurrection also.

2. Let us vindicate the Notion here used by the Apostle. How was he the
firstborn? the first fruits? the first-raised from the Dead? Two Objections
lie against it.

1. That many were raised from the dead before Christ.

2. Concerning the Resurrection of the Wicked. They are not parts of his
Mistical body, and in respect of them how could Christ rise as the firstborn,
and the first fruits.

1. For the first objection, how was Christ the first, since many were raised
before him? As the Widow of Sarepta's Son, that was raised to Life by Elijah, 1
Kings 17. The Shunamites son by Elisha, 2 Kings 4. A dead man by the touch of
Elisha's bones, 1 Kings 13.21. Our Savior in his Life time raised the Widow of
Nains only Son, Luke 7.15. Iairus's daughter, Luke 8.55. Lazarus, John 11.44.
Some others at his death Matthew. 27.52. how was he then the first, I answer we
must distinguish of a proper and an improper Resurrection: Christ was the
firstborn from the dead, because he arose from the dead by a proper
Resurrection which is to arise again to a life immortal; others were raised
again to a mortal estate, and so the great disease was rather removed then
cured. Christ's Resurrection is a Resurrection to immortality not to dye any
more, as the Apostle says, death has no more power over him, they only
returned to their natural Life, they were raised from the dead but still
mortal; but he whom God raised again shall see no corruption, Acts 13.34.

2. Others are raised by the power and virtue of his Resurrection, but he has
risen again by his own power, Ioh. 10.18. I have power to lay down my life, and
power to take it up again, raising the dead is a work of divine power, for it
belongs to him to restore life who gave it at first. Therefore Christ is said
not only to be raised again, but to rise from the dead, Romans 4.25. He dyed for
our offenses, and rose again for our Justification, as the Sun sets and rises
by his own motion.

3. All those that rose again before Christ arose only by special
dispensation, to lay down their bodies once more when God should see fit, and
rose only as private and single persons, but Christ rose as a public person.
His Resurrection is the cause and pattern of ours, for head and members do not
rise by a different power, he rose ato gain show the virtue that should quicken
our mortal bodies, and raise them at length.

2. The second objection is concerning the raising of the wicked, Christ cannot
be the firstborn or the first fruits to them, they belong not to his mystical
body, the firstborn implies a relation to the rest of the Family, and
offering of the first fruits did not sanctify the Tares, the Cockle or the
Darnel, or the Weeds that grow amongst the Corn, but only the Corn it self. I
answer,

1. Certain it is that the wicked shall rise again, there is no question of
that, Act. 24.15. I believe a Resurrection of the dead both of the just and
unjust, all that have lived whether they have done good or evil, Matthew. 5.45.
He makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just
and on the unjust, and it is said John 5.28, 29. All that are in their graves
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good to the
Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil to the Resurrection of
damnation, both must rise that both may receive a full recompense according to
their several ways, and though it be said Psalm. 1.6. The ungodly shall not
stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous, it
does not infringe this truth, the sense is those unhappy miscreants shall not
be able to abide the trial, as being self condemned: To stand in the judgment
is to make a bold defense, and whereas it is said also they shall not stand in
the congregation of the righteous: you must know that at the day of doom, there
is a congregation or a gathering together of all men, then a segregation, a
separating the Sheep from the Goats, then an aggregation, he shall set the
sheep on his right hand and the goats on his left, so that they make up two
distinct bodies, one of the good which is there called the congregation of the
righteous; the other of the wicked, who are to be judged by Christ as a just
and righteous Judge, assisted with his Holy Angels and the great Assembly and
Council of Saints: Not one of the sinners shall remain in the company of the
righteous, nor appear in their Society.

2. The wicked are raised, ex officio Iudicis, not beneficio Mediatoris: they
are raised by Christ as a Judge, but not by him as a Redeemer: The one sort are
raised by the power of his vindicative Justice, the other by the Holy Ghost by
virtue of his Covenant, Romans 8.11. He shall quicken your mortal bodies by his
spirit that dwells in you: The one by Christ's power from without, put forth
by him as Judge of dead and living; The other by an inward quickening influence
that flows from him as their proper head. When the Reaper gathers the Wheat
into his Barn, the Tares are bound in bundles and cast into unquenchable Fire,
Matthew. 15.30.

3. The wicked are forced to appear* and cannot shift that dreadful Tribunal,
the other go joyfully forth to meet the Bridegroom, and when the sentence of
condemnation shall be executed upon the one, the other by virtue of Christ's
Life and Resurrection shall enter into the possession of a blessed and Eternal
Life, wherein they shall enjoy God and Christ, and the company of Saints and
Angels, and sing Hallelujahs for ever and ever.

Thirdly, How is this an evidence and assurance to all good Christians, of
their happy and glorious Resurrection?

1. The Resurrection of Christ does prove that there shall be a Resurrection.

2. That to the faithful it shall be a blessed and glorious Resurrection: 1.
There shall be a Resurrection, it is necessary to prove that; partly because it
is the foundation of all Godliness, if there were not another Life after this,
there were some ground for that saying of the Atheists, Let us eat and drink
for to morrow we shall dye, 2 Cor. 15.32. If there be no future estate nor
being after this Life, let us enjoy the good things of the World whilst we can,
for with in a little while death comes, and then there is an end of all. These
Atheistical discourses and temptations to sensuality were more justifiable if
men were annihilated by death, no, the soul is immortal and the body shall rise
again, and come into the judgment, and unless we live Holily, a terrible
judgment it will be to us. Partly because we cannot easily believe that the
same body shall be placed in heaven, which we see committed to the Grave to rot
there. Of all Articles of Religion this is most difficultly assented unto, now
there is relief for us in this business in hand, Christ is the firstborn from
the dead. There were many praeludia resurrectionis, foretokens and pledges of
the Resurrection given to the old World, in the Translation of Enoch, the
Rapture of Elijah, the reviving of these few dead ones which I spoke of before,
but the great and public evidence that is given for the assurance of the
World, is Christ's rising from the Grave; this makes our Resurrection 1.
Possible. 2. Easy. 3. Certain and Necessary.


1. Possible, the least that we can gather from it is this, that it is not
impossible for dead men to rise, for that which has been may be. We have the
proof and instance of it in Christ, see how the Apostle reasons, 1 Cor.
15.13. If there be no Resurrection from the dead, then Christ is not risen, and
then our whole Faith falls to the ground, For all Religion is bottomed on the
Resurrection of Christ, if therefore Christ be risen why should it seem an
incredible thing to us, that others should be raised also.

2. It is Easy, for by rising from the dead he has conquered death and gotten
the victory of it, 1 Cor. 15.57. A separation there will be of the soul from
the body, but it is not such as shall last for ever. The victory over sin is
the victory over death, and the conquest of sin makes death an entrance into
immortality: The Scriptures often speak of Christ's destroying the power of
death, Heb. 2.14, That through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death. The devils design was by tempting men to sin, to keep them for ever
under the power of death, but Christ came to rescue men from that power by a
Resurrection from Death to Life. Again it is said he has abolished death and
brought Life and Immortality to light in the Gospel. He has voided the power
of death by taking a course for the destruction of sin, and made a clear
Revelation of that Life and Immortality which was not so certainly known
before. We look to the natural impossibilities, how what is turned to dust may
be raised again, because we do not consider the power of God, but the moral
impossibility is the greater, for the sting of death is sin, and the strength
of sin is the Law, that which makes sin able to do us hurt is the guilt of sin,
otherwise it would be but as a calm sleep, and this guilt is bound upon us by
the Law of the righteous God, which threatens eternal Death to the sinner. Now
get free from sin and it is easy to believe the conquest of death: I will
prove two things, that Christ's R^surrection shows both his victory over sin,
and his victory over death.

1, His victory over sin: That he has perfectly satisfied for sin, and
appeased the wrath of God, who is willing to be reconciled with all those that
come to the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel, which could not be if Christ had
remained under the power of death, for the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.17. If
Christ had not risen ye are yet in your sins, that is, God is not pacifyed,
there is no sufficient means of atonement or foundation laid for our
Reconciliation with him but his Resurrection declares that he is fully
satisfied with the ransom paid for sinners by Jesus Christ, for it was in
effect the releasing of our Surety out of Prison, so it is said, Romans 4.15. He
was delivered for our offenses, and raised up for our Justification: he dyed to
expiate and do away sin, and his Resurrection shows it was a sufficient
Ransom, and therefore he can apply the virtue of it to us.

2. His victory over death: For he got out of it, which not only shows there is
a possibility for a man by the power of God to be raised from Death to Life,
but a facility; as a second Adam, he brought Resurrection into the World; there
were two Adams: the one Man brought Death, and another brought Resurrection
into the World. The sentence of death is gone out against all the children of
Adam as such, and the Regenerate Believers that are recovered by Christ shall
be raised to immortal Life, he has gotten out of the power of death, so shall
we.

3. Certain and necessary. For several Reasons.

1. Our relation to Christ, he is the head of the body, now the head will not
live gloriously in Heaven and leave his members behind him, under the power of
death: Believers are called the fullness of him that fills all things, Ephesians.
1.23. Head and Members make up one perfect Man or mystical Body, which is
called the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. Otherwise it would be a maimed
Christ, or a Head without a Body, and therefore we should not doubt, but he
will raise us up with him.

Secondly, The charge and office of Christ which he will attend upon and see
that it be carefully performed, John 6.39. This is the Fathers will which has
sent me, that of all which he has given me I should lose nothing, but raise it
up again at the last day: as none so nothing in the Prophets expression
concerning the good Shepherd, not so much as a leg or a piece of an ear, that
he should be careful to preserve every one who belongs to his charge, and what
ever befalls them here, he is to see them forth coming at the last day, and to
give a particular account of them to God. Now certainly Christ will be very
careful to fulfill his charge and make good his office.

Thirdly, There is the Mercy of God through the Merits of Christ toward his
faithful ones who have hazarded their bodies, and their bodily interests for
his sake, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. If we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again even
those also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Upon the belief of
Christ's death and Resurrection depends also the raising of their bodies that
dye for the Testimony of Christ, or by occasion of Faith in Christ, and that so
certainly and speedily, that they that dye not at all shall at the day of
Judgment have no advantage of those that have layen in the Grave so many years,
the raising of the one being in the same twinkling of an eye with the change of
the other, for the Apostle says, they that are alive shall not prevent them
that are a sleep. So 2 Cor. 4.14. Knowing that he that raised up the Lord
Jesus, shall raise us up also with Jesus, and present us with you. He gives it
as the reason why he had the same spirit of Faith with David, who in his sore
afflictions professed his confidence in God, because he believed he spoke. So
they do profess the Faith of Christ, though imminent death and danger is always
represented to them, as before their eyes: because they steadfastly believed
that God would raise them to a glorious estate through Christ, therefore did
they openly proclaim what they did Believe concerning him. To the same purpose
to confirm Timothy against all danger of death, 1 Timothy 6.13. I give thee charge
in the sight of God who quickneth all things, that is, as thou believe that
God is able and will raise thee from the dead, that thou hold out constantly
unto the death and do not shrink for persecution.

2. It proves that to the faithful it shall be a blessed and a glorious
Resurrection: 1. Because Christ's Resurrection is not only a cause but a pattern
of ours; there is not only a Communion between the Head and Members in the
Mystical Body but a conformity. The members were appointed to be conformed to
their Head as in obedience and sufferings, so in happiness and glory here in
the one, hereafter in the other, Romans 8.29. He has predestined us to be
conformed to the Image of his Son: As Christ was raised from the dead, so we
shall be raised from the dead, God raised him from the dead, and gave him glory
and honor, that your Faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. So God will
raise us from the dead and put glory and honor upon us. There is indeed a
glory put upon Christ far surpassing the glory of all created things; but our
glory is like his for quality and kind, though not for quantity, degree and
measure, as to those prerogatives and privileges which his body in his
Exaltation is endowed withal. Such a glory it is that Christ shall be admired
in his Saints, the World shall stand gazing at what he means to do.

2. By the grant of God. They have a right and title to this glorious estate,
being admitted into his family; they may hereafter expect to be admitted into
his presence. The Holy Spirit abides in them as an earnest, till it be
accomplished, Ephesians. 1.14. Ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise, which
is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased
possession. The Spirit of Holiness marketh and distinguishes them as Heirs of
Promise from all others: The mark or seal is the impression of Christ's Image
on the soul; this seal becomes an earnest or part of payment, which is a
security or assurance to us that more will follow, a fuller conformity to
Christ in the glorious estate, and this earnest does continue till the
redemption of the purchased possession; the purchased possession is the Church,
and their redemption is their final deliverance, Ephesians. 4.30. when their bodies
are redeemed from the hands of the grave. See Romans 8.28.

USES.
I. Use. Is to persuade you to the belief of two grand Articles of Faith; the
Resurrection of Christ, and your own Resurrection.

1. The Resurrection of Christ. The raising of Christ from the dead is the
great prop and foundation of our Faith, 1 Cor. 15.14. If Christ be not risen,
then is our preaching vain, and your faith also is vain. All the Apostles
preaching was built upon this supposition, that Christ died and rose again.
Partly because this is the great evidence of the truth of the Christian
Religion; for hereby Christ was evidenced to be what he gave out himself to be,
the eternal Son of God, and the Savior of the World, whereof he has given
assurance to all men, in that he raised him from the dead, Acts 23.31. that is
the ground of Faith and Assurance. So Acts 13.33. God has raised Jesus from
the dead, for it is written, Thou art my son, etc. Partly to show, that he is
in a capacity to convey life to others both spiritual and eternal; which, if he
had remained under the state of death, could not be: The life of Believers is
derived from the life of Christ, Ioh. 14.19. Because I live, etc. If he had
been holden of death, he had neither been a fountain of Grace nor Glory to us;
1 Pet. 1.3. He has begotten us unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of
Christ from the dead. Partly, because the raising of Christ is the pledge of
Gods omnipotency, which is our relief in all difficult cases; the power which
raised Christ, exceeds all contrary powers, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Now the
resurrection of Christ, besides the veritableness of the report, manifested by
the circumstances, when a great stone was rolled at the mouth of the Sepulcher,
a guard of Soldiers set to watch against all fraud and impostures, yet he
brake through; his frequent Apparitions to the Apostles, yea to 500 disciples at
once; 1 Cor. 15.6. a great part of which were alive to testify the truth of
it, for some competent space of time; his pouring out of the Spirit; the
Apostles witnessing the truth of it in the teeth of opposition; his appearing
from Heaven to Paul; the prophesies of the Old Testament foretelling of it; the
Miracles wrought to confirm it; the holiness of the Persons who were employed
as chosen Witnesses, their unconcernedness in all temporal Interests; their
hazarding of all, their success: It would make a volum to give you the
evidences.

2. Your own Resurrection, what may facilitate our belief and hope of it?

1. Consider it is a work of Omnipotency. We are apt to say, how can it be,
that when our bodies are turned into dust and that dust mingled with other
dust, and has undergone many transmutations, that ^very one shall have his own
body and flesh again? Why consider the Infinite and Absolute Power of God, and
this will make it more reconcilable to your tho^ghts, and this hard point will
be of easier digestion to your Faith. To an Infinite power there is no
difficulty at all, Phil. 3.21. According to the working whereby he is able to
subdue all things to himself. He appeals to Gods power, how much Gods power
outworks our thoughts; for he were not infinite if he might be comprehended.
We are not fit Judges of the extent of his power; many things are mavelous in
our eyes, which are not so to his, Zech. 8.6. Therefore we must not confine God
to the limits of created b^ings, or our finite understandings. Alas! our
Cockel-^hell cannot empty an Ocean; we do no more know what God can do, than a
worm knows a man. He that made the world out of nothing, cannot he raise the
dead? He that brought such multitudes of creatures out of the dark Chaos, has
he forgotten what is become of our dust? He that gave Life and Being to that
which before was not, cannot he raise the dead? He that turned Moses Rod into a
Serpent, and from a Serpent into a Rod again, cannot he raise us out of dust
into men, and ^u^n us from men into dust, and from the same dust (...) us up
into the same men and women ^^ain?

2. We have a releif from the Justice of God. All will grant that God is, and
that God is a rewarder of good and bad. Now in this Life he does not dispense
these rewards: Many times here, instruments of public good are made a
sacrifice to public hatred, and wicked men have the world at will; therefore
there is a Judgment, when this life is ended; and if there be a Judgment, men
must be capable to receive reward and punishment. You will say, so they are by
having an immortal Soul; I, but the soul is not all of a man, the body is a
part; it has had its share in the work, and therefore it is most equal to
conceive it shall have its share in the reward and punishment. It is the body
which is gratified by the pleasure of sin for a season, the body which has
endured the trouble and pain of Faithful obedience unto Christ, therefore there
shall be a Resurrection of just and unjust that men may receive according to
what they have done in the body. God made the whole man, therefore glorifies
and punishes the whole man. The Apostle urges this as to the Godly, 1 Cor.
15.29.

3. Gods unchangeable Covenant-Love, ^^^ch inclines him to seek the dust of his
^onfederates. God has taken a believer into Covenant with himself, body and
soul; therefore Christ proves the Resurrection from Gods Covenant-Title;
Matthew. 22.31, To be a God, is certainly to be a Benefactor, Genesis 25.26. Not
blessed be Shem, but blessed be the Lord God of Sem. And to be a Benefactor,
becoming an Infinite Eternal Power. If he had not Eternal Glory to bestow upon
us he would not justify his Covenant-Title, Heb. 11.16. To whom God is a
benefactor, he is a Benefactor not to one part only, but to their whole
Persons: Their bodies had the mark of his Covenant upon them, their dust is in
Covenant with him, and wherever it is dispersed, he will look after it. Their
death and rotting in the Grave does not make void his Interest, nor cause his
Care and Affection toward them to cease.

4. We have relief also from the Redemption of Christ, which extends to the
bodies of the Saints, as it is often interpreted in Scripture; as where Christ
speaks of his fathers charge, this was a special Article in the Eternal
Covenant; Ioh. 6.39, 40. This is the will of my Father, that of all that he
has given me I should lose nothing, but raise it up at the last day. Christ
has engaged himself to this, he is the Guardian of the Grave, as Rispah kept
the dead bodies of Saul's sons, 2 Samuel 21.10. Christ has the keys of death and
hell, he has a charge of the Elect to the very day of their Resurrection that
he may make a good account of them, and may not lose so much as their dust, but
gather it up again. What shall I say! when the intention of his death is spoken
of, 1 These. 5.10. That whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with
him; that is, whether dead or alive; for they that are dead in the Lord, are
said to be fallen asleep. Whether we live or die we should live a spiritual
life here, and eternal life in Glory hereafter: So where the obligation, 1 Cor.
6.20. Ye are bought with a price. There would be no consequence if Christ had
not purchased the body as well as the Soul, and Christ will not lose one jot of
his purchase, if he expect duty from the body, you may expect glory for the
body; so redemption is particularly applied to the body; Romans 8.23. Waiting for
the Adoption the redemption of our bodies. Then is Christ's Redemption full,
when the body is exempted from all the penalties induced by sin.

5. The honor which is put upon the bodies of the Saints.

1. They are members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6.15. Know ye not that your bodies are
members of Christ, shall I then take the Members of Christ and make them
members of an harlot, God forbid. No Members of Christ can for ever remain
under death, but shall certainly b^ raised up again. When a Godly Man ^^eth,
the union between Soul and Body is dissolved, but not the union between him and
Christ, as Christ's own natural body in the grave was not separated from his
Person, and the Hypostatical Union was not dissolved; it was the Lord of Glory
which was crucified, and the Lord of Glory which was l^yed in the Grave, so the
Mystical (...) is not dissolved between Christ and (...), who are his Mystical
Body, (...) they are dead.

2. They are Temples of the holy Ghost; therefore if they be destroyed they
shall be built up again, 1 Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that your bodies are temples
of the holy Ghost. As Christ redeemed not the soul only, but the whole man, so
the Spirit in Christ's Name takes Possession both of body and soul; the body is
cleansed and sanctified by the spirit, as well as the soul; and therefore it is
quickened by the Spirit; Romans 8.11. If the spirit of him, that raised Jesus from
the dead, dwell in you he shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit
which dwells in you. The Holy Ghost will not leave his Mansion, or
dewlling place; the dust of Believers belongs to them who were once his Temple.
So it is a pledge of the Resurrection. Now therefore labor with your selves,
think often of it.

SERMON. VII.
Col. 1.19. For it pleased the father that in him should all fullness dwell.


With Chap. 2.9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.


THese words are produced to prove, that there is no defect in the Evangelical
Doctrine, and therefore there needs no Addition to it from the Rudiments of
men. That there is no defect, he proves from the Author of it Jesus Christ,
who was not only Man, but God; and beyond the Will of God, we need not look:
If God will come from heaven to teach us the way thither, surely his Teaching
is sufficient, his doctrine contains all things necessary to salvation. This
is the Argument of these words, For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily.

In which words observe three things: First, The House, In Him. Secondly, The
Inhabitant, All the fullness of the Godhead. Thirdly, The manner of dwelling in
the Word Bodily.


First, The House, or place of Residence, in Him. In the Man Christ Jesus; or
in that Humane Nature in which he carried on the business of our Salvation: As
despicable and abject as it was in the eyes of men, yet it was the temple and
seat of the Godhead.

Secondly, The Inhabitant: The fullness of the Godhead. Not a portion of God
only; or his Gifts and Graces (as we are made partakers of the Divine Nature,
1 Pet. 1.4.) but the whole Godhead.

Thirdly, the Manner (...), Bodily. The word may relate,

1. To the shadows and figures of the Law, and so it signifies Essentially,
Substantially; God dwelt in the Tabernacle, Temple, or Ark of the Covenant;
(...), because of the figures of his Presence. In Christ, (...), bodily. As his
Humane Nature was the true Tabernacle or Temple in which he resid^th. Christ
calls his Humane Nature a Temple, Ioh. 2.19. Or else,

2. With respect to the intimacy and closeness of the Union; so (...) may be
rendered personally: For body is often put for a person; the two Natures were so
united in him, that he is one Christ.

Doctrine. That Jesus Christ is True God, and True Man in one Person.

I shall prove the Point.

I. By Testimonies of Scripture. II. By Types. III. By Reasons taken from
Christ's Office.
I. By Testimonies of Scriptures. I shall pass by those that speak of the
reality of either nature apart, and only allege those that speak of both
together. Now these do either belong to the Old Testament or the New. I begin
with the former, the T^stimonies of the old Testament, because this union of
the two Natures in the Person of Christ; is indeed a Mystery, but such as was
foretold long before it came to pass; and many of the places wherein it was
foretold were so understood by the ancient Jews. The controversy between them
and Christians was not whether the Messiah were to be both God and man, they
agreed in that; but whether this was fulfilled, or might be applied to Jesus of
Nazareth. But the lat^er Jews finding themselves not able to stand to the issue
of that plea, say that we attribute many things to Jesus of Nazareth, which
were not foretold of the Messiah to come; as namely, that he should be God-man
in one person: Therefore it is necessary that this should be proved, that the
old Testament abounds with predictions of this kind. Let us begin with the
first Promise touching the Messiah, which was made to Adam after his Fall, for
the restoring of Mankind, Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman should bruise the
serpents Head. That is to say one of her seed, to be born in Time, should
conquer the Devil, Death, and Sin. Now when he is called the seed of the woman,
it is apparent he must be Man, and made of a woman: And when it is said that he
shall break the serpents head, who can do this but only God: It Is a work of
Divine Omnipo^^ncy, for Satan has much more power than any bare man. Therefore
it is said, Romans 16.20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly. Come we next to the Promise made to Abraham, Genesis 12.3. In thee shall
all the families of the earth be blessed. In thee, that is, in thy seed, as it
is often explained, Genesis 22.18. In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed. This seed was Christ the Messiah to come. Now he was to be God-man:
He was to be Man, for he is the seed of Abraham; God, because that blessedness
is remission of sins or Justification: For it is said, Gal. 3.8. The Scripture
foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before
the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations of the earth be
blessed. Regeneration, and the Renovation of our natures is also included in
it, as a part of this blessing, Acts 3.25, 26. Ye are children of the prophets,
and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, in
thy seed, shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. Therefore unto you
first God, having raised up his son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning
away every one of you from his iniquities. There is also Redemption from the
curse of the Law, and the gift of Eternal Life, included in it: Now all these
are works proper to God alone. Let us come to the Promise made to David, 2 Samuel
7.12, 13. I will set up thy seed after thee, and I will establish the throne of
thy kingdom for ever. It Is spoken in the Type of Solomon, but in the Mystery of
Christ, who is true Man as David's seed; and true God, for his Kingdom is
everlasting: And so David interprets it, Psalm. 45.6. Thy throne, O God, is
for ever and ever. The Kingdom of the Messiah is never to have an end. And the
Apostle affirms expressly, that those words are spoken to Christ the son of
God, Heb. 1.7. Let me next allege Jobs confession of Faith, which was very
Ancient, Job 19.25, 26. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand
at the latter day upon the earth, and though after my skin, worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh I shall see God. His Redeemer was true Man as appears
by his Title Goel; and because he shall stand on the Earth, and be seen by his
bodily eyes. True God, for he calls him so, I shall see God. Go we on in the
Scriptures, Isa. 4.2. Christ is prophesied of; In that day the branch of the
Lord shall be beautiful, and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be
excellent and comely. When he is called the Branch of the Lord, his Godhead is
signified; when he is called the fruit of the earth, his Manhood. So again,
Is^. 7.14. A virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and thou shall call his name
Imm^^uel. That is to say, God with us; which can agree to none but to hi^ that
is God and Man. So that this Mystery of God Incarnate, was not hid from the
Church of the Old Testament, for his very Name did import God with us, or God
in our Nature reconciling us to himself. So Isa. 9.6. To us a child is born, to
us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name
shall be called The wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
father, the prince of peace. Who can interpret these speeches and A^^ributes,
but of one who is God-Man? How could he else be a child, and yet the
Everlasting Father; born of a Virgin, and yet the Mighty God. So Isa. 11.1.
with the 4th. Verse. A rod out of the S^em of Iesse, and a branch out of his
roots: Therefore Man. And verse 4. He shall smi^e the earth with the rod of his
mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall be slay the wicked: Therefore God.
So Isa. 53.8, He shall be taken from prison and judgment; therefore Man: yet
who shall declare his generation? therefore God. So Ier. 23.5, 6. A branch
raised unto David, from his dea^ stock; therefore Man: yet the Lord, or Jehovah
our righteousness; therefore God. Shall I urge that speech, whereby Jesus did
silence diverse of the Learned Pharisees; Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said to my Lord,
sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes, thy footstool. He was born in
the mean Estate of humane Flesh, and King David's seed, and yet David's Lord;
which he could not be, if he were not God himself, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. Well then, he was David's Son as Man, but David's Lord as he was God.
And so do many of the Ancient Jewish Rabbis interpret this place. So again,
Micah 5.2. Thou Bethlehem Sphratah, Though thou ^e little among the thousands
of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in
Israel: whose goings forth have been from old, from everlasting. He is born in
Bethlehem, yet his goings forth are from everlasting. He came out of Bethlehem,
and therefore Man; his goings forth are from everlasting, and therefore God. So
Zech. 12.10. I will pour out the spirit of grace and supplication, and they
shall look upon me whom they have pierced. He is God because he gives the
spirit of grace; Man because he is pierced or crucified: So Zech. 13.7. Against
the man my fellow. A man he was, but Gods companion, his only begotten son, and
co-essential with himself, and so God.

Secondly, Come we now to the New Testament, in which this mystery is more
plainly and fully demonstrated: There often the son of Man is plainly asserted
to be also the Son of God. Thomas calls him his Lord, his God, Ioh. 20.28. We
are told that the word was made flesh, Ioh. 1.14. That God purchased the Church
with his own blood, Acts 20.28. which can be understood of no other but Christ;
by whose blood we are redeemed, and who being Incarnate, has blood to shed for
us; But God as a pure Spirit, has not flesh, and blood, and bones as we have.
So Romans 1.3, 4. Jesus Christ was made of the seed of David, according to the
flesh, but declared to be the son of God with power according to the spirit of
holiness, etc. In respect of his Divine subsistence, he was begotten not made;
in regard of his humane Nature, made, not begotten. True Man as David was, and
True God as the Spirit and Divine Nature is. Again, Romans 9.5. Whose are the
fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God
blessed for ever. Than which, nothing can be said more express, as to that
nature which is most apt to be questioned; for surely he that is God over all,
cannot be said to be a mere Creature. The Jews confessed him to be Man, and one
of their blood, and Paul asserteth him to be God over all: They accounted him
to be accursed, and Paul asserteth him to be blessed for ever: They thought him
inferior to the Patriarchs of whom he descended, and Paul over all; so that no
word is used in vain: and when he says according to the flesh, he insinuates
another Nature in him to be considered by us. The next place is, 1 Cor. 2.8.
They Crucified the Lord of Glory. He was Crucified, there his humane nature is
acknowledged, but in respect of the Divine nature he is called the Lord of
Glory, as in the 24th. Psalm, The Lord or King of Glory, is Jehovah Sabbath,
The Lord of Hosts. Go we farther, Phil. 2.6, 7. Who being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with Gone, but made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men.
By the form of God is meant not only the divine Majesty and Glory, but also the
divine essence it self: for without it there can be no true divine Majesty and
Glory. Now this he kept hidden under his humane nature, letting only some
small Rays sometimes to shine forth in his Miracles: but that which was most
sensible and conspicuous in him, was a true humane Nature in a low and
contemptible estate. Again 1 Timothy 3.16. Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God
manifested in our Flesh. That is the Eternal Son of God became Man, and assumed
the humane nature into the unity of his person. Once more 1 Pet. 3.18. He was
put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit. That is dyed according
to his humane nature, but by his divine nature raised from the Dead: it is not
meant of his soul: quickened, signifies not one remaining alive, but made alive;
that power belongs to God.

Secondly, By Types. Those that come to hand are these.

1. Melchisedec: Genesis 14.18. Melchisedec King of Salem, brought forth bread and
wine to Abraham. Which Type is interpreted by the Apostle, Heb. 7.2, 3. First
being by interpretation King of Righteousness, and after that also King of
peace. Without Father, and without Mother; having neither beginning of days,
nor end of Life, but made like unto the Son of God abides a priest
continually. What Melchisedec was is needless to dispute. The Apostle
considers him only as he is represented in the story of Moses, who makes no
mention of his Father or Mother, Birth or Death. Certainly he was a very Man,
but as he stands in Scripture, there is no mention of Father or Mother,
beginning or end, what he was or of whom he came. So is Christ as God without
Mother, as Man without Father: As God without beginning; as God Man without
ending of Life.

2. Another Type of him was Jacobs Ladder. The top of which reached Heaven, and
the bottom reached Earth, Genesis 28.12. And the Angels of God were ascending, and
descending upon it. This Ladder represented Christ the Son of Man, upon whom
the Angels of God ascend, and descend John 1.51. The bottom which reached the
earth, represented Christ's humane nature, and conversing with Men: The top
which reached Heaven; his heavenly and divine nature; and in both his
mediaation with God for Men: Ascend per hominem, and per venies ad Deum,
Christ reaches to Heaven in his divine original, to Earth in his Manhood, and
him the Angels serve. By his dwelling in our nature, this commerce between
Earth and Heaven is brought about.

The third Type is the Fiery cloudy pillar, Exodus 13.21. And the Lord went
before them in the day in a pillar of a cloud, and by night in a pillar of Fire
to give them light, to go by day and night, this figured Christ's guidance and
protection of his Church, traveling through this World to his heavenly rest:
The cloud signified his humanity, the fire his divinity: There were two
different substances, the fire and the cloud, yet but one pillar. So there are
two different natures in Christ, his divinity shining as fire, his humanity
darkning as a cloud; yet but one Person. That pillar departed not from them all
the while they traveled in the Wilderness; so while the Churches pilgrimage
lasts Christ will conduct us, and comfort and shelter us by his presence. His
Mediatory conduct cease not.

The fourth Type is the Tabernacle, wherein God dwelt symbolically, as in
Christ bodily: There God sat on the mercy seat which is called (...), Heb. 9.5.
so Christ Romans 3.25. A propitiation. He there dwelt between the Cherubims, and
did exhibit himself graciously to his people, as now he does to us by Christ.
The next shall be of the Escape Goat on the day of expiation, Lev. 16.10. One
Goat was to be slain, the other kept alive. The slain Goat signified (...), his
Flesh, or humane nature suffering, the Live Goat, (...), his Immortal Deity, or
as the Apostle expresses it, 2 Cor. 13.4. That Christ was to be crucified
through weakness, yet to live by the power of God, or as we heard before, 1
Pet. 3.18. Put to death in the Flesh and quickened by the Spirit. Because these
two things could not be shadowed by any one Beast, which the Priest having
killed could not make alive again; and it was not fit that God should work
mir^cles about Types; therefore he appointed ^wo, that in the slain Beast his
death might be represented; in the Live Beast his immortality. The like mystery
was represented also in the two birds for the cleansing of the Leper, Lev.
14.6, 7.

Thirdly, I prove it by Reasons taken from his office; which may be considered
in the general. And so it is expressed by one Word Mediator, or in particular
according to the several functions of it, expressed by the terms of King,
Priest and Prophet: or with respect to the persons that are to be considered
and concerned in Christ's Mediation.

1. His Office considered in the General, so he is called, Jesus the Mediator
of the New Testament, Heb. 12.24. It was agreeable that (...), a Mediator
should (...), a middle person of the same essence with both parties, and that
his operative Mediation, should presuppose his substantial Mediation, that
being God Man in the same person he should make an atonement between God and
Man: Sin has made such a breach and distance between us and God, that it
raises our fears, and causes backwardness to draw nigh unto him, and so
hinders our love and confidence in him. How can we depend upon one so far
above us, and out of the reach of our commerce, therefore a Mediator is
necessary; one that will pity us, and is more near and dear to God then we are.
One in whom God does condescend to man, and by whom Man may be encouraged to
ascend to God, now who is so fit for this as Jesus Christ, God manifested in
our flesh: The two natures met together in his person, and so God is nearer to
Man, then he was before (...) the pure Deity; for he is come down to us in our
flesh, and has assumed it into the unity of his person, and man is nearer to
God, for our nature dwells with him, so closely united, that we may have more
familiar thoughts of God, and a confidence that he will look after us, and
concern himself in our affairs and show us his grace and savor, for surely he
will not hide himself from his own flesh, Isa. 58.7. This wonderfully
reconcileth the heart of Man to God, and makes our thoughts of him more
comfortable and does encourage us to free access to God.

2. Come we now to the particular offices, by which he performs the work of a
Mediator; and they all show the necessity of both natures: these offices and
functions, are those of Prophet, Priest, and King.

1. Our Mediator has a Prophetical office belonging to his Administration,
that he may be made Wisdom to us, and therefore he must be both God and Man:
God that he may not only teach us outwardly, as an ordinary Messenger or
Minister, but inwardly putting his Law into our minds, and writing it upon our
hearts, Heb. 8.10. and 2 Cor. 3.3. Ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle
of Christ ministered by us, written not with Ink, but with the spirit of the
living God, not in Tables of stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the heart. Men
may be the instruments, but Christ is the Author of this Grace, and therefore
he must be God: To convince men's understandings of their duty, and to incline
their hearts to perform it, requires no less then a divine power. If such an
infinite virtue be necessary to cure the blindness of the body; how much more
to cure the natural blindness and darkness of the mind! And man he must also
be; for the great Prophet of the Church was to be raised up among his brethren,
like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Till such an one came into the World they were to
hear Moses, but then they were to hearken to him: he that was to come, was to
be a Lawgiver as Moses was, but of a far more absolute and perfect Law: a
Lawgiver that must match and overmatch Moses every way. He was to be a man as
Moses was in respect of our infirmities, such an one as Moses was whom the Lord
had known face to face, but of a far more divine nature: and approved to the
World, by Miracles, Signs, and Wonders as Moses was. Again 'twas prophesied of
him, that as the great Prophet of the World he should be anointed, that he
might come and Preach the Gospel to the poor, Isa. 62.1. Which could not be if
he had spoken from heaven in thunder, and not as a man conversed with men:
Again he was to approve himself as one who had grace poured into his lips,
Psalm. 45.2. That all might wonder at the gracious speeches that came from his
mouth, as they did at Christ's. In short that wisdom of the Father, which was
wont to assume some visible shape for a time, when he would instruct the
Patriarchs concerning his will, that he might hide his Majesty and put a vail
upon his glory, was now to assume our nature into the unity of his Person, not
a temporary and vanishing appearance. That God who at sundry times, and in
diverse manners speak in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, might in
these last days spoke to us by his son, Heb. 1.1, 2. Then God delivered his
will by parcels, now by him he would settle the whole frame of the Gospel.

2. Jesus Christ as he is the Apostle of our profession; so also he is the High
Priest, Heb. 3.1. and so must be both God and Man: Man, that he might be made
sin for us: God, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor.
5.21. Man to undertake our Redemption; God to perform it: Man, that he might
suffer, God that he might satisfy by suffering, and make our atonement full.
We are purchased by the Blood of God. Man, that he might have a sacrifice to
offer, God, that the offering might be of an infinite price and value, Heb.
9.14. Man, that he might have a Life to lay down for us; God, that the power of
laying it down and taking it up again, might be in his own hands, John 10.17,
18. I lay down my Life, that I may take it again, no man takes it from me, but
I lay it down of my self, I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take
it again. This was sit, that his suffering should be a pure voluntary act,
required indeed by God, but not enforced by Man: he had a liberty at his own
pleasure, as to any thing men could do, and thereby commends his love to
sinners. What shall I say? he was man that he might dye, he was God that by
death he might destroy him that had the power of death. He was Man, that by his
death he might ratify the New Covenant; God, that he might convey to the heirs
of Promise these precious Legacies of pardon and Life. Man that he might be a
merciful High Priest touched with the feeling of our infirmities; God, that we
coming boldly to the Throne of Grace, might find mercy and grace to help in
every time of need, Heb. 9.15, 16.

3. His Kingly office, he that was to be King of kings, and Lord of lords,
needed to be both God and Man: God that he might cast out the Prince of this
World, and having rescued his Church from the power of darkness, might govern
it by his Word and Spirit, and finally present it to himself, a glorious Church
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. Man he needed to be for his own
glory, that he might be the Firstborn among many brethren. And Head and
Members might suit, and be all of a piece; and for our consolation that we
might be heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. And for the
greater terror and ignominy of Satan, that the seed of the Woman might break
the Serpents Head. In short, God that he might govern and influence a people so
scattered abroad upon the face of the Earth, and raise them up at the last day:
Man, that our nature (the dignity of which was so envyed by Satan,) might be
exalted at the right hand of Majesty, and placed so near God far above the
Angelical.

Thirdly, With respect to the persons who are to be considered, and concerned
in Christ's Mediation: God to whom we are Redeemed, Satan from whom we are
Redeemed; and we our selves who are the Redeemed of the Lord. And you shall see
with respect to God, with respect to Satan, with respect to our selves: our
Mediator ought to be both God and Man.

1. God he need to be, with respect to God; that he may be appeased by a
valuable compensation given to his Justice: no mere man could satisfy the
Justice of God, appease his wrath, procure his favor, therefore our surety
needed to be God to do this. And with respect to Satan, that he might be
overcome; now none can bind the strong one, and take away his goods, but he
that is stronger then he, Luke 11.21. Now no mere man is a match for Satan, the
Conqueror of the devil must be God, that by strong hand he may deliver us from
his Tyranny. And with respect to Man, that he may be saved: Not only because
of the two former respects must he be God; but also there is a special reason
in the cause, the two former respects evince it: For unless God be appeased,
Man cannot be reconciled, and unless the Devil be overcome, Man cannot be
delivered: If a God be needful for that, man cannot be saved unless our
Redeemer be God: but there is a special reason, because of our own obstinacy
and rebellion, which is only overcome by the divine power. It Is necessary Man
should be converted and changed, as well as God satisfied, and Satan overcome.
Now who can convert himself, or chang^ his own heart? That work would cease for
ever unless God did undertake it by his all conquering Spirit. Therefore our
Mediator must be God, to renew and cleanse our hearts, and by his divine power
to give us a divine nature.

2. Man also he ought to be with respect to these Three parties: With respect
to God, that the satisfaction might be tendered in the nature which had sinned:
That as by Man came death, by man also might come the Ressurection from the
Dead, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. That as in Adam all dye, so by Christ shall all be made
alive. So with respect to the Devil; that he might be overcome in the nature
that was foiled by his Temptations. And with respect to us, That he that
sanctifyeth and they that are sanctified, might be of one, Heb. 2.11. The
Priest that wrought the expiation, and the people for whom 'twas wrought were
of one stock: the right of Redeeming belonged to the next Kinsman: Christ is
our Goel who Redeemed us, not only jure propreitatis, as his creatures: to God
as God: but Iure propinquitatis, as his Kinsmen: So as Man, we are of Kin to
Him, as he came in our nature, and as he sanctifies: doubly a kin, not only by
virtue of his incarnation but our Regeneration; as he was made of a Woman, and
we born of God. These are the Reasons,

USE.
Let me press you to admire this Mystery of Godliness: The Man Christ Jesus in
whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily. The life and strength of our
Faith depends upon it, for as he is true Man, flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bone, he will not be strange to us: and as he is God, he is able to help us.

Two things I will press you to.

1. Consider what a fit object he is for your Faith to close with. 2. Own him
as your Lord and your God.
1. To raise your trust and confidence, consider what a fit object he is for
your Faith, how he is qualified for all his offices, of Prophet, Priest and
King:

1. As your Prophet: consider how necessary it was that God dwelling in man's
nature should set a foot the Gospel: Partly because when ever you come
seriously to consider this matter; this thought will arise in you, that this
blessed Gospel could not be without repealing the Law of Moses, given with such
solemnity by God himself: and it was not fit it should be abrogated by any but
him who was far above Moses, to wit, by the Son of God himself, not any fellow
servant equal to Moses. The Apostle tells us that Moses was Faithful in Gods
House as a servant, but Christ as a Son over his own House, Heb. 13.5, 6. The
servant must give place when the Son, and Lord himself comes, but rather take
it from what Moses foretold himself, Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19. I will raise them up a
Prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and I will put my words into
his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I command him, and it shall
come to pass, that he that will not hearken to my word which he shall speak in
my name, I will require it of ^im. Now these words cannot be verified in any
other Prophet after Moses until Christ, for that of these Prophets there arose
none in Israel like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.10. They had no authority to be
Lawgivers as Moses had, but were all bound to the observation of his Law till
Christ should come, whom Moses calls a Prophet like unto himself, that is a
Lawmakers, exhorting all men to hear and obey him. None of the Prophets did
take upon them that privilege, they must let that alone till the Messiah
should come, whose office it is to change the Law given upon Mount Sinai, and
instead thereof to propagate or promulgate a new Law to begin at Sion, Isa.
2.3. The Law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
And in another place, the Isles shall wait for his Law, Isa. 42.4. Well now
this is a mighty confirmation of our Religion, and binds both our Faith and
Obedience, to consider Christ's Authority, that a greater then Moses is here.
Partly because it concerns us to receive the Gospel as an eternal Doctrine
that shall never be changed; For it is called an everlasting Covenant; and
nothing conduces to that so much, as to consider that it is promulgated by the
eternal God himself: by him in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily.
Partly because the Gospel, if we would profit by it, is to be received by all
Believers, not only as an everlasting Covenant; but as certain, perfect, and
saving. Now if the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him, who gave this Covenant,
we cannot deny either the certainty or the perfection or the savingness of it;
for if we receive it from him who is Truth it self, we cannot be deceived. It Is
certain if he Taught us in person, surely all his works are perfect:
(subordinate Ministers may mingle their weaknesses with their doctrine,) if we
have it from a Savior, surely it is a Doctrine that brings Salvation.

2. Consider what a fit object here is for your Faith, as Christ is a Priest:
so his great business is to reconcile us to God, in the body of his flesh
through death, who once were strangers and enemies, Col. 1.21. consider how fit
he was for this, God and Man were first united in his Person, before they were
united in one Covenant. If you consider the fruits of his Redemption and
Reconciliation. The evil from whence we were to be delivered, the good that was
to be procured; Christ is every way a commodious Mediator for us, as God man:
If you consider the evil from whence we are delivered, he was man: that the
chastisement of our peace might be put upon his shoulders: God, that by his
stripes we might be healed, Isa. 53.5. Or if you consider the good to be
procured; he does it as God-man: He was a man, that as by the disobedience of
one many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one many might be made
righteous: God, that as sin reigned unto death, so Grace might reign through
righteousness unto Eternal Life by Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5.19, 21. As he
is God, his merit is full; as he is Man, we are partakers of the benefit of it.

3, Consider how fit an object he is for our Faith as King: For as the fullness
of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, he is the greatest and most glorious person
that ever was in the World: Infinitely superior above all power that is named
in this World or in the World to come. The Man who is our Shepherd is fellow to
the Lord of Hosts. The thought of Immanuel, makes the Prophet startle, and
brake out into a Triumph when Senacherib break in with his forces, like a
deluge in the Land of Judah. They fill thy Land O Immanuel, Isa. 8.8. Then
verse 9, 10. Associate your selves and ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your
selves and ye shall be broken in pieces, take counsel together it shall come to
naught, speak the word it shall not stand: For God is with us. Or because of
Immanuel. Surely Christ is the foundation of the Churches happiness, and may
afford us comfort in the most calamitous condition: we are in his hands, under
his Pastoral care and protection, Ioh. 10.28. I give unto them eternal Life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.
Neither Man nor Devil can break off totally and finally their union with him.
In short, he that assumed our nature to himself, will communicate himself to
us. All union is in order to communion, here is a commodious and a blessed
Savior represented unto you.

Secondly, Own him as your Lord and your God. This was the Profession of
Thomas's Faith, John 2^.28. My Lord and my God, I shall insist on that
Scripture. In the History there are these remarkables.

1. Thomas his absence from an Assembly of the Disciples, when Christ had
manifested himself to them, verse 24. Being absent he not only missed the good
news which many brought, but also the comfortable sight of Christ; and was
thereby left in doubts and snares.

2. When these things were told him, he bewrayes his incredulity, v. 25. when
they told him he said unto them, except I see in his hands the print of his
nails* and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into
his side, I will not believe. This unbelief was overruled by Gods Providence
for the honor of Christ. His in^redulity was an occasion to manifest the
certainty of Christ's Resurrection: If credulous Men, or those hasty of belief
had only seen Christ, their report had been liable to suspicion; Solomon makes
it one of his Proverbs, the simple believes every word. Here is one that had
sturdy and pertinacious doubts, yet brought at last to yield. However this is
an instance of the proneness of our hearts to unbelief; especially if we have
not the objects of Faith under the view of the senses: and how apt we are to
give Laws to Heaven, and require our terms of God.

3. Christ's condescension in two things.

1. In appearing again verse 26. on the first day of the next week, to show how
ready he is to honor and bless his own day; and to give satisfaction to poor
doubting souls, by coming again to them: and it was well Thomas was there at
this time.

2. In giving Thomas the satisfaction of sense, verse 27. reach hither thy
finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my
side. With what mildness does our Lord treat him, though under such a
distemper! unbelief is so hateful to Christ, that he is very careful to have it
removed; and in condescension grants what was his fault to seek.

4. The next thing is Thomas his Faith, verse 28. And he answered and said my
Lord, and my God. He presumes not to touch Christ, but contents himself only
to see him, and having seen him makes a good confession, (...).

1. Observe, The two Titles given to Christ: God and Lord: He is God the
Fountain of all our happiness, and Lord, as he has a dominion over us, to
guide and dispose of us at his own pleasure.

2. Observe, The appropriation or personal application to himself. My God and
my Lord.

Hence we may observe,

1. That God leaves some to themselves for a while, that themselves and others
may be more confirmed afterward. Thomas his Faith was as it were dead and
buried in his heart, and now upon the sight of Christ quickened and revived: we
must not judge of men by a fit of Temptation, but stay till they come to
themselves again. Who would have thought that out of an obstinate incredulity,
so great a Faith should spring up suddenly.

2. We may observe Thomas, that is with much ado awakened, makes a fairer
confession then all the rest. They call him their Lord, but he his Lord and God.

3. We may observe again that true believing with the heart, is joined with
confession of the mouth, Psalm. 116.10. I believed therefore have I spoken.

4. Hence you may take notice of the reality of the two natures in the unity of
Christ's person, for he is both Deus and Dominus. But how comes he to
acknowledge Christ's Godhead, he did not feel the Divinity of Christ in hands,
or side, or feet. Videbat, tangebatque hominem, and confitebatur Deum, quem non
videbat, neque tangebat, says Austin. Herein his Faith was beyond sense, he
felt the manhood, and acknowledges the Deity.

5. Hence we may observe, that those that are rightly conversant about Christ
and the mysteries of his Death and Resurrection, should take Christ for their
Lord and their God: Thomas says my Lord and my God, and his confession should
be the common confession of all the Faithful. I shall quit the three first, and
insist only on the two last. I therefore begin with the fourth observation.

4th. Hence you see the reality of the two Natures in the unity of Christ's
person: The name of God is joined with the Title of Lord; therefore the name of
God belongs to him, no less then the title of Lord: Thomas when he says my
Lord, he seems not to have satisfied himself till he had added this other
name and title my God: now this imports the reality of his Divine Nature, for
these three reasons.

1. Those things which are proper to God, cannot, ought not, to be transferred
to a mere Creature; but this title of my God is a Covenant title, and so often
used in Scripture, and therefore Christ was God.

2. To whom truly and properly the Names and Titles of things do belong, to him
that which is signified by those Names, and Titles does belong also: For
otherwise this would destroy all certainty of speech, you cannot speak or
write, unless words signify what in vulgar use they are applied unto: there
could be no reasoning a signo ad rem significatum, from the sign to the thing
signified. If I should call a brute a Man, or a creature God, how can we
understand what is spoken or written: the argument is the more cogent, because
a name is an implicit contracted definition, as a definition is a name
explained and dilated, As when I say a man is a reasonable creature, so a God
is one that has power over all blessed for ever.

3. The greater any person is, the more danger there is of giving him titles
that do not belong to him; for that is to place him in an honor to which he
has greater pretensions then others: but no right, especially does this hold
good in Religion, it is true in Civils. (To give one next the King, the Title
of King, would awaken the jealousy of Princes, and breed much inconvenience)
but especially does this hold good in Religion, where God is so jealous of
giving his glory to another, Isa. 42.80. Therefore the greater the dignity of
Christ was above all other creatures, the more caution was necessary, that the
name of God might not be ascribed to him, if he were only mere Man, and it did
not properly agree to him: for the more dangerous the error the more cautiously
should we abstain from it.

4. Consider the person by whom this title was given; by a Godly Man: No godly
man would call an Idol, or a Magistrate, or a Teacher, or a King or an Angel,
or any created thing above an Angel, His Lord, and his God. But this was done
by Thomas, one bred up in the Religion taught by Moses and the Prophets; and
the chief point of that Religion was, that God is but one; Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O
Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. This was one of the sentences written on
the fringes of their garments, and it is quoted by Christ, whose disciple Thomas
also was, Mark 12.29. And explained by a learned Scribe which came to him, Mark
12.32. Well master, thou have said the truth, for there is but one God, and
there is none other but him. Now Thomas knowing this, and the first
Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods before me. If he were not persuaded
of it, would he say to Christ, My Lord, and my God?

5. The Person to whom he spoke it; He said to him: Not to the Father, but to
Jesus of Nazareth; My Lord, and my God. Surely as the Saints would not derogate
from God, so Christ would not arrogate what was proper to his Father. Therefore
as his disciples would have been tender of giving it to him, so he would have
refused this honor being so holy, if it had not been his due. But Christ
reproved not, but rather approved this Confession of Faith; therefore it was
right and sound. Christ had said to him, be not faithless but believing, and
then Thomas says, My Lord and my God. And Jesus says to him, Thomas, because
thou have seen me, thou have believed, blessed are they that have not seen, and
yet have believed. There is no rebuke for ascribing too much to him.

6. The conjunction of the Divine and Humane Nature is so necessary to all
Christ's functions and offices, that less would not have been sufficient than to
say, My Lord, my God. The Functions and Offices of Christ are three, to be a
Prophet, Priest and King.

1. To be a Prophet, Matthew. 23.10. One is your master even Christ. Now to be
our master and teacher, it is necessary that he should have the humane nature
and divine conjoined: The humane nature, that he might teach men by word of
mouth, familiarly and sweetly conversing with men; and also by his Example, for
he perfectly teaches that teaches both ways, by word, and deed. And it is a
mighty condescension, that God would come down, and submit to the same Laws we
are to live by: His divine nature was also necessary, that he might be the best
of teachers; for who is such a teacher as God, and that he might teach us in
the best way, and that is, when God taking the nature of man, does vouchsafe to
men his familiar conv^rse, eating and drinking and walking with them, offering
him^^^f to be seen and heard by them. As he of ol^ taught Abraham, Genesis 18.
accepting his entertainment, nothing more profitable, or honorable to men can
be thought of. In Christ's prophetical Office, four things are to be considered:

1. What he Taught. 2. How he Taught. 3. By what Arguments he confirmed his
Doctrine. 4. How he received it from the Father.
1. What he Taught: Christ preached, but chiefly himself: He revealed and
showed forth God, but by revealing and showing forth himself, Ioh. 14.9. He
called men, but to himself; he commanded men to believe, but in himself; Ioh.
14.1. He promised eternal Life, which he would give, but to men believing in
himself: He offered Salvation to miserable sinners, but to be had by himself:
He wrought a fear of Judgment to come, but to be exercised by himself: He
offered remission of sins, but to those that believed in himself: He promised
the Resurrection of the dead, which he by his own Power and Authority would
bring to pass. Now who could do all this but God? A mere man, if faithful and
holy, would have turned off men from himself to God: 2 Cor. 4.5. For we preach
not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for
Jesus sake. They designed no honor to themselves, but only to Christ; they
were loath to transfer any part of this glory to themselves: so would Christ if
he had not been God. Therefore what should his disciples say, but my Lord, my
God.

2. How he Taught. There is a twofold way of teaching; one Humane, by the
mouth, and sound of words striking the Ear; the other Divine, opening and
affecting the Heart. Christ used both ways: As the humane nature was necessary
to the one, so the divine to the other. As the Organs of speaking cannot be
without the humane nature, so the other way of teaching cannot be without a
Divine Power. When the Disciples came to Christ, Lord increase our Faith, Luke
17.5. he did not answer as Jacob did to Rachel, (when she said, Give me
children or I dye) Am I in the place of God? Christ after his Resurrection, did
not only open the Scriptures as was said before, but Luke 24.45. He opened
their understandings, that they might understand the scriptures. And he opened
the heart of Lydia, Acts 16.14. And poured the Holy Spirit on the Apostles, on
the day of Pentecost; Acts 2. and by the same efficacy teaches the Church,
wherever it is scattered.

3. If you consider, By what Arguments he confirmed his Doctrine, By many, and
the greatest Miracles, not done by the power of another, but his own; and her
required men to believe it, Matthew. 9.28. Believe ye that I am able to do this?
Whence had he the power to know the Thoughts of Men, to cure all sorts of
diseases in a moment, to open the Eyes of the blind, to raise the dead, to
dispossess Devils; but from that Divine Nature which was in him? Was it in his
Body and Flesh, then it was finite, and in some sort Material: Was it in his
Soul, Understanding, Will, or Fantasy, or Sensitive Appetite? how could it
work on other men's bodies. Therefore it was from his Divine Nature; My Lord, my
God.

4. How he received this Doctrine from the Father? Did God ever speak to him,
or appear to him? Is there any time, or manner, or speech noted by the
Evangelists when God made this Revelation? None at all. If he were a mere
Creature, or nothing but a Man, surely, that should have been done. He revealed
the most intimate Counsels and D^crees of God, as perfectly knowing them; but
when, or how they were revealed to him by his Father, is not said, which if he
had been mere Man, would have conduced to the Authority of his Message and
Revelation. But all this needed not, he being a Divine Person of the same
essence with his Father: Therefore, My Lord, my God.

2. His Priestly Office: The Humane Nature was necessary for That, for the
reasons alleged by the Apo^^le, H^b. 2.14.17. And also the Divine Nature, that
there might be a Priest a^ well as a Sacrifice: There had been no Sacrifice i^
he had not been Man: and no P^^^^t, if he had not been God to offer up himself
through the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. The sacrifice must suffer, the Pri^^t
Act; and besides, he could not ^nter in^o the H^^venly Sanctuary to present
himself b^for^ God for us, Heb. 9.24. Th^n ^he H^^venly Sanctuary and
Tabernacle, need (...) to be made, before he entered: For as the Earthly Priest
made the Earthly Tabernacle before he ministered in it, so the True Priest was
to make the Heavenly Tabernacle, as the Author to the Hebrews says in many
places. But to leave that; the Priest was to expiate sins, by the offering of a
sacrifice instead of the sinner: So Christ was to satisfy the Justice of God
for sinners by his Mediatory sacrifice: Now this he could not do unless he had
been God as well as Man. The Dignity of his Person, did put a value upon his
sufferings; without this, how shall we pacify Conscience, representing to us
the evil of sin, and the dreadfulness of Gods Wrath, And the exact Justice of
the Judge of all the World? Romans 3.25, 26. especially when these apprehensions
are awakened in us by the curse of the Law, and the stinging sense of Gods
Threatenings, which are so absolute, universal, and every way true and evident;
unless we know a sufficient satisfaction has been made for us. If you think
the promises of the Gospel are enough; alas, when the threatenings of the Law
are so just, and built upon such evident Reason, the soul is exposed to
doubtfulness: And if the threatenings of the Law seem altogether in vain, the
promises of the Gospel will seem less ^irm and valid. The Truth and Honor of
Gods Government, must one way or other be kept up, and that will not be unless
there be a fair passage from Covenant to Covenant, and that the former be not
repealed, or relaxed, but upon valuable consideration, as it is, when our
Mediator and surety bears our sorrows and griefs, and satisfies for us. But
now if he were mere Man, it would not have that esteem and value, as to be
sufficient for so many men, and so many sins as are committed against an holy
God. Therefore he needs to be God also.

3. His Kingly Office: How can that be exercised without an Infinite Power?
Because by our King and Judge, all our Enemies are to be overcome; the World,
Sin, Death and the Devil: And what is necessary to do this, every man may soon
understand. And as an Infinite Power is necessary, so an Infinite Knowledge;
that all things in Heaven and Earth may be naked and open to him, and that he
search the heart, and try the Reins; and then, that he may subject all things
to himself, raise all the dead to life, govern and protect the faithful in all
the parts of the world; that he may be present with them, in every Age and
Place, to help and relieve them. In short, to do all things both in Heaven and
in Earth, that fall within the compass of his office. Now what is a divine, and
infinite Power if this be not? What can the Father do which the Son cannot do
also? yea what does the Father do which the Son does not likewise; Ioh. 5.19.
Is there any work which the one does, but the other cannot do? Besides there
needs infinite Authority and Majesty, therefore the King of the Church must
be infinite. But how is he infinite, if he has only a finite Nature, such as
a mere Creature has? Or how could his finite Nature, without change and
conversion into another Nature, be made infinite? For without doubt, that
nature is infinite, which has an infinite power of Understanding, Willing and
Acting. Well then, Christ cannot be truly owned, unless he be owned as Lord and
God.

5. Those that are rightly conversant about Christ, and the Mysteries of his
Death and Resurrection, should take Christ for their Lord and their God. Every
one of them should say my God, on whom I depend; my Lord, to whose use I resign
my self. I shall

1. Explain in what sense these words may and ought to be used.

2. Give you the Reasons, why it becomes Christians to be able to say My Lord,
my God.

1. In what sense these words may, and ought to be used, My Lord, and my God.
There are two things considerable in those words:

(1.) An Appropriation, or a claim and challenge of Interest in him. (2.) A
Resignation or Dedication of our selves to his Use and Service.
Both are employed in these Titles, My Lord, my God. Christ was his God, or
Benefactor; and also his Lord and Master. However that be, in the mutual
stipulation of the Covenant it is evident, Cant. 2.16 I am my beloved, and my
beloved is mine. There is the appropriation of Faith, and the resignation of
Obedience. Ezekiel. 36.28. Ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. Zech.
13.9. I will say it is my people, and they shall say the Lord is my God.

1. The one is the fruit and effect of the other. God says, I am thy God; and
the Soul answers, I am thy servant: As when Christ said Mary, she presently
said Rabboni. God awakeneth us by the offer of himself, and all his Grace to do
us good, and then we devote our selves to his Service, and profess subjection
to him. If he will be our God, we may well allow him a dominion and Lordship
over us, to rule us at his pleasure. We choose him, because he chooses us, for
all Gods works leave their impression upon our hearts: He comes with Terms of
Peace, and we with Profession of Duty. God loves first, and most, and purest;
and therefore his love is the cause of all.

2. The one is the Evidence of the other: If God be yours, you are his. He is
yours by gift of himself to you: and you are his, by gift of your selves to
him. The Covenant binds mutually. Many will be ready to apply, and call God
their God, that do not dedicate and devote themselves to God. If you be not the
Lords, the Lord is not yours. He refuses their claim, that say, Hosea 8.2.
Israel shall cry unto me, my God we know thee. Israel has cast off the thing
that is good. In their distress, they pleaded their Interest in the Covenant,
but God would not allow the claim, because they denied obedience.

3. The one is more sensible and known to us than the other. A believer cannot
always say God (...) mine, but he will always say, I am his; Psalm. 119.94. I am
thine save me. I am thine, and will be thine, only thine, wholly thine, and
always thine. Appropriation has more of a Privilege in it, Resignation is
only a Duty. We have leave and allowance to say God is my God, but we cannot
always say it without doubt and hesitancy, because our Interest is not always
alike evident and clear. When you cannot say my God, yet be sure to say my
Lord. We know God to be ours, by giving up ou^ selves to be his. His choice and
election of us is a secret, till it be evidenced by our choice of him for our
God and Portion: our Act is more sensible to the Conscience. Be more full, and
serious in the resignation of your selves to him, and in time that will show
you your Interest in God.

4. Gods Propriety in us, by Contract and Resignation, speaks Comfort, as
well as our Propriety and Interest in God. You are his own, and therefoe he
will provide for you and care for you; 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his
own, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel. Interest does
strangely endear things to us: The world will love its own, Job. 5.19. and will
not God love his own, and Christ love his own, Job. 13.1. you may trust him,
and depend upon him, and serve him cheerfully for you are his own: So that if
we had no Interest in God established by the Covenant, if God had not said to
us I am yours, yet our becoming his, would make it comfortable; For every one
takes himself to be bound to love his own, provide for his own, and to defend
his own, and do good to his own: Indeed God is ours, as well as we are his; but
our being his, draws along with it much comfort and blessing. But to speak of
these apart.

1. The Appropriation, or claim of Interest is a sweet thing. If God be your
God, why should you be troubled? 'Psal. 16.5, 6. The Lord is the portion of my
inheritance, and of my cup. Thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen unto me
in pleasant places, yea I have a goodly heritage. You have a right to God
himself, and may lay claim to all that he has for your comfort and use. His
Attributes yours, his Providence yours, his Promises yours, what may not you
promise your selves from him? Support under all Troubles, relief in all
necessities. You may take hold of his Covenant, Isa. 56.4. and lay claim to all
the privileges of it. It Is all yours.

2. This dedication, this resignation of our selves to Gods use, to be at his
disposing, without reservation, or power of revocation is often spoken of in
Scripture; Isa. 44.5. One shall say I am the Lords, another shall call himself
by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord,
and surname himself by the name of Israel. The meaning is, to give up their
names to God, to be entered into his Muster Roll, and to be listed in his
service, Romans 6.13. Yield up your selves to God, as those that are alive from
the dead. It Is the immediate fruit of Grace and new life infused in us: A
natural man lives to himself, to please himself, and give satisfaction to his
own Lusts. Grace is a new Being and Life, that inclines us to Live and Act for
God* As soon as this life is begotten in us, by the power of his Spirit, our
hearts are inclined toward God, and you devote your selves to serve and please
him. As your work and business was before to serve the Devil, the World and the
Flesh; so now to please, serve and glorify God.

Secondly, The Reasons why it becomes Christians to be able to say, My Lord,
my God.

1. Because our interest in him is the ground of our comfort and confidence.
It Is not comfortable to us that there is a God, and that there is a Lord, that
may be terrible to us: The Devils believe, and the damned spirits feel there is
a God, and there is a Lord; but their thought of God is a part of their Misery
and Torment, James 2.19. The more they think of God, the more their Horror is
increased; to own a God, and not to see him as ours, the remembrane of it will
be troublesome to us, 2 Samuel 30.6. David comforted himself in the Lord his God.
There was the comfort, that he had a God to go to when all was lost, and that
God was his God. So Heb. 3.18. I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the
God of my Salvation. If God be our God, we have more in him, then trouble can
take from us. So Luke 1.47. My Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. When you
make particular application to your selves, it breeds strong comfort.

2. Because nothing strikes upon the heart with such an efficacy; as what
nearly concerns us, affects us most. The love of Christ to sinners in general,
does not affect us so much as when it is shed abroad in our own Hearts by the
Spirit; Gal. 2.20. He loved me, and gave himself for me; that draws out our
hearts to God again, and is quickening motive to stir us up to the life of Love,
and Faith. So Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye trusted after ye heard the word of truth,
the Gospel of your salvation. It Is not sufficient to know that the gospel is a
Doctrine of Salvation to others only; but to find it a doctrine of Salvation
to themselves in particular. That they may apply the promises to their own
heart. A Christian is affected most with things according as he is concerned in
them himself. It binds our obedience the more firmly, when we know that we
are particularly engaged to God, and have chosen him for our God, and our Lord.

3. Bacause without a real, personal entering into Covenant, the Covenant does
us no good unless every one of us do choose God, for our God and Lord, and
particulary own him. Every man must give his hand to the Lord, and personally
engage for himself. It Is not enough that Christ engage for us in being our
surety, but we must take a bond upon our selves: Something Christ did for us
and in our name, he interposed as the surety of a better Testament, Heb. 7.22.
Something must be done personally by us before we can have benefit by it. You
must give up your selves to the Lord. It is not enough that the Church engage
for us, but every man must engage his own heart to draw nigh to God, Ier.
30.21. Who is he that ingageth his heart to d^^^ ^igh to me. It Is not enough
that our Parents did engag^ for us; Deuteronomy. 29.10.11, 12. They d^d in the name of
their little ones avouch God ^o be their God; as we dovote, dedicate and engage
our Children to God in Baptism: But no man can savingly transact this work for
another. We ratify the Covenant in our own persons, 2 Cor. 9.13. by a
professed subjection to the gospel of Christ. This is a work cannot be done by
a Proxy, or Assigns; unless we personally enter into Covenant with God for our
selves, our dedication by our Parents will not profit us, we shall be as
Children of the Aethiopians unto God, Amos 9.7. though Children of the
Covenant, all this will not serve; these are visible external privileges. But
there is something required of our Persons; every one must say for himself, My
Lord, and my God. And this must not only be done in words, and by some visible
external Rites, that may signify so much: As for instance coming to the Lords
Supper; that is the New Testament in Christ's Blood; Luke 22.2^. It Is
interpretative, a sealing the New Covenant, between Christ and us: God gives,
and you take the Elements as a pledge and Token that God and you are agreed.
That he will give you himself, his Christ and all his Benefits; and you will
walk before him in newness of life: Now to rest in the Ceremony, and neglect
the Substance, is but a mockery of God: As many rend the Bond, yet prize the
Seal; care much for the Sacram^n^, that never care for the Duty it binds them
unto. If your hearts be hearty and well with God, you come now personally ^o
enter into Covenant with him: But this business must not be done only
exter^ally, but internally also: It Is a business done between God and our
Souls, though no outward witnesses be conscious to it. God comes speaking to
us by his Spirit in this Transaction; Psalm. 35.3. Say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation. And we speak to God, Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my Portion says my
soul. There is verbum mentis, as well as verbum oris. This Covenant is carried
on in soul Language; Psalm. 16.21. O my soul Thou have said unto the Lord, thou
art my Lord. So Psalm. 27.8. When thou said seek ye my face, my heart said,
thy face Lord will I seek. The Lord offers, or represents himself as our
Lord, and we prosess our selves to be the Lords. No eye sees, or ear hears,
what passes between God, and the Soul. Now without this Personal inward
Covenanting, all the privilege of the Covenant will do us no good: And this
Personal inward covenanting amounts to full as much as My Lord, my God.
Therefore it concerns every one of us see whether we have thus particularly
owned Christ, if there has been any Treaty between God, and our Souls; and
whether it came to any conclusion, and particular Soul engagement. That you
could thus own Christ. Not only as God, and Lord, but as your God, and your
Lord.

SERMON. VIII.
Col. 1.20. And having made peace by the blood of his Cross, to reconcile all
things to himself, by him I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in
heaven.


IN these words observe, First, What Christ was to do. Secondly, The manner how
he did it. Or,


First, The End for which he was appointed. To be our Mediator and Redeemer,
and accordingly promised and sent into the world to reconcile all things to
God, Whether they be things in heaven, or things in earth.

Secondly, The means by which he accomplished it. Having made peace by the
blood of his Cross; that is, by his bloody sacrifice on the Cross, thereby
answering the sacrifices of Atonement under the Law. In the first branch take
notice of 1. The Benefit, Reconciliation with God. 2. The person procuring it,
by him; and it is repeated again, I say by him. 3. The persons to whom this
Benefit is intended, expressed (1.) Collectively, (...), all things. (2.)
Distributively: Whether they be things in earth or things in heaven.



As they are Collectively Expressed, it teaches us that grace is revealed and
offered in the most comprehensive expressions that none may be excluded or have
just cause to exclude themselves. As it is distributively expressed, the latter
clause is of a dubious Interpretation; some, by things on earth, understand
Men; but by things in heaven, the Angels: Surely not the fallen Angels, for
they are not in Heaven, neither was Christ sent to reconcile them, nor relieve
them in their Misery, and reduce them to God, Heb. 2.16. (...), what then shall
we understand by things in heaven? Some think the holy Angels; others the
glorified Saints. 1. Those that assert the first, argue thus; that the Angels
are properly inhabitants of Heaven, and so fitly called things in Heaven; and
they are Enemies to Men whilst they are ungodly, Idolatrous and Rebels to God
(as good Subjects hold with their Prince, and have common Friends and Enemies
with him) but are reconciled to them as soon as they partake of the Benefits of
Christ's Death; as we are told of joy in heaven among the angels of God, at the
conversion of one sinner, Luke ^5.10. Now if there be so much joy over one
Sinner repenting, how much more when many sinners are snatched out of the Jaws
of Hell. They make the sense to be thus; before, for the sins of men they we^^
ali^nated from them, but then reconciled: but this Scripture speaks not of the
Reconciliation of Angels and Men, but the Reconciliation of all things to God;
for so it is expressly in the Text to reconcile all things to himself. Now the
good Angels cannot be said to be reconciled to God, for there was never a
breach between them; s^ nunquam cum matre in gratiam rediisse. 2. Therefore I
interpret it of the glorified Saints: See the like expression, Ephesians. 1.10 To
gather together in one all things to Christ which are in heaven, and in earth:
And more clearly Ephesians. 3.15. Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is
named. Meaning thereby, the Faithful, who are already in Heaven, and those who
are now remaining upon Earth. This is a comfortable note, and tea^h^s ^s,

1. That the Apostle Paul knew no Purgatory, or third place for Souls after
Death.

2. That the Saints departed are now in Heaven as to their Souls, and gathered
to the Rest of the Spirits of just men made perfect.

3. The souls now in Heaven once needed the Merit of Christ, even as we do.
None come thither but they were first reconciled to God. By him their peace was
made and they obtained Remission of sins by the blood of his Cross as ye do. In
short all that go to Heaven go thither by the Mediation, Sacrifice and
Meritorious Righteousness of the same Redeemer.

Doct. One great benefit we have by Christ, is Peace and Reconciliation with
God. Here I shall show, 1. What this Reconciliation is. 2. How it was obtained.
3. What Assurance we have that it is obtained. 4. How and upon what terms it is
applied to us.


1. What this Reconciliation is?

I Answer, It is not an original Peace, but a returning to Amity after some
foregoing breach: Now the breach by sin consisted in two things; an aversion of
the Creature from God, and an aversion of God from the Creature; so before
Peace and Reconciliation can be made, two things must be removed; Gods Wrath,
and our sinful Nature; God must be pacified and man Converted. Gods Wrath is
appeased by the blood of Christ, and our Natures are changed and healed by the
Spirit of Grace. First Gods Wrath is appeased, and then the Spirit is bestowed
upon us; for while God is angry and offended, no saving benefit can be expected
from him. This Text speaks not how he took away our enmity, but how he appeased
God for us, not so much of the Application as the impetration of this benefit.
The Application is spoken of verse the 21. how it is applied to us, but here
the Apostle more directly speaks of the impetration, how it was procured and
obtained for us; namely by Christ's satisfying Gods Justice for that wrong,
which caused the breach or the dying of the Son of God for a sinful World. Now
this has an influence on Gods pardon, and our Conversion, for by virtue of
this Reconciliation we are justified and pardoned. Therefore we are said to be
justified by his blood, Romans 8.9. that is the price is paid by Christ and
accepted by God, there needs nothing more to be done on the Mediators part,
by virtue of the same peace made we are also sanctified, and converted unto
God, 2 Cor. 5.18. The gift of the sanctifying spirit is given us as the fruit
of Christ's death.

2. How it was obtained, by the blood of his cross he made peace. This implies
death, and such a death as in appearance was accursed; for the death of the
cross is the vilest and most cruel death, Gal. 3.13. Christ has Redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, for it is written cursed
is every one that hangs on a Tree. Now we must see the reasons of this course
or way of Reconciling the world, that we may not mistake Gods design, nor be
possessed with any imaginations which are derogatory to Gods honor; as suppose
if we should hence conceit that God is all wrath and justice, unwilling of
himself to be Reconciled to man, or that he delights in blood, and is hardly
drawn to give out grace. Oh no these are false misprisions, and
misrepresentations of God. Therefore let us a little inquire into the reasons
why God took this way to Reconcile all things to himself, and ordained Christ
to bear the chastisement of our peace. I answer, That the Justice of God might
be eminently demonstrated, the Lawgiver vindicated, and the breach that was
made in the frame of Government repaired, and God manifested to be a hater of
sin, and yet the sinner saved from destruction; and that the love of God might
be eminently and conspicuously discerned, and our peace the better secured. As
let us a little see these things more particularly I begin.

1. With the holiness of Gods nature, who is of purer eyes then to behold
iniquity, Hab. 1.13. that is so as to approve of it, or altogether connive at
it, so as to let it go without punishment or mark of his displeasure: therefore
some way must be found out to signify his purest holiness and his hatred and
detestation of sin, and that it should not be pardoned without some testimony
of his displeasure against it, we are told God hates the workers of iniquity,
Psalm. 5.5. and the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, Psalm 11.7. and
therefore when God was to grant his universal pardon he would not do it without
this propitiatory atonement.

2. The honor of his governing Justice was to be secured, and freed from any
blemish, that the awe of God might be kept up in the World. In the mystery of
our Redemption we must not look upon God only as pars laesa, the wronged
party; but as Rector Mundi, God was to carry himself as the Governor of the
World. Now there is a difference between a private person and a governor:
private persons may pass by offenses as they please, but a governor must do
right, and what conduces to the public good. There is a twofold notion that we
have of public right, Iustum est quod fieri debet, and justum est quod fieri
potest. That which ought to be done or we are unjust, as for instance to punish
the righteous equally with the wicked, that Abraham pleads, Genesis 18.25. That
be far from thee to do after this manner to slay the Righteous with the wicked,
and that the Righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee, shall
not the Judge of all the earth do right. Not that Abraham minds God of his
Office but he was confidently assured of the nature of God, that he could not
do otherwise. But now there is justum quod fieri po^est, which if it be done or
if it be not done, the party is not unjust, the first part of Justice is paying
of debts, the second exacting or requiring of debts. Now the Judge of the World
does all things wisely and righteously, the question is therefore whether God
passing by the offenses of the World without any satisfaction required does
deal justly? As a free Lord he may make what Laws he pleases, but as a just
Judge with respect to the ends of government, he does that which is for public
good. The right of passing by a wrong, and the right of releasing a punishment
are different things, because punishment is a common interest, and is referred
to a common good to preserve order and government, and for example to the
future. The Government of the world required it that God should stand on the
satisfaction of Christ, and the submission of the sinner: that he may be owned
and reverenced, as the just and holy Governor of the World a valuable
compensation is insisted on for this end, Romans 2.25, 26. Whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, to declare his
Righteousness for the Remi^^ion of sins that are past through the forbearance
of God. To declare I say at this time his righteousness, that he might be just
and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus.

3. To keep up the Authority of his Law. God had made a former Covenant which
was not to be quitted and wholly made void but upon valuable consideration;
therefore if it broken and no more ado made about it, all respect and obedience
to God would fall to the ground. The Law may be considered either as to the
precept or sanction: the Authority of the precept is kept up by Christ's
submission to the Law, and living by the same rules, we are bound to live by,
and performing all manner of obedience to God, for it behoved him to fulfill
all Righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. being set up as a pattern of holiness in our
nature, to which we are to be conformed. But that which is most considerable in
this case is the sanction or penalty; if this should be relaxed, and no
satisfaction required, it might leave upon God the blemish of levity,
mutability and inconstancy: the Law was not given in jest but in the greatest
earnest that ever Law was given; and so solemn a Transaction was not
constituted to no purpose, therefore God will not part with the Law upon light
terms, Gal. 4.4, 5. When the fullness of time was come God sent forth his son
made of a woman, made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the Law.
That men may k^ow that it is a dangerous thing to transgress his Law, and that
they may fear and do no more presumptuously: p^rtly that it might not foster in
us hopes of impunity which are very natural to us, Genesis 3.5. The devil s^^ks to
weaken the truth of Gods threatning^, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. We are apt to look upon
the threatenings of the Law as a vain scarecrow. Therefore for the terror and
warning of sinners for the future, God would not release us from the
punishment, till our surety undertook our Reconciliation with God by bearing
the chastisement of our peace.

4. Christ death was necessary to make sin odious, and obedience more
acceptable to us.

1. Sin more odi^us or hateful, no other remedy would serve the turn to procure
the pardon and destruction of it, then the bloody death of the cross, Romans 8.3.
Surely it is no small thing for which the Son of God must dye, when you read or
hear of Christ's sufferings, you should never think an extenuating and
favorable thought of it more.

2. To commend obedience: for Christ's suffering death at the command of his
Father was the noblest piece of service, and highest act of obedience that ever
could or can be performed unto God: It is beyond any thing that can be done by
Men or Angels. There was in it so much love to man, so much self-denial,
humility and patience, so much resignation of himself to God who had appointed
him to be our Redeemer that it cannot be paralleled. The great and most
remarkable thing in Christ's death was obedience, Romans 5.18. Phil. 2.7, 8. God
delighted not in more blood, but blood offered in obedience as the best way to
impress upon man a sense of his duty, and to teach him to serve and please God
at the dearest rate.

5. This death commends the love of God to us, for it is the great
demonstration of it. Many draw a quite contrary conclusion as if he were with
much a do brought to have mercy on us, but they forget that he is first and
chief in the design, 2 Cor. 5.19 God was in Christ Reconciling the World unto
himself, Christ came from heaven to declare to us the greatness of Gods love.
God thought nothing too dear for us, not the Son of his love, nor his death,
ignominy and shame, Romans 5.8. God commends his love in that while we were yet
sinners Christ dyed for us. When we had alienated our hearts from God, refused
his service, and could expect nothing but the rigor of his Law and vindictive
Justice, then he spared not his own Son to bring about this Reconciliation for
us.

6. As God is pacifyed, so it gives us hopes: our business lies not with a God
offended, but with a God Reconciled: if we had not to do with a pacifyed God,
who could lif^ up his face to h^^, or think a comfortable thought of him, but
this gives us hope, Romans 5.10. For i^ when we were Enemies, we were reconciled
to God by the death of his son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by
his Life. We were enemies by sin in us which God hates, and declares his
wrath against it in the Law. Then by the satisfaction wrought by Christ, we
were restored to his favor, so far that free and easy conditions were
procured in the Gospel, and his spirit is offered to prepare and fit us for a
Life of Glory. We have heard what Christ has done.

Thirdly, What assurance have we that this peace is obtained. Consciences are
not easily settled, therefore some visible evidences are necessary that God is
pacifyed, I shall name three or four.

1. Christ Resurrection and Ascension into glory, this shows that God was
propitiated and has accepted the ransom that was given for Souls. We read Romans
4.25. that he dyed for our offenses and rose again for our Justification, his
dying notes his satisfaction, his rising again the acceptance of it. God by
raising him up from the dead showed that he had received the death of his Son,
as a sufficient ransom for our sins; for he dyed in the quality of a surety,
and in that quality was raised up again: By his death he made the payment, by
his Resurrection the satifaction of it was witnessed to the World, for then our
surety was let out of prison, Isa. 53.8. He shall be taken from prison and from
judgment, in his death he was in effect a prisoner, under the arrest of divine
vengeance, but when he rose again he was discharged, therefore there is great
weight laid upon it as to our acquittance, Romans 8.34. yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God. There is some special thing in his
Resurrection comparatively above his death which has influence on our
Justification; that is, it was a visible evidence given to the World, that
enough was done for the expiation of sins, and to assure us of our deliverance
if we be capable, and his ascension into glory does further witness it, he
being exalted to the greatest dignity is able to defend and protect his people,
and has the advantage of interceding with his father for the supply of all our
wants.

2. The grant of the New Covenant which is therefore called the Covenant of his
peace, Isa. 54.10. The Covenant of my peace shall not be removed, Ezekiel. 37.26.
I will make a Covenant of peace with them, it is so called not only because
thereby this peace and Reconciliation is offered to us, but the terms are
stated and the conditions required are far more equitable, gracious, and
commodious for us then the terms of the Law Covenant: Man as a sinful creature
is obnoxious (...) Gods wrath for the violation of the Law of nature, and so
might perish without remedy, and no impeachment to Gods goodness can happen
thereby, but when God will give bounds to his sovereignty over him* and c^ter
into terms of Covenant wit^ him, and give him a bottom to stand upon, whereon
to expect good things from him, upon the account of his faithfulness and
righteousness; this is a condescension, and so far condescended in the first
Covenant, that after that man has cast away the mercies of his creation, and
his capacity to fulfill that covenant, this was mere mercy and grace; that God
would enter into a second Covenant, it is not from any mutableness in God, but
from the merit and satisfaction of a Redeemer. Surely there must be some great
and important cause to change, alter and abrogate, a covenant so solemnly made
and established, to lay aside one covenant and to enter into an other,
especially since the former was so Holy, Righteous and Equal, fit for God to
give, and us in the state we then were in to receive. Now what was the
important reason; Christ came to salve Gods honor in the first covenant, and
to secure the ends of his Government, though a second covenant should be set
up, the blood of his cross has made this Covenant everlasting, Heb. 13.20. and
upon gracious terms does convey great and precious privileges to us.

3dly. The pouring out of the spirit, which certainly was the fruit and effect
of Christ's death, and also an evidence of the worth and value of it: The
Apostle tells us, That Christ was made a curse for us, that the blessing of
Abraham might come upon the Gentiles by faith in Jesus Christ. And what
blessing was that? the gift of the Spirit, Gal. 5.13, 14. And in another place
when he interprets the Types of the Law. He tells us, that the Fathers did
all eat of the same spiritual meat that we do, and did all drink of the same
spiritual drink, for they drank of the Rock that followed them, and that Rock
was Christ. If the Rock was Christ, the water that g^shed out of the Rock was
the spirit, often compared to waters in Scripture, John 4.14. And John 7.38,
39. And the Rock yielded not this water till it was smitten with the Rod of
Moses: a figure of the curses of the Law Christ was stricken and smitten of
God, and so procured the spirit for us, John 7.39. The Holy Ghost was not yet
given, for Jesus was not yet glorified. That is had not finished his passion,
and the acceptance of it was not yet attested to the World, till he was
advanced at the right hand of God; and then this effect declared it. The spirit
was given before, but more sparingly, because it was given upon trust, and with
respect to the satisfaction that was afterward to be made, and accepted: And
then it was witnessed to the World by a more copious and plentiful effusion of
the spirit. Therefore it is said, Acts 2.33. Therefore Jesus being by the right
hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy
Ghost, he has shed forth this which ye now see and hear. The merit and value
of the sacrifice is thus visibly attested, therefore this is one of the
witnesses, Acts 5.30, 31, 32. The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus whom ye
slew, and hanged on a Tree, him has God exalted with his right hand to be a
Prince, and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins.
And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom
God has given to them that obey him. And what was the evidence given to the
Church in general, is the evidence given also to every particular believer.

4thly. Some have obtained the effects and fruits of Christ's death, this peace
begun here has been perfected in heaven. The Text says he has Reconciled all
things to himself, whether they be things in Heaven or things in Earth. Here
many are pardoned and accepted with God, and have the comfort of it in their
own Souls. Others are gone home to God, and have the full of this peace. All
were by nature children of wrath, under the curse as well as others. Now if
some in all generations have enjoyed the love, favor and friendship of God in
this World and upon their departure out of it have entered into glory; upon
this account it is evident that Christ is accepted to the ends for which God
sent him; thus Abraham the Father of the faithful, and all the blessed souls
who are gathered into his bosom, and are alive with God in Heaven. Certain it
is they were all sinners by nature, for there is no difference between any of
the children of men, and yet God admits them into his peace. Was it a personal
privilege peculiar to them only? No the Apostle tells us, Romans 4.23. It was
not written for his sake alone, and Paul obtained mercy for them that should
hereafter believe on Christ, for life everlasting, 1 Timothy 1.16. Therefore all
penitent believers may be assured that this sacrifice is sufficient, and will
avail for their acceptance with God. We take it for a good token of a healing
Water, when we see the Crutches of Criples that had been cured, all the blessed
Saints in Heaven are witness to a sincere soul; they all obtained this blessed
condition through the blood of his Cross Reconciling them to God. There is none
in glory but had his pardon sealed through the blood of Christ.

4. How and upon what terms is it applied to us: for we have considered
hitherto only how Christ has made peace or made the atonement. Yet if we
receive not the atonement we may perish for ever, for all that, besides the
work done on the Cross by Christ alone, there is a work to be done in our
hearts, the work of making peace is sufficiently done by Christ, there needs
nothing to be added to it, no other ransom, nor sacrifice, nor propitiation:
Christ has so fully satisfied divine Justice, that he has obtained the new
Covenant, but we are not actually admitted (...) this peace till we have
personally accepted the Covenant. Now here it sticks: God has been in Christ
Reconciling the World unto himself, there was the foundation laid; but
therefore we pray you to be Reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. There is our Title, Claim,
actual Right, security. But how do we receive this atonement? or how are we
interessed in it? the conditions and terms are gracious, such as the nature of
the business calls for: as to our entrance into this peace, no more is
required but Faith and Repentance. The Gospel is offered to all, but the
penitent Believer as being only capable is possessed of it.

1. Faith is required that we Believe what the Son of God has done, and
purchased for us, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. If we sincerely embrace the Gospel, we are
Reconciled to God, and accepted with him. The Faith that justifies, is partly
an assent to the Truth of the Christian Religion, especially the fundamental
Truth, that Jesus is the Son of God, and Savior of the World. And partly an
acceptance of Christ as God offers him, a serious, thankful, broken hearted
acceptance of Christ as your Lord and Savior, serious because of the weight of
the business, broken hearted because of the condition of the person accepting:
a selfcondemning sinner, or one that has an awakening sense of his sin and
misery. Thankful because Reconciliation with God and fruition of them in Glory
is so great a benefit, and you take him as Lord, for every knee must bow to
Christ, he is a Savior by merit and efficacy. By his meritorious Righteousness
you obtain all benefits, by the efficacy of his spirit, you perform all duties;
the last thing is trust and dependence, Ephesians. 1.13. Trust is such an expectation
of the benefits offered by Christ, that forsaking all other things you entirely
give up your selves to the conduct of his Word and Spirit.

2. The next thing is Repentance which is a turning from sin to God, we turn
from sin by hatred, and we turn to God by Love. We turn from sin by hatred;
hatred of sin is the ground of all mortification, there is a twofold hatred, of
abomination and of enmity. We turn to God by Love which is the great principle
to incline us to God, and is the bottom of vivification or living to God. Now
all this is necessary to actual peace, for our refreshing begins in conversion,
Acts 3.19. there is no peace allowed to the wicked, we must take Christ's yoke,
or we shall find no rest for our souls, Matthew. 11.29. we are not reconciled to
God till our enmity be broken and overcome, then of enemies we become Friends,
of Strangers, intimates; then we are reconciled. This then is required of you,
only let me add this caution, what is at first Vows and Purposes, must be
afterward Deeds and Practices, and having engaged your selves to God to live
to him, to keep your selves from sin, and to follow after Holiness; This must
be your business all the days of your lives. For so you continue your peace
and interest in God, Gal. 6.16. And as many as walk according to this rule,
peace be on them, and mercy, and on the Israel of God.

USE.
1. To Exhort you to enter into this peace that you may be partakers of the
fruit of Christ's Blood, and the virtue of his cross may be effectual in you.

1. Let me reason a periculo, from the danger, consider what it is to be at
odds with God, and how soon and how easily he can revenge his quarrel against
you, and how miserable they will be for ever, that are not found of him in a
state of peace, Psalm. 7.11, 12, 13. God is angry with the wicked every day, if
he turn not, he will w^et his sword; he has bent his bow, and will make his
Arrows ready. There the Psalmist represents God and man as in a state of
hostility against each other. The wicked man affronts his holiness, questions
his justice, slights his wrath, breaks his Laws, wrongeth his people, and says
tush, I shall have peace though I add drunkenness to thirst. God for a while
gives time and warning, but every moment can break in upon us, for he is able
easily to deal with us, Cominus hand to hand, for he has his sword; Eminus at
a distance, for he has his bow: he is not only able to deal with them but
ready, for he is whetting his Sword and has bent his Bow, the Arrow is upon
the string though not as yet sent or shot out, what remedy then is there. There
is but one exception if he turn not; if he be not reduced and brought home to
God by a timely Repentance, he falls into the hands of the living God. Now no
persons are in so dangerous an estate as those that have peace offered and
despise it, Isa. 27.4. Let him take hold of my strength. When God is ready to
strike. A man that is fallen into the power of his enemy will take hold of his
Arm, we are always in Gods power, his vengeance may surprise us before we are
aware, what is our business but to be found of him in peace.

2. Ab utili, from the happiness of being at peace with God: your great work is
over, and you have a World of benefit by it, you stop all danger at the
fountain head. When you are at peace with God, you are at peace with the
creatures, Ezekiel. 34.25. I will make with them a Covenant of peace and will
cause the evil beasts to cease out of the Land, danger might way-lay us at
every turn: Then for Men, Prove. 10.17. When a man's ways please the Lord he
makes his enemies to be at peace with him. Then peace in your own Consciences,
Romans 15.13. Now the God of hope fill you with joy and peace. In believing to
have a man's Conscience settled on sound terms is a great Mercy. Peace with the
Holy Angels instead of being instruments of vengeance, they are ministering
Spirits, Heb. 1.14. Lastly Communion with God himself, Romans 5.1, 2. Therefore
being justified by Faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom also we have access by Faith, etc. Ephesians. 2.17, 18. Preaching peace by
whom also we have access by one Spirit unto the Father.

3. I Reason from the confidence we may have of this benefit if we submit to
Godly terms.

1. God is willing to give it, verse 19. It pleased the Father that in him all
fullness should dwell, there is Gods authority and good pleasure in it. The
first motive came from God who received the wrong, not from him that gave it.
God was in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14. Among men the inferior should seek to the
superior. The party offending to the party offended, the weaker to the
stronger, they that need the Reconciliation to him that needs it not, but
here all is contrary.

2. You may be confident of it upon another ground, the sufficiency of Christ
to procure all fullness. The whole divine nature did inhabit and reside in the
man Christ Jesus, and so he is completely fitted, and furnished for this work:
he has paid a full price for this peace when he bare our sins and carried our
sorrows, and by his Spirit he changes our hearts as well as pacifies the wrath
of God. And then he preserves this peace by his constant intercession, Heb.
2.17, 18. Now shall we doubt of it? But that we may get it.

1. Let us take the way of entrance by Faith and Repentance. It concerns us
much to see whether we be in peace or trouble, if in trouble you see the cure,
if in peace the next question is, is it Gods peace? That Is had by the blood of
Christ, the merit of which we must depend upon and devote our selves to God,
break off our old league with sin, and bind our selves with a Bond to live unto
God, to be the Lords for evermore.

2. When this peace is made be very tender of it, that no breach fall out
between you and God, Psalm. 85.8. He will speak peace to his people and to his
Saints, but let not them turn again to folly.

3. Let us be thankful to God for this fruit of Christ's death, it is an act of
free and undeserved mercy, and to be imputed to nothing but his mere grace that
God has appointed such a way: It pleased the Father to bruise him, Isa. 53.9.
That he sends Ambassadors to publish it, Acts 10.36. the word which God sent
unto the Children of Israel Preaching peace by Jesus Christ he is Lord of all,
and that he appoints a ministry. It is a great privilege in it self; for by
this peace we have not only the beginnings but the increase of grace till all
be perfected in heaven, Heb. 13.2^, 21. Now the God of peace that brought again
from the dead our Lord Jesus, make you perfect in every good work, to do his
will working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, 1 Thessalonians. 1.23.
The God of peace sanctify you that you may be preserved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. This peace does encourage us in all
temptations from the devil, Romans 16.20. The God of peace shall bruise satan
under your feet shortly. From the World, Ephesians. 6.15. shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of peace. Fears of the wrath of God, and doubts about our eternal
condition, Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink but
righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, here are three words, Comfort,
Peace and Joy, these succeed one another as so many degrees, Comfort is support
under trouble, Peace a ceasing from trouble, joy a lively sense of the love of
God.

FINIS.

