Thomas Manton DD.



A PRACTICAL EXPOSITION OF THE Lord's-Prayer.

BY The late Reverend and Learned Divine THOMAS MANTON, D.D.

LONDON; Printed by I. D. and are to be sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the
Golden-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

The Preface,
SUch is the Divine Matter, and admirable Order of the Lord's Prayer, as became
the Eternal Wisdom of God, that composed and dictated it to his Disciples. In
it are opened the Fountains of all our regular Petitions; and the Arguments
contained to encourage our Hopes for obtaining them. In our Addresses to Men,
our study is to conciliate their favorable Audience: but God is most
graciously inclined and ready to grant our Requests; therefore we are directed
to call upon him by the Title of Our Father, in Heaven, to assure us of his
Love and Power, and thereby to excite our reverent Attention, to raise our
Affections, to confirm our Confidence in Prayer. The supreme end of our desires
is the Glory of God in Conjunction with our own Happiness: This is expressed in
the two first Petitions, That His Name may be Hallowed, and His Kingdom come,
that we may partake of its Felicity. In order to this, our Desires are directed
for the Means that are proper and effectual to accomplish it. And those are of
two kinds, the good things that conduct us, and the removal of those Evils that
obstruct our Happiness. The good things are either, the Spiritual and Principal
Means to prepare us for Glory, an entire, cordial and constant Obedience to the
divine Commands, expressed in the third Petition, Thy Will be done on Earth, as
it is in Heaven: Or natural and subservient, the Supports and Comforts of this
Life, which are contained in the fourth Petition, Give us this Day our daily
Bread. The removal of Evils is disposed according to the order of the good
Things we are to seek: We pray that our Sins may be forgiven, the guilt of
which directly excludes from his glorious Kingdom, that we may be preserved
from Temptations, that withdraw us from observing the Divine Commands; and to
be delivered from all afflicting Evils, that hinder our arrival at our blessed
End. The Conclusion is to strengthen our Faith, by ascribing to our Heavenly
Father, the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, and to express our ardent desires of his
Blessing, by saying, Amen.

This divine comprehensive Prayer is the Subject of the following Sermons,
wherein the Characters of Dr. Manton's Spirit, are so conspicuous, as
sufficiently discover them to be his; and the Reader is assured they have been
diligently compared with his own Copy.

WILLIAM BATES.

ADVERTISEMENT.
DR. Manton's second Volumn of Sermons, in Folio, on the 25th Chapter of St.
Matthew, the 17th of St. John, the sixth and eighth Chapters to the Romans, and
the fifth of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, being perused by Dr. Bates,
Dr. Collins, and Mr. How, is now in the Press, and will be finished with all
Expedition, there being three Presses already at work, and two more will be
shortly employed for the dispatch thereof. Therefore all Persons who expect the
benefit of the Proposals, are desired to send in their Money forthwith.

The Proposals are to be had at Jonathan Robinson's at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE EXPOSITION OF THE Lord's-Prayer.
MATTHEW. 6. 6, 7, 8. But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when
thou have shut the Door, pray to thy Father, etc.
I Intend to go over the Lord's Prayer; and to make way for it, I shall speak a
little of these foregoing Verses, wherein our Lord treats of the Duty of
Prayer, and the Necessity of being much therein.

In the beginning of this Chapter our Lord taxes the Hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, which was plainly to be seen in all their Duties: their Alms, their
Prayers, and their Fasting

I. For their Alms. Christ deals with that in the four first Verses. It seems
it was their Fashion when they gave Alms to sound a Trumpet; and their Pretense
was to call all the Poor within hearing: Or to give notice that such a Rabby
gives Alms to Day. Now our Lord shows, that tho this were the fair pretense
to call the Poor, yet their Heart was merely upon their own Glory, their own
Esteem with Men; and therefore he persuades his Disciples to greater Secresy in
this Work; and to content themselves with God's Approbation, which will be
open, and manifest, and honorable enough in due time, when the Archangel
shall blow the Trumpet to call all the World together, 1 These. 4. 16. And
Christ shall publish their good Works in the hearing of Men and Angels, Matthew.
25. 34, 35, 36. Thus he deals with them upon the point of Alms.

II. For their Prayers; Christ taxes their Affectation of Applause, because
they sought out places of the greatest Resort, the Synagogues and Corners of
the Streets, and there did put themselves into a praying Posture, that they
might be seen of Men, and appear to be Persons of great Devotion, and so might
the better accomplish their own Ends; their Public Designs upon the Stage (for
the Pharisees were great Sticklers at that time) and also their private Designs
upon Widows Houses, that they might be trusted with the management of Widows
and Orphans Estates, as being devout Men, and of great Sanctity and Holiness.

In which Practice, there was a double Failing: 1. As to the Circumstance of
Place, performing a personal and solitary Prayer in a public Place, which was
a great Indecorum, and argued the Action to be Scenical, or brought upon the
Stage merely for public Applause. And certainly, that private Praying which is
used by Men in Churches, does justly come under our Lord's Reproof. 2. Their
next Failing was as to their End: [ Verily they do it to be seen of Men.]


Object. But what Fault was there in this? Does not Christ himself direct us in
his Sermon, Mat. 5. 16. Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see
your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven? And yet the
Pharisees are here taxed for praying, fasting, and giving Alms, that they might
be seen of Men; How can these Places stand together?

By way of Answer:

1. We must distinguish of the different Scope and Intention of Christ in these
two places: There, Christ's Scope is to commend and enjoin good Works to be
seen of Men, ad edificationem, for their Edification; Here, his Scope is to
forbid us to do good Works to be seen of Men, ad ostentationem, for our own
Ostentation: There, Christian Charity to the Souls of Men is commended; and
here, Vainglory is forbidden.

2. Again, Good Works are to be distinguished. Some are so truly and indeed;
others only in outward show and appearance. Good Works; that are truly so and
indeed, Christ enjoins there; Hypocritical and feigned Acts, that are only so
in outward show and semblance, are forbidden here. To pray is a good Work, take
inward and outward Acts of it together, and so it is enjoined: But hypocritical
and superstitious Prayer, which has only the face and show of Goodness; this
is forbidden.

3. We must distinguish of the Ends of good Works; principal, and subordinate;
adequate, and inadaequate. First, the principal and primary End of good Works,
must not be that we may be seen of Men, but the Glory of God; but now the
subordinate, or less principal End may be to be seen of Men. Again, it must not
be our adequate End, (that is) our whole and main Intention and Scope; but a
collateral and Side-End it may be. It is one thing to do good Works, only that
they may be seen; it is another thing to do good Works, that they may not only
be seen, but also be imitated, to win others by them to give Glory to God. It
is one thing to do good Works for the Glory of God, another thing to do them
for the Glory of our selves: We may do good Works to be seen, in the first
respect, but not in the last. We may not pray, with the Pharisees, merely to be
seen of Men; yet we may let our Light shine before Men, to draw them to Duty,
and give more Glory to God.

4. Again, There Christ speaks of the general Bent of our Conversation, and
here only of particular and private Duties: It would argue too much Hypocrisy
to do these in public, tho the whole Frame and Course of our Carriage before
Men, must be religious in their sight. And that is agreeable to what the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 8. 21. We should provide for honest Things, not only in
the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of Men. And, Phil. 2. 15.
Christians are advised there, to be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God,
without rebuke, in the midst of a crook'd and perverse Generation, shining
among them as Lights in the World. That which is obvious to the Sight and
Observance of Men, must be such as will become our holy Calling: But our
private and particular Duties, which are to pass between God and us, these must
be out of sight. I hope another Man may approve himself to be honest and
religious to me, tho he does not fall down, and make his personal and private
Prayers before me. But to leave no scruple, if possible;

5. We must distinguish of the diverse Significations of that Phrase which is
used here, (...), [That we may be seen.] There is a twofold Sense of (...), or
That: It may be taken two ways, as they speak, either causally, or eventually.
Causally, and then it implies and imports the End and Scope why we do such a
thing, namely, for this very purpose, that we may obtain it. And thus the
Pharisees here did pray, (...), that they might be seen of Men, (that is) this
was their main End and Scope. Thus That is taken causally. Secondly, That,
sometimes is taken eventually, and then it does not import the End and Scope,
but only the Event that will fall out, and follow upon such a thing. Thus That
is often taken in Scripture. John 9. 39. Christ says there, For Judgment I am
come into the World, that they which see not, might see; and that they which
see, might be made blind. 'Twas not Christ's Scope to do so, but Christ foresaw
that this would be the Event of his coming into the World, and therefore he
says, That, etc. So Luke 14. 10. Christ tells them there, But when thou art
bidden to a Feast, go and sit down in the lowest Room, that when he that ^ade
thee comes, he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher: Then shall thou have
worship in the presence of them that sit at Meat with thee. That is taken
eventually, not causally: for Christ does not bid them there, to set themselves
at the lower End of the Table, for this very end, or to make this their scope:
that is the thing he forbids, Affectation of Precedence: But that, hoc est,
then it will follow, (that is) this is likely to be the Event; then the Master
of the House will come to you, if you do this. Not that it should be your Scope
to feign Humility, that you may obtain the highest Place at the Table. And so
may Christ's Words be taken, Let your Light so shine, etc. This will fall out
upon it then, Men will be conscious to your Christian Carriage, and gracious
Behavior, and by that means God will be much honored and glorified: There it
is taken eventually. But here it is taken causally, The Pharisees did it that
they might be seen of Men; that is, this was their Scope, and principal
Intention. And thus may you reconcile these two Places of Scripture.

Well now, Christ having taxed them for these two Faults: For their undue
Place, the Synagogue, and Corners of the Streets, being unfit for a private and
personal Act of Worship; and for their End, that they might be seen of Men: He
says, They have their Reward: That is, the whole Debt is paid, they can
challenge nothing at God's hands. God will be behind-hand with none of his
Creatures. As they have what they looked for, so they must expect no more; they
must be content with their Penny. The Phrase is borrowed from Matters of
Contract between Man and Man, and is a Word proper to those which give a
Discharge for a Debt. As Creditors, and Money-Lenders, when they are paid home
the full Sum which is due to them, then they can exact no more: So here, they
must be contented with the empty windy Puffs of Vainglory, and to feed upon
the unsavory Breath of the People, they can expect no more from God; for the
Bond is cancelled, and they have received their full Reward already. Briefly,
here is the Difference, in the several Rewards that the Hypocrites and the
Children of God have: The Hypocrites, they are all for the present, and have
their Reward, and much good may it do them; there is not a Jot behind, 'twill
be in vain to expect any more: But now for the Children of God, your Father
will reward you; they must expect and wait for the future. And yet in Scripture
we read oftentimes, that the Children of God have their Reward in this Life;
but then the Word in the Original is (...), which signifies they have but in
part; not the Word which is used here, (...), which signifies they have what is
due, it is fulfilled, paid them. So those Expressions in Scripture are to be
taken: Ye have eternal Life; And he has; And that ye may have. It Is often
spoken in Scripture of the Children of God, so that they seem to have their
Reward too. They have their Reward, but it is partially, not totally: There is
something, the best Things, yet behind. A Child of God, he has Promises,
First Fruits, some Beginnings of Communion with God here; but he looks for
greater Things to come.

Well then, Christ (having disproved the Practice of the Pharisees) seeks to
set his own Disciples right in the management of their Prayers, as well as in
their Alms. Pharisaism is very natural in the best. We are apt to be haunted
with a carnal Spirit in the best Duties, not only in Alms, where we have to do
with Men, but in Prayer, where our Business lies wholly with God, especially
in Public Prayer; even there much of Man will creep in. The Devil is like a
Fly, which if driven from one place, pitcheth upon another; so drive him out
of Alms, and he will seek to taint your Prayers.

Therefore Christ, to rectify his Disciples in their personal and solitary
Prayers, instructs them to withdraw into some place of Recess and Retirement,
and to be content with God, for Witness, Approver, and Judge. But thou when thou
prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy Doors, pray to thy
Father which is in secret, etc.

In which Words you may observe, I. A Supposition concerning solitary Prayer:
But thou when thou prayest. II. A Direction about it: Enter into thy Closet,
and shut thy Door, and pray to thy Father which is in secret. III.
Encouragement to perform it: And thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward
thee openly. Where two Things are asserted:


1. God's Sight; He is conscious to thy Prayers, when others are not.

2. God's Reward: He will reward thee openly.

To open the Circumstances of the Text:

I. In the Supposition, But thou when thou prayest. Observe:

1. Christ takes it for granted, that his Disciples will pray to God: He does
not say, If thou prayest, but when thou prayest, as supposing them to be
sufficiently convinced of this Duty of being often with God in private.

2. I observe again, Christ speaks of solitary Prayer, when a Man alone, and
without Company, pours out his Heart to God: Therefore Christ speaks in the
singular Number, When thou prayest; not plurally and collectively, When ye
pray, or meet together in Prayer. Therefore he does not forbid Public Praying
in the Assemblies of the Saints, or Family Worship; both are elsewhere required
in Scripture. God has made Promises to public, and Church-Prayer, praying
with Men, or before Men: Mat. 18. 19. When two or three are met together, and
shall agree on Earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be
done for them, of my Father which is in Heaven. And when they shall agree in
one public Prayer, it seems to have a greater Efficacy put upon it: When more
are interessed in the same Prayer; when with a combined Force, they do as it
were besiege the God of Heaven, and will not let him go, unless he leaves a
Blessing. Look as the Petition of a Shire and County to Authority, is more than
a private Man's Supplication: So when we meet as a Church to pray, and as a
Family, there is combined Strength. And in this Sense that Saying of the
Schoolmen is Orthodox enough, viz. That Prayer made in the Church has a more
easy Audience with God; why? because of the Concurrence of many which are met
there to worship God. Christ does not intend in this, any way to justle out
that, which he seeks to establish elsewhere. Let your Intentions be secret, tho
your Prayers be public and open in the Family, or Assemblies of the Saints.

II. Let us open the Direction our Lord gives about solitary Prayer. The
Direction is suited so as to avoid the double Error of the Pharisees, their
Offense as to Place, and as to the Aim and End.

1. Their Offense as to the Place: Enter into thy Closet, and shut thy Door.
These Words are not to be taken metaphorically, nor yet pressed too literally.
Not metaphorically, (as some would carry them) Descend into thy Heart, be
serious and devout with God in the Closet of thy Soul, which is the most inward
Recess and retiring Place of Man. This were to be wanton with Scripture. The
literal Sense is not to be left without necessity, nor yet pressed too
literally, as if Prayer should be confined to a Chamber and Closet: Christ
prayed in the Mountain, Mat. 14. 23. and, Genesis 24. 63. Isaac went into the
Field to meditate. The meaning is, Private Prayer must be performed in a
private Place, retired from Company, and the Sight of Men, as much as may be.

2. Christ rectifieth them as to the End: Pray to thy Father which is in
secret: That is, Pray to God, who is in that private Place, tho he cannot be
seen with bodily Eyes: Wherein Christ seems secretly to tax the Hypocrisy of
the Pharisees, who did rather pray to Men, than to God, who was invisible;
because all their Aim was to be approved of Men, and to be cried up by them as
devout Persons. So that what the Lord says concerning Fasting, Zech. 7. 5, 6.
When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh Month, even those seventy
Years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me? And when ye did eat, and when ye
did drink, did not ye eat for your selves, and drink for your selves? So here,
was this unto God? No, tho the Force and Sound of the Words carried it for God,
yet they were directed to Men. When God is not made both the Object and Aim, it
is not to him: when you seek another Play Master, you decline God, yea, you make
him your Footstool, a Step to some other Thing.

III. Here are the Encouragements to this personal, private, and solitary
Prayer; and they are taken from God's Sight, and God's Reward.

1. From God's Sight: Thy Father sees in secret; that is, observes thy
Carriage. The Posture and Frame of thy Spirit, the Fervor and Uprightness of
Heart, which thou manifestest in Prayer, is all known to him. Mark, that which
is the Hypocrites Fear, and binds Condemnation upon the Heart of a wicked Man,
is here made to be the Saints Support, and ground of Comfort, that they pray to
an All-seeing God. 1 John 3. 20. If our Hearts condemn us, God is greater than
our Hearts, and knows all Things. Their heavenly Father sees in secret, he
can interpret their Groans, and read the Language of their Sighs. Tho they fail
as to the outside of a Duty, and there be much brokenness of Speech; yet God
sees brokenness of Heart there, and it is that he looks after. God sees;
what is that? He sees whether thou prayest or no, and how thou prayest. (1.) He
sees whether thou prayest or no; mark that Passage, Acts 9. 11. The Lord said
to Ananias, Arise, and go into the Street which is called Straight, and enquire
in the House of Judas, for one called Saul of Tarsus; for behold, he prays.
Go into such a City, such a Street, such a House, such a Part, in such a
Chamber, behold, he prays. The Lord knew all these Circumstances. It is known
unto him, whether we toil or loiter away our Time, or whether we pray in
secret; He knows what House, in what Corner of the House, what we are doing
there. (2.) He sees how you pray. Romans 8. 27. It is propounded as the Comfort
of the Saints, And he that searches the Heart, knows what is the Mind of the
Spirit. God knows you thoroughly, and can distinguish of your Prayers, whether
they be customary and formal, or serious Acts of Love to God, and Communion
with him.

2. The other thing which is propounded here, is God's Reward: And he will
reward thee openly. How does God reward our Prayers? Not for any Worth or
Dignity which is in them. What Merit can there be in begging? what does a
Beggar deserve in asking Alms? But it is out of his own Grace and Mercy, having
by Promise made himself as it were a Debtor to a poor faithful and believing
Supplicant. But He will reward thee openly; how is that? Either by a sensible
Answer to thy Prayers, as he does often to his Children, by granting what they
pray for; as when Daniel was praying in secret, God sent an Angel to him, Dan.
9. 20. Or by an evident Blessing upon their Prayers in this World, for the
conscionable Performance of this Duty. Abraham, Isaac; and Jacob, that were Men
of much Communion with God, were eminently and sensibly blessed; they were
rewarded openly, for their secret Converse with him. Or it may be, by giving
them Respect externally in the Eyes of others. A praying People dart Conviction
into the Consciences of Men. It is notable, that Pharaoh in his Distress sent
for Moses and Aaron, and not for the Magicians. The Consciences of wicked Men
are open at such a time, and they know God's Children have special Favor, and
great Audience with him; and he having the Hearts of all Men in his hands, can
manage and dispose Respect, according as he pleases: And when they are in
Distress, this Honor God has put upon you, they shall send for you to pray
with them; and those which honor him, tho but in secret, God will openly put
Honor upon them, 1 Samuel 2. 30. But chiefly this is meant at the Day of
Judgment; then those which pray in secret, their heavenly Father will reward
them openly. When thou relievest the Poor, and show Comfort to the Needy,
they cannot recompense thee; but then thou shall be recompensed, at the
Resurrection of the Just, Luke 14. 14. There Is the great and most public
Reward of Christians. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Then he will bring to Light the hidden
Things of Darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the Heart; and then
shall every Man have Praise with God: That is, every Man that is praiseworthy,
however he be mistaken, and judged of the World; for the Apostle speaks it to
comfort them against the Censures of Men. And mark, this is opposed to the
reward which the Pharisees pleased themselves with: It was much with them to be
well thought of in such a Synagogue, or before such a Company of Men; but your
Father which sees in secret, will reward you openly, (that is) not only in the
Eyes of such a City, or Town, but before all the World.

The Point is this.

Doct. That private, solitary, and Closet-Prayer is a Duty very necessary and
profitable.

It is a necessary Duty, for Christ supposes it of his Disciples, to whom he
speaks: But thou, when thou prayest, etc. And it is profitable, for unto it God
makes Promises; you have a Father which sees in secret, and one day shall be
owned before all the World.

First; It Is a Duty Necessary; and that will appear,

1. From God's Precept: That Precept which requires Prayer, requires secret
and Closet-Prayer: For God's Command to pray, first falls upon single Persons,
before it falls upon Families and Churches, which are made up of single
Persons; therefore where God has bidden thee to pray, you must take that
Precept as belonging to you in particular. I shall give some of the Precepts,
Col. 4. 2. Continue in Prayer, and watch in the same with Thanksgiving. And 1
These. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing. These are principally meant of our personal
Addresses to God, every Man for himself; for in joining with others, the Work
is rather imposed upon us, than taken up upon choice; and that can only be at
stated Times, when they can conveniently meet together; but we our selves are
called upon to continue to pray, and that without ceasing, (that is) to be
often with God, and to keep up not only a praying Frame, but a constant
Correspondence with him. Surely every Man which acknowledges a God, a
Providence, and that depends upon him for Blessings; much more every one that
pretends he has a Father in Heaven, in whose Hands are the Guidance of all the
things of the World, is bound to pray personally and alone; by himself to
converse with God.

2. I shall argue it from the Example of Christ, which binds us, and has the
force of a Law in things moral; as Christ's Word is our Rule, so his Practice
is our Copy. This is true Religion, to imitate him whom we worship. In this you
must do as Christ did. Now we often read that Christ prayed alone, he went
aside to pray to God; therefore if we be Christians, so it should be with us.
Mark 1. 35. And in the Morning rising up a great while before Day, he went out
and departed into a solitary Place, and there prayed. He left the Company of
his Disciples, with whom he often joined, that he might be alone with God
betimes in the Morning. And again, you have it, Mat. 14. 23. And when he had
sent the Multitude away, he went up into a Mountain apart to pray; and when the
Evening was come, he was there alone. And Luke 6. 12. It is said, He went out
into a Mountain to pray, and continued all Night in Prayer to God. You see
Christ takes all Occasions in retiring and going apart to God. Now the Pattern
of Christ is both engaging and encouraging.

It is very engaging: Shall we think our selves not to need that Help which
Christ would submit unto? There are many proud Persons which think themselves
above Prayer. Christ had no need to pray as we have, he had the Fullness of the
Godhead dwelling in him bodily, yet he was not above Prayer. And if he had
need of Prayer, he had no need of Retirement, to go and pray alone; his
Affections always served, and he was not pestered with any Distraction; and all
Places and Companies were alike to him; and yet he would depart into a solitary
Place that he might be private with God.

Then the Pattern of Christ is very encouraging: For whatever Christ did, he
sanctified in that respect; his Steps in every Duty leave a Blessing. Look as
Christ sanctified Baptism by being baptized himself, and made the Water of
Baptism to be saving and comfortable for us; and the Lord's Supper, by being a
Guest himself, and eating himself at his own Table; So he sanctified private
Prayer; when he prayed, a Virtue went out from him, he left a Strength to
enable us to pray. And it is encouraging in this respect, because he has
experimented this Duty; he knows how soon human Strength is spent and put to
it, for he himself has been wrestling with God in Prayer with all his Might.
His submitting to these Duties, gave him Sympathy; he knows the Heart of a
praying Man when wrestling with God with all Earnestness; therefore he helps
us in these Agonies of Spirit. Again, his praying is an Encouragement against
our Imperfections. Christians, when we are alone with God, and our Hearts are
heavy as a Log and Stone, what a Comfort is it to think Christ himself prayed,
and that earnestly, and was once alone wrestling with God in human Nature:
Matthew. 14. 23. and when the Enemy came to attach him, he was alone striving
with God in Prayer; he takes all occasions for Intercourse with God; and if you
have the Spirit you will do likewise.

3. I might argue from God's end in pouring out the Holy Ghost; wherefore has
God poured out his Spirit? Zech. 12. 11, 12, 13, 14. I will pour out the Spirit
of Grace, and of Supplication, etc. He pours out the Spirit, that it may
break out by this Vent; the Spirit of Grace will presently run into
Supplication; the whole House of Israel shall mourn, there is the Church, they
have the Benefit of the pouring out of the Spirit; and every Household has
benefit, that he and his Family may mourn apart, and every Person apart; that
we may go and mourn over our Case and Distempers before God, and pour out our
Hearts in a holy and affectionate manner. This Argument I would have you to
note, that this was God's end in pouring out his Spirit, for a double reason;
both to take off Excuses, and to quicken Diligence.

Partly, to take off Excuses; because many say, they have no Gifts, no
Readiness and Savouriness of Speech, and how can they go alone and pray to God?
Certainly Men which have Necessities, and a sense of them, can speak of them in
one Fashion or other to God; but the Spirit is given to help. Such is God's
Condescension to the Saints, that he has not only provided an Advocate to
present our Petitions in Court, but a Notary to draw them up; not only
appointed Christ for help against our Guilt and unworthiness, but likewise the
Spirit to help us in Prayer; When we are apt to excuse our selves by our
Weakness and Insuff^ciency, he has poured out the Holy Ghost, that we may pray
apart. Partly to this end the more to awaken our Diligence. That God's precious
Gift be not bestowed upon us in vain, to lie idle and unimployed, he has
poured out the Spirit, and therefore we should make use of it, not only that we
may attend to the Prayers of others, and join with them; but that we may make
use of our own share of Gifts and Graces, and open and unfold our own Case to
God.

4. That it is a necessary Duty, I plead it from the Practice of the Saints,
who are a praying People. O how often do we read in Scripture, that they are
alone with God, pouring out their Souls in Complaints to him! nothing so
natural to them as Prayer; they are called a Generation of them that seek God;
Psalm. 24. 6. As light Bodies are moving upward, so the Saints are looking
upward to God, and praying alone to him. Daniel was three times a day with God,
and would not omit his hours of Prayer, though his Life was in danger; Dan. 6.
10. And David, seven times a day do I praise thee; Psalm. 119. 164. And
Cornelius, it is said, that he prayed to God always; Acts 10. 2. not only with
his Family, but alone, in holy Soliloquies: He was so frequent and diligent
that he had gotten a Habit of Prayer ( he prayed always.) Well then, if this be
the Temper of God's People, then to be altogether, like them; when we have no
delight in these private Converses with God, or neglect them, it gives just
cause of Suspicion.

5. Our private Necessities show that is a necessary Duty, which cannot be so
feelingly spoken to and expressed by others, as by our selves; and (it may be)
are not so fit to be divulged and communicated to others; we cannot so well lay
forth our Hearts with such largeness and Comfort in our own Concernments before
others: There Is the Plague of our own Hearts, which every one must mourn over:
1 Kings 8. 38. As we say, no Nurse like the Mother; so, none so fit, humbly
with a broken Heart to set forth our own Wants before the Lord. There is some
Thorn in the Flesh that we have cause to pray against again and again: For this
I sought the Lord thrice, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8. We should put
Promises in suit, and lay open our own Case before the Compassions of God. It
is a Help sometimes to join with others; but at other times it would be a
Hinderance; we have peculiar Necessities of our own to commend to God,
therefore must be alone.

Secondly; This Closet and Solitary Prayer, as it is a necessary Duty, so it is
a profitable one.

1. It conduces much to I^largement of Heart. The more earnest Men are, the
more they desire to be alone, free from Trouble and Distraction. When a Man
weeps, and is in a mournful Posture, he seeks Secre^y, that he may indulge his
Grief. They were to mourn apart, Zech. 12. and Ier. 13. 17. My Soul shall weep
sore for your Pride in secret Places. So here, when a Man would deal most
earnestly with God, he should seek Retirement, and be alone. Christ in his
Agonies went apart from his Disciples. When he would pray more earnestly, it is
said, He was withdrawn from them about a Stones cast; Luke 22. 41, 44. it is
said, He went apart. Strong Affections are loath to be disturbed and diverted,
therefore seek Retirement. And it is notable, Jacob, when he would wrestle with
God, it is said, Genesis 32. 24. And Jacob was left alone, and there wrestled a
Man with him until the breaking of the Day. When he had a mind to deal with God
in good earnest, he sent away all his Company.

A Hypocrite, he finds a greater flash of Gifts in his public Duties, when he
prays with others, and is the Mouth of others; but is slight and superficial
when alone with God; if he feels any thing, a little overly matter serves the
turn: But usually God's Children most affectionately pour out their Hearts
before him in private, where they do more particularly express their own
Necessities, there they find their Affections free to wrestle with God. In
public we take in the Necessities of others, but in private our own.

2. As it makes way for Enlargement of Heart on our part, so for secret
Manifestations of Love on God's part. Bernard has a Saying, The Churches
Spouse is bashful, and will not be familiar and communicate his Loves before
Company, but alone. The sweetest Experiences which God's Saints receive many
times, are when they are alone with him. When Daniel was praying alone with
great Earnestness, the Angel Gabriel was sent, and caused to fly swiftly to him
to tell him his Prayers were answered, Dan. 9. 21. And Cornelius, while he was
praying alone, an Angel of God came unto him, to report the hearing of his
Prayers; Acts 10. 3. and verse. 9. Peter, when he was praying alone, then God
instructs him in the Mystery of the calling of the Gentiles; then had he that
Vision, when he was got upon the top of the House to pray. Before we are
regenerated, God appears to us many times when we do not think of it; but
after we are regenerated, usually he appears upon more eminent Acts of Grace;
when we are exercising our selves, and more particularly dealing with God, and
putting forth the Strength of our Souls to take hold of him in private.

3. There is this profit in it; It is a mighty Solace and Support in
Affliction, especially when we are censured, scorned, and despised of Men, and
know not where to go to find a Friend with whom we may unbosom our Sorrow; then
to go aside, and open the matter to God, it is a mighty ease to the Soul: Job
16. 20. My Friends scorn me; but mine Eye pours out Tears unto God. When we
have a great Burden upon us, to go aside and open the matter to God, it gives
Ease to the Heart, and Vent to our Grief; as Hannah in great Trouble, falls a
praying to God, and then was no more sad; 1 Samuel 1. 13. As the opening of a
Vein cools and refreshes in a Fever: So when we make known our Case to God,
it is a mighty Solace in Affliction.

4. It is a great Trial of our Sincerity, of our Faith, Love, and Obedience,
when we are alone, and no body knows what we do, then to see him that is
invisible; Heb. 11. 27. When we are much with God in private, where we have no
Reasons but those of Duty and Conscience to move us. Carnal Hypocrites will be
much in outward Worship: They have their Qualms, and pray themselves weary, and
do something for Fashion sake, when foraign Reasons move them; but will they so
pray, as to delight themselves in the Almighty? Will they always call upon God?
Job 27. 10. That Delight in God, which puts us upon Converses with God, affects
Privacy.

5. It is a profitable Duty, because of the great Promises which God has made
to it. This secret and private Prayer in the Text shall have a public Reward;
it will not be lost, for God will reward it openly. So Job 22. 21. Acquaint now
thy self with him, and be at Peace; thereby Good shall come unto thee. Frequent
Correspondence with, and constant Visits of God in Prayer, what Peace, Comfort,
Quickening brings it into the Soul! So Psalm. 69. 32. His Soul shall live that
seeks the Lord. Without often seeking to God, the vitality of the Soul is lost;
we may as well expect a Crop and Harvest without sowing, as any Liveliness of
Grace, where there is not seeking of God. Could a Man take notice of another in
a Crowd, whose Face he never saw before? So, will God own and bless you in the
Crowds of the Assemblies of his People, if you mind not this Duty when you are
alone?

APPLICATION.
Use 1. To reprove those which neglect Closet-Addresses to God; they wrong God,
and themselves;

1. They wrong God: because this is a necessary part of the Creatures Homage;
of that Duty he expects from them, to be owned not only in public Assemblies,
but in private.

And they wrong Themselves: because it brings in a great deal of Comfort and
Peace to the Soul; and many sweet and gracious Experiences there are, which
they deprive themselves of, and a Blessing upon all other things.

But more particularly to show the Evil of this Sin.

1. It is a Sin of Omission; and these Sins are very dangerous, as well as Sins
of Commission. Natural Conscience usually smites more for Sins of Commission,
than for Sins of Omission. To wrong and beat a Father seems a more heinous and
unnatural Act, then not to give him due Reverence and Attendance. We are
sensible of Sins of Commission; but yet God will charge Sins of Omission as
well as Commission upon you, and so will Conscience too when it is serious;
when against the plain Knowledge of God's Will you can omit such a necessary
part of God's Worship; James 4. 17. To him that knows to do good, and does it
not, to him it is Sin: That is, it will be Sin with a Witness; Conscience will
own it so, when it is awakened by the Word, or by Providence, or great
Affliction, or cast upon your Deathbed; how will your own Hearts reproach you
then, that have neglected God, and lost such precious Hours as you should have
redeemed for Communion with him! Sins of Omission argue as great a Contempt of
God's Authority, as Sins of Commission; for the same Law which forbids a Sin,
does also require a Duty from us.

And Sins of Omission argue as much Hatred of God, as Sins of Commission. If
two should live in the same House, and never speak to one another, it would be
taken for an Argument of as great Hatred as to sight one with another: So, when
God is in us, and round about us, and we never take time to confer with him, it
argues much hatred and neglect of Him.

And Sins of Omission are an Argument of our Unregeneracy, as much as Sins of
Commission. A Man which lives in a course of Drunkenness, Filthiness and
Adultery, you would judge him to be an unregenerate Man, and that he has such a
Spot upon him as is not the Spot of God's Children: So, to live in a constant
neglect of God, is an Argument of Unregeneracy, as much as to live in a course
of Debauchery. The Apostle, when he would describe the Ephesians by their
unconverted State, describes it thus; Ephesians. 2. 12. That they lived without God
in the World, when God is not owned and called upon; and unless the Restraints
of Men, the Law of common Education, and Custom of Nations call for it, they
live without God. So Psalm. 14. 1. They are corrupt, they have done abominable
Works; there is none that does Good, they are altogether become filthy; every
unregenerate Man is that Atheist. There is some Dif^erence among unregenerate
Men; some are less in the Excesses and gross Out-breakings of their Sins and
Folly: some sin more, some less; but they all are abominable on this account;
because they do not seek after God. And the Apostle makes use of that Argument
to convince all Men to be in a State of Sin; Romans 3. 11. There is none that
seeks after God. The Heart may be as much hardened by Omissions, (yea,
sometimes more) than by Commissions. As an Act of Sin brings a Brawniness and
Deadness upon the Heart; so does the Omission of a necessary Duty. Not only the
breaking of a String puts the Instrument out of Tune; but its being neglected,
and not looked after. Certainly by Experience we find none so tender, so holy,
so humble, and heavenly, as they which are often with God: This makes the Heart
tender, which otherwise would grow hard, dead, and stupid.

2. It is not only an Omission in general, but an Omission of Prayer, which is,
first, a Duty very natural to the Saints. Prayer is a Duty very natural and
kindly to the new Creature. As soon as Paul was converted, the first News we
hear of him, Acts 9. 11. Behold, he prays. As soon as we are newborn, there
will be a crying out for Relief in Prayer. It is the Character of the Saints,
This is the Generation of them that seek thee. Psalm. 24. 6. a People much in
calling upon God. And the Prophet describes them by the Work of Prayer, Zeph.
3. 10. My Supplicants: And, Zech. 12. 10. I will pour upon them the Spirit of
Grace and Supplication. Where ever there is a Spirit of Grace, it presently
runs out into Prayer. Look as a Preacher is so called from the frequency of
his Work; so a Christian is one that calls upon God: Every one that calls
on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. Romans 10. 13. In vain he is called a
Preacher, that never preaches; so, he is in vain called a Christian, that
never prays. As Things of an airy Nature move upward; so the Saints are
carried up to God by a kind of Naturality, when they are gracious. God has no
Tongue-ty'd or dumb Children; they are all crying, Abba, Father. Then, it is an
Omission of a Duty which is of great Importance, as to our Communion with God,
which lies in two Things, Fruition, and Familiarity; in the Enjoyment of God,
and in being familiar and often with him: Fruition we have by Faith, and
Familiarity is carried on by Prayer. There are two Duties which are never out
of season, Hearing, and Prayer, both which are a holy Dialogue betwixt God and
the Soul, until we come to Vision, the Sight of him in Heaven. Our Communion
with God here is carried on by these two Duties: We speak to God in Prayer, God
answers us in the Word; God speaks to us in the Word, and we return and echo
back again to him in Prayer: Therefore the New Creature delights much in
these two Duties. Look as we should be swift to hear, James 1. 19. until we
come to seeing, we should take all Occasions, and be often in hearing: So in
Prayer, we speak to God, and therefore should be redeeming Time for this Work.
In the Word God comes down to us, and in Prayer we get up to God; therefore if
you would be familiar and often with God, you must be much in Prayer. This is
of great Importance. You know the very Notion of Prayer, it is a visiting of
God, Isa. 26. 16. O Lord, in Trouble have they visited thee; they poured out a
Prayer, when thy Chastening was upon them. Praying to God, and visiting of God,
are equivalent Expressions. Now it argues very little Friendship to God, when
we will not so much as come at him. Can there be any Familiarity, where there
is so much Distance and Strangeness, as never to give God a Visit?

3. It is the Omission of personal and secret Prayer, which in some respects
should be more prized than other Prayer.

Partly, because here our Converse with God is more express as to our own Case.
When we join with others, God may do it for their sakes; but here, Psalm. 116.
1. I love the Lord, because he has heard [my] Voice, and [my] Supplication.
When we deal with him alone, we put the Promises in Suit, and may know more it
is we that have been heard: We put God more to the Trial; we see what he will
do for us, and upon our asking and striving.

Partly, here we are more put to the Trial, what Love we will express to our
Father in secret, when we have no outward Reasons, no Inducements from Respects
of Men, to move us. In public Duties, (which are liable and open to the
Observance of others) Hypocrites may put forth themselves with great vigor,
quickness, and warmth; whereas in private Addresses to God, they are slight and
careless. A Christian is best tried and exercised in private, in those secret
Intercourses between God and his own Soul; there he finds most Communion with
God, and most Enlargement of Heart. A Man cannot so well judge of his Spirit,
and discern the Workings of it in public, because other Men's Concernments and
Necessities, mingled with ours, are taken in, and because he is more liable to
the Notice of others: But when he is with God alone, he has only Reasons of
Conscience and Duty to move him. When none but God is conscious, and our own
Hearts, then we shall see what we do for the Approbation of God, and Acceptance
with him.

And partly, in some respects this is to be more prized, because Privacy and
Retiredness is necessary, and is a great Advantage, that Men's Spirits may be
settled and composed for the Duty. Sinful Distractions will crowd in upon us,
when in Company, and we are thinking of this and that. How often do we mingle
Sulphur with our Incense? carnal Thoughts in our Worship? How apt are we to do
so in public Duties? But in private, we are wholly at leisure to deal with
God, in a Child-like Liberty. Now will you omit this Duty, where you may be
most free, without distraction, to let out the Heart to God?

And partly, because a Man will not be fit to pray in public, and in Company,
which does not often pray in secret; he will lose his Savor and Delight in
this Exercise, and soon grow dry, barren, sapless, and careless of God. Look as
in the Prophet Ezekiel, you read there, that the Glory of the Lord removed from
the Temple by degrees; it first removed from the Holy Place, then to the Altar
of Burnt-Offerings, then to the Threshold of the House, then to the City, then
to the Mount which was on the East Side of the City; there the Glory of the
Lord stood hovering a while, as loath to be gone, to see if the People would get
it back again. This seems to be some Emblem and Representation of God's dealing
with particular Men: First, God is cast out of the Closet, private Intercourses
between God and them are neglected; and then he is cast out of the Family, and
within a little while out of the Congregation; public Ordinances begin to be
slighted, and to be looked upon as useless things; and then Men are given up to
all Profaneness and Looseness, and lose all: So that Religion as it were dies
by degrees, and a carnal Christian loses more and more of the Presence of God.
And therefore if we would be able to pray in Company, we must often pray in
secret.

4. Consider the Mischief which follows Neglect of private Converse with God.
Omissions make way for Commissions. If a Gardener withholds his hand, the
Ground is soon grown over with Weeds. Restrain Prayer, and neglect God, and
noisome Lusts will abound. Our Hearts are filled with Distempers, when once we
cease to be frequent with God in private. It is said of Job, chap. 15. 4. Thou
restrainest Prayer before God. That Passage is notable, Psalm. 14. 4. They eat
up my People as they eat Bread, and call not upon the Lord. Omit secret Prayer,
and some great Sin will follow; within a little while you will be given up to
some evil Course or other: Either brutish Lusts, Oppression, or Violence; to
hate the People of God, to join in a Confederacy with them which cry up a
Confederacy against God. The less we converse with God in private, the more is
the Awe of God lessened. But now a Man which is often with God, dares not
offend him so freely as others do. As they which are often with Princes, and
great Persons, are better clothed, and more neat in their Apparel and
Carriage: So they which are often conversing with God, grow more heavenly,
holy, watchful, than others are; and when we are not with God, not only all
this is lost, but a great many Evils to be found. It is plainly seen by Men's
Conversations, how little they converse with God.

But now to avoid the Stroke of this Reproof, what will Men do? Either deny the
Guilt, or excuse themselves.

First; Some will deny the Guilt: They do call upon God, and use private
Prayer, therefore think themselves to be free from this Reproof. Yea, but are
you as often with God as you should be?

There are three sorts of Persons:

1. Some there are that omit it totally, cannot speak of redeeming any Time for
this Work. These are practical Atheists, without God in the World, Ephesians. 2. 12.
They are Heathens and Pagans, under a Christian Name and Profession. We should
pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. (that is) take all praying Occasions:
Therefore they which pray not at all, all the Week long God hears not from
them, surely come under the force of this Reproof.

2. There are some which perform it seldom; O how many Days and Weeks pass over
their Heads, and God never hears from them! The Lord complains of it, Ier. 2.
32. They have forgotten me Days without number. It was Time out of mind since
they were last with God.

3. The most do not perform it so often as they should. And therefore (that I
may speak with Evidence and Conviction) I shall answer the Case; what Rules may
be given, how often we should be with God, and when we are said to neglect God.

1. Every day something should be done in this kind. Acts 10. 2. Corneliu^
prayed to God always, every day he had his Times of Familiarity with God.
Daniel, tho with the hazard of his Life, would not omit praying three times a
day. Dan. 6. 10. And David speaks of Morning, Evening, and Noon, Psalm. 55. 17.
Tho we cannot bind all Men absolutely to these Hours, beause of the difference
of Conditions, Employments, and Occasions; yet thus much we may gather from
hence, That surely they which are most holy, will be most frequent in this Work.

2. Love will direct you. They which love one another, will not be strange one
to another; a Man cannot be long out of the Company of him whom he loves.
Christ loved Lazarus, and Mary, and Martha, John 11. 5. and therefore his great
Resort was to Bethany, to Lazarus's House. Surely they which love God, will
have frequent recourse to him. In the Times of the Gospel, God trusts Love; we
are not bound to such particular Rules, as under the Law: Why? for Love is a
liberal Grace, and will put us upon frequent Visits, and tell us when we should
pray to God.

3 The Spirit of God will direct you. There are certain Times when God has
Business with you alone; when he does (as it were) speak to you, as to the
Prophet in another Case, Ezekiel. 3. 22. Go forth into the Plain, in the Desert,
and there I will talk with thee: So, get you to your Closets, I have some
Business to speak with you. Thou said, Seek ye my Face: my Heart answered,
Thy Face, Lord, will I seek, Psalm. 27. 8. God invites you to Privacy and
Retirement; You are sent into your Closet, to deal with God about the Things
you heard from the Pulpit. This is the actual Profit we get by a Sermon, when
we deal seriously with God about what we have heard. When God sends for us (as
it were) by his Spirit, and invites us into his Presence by these Motions; it
is spiritual Clownishness to refuse to come to him.

4. Your own inward and outward Necessities will put you in mind of it. God
has not stated what Hours we shall eat and drink; the Seasons and Quantity of
it are left to our Choice. God has left many Wants upon us, to bring us into
his presence: Sometimes we want Wisdom, and Counsel in Darkness; Iam. 1. 5. If
any lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to all Men liberally. It is
an Occasion to bring us to God; God is the best Casuist to resolve our Doubts,
and guide us in our Way. Sometimes we lack Strength to withstand Temptations;
the Throne of Grace was set up for a Time of Need, Heb. 4. 16. when any Case is
to be resolved, and Comfort to be obtained. We want Comfort, Quickening,
Counsel, and all to bring us to God. So for outward Necessities too. Certainly,
if a Man does but observe the Temper of his own Heart, he cannot neglect God,
but will find some occasion or other to bring him into his presence, some
Errand to bring him to the Throne of Grace. We are daily to beg Pardon of Sin,
and daily to beg Supplies. Now certainly, when you do not observe these Things,
you neglect God.

Secondly; Others, to avoid it, will excuse themselves: Why, they would pray to
God in private, but either they want Time, or they want a convenient Place, or
want Parts and Abilities. But the truth is, they want a Heart, and that is the
Cause of all; and indeed, when a Man has no Heart to the Work, then something
is out of the way.

1 Some plead they want Time: Why, if you have Time for other Things, you
should have a Time for God. Shall we have a Season for all Things, and not for
the most necessary Work? Have thou time to eat, drink, sleep, follow thy
Trading? (how do thou live else?) and no time to be saved, no time to be
familiar with God, which is the greatest Business of all? Get it from your
Sleep and Food, rather than be without this necessary Duty. Jesus Christ, who
had no such Necessity as we have, yet it is said, Mark 1. 35. He arose a great
while before day, and went out, and departed into a solitary Place, and there
prayed. Therefore must God only be encroached upon? the lean Kine devour the
fat? Sarah thrust out instead of Hagar? and Religion be crowded out of Doors?
Faelix illa domus, ubi Martha queritur de Maria: That Is a happy House, where
Martha complains of Mary. Martha, which was cumbred with much Service,
complained of Mary, that she was at the feet of Jesus Christ, harkening to his
gracious Counsel; but in most Houses Mary may complain of Martha; Religion is
neglected, and goes to the Walls.

2. Some want a Place. He that does not want a Heart, will find a Place. Christ
went into a Mountain to pray; and Peter, to the top of the House.

3. Many say they want Parts, they cannot tell how to pray. Wherefore has God
given his Spirit? In one fashion or other, a Man can open his Case to God; he
can go and breath out his Complaints, the Lord will hear Breathings. Go,
chatter out thy Requests to thy Father: tho you can but chatter like a Crane,
yet do it with fervency, and with a Spirit of Adoption. We have not only Christ
given us for an Advocate, but the Holy Ghost to help our Infirmities. He has
given us the Spirit of his Son, whereby we may cry, Abba, Father. Gal. 4. 6. A
Child can acquaint a Father with his Wants.

USE 2. To exhort God's Children to Frequency in this Duty, and to much
Watchfulness and Seriousness in the performance of it. First; To Frequency. For
Arguments again to press you.

1. It argues more Familiarity to pray to God alone, than in Company. He that
goes to a Prince alone, and upon all Occasions has access to him in private,
when Company is gone, has nearer Friendship, and a greater Intimacy with him,
than those which are only admitted to a Speech with him in the Company of
others: So the oftener you are with God alone, the more familiar. He loves to
treat with you apart; as Friends are most free and open to one another, when
they are alone.

2. Then you will have a more sensible Answer of your own Prayers; you will see
what God has done upon your Requests. Dan. 9. 21, 22. Daniel was praying for
the Church, and an Angel comes and tells him, It is for thy Prayers and
Supplications that I am come. Therefore surely a Man would take some time to go
and plead the Promises with God. But further, by way of Means:

1. Consider the Omnipresence of God, which is the Argument in the Text: He is
in secret, and sees in secret. If Men were convinced of that, they would make
Conscience of secret Prayer. Look as Jesus Christ says of himself, John 16. 32.
You leave me alone, and yet I am not alone, for the Father is with me. So when
you are alone, you are not alone; there is a Father in secret; tho Nobody to
see and hear, yet God is there. We are apt to think all is lost, which Men are
not conscious to, and done in their ^^ght. Acts 10. 4. Thy Prayers, and thine
Alms, are come up for a Memorial before God. God keeps a Memorial of your
private Prayers; there is a Register kept in Heaven, and never a Prayer lost.

2. Consider the Excellency of Communion with God. Ier. 2. 32. Can a Maid
forget her Ornaments, and a Bride her Attire? Women are very curious and
careful of their Ornaments, and will not forget their Dressing-Attire,
especially a Bride upon the Wedding Day, she that is to be set forth in most
costly Array, she makes it her Business to put on Jewels, to be seen in all her
Glory. God is as necessary to us, as Ornaments to a Bride. We should be as
mindful of Communion with God, as a Bride of her dressing Ornaments. (Ye^ they
have forgotten me days without number.) What ever is forgotten, God must not be
forgotten.

3. Make God a good Allowance; resolve to be much in the practice of it. It is
best to have set Times for our Religious Worship. For Persons, which are sui
juris, at their own dispose, it is lawful, and very convenient to dedicate a
certain part and portion of our Time to the Lord of Time. Lazy idle Servants
must be tasked, and required to bring in their Tale of Brick: So it is good to
task the Heart; to make God a fair, and reasonable, and convenient Allotment of
some part of our Time. David had his fixed Hours: Three times a day will I call
upon thee. And Daniel had his set Times; he prayed three times a day. Tho we
cannot charge you to observe these Hours, yet you should make a prudent Choice
your selves, and consecrate such a part of Time, as will suit with your
Occasions, your Course of Life, according to your Abilities and Opportunities.
It is an Expression of Love to God, to give him somewhat that is your own; and
it will be of exceeding Profit to you, and make your Communion with him more
seasonable and orderly. This will make you careful and watchful how you spend
your other Hours, that you may not be unfit when Times of Prayer come. 1 Pet.
3. 7. Husbands, dwell with your Wives according to knowledge, that your Prayers
be not hindered. But do not propose a Task too great for your Strength, and
perplex your selves with such an unreasonable Allowance, as will not suit with
your Occasions. Men create a Trouble to themselves, and bind themselves with
Chains of their own making, when they propose more Duty than they can well
discharge.

The second Part of the USE.
Do it seriously, with Caution, and warily. Here Christ gives direction; When
thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and shut thy Door, and then think of thy
Father which is in secret. We need a great deal of Caution: for,

1. When you shut the Door upon all others, you cannot shut the Devil out of
your Closets; he will crowd in. When you have bolted the Door upon you, and
shut other Company out, you do not lock out Satan; he is always at hand, ready
to disturb us in holy Duties; wherever the Children of God are, he seeks to
come at them. When the Sons of God met together, Satan was in the midst of
them. Job 1. He meets in Congregations, he gets into the Closet. When Joshua
the High Priest was ministering before the Lord, Satan stood at his right hand,
ready to resist him. Zech. 3. 1.

2. There needs Caution, because in private Duties there may be many Failings
and Evils, which we are apt to be tainted with in our private Addresses to God.

(1.) There may be danger of Ostentation; therefore Christ gives direction
here, that it should be managed with the greatest Secrecy, both as for Place,
Time, and Voice. Let none but God be conscious to our drawing aside, that we
may be alone. Withdraw your selves out of the sight and hearing of others, lest
Pride and Ostentation creep upon you. The Devil will seek to blast this serious
Acknowledgment to God, one way or other.

(2.) There may be Customariness, for fashion sake. It is said of Christ, That
he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, as his Custom was. We may use
accustomed Duties; but we must not do them customarily, and for fashion sake,
no more than Christ himself did; for tho this was his Custom, yet he was not
customary in these his Synagogue-Attendances. We are very apt to do so, because
we have used it for these many Years. Men go on in a Tract of Duty, and regard
not the Ends of Worship. Zech. 7. 3. they come with a fond Scruple, and Case of
Conscience, to the Prophet: They had an old Custom among them, to ^ast for the
Destruction of the Temple; now when the Temple was built again, Should I weep
in the ^ith Month, separating my self, as I have done these so many Years?

(3.) Much Slightness and Perfunctoriness of Heart you may be guilty of. Such
is the Wickedness of Men, that they think God will be put off with any thing.
And tho they would set off themselves with Applause in the hearing of others,
yet how slight are they apt to be, when they deal with God alone. Consider, you
must sanctify the Name of God in private, as well as in public; you must speak
to God with Reverence and Fear, and not in an overly fashion. Take heed of this
Slightness; it is a great Wrong to the Majesty of God. When they offered a
sickly Offering, says God, I am a great King, and my Name is dreadful among
the Heathen: You do not consider my Majesty.

(4.) There may be this Evil; Resting in the Work, in the Tale and Number of
your Prayers. Luke 18. 11. I fast twice in the Week. Man is very apt to rest
and dote upon his own Worth, and to build all his Acceptance with God upon it;
to come to God, and challenge him for a Debt, as the Pharisee did. It is very
natural to rest in those Duties, and make them an Excuse for other things.

(5.) There may be Pride, even in the Exercise of our Gifts. There is a Delight
in Duties, which seems spiritual many times, when it is not. As when a Man
delights in the Exercise of his own Gifts, rather than in Communion with God;
when there is a secret tickling of Heart, with a conceit of our own Worth; as
when in the carriage of a Duty we come off roundly, and Parts have their free
Course and Career. This Complacency and Pride, it may be not only in public,
where we have advantage to discover our selves with Applause; but in private,
between God and our Souls. When a Man is conceited of his Gifts, they may end
in the private Exercise of them, to the wrong of God. When Invention is quick
and free, he may have such a delight, as may make him rest in the Work, as it
is a Fruit of Parts, rather than as a Means of Communion with God. Therefore
there needs a great deal of Caution, when we are alone with our heavenly Father.

MATTHEW. 6. 7, 8. But when ye pray, use not vain Repetitions, as the Heathen do;
for they think they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore
like unto them; for your Father knows what things ye have need of, before ye
ask him.
OUr Lord having spoken of the Ostentation of the Pharisees, and their
Vainglory, he comes here to dissuade from another Abuse, and that is Babbling
and Liplabour: They prayed to be seen of Men, but the Heathens were guilty of
another Abuse. Here take notice, 1. Of the Sin taxed. 2. The Reasons which our
Lord produces against it.


First; The Sin taxed is set forth by a double Notion: Here is (...), and
(...); the first we translate, Vain Repetitions; and the last, Much speaking.
Both may well go together; for when Men affect to say much, they will use vain
Repetitions, go over the same things again and again; which is as displeasing
to God, as it is irksom to prudent and wise Men.

But let us see a little what these Words signify. The first Word is, (...),
which we translate vain Repetitions. Battus was a foolish Poet, that made long
Hymns, consisting of many Lines, but such as were often repeated, both for
Matter and Words. And Ovid brings in a foolish Fellow, that would be often
repeating the same Words, and doubling them over.

Montibus, inquit, erant, and erant sub montihus illis. And again, -- Et me
mihi perfide prodis?
Me mihi prodis? ait --
And from thence this Word is taken, which is here used by the Evangelist,
(...), or idle babbling over the same thing. And the Scripture represents this
vain going over of the same things. Eccles. 10. 14. A Fool also is full of
Words; a Man cannot tell what shall be; and what shall be after him, who can
tell? The most judicious Interpreters do conceive there is a (...), an Imitation
of the Fool's speaking. Groundless, fruitless Repetitions are here reproved, or
the tumbling out of many insignificant Words, and the same over and over again;
this is vain Repetition. But the other Word which Christ uses to tax the same
Abuse, is (...), Much speaking; it signifies Affectation of Length in Prayer,
or using many Words, not out of fervency of Mind, but merely to prolong the
Duty, as if the length of it made it more powerful or acceptable with God, or a
more comely piece of Worship. This is what our Lord here reproves, vain
Repetitions, and much speaking.

Secondly; Here are the Reasons produced against it; they are two.

(1.) That it is a Heathenish Custom, and that grounded upon a false
Supposition. The Heathens were detestable to the Jews, and therefore their
Customs should not be taken up, especially when grounded upon an Error, or a
Misprision of the Nature of God. Now the Heathens think they shall be heard for
their much speaking, for their mere praying, and composing Hymns to their Gods,
with thundering Names repeated over and over again.

It is inconsistent with the true Nature of God, verse. 8. Be not therefore like
unto them; for your Father knows what Things you have need of, before you ask
him. Here we learn three Things. (1.) Christianity and true Religion takes up
God under the Notion of a Father, that has a care of his Children. This will
decide many Questions about Prayer, and what Words we should use to God in the
Duty; go to God, as Children to their Father. (2.) He is represented as an
Omniscient God, one that knows all Things, our Wants and Necessities. (3.) As
an Indulgent Father, who has a propense and ready mind to help us, even before
we ask.

From the Words thus opened, that which we may observe is this: Viz.

Doct. That certainly it is a Sin, needlessly to affect length of Speech, or
vain Repetitions in Prayer.

Our Lord dissuadeth us from it here, and his Authority should sway with us: He
knew the Nature of Prayer better than we do; for he appointed it, and he was
often in the practice and observance of it. So we are directed to the contrary,
Eccles. 5. 2. Be not rash with thy Mouth, and let not thine Heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth;
therefore let thy Words be few. Remember, you have to do with a great God, and
do not babble things over impertinently in his Ears. It is a Truth evident by
the Light of Nature: Paucis verbis rem divinam facito. Platinus. If you be to
worship God, a needless Prolixity does not become Addresses to him.

But because this Text may be abused, I shall endeavor to clear it a little
further. There are two Extremes; the slight and careless Spirit, and Babbling.

(1.) There is the slight and careless Spirit, who does the Work of an Age in a
Breath, and is all for Starts, and sudden Pangs, which pass away like a Flash
of Lightning in a dark Room; whose good Thoughts are gone, as soon as they rush
into the Heart. A poor, barren, and slight Spirit, which is not under the
Influence and Power of that Celestial Love, which keeps the Soul in converse
with God, cannot endure to be any while with God. Alas! we need Stroke upon
Stroke to fasten any thing upon the Heart. We are like green Wood, that will
not presently take Fire, until it lie long there, and be thoroughly and well
warmed; so until we have gone far in the Duty, we can hardly get any warmth of
Heart. They which are short in Prayer, had need of much habitual preparation of
Heart.

The Babbler is another Extreme, who thinks the Commendation of a Duty is to be
long in it; and affects to say much, rather than well; whereas serious and
short Speech makes the best Prayer. Prove. 10. 19. In the multitude of Words
there wants not Sin: Either to God, or Men, it is true; but especially when
affected: So they do but beat the Air, rather than pray to God.

These, then, are the two Extremes; Shortness, out of Barrenness or Slightness;
or Length, out of Affectation: ^^d we must carefully avoid these. Christ would
(...) justify that Shortness, which comes from Slightness, and Barrenness of
Heart; nor, on the other side, indulge the Affectation of Length in Prayer.

Therefore let us a little see, I. What is the Sin. II. Give you the Force of
our Lord's Reasons here urged, or how conclusive our Savior's Arguments are
against this Practice.


What is the Sin? That Is necessary to be known; for all Repetitions are not
vain, nor is all Length in Prayer to be accounted Babbling.

First; For Repetitions:

1. When they express Fervency and Zeal, they may be used: And so we read,
Christ prayed over the same Prayer thrice; Mat: 26. 44. O my Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me. And another Evangelist shows, that he
did this out of special Fervency of Spirit; Luke 22. 44. Being in an Agony, he
prayed more earnestly. And so we read of the Prophet Daniel, chap. 9. 17, 18,
19. O our God, hear the Prayer of thy Servant; O my God, incline thine Ear, and
hear; O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not for
thine own sake, O my God. All this was out of vehemence; he goes over again and
again the same Request. When we use many Words of the same kind and
signification, and it be out of vehemence and fervency of Spirit, it is not
forbidden.

2. This Repetition is not to be disproved, when there is a special Emphasis,
and spiritual Elegancy in it, as Psalm. 136. you have it twenty six times
repeated, [ For his Mercy endures for ever,] because there was a speci^^
^eason in it, his purpose there being to she^^^ Unweariedness, and the
unexhausted Riches of God's free Grace; that notwithstanding all the former
Experiences they had had, God is where he was at first. We waste by giving, our
Drop is soon spent; but God is not wasted by bestowing, but has the same Mercy
to do good to his Creatures, as before. Tho he had done all those Wonders for
them, yet his Mercy was as ready to do good to them still. All along God saved
and blessed his People; For his Mercy endures for ever. But as there are
Repetitions which have their Use; so there are useless Tautologies, and vain
Repetitions: And such they are, when they neither come from the Heart, nor go
to the Heart; when they come not from the abundance of the Heart, but rather
the emptiness of the Heart, because we know not how to enlarge our selves to
God, therefore fall upon idle and useless Repetitions of the same Words and
Requests. As a Man that has small Skill in Music, does only play over the
same Note; so when Men have not a full spiritual Abundance, they waste
themselves in Prayer in these idle Repetitions. And then they go not to the
Heart, they do not conduce to warm the Affections. A vain clamorous
ingeminating the same thing without Faith, and without Wisdom, merely to fill
up the Tale of Words, or to wear out a little time in a religious Exercise;
that is it which is here condemned under the notion of vain Repetitions.

Secondly; For the other word (...), or much speaking. Every long Prayer is not
forbidden; for our Lord Jesus himself centinued all Night in Prayer, Luke 6.
12. And in extraordinary Duties of fasting, Length seems to be very necessary;
Esther 4. 16. They fasted and prayed together for three days and nights,
without eating any Bread. And Solomon prayed long at the Dedication of the
Temple.

But that which is forbidden, is, when Men speak Words without need, and
without Affection; a needless lengthening out of Prayer, and that upon a
Conceit that it is more acceptable to God.

1. In the General, Prayer should be short, as all Examples of Scripture teach
us; and the Lord's Prayer you see how concise and short it is, for presently
upon this our Lord teaches his Disciples to pray. For Prayer is a spending
rather then a feeding Duty. Those which affect long speaking, many times run
into this, they make it a feeding Duty, for they mingle Exhortations with
Prayer, which is a great Abuse: A Man can bear up under the hearing of the Word
for an Hour or two, better than half an Hour in Prayer, with that necessary
Vigor of Spirit which God has required. Therefore the general Rule is, Let
your Words be concise, but full of Affection. Look as in vast and great Bodies,
the Spirits are more diffused and scattered, and therefore they are more
unactive than those which are of a smaller Compass; so in a long Prayer, there
may be more of Words, but less of Life.

2. The Affectation of Prolixity is naught; usually it comes from some evil
Ground; either from Pride, and Ostentation of Gifts. Thus we read, the
Pharisees were taxed for making long Prayers, Mat. 23. 14. that under the
color of them, they might devour Widow's Houses, (that is) be credited and
trusted with the Management of their Estates: Or else it may come from
Superstition, such as is in the Heathens, who had unworthy Thoughts of God, as
if he were harsh and severe, and delighted in much speaking, and need to be
quickened: Or it may come from Folly, for Folly abounds in Words though it be
scanty in true Affection and hearty Respect to God. A wise Man is content with
Words enough to express his Mind: Choice and measure of Speech discovers
Wisdom.

3. So much time should be spent in Prayer, and so many Words are necessary, as
may be convenient and profitable both for our selves and others. For our
Selves, when we are alone, so much as may express Faith, and may argue great
Plea in the Promises; and so much as may reach fervent Desire; while the
Fervency continues, the Speech should continue: and so much as may express our
filial Dependence, that we have a Sense that God is our Father, which are the
ends for which Prayer was appointed. And so as it may suit with the Convenience
of others, that they may be warmed, but not tired, and may not be exposed to
the Temptations of Weariness, and Wanderings, and Distractions in their Mind,
when things are spun out unto an unreasonable length; for then it is neither
pleasing to God, nor profitable to Men. Thus I have stated the Offense our Lord
forbids; what are those vain Repetitions and idle Babblings, such as arise from
Weariness of Soul, and mis-conceit of God, or some other base Grounds; not that
plentiful Expression, which comes from a large and free Heart, pouring out it
self before the Lord. And if we be swayed by his Authority, these things should
be regarded by us, and we should remedy these Sins in Prayer.

II. Let us come to examine our Lord's Reasons which are produced against it,
and see how conclusive they are in the Case, and you will discern the drift of
Christ's Speech.

Our Lord reasons;

First; From the Practice of the Heathens, [ But when ye pray, use not vain
Repetitions, as the Heathens do.] In this Reason, several Propositions are
couched and contained, which deserve to be weighed by us.

1. This is implied, That the Heathens had a sense of the necessity of Worship,
as well as the Being of a God. Though natural Light be inferioris
Haemisphaerii, of the lower Hemisphere, and chiefly reaches to Duties of the
second Table, of Commerce between Man and Man; for that Light which was left in
the Heart of Man, since the Fall, more directly respects our Carriage toward
Men, and there it is more clear and open; yet it so far reaches to the Duties
of the higher Hemisphere, as that there is some discerning too of the Duties of
the First Table; of Piety as well as Honesty: as that there is a God; and if
there be a God, he is to be worshipped; for these two Notions live and die
together. The rude Mariners were sensible of a Divine Power which was to be
called upon, and consulted with in case of Extremity; and that the way of
Commerce was by Worship. Jonah 1. 5. when the Storm arose, They called every
Man upon his God.

2. Though Heathens were sensible of the Being of a God, and the necessity of
Worship; yet they were blind and dark in Worship; for Christ says, Be not as
the Heathen, for they think they shall be heard for their much speaking.
Usually a half-Light misleads Men. The Heathens, though they had some Notions
of an eternal Power, yet when they came to perform their Worship; Romans 1. 21.
They glorified him not as God, but became vain, (...), in their Imaginations,
(that is) in their Practical Inferences: They saw an infinite, eternal Power,
which was to be loved, trusted, worshipped; but when they came to suit these
Notions to practice, to love, trust, and worship him, there they were vain,
frivolous, and had Mis-conceits of God.

3. Their Errors in Worship were many. Here our Lord takes notice but of one,
that they thought to be heard for their much speaking; and there the original
Mistake of the Heathens (and that which compriseth all the rest) was this, a
Transformation, or changing of God into the Likeness of Man, which is very
natural and incident to us; upon all occasions we are apt to mis-conceive of
God, and to judge him according to our own Model and Scantling; Ps. 50. 21. Thou
thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self: so did these. Because Man
is wrought upon by much speaking, and carried away with a Flood of Words,
therefore they thought so it would be with God. This Transformation of the
Divine Nature into an Idol of our own shaping and picturing, the turning of God
into the form of a corruptible Man, this has been the Ground of all the
Miscarriage in the World.

But more particularly: their Error in this matter was charging Weakness and
Harshness upon God, or not worshipping him according to his Spiritual Nature.

1. Charging Weakness upon God, as if many Words did help him to understand
their meaning, or to remember their Petitions the better. Hence that Practice
of Baal's Priests, 1 Kings 18. 26. They called on the Name of Baal from Morning
till Night; O Baal, hear us. They were repeating and crying again and again, O
Baal; as if their Clamor would awaken their God; whence Elijah's Sarcasm, He
sleeps, and must be awaked: As those that for two hours together cried out,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Acts 19. 34.

2. Their ascribing Harshness to God, as if he were hard to be entreated, and
delighted in the pain of his Creatures, and would be more affected with them,
because they wearied themselves with the Irksomeness of a long Prayer. Penal
Satisfactions are very natural. Superstition is a Tyranny, it vexes the Soul
with unreasonable Duty, affects outward length to the weariness of the Flesh.
The general conceit is, that Man thinks God must be served with some
self-denial, and the Flesh must be displeased; but it shall be displeased but
in a little, and in an outward way, as Baal's Priests gasht themselves; as if
God were pleased with our burdensome and long Exercises.

3. There was this Error in it; They did not conceive aright of the Spiritual
Nature of God, as if he were pleased with the mere Task, a long Hymn, and an
idle Repetition of Words, without Sense and Affection: Whereas the Lord does
not measure Prayers by Prolixity, but by the Vehemence; not by the Labor of
the external Work, but by the inward Affection manifested therein: and Words
are only accepted with him, as they serve to quicken, continue, or increase our
Affection.

Secondly; Our Savior's next Reason is drawn from Verse. 8. Be not ye like unto
them, for your Father knows what things ye have need of, before you ask him.
It is inconsistent with the true Notion of God. Here are three Propositions;
all which are of force to draw us off from babbling, or Affectation of many
Words in Prayer. As,

1. That God is a Father, and that both by Creation and Covenant. By Creation,
to all Mankind, kind, so he will be ready to sustain that which he has made;
he that has given Life, will give Food; he that has given a Body, will give
Raiment; Things expect Supply thence, from whence they received their Being.
But much more by Covenant, so he is our Father in Christ, (Doubtless thou art
our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us -- Isa. 63. 16.) Well, but what is
this to the present Purpose, that God is a Father? This is a Check to babbling;
therefore we should go to him in an unaffected manner, with a Childlike Spirit
and Dependence, with Words reverent, serious, and plain. Children do not use to
make starched Speeches to their Fathers, when they want Bread, but only express
their natural Cry, and go to them for such things as they stand in need of;
there they speak and are accepted; and a Word from a Child moves the Father,
more than an Orator can move all his Hearers. Even such a naked Address should
we make to God in a plain manner; for when we come to pray, Christ would have
us take up God in the Notion of a Father, and to behave our selves in a natural
way to him; for affected Eloquence or Loquacity in Prayer, is one of the main
things Christ here disproves. Prayer ought to be simple, and plain: Therefore
the great Business of the Spirit of Adoption is to make us cry, Abba, Father;
Romans 8. 15.

2. He is such a Father as is not ignorant of our Wants. The care of his
Providence is over all the Creatures he has made; God has an Inspection over
them, to provide Necessaries for them; much more over his People. His Eyes run
to and fro, to find them out in all the places of their Dispersion; and he does
exercise his Power for their Relief. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Now this Thought should be
rooted in our Hearts, when we come to pray to God; I go to a Father, which has
found me out in the Throng of his Creatures, and knows what is good for me.
This is a great ground why we should not use Battology, because God knows what
my Needs are. Words are not required for God's sake, but for ours; not to
inform God, but that we may perform our Duty the better. Well then, so far as
they are useful, so far they should be used; to bound our Thoughts, to warm our
Affections, to strengthen our Faith. (1.) To bound our Thoughts; for an
Interruption in Speech is sooner discerned, than an Interruption in Meditation.
(2.) And to warm our Affections. Words at first are Vent to Affection, but
afterward they continue to increase the Affection; as a Hearth is first warmed
by the Fire, and then it serves to keep in the Fire. (3.) And they conduce to
strengthen our Faith, while we plead Promises in God's hearing. We wrestle with
God, that we may catch a heat our selves. And therefore Words should be only
used, as they conduce to the strengthening our Faith, or continuing our
Affection to God: Longer than they serve that End in Prayer, they are Babbling,
and vain Repetitions, and much speaking, which Christ here forbids. Consider,
there is not a Change in God, but a Change in us, wrought by Prayer. It Is
neither to give Information to God, that he may know our meaning; nor to move
him, and persuade him to be willing, by our much speaking: but only to raise up
our own Faith and Hope toward God.

3. He is such a Father, as is not unwilling to relieve us. Your heavenly
Father is very ready to give you such Things as you stand in need of, as Christ
expresses it, Mat. 7. 11. If ye being evil, know how to give good Things unto
your Children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give good Things to
them that ask him? And, Luke 11. 13. it is, How much more shall your heavenly
Father give his holy Spirit? When you come to beg for Grace, consider what
earthly Parents would do for a Child: Their Affections are limited, they are in
part corrupt; and poor straightened Creatures have not such Bowels of Compassion
as God; and yet when a Child comes to them with a genuine Cry, with a sense of
his Want, and Confidence of his Father, he cannot harden his Bowels against his
Child. This also checks much speaking; for we do not pray to stir up Mercy in
him, as if he needed much Entreaty, and were severe, and delighted to put the
Creature to Penance: No, he is ready before we ask; he knows our Wants and
Needs, and is ready to supply us with those Things we stand in need of, only
will have this comely Order observed. Sometimes he prevents our Prayers, before
we ask: Before they call, I will answer; and I am found of them that sought me
not. Before we can have a Heart to come, the Lord prevents us with his
Blessing. And sometimes he gives us what we ask. This is the Condescension of
God, that when you call, he will answer; and when you cry, he does in his
Providence say, What will you have, poor Creatures? And he gives more than we
ask: As Solomon asked Wisdom, and God gave him more than he asked, Wisdom,
Riches, and Honor. Object. But here is an Objection: These Notions seem not
only to exclude long Prayer, and much speaking, but all Prayer. If God know our
Wants, and is so ready to give, whether we ask or no, what need we open them to
him in Prayer at all?

I answer; It is God's prescribed Course, and that should be enough to gracious
Hearts, that will be obedient to their Father. Whatever he intends, tho he
knows our Wants, and resolves to answer them; yet it is a piece of religious
Manners, to ask what he is about to give. Ier. 29. 11. I know my Thoughts
toward you, Thoughts of Peace; yet will I be enquired of you for these Things.
God knows his own Thoughts, has stated his Decrees, and will not alter the
beautiful Course of his Providence for our sakes; yet he will be sought unto.
So Ezekiel. 36. God purposed to bless them, and therefore promises, I will do
thus and thus for you; yet, verse. 37. I will yet for this be enquired of by the
House of Israel, to do it for them: I will do it, but you shall milk out the
Blessing by Prayer. This Course is also necessary, and that both for his
Honor, and our Profit and Comfort.

(1.) It is necessary for his Honor, that God may still be acknowledged; that
the Creature may be kept up in a constant dependence upon God, and may go about
nothing, but may ask his Leave, Counsel, and Blessing. Prove. 3. 6. In all thy
Ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy Paths. We ask God's Leave that we
may do such a thing, for he has the Dominion over all Events: And if we are
doubtful, we ask his Counsel, whether we may stay here or there, or dispose of
our selves and Families: And we ask his Blessing upon our Resolution. Now that
we may know God does all, that he governs all humane Affairs; that we may
live upon his Allowance, and take our daily Bread from his hands; and that we
may see we hold all these Things from our great Landlord, therefore we pray
unto him. We are Robbers and Thieves, if we use the Creature without his Leave.
God is the great Owner of the World, who gives us our daily Bread, and all our
Supplies; therefore he will have it asked, that we may acknowledge our
dependence.

(2.) It is most for our Profit. Partly, that our Faith should be exercised in
pleading God's Promise, for there we put the Promise in Suit. Faith is begotten
in the Word, but it is exercised in Prayer; therefore it is called the Prayer
of Faith. In the Word, we take Christ from God; in Prayer, we present Christ to
God. That Prayer which is effectual, it is an Exercise of Faith. Romans 10. 14.
How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? And as it concerns
our Faith, so also our Love, which is both acted and increased in Prayer. It is
acted; for it is Delight in God, which makes us so often converse with him.
Thus the Hypocrite, Job 27. 10. Will he always call upon the Lord? Will he
delight himself in the Almighty? They that love God, cannot be long from him;
they that delight in God, will be often unbosoming themselves to him. It does
also increase our Love; for by Answers of Prayer, we have new Fuel to keep in
this holy Fire in our Bosoms. We pray, and then he gives direct Answers, Psalm.
116. 1. I love the Lord, because he has heard my Voice, and my Supplication.
So our Hope is exercised, in waiting for the Blessing prayed for: Psalm. 5. 3. O
Lord, in the Morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up. That
looking up is the Work of Hope; when we are looking and waiting to see what
comes in from pleading Promises. It is much too for our Peace of Conscience;
for it eases us of our Burdens: It is the Vent of the Soul, like the opening
of a Vein in a Fever. When our Hearts swell with Cares, and we have a Burden
upon us, and know not what to do, we may ease our selves with God. Phil. 4. 6.
Be careful for nothing; but in every Thing, by Prayer and Supplication, with
Thanksgiving, let your Requests be made known to God: And the Peace of God
shall keep your Hearts. O blessed Frame, that can be troubled at nothing here
in this World, where there are so many Businesses, Encounters, Temptations!
What Is the way to get this Calmness of Heart? Be much in opening your Hearts to
God; let your Requests be made known to God. Look as in an Earthquake, when the
Wind is imprisoned in the Bowels of the Earth, the Earth heaves, and shakes,
and quakes, until there be a Vent, and the Wind be got out, then all is quiet:
So we have many Tossings and Turmoilings in our Minds, till we open and unbosom
our selves to God, and then all is quiet. Also it prepares us for the
Improvement of Mercies, when we have them out of the hands of God by Prayer:
For this Child I prayed, said Hannah, and I will lend him unto the Lord. 1 Samuel
1. 27, 28. Those Mercies we expressly prayed for, we are more thoroughly obliged
to improve for God. What is won with Prayer, is worn with Thankfulness.

APPLICATION.
USE 1. To caution us against many Abuses in Prayer, which may be disproved and
taxed, either formally, or by just Consequence. I shall instance in five.

1. An idle and foolish Loquacity, when Men take a liberty to prattle any thing
in God's hearing, and do not consider the Weight and Importance of Prayer, and
what a Sin it is to be hasty to utter any thing before God. Eccles. 5. 2. It is
a great Irreverence, and Contempt of the Majesty of God, when Men go hand over
head about this Work, and speak any thing that comes into their mind. As Men
take themselves to be despised, when others speak unseemly in their presence:
Surely it is a lessening, and a despising of God, when we pour out raw,
tumultuous, undigested Thoughts, and never think of what we are to speak, when
we come to God. Psalm. 45. 1. My Heart is inditing a good Matter: The Word
signifies, it boils or fryes a good Matter. It is an Allusion to the Mincah,
or Meat Offering, which was to be boiled or fried in a Pan, before it was to be
presented to the Lord, that they might not bring a Dough-bak'd Sacrifice and
Offering to the Lord. Such ignorant, dull, senseless Praying, it is a
blaspheming of God, and a lessening of the Majesty of God.

2. A frothy Eloquence, and an affected Language in Prayer, this directly comes
under Reproof: As if the Prayer were more grateful to God, and he were moved by
Words and Strains of Rhetoric, and did accept Men for their Parts, rather than
Graces. Fine Phrases, and quaint Speeches, alas! they do not carry it with the
Lord: They are but an empty Babble in his Ears; rather than an humble Exercise
of Faith, Hope, Love, and Child-like Affections, and holy Desires after God. If
we would speak with God, we must speak with our Hearts to him, rather than with
our Words. This is a Sin of Curiosity, as the other was of Neglect. It Is not
Words, but the Spirit and Life, which God looks after. Prayer, it is not a Work
of Oratory, the Product of Memory, Invention, and Parts; but a filial
Affection, that we may come to him, as to a Father, with a Child-like
Confidence. Therefore too much Care of verbal Eloquence in Prayer, and tunable
Expressions, is a Sin of the same nature with Babbling. Tho Men should have the
Wit to avoid impertinent Expressions, and Repetitions; yet when Prayer smells
so much of the Man, rather than of the Spirit of God, alas! it is but like the
unsavory Belches of a rotten Breath in the Nostrils of God. We should attend
to Matter, to the Things we have to communicate to God, to our Necessities*
rather than to Words.

3. Heartless speaking, filling up the Time with Words; when the Tongue
out-runs the Heart; when Men pour their Breath into the Air, but their Hearts
are dead and sleepy, or their Hearts keep not time and pace with their
Expressions. We oftener pray with our Tongues, than with our Minds; and from our
Memories, than our Consciences; and from our Consciences, than our Affections;
and from our Affections, as presently stirred, than from our Hearts renewed,
bended and inclined toward God. Be the Prayer long or short, the Heart must
keep pace with our Tongues. As the Poet said, Disticha longa facit, his
Disticks were tedious; so it is tedious and irksom to God, unless we make
Supplication in the Spirit. Ephesians. 6. 18. Remember, God will not be mocked.

4. When Men rest in outward Vehemence, and loud Speech. Says Tertullian,
Quibus Arteriis opus est, si pro streno audiamus? What Lungs and Sides must we
have, if we be heard to speak to Heaven, by the Noise and Sound? In some there
is a natural vehemence and fierceness of Speech, which is rather stirred up by
the heat and agitation of the bodily Spirits, than any vehemence of Affection.
There is a Contention of Speech, which is very natural to some, and differs
much from that holy Fervor, the Life and Power of Prayer, which is accompanied
with Reverence, and Child-like Dependence upon God. It is not the loud Noise of
Words, which is best heard in Heaven; but the fervent affectionate Cries of the
Saints, are those of the Heart, rather than of the Tongue. Exodus 14. 17. it is
said, Moses cried to the Lord: We do not read of the Words he uttered; his Cry
was with the Heart. There is a crying with the Soul, and with the Heart to God.
Psalm. 10. 17. Lord, thou have heard the Desire of the Humble. It is the Desires
God hears. Psalm. 39. 9. Lord, all my Desire is before thee; and my Groaning i^
not hid from thee. The Lord needs not the Tongue, to be an Interpreter between
him and the Hearts of his Children. He that hears without Ears, can interpret
Prayers tho not uttered by the Tongue. Our Desires are Cries in the Ears of the
Lord of Hosts: the vehemence of the Affections may sometimes cause the
extention of the Voice; but Alas! without this it is but a tinkling Cymbal.

5. Popish Repetition, and loose shreds of Prayer often repeated, as they have
in their Liturgy over and over again, their Gloria Patri, so often repeated,
their Lord have Mercy; and in their Prayer made to Jesus, Sweet Jesus, Blessed
Jesus; and going over the Ave Maria, and this to be tumbled over upon their
Beads, and continuing Prayer by tale and by number: Surely these are but vain
Repetitions, and this is that much-speaking which our Lord aims at. Thus I have
dispatched the abuses of Prayer.

Use. 2. To give you direction in Prayer; how to carry your selves in this holy
Duty toward God in a comely manner.

I shall give you Directions, 1. About our Words In Prayer. 2. About our
Thoughts 3. About our Affections

First, about our Words; there is a use of them in Prayer, to excite, and
convey, and give vent to Affection: Hos. 14. 2. Take with you Words, and turn
to the Lord, and say, Take away all Iniquity, and receive us graciously. Surely
the Prophet does not only prescribe that they should take Affections, but take
with them Words: Words have an Interest in Prayer.

Now these may be considered, either when we are alone, or in Company.

1. When we are alone: Here take the advice of the Holy Ghost, Eccl. 5. 2. God
is in Heaven, and thou art upon Earth, therefore let thy Words be few. How few?
Few in Weight, Conscience, Reverence. Few in Weight, affecting rather to speak
Matter than Words; concisely and feelingly, rather than with curiousness, to
express what you have to say to God. Few in Conscience. Superstition is a
Bastard-Religion, and is tyrannous, and puts Men upon tedious Services, and
sometimes beyond their Strength; therefore pray neither too short, nor too
long: do it not merely to lengthen out the Prayer, or as counting it the better
for being long; the shortness and the length must be measured by the fervency
of our Hearts, our many necessities, and as it tends to the inflaming our
Zeal; as it can get up the Heart, let it still be subservient to that. Few with
Reverence, and managed with that Gravity, Awfulness, and Seriousness, as would
become an Address to God. As Abraham, Genesis 18. 31. had been reasoning with God
before, therefore he says, Let not God be angry, if I speak to him this once,
when he renewed the Suit. Thus alone.

2. In Company; there our Words must be apt and orderly, moving as much as may
be, not to God, but to the Hearers; managed with such Reverence and
Seriousness, as may suit with the Gravity of the Duty, and not increase, but
cure the Dullness of those with whom we join. And what if we did in public
Duties choose out Words to reason with God, as Job says, Chap. 9. 14. Choose
out my Words, to reason with him. If we did use Preparation, and think a little
before hand, that we may go about the Duty with serious Advice, and not with
indigested Thoughts. But this has the smallest Interest in Prayer.

Secondly, Our Thoughts; That we may conceive aright of God in Prayer, which is
one of the greatest difficulties in the Duty.

1. Of his Nature and Being.

2. Of his Relation to us.

3. Of his Attributes.

First, Of the Nature and Being of God. Every one that would come to God, must
fix this in his Mind, That God is; and that God is a Spirit: And accordingly he
must be worshipped, as will suit with these two Notions. Heb. 11. 6. He that
comes to God, must believe that God is, and then that God is a Spirit; for it
is said, Ioh. 4. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship
him in Spirit and Truth. O then, when ever you come to pray to God, fix these
two Thoughts, let them be strong in your Heart, God is: I do not speak to an
Idol, but to the living God: And God is a Spirit, and therefore not so much
pleased with plausibleness of Speech, or tuneable cadency of Words, as with a
right Temper of Heart. Alas! when we come to pray, we little think God is, or
what God is: much of our Religion is performed to an unknown God; and like the
Samaritans, We worship we know not what. It is not Speculations about the
Divine Nature, or high strained Conceptions, which does fit us for Prayer: the
discoursing of these things with some Singularity, or Terms removed from common
Understanding, this is not that which I press you to; but such a sight of God,
as prompteth us to a reverent and serious worshipping of him. Then we have
right Notions of God in Prayer, when we are affected as Moses was, when God
showed him his Back-parts, and proclaimed his Name, Exodus 34. He made haste,
bowed his Head and worshipped; when our Worship suiteth with the Nature of God,
it is Spiritual and Holy, not Pompous and Theatrical. Well then, these two
things must be deeply imprinted in our Minds, that God is, and that He is a
Spirit. And then is our Worship right.

For Instance,

1. For the first Notion, God's Being. Then is our Worship right, when it does
proclaim to all that shall observe us* or we that observe our selves, there is
a great, an infinite, eternal Power, which sits at the upper end of Causes, and
governs all according to his own Pleasure. Alas! the Worship of many is flat
Atheism, they say in their Hearts, either there is no God, or believe there is
no God. Therefore, do you worship him as becomes such a glorious Being? Is his
Mercy seen in your Faith and Confidence? His Majesty, in your Humility and
Reverence? His Goodness, in your Soul's rejoicing? His Greatness and Justice,
in your trembling before his Throne? The Worship must be like the Worshipped,
it must have his Stamp upon it.

2. For the other Notion, God is a Spirit, therefore the Soul must be the chief
Agent in the Business, not the Body, or any Member of the Body. Spirits they
converse with Spirits: The Body is but employed by the Soul, and must not guide
and lead it, but be led by it. Therefore see whether there be the Spirit,
otherwise that which is most Essential to the Worip is wanting. To have nothing
employed but the Tongue, and the Heart about other Business, is not to carry
your selves as to a God, and a God that is a Spirit. Recollect your selves;
where is my Soul in this Worship? And how is it affected toward God?

Secondly, As there must be Thoughts to direct us in his Being and Nature; so
also, in his Relation as a Father: As one that is inclinable to pardon, pity
and help you. We have the Spirit of Adoption given us for this very end and
purpose, that we may cry, Abba, Father; and Gal. 4. 16. Because you are Sons,
therefore he has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying,
Abba, Father. And Romans 8. 15. We have received the Spirit of Adoption, crying,
Abba, Father; that we may come to God in a Child-like manner, dealing with him
as with a Father, acquainting him with our Wants, Necessities, Burdens, with a
hope of Relief and Supply.

Object. Ay, says a distressed Soul, if my Heart be thus carried up to God, if
I could discern such a Spirit of Adoption, prompting me to go to God as a
Father, then it would be better with me.

To this I answer:

1. Many times there is a Child-like Inclination, where there is not a
Child-like Familiarity and Boldness: What Is that Child-like Inclination? The
Soul cannot keep away from God, and that is an implicit owning him as a Father.
Jer. 3. 19. Thou shall call me, My Father, and shall not turn away from me. It
is a Child-like act to look to him for all our Supplies, and to recommend our
Suit: As when a Child wants any thing, he goes to his Father.

2. There Is a Child-like Reverence many times, when there is not a Child-like
Confidence; the Soul has an awe of God, when it cannot explicitly own him as
our God, and Father, yet it owns him in the humbling way, Luke 15. 18. I have
sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am not worthy to be called thy Son.
Tho we cannot confidently approach to God, as our reconciled Father; yet we
come with Humility and Reverence: Lord, I would fain be, but I deserve not to
be called thy Child.

3. There Is a Child-like dependence upon God's General Offer, tho we have not
an Evidence of the Sincerity of our particular Claim: God offers to be a
Father in Christ to all penitent Believers. Now, when a brokenhearted Creature
comes to God, and looks for Mercy, upon the account of the Covenant, tho he
cannot see his own Interest; for then we come to God, tho not as our Father,
yet as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that is a Relief in
Prayer; as, Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And verse. 17. The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory. And Ephesians.
3. 14. I bow my Knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Mark, when we
come to him as the Father of Christ, we believe what God offers in the
Covenant of Grace; namely, that he will deal kindly with us, as a Father with
his Children; that he will be good to those that come to him by Christ. The
Term [Father] is not only to be considered with respect to the Disposition or
Qualification of the Persons, but the Dispensation they are under. It Is the New
Covenant. In the new Covenant, God undertakes to be Fatherly, that is, to pity
our Miseries, to pardon our Sins, to heal our Natures, to save our Persons. Now
all that come for refuge to take hold of this hope set before them, may come to
God as a Father, if they believe the Gospel in general, tho they are not
assured of God's love to themselves.

4. There may be a Child-like Love to God, when yet we have not a Sense and
Assurance of his Paternal Love to us. God has a Title to our choicest and
dearest Love, before we can make out a Title to his highest Benefits. We owe
our Hearts to him. Prove. 23. 26. My Son give me thy Heart. If you give him your
Hearts, you are Sons, tho you know it not. God may be owned as a Father, either
by our Sense of his Fatherly Love, or by our Choice and Esteem of him, Optando,
si non affirmando. Come as Fatherless without him, Hos. 14. 3. or (to speak it
in other Words) the unutterable Groans of the Spirit, do discover the Spirit of
Adoption, as well as the unspeakable Joys of the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 8. There is
an Option and Choice, tho we be not assured of our special Relation.

5. God is glorified by an Affiance, and a resolute Adherence, where there is
no Assurance. When you are resolved, let him deal with you as an Enemy, you
will stick to him as a Father. Job. 13. 15. Tho he slay me, yet will I trust in
him. Faith can take God as a Friend, and Father, and put a good construction
upon his Dealings, when he seems to come against us as an Enemy. And we give
Glory to God, when we can adhere to him as our only Happiness, and trust his
Fatherly Kindness and Goodness, tho he cover himself with Frowns, and hide
himself from our Prayers; and you own him as the Father of Mercies, tho it may
be you have no Sense and Feeling of his Fatherly Love to you.

6. There is a difference between the Gift it self, and the Degree. We cannot
say we have not the Spirit of Adoption, because we have not so much of the
Spirit of Adoption as others have; I mean as to the Effects: We may have the
Spirit as a Sanctifyer, tho not as a Comforter; tho he does not calm our
Hearts, and rebuke our Fears, yet if he does sanctify us, and incline us to
God. The Spirit was only given to Christ without measure, but to Christians in
a different Measure and Proportion; and usually, as you submit more to his
gracious Conduct, and overcome the Enemies of your Peace, the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh. The impression is left upon some in a smaller, and upon others
in a larger Character. All are not of one growth and size; some are more
explicitly Christians, others in a Riddle. Much Grace does more discover it
self, than a little Grace under a heap of Imperfection. Some are more mortified
and Heavenly-minded than others.

7. When all other Helps fail, Faith will make use of our common Relation to
God as a Creator, as we may come to him as the workmanship of his Hands. It is
better to do so than keep off from him. And we may come to him as the
workmanship of his Hands, when we cannot come to him as Children of his Family.
The Church says, Isa. 64. 8. Now, O Lord, thou art our Father: we are the
Clay, and thou our Potter, and we all are the work of thy Hand. They plead for
Favor and Mercy, by that common Relation, as he was their Potter, and they his
Clay. And David, Psalm. 119. 73. Thy Hands have made me and fashioned me: give
me understanding, that I may learn thy Commandments. Surely it is some Comfort,
to claim by the Covenant of Noah, which was made with all Mankind; when we
cannot claim Mercy by the Covenant of Abraham, which was made with the Family
of the Faithful. The Scriptures warrant us to do so; Isa. 54. 9. For this is as
the Waters of Noah unto me. All this is spoken to show, that one way or other
we should bring our Hearts to depend upon him, as a Father, for Succor and
Relief.

Thirdly; His Attributes. Three this Text offers: God's Omnisciency, He
knows; His fatherly Care, Your Father knows what you stand in need of: And his
Readiness to help, even before we ask.

1. He is Omniscient: He knows our Persons; for Christ calls his own Sheep by
Name. Joh. 10. 3. He knows every one of us by Head and by Pole, by Person and
Name. Yea, and he knows our State and Condition. Psalm. 56. 8. Thou tellest my
Wanderings; put thou my Tears into thy Bottle; are they not in thy Book? All our
Wanderings, he tells them; all our Tears, he has a Bottle for them: to show
God's particular Notice, they are Metaphorical Expressions. And he observes us
in the very Posture, when we come to pray, and where. Acts 9. 11. Go to such a
Street, in such a Place, and enquire for one Saul of Tarsus; for, behold, he
prays. The Lord takes notice, in such a City, in such a Street, in such a
House, in such a Room, and what you are doing when you are praying. And he
sees, not only that you pray, but how you pray. Romans 8. 27. And he that
searches the Heart, knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes
Intercession for the Saints, according to the Will of God. He can discern
between Lust^ and Groans, Words and Affections, and such Words as are the
Belches of the Flesh, and such as are the Breathings of the Spirit.

2. There Is his fatherly Care; for it is said, Your Father knows what Things
you have need of. He knows what pincheth and presses you. It Is said, 1 Pet. 5.
7. Casting all your Care upon him, for he cares for you. It is not said, that
he may take care of you, but he does take care. God is aforehand with us; and
our carking Care does but take the Work out of God's hand, which he is doing
already. Our Cares are needless, fruitless, burthensom; but his are assiduous,
powerful, blessed. A small Matter may occassion much Vexation to us; but to him
all things are easy. Upon these Considerations, We should be careful for
nothing, but make known our Requests unto God. Phil 4. 6. Praying for what we
want, and giving thanks for what we have; For your Father knows you have need
of these Things. Mat. 6. 32. His fatherly Love will not suffer him to neglect
his Children, or any of their Concernments. Therefore if you have a Temptation
upon you to Anxiety and Carefulness of Mind, and know not how to get out of
such a Strait, and conquer such a Difficulty, remember you have a Father to
provide for you: This will prevent tormenting Thoughtfulness, which is good for
nothing but to anticipate your Sorrow.

3. The next Thought is, his Readiness to help. This should be deeply impressed
upon your Minds, and should habituate these Thoughts, how ready God is to help,
and to run to the Cry. Psalm. 32. 5. I said, I will confess my Transgressions
unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. Before his Purpose
could be brought to pass. Isa. 65. 24. Before they call, I will answer, and
whiles they are yet speaking, I will hear. So Jer. 31. 20. I heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself, etc. God's Bowels were troubled presently. He is more ready
to give than you to ask: This will help and direct you mightily in the business
of Prayer, for God has a care for his Children, and very ready to help the
weak, and relieve them in all their Straits.

Thirdly, For Directions about our Affections in Prayer: three things are
required, viz. Fervency, Reverence, Confidence.

1. Fervency; that usually comes from two grounds; a brokenhearted Sense of
our Wants, and a desire of the Blessing we stand in need of. For the
brokenhearted Sense of our Wants, especially Spiritual Weaknesses, are
incident to the best. All Christians have continual need to cry to God. We have
continual Necessities both within and without. Go cry to God your Father
without Affectation, but not without Affection, and seek your Supplies from
him. Let me tell you, the more Grace is increased, the more sense of Wants is
increased. For Sin is more hated, Defects are less born. And then, there must
be a desire of the Blessings, especially Spiritual; our Needs must stir up
fresh Longings and holy Desires after God. Mat. 7. 7. Ask, Seek, Knock. Luke
11. 8. For his Importunity, he will rise and give. We spend the earnestness of
our Spirits in other Matters, in Disputes, Contests, Earthly Pursuits; our
importunate earnestness runs in a worldly Channel: No, no, it must be from
simplicity and sincerity, pouring out your Hearts before him: No Sacrifice
without him. Jam. 5. 16. The effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous Man
avails much.

2. Reverence; a reverent respectful Carriage toward our heavenly Father:
Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling. Mark, there
is in God a mixture of Majesty and Mercy; so in us there must be of Joy and
Trembling. God's Love does not abase his Majesty; nor his Majesty diminish his
Love. We ought to know our distance from God, and to think of his Superiority
over us; therefore we must be serious. Remember, God is greatly to be feared in
the Assembly of the Saints: and to ^e had in reverence of all them that are
about him, Psalm. 89. 7.

3. With Confidence; Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have boldness and access, with
confidence by the Faith of him. There is boldness in pouring out our Requests
to God, who will certainly hear us, and grant what is good; we must rely upon
his Goodness and Power in all our Necessities. He is so Gracious in Christ,
that he will do that which is best for his Glory, and our Good; and upon other
Terms we should not seek it. If you would not turn Prayer into Babbling,
much-speaking to Affectation of Words; take heed of these Abuses, and labor to
bring your Hearts to God in this manner.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE Lord's-Prayer.
Our Father, which art in Heaven.
I Have insisted upon the foregoing Verses, which do concern the Duty of
Prayer; let me now come to the Lord's-Prayer it self. This Prayer was formed
and digested by Christ, and therefore to be highly esteemed by Christians.
Jesus Christ, who was the Wisdom of God, he knew both our Necessities, and the
Father's good Will toward us; and therefore surely he would give us a perfect
Form and Directory. We are not absolutely tied to this Form; we do not read
that it was ever used by the Apostles, tho we have many of their Prayers upon
Record, in the Acts, and in the Epistles, yet they plainly differ as to the
Construction of the Words. And this very Prayer is diversely set down by the
Evangelists themselves. Mat. 6. 11. Give us this day our daily Bread; it is in
other Words, Luke 11. 3. Give us day by day our daily Bread. And, v. 12. And
forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors; in Luke 11. 4. it is, And
forgive us our Sins, for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us. But
however, tho we are not tied to this Form, yet I think it may be humbly used:
for Christ taught his Disciples how to pray, while as yet they were in their
Ignorance and Tenderness, and had not received the Spirit. And God usually puts
Words into Sinners Mouths; Hosea 11. 2. Take with you Words, and say unto him,
Receive us graciously. Look as Joseph is said to feed his Father, and his
Brethren, as a little Child is nourished, as it is in the Margent, (there is
not only Food provided, but it is put into their Mouths) Genesis 47. 12. So did
Christ teach his Disciples to pray, not only as directing them what they should
pray for, but putting a Form of Words into their Mouths.

In this Prayer, there are three Parts observable: 1. The Preface. 2. The
Petitions themselves. 3. The Conclusion.


In the Preface we have a Description of God, as always we should begin Prayer
with awful Thoughts of God. God is described, partly, from his Goodness and
Mercy, Our Father; and partly, from his Greatness and Majesty, Which (...) in
Heaven.

I. His Goodness and Mercy, Our Father: Where is set forth, 1. The Relation
wherein God stands to his People, in the Word, Father. 2. Their Propriety and
Interest in that Relation; wherein not the particular Interest of a single
Believer is asserted, My Father; but the general Interest of all the Elect in
Christ, Our Father.


I shall wave all which may be said concerning Prayer in general; concerning
the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of a Form in Prayer; The Disputes concerning the
Use of this Form; as also all the Disputes concerning the Object of Prayer,
which we learn from hence to be God alone. Surely Prayer is a Sacrifice, and
belongs only to God; it cannot be made to any other but to him, who knows
all the Prayers that are made in the World at the same time, and the Hearts of
all those that pray. I will also wave what might be spoken concerning
Preparation before Petition; for here there is a Preface before the Prayer it
self. Neither shall I speak concerning the Necessity of conceiving right
Thoughts of God in Prayer; how we may conceive of his Goodness, to beget a
Confidence; of his Majesty, to beget an Awe and Reverence.

That which I shall insist upon, is, the Notion and Relation under which God is
here expressed, which is that of Father; Our Father.

Observe, Those that would pray aright, must address themselves to God, as a
Father, in Jesus Christ.

Hypocrites at the last Day will cry, Lord, Lord; but Christ has taught us to
say, Our Father.

Here I shall, I. Enquire in what Sense God is a Father. II. What
Encouragements we have from thence in Prayer, when we can take him up under
this Notion and Appellation.


I. In what Sense God is a Father? This Title may be given to God, either
essentially, or with respect to personal Relation.

1. Essentially; and so it is common to all the Persons in the Godhead, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; all three are God, and our Father. And thus not only the
First Person, but the Second is called the Everlasting Father, Isa. 9. 6. And
the Holy Ghost, being Author of our Being, is called our Maker. But,

2. It may be ascribed to God personally: And so the first Person is called God
the Father; and that either with relation to Christ, or to us.

(1.) With relation to Christ, as the Son of God: So the first Person is called
the Father, as he is the Fountain of the Deity, communicating to and with him
the Divine Essence. Psalm. 2. 7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.
The personal Property of the Father, is to beget; and of the Son, to be
begotten. There is an eternal Now, wherein God is said to beget him. Thus he
may be called the Father of Christ, as he is the second Person; now, as
Incarnate and Mediator. Tho God be Christ's Father, as second Person; yet they
are all equal in Power, Dignity, and Glory: But as Mediator, God is his Father
in another respect. So it is said, John 14. 28. My Father is greater than I:
Not as God, for so he was equal: He thought it no Robbery to be equal with God.
Phil. 2. 6. But greater than I, that is, consider him as Man and Mediator, in
the state of his Humiliation: For it is notable to consider upon what occasion
Christ speaks these Words: If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I
go unto the Father; for my Father is greater than I: That is, You admire me,
and prize my Company exceedingly, because you see the Power which I put forth
in the Miracles which I do; ye would rejoice, if you understood it aright; He
is infinitely more glorious, than I appear in this State of Abasement and
Humiliation. Thus with respect to Christ, God, the first Person, may be called
the Father.

(2) With respect to Us; for the first Person is not only the Father of Christ,
but our Father; John 20. 17. I go to my Father, and your Father. We share with
Christ in all his Relations: As God was his God by Covenant; so he is our God.
And in this Sense, personally, it may be taken here; for our Business lies
mainly with the first Person, with whom Christ intercedeth for us: 1 John 2. 1.
We have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Righteous. Before
whom does he appear? Before the Father. And it is to him to whom we direct our
Prayers, tho not excluding the other Persons. Ephesians. 3. 14. I bow my Knees unto
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Tho it be not unlawful to pray to Christ,
or to the Holy Ghost; for that has been done by the Saints. Stephen says,
Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit; and Jacob says, The Angel of the Covenant bless
the Lads. And all baptized Persons are baptized in the Name of the Son and
Holy Ghost, as well as in the Name of the Father. But usually Christian Worship
is terminated upon God the Father, as being chief in the Mystery of Redemption;
and so it is said, Ephesians. 2. 18. Through him, by one Spirit, we have access to
the Father. We come to him through Christ, as the meritorious Cause, who has
procured Leave for us; and by the Spirit, as the efficient Cause, who gives us
an Heart to come; and to the Father, as the ultimate Object of Christian
Worship. Christ procures us Leave to come, and the Spirit gives us a Heart to
come: So that by the Spirit, through Christ, we have access to God. So that now
you may see what is meant by the Father; Our Father.

But now let me distinguish again; God is a Father to Mankind, either, 1. In a
more general consideration and respect, by Creation; or, 2. In a more special
regard, by Adoption.


First; By Creation God is a Father: At first he gave a Being to all Things;
but to Men and Angels he gave Reason; John 1. 4. And this Life was the Light of
Man. Other Things had Life; but Man had such a Life as was Light; and so by his
original Constitution he became to be the Son of God. To establish the Relation
of a Father, there must be a Communication of Life and Likeness. A Painter,
that makes an Image or Picture like himself, he is not the Father of it; for
tho there be Likeness, yet no Life. The Sun in propriety of Speech is not the
Father of Frogs, and putrid Creatures, which are quickened by its heat; tho
there be Life, yet there is no Likeness. We keep this Relation for univocal
Generations, and rational Creatures. Thus by Creation the Angels are said to be
the Sons of God; Job 38. 7. When he was laying the Foundations of the Earth,
the Sons of God shouted for Joy; that is, the Angels. And thus Adam also was
called the Son of God, Luke 3. ult. Thus by our first Creation, and with
respect to that, all Men are the Sons of God, Children of God. And (mark it) in
respect of God's continual concurrence to our Being, tho we have deformed our
selves, and are not the same that we were; when we were first created; yet
still in regard of some sorry Remains of God's Image, and the Light of Reason,
all are Sons of God, and God in a general Sense is a Father to us; Yea, more a
Father than our natural Parents are: For our Parents, they concur to our Being
but instrumentally, God originally: We had our Being under God from our
Parents: He has the greatest hand and stroke in forming us in the Belly, and
making us to be what we are. Which appears by this: Parents, they know not
what the Child will be, Male or Female, beautiful or deformed; they cannot tell
the Number of Bones, Muscles, Veins, Arteries; and cannot restore any of
these, in case they should be lost and spoiled: So that he that framed us in
the Womb, and wonderfully fashioned us in the secret Parts, he is our Father,
Psalm. 139. 14. As the Writing is rather the Work of the Penman, than of the
Pen; so we are rather the Workmanship of God, than of our Parents: They are but
Instruments; God is the Author and Fountain of that Life and Being, which we
still have. And again, consider, The better Part of Man is of his immediate
Creation; and in this respect, he is called the Father of Spirits. Heb. 12. 19.
They do not run in the Channel of carnal Generation, or fleshly Descent; but
they are immediately created by God. And it is said, Eccles. 12. 7. The Spirit
returns to God which gave it.

Well then, you see how in a general Sense, and with what good reason God may
be called, Our Father. Those which we call Fathers, they are but subordinate
Instruments; the most we have from them is our Corruption, our being depraved;
but our Substance, and the Frame and Fashion of it, our Being, and all that is
good in it, that is from the Lord.

Now this is some Advantage in Prayer, to look upon God as our Father by virtue
of Creation, that we can come to him, as the Work of his Hands, and beseech him
that he will not destroy us, and suffer us to perish. Isa. 64. 8. But now, O
Lord, thou art our Father; we are the Clay, and thou our Potter; and we are all
the Work of thine Hand. There is a general Mercy that God has for all his
Creatures; and therefore as he gave us rational Souls, and fashioned us in the
Womb, we may come to him, and say; Lord, thou art our Potter, and we thy Clay,
do us good, forsake us not.

What Advantage have we in Prayer, from this common Interest, or general
Respect of God's being a Father by virtue of Creation?

1. This common Relation binds us to pray to him: All things which God has
made, by a secret Instinct they are carried to God for their Supply. Psalm. 145.
15. The Eyes of all Things look up to thee. In their way they pray to him, and
moan to him for their Supplies, even very Beasts, young Ravens, and Fowls of
the Air. But much more is this Man's Duty, as we have Reason, and can clearly
own the first Cause. And therefore upon these natural Grounds the Apostle
reasons with them, why they should seek after God. Acts 14. 17.

2. As this common Relation binds us to pray; so it draws common Benefits
after it. Mat. 6. 25, 26. Is not the Life more than Meat, and the Body than
Raiment? Behold the Fowls of the Air: for they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into Barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Christ says,
where God has given a Life, he will give Food; and where he gives a Body, he
will give Raiment, according to his good pleasure. He does not cast off the
Care of any living Creature he has made, as long as he will preserve it for
his Glory. Beasts have their Food and Provision, much more Men, which are
capable of knowing and enjoying God.

3. It gives us Confidence in the Power of God. He which made us out of
nothing, is able to keep, preserve, and supply us, when all things fail, and in
the midst of all Dangers. Saints are able to make use of this common Relation.
And therefore it is said, 1 Pet. 4. 19. That we should commit our Souls unto
him, in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. The Apostle speaks of such
Times, when they carried their Lives in their hands, from day to day: They did
not know how soon they should be haled before Tribunals, and cast into Prisons.
Remember, you have a Creator, which made you out of nothing; and he can keep
and preserve Life, when you have nothing. Thus this common Relation is not to
be forgotten, as he gives us our outward Life and Being. Psalm. 124. 8. Our Help
is in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth: As if the Psalmist had
said, As long as I see these glorious Monuments of his Power, these Things
framed out of nothing, shall I distrust God, whatever Exigence or Strait I may
be reduced to?

Secondly; More especially, there is a particular Sort of Men, to whom God is a
Father in Christ, and that is, to Believers. John 1. 12. To as many as received
him, to them gave he Power to be called the Sons of God. Those which in their
natural State and Condition were Children of Wrath, and Slaves to Sin and
Satan; when they come, and are willing to welcome and receive Christ into their
Hearts; in a sense of their Misery, are willing to make out after God and
Christ; they have an Allowance to call God Father, and may have Child-like
Communion with him, and run to him in all Straits, and lay open their
Necessities to him. 2 Kings 4. 19. When the Child cried unto his Father, he
said, Carry him to his Mother: So when we are ill at ease, and in any Straits,
this is the Privilege of our Adoption, that we have a God to go to; we may go
to our Father, and plead with him, as the Church, Isa. 63. 16. Doubtless thou
art our Father, tho Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not:
Thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer. It is good to know God under this
special Relation of a Father in Christ; and this is that which is the Grace of
Adoption. Adoption is an Act of Free Grace, by which we that were Aliens and
Strangers, Servants to Sin and Satan, are, in and by Christ, made Sons and
Daughters of God, and accordingly are so reckoned, and treated with, to all
Intents and Purposes. It is a great and special Privilege, given to God's own
Children, by virtue of their Interest in Christ; and therefore it is said, 1
John 3. 1. Behold what Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the Sons of God! That is; Behold it as a certain Truth, and admire it as
a great Privilege. This second Relation is a very great Privilege, and it will
appear to be so, if we consider,

1. The Persons that receive it: We that were Aliens, and Enemies, and
Bondslaves; that were of another Line and Stock: That might say to Corruption,
Thou art my Father; to the Worm, Thou art my Mother, and my Sister. Job 17. 14.
We that were Cousin-Germans to Worms, a handful of enlivened Dust, that we
should be taken into such a Relation to God! We that might say indeed to the
Devil, Thou art our Father, and the Lusts of our Father we will do. John 8. 44.
Satan is the Sinners Father, and God disclaims them. The Lord disclaims the
People which were brought out of the Land of Egypt, when they rebelled against
him. Exodus 32. 7. The Lord said unto Moses, Go, get the down; for thy People
which thou broughtest out of (...) Land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves:
(...) People, which thou have brought, in Scorn and D^^^dain, as if God did
disavow them from being hi^ And so it was with us all. When Adam had ^^belled
against God, God executed the Law of the rebellious Child against him, which
was this, that he should be turned out of Doors. So was Adam turned out of
Paradise, and lost his Title and Heritage; and we were reckoned to the Devil.
Now, behold what manner of Love was this, that we should be called the Sons of
God!

2. You will wonder at it, you will behold it as an excellent Privilege, if you
consider the Nature of the Privilege it self; To be Sons and Daughters of God,
to be able to call God Father. This was Christ's own Title and Honor. When God
had a mind to honor Christ, he proclaims it from Heaven, Mat. 3. 17. This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased. Surely, if our Hearts were as
apprehensive of heavenly Privileges, as they are of earthly, we would admire it
more. Earthly Alliance, how is it prized! If a great Man should match into our
Blood and Line, what an Honor and Glory do we reckon it to us! 1 Samuel 18. 23.
Seems it to you a light thing to be a King's Son in Law? Do we account this a
small Matter, to be related to Kings, and Princes, and Potentates? No, no; we
have high thoughts of it: And is not this an excellent thing, to be Sons and
Daughters of God? In all other Cases, if Men have Children of their own, they
do not adopt: God had a Son of his own, in whom his Soul found full Delight and
Complacency; yet he would adopt and take us wretched Creatures, he would invest
us with the Title of Sons. And shall it be said of this and that Believer,
Here Is the Son of God? O behold what manner of Love! etc.

3. Then do but consider the Consequents of it, both in this Life, and the Life
to come. In this Life, what Immunities and Privileges have we? Free Access to
God; we may come and treat with him when we please, as Children to a Father,
when we stand in need of any thing. We have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father. Romans 8. 15. If we ail any thing, we may go to our
Father, and acquaint him with our Case and Grief. And we shall have a Child's
Allowance here in the World: The Heirs of Glory are well provided for in their
Nonage; they have a Right to a large Portion, all the good Things of the
World, Meat, Drink, Marriage; such Things they have by a Son's Right: They have
a Right to the Creature, in and by him who is Heir of all Things; so they are
established in their Right which Adam lost. 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4. And they are under
the Ministry of Angels; the Angels are sent forth to be their Guardians, and to
supply and provide for them.

And then in the Life to come, (for we are not only Sons, but Heirs) we have a
Right to the glorious Inheritance. Romans 8. 17. If Children, then Heirs, Heirs
of God. Here all the Children are Heirs, Male and Female, every Son and
Daughter, an Heir, and Joint-heirs with Christ. We do as it were divide Heaven
between us; we have a great, blessed, and glorious Inheritance; poor despicable
Creatures, chosen Heirs of a Kingdom. James 2. 5.

4. You will see it was a very great Privilege, if you consider how we come to
be entitled to it. Ephesians. 1. 5. Having predestined us unto the Adoption of
Children, by Jesus Christ, to himself: We come to it in and by Jesus Christ.
Christ was fain to come down, and to take a Mother upon Earth, that we might
have a Father in Heaven. He comes down, and was made a Man; he became our
Brother, and so lays the Foundation for the Kindred. Heb. 2. 11. Nay, not
only incarnate, but he died, to purchase this Title for us. When the Business
was debated in the Council of the Trinity, how lost Man might be restored in
Blood, and have a Right and Interest in God; and when Justice put in Exceptions
against us, Jesus Christ was content to be made under the Law, that we might
receive the Adoption of Sons. Gal. 4. 4, 5. There could be no Reconciliation,
no Amity, no Alliance, until Sin was expiated, and Justice satisfied: therefore
Christ was not only made of a Woman, but made under the Law; first, our Brother
by In^^rnation, and then our Redeemer by his Death and Suffering. As under the
Law, if a Man had waxen poor, the next of Kin was to be his Redeemer; Levit.
25. 25. Or if he had sold himself, v. 47. one of his Brethren was to redeem
him. Christians, there was a kind of Sale and Forfeiture, on our part, of the
Inheritance, and Right and Title of Children; therefore Jesus Christ, when he
became a Man, jure propinquitatis, by virtue of his Kindred, and Nearness to
us, came to redeem his People, and purchase us to God. And this is the Relation
which is mainly intended in this place; for mark, Christ taught his Disciples
to pray, Our Father; others, they cannot speak of this Relation; and in them
all that believe, and all that walk in the Spirit, these alone can come to God
as a Father.

II. What Advantage have we in Prayer, by taking up God under this Notion and
Relation, when we can come to him, and say, Our Father?

1. It conduces to our Confidence in Prayer.

2. It furthereth our Duty.

First; It conduces to our Confidence in Prayer: For it is not an empty Title,
or a naked Relation; but this is the ground of all that Favor and Grace which
we stand in need of, and receive from God. ^It is notable, 2 Cor. 6. 8. says
God, I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters. In
other places it is said, Ye shall be called my Sons; but here, You shall be my
Sons; you shall not only be called so, but be so. He will really perform all
the parts of a Father to us; yea, no Father like God. The outward Father is but
a Shadow; as still in the Comparison, outward Things are but the Shadow and
Similitude, the Reality is in inward Things: A Servant is not always a Servant,
there may be a Release; a Husband is not always a Husband, there may be a
Separation by Divorce: but a Father is always a Father, and a Child a Child. I
am the true Vine: The ou^ward Vine is but a Shadow, but Christ himself has the
true Properties of a Vine: So the outward Father is but a Shadow and
Similitude, the Reality is in God; none so fatherly and kind as he. Mat. 7. 11.
If ye being evil, know how to give good Gifts unto your Children; how much more
shall your Father which is in Heaven, give good Things to them that ask him?
There is a how much more upon the fatherly Care of God. Natural Parents, whose
Affections are stinted and limited, nay, corrupt and sinful, when a Son comes
for a Fish, will not give him a Scorpion; when he comes for Bread, will not
give him a Stone; that were a monstrous thing, vile, and unnatural. So Isa. 49.
15. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have Compassion
on the Son of her Womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.
Passions in Females are more vehement, the Mother has stronger Affections; if
the Mother could do so, as totally to forget that ever she had such a Child,
yet she would not forget her Sucking Child; a poor shiftless, helpless Babe,
that can do nothing without the Mother; a Child which never provoked her, she
would not forget such a Child: they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.
Certainly God which has left such an impression upon the Hearts of Parents,
has more of Pity, Bounty, and Goodness in his own Heart; for whatsoever of God
is in the Creature, is in God in a more eminent manner.

But particularly, How will God perform the parts of a Father?

1. In allowing them full leave to come to him in all their Necessities, Gal.
1. 6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
Hearts, crying, Abba, Father: There is a Spirit that attends upon this State.
They which are Sons shall have the Spirit of Sons, and God will incline their
Hearts to come and call to him for Supplies. This is a great Advantage. When he
gives a Spirit of Prayer, then he will be ready to hear and grant our Requests;
not only to give us a Heart to ask them, but to incline his Ear. Luke 11. 13.
How much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
him? When we ask for the highest Blessing; when we come and are importunate
with him, and will take no nay.

2. In supplying all our Wants. Mat. 6. 32. Your Father which is in Heaven,
knows you have need of these things. A Father will not let his Child starve;
certainly none so Fatherly as God: You have not such a Father as is ignorant,
regardless of your Condition, but takes an exact notice of all your Wants and
Pressures. It is notable to observe, how God condescendeth to express the
particular notice he takes of the Saints: Isa. 49. 16. Behold, I have graven
thee upon the Palms of my Hands. As we use to tie things about our Hands, that
we may remember such a Work and Business: So God does as it were put a print
and mark upon his Hands, to speak after the manner of Men. Nay, Mat. 10. 30.
The Hairs of their Heads are numbered; God has a particular notice of their
Necessities: And Jesus Christ, he is his Remembrancer, one that ever appears
before him to represent their Wants. Heb. 9. 24. As the High Priest, in the
Law, was to go in with the Names of the Tribes upon his Breast and Shoulder,
when he did minister before God, Exodus 28. Which is a Type, how much we are in
the Heart of Christ, ever representing himself before the Lord on the behalf of
such and such a Believer.

3. Pitying our Miseries. As he takes notice of them, so he will pity their
Miseries; as a Father pityeth his Children, when he sees them in an afflicted
Condition. Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a Father pityeth his Children: So the Lord
pityeth them that fear him. Nay, he will pardon their Sins. Man. 3. 17. And, I
will spare them, as a Man spares his own Son which serves him. An only Son
needs not fear much, if his Father were to be his Judge, tho he has done
unworthily. They may exhaust and draw up all their Pity, their Bowels may
shrink when they meet with multitude of Provocations. Now God will spare us, as
a Man spares his only Son: Nay, not only his only Son, but his dutiful Son,
which serves him. Many times we forget the Duty of Children, but God will not
forget the Mercy of a Father. I will go to my Father, says the Prodigal. He
had forgotten the Duty of a Child, he went into a far Country, and wasted his
Patrimony, and that basely and ^ilthily upon Harlots; yet upon his Return, when
he was a great way off, The Father runs to meet him half way, and kisseth him.

4. In disciplining, and treating us with much Indulgence, and Wisdom, and
Care. A Father takes a great deal of Pains, in forming his Child, and
fashioning its Manners, and Behavior: So does God with his Children. If he
afflicts, it is as a Father, only with purposes of good, and not so as an
Earthly Father: Heb. 12. 10. For verily, for a few days they chastned us after
their own Pleasure; but he for our Profit, that we might be partakers of his
Holiness. They mingle a great deal of Passion with their Correction, when they
are inflamed; but God never mingleth Passion with his Rod: When he gives a
bitter Cup, he is a Father still, Ioh. 18. 11.

5. In providing able Guardians for his Children. None so attended as God's
Children are, those which are adopted and taken into Grace and Favor with
Christ; Heb. 1. 14. Angels are ministering Spirits, sent abroad for the Heirs of
Salvation. They have a guard of Angels to watch over them, that they dash not
their Foot against a Stone.

6. In laying up an Inheritance for them. The Apostle says, 2 Cor. 12. 14.
Children ought not to lay up for their Parents, but Parents for their Children.
Now, God has laid up for us, as well as laid out much upon us. Luke 12. 32.
Fear not, little Flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. He has a Kingdom, a glorious Inheritance to bestow upon us: And we are
kept for that happy State. Tho he has an Heir already, Jesus Christ, the Heir
of all things; yet God has made us Coheirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17.

Thus, then it is a mighty Advantage: If we did take up God in this Notion, to
look upon him as a Father, it would increase our Confidence, and Dependence
upon him; This is a sweet Relation; the Reality is more in God, than can be in
an Earthly Father: for he is a Father according to his Essence, knowing our
Necessities, pardoning our Sins, supplying our Wants, forming and fashioning
our Manners, providing able Guardians for us, and laying up a blessed
Inheritance for us, in Heaven.

Secondly, As it encourages us to pray, so it furthereth our Duty in Prayer,
that we may behave our selves with Reverence, Love, and Gratitude.

1. With a Child-like Reverence, and Affection in Prayer; Mal. 1. 6. If then I
be a Father, where is mine Honor? And if I be a Master, where is my Fear? If
we expect the Supplies of Children, we must perform the Duty of Children. God
will be owned as a Father, not with a Fellow-like Familiarity, but humbly, and
with an awe of his Majesty.

2. With Love. Now, our Love to God is mainly seen by Subjection, and Obedience
to his Laws. Thus Christ would have us take up God in Prayer, under such a
Relation, that we might mind our Duty to him. 1 Pet. 1. 17. And if ye call on
the Father, who without respect of Persons judges according to every man's
work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. We never pray aright, but
when we pray resolving to cast off all Sin. How can we call him Father, whom we
care not continually to displease from Day to Day? So the Lord treats his
People. Jer. 3. 5, 6. Thou have said, thou art my Father: Behold, thou have
spoken and done evil things as thou could. God takes it to be a Contumely
and Reproach to himself, when we do evil, yet come and call him Father. He
takes it ill, that Men should come complementally, and flatter him with Lying
Lips, and do not walk as Children in holy Obedience: Therefore it is an
engagement to serve God with Holiness.

3. With Gratitude. When we come to pray, we must remember, not only what we
want, but what we have received, acknowledging we have all from him, he is our
Father, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish People, and unwise?
Is not he thy Father that has bought thee? Has he not made thee and
established thee? We must acknowledge the good we have, as well as that we
expect to come from him. Therefore, if we would have a praying Frame, and be
eased of our Solicitude, and that anxious care which is a disparagement to
Providence, it is good to take up God under the Notion of a Father, which makes
us rest upon him for all things. Mat. 6. 25. Take no thought for your Life,
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your Body, what ye shall
put on, Why? For your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these
things. You that are able Fathers would take your selves disparaged, if that
your Children should filch and steal for their Living, and beg, and be
sollicitous, and go up and down from Door to Door for their Maintenance and
Support, and not trust to your Care and Provision. A Believer, which knows he
has a Heavenly Father, will not be negligent in his Calling, but be active and
industrious in his way, and use those lawful means which by the Providence of
God he has been brought up in, and then, Be careful for nothing, as the
Apostle's advice is, Phil. 4. 6. And in every thing, by Prayer and
Supplication, make your request known unto God. O could we turn Carking into
Prayer, and run to our Father, it would be happy for us. Care, and Diligence,
and necessary Provision, that is our work and labor; but for the Success and
Event of Things, leave it to God. When we are carking in the World with such
anxiousness, and troubled with restless Thoughts; how we should be provided for
in old Age, and what will become of us and ours, we take God's work out of his
Hands; this is a disparagement to our Heavenly Father, and a reproach to his
Providence and Fatherly Care. Well then, certainly this is of great advantage
in Prayer.

APPLICATION.
Use. If it be a great advantage in Prayer, to take up God under the Notion and
Relation of a Father: Then those that would pray aright, let this instruct and
quicken them above all things. Clear up your Adoption, that you may be able to
call God Father, for otherwise when you come to pray, it is a very Lie to God:
As Acts 5. 4. When Annanias spoke false to the Apostle, says Peter to him;
Thou have not lied unto Men, but unto God. Why? Because he knows all that is
done in the World. But much more do they lie unto God here; this is a very
Disgrace and Blasphemy, a Contumely, rather than a Prayer and Supplication,
when you will come, and make God to father the Devil's Brats: When you that
live in Sin, and have no Reverence and Awe of God upon your Hearts, shall come
and pray to him, this is a Lie, which is told to the very Face of God.

But if this be a Truth, that all those which would pray aright must clear up
their Adoption, and get a sense of it, then here will Doubts arise. Therefore,
here I shall handle three Cases.

1. What shall natural Men do? Must they desist from Prayer? for they have no
right to it.

2. What shall they do, which have not as yet received the Testimony of the
Spirit? For a Child of God may have the Right of Children, yet have not a sense
of his Adoption.

3. What are the Evidences by which our Adoption may be cleared up to us, how
we may know we are taken into a Child-like State?

First; What shall natural Men do? must they desist from Prayer? for they have
no Right to it.

I answer; You may see here the miserable Condition of wicked Men, how much
they are bound to pray, and yet what an Impossibility lies upon them of
praying aright. Certainly none should desist from this Duty of Prayer, because
they cannot perform it aright; for tho we have lost our Power and Fitness, yet
there is no reason God should lose his Right, and his Power to our Obedience.
There is an Obligation and Precept from God, as a Father by Creation, upon all
Mankind; all which are reasonable Creatures, they are to own God as a Father in
this way. I say, Prayer is an Homage we owe to God by natural Right; therefore
no doubt wicked Men do sin, when they cease to pray. It is one of the
Accusations brought against natural Men, and is an Aggravation of their Sin.
Psalm. 14. 1. They do not call upon God. Romans 3. 10. it is applied to natural
Men. This is the Misery they have subjected themselves to, that their Prayer is
turned into Sin. As a natural Man must not omit Hearing, because it is a means
to bring him to be acquainted with God, tho he cannot hear in Faith: So he must
not omit Prayer, because it is one Means to bring us to own God as a Father by
Adoption. A Man is not to turn the Back upon him, but call him Father, as well
as he can. Ier. 3. 19. But I said, How shall I put thee among the Children, and
give thee a pleasant Land, a goodly Heritage of the Hosts of Nations? And I
said, Thou shall call me My Father, and shall not turn away from me. Better to
own God any way, than not to own him at all, than not to enquire after him; to
own him rationally, if not spiritually; to own him by Choice, if not out of
Sense. If we cannot come and clear up our Title to this great Privilege by the
Spirit of Adoption; yet any way, Thou shall not turn away from me. We should
not shut the Door upon our selves. It is required of a natural Man, being weary
of his Sins, to fly to God in Christ Jesus, for his Grace and Favor, that he
might become his God and Father.

Secondly; What shall they do, which have not as yet received the Testimony of
the Spirit, that do not know their Adoption?

I answer; A Child of God may have the Effects and Fruits of Adoption, yet not
always the feeling of it, to witness to him, that God has taken him into a
Child-like Relation to himself. Certainly, they are in a very uncomfortable
Condition, for they want an Help in Prayer. Doubtless thou art our Father; O
what an Advantage is that! How much of Eloquence and Rhetoric is there in
that, when we can speak to God as a Father! Yet they are not to neglect their
Addresses to God; for this is a means to obtain the Spirit of Adoption. Luke
11. 13. He will give the Spirit to them that ask him. Therefore in what ever
Condition we be, we must pray; otherwise we shut the Door upon our Hopes. You
continue the Want upon your selves, and so wholly detain your selves in a
comfortless Condition.

There is a fourfold spiritual Art we must use in Prayer, when we have not the
Sense of our Adoption, that we may be able to speak to God as our Father.

1. Disclaim, when you cannot apply. When you cannot clear up your own Relation
and Interest, then disclaim all other Confidences. If thou can not say,
Father; yet plead Fatherless. Hos. 14. 3. In thee the Fatherless find Mercy.
Come as poor, helpless, shiftless Creatures; seek Peace and Reconciliation with
God in Christ: It may be, God may take you into his Favor; He is a Father of
the Fatherless.

2. Own God in the humbling way; Learn the Policy of the Prodigal, Luke. 15.
18, 19. Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy Son. This is the Policy and Art of an humble Faith, to
call God Father. As Paul catches hold of the Promise on the dark Side, Jesus
Christ came to save Sinners; and presently he adds, Whereof I am chief: So
when a Believer can come, and say, Lord, I am not worthy to be called thy Son,
make me as one of thy hired Servants.

3. The third Policy we should use in Prayer, is, to call him Father in Wish;
Optando, si non affirmando: If we cannot do it by direct Affirmation, let us do
it by Desire. Let us pray our selves into this Relation, and groan after it,
that we may have a clearer Sense that God is our Father in Christ.

4. Faith has one Art more, it makes use of Christ Jesus. God has a Son,
whose Name signifies much in Heaven; therefore if you cannot come to him as
your Father, come to him as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians.
3. 14. For this cause I bow my Knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Let Christ bring you into God's presence. He is willing to change
Relations with us. Take him along with you in your Arms; go to God in Christ's
Name: Whatsoever you ask in my Name, shall be given to you.

Thirdly; But what are the Evidences by which our Adoption may be cleared up to
us? How shall we know that we are taken into a Child-like State?

1. Consider, how it is brought about. How do we come to be related to God by
Christ Jesus? By receiving Christ, as he is offered in the Gospel. John 1. 12.
To as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God. It
is a Prerogative, and special Grant, those which receive Christ, even those
that believe in his Name, (that is) those who out of a sense of their own Need,
and Sight of Christ offered in the Promise, do really consent to take him, for
the Ends for which God offers him, to wit, as Prince and Savior, that he
might give you Repentance, and Remission of Sins, not in pretense, but in your
Hearts: These have full liberty to call God Father, to come to treat and deal
with him; tho they have not a sense of the Blessedness of their State, for this
follows Believing: After you believed, you were sealed by the holy Spirit of
Promise. Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.

2. There is a Witness which is given to the Saints, that the thing may not be
always dark and doubtful: The Holy Ghost is given as a Witness. If you would
know whether or no you are the Children of God, see that of the Apostle, Romans
8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the
Children of God. As under the Law, in the Mouth of two Witnesses every doubtful
Thing was to be established, Deuteronomy. 17. 6. So here, the Spirit bears Witness,
together with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God. Our Spirits alone
may be lying, deceitful; we may flatter our selves, and think we are the
Children of God, when we are Children of the Devil. All certainly comes from
the Holy Ghost; and therefore the great Question which is traversed to and fro
in the Heart, is, Whether we be God's Children? What is the Spirit's Witness?

(1.) He lays down Marks in Scripture, which are the Ground and Decision of
this Debate; for the Scriptures are of the Holy-Ghost's inditing, and so may be
said to bear witness. Romans 8. 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the Sons of God. 1 John 3. 10. In this the Children of God are
manifest, and the Children of the Devil: Whosoever does not Righteousness, is
not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother. Thus the Spirit bears
witness to our Spirits, by laying down such Marks, as we by our own spiritual
Sense, and renewed Conscience, feel to be right within our selves. And this is
the main thing called the Witness of the Spirit.

(2.) He works such Graces as are peculiar to God's Children, and are
Evidences of our Interest in the Favor of God: and therefore it is called, the
Sanctification of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. Look as John knew Christ to be the Son of God, by the
Spirit's descending and abiding upon him, John 1. 32. So by the Spirit's Work,
and the Spirit's Inhabitation, we know whether we are the Children of God, or
no; whether we dwell in God, and God in us, because of his Spirit that he has
given us, that is, because of those Graces wrought in us. And this is called
the Seal of the Spirit; for the Holy Ghost, stamping the Impress of God upon
the Soul, working in us an answerable Likeness to Christ, is said to be the
Seal; then we have God's Impress upon us.

(3.) The Spirit goes further; he helps us to feel and discover those Acts in
our selves. There is a stupid Deadness in the Conscience, so that we are not
always sensible of our spiritual Acts. Hagar saw not the Fountain near her,
until God opened her Eyes: So we may not see the Work of the Spirit, without
the Light of the Spirit. We cannot own Grace in the midst of so much Weakness
and Imperfection, there is a misgiving of Conscience; therefore the Spirit of
Sanctification is also a Spirit of Revelation. Ephesians. 1. 17. The Author of the
Grace, is the best Revealer and Interpreter of it: He works, and he gives us a
sight of it. As a Workman that made a thing, can best warrant it to the Buyer;
he knows the Goodness and Strength of it, and how it is framed and made: So the
Holy Ghost, which works Grace, he reveals and discovers this Grace to us.

(4.) The Spirit helps us to compare them with the Rule, and accordingly to
judge of their Sincerity. The Spirit opens our Understandings, that we may be
able to discern the Intent and Scope of the Scripture, that so we may not be
mistaken. We must plow with God's Heifer, if we would understand the Riddle. In
thy Light, we shall see Light. We shall be apt to misapply the Rule, so as to
judge of our own Actions. Romans 9. 1. I lie not, the Holy Ghost bearing me
witness; when he had spoken of some eminent Thing wrought in him. We are apt to
lie, and feign and misapply Rules, Comforts, and Privileges: But now the
Holy Ghost bearing witness with our Spirits, by this means we come to have a
Certainty. There are so many Circuits, Wiles, Turnings in the Heart of Man,
that we are not competent Judges of what is wrought in us; therefore it is
usually ascribed to the Spirit to be the Searcher of the Heart. Psalm. 139. 7.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy Presence?
Acts 5. 4. Thou have not lied unto Men, but unto God. The Holy Ghost is rather
spoken of, than any other Person, because it is his personal Operation to abide
in the Hearts of Men, and to search and try the Reins: It is more particularly
ascribed to him, tho it belongs to all the Persons.

(5.) As the Spirit helps us to compare that which is wrought with the Rule,
the impression or thing sealed with the Stamp or the thing sealing; so he helps
us to conclude rightly of our Estate: For many times when the Premises are
clear, the Conclusion may be suspended, either out of Self-Love, in case of
Condemnation; or out of legal Fear and Jealousy, in case of Self-acquitment.
Therefore the Conclusion is of the Holy Ghost. 1 John 4. 13. Hereby we know
that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit.
There Is a great deal of do to bring us to Heaven with Comfort. There needs a
Person of the Godhead to satisfy us, as well as to satisfy God, and help us to
determine concerning our Condition.

(6.) He enlivens and heightens our Apprehensions in all these Particulars, and
so fills us with Comfort, and raises our Joy upon the feeling of the Sense of
the Favor of God; for all this is the Fruit of his Operation. Therefore it is
said, Romans 5. 5. The Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts, by the
Holy Ghost which is given unto us. Those unspeakable Glimpses of God's Favor,
and sweet Manifestations of God's Love in the Conscience, which we have, these
are given by the Holy Ghost. There is not one Act of the Soul, but the
Holy Ghost has a stroke in it for our Comfort, in every degree, all comes from
God. So that if you would know what the Witness of the Spirit is, consider,
What are the Marks in Scripture? What Graces are wrought in your Hearts? How
does the Spirit help you to discern those Graces, to compare them to the Rule,
to make accordingly in these Things a Determination of our Condition? And what
Joy and Peace have you thereupon wrought in your Hearts by the Holy Ghost? For
an immediate Testimony of the Spirit, the Scripture knows of no such thing. All
other is but Delusion, besides this.

(3.) There are certain Fruits and Effects, which do more sensibly evidence it
unto the Soul. What are those Fruits of the Spirit of Adoption in our Hearts,
by which we may further evidence it, whether we are the Children of God, or no?

(1.) In Prayer, by a kind of Naturalness or Delight in this Duty of holy
Commerce with God. Romans 8. 15. We have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby
we cry, Abba, Father. Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. And, Zech. 12. 10. I
will pour upon the House of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
Spirit of Grace, and of Supplication. Wherever the Spirit of God is
dispensed, and dwells in the Hearts of any, the Heart of that Man will be
often with God: The Spirit of Grace will put him upon Supplication; he will be
often acquainting God with his Desires, Wants, Fears.

(2.) You will be mainly carried out to your Inheritance in Heaven. Those which
are the Children of God, do look after a Child's Portion; and will look for an
Estate in Heaven, and cannot be satisfied with present Things. Worldly Men,
they have their Reward. Mat. 6. 2 They discharge God for other Things; If they
may have Plenty, Honor, worldly Ease, and Delights here, they never look after
Heaven. As a Servant has his Reward from Quarter to Quarter, but a Child waits
until the Inheritance comes: So when we are begotten for this lively Hope, when
there is an Heavenly-mindedness in you, this is a Fruit of the Holy Ghost
wrought in the Heart, by which you might know you are the Sons of God. Romans 8.
23. Having the First Fruits of the Spirit, we groan within our selves, waiting
for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our Body.

(3.) By a Child-like Reverence and Dread of God; when we are afraid to offend
God. Ier. 35. 5, 6. The Sons of Rechab, their Father had commanded them that
they should drink no Wine; now says God by the Prophet, Set Pots full of Wine,
and Cups, and say unto them, Drink ye Wine: That is, present the Temptation.
No, they would not; Our Fathers have forbidden us. So, when a Child of God is
put upon Temptation, his Heart recoils, and reasons thus; How can I do this
Wickedness, and sin against God? I dare not, my Father has forbidden me. There
is an Awe of his Heavenly Father upon him. 1 Pet. 1. 17. If you call on the
Father, who without respect of Persons, judges according to every Man's Work;
pass the Time of your sojourning here in Fear.

We now come to speak of the Possessive Particle, [ Our] Father. The Word is
used for a double Reason: 1. To comfort us in the Sense of our Interest in God.
2. To mind us of the common Interest of all the Saints in the same God: It is
not my, or thy Father only, but our Father.


First; Observe the great Condescension of Christ, that poor Creatures are
allowed to claim an Interest in God. If Christ had not put these Words in our
Mouths, we never had had Boldness to have gone to God, and said, Doubtless,
thou art our Father. But he which was in the Bosom of God, and knew his
Secrets, has told us, it is very pleasing to God, we should use this
Compellation to him. This is a Privilege which cannot be sufficiently valued,
if we consider, 1. The Unworthiness of the Persons which enjoy it; poor Dust
and Ashes, sinful Creatures, that were Children of the Devil, that we should
lay Claim and Title to God for our Father! And, 2. If we consider the Greatness
of the Privilege it self: O behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed
upon us, that we should be called his Children! 1 John 3. 1. We think it much,
when we can say, This Field, this House is mine; but surely this is more, to
say, this God is mine.


Again; Observe here, That Interest is a ground of Audience. So Christ would
have us begin our Prayers, Our Father; God's Interest in us, and our Interest
in God. God's Interest in us: When Christ mediates for his Disciples, he says,
Ioh. 17. 6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me. And David, Psalm. 119. 94.
I am thine, save me: That Is his Argument; the Reason is, Because God, by taking
them for his own, binds himself to preserve and keep them. Every Body is bound
to look to his own. He that provides not for his own, is worse than an Infidel.
Now what a sweet thing is it, when we can go to God, and say, we are thine. So
it is the same, as to our Interest in God; it is an excellent Encouragement.
Psalm. 42. 11. Hope thou in God, says David to his Soul; why? for he is my God.
And elsewhere, reasoning with himself, Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I
shall not want: First, his Covenant Interest is built, and then Conclusions of
Hope. So 2 Samuel 30. 6. David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. It is
sweet, when we can go to God, as our God. Luther was wont to say, God was known
better by the Predicament of Relation, than by his natural Properties. Why is
Interest such a sweet thing? Because by this Relation to God, we have a Claim
to God, and to all that he can and will do. God has made over himself, quantus
quantus est, as great as great he is, for his Use and Comfort. Therefore the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 16. 5. The Lord is the Portion of mine Inheritance, and
of my Cup. A Believer has as sure a Right and Title to God, as a Man has to
his Patrimony, to which he is born. Look as the Right was any Israelite had to
that Share which came to him by Lot; so we may lay claim to God, and live upon
his Power and Goodness, as a Man does upon his Estate.

Well then, labor to see God is yours, if you would find acceptance with him.
It is not enough to know the Goodness and Power of God in general, but we must
discern our Interest in him; that we may not only say, Father, but Our Father.
It is the Nature of Faith, thus to appropriate and apply. John 20. 28. My Lord,
and my God. How is God made ours? How shall we know it, that we may come and
lay our Claim to him? Behold, Christ teaches us here to say, Our Father, by
taking hold of his Covenant; and this is God's Covenant-Notion, I will be your
God, and you shall be my People. When we give up our selves to be God's, then
he is ours. Resignation and Appropriation go together. I am my Beloved's;
there is the Resignation of Obedience: And he is mine; there is the Appropriation
of Faith. A Believer cannot always say, God is his, but, I am thine; however it
be with him, he would be no others but the Lord's. If he cannot say, he is
God's, by an especial interest; yet he will be God's, by the resignation of his
own Vows. He knows God has a better Right and Title to him, than he has to
himself.

Quest. But how shall we know that we do indeed resign up our selves to God?

I answer; When we make him our chief Good, and our utmost End, (that is) when
we unfeignedly choose him for our Portion, and set apart our selves to act for
his Glory.

1. When we choose and cleave to him, as our all-sufficient Portion: The Lord is
my Portion, says my Soul. Lam. 3. 24. Sometimes the Lord speaks to us, I am
thy Reward, I am thy Salvation, Psalm. 35. 3. So the Soul speaks to God, Thou
art my Portion. When we cleave to God, He is my Portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? etc. When our Souls are satisfied in God,
having enough in him; this is to give up our selves to him.

2. When we set apart our selves to his Use, to live and act for his Glory;
this is also entering into Covenant with God. As in that formal Matrimonial
Covenant, that was used between the Prophet and his Wife, Hos. 3. 3. Thou shall
not be for another Man, so will I also be for thee: So in the Covenant, we
resolve to renounce all others, and to live and act for God. The Lord has set
apart him that is godly for himself. Psalm. 4. 3. When we are thus set apart for
God, to serve him, and glorify him, by this special Dedication of our selves to
his Use; this is the Act of Grace on our part. We were God's by Election; but
he comes and takes possession for himself by the Spirit, and then the Soul sets
himself apart for God.

Secondly; That all the Saints have a common Interest in the same God;
therefore Christ taught us to say, Our Father. They have one Father, as well as
one Spirit, one Christ, one Hope, and one Heaven. Ephesians. 4. 6. Questionless, it
is lawful to say, My Father. Some have disputed it, because they suppose this
Expression is used to signify Christ's singular Filiation; Christ could only
say, My Father. But it is lawful, provided we do not say it exclusively, and
appropriating it to our selves. But here Christ, when he gives us this perfect
Form, teaches us to say, Our Father. As the Sun in the Firmament is every
Man's, and all the World's; so God is every single Believer's God, the God of
all the Elect. But why would Christ put this in this perfect Pattern and Form of
Prayer?

1. To quicken our Love to the Saints in Prayer. When we come to pray, there
must be a brotherly Love expressed; now that is a distinct thing from common
Love: Add to brotherly Kindness, Charity. 2 Pet. 1. 7. When we are dealing with
God in Prayer, we must express somewhat of this brotherly Love: How must we
express it? In praying for others, as well as for our selves. Necessity will
put Men upon praying for themselves; but brotherly Love will put them upon
praying for others. Wherein must Brotherly Kindness be expressed in Prayer? In
two Things:

(1.) In a Fellow-feeling of their Miseries, in being touched with their
Necessities, as we would be with our own. To be senseless, it is a spiritual
Excommunication, a casting our selves out of the Body. Members must take care
for one another. We must be grieved with their Pains: Who is offended, says
the Apostle, and I burn not? If there be any Power in such a Confession, or
Title of a Father, we must be wrestling with God, how well soever it be with
us, remembering we speak to him, in whom others have a joint Interest with our
selves.

(2.) It must be expressed, in wishing the same good to others, as to our
selves. Many that pray in their own Case, with what Earnestness and Importunity
are they carried out! but how flat and cold in the Case of others! Now a good
Christian must be as earnest with God for others, as for himself. Look what
Earnestness and Heedfulness of Soul he shows, when he puts up Prayers for
himself; the same must he do for all Saints. Ephesians. 6. 18. Self-love, and
Self-respect must not breath only in our Prayers; they must be carried out with
as much Earnestness, as if we would go to God in our own Case.

2. Again; As it shows us what brotherly Love we should express in Prayer; so
it checketh many carnal Dispositions, which we are guilty of, and Christ would
mind us of them. It checks Strife and Contention; we are Brethren, have one
common Father. Every where Meekness and Love, it is a Qualification for Prayer.
Let the Husband live with his Wife according to Knowledge, that their Prayers be
not hindered. 1 Pet. 3. 7. If there be such Brauls in the Family, how can the
Husband and Wife call upon God with such an united Heart as is requisite? So, 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will that Men pray every where, lifting up holy Hands, without
wrath and doubting. Not only lift up pure Hands to God, and that without
doubting; there must be Confidence in our Prayers: But that is not all, but
without wrath; there must be nothing of Revenge and Passion mingled with your
Supplication. And then it checketh Pride and Disdain. Christ teaches all, in
all Conditions, whether Masters or Servants, Fathers or Children, Kings or
Beggars, all to say, Our Father; for we have all one Father. Thou have not a
better Christ, nor a better Father in Heaven, than they have. The Rich and the
Poor were to give one Ransom under the Law, Exodus 30 to show they have all the
same Redeemer. The Weak should not despise nor disdain the Strong, nor the Rich
be ashamed to own the Poor as Brethren. We should never be ashamed to own him
as a Brother, whom God will own as a Son.

Which art in Heaven.
WE have considered the Title given to God, with respect to his Goodness and
Mercy; He is a Father, [ Our Father.] Now let us consider the Titles given to
him, with respect to his Greatness and Majesty, [ Which art in Heaven.] From
thence note:

Doct. It is an Advantage in Prayer, to look upon God as a Father in Heaven.

By way of Explication, to show,

First; What is meant by Heaven. There are three Heavens in the Computation of
the Scripture: There is, first, the lowest Heaven, that where the Fowls of the
Air are, whence the Rain descends; therefore the Fowls are called the Fowls
of Heaven, Job. 35. 11. And, Iam. 5. 18. Elijah prayed, and the Heaven gave
Rain. Secondly, the Luminary Heaven, where the Sun, Moon, and Stars are:
Therefore it is said, Mat. 10. 25. The Stars of Heaven shall fall. Thirdly,
there is the highest Heaven, or the Heaven of the Blessed, spoken of, Mat. 7.
21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven; that is, into the third Heaven, the glorious Heaven, the blessed
Presence of God. Mat. 18. 10. In Heaven, their Angels do always behold the Face
of my Father which is in Heaven: [In Heaven,] that is, the third Heaven; so it
is called by Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 2. Which was the highest Part, because he saw and
heard Things which it is not lawful for a Man to utter. In this Heaven God is.

Secondly; How is God there, since he is every where?

1. Negatively; It is not to be understood so, as if he were included in
Heaven, or locally circumscribed within the Compass of it; For the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain him, 1 Kin. 8. 27. In regard of his Essence, he is in
all Places, being infinite and indivisible: He is not included within the
Heavens, nor excluded from Earth, but fills all Places alike. Ier. 23. 24. Do
not I fill Heaven and Earth? says the Lord. But yet in an especial manner is
God present in Heaven: That appears, because there is his Throne: Psalm. 103.
19. He has prepared his Throne in the Heavens. Earthly Kings, they have their
Thrones exalted higher than other Places; but God's Throne is above all, it is
in Heaven. He has a more universal and unlimited Empire, than all the Kings of
the Earth; so he has a more glorious Throne. Heaven is the most convenient
Place, to set forth his Majesty and Glory to the World, because of the
Sublimity, Amplitude, and Purity of it. And so, Isa. 66. 1. Thus says the
Lord, The Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool. Heaven is his
Throne, because there is his Majestical Presence, more of his Glory and
Excellency is discovered: And the Earth is his Footstool, because there, in the
lowest part of the World, he manifests his powerful Presence, among the lower
Creatures.

Briefly, to conceive how God is in Heaven, we must consider, 1. The several
ways of his Presence: He is in Christ, hypostatically, essentially, or (as the
Apostle speaks) bodily; Col. 2. 19. The Fullness of God dwells in him bodily. In
the Temple under the Law, there God was present symbolically, because there
were the Signs and Tokens of his Presence. The Jewish Temple was a Sacramental
Place, and Type of Christ, in whose Name* and by whose Merit, Worship was
acceptable to God. But now in Christians, he is present energetically, and
operatively, by his Spirit. And in Heaven, he there dwells by some eminent
Effects of his Wisdom, Power, Greatness, and Goodness. God has showed more of
his Workmanship in the Structure of the Heavens, than in any other part of the
Creation, that being the most glorious part of the World. Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3.
The Heavens declare the Glory of the Lord, and the Firmament shows his handy
Work, etc. Certainly it is meet, God should dwell in the most glorious part of
the World; now Heaven is the most glorious part of the Creation. Heathens in
their Straits would not look to the Capitol, where their Idols were; but to
Heaven, where God has impressed his Majesty and Greatness. When ever we look
upon these aspectable Heavens, the vast Expansion of those glorious Luminaries,
the Purity of the Matter, and Sublimity of its Posture, it cannot but raise our
Hearts to think of a glorious God that dwells there. When we come by a poor
Cottage, we guess the Inhabitant is no great Person; but when we see a
magnificent Structure, we easily imagine some Person of account dwells there:
So, tho the Earth does declare the Glory of God, and show much of his Wisdom
and Power, yet chiefly the Heavens, when ever we look upon them, we cannot
choose but have awful Thoughts, and be struck with a Religious Horror, at the
remembrance of the great God, which has stretched out these Heavens by his
Wisdom and Power.

2. Therefore God is said to dwell in Heaven, because from thence he
manifests his powerful Providence, Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness. God is not
so shut up in Heaven, as not to mind human Affairs, and to take notice of what
is done here below: Psalm. 11. 4. The Lords Throne is in Heaven: His Eyes
behold, his Eyelids try the Children of Men. Tho his Throne be in Heaven, yet
his Providence is every where, his Eyes behold, he sees how we behave our
selves in his Presence; and his Eyelids try the Children of Men: He may seem
to wink now and then, and to suspend the strokes of his Vengeance, but it is
but for our Trial. He owneth his Children from Heaven, Deuteronomy. 26. 15. Look down
from thy holy Habitation, from Heaven, and bless thy People. And from thence he
punishes the Wicked, Romans 1. 18. The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven.

3. There is God most owned by the Saints and glorified Angels, therefore he is
said to dwell there; as a King is beloved by his Subjects, but most immediately
served and attended upon by those of his own Court. So that in Heaven, there we
have the highest Pattern of all that Duty which does immediately concern God.
In this Prayer, Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done; these
three Petitions concern God more immediately; now before we put them up, Christ
would have us think of our Father in Heaven, praised by (...) and Saints, that
fall down before his Throne, crying, Honor, ^lory, and Praise. There he
Reign^th, his ^hrone is there, and there he is perfectly obeyed, and served
without any oppo^ition.

4. There God is most enjoyed, and therefore he dwells there, for there he does
more immediately exhibit the fullness of his Glory to the Saints and Angels. In
Heaven God is all in all. Here we are supplied at second or third Hand. Hos. 2.
18. I will hear the Heavens, and the Heavens shall hear the Earth, etc. But
there God is immediately and fully enjoyed. Here there are many Wants and
Vacuities to be filled up; But in thy Presence there is fullness of Joy, and at
thy right hand there are Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. Look, as when
the Flood was poured out upon the World, you read, that the Windows of Heaven
were opened, Genesis 7. 11. The drops of Rain were upon Earth, but the Cataracts
and Floodgates were in Heaven: So when he raineth down drops of Sweetness upon
his People, the Floodgates are above, they are reserved for that place where
they are fully enjoyed.

Thirdly, Why has God fixed and taken up his dwelling place in the Heavens? I
answer,

1. Because mortal Men they cannot endure his glorious presence. Deuteronomy. 5. 23.
When ye heard the Voice out of the midst of the Darkness, for the Mountain did
burn with Fire, ye said, Behold, the Lord our God has showed us his Glory, and
his Greatness, and we have heard his Voice out of the midst of the Fire: now
therefore why should we dye? For this great Fire will consume us; if we hear
the Voice of the Lord our God any more, then we shall dye. Any manifestations
of God, how easily do they over-set, and overcome us? A little Spiritual
Enjoyment it is too strong for us. If God pour out but a drop of Sweetness into
the Heart, we are ready to cry out, Hold, Lord, it is enough; Our crazy Vessels
can endure no more. Therefore, when Christ was transfigured, the Disciples were
astonished, and fell back; they could not endure the Emissions and Beamings out
of his Divine Glory, because of the Weakness and Incapacity of the present
State; therefore has God a place above, where he discovers his Glory in the
utmost Latitude. It is notable, in Scripture, sometimes God is said to dwell in
Light, 1 Timothy 6. 16. And sometimes to make Darkness his dwelling place, Psalm.
18. 11. How does he dwell in Light, and how in Dark^ess? Because of the
glorious mani^estations which are above, therefore it is said he dwells in
Light; and because of the weakness and incapacity of our apprehension,
therefore he is said to dwell in Darkness.

2. To try our Faith, and our Obedience, that he might see whether we would
live by Faith, yea or no; whether a Believer would love him, and obey him, tho
he were invisible, and withdrawn within the Curtain of Heaven. You know when
the Israelites saw the Glory of God, then they cried, All that God has
commanded us we will do, Deuteronomy. 5. 27. But as soon as that Manifestation ceased,
they were as bad as ever. If all were liable to Sense, there would be no trial
of this World; but God has shut up himself, that by this means the Faith of
the Elect might be manifested; for Faith is the Evidence of things not seen,
Heb. 11. 1. Where there is no sight there is exercise for Faith. And that our
Love might be tried, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen, ye love: in whom tho
now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory. And this is that which discovers the Faithless and disobedient World.
Job 22. 12, 13, 14. Is not God in the height of Heaven? How does God know? Can
he judge through the dark Cloud? Thick Clouds are a Covering to him that he
sees not, and he walks in the circuit of Heaven.

3. It is fit there should be a better place, into which the Saints should be
translated, when the course of their Obedience is ended. Ephesians. 1. 3. He has
blessed us with Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Places. The main of Christ's
Purchase we have in Heavenly Places. It is fit the place of Trial and place of
Recompense should differ: therefore the place of Trial, that is God's
Footstool; and the place of Recompense, that is God's Throne. The World, that is
a place of Trial, it is a Common Inn for Sons and Bastards, for the Elect and
Reprobate; a Receptacle of Man and Beast: Here God will show his Bounty unto
all his Creatures. But now in the place of his Residence, he will show his Love
to his People. Therefore when we have been tried and exercised, there is a
place of Preferment for us.

Fourthly, What Advantage have we in Prayer by considering God in Heaven? Very
much, whether we consider God absolutely, or with respect to a Mediator; both
ways we have an Advantage.

First, If we consider the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who have their
Residence in Heaven; consider them without respect to a Mediator. Why, the
looking up to God in Heaven*

1. It shows us, that Prayer is an act of the Heart, and not of the Lips;
that it is not the sound of the Voice which can pierce the Heavens, and enter
into the Ears of the Lord of Hosts, but Sighs and Groans of the Spirit.
Christians, in Prayer God is near to us, and yet far from us; for we must look
upon him as in Heaven, and we upon Earth. How then should we converse with God
in Prayer? Not by the Tongue only, but by the Heart. The Commerce and Communion
of Spirits is not hindered by local Distance: but God is with us, and we with
him, when our Heart goes up.

2. It teaches, the great work of Prayer is to lift up the Heart to God; To
withdraw the Heart from all created things which we see and feel here below,
that we may converse with God in Heaven. Psalm. 123. 1. Unto thee lift I up mine
Eyes, O thou that dwell in the Heavens. And, Lam. 3. 41. Let us lift up our
Heart with our Hands unto God in the Heavens. Prayer does not consist in a
multitude and clatter of Words, but in the getting up of the Heart to God, that
we may behave our selves as if we were alone with God, in the midst of glorious
Saints and Angels. There Is a double Advantage which we have by this getting the
Soul into Heaven in Prayer: It Is a means to free us from Distractions, and
Doubts. To free us from Distractions and other inter-current Thoughts. Until we
get our Hearts out of the World, as if we were dead and shut up to all present
things, how easily is the Heart carried away with the Thoughts of earthly
Concernments? Until we can separate and purge our Spirits, how do we interline
our Prayers with many ridiculous Thoughts? It is too usual for us to deal with
God, as an unskilful Person that will gather a Posy for his Friend, and puts in
as many, or more, stinking Weeds, than he does choice Flowers. The Flesh
interposeth, and our carnal Hearts interline and interlace our Prayers with
vain Thoughts and earthly Distractions. When with our Censor we come to offer
Incense to God, we mingle Sulphur with our Incense. Therefore we should labor,
all that we can, to get the Heart above the World, into the Presence of God,
and company of the Blessed, that we may deal with him, ad if we were by him in
Heaven, and were wholly swallowed up of his Glory. Tho our Bodies are on Earth,
yet our Spirits should be with our Father in Heaven. For want of practicing
this in Prayer, these Distractions increase upon us. So for Doubts, when we
look to things below, even the very manifestations of God to us upon Earth, we
have many Discouragements; Dangers without, and Difficulties within: till we
get above the Mists of the lower World, we can see nothing of Clearness and
Comfort; but when we can get God and our Hearts together, then we can see there
is much in the Fountain, tho nothing in the Stream; and tho little on Earth,
yet we have a God in Heaven.

3. This impresseth an Awe and Reverence, if we look upon the Glory of God
manifested in Heaven, that Bri^ht and Luminous Place. This is urged by the
Holy Ghost, Eccles. 5. 2. Thou art upon Earth, and God is in Heaven; therefore
let thy Words be few. Genesis 8. 27. Who am I that I should take upon me to speak
unto the Lord, who am but Dust and Ashes? We are poor crawling Worms, and
therefore when we think of the Majesty of God, it should impress an holy awe
upon us. Mean Persons will behave themselves with all Honor and Reverence,
when they supplicate to Men of Qu^lity; So should we to God, who is so High and
so much above us, he is in Heaven. It is a Diminution of his Greatness, Mal. 1.
14. when we put off God with any thing, and come slightly and carelessly into
his Presence.

4. It teaches us, that all our Prayers should carry a Correspondence with our
great Aim. What Is our great Aim? To be with God in Heaven, as remembering that is
the Center and Place of our Rest, to which we are all tending. Col. 3. 1. If ye
then be risen with Christ, seek those Things which are above, where Christ
sits on the right hand of God. We come to our Father which is in Heaven; He
will have his Residence there, that our Hearts might be there. Therefore the
main things we should seek of God from Heaven, are Saving-Graces; for these
come down from above, from the Father of Lights. Jam. ^. 17. We have liberty to
ask Supplies for the outward Life, but chiefly we should ask spiritual and
heavenly Things. Mat. 6. 22, ^3. Your heavenly Father knows that ye have need
of all these Things: What then? First seek the Kingdom of God, etc. If we have
to do with a heavenly Father, our first and main Care should be to ask Things
suitable to his Being, and his Excellency. If Children should ask of their
Parents, such a thing as is pleasing to their Palate, possibly they might give
it them; but when they ask Instruction, and desire to be taught, that is far
more acceptable to them. When we ask Supplies of the outward Life, Food,
Raiment, God may give it us; but it is more pleasing to him, when we ask for
Grace. In every Prayer, we should seek to be made more heavenly, by conversing
with our heavenly Father.

5. It gives us ground of Confidence in God's Power, and absolute Dominion
over all Things; for God is in Heaven, above all created Beings. Psalm. 115. 3.
Our God is in the Heavens, and does whatsoever he pleases. So, 2 Chronicles. 20. 6.
Art not thou God in Heaven? And rulest not thou over all the Kingdoms of the
Heathen? And in thine hand is there not Power and Might, so that none is able
to withstand thee? O what an Advantage is this in Prayer, when we think of our
All-sufficient God, who made Heaven and Earth, and has fixed his Throne there!
What can be too hard for him?

6. Here is Encouragement against carnal Fear. Whatever the World does against
us, we have a Father in Heaven, and this should bear us up against all their
Threatenings and Oppositions. When there were Tumults and Confusions in the
World, it is said, Psalm. 2. 4. But God which sits in Heaven, shall laugh them
to Scorn. An earthly Parent may have a large Heart, but a short Hand; tho they
may wish us well, yet they cannot defend us, and bear us out in all
Extremities: But our Father in Heaven will laugh at the Attempts against his
Empire and Greatness. Thus considering God absolutely, it is an Advantage to
reflect upon him as a Father in Heaven.

But I suppose this Expression has respect to a Mediator. Therefore,

Secondly, Let us look upon God with respect to a Mediator; for so I think we
are chiefly bound, to consider our Father in Heaven, because of Christ, which
sits there at his right hand. Heb. 8. 1. It is said there, He sat down on the
right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens, a Minister of the
Sanctuary. O this is comfortable to think of: In Heaven we have a Savior,
Jesus Christ, representing our Persons, and presenting our Prayers to God, by
which means God is reconciled and well pleased with us. So that our Duty in
Prayer is, to look up to Heaven, and to see Christ at God's right hand, as or
High Priest, mediating for us, that we may be accepted with God.

A notable Resemblance we have between God's Presence in the Tabernacle or
Temple, and God's Presence in Heaven.

In the Temple you know there were three Partitions: There was to outward
Court; and the Sanctuary, as the Apostle calls it, where the Table of
Shewbread was set; and there was the holy Place, the Holy of Holies. Just so
in Heaven there are three Partitions; there is the Airy Heaven, and the Starry
Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens: The lower Heaven, which answers to the
outward Court; the Starry Heaven, which answers to the Sanctuary; and the
Heaven of Heavens, which answers to the Holy of Holies, by a fit Analogy and
Proportion. Well, In the Holy of Holies, says the Apostle, there was the
Golden Censer, and the Mercy-Seat; Heb. 9, 4. There you find God conspicuously
manifests his Presence, and give Answers to his People: At the Mercy-Seat,
there will I answer thee, says the Lord, So here, in this Heaven of Heavens,
there is a Mercy-Seat, there is a Throne of Grace, and there God will answer. We
may come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find
Grace to help in time of Need. Heb. 4. 16. Into this Holy of Holies none but
the High Priest did enter, and that once a Year, after the Sacrifice of
Atonement for the whole Congregation; then the High Priest was to come into the
Holy of Holies, he as to pass through the Vail with Blood, and with sweet
Incense in his hand. Just thus is Jesus entered into the Heaven of Heavens for
us; he is gone there to present his Blood and Sufferings, to appear before God
for us, to present himself as a sweet smelling Sacrifice. Heb. 9. 24. Ephesians. 5.
2. Now the High Priest, when he went with this Blood into the Mercy-Seat, he
went in with the Names of the twelve Tribes upon his Breast and Shoulder; and
Jesus also does appear before God for us, representing our Persons continually
before his Father. Now about the Mercy-Seat, there were Cherubims, and Figures
of Angels; just about the Ark, there they stooped down, to show, the Angels do
attened about the Throne, to dispatch Messages abroad into the World, and
convey Blessings to the Saints. There is a Throne of Grace, a Mercy-Seat, a
Mediator there, Angels at God's Beck, ready to send up and down, to and fro,
for the good of the Saints. And mark, not only has Jesus this Liberty to enter
into this Heaven of Heavens; but all the Saints have a Liberty to enter, and
that not only at Death, but in their Life time; for says the Apostle, Heb. 10.
19. Having therefore boldness to enter into the Holiest, by the Blood of Jesus.
All of us, not only when we die, and personally go to God, do we enter into the
Holy of Holies, but now we have Boldness: It relates to Prayer, for the Word
signifies Liberty of Speech. This Holy of Holies, which was closed and shut up
against us before, is opened by the Blood of Jesus; the Vail is rent, and now
all Saints have a Privilege to come freely to converse with God. It is good to
observe the Difference between the Holy of Holies, and the Heaven of Heavens:
The Jews, their Sanctum Sanctorum was earthly; but our Holy of Holies is
heavenly. Into theirs, which was as it were God's Bedchamber, the common
People were not admitted; none but the High Priest could enter into the Holy of
Holies: But now into ours all Believers may enter, and converse with God. There
the High Priest could enter but once a Year: Now we may come to the Throne of
Grace, as often as we have a Cause to present to God. There the High Priest, he
entered with the Blood of Beasts; but we enter by the Blood of the Son of God. O
what a great Privilege is this, that we have a Father in Heaven! In this
respect the Holy Place is now open to us: Tho we have not a personal Access
till Death, yet by the Blood of Jesus we may come with Boldness, presenting our
selves before the Lord, with all our Wants and Desires. The great Distance
between Heaven and Earth shall not hinder our Communion with God, if we have a
Friend above.

Therefore it is very comfortable now to say, Our Father, which art in Heaven;
(that is) our gracious and reconciled Father, in and by Christ.

APPLICATION.
If we have a Father in Heaven, let us look up to Heaven often.

1. If we have a Father in Heaven, and a Savior at his right hand, to do all
things that are needful for us; let us look upon the aspectable Heavens with an
Eye of Sense, with our bodily Eyes, It is good to contemplate the Glory of the
heavenly Bodies, or the Outside of that Court which God has provided for the
Saints. It is not an idle Speculation I press you to: The Saints of God have
thought it to be worthy of their Morning and Evening-Thought. It is notable,
David does (in two Psalms especially) contmeplate Heaven* (...) seems to be a
Nightly, the other a (...)-Meditation. The Night-Meditation you have, Psalm. 8.
3. When I consider thy Heavens, the Work of thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars
which thou have ordained. David was got abroad in a Moon-shining Night, looks
up, and had his Heart affected. But now the 19th Psalm, that seems to be a
Morning-Mediation; he speakds of the Sun coming out like a Bridegroom from his
Chamber in the East, and displaying his Beams, and Heat, and Influences to the
World; and then says he, v. 1. The Heavens declare the Glory of God. Morning
and Evening, or when ever you go abroad to see the Beauty of the outward
Heavens, say, I have a Father there, a Christ there; this is the Pavement of
that Palace, which God has provided for the Saints. Christians, it is a sweet
Meditation, when you can say, He that made all Things, is there. It will be a
delightful, profitable thing, sometimes with an Eye of Sense to take a view of
our Father's Palace, as much as we can see of it here below.

2. Let me especially press you to this, with an Eye of Faith to look within
the Vail; and when ever you come to pray, to see God in Heaven, and Christ at
his Right Hand. The great Work of Faith is, to see him that is invisible; and
the great Duty of Prayer is, to get a Sight of God in Heaven, and Christ at his
right hand. What Stephen did miraculously, or in an Ecstasy, we must do
graciously in Prayer. Now it is said of Stephen, Acts 7. 56. Behold, I see the
Heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God. There is
a great deal of Difference about Stephen's Sight: How the Heavens could be
opened; for they are solid Bodies, and cannot be divided; fluent Air, and so
come together again: How he could see the Glory of God with his corporal
Senses, which is invisible: How he could see Christ at such a Distance, the Eye
not being able to reach so far. Some think it to be a mere intellectual Vision,
or a Vision of Faith; that is, he did so firmly believe, and had the Comfort of
it in his Heart, as if he had seen it with his Eyes. So they think Stephen saw
the Glory of God, and Christ at his right hand, as Abraham saw Christ's Day,
and rejoiced; that is, he saw it by Faith. Some think it to be a Prophetical
Vision, by seeing those things objected to his Fancy, by imaginary Species; as
Isaiah saw God in a Vision, Isa. 6. and as Paul's Rapture. Some think it a
Symbolical Vision; that he saw these thing represented by some corporeal
Images, as John saw the Holy Ghost descending in the form of a Dove. Some think
his bodily Eyes did pierce the Clouds, and got a sight of the Glory of Christ.
Whatever it be, there must be such a Sight in Prayer, something answerable to
this; in a spiritual way this must ever be done. Psalm. 5. 3. I will pray, says
the Psalmist, and look up. There is a looking up required in all Prayer, a
seeing the invisible God by Faith. If you would have God look down upon you
from his holy Habit^tion, you must look up with an Eye of Faith, and converse
with God in Heaven. Psalm. 63. 4. I will lift up my Hands in thy Name. If you
would have God look upon you with an Eye of Compassion, you must look up, and
see Christ at his right hand, by an Eye of Faith.

3. Let us love our Father; love God in Christ, and love the Place for his
sake, where his Residence is.

(1.) Love God in Christ. Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? When
God has been so gracious to you! Christians, if I had no other Argument to
press you to love god, but that he which is in Heaven, offers to be your
Father in Christ Jesus, it might suffice; because it is a great Condescension,
that the God of Heaven will look upon poor boken-hearted Creatures: that he
whose Throne is in Heaven, would look upon him that is of a trembling Spirit.
Isa. 66 2. That the high and lofty One, that dwells in the high and holy
Place, will look to him that is of a contrite Heart. Isa. 57. 15. That he that
is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, will be our Father, and own us, and bless us!
A great Condescension on God's part, and a great Dignity also is put upon us;
and how should our Hearts be affected with it? Therefore though there be a
great Distance between Heaven and Earth, it should not lessen our Affections to
God. He is mindful of us, visits us at every turn, we are dear and tender to
him; therefore let the Lord be dear to you. The Butler, when he was exalted,
forgot Joseph; but Christ is not grown stately with his Advancement, He does
not forget us; O let not us forget God. Let us manifest our Love, by being
often with him at the Throne of Grace, with our Father which is in Heaven. A
Child is never well, but when in the Mother's Lap, or under the Father's Wing:
So should it be with us, with an humble Affection coming into the presence of
God, and getting into the Bosom of our heavenly Father. Never delight in any
thing, so much as conversing with him, and serious Addresses to him in Prayer.
Again,

(2.) Love the Place for his sake; God is there, and Christ is there. We have
cause to love the Place for our own sakes; and in a short time, if you continue
patient in well-doing, you will be with God. It is not only God's Throne, but
it is your House. 2 Cor. 5. 1. We look for an House in Heaven, no made with
hands. It is a Place appointed for our everlasting Abode; therefore all our
Hopes, Desires, and Delights should run that way. But chiefly I would press you
to love it for his sake, the Place where you heavenly Father dwells. God has
not taken his Denomination from Earth, which is the Place of Corruption; but
from Heaven, which is the Place of Glory and Happiness. O let us not forget our
heavenly Father's House. We are to apt to say, it is good to be here.
Christians, let us draw home apace; let us grow more heavenly-minded every day,
seek the things which are above; prize it rather upon this occasion, because if
we were more heavenly in the frame of our Hearts, we would be more heavenly in
our solemn Approaches to God. What Is the reason a Man is haunted with the
World, and things which are of a worldly Interest and Concern, when he comes to
Prayer? It Is because his Heart is taken with these Things.

Hallowed be thy Name.
WE are now come to the first petition of the Lord's Prayer; there three Things
will fall under Discussion.

I. The Order of this Petition. II. The Necessity of putting up such a Request
to God. III. The Sense and M^aning of the Petition it self.
I. Of the Order; it is the first of all the six. The Petitions of the
Lord's-Prayer may thus be ranked: The four first concern the obtaining of Good;
and the two last, the removal of Evil: either the removal of Evil past, and
already committed; or the removal of Evil future, and such as may be admitted
by the Temptation of the Devil. Among the former, those Things that do more
immediately concern the Glory of God, they have the first place. In this
Petition, the Glory of God is both desired and promised on our part; for every
Prayer is both an Expression of a Desire, and also an implicit Vow, or a solemn
Obligation that we take upon our selves, to prosecute what we ask. Prayer, it
is a preaching to our selves in God's hearing. We speak to God, to warm our
selves; not for his Information, but for our Edification.

From the Order observe,

Doct. That those Things are to be desired in the first place, and with the
greatest Affection, which do concern the Glory of God: The first Petition is,
Hallowed be thy Name.

Here to show; 1. Why this Petition if put first. 2. Present some Reasons of
the Point.


First; This Petition is put first, for a double Reason:

1. Partly, to show that this must be the End of all our Requests. All that we
desire and pray for, in behalf of our selves and others, must be subordiante to
this End. All these things must be asked, that by the accomplishment of them,
God may be brought more in request in the World. See all the other Petitions in
this Prayer, how they are suited to this End in Scripture. When we say, Thy
Kingdom come, what do we beg that for, but ultimately the Glory of God? Phil.
2^ 10, 11. God has given him a Name which is above every Name, that every
Tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the
Father. When we say, Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven; it is still
to the Glory of God. Mat. 5. 16. That our good Works may so shine forth before
Men here upon Earth, that they may glorify our Father which is in Heaven, When
we ask our daily Bread, and Provisions for the present Life, it is still that
he may be glorified in our comfortable Use of the Creature: 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of
God. When we ask for the Remission of Sins, it is, that God may be glorified in
Christ: Romans 3. 25, 26 Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through
Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that
are past, that he may be just, etc. When we beg Freedom from Temptation, it is
that we may not dishonor God: Prove. 30. 8, 9. Lest I be full, and deny thee,
and say, Who is the Lord? Or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my
God in vain. Still that God may be glorified in every Condition. When we ask
Deliverance from Evil: Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the Day of Trouble; I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. So that the Glory of God, in all
Requests that we make to him, like Oil, still swims on the Top, and must be the
End of all the rest; for other things are but Means in subordination to it.

2. It notes, that our chiefest Care and Affection should be carried out to the
Glory of God, when we pray: We should rather forget our selves, than forget
God. God must be remembered in the first place. There is nothing more precious
than God himself, therefore nothing should be more dear to us than his Glory.
This is the great Difference between the Upright and the Hypocrite: The
Hypocrite never seeks God, but when his Necessities do require it, not in and
for himself; But when the Upright come to seek God, it is for God in the first
place: their main Care is about God's Concernments, rather than their own. Tho
they seek their own Happiness in him, and they are allowed so to do; yet it is
mainly God's Glory which they seek, not their own Interests and Concernments.
See that, Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto us, not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy Name
give Glory, for thy Mercy, and for thy Truth's sake. It is not a Doxology, or
Form of Thanksgiving, but a Prayer; not for our Safety and Welfare, so much as
thy Glory: Not to reek and satisfy our Revenge upon our Adversaries, not for
the Establishment of our Interest, but for the Glory of thy Grace and Truth,
that God may be known to be a God keeping Covenant; for Mercy and Truth are the
two Pillars of the Covenant. It is a great dishonouring of God, when any thing
is sought from him, more than himself, or not for himself. Says Austin, it is
but a carnal Affection in Prayer, when Men seek Self more than God. Self and
God are the two things that come in competition. Now there are several sorts of
Self; there is carnal Self, natural Self, spiritual Self, and glorified Self;
above all these, God must have the Pre-eminence.

(1.) Carnal Self. By a foolish Mistake we take our Lusts to be our selves.
Col. 3. 5. Mortify your Members here upon Earth: And these Members he makes to
be Fornication, Uncleanness, and the like. Our Sins are as dear to us, as any
essential or integral part of the Body; they are our Members. Now these should
have no room in our Prayers at all, tho usually they have the first place. Jam.
4. 3. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it
upon your Lusts. Our Prayers should be the Breathings of the Spirit, and
usually they are but the Belches and Eructations of the Flesh. And for these it
is we are so instant and earnest with God. We would have God bless us in some
revengeful and carnal Enterprise. We deal with God, as the Thief that lighted
his Candle at the Lamps of the Altar: So many would make God a Party in their
carnal Designs. Prove. 21. 27. The Sacrifice of the Wicked is an Abomination;
how much more, when he brings it with a wicked Mind? It is an Abomination,
when it is at the best; but when he has an ill Aim, then it is an Abomination
with a witness. Foolish Creatures vainly imagine to entice Heaven to their
Lure. Balaam builds Altars, and sacrificed, out of hope that God would curse
his own People, and engage in Moab's Quarrel; like the Man in the Gospel, that
would make no other use of Christ, than to compose his civil Difference: Luke
12. 13. he comes to him as a Man of Authority, Master, speak to my Brother,
that he divide the Inheritance with me. We all look upon God, tanquam aliquem
magnum, (as Austin said he did in his Infancy) as some great Power, that would
serve all our carnal Turns. In this Sense, we make God to serve our Sins, Isa.
43. 24. when we would have God to contribute to our Lusts; to our Pride,
Wantonness, Revenge. This is such a foolish Request, as if a Wife should beg of
her Husband, to give her leave to go on with her Adulteries. Survey all the
Petitions which are in this present Platform of Prayer, there is not one that
is calculated for such an evil purpose, as our Revenge, Pomp, Pride, Pleasure.
Carnal Self surely must give way to God.

(2.) There Is a natural Self, when we seek our own Temporal Felicity. Christ
has allowed these natural Desires a Room in our Prayers; but they must keep
their Order, and their Place: first, God's Glory; and then, our Safety. The
obtaining of natural Good is put in the last place. And therefore when our
Thoughts only run upon Temporal Felicity, and outward Supplies, it is not
Prayer, but a brutish Cry: Hos. 7. 14. They howl upon their Beds for Corn, Wine
and Oil. Beasts are sensible of their Pain, and are carried by natural Instinct
to seek their own Welfare, as well as Men. And therefore when this is our first
and only Request, it is a Perversion of that Order, which Christ has set down
in this perfect Form of Prayer.

(3.) There is Spiritual Self: Which is valuable, either in point of
Justification, or Acceptance with God; or in point of Sanctification, and
Conformity to him. Now as these Blessings cannot be severed from God's Glory,
where they are really enjoyed; so they must not be severed in our Prayers, nor
preferred before it. To ask Pardon as a separate Benefit, as it concerns our
Ease and Quiet, not as it concerns God's Glory, is a Perversion and a Diversion
of our Prayers. The main thing, which God intends should be the main thing in
our Requests, is, the Praise of his glorious Grace, wherein he has made us
accepted in the Beloved. Ephesians. 1. 6. And therefore this is the main thing which
the Soul intends: Psalm. 79. 9. Help us, O God of our Salvation, for the Glory
of thy Name; and deliver us, and purge away our Sins, for thy Names sake. The
Argument is not taken from themselves merely, or from their own Misery, but
from God's Glory. If God could not be more glorified in our Pardon, and
Acceptance with him, than in our Death and Damnation, it were an evil thing to
desire Pardon. But now when God has abundantly cleared up this to us, he is no
Loser by Acts of Mercy; that this conduces more to the exalting of his great
Name, to accept poor Sinners to Mercy: the Soul goes with the more confidence
to beg it of God, that he would purge us from our Filthiness for his Names
sake. But now Men's Thoughts are wholly taken up with their own Peace and
Safety, and take no care for God's Honor; this is but a Selfish Request, or an
Offer of Nature after Ease. For the other part, to ask for Grace, and
Conformity to God's Will, merely as it is a Perfection of our Nature,
abstractly from God's Glory; it is not a right Request: It is contrary to the
very Nature of Grace, whose Tendency is to God in the first place, that his
Name may be glorified, that we should be to the praise of his glorious Grace.
Grace wrought in us, is but a Creature, and not to be preferred before the
Creator. See how the Apostle prays, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11, 12. We pray always for you,
that our God would count you worthy of this Calling, and fulfill all the good
Pleasure of his Goodness, and the Work of Faith with Power: That the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the
Grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ* That is a regular Prayer, when all
our spiritual Interests are swallowed up in God, and we beg that his Name may
be glorified in us, and upon us.

(4.) There is glorified Self, which stands in the eternal Fruition of God.
Man was made for two Ends; to glorify God, and to enjoy him. Now our Crown of
Glory must be laid at God's Feet; as the Elders, Rev. 4. 10. Saying, Thou art
worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power. All our Desires must
give place to this, that he may be glorified in our eternal Happiness; and we
are to beg it no farther, than as it may stand with his Honor. Man's chief End,
and so his chief Request in respect of himself, is, to enjoy God; but with
respect to God, so it is the highest only of subordinate Ends; for the highest
chiefly and absolutely, is the glorifying of God.

Well then, therefore this is put first, to show, that our chiefest Care and
Affection should mainly run upon the Glory of God, and that God might be
advanced, and lifted up on high.

Secondly; To give you some Reasons, why those things which concern the Glory
of God must be sought in the first place, and with the greatest Affection.

1. As we are reasonable Creatures, it is fit it should be so. In all regular
Desires, the End is first intended, and then the Means. But now the Glory of
God, that is the End of all things: Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made all Things
for himself; that is, for his own Glory, for the manifesting of his Excellency.
And so our Redemption, Luke 2. 14. Glory be to God on high. When God came to
show his Good Will in Christ, it was to make way for his Glory: As it begins in
Good Will, so it must end in Glory. This is the end of all the Privileges we
have by Nature and Grace. Now God's Glory is the end of our Being and Service,
and therefore must be first taken care of in our Prayers; first his Glory, and
then our Profit, for the End is the first thing intended by any rational Agent.

2. As we are the Children of God by Adoption: The great Duty of Children is to
honor their Parents. God pleads for Honor upon this account, Mal. 1. 6. If I
be a Father, where is my Honor? So that if you consent to the Preface, and
say, Our Father; then the next request will be, Hallowed be thy Name. If we
would own our selves in such a P^lation, then we must make it our chief desire
and care, that God might be glorified by our selves and others. Every kind of
Honor will not serve the turn of our Heavenly Father. He must not be honored
as an ordinary Father, in a common Notion, but as an In^inite and Eternal
Majesty; and to prefer any thing to his Interest or Glory, or to equal any
thing to him, it is to make an Idol of him, and to renounce him to be our
Father. The case of earthly Parents is not always so. But now you renounce God,
when an Idol is set in the Throne; when any Interest or Concernment of yours is
preferred before God, and before his Interest and Concernment.

3. That which is of most value and consideration should be sought first. Now
God's Glory, it has an in^inite Excellency above all other things. The Glory
of God is of more worth than all Creatures, than their Being and Happiness. The
End is more worthy than that which serves and conduces to the End. Meats and
Drinks, they were made for the Body, therefore are not so good as the Body. Who
would dig for Iron with Mattocks of Gold? The Means or Instrument is better
worth than the Purchase. Now no matter what becomes of us, so God may be
glorified. As it is said of David, Thou art better than ten thousand of us;
therefore, tho they exposed their Bodies to hazard, they thought it not safe
for him: So is God better than the whole World of Men or Angels. Our first care
must be that he may be glorified, then let other Things succeed in their place.

4. The Example of Christ, shows how much the Glory of God should be cared for,
and preferred before the Creatures Good; Joh. 12. 27, 28. Father, save me from
this hour: There was the Innocent and sinless Inclination of his Human Nature.
But, For this Cause came I unto this Hour; Father glorify thy Name. He does not
so earnestly insist upon that, but submits all his Human Concernments, tho
exceeding precious, that they might give way to the Glory of God; and he had no
respect to his own Ease, or to the innocent inclination of his Human Nature, or
to the felt Comforts of the Godhead. Now Christ's Example, it is the best
Instruction: he taught us how we should behave our selves to our Heavenly
Father; and therefore, we should learn to prefer the Honor of God, before our
own ease: And if God but get up, tho we be kept low and poor, yet we should be
contented. Look, as all natural Things will act against their particular
Inclination on for a general Good; as to avoid a Vacuity, the Air will descend,
and the Water ascend, that there may not be a Confusion or Dissolution of the
Frame of Nature: So has Christ taught us still to prefer a general Good.
Father, glorify thy self; that is it we must insist upon, tho it be with our
Loss, Suffering, Trouble, yea, sometimes with our trouble of Conscience, we
must be content.

5. From the Nature of Prayer. The whole Spiritual Life it is a living to God.
Gal. 2. 19. I am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God. The whole
Tendency and Ordination of all acts of the Spiritual Life, they are to God.
Even the Natural Life is overruled and directed to this End; there is an
Eating and Drinking to God; the Meat and Drink we take, if God be not the last
End of it, it is but a Meat Offering, and a Drink Offering to our own Appetite,
and a Sacrifice to Moloch: Now much more in acts of immediate Worship, there
God will be principally regarded, for their respect and tendency is mainly to
God. In our whole Life we are God's, dedicated to him. Every Godly Man is set
apart for God. A Man that is a Christian, must Be holy in all manner of
Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. A Christian must look upon himself, as one that is
dedicated to God, when he is at his Meals, in his Trade and Calling; and Grace
is to run out in every Act. But much more is this tendency of Grace to bewray
it self in our solemn Sequestration of our selves, when we make our nearer
approaches to him. Lev. 10. 3. I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me,
and before all the People will I be glorified. What is it to sanctify God? A
thing is sanctified when it is set apart: And God is sanctified, when we set
apart our selves wholly for him, when he has more than common Affections, and
common Respects. And therefore in Prayer, in the first^ place we should go to
God, for God, and surely in such a Request we are likely to speed.

6. Love to God (if it be unfeigned, and has any Strength in the Soul) will
necessarily put us upon this. Love seeks the good of the Party beloved, as much
or more than its own. Those which love, have all things in common between them;
and one counts it done to himself what is done to the other: So it is in the
Love between us and God. Look, as Christ loves the Saints, and counts what
ever you do to them it is done to him, because done to those whom he loved,
Mat. 25. So reciprocally, the Saint which loves God, what is done to God is
done to us; when God is honored, we are comforted as much or more than with
our own Benefit: And when God is dishonored, we have the Grief and Sorrow.
Psalm. 69. 9. The Reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me.
Or if they hear God's Name rent in pieces, and Men dishonor him by their
filthy Lives, it goes to their Hearts; for God and they have but one common
Interest: Nay, they prefer God's Interest before their own, or any others; Ioh.
21. 15. Simon, Son of Jonas, love thou me more than these? By the Worlds
Maxim, Love should begin at home; but by Christ's Direction, it begins with
God: They are more tender of God's Glory, than their own Lives, and outward
Comfort. I count not my Life dear to me, says Paul. Thus you see, what reason
there is why our main Care and Thoughts should be taken up about the
Concernments of God, and about the Glory of his Holy Name.

Use. 1. To reprove us, that we are no more affected with God's Glory, O how
little do we aim at and regard it in our Prayers? We should seek it, not only
above the Profits and Pleasures of this Life, but even above Life it self; yea,
above Life present and to come. But alas! since the Fall we are corrupt, and
wholly poisoned with Self-Love, we prefer every base Interest and Trifle before
God; nay, we prefer carnal Self before God. Some are wholly brutish, and so
they may wallow in Ease and Pleasure, and eat the Fat, and drink the Sweet,
never think of God, care not how God is dishonored, both by themselves and
others. And then some, O how tender are they in matters of their own
Concernment, and affected with it, more than for the Glory of God! Ioh. 12. 43.
They are more affected with their own Honor, and their own Loss and Reproach,
than with God's dishonor, or God's Glory. If their own Reputation be but
hazarded a little, O how it stings them to the Heart! But if they be faulty
toward God, they can pass it over without Trouble. A Word of Disgrace, a
little Contempt cast upon our Persons, kindles the Coals, and ^ills us with
Rage; but we can hear God's Name dishonored, and not be moved with it. When
they pray, if they beg outward Blessings, if they ask any thing, it is for
their Lusts, not for God; it is but to feed their Pomp and Excess, and that they
may shine in the Pomp and Splendour of external Accommodations. If they beg
Quickening and Enlargment, it is for their own Honor; that their Lusts may be
fed by the Contributions of Heaven: So by a wicked Design, they would even make
God to serve the Devil. The best of us, when we come to pray, what a deep Sense
have we of our own Wants, and no desire of the Glory of God. If we beg daily
Bread, Maintenance and Protection; we do not beg it as a Talent to be improved
for our Master's use, but as Fuel for our Lusts. If we beg Deliverance, it is
because we are in pain, and ill at ease; not that we may Honor and glorify
God, that Mercy and Truth may shine forth. If we beg Pardon; it is only to get
rid of the Smart, and enlarged out of the Stocks of Conscience. If they beg
Grace; it is but a lazy Wish after Sanctification, because they are convinced
there is no other way to be happy. If they beg eternal Glory; they do not beg
it for God, it appears plainly, because they can be content to dishonor God
long, provided they at length may be saved. Most of us pray without a Heart set
to glorify God, and to bring Honor unto his great Name. Tho a Man has never
so much sense and feeling in his Prayer, yet if his Heart be not duly set as to
the Glory of God, his Prayer is turned into Sin. It is not the manner of the
Vehemence only, for a Carnal Spring may send forth High-Tides of Affection; and
Motions that come from Lust, may be earnest and very rapid: Therefore it is not
enough to have Fervor and Vehemence, but when our aim is to honor and glorify
God: Zech. 7. 5, 6. When ye fasted, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me? And
when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did you not eat for your selves, and
drink for your selves?

Use. 2. For Exhortation, to press us to seek the Glory of God above all
things. Take these Arguments.

1. How necessary it is the Lord should have his Glory. The World serves for no
other purpose, it is made and continued for this End; Rev. 4. 11. Thou art
worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: For thou have created
all things, and for thy Pleasure they are and were created. All that God has
made, it was for his own Glory. And Romans 11. 36. For of him, and through him,
and to him are all things: To whom be Glory for ever. Amen. Of him, in a way of
Creation; Through him, by way of Providential Influence and Supportation; that
they may be To him, in their final tendency and result. God did not make us for
our selves, but his own Glory.

2. It is a singular Benefit to be admitted to sanctify God's Name. O that poor
Worms should come and put the Crown upon God's Head! And that he will count any
thing we can do to be a Glory to himself; ^ Chron. 29. 14. But who am I, and
what is my People, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this
sort? For all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.

3. Consider how much it concerns us; that we may make some Restitution for
our former dishonouring of God, therefore we should be more zealous in this
Work. How forward have we been to dishonor God in Thought, Word, and Deed,
before the Lord wrought upon us? There is not a Mercy but we have abused it,
nor any thing we have meddled with, but one way or other we have turned it to
the Lord's Reproach and Dishonor. Now when the Lord has put Grace in our
Hearts, When we are a People formed for his Praise. Isa. 43. When he has made
us anew, we should think of making some Restitution, some amends to God, and
should zealously affect his Glory above all things.

Use. 3. For Trial. Do we prefer the Glory of God in the first place? Take
these Marks.

1. Then we would be content with our own loss, provided the Name of God may
gain any respect in the World; and so he may be magnified, no matter what
becomes of us, and our Interest and Concernment. Phil. 1. 20. The Apostle
expresses there a kind of Indifferency; So Christ shall be magnified in my
Body, whether it be by Life or by Death. O then it is a sign you make it your
purpose, drift, and care, when you are contented to do or be any thing that God
will have you to be or do. This holds good, not only in temporal Concernments,
when you are content to want necessary Food, etc. But it holds also in
Spiritual Concernments: As to sense of Pardon; tho God should suspend the
Consolations of his Spirit, yet if it be for the Glory of his Grace, I am to be
content: Nay, in some Cases God's Glory is more to be cared for than our own
Salvation, if they two could come in competition; but that case never falls out
with the Creature; our Salvation is conjoined with the Glory of God. But yet in
supposition, if it should, as Paul and Moses puts the Supposition, Exodus 32.
32. Blot me, I pray thee out of the Book which thou have written: So God might
be honored in saving that People. So Romans 9. 3. For I could wish that my self
were accursed from Christ, for my Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the Flesh.
It was not a rash Speech, a thing spoken out of an unadvised Passion; see but
with what a serious Pre^ace it is ushered in, verse. 1. God is my Witness I lie
not, my Conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost: He calls God to
witness, this was the real disposition of his Heart, and he speaks advisedly,
and with good deliberation.

Object. But is it lawful thus to wish to be accursed? Certainly Paul could not
wish himself to love Christ less, or to be less beloved of him; for these
things we cannot part with them without Sin: but in our enjoyment of Christ
there is a happy part, some personal Happiness which resulteth to us; now all
this he could lay at God's Feet. How so? What for others? A regular Love begins
at home, and every Man is bound to look to his own Salvation first, and then
the Salvation of others. But that was not the case, it was not their Salvation,
and Paul's Salvation, which was in Competition; but the Glory of God, and the
common Salvation of the Jews, and Paul's particular Salvation. It was a mighty
prejudice to the Gospel, that the People from whom Christ's Messengers
proceeded, (for the Law went out of Sion, the Gospel came out from among the
Jews,) that so many of them were prejudiced, and a mighty Eclipse to the Glory
of God. Now he could lay down all his personal Happiness at God's Feet, he
speaks in Supposition, if such a Case falls out. But however this is a clear
Rule, the Glory of God must be preferred before our own Salvation. In some
Cases there will be need of this Rule. For Instance, there is many a Man that
possibly is convinced of a false Religion; and the first Question Men make is,
if they can be saved in such a Religion, but many Men are hardened in Popery.
When therefore a Man is contented to continue in a false Religion, and
dishonor God with his compliance there, provided he may be saved; he prefers
his own Salvation before the Glory of God. And in case of the delay of
Repentance, when Men dally with God, and put off the work of returning to the
Lord until another time, or hereafter it is time enough to repent; these Men
prize their Salvation before the Glory of God: If it were true upon that
Supposition, that if ever they shall be saved, they are contented God shall be
dishonored a great deal longer, and that if they be saved at length, this will
satisfy them.

Quest. But how may we discern that we make the Glory of God the first and
chief thing we aim at in Prayer?

1. Partly by the work of your own Thoughts. The End is first in Intention, tho
last in Execution. When you are praying for a public Mercy against an Enemy,
what runs in your Thoughts? Revenge, Safety, and your own personal Happiness,
or God's Glory? What will thou do, O Lord, unto thy great Name? Josh. 7. 9. Are
you pleasing your selves, with Suppositions of your Escape and Deliverance, and
reeking your Wrath upon your Adversaries? So in Prayer for Strength and
Quickening, what is it that runs in your Mind? Are you entertaining your Spirit
with Dreams of Applause, and feeding your Minds with the sweetness of popular
Acclamation?

2. By the manner of praying, absolutely for God's Glory, but for all other
things with a sweet Submission to God's Will. Joh. 12. 27. Father, save me from
this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy Name.
Then came there a Voice from Heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will
glorify it again. Christ is absolute in the Request, and he receives an Answer.
Is this enough? Do you mainly press God with this, that he might provide for
his own glorious Name, that his Name might not lie under Reproach? But now
carnal Aims do make Affection impetuous and impatient of check and denial.
Rachel must have Children, or dye. When the Heart is set upon earthly Success,
Pleasure, or Comfort, then they cannot brook a denial without Murmuring. The
Children of God only accept of God's Glory, and in all other things they leave
themselves to God's disposal, and therefore this is the main thing.

3. Partly too by the Disposition of your Hearts when your Prayers are
accomplished, and God has given any Blessing you pray for; we do not ask it
for God's Glory, if we do not use it for God's Glory. The time of having
Mercies is the time of Trial, and therefore when we consume our Mercies upon
our Lusts, when they do not conduce to check our Sins, it is a sign God's Glory
is not the thing intended, as it should be.

Thus for the Order of this Petition.

II. The Necessity of putting up such a Request to God. It Is his charge to us
in the Third Commandment, That we should sanctify his Name; Thou shall not take
the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: The positive part of that Commandment,
is, Thou shall sanctify it. Now here we make it matter of Prayer to God;
Hallowed be thy Name. From whence let me observe.

Doct. Those that would have God's Name Hallowed and Glorified, must seriously
deal with God about it.

There are several Reasons why we must put up such Requests to God. I might
argue from the Utility, and the Necessity of it.

First, the Utility: We put up these Requests to God.

1. That we may more solemnly warn our selves of our own Duty. In Prayer there
is an implicit Vow, or solemn Obligation, that we take upon our selves, to
prosecute what we ask; It is a Preaching to our selves in God's hearing. So
that every Word we speak to God, is a Lesson to us, and our Requests are as so
many Exhortations to glorify his Holy Name: With what Face can we ask that
which we are wholly wretchless and neglectful of. Then we shall certainly come
under that Character, Mat. 15. 7, 8. This People draws nigh unto me with
their Mouth, and honors me with their Lips: but their Heart is far from me.
It is the greatest Mockage of God to ask, unless we have a Mind to pursue, and
diligently to attend to this Work and Business, that the Name of God may be
glorified in us, and upon us.

2. That we may have a due Sense and Grief for God's Honor. God's Children,
they are troubled to see God dishonored. Lot's righteous Soul was vexed, not
with Sodom's Injuries, but with Sodom's Sins. 2 Pet. 2. 8. And David says,
Rivers of Tears run down mine Eyes, because Men keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119.
136. Many will scarce weep for their own Sins, where they have advantage of
remorse of Conscience; but when they are zealously affected with God's Glory,
they will weep for others Sins: When his Name is torn and rent in pieces, it is
a grief of Heart to them. Now God will have us ask this, that this Holy Sense
of Spiritual Grief may be kept up; for when it is become the matter of our
Requests, then we are interested in the Glory of God. We are loath to see things
miscarry, where we have petitioned and begged for others; so when we have
begged the Glory of his Name, it will further this Spiritual Sense and Grief of
Heart, when his Name is dishonored.

3. That we may count it as great a Blessing when God is glorified, as when we
are saved. Continue in Prayer, says the Apostle, and watch thereunto with
Thanksgiving. When we have been instant with God in Prayer, that he might be
glorified, then we shall count it as great a Blessing when he is glorified, as
when we are saved. Prayer makes way for the increase of our Esteem, and engages
us to observe the return. When we have asked it of God, we will be affected
with it then. When we see all his Works praise him, what a Comfort will this be
to the Soul. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, Psalm. 103. ult.

But Secondly, Let me show the Necessity of dealing with God about it. The
Necessity will appear, both in respect of Persons, and Things; when we beg that
God's Name may be Hallowed, we beg Dispositions of Heart, and Occasions.

First, The Necessity will appear in respect of Persons; both as to our Selves,
and Others.

First, In respect of our Selves. There is a great Necessity that we should
deal with God about the Hallowing of his Name; because we need Direction,
Quickening, Sincerity, Submission to God, Humility, and Holiness.

To instance in these six Things.

1. We need Direction. The Habits of Grace are God's Gifts, and the Exercise of
Grace is another thing; to actuate, quicken, guide, and direct it, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
5. The Lord direct your Hearts to the love of God. And so in Prayer, and in
honoring of God. In Prayer, We know not how, or what to pray for as we ought.
Tho we have Grace, yet we need Direction. A Ship that is well rigged, yet needs
a skilful Pilot. Romans 8. 26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities:
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought. How much are we to seek,
to give God his due Honor? Of our selves we cannot so much as think a good
Thought, 2 Cor. 3. 5. There is an utter insufficiency in us to meditate of God,
and conceive aright of his Excellency, and give him the Honor which is due to
him. None of us but needs daily to go to God, that we may be taught how to
hallow and sanctify his Name.

2. We need Quickening, being so backward to this Duty. All the Lepers could beg
Help, and but one returned to give God the Glory. There is much dullness and
deadness of Heart, as to the praising of God, and glorifying of God. Self-Love
will put us upon other Things; but it is Grace must quicken us to glorify him,
and praise him. When we go to God for our selves, our Necessities will sharpen
our Affections, and put a shrill Accent upon our Prayers: But now when we beg
of God, for God, then there is a greater Restraint upon us. And therefore David
says, Psalm. 51. 15. Open thou my Lips, and my Mouth shall show forth thy
Praise. We need God to open our Mouths, (that is) enlarge our Hearts, and
quicken our Affections. How apt are we to turn the back upon the Mercy-Seat?
Ezekiel. 46. 9. If a Man came in at the North Gate, he was to go out at the South
Gate, but never at the same Door; why? That he might not turn his Back upon the
Mercy-Seat. When we have prayed, we are apt to forget that God which has
blessed as; and therefore that our Hearts might be enlarged and quickened, we
need to go to God.

3. We need Vprightness and Sincerity, that we may mind the Glory of God. This
is not a Work of Nature, but Grace. Phil. 2. 21. All Men seek their own, not
the Things which are Jesus Christ's. There is the Fruit and Effect of Nature,
it puts Men upon seeking their own Things, worldly Ease, Profit, and Pleasure;
every Creature naturally seeks its own Welfare: But to make the Glory of God
our great Aim and Pursuit, it is ^ra^e puts upon that. Water ascends no higher
than it descends; so Nature cannot rise beyond it self. The Stream cannot rise
above the Foun^ain, and above the Principle. A Man that has nothing but
Nature, he cannot unfeignedly seek the Things which are of God. The Old Man,
with the deceitful Lusts, that is the natural Man: The upright Heart, that
unfeignedly seeks God, needs Grace from above. Without Influence from God, our
Actions cannot have a tendency to God. We shall prefer our Interest before
God's Glory, if we have no higher Principle than what our Hearts could furnish
us with.

4. We must go to God for Submission. Now there is a double Submission
required, which if we have not, we shall find it marvellously difficult to
glorify God: One, as to the choice of Instruments; another, as to the Way and
Means, by which God will bring about his own Glory.

(1.) As to the Choice of Instruments. There is in us an Envy, and wicked
Emulation. O how hard a matter is it, to rejoice in the Gifts, and Graces, and
Services of others, and be content with the Dispensation, when God will cast us
by, as unworthy, and use others for the glorifying of his Name! Therefore that
we may refer the Choice of Instruments to God, we need go to him, and say,
Lord, hallowed be thy Name; do it which way, and by whom thou please. We are
troubled, if others glorify God, and not we, or more than we; if they be more
holy, more useful, or more serious, Self will not yield to this. Now by putting
up this Prayer to God, we refer it to him, to choose the Instrument whom he will
employ. It was a commendable Modesty and Self-denial in John Baptist, which is
described, John 3. 13. He must increase, I must decrease. When we are contented
to be abased and obscured, provided Christ may be honored and exalted; and be
content with such a Dispensation, tho with our Loss and Decrease. Many are of a
private Station, and straightened in Gifts, and can have no public
Instrumentality for God; now these need to pray, Hallowed be thy Name, that
they may rejoice when God uses others, whom he has furnished with greater
Abilities.

(2.) A Submission for the Way; that we may submit to those unpleasing Means,
and Circumstances of his Providence, that God will take up, and make use of,
for the glorifying of his holy Name. Many times we must be content, not only to
be active Instruments, but passive Objects of God's Glory: And therefore i^ God
will glorify himself by our Poverty, or our Disgrace, our Pain and Sickness, we
must be content. Therefore we need to deal with God seriously about this
Matter, that we may submit to the Lord's Will, as Jesus Christ did, John 12.
27, 28. Save me from this Hour; but for this cause came I unto this Hour:
Father, glorify thy Name. And there was a Voice from Heaven, that said, I have
glorified it, and will glorify it again. Put me to Shame, Suffering, to endure
the Cross, the Curse, so thou may be glori^ied. This was the humble
Submission of Christ Jesus, and such a Submission should be in us. The Martyrs
were ^^ntented to b^ bound to the Stake, if that way God will use them to his
glory. Phil. 1. 20. says Paul, So Christ shall be magnified in my Body,
whether it be by Life, or by Death: If my Body be taken to Heaven in glory, or
whether it be exercised or worn out with Ministerial Labor. We need to deal
with God, that we may have the End, and leave the Means to his own choosing;
that God may be glorified in our Condition, whatever it be. If he will have us
rich and full, that he might be glorified in our Bounty; if he will have us
poor and low, that he may be glorified in our Patience; if ^e will have us
healthy, that he may be glorified in our Labor; if he will have us sick, that
he may be glorified in our Pain; if he will have us live, that he may be
glorified in our Lives; if he will have us die, that he may be glorified in our
Deaths: And therefore, Whether we live or die, we are the Lord's. Romans 14. 9. A
Christian is to be like a Dye in the hand of Providence, content whether he be
cast high or low; and not to grudg at it, whether he will continue us longer,
or take us out of the World. As a Servant employed beyond the Seas, if his
Master will have him tarry, there he tarries; if he would have him come home,
home he comes. So that we had need to deal seriously with God about this
submissive Spirit.

5. Humility; that we may not put the Crown upon our own Heads, but may cast it
at the Lamb's feet; that we may not take the Glory of our Graces to our selves.
God's great Aim in the Covenant is, That no Flesh should glory in it self: but
whosoever glories, may glory in the Lord. 1 Cor. 1. 27,-31. He would have us
still come and own him, in all that we are, and in all that we do. As the good
Servant gave account of his Diligence, Luke 19. 16. he does not say, My
Industry, but, Thy Pound has gained ten Pounds. And Paul was a zealous
Instrument, that went up and down doing good; he labored more abundantly than
they all: Yet not I, but the Grace of God, which was with me. 1 Cor. 15. 10. In
this Case, if we would honor and glorify God, we must do as Ioab did, when he
was likely to take Rabbah: He sent for David, to gather up more Forces, and
encamp against the City, and take it, Lest I take the City, and it be called
after my Name. 2 Samuel 12. 28. How careful was he that his Sovereign might have
the Honor? So careful should we be, that the Crown be set upon Christ's Head,
and that he may have the glory of our Graces and Services, that they may not be
called after our own Name, that God may be more owned in them than we. Now what
more natural, than for Creatures to intercept the Revenues of the Crown of
Heaven, and to convert them to their own Use? It is a vile Sacriledg, to rob
God of the Glory of that Grace he has bestowed upon us; and yet what more
common? The Flesh is apt to interpose upon all occasions; and therefore we need
to put up this Request, Hallowed be thy Name.

6. There is Holiness required, that we may not be a Disgrace to God, and a
Dishonor to him. The Lord says, Ezekiel. 20. 9. That his Name should not be
polluted before the Heathen, among whom they (his People) were. The Sin of
God's People does stain the Honor of God, and profane his Name. When Men
profess much, to be a People near God, and live carnally and loosly, they
dishonor God exceedingly by their Conversation. Men judge by what is visible
and sensible, and so they think of God, by his Servants and Worshippers; as the
Heathens did of Christ in Salvian's time, If he was a holy Christ, certainly
Christians would live more temperately, justly, and soberly. They are apt to
think of God by his Worshippers, and by the People that profess themselves so
near and dear to him; therefore it concerns us to walk so, that our Lives may
honor him. Mat. 5. 16. Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see
your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. As the Loins of
the Poor (says Job) blessed him, Job 31. 20. namely, as they were fed and
clothed by his Bounty: So our Lives may glorify God. David says, Psalm. 119.
7. Then shall I praise thee with Vprightness of Heart, when I have learned thy
righteous Judgment. There is no way to praise God entirely and sincerely, until
we have learned both to know and do his Will. Real Praise is the Praise God
looks after. Otherwise we do but serve Christ, as the Devil served him, who
would carry him upon the Top of the Mountain, but it was with an intent to bid
him throw himself down again: So we seem to exalt God much in our Talk and
Profession; yea, but we throw him down, when we pollute him, and deny him in
our Conversation. Our Lives are the Scandal of Religion, and a Pollution and
Blot to the Name of God. So that with respect to our selves, you see what need
we have to go to God, that he will give us Grace that we may please him, and
glorify his Name.

Secondly; In regard of Others. A Christian cannot be content to glorify God
himself, but he would have all about him to glorify God. As Fire turns all
Things round about it into Fire; and Leaven, it spreads still, until it has
subdued the whole Lump: So is Grace a diffusive, a spreading thing. As far as
we can reach and diffuse our Influence, we would have God brought into request
with all round about us. Being converted, says Christ to Peter, strengthen thy
Brethren? So it will be, where there is true Grace. Mules, and Creatures which
are of a Mongril and Bastard-Race, they beget not after their kind: So
Bastard-Christians are not for the calling in of others, and the gaining of
those about them. But a true Christian will be earnest, and much in this
Matter. Now their Hearts are not in our Power, but in God's; therefore we need
to be much in Prayer, and make this our main Request, Lord, hallowed be thy
Name. For hereby,

1. We acknowledge God's Dominion over the Spirits of Men, which is a great
Honor to God, and a quieting to us. It is a Title often given to God in
Scripture, that he is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh. If they had a
Magistrate to choose, they go to God: Numb. 27. 16. Let the Lord, the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh, set a Man over the Congregation. If a Judgment to be
averted, Numb. 16. 22. O God, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, shall one
Man sin, and will thou be wroth with all the Congregation? This is a great
Honor to God, when we acknowledge the Power and Dominion that he has over the
Hearts and Spirits of Men. To roll a Stone, is not so much as to rule the
Creatures; and to keep the Sun in his Course, is not so much as to rule the
Spirits of Men, and to work them to the glorifying of his holy Name. God can
turn the Hearts of Men this way, and that way, according as he pleases. Prove.
21. 1. The King's Heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of Water, he
turns it whithersoever he will. As a Man can dispose of a Watercourse, turn
it hither and thither, as the Necessities of his Field or Garden require: So
can God draw out the Hearts and Respects of Men. Surely there would not be so
many Disorders in the World, if we did often reflect upon (...) Attribute, or
did deal with God about his Power over the Spirits of Men. We are wrathful, and
think nothing but the Confusion of Men would serve the Turn; and there is no
Riddance of our Burden, but by the Destruction of those who stand in our way:
Whereas the Conversion of Men, a Change of their Spirits and Hearts, would be a
better Cure, and bring more Honor to God, and Safety with it. The truth is, we
look more to Men than to God; and that is the Reason why we pitch rather upon
the Destruction, than the Conversion of others: Destruction, that may be
executed by the Creature; but Conversion, that is a Power (to order and
regulate the Spirits of Men) which God has reserved in his own hands. One
Angel could destroy above an Hundred and Eighty Thousand in Sennacherib's Camp,
in one Night; but all the Angels, with their united Strength, cannot draw in
one Heart to God. But now the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, who is too hard
for him? O did we often reflect upon this, we would be dealing with God about
this Matter, that he would work upon the Spirits of Men. If there be a wicked
Ruler, or an obstinate Child or Servant, etc. that he would sanctify himself
upon them, and change their Hearts.

2. You discover much Love to God, when as you would not dishonor him your
selves, so you are careful others may not dishonor him. Praise him, all ye
Ends of the Earth. Psalm. 98. 4. and 100. 1. You would have all the World own
him. Private Spirits, that would impale and enclose Religion, that they may
shine alone, they do not love God, but themselves, their own Credit, and their
own Profit. Would to God all the Lord's People were Prophets! Numb. 11. 29.
That was a free and noble Speech. God is resembled to the Sun, because it is He
that must shine alone; but the Church is compared to the Moon and Stars, where
all may shine, but every Star in its own glory. True Christians would have all
to be as they are, unless it be with respect to their Bonds and Encumbrances.

3. You discover Love to others, you would have them glorify God. The Angels,
they rejoice when a Sinner is converted; they have a great Love to Souls. Luke
15. 7. And so do Christians; the more spiritual they are, the more they come
near to the blessed Spirits above, and the more affected they are with the good
done to others, and with their Conversion. Says Paul, Romans 9. 3. I could wish
that my self were accursed from Christ, for my Brethren, my Kinsmen according
to the Flesh: Such a Zeal and entire Affection he had to the Souls of others,
that he could lay all his personal Happiness at Christ's feet. And thus you see
what need we have to deal seriously with God in this Business, if indeed we
make this our Aim: Especially those which are in public Relations, as Paul
was, which had an Office put upon him to procure the Salvation of others; how
will their Hearts run out upon it?

Secondly; It is needful we should deal with God about the sanctifying of his
Name, as in regard of Persons, so of Things and Events. God has the disposal
of all Events in his own hands. There are many Things which concern the Glory
of God, that are out of our Reach, and are wholly in God's hands; and therefore
it discovers our Love to his Glory, and our Submission to his wise and powerful
Government of all Affairs, when we deal with God about it, and refer the Matter
to his disposal, and say; Lord, hallowed be thy Name, take the Work into thy
own hands. We discover our Love to his Glory, because we make it a part of our
Request, that all these Events may conduce to the glory of his Majesty. As
Joshua, when Israel fell before their Enemies, Josh. 7. 9. Lord, what will thou
do for thy great Name? There was his Trouble. And Moses, Numb. 14. 15, 16. What
will the Nations say round about? Because the Lord was not able to bring this
People into the Land which he swear unto them, therefore he has slain them in
the Wilderness. It goes near to the Heart of God's Children, when they see any
thing that will tend to God's Reproach.

But that is not all; it is not enough we discover that, but also our
Submission to his wise and powerful Government, when we refer the Matter to his
disposal, and can see that he can work out his own Ends, out of all the
Confusions which happen there, out of Sins, Errors, Wars, Blood. Psalm. 76. 10.
The Wrath of Man shall praise thee; the Remainder of Wrath shall thou restrain.
In the Septuagint it is, the Wrath of Man shall keep Holy Day to thee, shall
increase a Festival for thee. God many times gets up in the World, upon Satan's
Shoulders. When Matters are ravell'd and disordered, he can find out the right
End of the Thread, and how to disentangle us again; and when we have spoiled a
Business, he can dispose it for good, and make an Advantage of those things
which seem to obscure the Glory of his Name.

By the way, both these must go together; our Love to his Glory, and our
Submission to his Providence. Our Love to his Glory; for we should not be
altogether wretchless and careless how Things go; and yet not carking, because
of the Wisdom and Power of his Providence. The truth is, we should be more
sollicitous about Duties, than Events. The Glory of Events belongs to God
himself, and we are not to take his Work out of his hand, but mind him in it.
Look as some would lern their School-fellows Lesson better than their own; so,
we would have Things carried thus and thus: And so by murmuring we tax
Providence, rather than adore it, and we eclipse the Glory of God. Yet we must
be sensible of the Reproaches cast upon God, and must pray the Lord to
vindicate and right his Name, to take the Way and Means into his own hands.

Thus you have seen the Necessity of putting up such a Request to God, Hallowed
be thy Name.

Use 1. Is for Information. It informs us, That whatever we bestow upon God, we
have it from God at first. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. Of thine own have we given thee.
The King of all the Earth, we cannot pay him any Tribute, but out of his own
Exchequer. When we are best affected to God's Interest, and pray for God's
Concernments, we must beg the Grace which makes us to do so. It is his own
Gift: It is he must enable and incline us, quicken and direct us. So that in
all Things he is Alpha and Omega; we begin in him, when ever we end in him: And
when we do most (...) God, we have all from him*

Use 2. For Direction in the Matter of glorifying God, in four Propositions.

1. This Life is not to be valued, but as it yields us Opportunities for this
End and Purpose, to glorify God. We were not sent into the World to live for
our selves, but for God. If we could make our selves, then we could live to our
selves: If we could be our own Cause, then we might be our own End. But God
made us for himself, and sent us into the World for himself. Christ says, John
17. 4. Father, I have glorified thee on Earth, etc. It is not our Duty only to
glorify God in Heaven, to join in Consort with the Angels in their Hallelujahs
above, where we may glorify him without Distraction, Weariness, and Weakness;
but here on Earth, in the midst of Difficulties and Temptations. There are none
sent into the World to be idle, or to bring forth Fruit to themselves, Hos. 10.
1. to improve their Pains and Strength, to promote merely their own Interest;
but God's Glory must be our chief Work and Aim, while we are here upon Earth;
this must be the Purpose and Intent of our Lives.

2. Every Man, besides his general Calling, has his own Work and Course of
Service, whereby to glorify and honor God. John 17. 4. I have finished the
Work which thou gave me to do. As in a great House, one has one Employment,
one another: So God has designed to every Man his Work he has to do, and the
Calling he must be in; some in one Calling, and some in another; but they all
have their Service and Work given them to do for God's glory.

3. In discharge of this Work, as they must do all for God, so they can do
nothing without God. Every morning we should revive the Sense of it upon our
selves, as the Care of our Work and Aim, so the Sense of our Impotency: This
day I am to live with God; but how unable am I? and how easily shall I
dishonor him? The way of Man is not in himself. Jer. 10. 23. When a Christian
goes abroad in the Morning, he must remember he is at Christ's dispose; he is
not to do as he pleases, but to be guided by Rule, and act for God's glory,
and fetch in Strength from Christ. Col. 3. 17. Whatsoever ye do in Word or
Deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus: Not only in our Duties, or
immediate Converses with God, but in our Sports, Business, Recreation. What is
it to do things in the Name of Christ? That is, to do it according to Christ's
Will and Command. He has allowed us Time for Recreation, for conversing with
God, and calling in Christ's Help, and aiming at his Glory. If we have any
thing to do for God, we must do it in his own strength, in every Word and Deed.

4. You are directed again, when the Glory of God, and sanctifying of his Name,
either sticks with us, or sticks abroad, God must be specially consulted with
in the Case. When our Hearts are backward; then, Lord, open thou my Lips; Lord,
affect me with a sense of thy Kindness and Mercy. When it sticks abroad, when
such Events fall out, as for a while God's Name is obscured, and seems to be
clouded; Lord, what will thou do for thy great Name?

III. Having opened the Order of the Words, and the Reasons of putting up such
a Request to God, I now come to the Sense of the Petition, Hallowed be thy
Name. Four Things will come under Consideration: 1. What is meant by the Name
of God. 2. What it is to hallow and sanctify it. 3. I shall take notice of the
Form of the Proposal, (...), Hallowed. 4. The Note of Distinction, Thy Name.


First; What is meant by God's Name? 1. God himself. 2. Any Thing whereby he is
made known.


1. God himself. Name (by an Hebraism) is put for the Person it self. Thus,
Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a few Names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their
Garments; that is, many Persons. So, Acts 1. 15. it is said there, The Number
of the Names together were abo^t one hundred and twenty; that is, of Persons.
So it is used in the present Case: God's Name is put for God himself. Psalm. 20.
1. The Name of the God of Jacob defend thee! That is, God himself. So, Psalm.
44. 5. Through thy Name will we tread them under, that rise up against us; that
is, by Thee. And to believe in the Name of Christ, is to believe in Christ
himself. Name is put for Person; for the immediate Object of Faith, is the
Person of Christ. John 1. 12. To as many as received him, to them gave he Power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.

2. Any thing whereby he is made known to us* Nomen quasi not ^men. As a Man is
known by his Name; so God's Titles and Attributes, his Ordinances, his Works,
his Word, are his Name; chiefly the two latter. For his Works, they are a part
of the Name of God: Psalm. 8. 1. the Burden of that Psalm is twice repeated; O
Lord, our Lord, how great is thy Name in all the Earth! By the Name there, is
meant, God made known in his Works of Creation and Providence; for he speaks
there of Sun, Moon, and Stars, which proclaim an Eternal Power to all the
World; and he speaks of such a Name as is in all the Earth. And, Psalm. 117. 19,
20. He has not dealt so with any Nation, and given them his Word, Statutes,
and Ordinances; every one has not that Privilege: But, How great is thy Name
in all the Earth! That is, how manifestly art thou made known by thy Works! But
above all, by Name is meant his Word: Psalm. 138. 2. Thou have magnified thy
Word above all thy Name. There is more of God to be seen in his Word, than in
all the Creatures of the World, and in all his other Works besides. We
understand more of God, than can be taken up by the Creation: It helps us to
interpret the Book of Nature and Providence; there we have his Titles,
Attributes, Ordinances; there we have his greatest Work, in which he has
discovered so much of his Name, the Mystery of Redemption, which is not
elsewhere to be known. Thus by the Name of God, is meant God himself, as he
has made known himself in the Word: We desire that he may be sanctified, that
he may with honor and reverence be received every where.

Secondly, The second Thing to be explained; What is meant by Hallowed? In
Scripture God is said sometimes to be magnified, sometimes to be justified,
sometimes to be glorified, and sometimes to be sanctified. Now it is not here
said, Magnificetur nomen tuum, or glorificetur, but san^tifi^^tur, Let thy Name
be sanctified. All these Terms do express how God is to be honored by the
Creature; and they have all distinct Notions. God is said to be magnified, Luke
1. 46. My Soul does magnify the Lord. To magnify God, argues a high esteem, or
a due sense of his Greatness. Again, God is said to be justified, Luke 7. 29.
The People and the Publicans justified God. What is it to justify God? To
justify, is to acq^it from Accusation; and when that Word is applied to God, it
signifies our owning of him, notwithstanding the Prejudices of the World
against him. To glorify God, is to make him known to others, and to bring him
into Request wi^h others; for Glory, it is clara cum laud notitia, a public
Fame or Knowledge of Excellency. Thus Christ says, John 17. 10. I am glorified
in them; speaking of his Apostles, because by their means he was made known to
the World. All these are included in the Word of the Text. Yet there is
somewhat more intended by to be sanctified: When is God then said to be
sanctified?

To hallow, and to sanctify, is to set apart from common Use; and so to
sanctify the Name of God, is to use it in a separa^e manner, with that
reverence and respect which is not used to any thing else. So that when we
pray, that God's Name may be h^llowed or sanctified, we desire, that according
as he has made known himself in the Word, so he may be known, reverenced, and
esteemed in the World; known to be the only true God; 1 Kings 18. 36. Let it be
known this day, that thou art God in Israel; and accordingly worshipped and
glorified in the Hearts and Lives of Men.

The third Thing to open, is the Form of Proposal, (...): It is not
sanctificemus, let us hallow; but sanctificetur, let it be hallowed: For in
this Form of Speech, all the Persons concerned in this Work are included, God,
our selves, and others.

1. God is to be included in the Prayer, that we may express our sense of his
Providence, working all things for the glory of his holy Name, yea, discovering
his Excellency, showing himself to be the holy God. Ez^k. 38. 23. I will
magnify my self, and sanctify my self, and I will be known in the Eyes of many
Nations, and they shall know that I am the Lord. The Lord magnifieth himself,
by the more eminent Effects of his Care and Providence; but he sancti^ieth
himself chiefly, by blessing and defending the Godly, and by punishing and
afflicting the Wicked; for thereby he declares his Holiness, the Purity of his
Nature, and his Love to Saints. So that when we say, Hallowed be thy Name, we
mean; Lord, declare thy self to be a holy God, by putting a distinction between
Men and Men in the course of thy Providence, and owning thy People from Heaven.

2. We include our selves, when we say, Hal^^^ed be thy Name; for it is
especially the Duty of God's People. Isa. 29. 23. They shall sanctify my Name,
and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and ^^all fear the God of Israel. It is our
Duty, by our religious Carriage to evidence that we have a holy God. This must
be our first Care, that we our selves be sanctified, and to sanctify our
Sanctifier, the Holy One of Israel. Some, they would have God glorified by
others, but do not look to themselves, how they sanctify God. Now God has made
this to be a great part of our Care, that his own People should not only
magnify and glorify him, but sanctify him; therefore he rather makes them good
than great. When he would make Men great, then he shows his Magnificence, to be
the Almighty Disposer of the Riches of the World; but when he makes them good,
then he expects to be sanctified, that his People should discover, that he is a
holy One; that he is holy in himself, for we add nothing to him, when we
sanctify him, but only discover him to be such an one. In short, God
sanctifies us effectively, by working Grace and Holiness in us; and we
sanctify him relatively, objectively, declaratively, declaring him to be a holy
God, and that we are a People belonging to this God.

3. The Speech is so formed, that others may be included, and that we may
express our Sense of their dishonouring God, as a thing that is grievous to us;
that we may show how near it goes to our Heart, to see the Ignorance, Atheism,
and Blasphemy that is in the World. They would have the holy God to be
sanctified abroad, either by the Conversion of Men, or by their Punishment. And
so it is meant, Isa. 5. 16. God that is holy, shall be sanctified in
Righteousness: That is, his Holiness, and Hatred of Sin shall appear, either in
the Conversion of obstinate Sinners, that God may be sanctified by them; or
else for Punishment, that God may be sanctified upon them.

Fourthly, The next thing is the note of Distinction, Hallowed be [thy] Name,
not ours. There seems to be a secret opposition between our Name, and the Name
of God. When we come to pray, we should distinctly remember whose Name is to be
glorified, that God may be at the end of every Request. We beg of God many
times, but we think of our selves, our Hearts run upon our own Name, and upon
our own Esteem. How often do we come to him with a selfish aim, as if we would
draw God into our own Designs and Purposes? None are so un^it to glorify God,
and so unwelcome to him, as those that are so wedded and vehemently addicted to
their own Honor and Esteem in the World. Therefore Christ by way of
Distinction, by way of Opposition to this innate Disposition that is in us, he
would have us to say, Hallowed by THY Name. That which gives ^ost Honor to
God, is believing. Romans 4. 19, 20. Abraham was strong in Faith, giving Glory to
God. Now none so unfit for the work, as they that seek Glory for themselves,
Joh. 5. 44. How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek
not the honor that comes from God only? Affectation of Vainglory, or
Splendour of our own Name, is a temper inconsistent with Faith, which is the
Grace that gives honor to God. I say, when we hunt after Respect from Men, and
make that the chiefest scope of our Actions, God's Glory will certainly lie in
the Dust; when we are to suffer ignominy and Abasement for his sake, the care
of God's Glory will be laid aside. The great Sin of the old-World was this,
Genesis 11. 4. Let us (...) u^ a Name. There are many Conceits about that
Enterprise, what that People should aim at there, in building so great and so
vast a Tower, before God confounded their Tongues. Some interpreting that
place, Let us build us a Tower even to Heaven, think this was their intention
to make a way into Heaven. But it is not likely they would be so foolish that
had so late Experience of the Flood, and when the Ark rested upon the top of
the highest Mountains, found themselves to be at so great and vast a distance
from Heaven. Some think it was (as Josephus) to secure themselves from another
Flood: But that was sufficiently done by God's Promise, who had engaged to them
he would no more destroy the Earth by Water; and if that were their intention,
why should they build in the Plain, between the two Rivers of Tygris and
Euphrates? Moses gives the main reason there, that they might have an immortal
Name among Posterity. But now see how ill they reckon, that do reckon without
God. Those that are so busy about their own Name, how soon will God blast them!
When in any Action we do not seek Glory to God, but our selves, it is the ready
way to be destroyed. This was the Means to bury them in perpetual Oblivion.
Nebuchadnezzar, when he re-edified the City, Dan. 4. 30. Is not this great
Babylon that I have built for the House of the Kingdom, by the might of my
Power, and for the honor of my Majesty? How does God disappoint him, and turn
him out among the Beasts? Thus are we sure to be disappointed and blasted, when
our Hearts run altogether upon our own Name. But now Christ says [ Thy Name]
when we are careful of that, this is the way to prosper.

From the Words thus illustrated, I shall only observe,

Doct. That God will be so glorified in the World, as that his Name may be
hallowed or sanctified.

Here I shall show, 1. How many ways God's Name is sanctified. 2. Why God will
be so glorified, as that he may be sanctified.


First, How many Ways is God's Name sanctified? I answer, either upon us, or by
us.

(1.) Upon us, by the righteous Executions and Judgments of his Providence. And
so God is sanctified, when he does by a high hand of Power, recover and extort
the Glory of his Holiness from the dead and stupid World. As by that notable
stroke of the Bethshemites, when Fifty thousand were slain for peeping into the
Ark; 1 Samuel 6. 20. This was the result of all, Who is able to stand before this
Holy Lord God? There he discovered himself to be a Holy God, to be one that
has a high displeasure against the Creatures Disobedience. Now when he does by
a high hand extort this from the Wicked, or from his Children, then he
sanctifies himself upon us.

(2.) By us. And so he is sanctified, in our Thoughts, Words, and Actions; in
our Heart, Tongue, or Life.

1. In our Hearts; 1 Pet. 3. 15. Sanctify the Lord God in your Heart. How is
God sanctified in our Hearts?

(1.) When we have awful Thoughts of his Majesty, Psalm. 111. 9. Holy and
Reverend is his Name. Not only when we speak of the Name of God, but when we
think of it, we should be seriously affected. But,

(2.) More especially God is sanctified, when in Straits, Difficulties, and
Dangers, we can bear our selves upon the power and sufficiency of God, and go
on resolutely and cheerfully with our Duty, notwithstanding Discouragements.
This is to sanctify the Lord God in our Hearts. I shall prove it by two places
where the Phrase is used; one is, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to give an
answer to every Man that asks you a reason of the Hope that is in you, with
Meekness and Fear. Mark, the Christians that did profess the Name of God, which
spoke of God as their Hope, or Object of their Religion, were in great danger:
Now what direction does he give them, that they might not be afraid, but bear
up? For he speaks before, Be not afraid of their Terror, or be troubled: But
sanctify the Lord God in your Hearts. See the same Phrase used for the same
purpose, Isa. 8. 13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your
Fear, and let him be your Dread. He opposes it plainly there, to Carnal Fear,
verse. 12. Say ye not a Confederacy, to all them to whom this People shall say a
Confederacy; neither fear ye their Fear, nor be afraid: But sanctify the Lord
of Hosts himself, and let him be your Fear. How comes this direction to be used
in the present Case? Thus, to sanctify is to set apart, and to sanctify God, is
to set God apart as the alone Object of Fear and Trust, that he alone is to be
feared and trusted; so that we can see no match for God among the Creatures:
Therefore we are to embolden our selves in the Lord, and go on cheerfully; when
we can counter-ballance all Fears and Dangers with his surpassing Excellency.
To Glorify God, is, to do that which simply and absolutely tends to the
Manifestation of his Excellency, without any Relation to the Creature: But to
Sanctify God, is, to set God above the Creature, to do that which tends to
exalt his Greatness and Excellency from and above all Terrors, and all the
Discouragements that we can have from the Creature: It is to ascribe that
Greatness, that Power and Glory to God alone, which cannot be ascribed to any
thing else, and so to go on cheerfully with our Duty, whatever Difficulties we
meet with. Thus Moses was chidden, that was amazed with present Difficulty,
Numb. 20. 12. And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me
not, to sanctify me in the Eyes of the Children of Israel; therefore ye shall
not bring this Congregation into the Land which I have given them. Because they
were discouraged, and thought they should never carry on their Business,
therefore God says, Ye believe not to sanctify me: You sanctify not God, or
set him aloft, as the alone and Supreme Object of Fear and Trust. It is a
practical acknowledgment of God's matchless Excellency. Thus we sanctify God in
our Hearts.

2. God is sanctified with our Tongues, when we use God's Name, Titles,
Ordinances, and Word, as Holy Things. When we speak of the Lord with Reverence,
and with great seriousness of Heart, not tak^ng his Name in vain; especially
when we are deeply affected with his Praise. It is no slight thing to praise
God. God's People when they have gone about it, see a need of the greatest
Help. Psalm. 51. 15. O Lord, open thou my Lips, and my Mouth shall show forth
thy Praise. And Psalm. 45. 1. My Heart is inditing a good matter; my Heart frys
or boyls a good Matter. When we will not give God Dough-bak'd Praise, nor speak
of his Name slightly, but so as becomes his Greatness, and surpassing
Excellency.

3. In our Actions. Our Actions may be parted into two things; Worship, and
ordinary Conversation.

1. In our Worship, there God especially will be sanctified. Lev. 10. 3. I will
be sanctified in all that draw near unto me. God is very tender of his Worship:
Sancta Sanctis, Holy Things must be managed by Holy Men, in a Holy Manner.
Therefore what is it to sanctify God, when we draw nigh to him? To have a more
excellent frame of Heart in Worship, than we have about other things. As in
Prayer, the frame of our Hearts must not be common, we must not go about it
with such a frame of Heart, as we go about our Callings, worldly Business, and
Converses with Men; but there must be some special Reverence, such as is
peculiar to him. When we draw near to God in the Word, he will be sanctified.
The Word must be received with Meekness, and by Faith applied to our Souls, as
an Instrument designed to our endless Good. When we have a peculiar Reverence
for God, and a respect to God in all our Approaches; Eccles. 5. 1. Look to thy
Feet when thou go to the House of God: we must not go about these Holy
Services Hand over Head, but with great Caution and Heed. Thus is God
sanctified in Worship, or in our immediate converse with him.

2. In our ordinary Conversation. Then God is sanctified; when our Life is
ordered so, that we may give Men occasion to say, that surely he is a Holy God
whom we serve. By two things you may know you sanctify God in your
Conversations; when you walk as remembering you have a Holy God; and when you
walk as discovering to others you have a Holy God.

(1.) When you walk as remembering your selves that you have a Holy God,
therefore you must be watchful and strict. It is notable, when the Israelites
were making a hasty Promise, Joshua puts them in Mind, Chap. 24. 9. You cannot
serve the Lord, for he is a Holy God. So we should remember when we give up our
selves to God, he is a Holy and Jealous God, that is narrowly observant, and he
will not be put off with any thing that is Common.

(2.) As discovering you have a Holy God. A carnal Worshipper prophaneth the
Memory of God in the World. But now a Christian that walks according to his
Holy Calling, that is Holy in all manner of Conversation, he discovers what a
God he has. 1 Pet. 2. 9. That ye should show forth the Praises of him, who
has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. We are not only to
conceive, and make use of them to beget Fear and Reverence in our Hearts of the
All-seeing God; but are to show them forth, to evidence them to others: We
should discover more than a Human Excellency, that so those which look upon us
may say, these are the Servants of the Holy God.

Secondly, For the Reasons, Why God will be so glorified, that he may be
sanctified.

1. Because this is the Glory that is due to his Name; Psalm. 96. 8. Give unto
the Lord the Glory due to his Name. Every Glory will not serve the turn, but
such Glory as is proper and peculiar for that God we serve. It is a stated Rule
in Scripture, That Respects to God must be proportioned to the Nature of God.
God is a Spirit, therefore will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth. God is a God
of Peace, therefore lift up pure Hands, without Wrath and Doubting. God is a
Holy God, therefore will be sanctified. They which worship the Sun, among the
Heathens, they used a Flying-Horse, as a thing most suitable to the swift
Motions of the Sun. Well then, they that will glorify and honor God with a
Glory due to his Name, must sanctify him as well as honor him: Why? for God is
glorious in Holiness, Exodus 15. 11. This is that which God counts to be his
chief Excellency, and the Glory which he will manifest among the Sons of Men.

2. This is that Glory which God affects, and therefore the Saints will give it
him. Isa. 6. 3. The Holy Angels, what do they cry out when they honor God?
They do not acknowledge his Power and Dominion over all Creatures as Lord of
all; but they give him his peculiar Glory, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of
Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory. So David, Psalm. 103. 1. Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, yea, all that is within me bless his Holy Name. That Is the
Notion upon which he pitcheth, he would praise God with such praise as is
welcome and acceptable to him.

3. This is that Attribute which is most eclipsed, and most blotted out in the
Hearts of the Sons of Men, because of God's Patience, because he does not take
Vengeance of all the Sins of Men: Thou thoughtest I was altogether such a one
as thy self, Psalm. 50. 21. Certainly if Men did not blot and stain God in their
Thoughts, if they did not fancy an unreasonable Indulgence, such as is not
comely and proper to his Majesty, they could not go on in Sin, and think God
could be so pure; therefore he will be so glorified, that he may be sanctified.

Use. To press us so to glorify God, as we may also sanctify him. Let this be
your care. To quicken you, remember,

1. God is much offended with his People that do not sanctify him. Moses and
Aaron, as choice and as dear to God as they were, yet you know what the Lord
says, Numb. 20. 12. Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the Eyes of
the Children of Israel; therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the
Land which I have given them. When Moses and Aaron murmured, and spoke
unadvisedly, and did not sanctify him, nor carry God's Excellency aloft, They
shall not enter. And God remembers this a great while after, in that Deuteronomy. 32.
51. Because ye trespassed against me among the Children of Israel, at the
Waters of Meribahkadesh, in the Wilderness of Zin; because ye sanctified me not
in the midst of the Children of Israel, thou shall not go unto the Land which I
give the Children of Israel. Well then, tho God's Children should get to
Heaven, yet if they do not sanctify God, they will want many a Privilege. God
will remember this against them; for he takes it ill, when his People will not
sanctify him, as becoming his peculiar Excellency.

2. If you do not sanctify God, then you pollute God, and stain his Memory in
the World; Ezekiel. 36. 20. Ye have profaned my Holy Name among the Heathen. How
is God polluted? Not intrinsecally, God cannot receive any Pollution from us.
It is here, as in that Case, A Man that lusts after a Woman, has committed
Adultery with her already in his Heart, Mat. 5. 28. The Man pollutes the Woman
in his Heart, while she remains spotless and undefiled: So in this Case, we
blemish God in appearance, as much as in us lies we pollute and blot God, tho
he remains pure and undefiled. You make Heathens think as if you had an unholy
God. Well then, glorify God.

For Directions, 1. Be Holy. The Praise of the Wicked is a disgrace to him, it
is an obscuring of his Praise, 1 Pet. 1. 15. As he which has called you is
holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. 2. Study his Name, if ye
would sanctify his Name. Psalm. 9. 10. They that know his Name will put their
trust in him. 3. Submit to his Providence without Murmuring. When we can speak
well of him, tho he seem to deal most hardly; as the Bethshemites, when there
was such a Slaughter made among them, fifty thousand slain: They do not say,
murmuringly, who can stand before this severe, cruel God? but before this Holy
God? They own his Holiness in the Dispensation, tho it were so dreadful, 1 Samuel
7. 20. It is a great Glory to God when you own him as just in all his ways,
when he deals most hardly. Whatsoever be our Lot and Portion, yet he is a Holy
God. But to cavil and murmur, it is to tax and blemish God before the World. 4.
Live to public Ends, that is to draw God into Request with others: Let this be
the aim of your Conversation, not only to get Holiness enough to bring you to
Heaven, but to allure others, and recommend God to them, that by the Purity and
Strictness of your Conversation you might gain upon others, and bring them to
be in love with God, and acquainted with him.


And Lastly, be sensible when God's Name is dishonored, by your selves and
others, not enduring the least profanation of it.

Thy Kingdom come.
THE first Petition concerns the End, the rest the means. Now among all the
Means, none has such a near and immediate respect to the Glory of God as
Christ's Kingdom; for here there is more of God discovered, more of his
infinite Grace, Justice, Wisdom, and Power, than possibly can be elsewhere: All
other things are for the Church, and the Church for Christ as Head and King,
and Christ for God, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. So that Christ's Kingdom is the primary
Means of advancing God's Glory; and therefore among all the Means it must be
sought in the first place, Mat. 6. 33. Seek first the Kingdom of God. First,
not above the Glory of God, it does not come in competition with that, but
above all other things whatsoever, before Pardon and Grace.

In the Words observe three things.

1. We grant [a Kingdom.] 2. By way of Distinction and Appropriation, we say [
Thy Kingdom.] 3. By way of Supplication, we beg of God that it [may Come.]
The Concession, the Distinction, the Supplication are the three things to be
opened.

First, The Concession of a Kingdom, which our heavenly Father has. A Kingdom
(in the general, signifies the Government of a People under one Head, or
Governor; and therefore the Term may be fitly applied to God, who alone is
Supreme, and we are all under his Dominion.

Now God's Kingdom is twofold: 1. Universal. 2. More Particular and Special.


First, There Is a Universal Kingdom over all Things; over Angels, and Devils;
over Men Elect, and Reprobate; over Beasts, and Living Creatures; and over
inanimate Things, Sun, Moon, and Stars. This is spoken of, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11.
Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as Head above all. And
again, Psalm. 103. 19. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens: and his
Kingdom rules over all. There is no such Monarch as God is, for largeness of
Empire, for absoluteness of Power, and Sublimity of his Throne. This is not
principally understood here, but is implied as a Foundation and Ground of
Faith, whereupon we may deal with God about that Kingdom, which is specially
intended in this Request.

Secondly, More Particularly and Especially, God has a Kingdom over a certain
Order and Estate of Men. Of this especial Kingdom there are two notable
Branches and Considerations. One is, that Administration which belongs to the
present Life, and is called the Kingdom of Grace; and the other belongs to
the Life to come, and is called the Kingdom of Glory.

1. The Kingdom of Grace is spoken of in many places, specially that Luke 17.
20, 21. When he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the Kingdom of God should
come? he answered them and said, The Kingdom of God comes not with
Observation. Neither shall they say, Lo, here, or, lo, there: for, behold the
Kingdom of God is within you, (or among you.) He speaks of a Kingdom of God
that was already come among them, in the dispensation of his Grace by Christ.
And then, the other belongs to the Life to come, called the Kingdom of Glory,
Mat. 25. 34. Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the Foundation of the World. 1 Cor. 15. 50. Flesh and Blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God.

Now the Kingdom of Grace may be considered two ways; as Externally
administered; and as internally received.

(1.) As Externally administered in the Ordinances and Means of Grace, as the
Word, and Seals, and Censures, and the like. In this Sense it is said, Mat. 21.
43. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation, bringing
forth the Fruits thereof. The Gospel, or Means of Grace, administered in the
visible Face of the Church, they are called God's Kingdom upon Earth, and a
very great Privilege they are, when they are bestowed upon any People. Surely,
when Christ says, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, he does not mean
it of the inward Kingdom, that they had not, that cannot be lost, but of the
outward and external Means.

(2.) As internally received: and then by it is meant the Grace of God, which
rules in the Hearts of the Elect, and causes their Souls to submit and subject
themselves unto the Obedience of Christ, and unto his Scepter, and to his Word
and Spirit, and this is that Kingdom properly which is within us. This is the
Kingdom of God which consists in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost, Romans 14. 17. And this differs from the Kingdom of Glory, not so much
in Nature, as in Degree.

Well then, That by the Kingdom of God is here meant, not his general Empire
over all the World, and all the things of the World (tho that be not wholly
excluded); but his special Kingdom, which he does administer by Christ: And
that either as externally managed by Ordinances, and visible means of Grace; or
as internally received and administered in the Hearts of the Elect. This is that
Kingdom we beg, that it may flourish and get ground more and more.

2. Then for the Kingdom of Glory, it is either begun and inchoate, or else
consummate and perfect.

1. It Is begun and inchoate upon our Translation to Heaven, in the very moment
of Death: In which Christ reigns in the other World, in the Spirits of just Men
made perfect (that is) being perfectly freed from Sin, and admitted into the
clear and immediate Vision and Fruition of God, tho our Bodies abide in the
Grave, expecting full Redemption and Deliverance. That there is such a Kingdom
carried on, many Scriptures intimate, Phil. 1. 23. I desire to depart, and to
be with Christ. As soon as the Saints are loosed from the Body, they are with
Christ under his Government. Luke 23. 43. This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. As soon as Christ died he was in Paradise, and there was the good
Thief with him. The Scriptures do not establish any such drousy conceit as the
Sleep of Souls; or such an Estate wherein they do not enjoy God. We read of the
Spirits of just Men made perfect, which make up the Congregation which is
above, of which Christ is Head, Heb. 12. 23. As the Spirits of the Wicked are
in Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19. that is, in Hell. This is the Kingdom of Glory begun.

2. There Is a Kingdom of Glory consummate; when Sin, and Death is utterly
abolished, and the Elect perfectly separated from the Reprobate, and conducted
into Heaven, and there remain with the Lord for ever. This is a Kingdom, Mat.
25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. The
full and final Estate we enjoy after the general Judgment and Resurrection,
that is called a Kingdom. Well, now you see what is meant by the Kingdom we pray
for.

Secondly, Here Is a note of Distinction, [ Thy Kingdom;] by which the Kingdom
here spoken of is limited by particular reference to God; not only to
difference it from the Kingdoms of Men, which are subordinate to it; but those
adverse Kingdoms which are set up against God; as the Kingdom of Sin, Satan,
Antichrist, the destruction of which we intend when we pray for the
advancement of God's Kingdom; As I shall show you.

Thirdly, Here Is the Supplication, or the Request which we make to God about
this Kingdom, (...), Let it [ Come.] What do we mean by that? This Word must be
applied to the several acceptations of Christ's Kingdom.

1. If you apply it to the External Kingdom of Grace, then when we say, [ Thy
Kingdom come;] the meaning is, Let the Gospel be published, let Churches be set
up every where, let them be continued and maintained against all the malignity
of the World, and Opposition of the Devil: And in the publication of the Gospel
where the sound of it has not been heard, that God would come there in the
Power of his Spirit, and draw People into Communion with himself. Mat. 12. 28.
If I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, then the Kingdom of God is come unto
you; meaning in the public tenders thereof. Says he, if this Miracle does
clearly (as it does in your Consciences) evidence my Mission, then you may know
the Kingdom of God is come, (that is) that there is a Publication of the Gospel
of Grace. Then we pray for the continuance of this Privilege, notwithstanding
opposition, that Christ may stand his Ground. This is that we seek of God, that
he may maintain his Interest among the Nations of the World, that the Gates of
Hell may not prevail against his Kingdom.

2. If you refer it to the Internal Part of this Kingdom, then we beg the
Beginning, the Progress, and the final Consummation of it. First, the
Beginning, or the Erection of a Throne for Christ in our own Hearts, and the
Hearts of others, that he may fully exercise Regal Power. Secondly, The
Increase of this Kingdom by Holiness and Obedience, and sincere Subjection to
him; for the Kingdom of Grace is so come already, that it will still be coming
yet more and more. So long as we need to pray, so long shall we have cause to
say, Thy Kingdom come. Thirdly, The Consummation of it, when the Fullness of
Glory in the second Coming of Christ shall be revealed; when our Head shall be
glorious, and his Day shall come, (...): For the present it is Man's Day, so
the Scripture seems to call it; but then it is the Day of the Lord, when all
the Devils shall stoop, and Enemies receive their final Doom, and the Saints
shall have the Crown of Glory put upon their Heads in the Sight of all the
World.

Well, the Sum of all is this, That tho this Petition do mainly concern the
special Kingdom, which God administreth by Christ; yet God's universal Kingdom,
the Kingdom of his Power and Providence, is a mighty Support and Prop to our
Faith, in making this Request to God. When we consider what an unlimited Power
God has over all Creatures, even Devils themselves, to dispose of them for his
own Glory, and his Churches Good; we need not to be discouraged, though
Christ's Kingdom be opposed in the World, but should with the more confidence
deal with God about it.

That which I shall handle upon this Petition, will fall under these two
Points: 1. That God has a Kingdom, which he will administer and manage for his
own glory. 2. All those which are well affected to God's glory, should desire
the coming of this Kingdom, and seriously deal with God about it.


For the first, namely,

Doct. 1. That God has a Kingdom, which he will administer and manage for his
own Glory.

I speak not of the Kingdom of his Power and Providence, but of the
Dispensation of Grace by Christ. The Evangelical Gospel-State is compared to a
Kingdom; as, Mat. 3. 2. The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. So to the Disciples,
Mat. 10. 7. And as ye go, preach, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. And
so Christ himself.

It may be called so with very good reason: For in this Kingdom there is a
Monarch, Jesus Christ, to whom all Power and Authority is given. God the Father
calls him, my King; Psalm. 2. 6. I have set my King upon my holy Hill. And this
King has his Throne in the Consciences of Men, where Thoughts are brought into
Captivity to him. 2 Cor. 10. 5. And he has his Royal Scepter, Psalm. 110. 3.
which is called the Rod of his Strength. And he has his Subjects, and they are
the Saints, Rev. 15. 3. King of Saints. And he has his Laws and Constitutions;
we read of the Law of Faith, and the Law of Liberty. And in this Kingdom there
are Privileges, and Royal Immunities; there is Freedom from the Curse of the
Law, and from the Power of Sin, and from the destructive Influence of Satan and
the World. And here are Punishments and Rewards, both for Body and Soul; there
is Hell and Heaven. Now because all these things do so fitly suit, therefore is
the Gospel called a Kingdom. It will not be amiss to insist upon some of these.

1. The State of the Gospel, or Evangelical State, it is God's Kingdom, in
regard of the Monarch whom God has set up, (that is) Jesus Christ, the great
Lord of all Things. There is no King like him: God has made him higher than
the Kings of the Earth. Psalm. 89. 27. How does he exceed all other Monarchs and
Potentates in the World? Partly, for Largeness of Command and Territory. All
Kings and Monarchs have certain Bounds and Limits, by which their Empire is
terminated; but Christ is the true Catholic King, his Government runs
throughout the whole Circuit of Nature and Providence; he has Power over all
Flesh, John 17. 2. yea, Devils themselves are to stoop to him. Phil. 2. 10.
Every Thing under the Earth is to bow the Knee to Christ. Partly, for the
Excellency of his Throne. This King has a double Throne, one in Heaven, the
other in the Heart of an humble Sinner, which is his second Heaven. Isa. 57.
15. And in both these respects there is no Monarch like Christ. He has
prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all. Psalm. 103.
19. Earthly Kings, that their Majesty may appear to their Subjects, have their
Thrones usually exalted; there were six Steps to Solomon's Throne, a
Description of it you have in 1 Kings 10. 18, 19. But what is this to the Throne
of Christ, which God has fixed above in the Heavens? The whole Globe of Sea
and Earth is but as one Point, and there are ten thousand times ten thousands
of Angels about his Throne: The Supporters of this Throne are Justice and
Mercy. And in regard of his other Throne also in the Hearts of Men: The Power
of outward Potentates reaches but to the Bodies of Men; they can take
cognizance of nothing, but of external Conformity to their Laws: But Christ
gives Laws to the Thoughts, 2 Cor. 10. 5. So for his Royal Furniture: Other
Princes, they have their Chariots, and Coaches, and Horses, etc. but He makes
the Clouds his Chariot, and walks upon the Wings of the Wind, Psalm. 104. 3.
Riding up and down in the World, dispensing Mercies and Judgments. So for
Troops and Armies to support his Dignity, all the Hosts of Heaven are obedient
to him; one Angel in one Night destroyed in Sennacherib's Army, an Hundred
Fourscore and Five Thousand. Hostility against him must needs be deadly. He is
above in Heaven, and can rain down Fire and Brimstone upon us, and cannot be
resisted. He is higher than the Kings of the Earth too, because none has so
good a Right and Title to rule, as this King has, whom God has set upon his
holy Hill of Sion. God's Dominion over the Creatures is founded in Creation:
Other Kings find their Subjects; he makes them. He has the first and chief
Right; there is nothing we have, but he made. We depend upon him every moment
for his providential Assistance; therefore he has the highest Right and Title:
No Creature can be sui juris, at his own dispose. And he has a Right by
Conquest, and by Purchase; he has bought us, and given his Life a Ransom for
many. Mat. 20. 28. Christ is opposed there to worldly Potentates; they must be
served, but he came to minister: Subjects, their Blood and Lives must go to
preserve the Rights of the Prince; but he gave his Life. And he has a Right
too by Contract and Covenant. All that are Subjects of his Kingdom, have sworn
Allegiance. He has such an absolute Right, that thou can call nothing thy
own. We think indeed, our Lips are our own, Psalm. 12. 4. and our Estates our
own: as Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 11. Shall I take my Bread, and my Water, and my
Flesh? etc. All you have, it belongs to this King, by Right of Creation, and
Providence. Therefore in all these respects he is higher than the Kings of the
Earth.

2. The Gospel-State is set forth as a Kingdom, in regard of the Subjects, and
their Privileges: The Gospel does not only reveal a King, but makes all Kings:
He has made us to be Kings and Priests, etc. Rev. 1. 5. All those that submit
to him. So that indeed Christ may properly be styled, Rex Regum, King of Kings.
As the King of Assyria made his Boast, Isa. 10. 8. Are not my Princes
altogether Kings? A vaunting Speech of his, that his Princes and Favorites
were for Power and Authority as good as Kings. But Christ may say so; Are not
my Subjects altogether Kings? not only Kings in regard of their spiritual Power
and Command they have over themselves, ruling their own Spirits in the Fear of
God, while others are Slaves to their base Affections; but in point of their
Privileges: They have Kingly Privileges, they are made Kings; they are royally
attended by Angels, they are sent forth to be as Guardians to the Heirs of
Promise, Heb. 1. 14. They have Royal Immunities, from the Curse of the Law,
from the damnable Influence of Sin; they may as well pluck Christ from the
Throne, as pluck the Elect out of that State wherein they are. As David said,
Is it a small thing to be the King's Son in Law? So, is it a small thing to be
the Sons of God, Coheirs with Christ? This Honor and Glory does God put upon
his Saints. And there is the greatest Pleasure and Contentment in this State;
for this Kingdom, which all the Saints are interested in, it consists in
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans 14. 17. And surely these
Consolations of God should not be small to us. It is a State of most absolute
Freedom and Sovereignty; John 8. 36. If the Son shall make you free, then shall
ye be free indeed. Many a Monarch which rules over Men, may be a Captive to
his own Lusts; but these are free. There are the richest Revenues and Increase,
which belong to Christ's Subjects: All Things are yours, (1 Cor. 3. 21.)
whether Paul, or Apollos, etc. They are ours by Covenant, and when they come
into our possession, (by the fair Allowance of God's Providence) we have them
with a Blessing, and may use them with a great deal of Comfort.

3. In regard of the Laws, and Manner of Administration. I shall not speak of
the External, Political Government of the Church, (which questionless is
Monarchical, I mean in regard of Christ the Head; tho it be Aristocratical, in
regard of Officers, and (in some respect) Democratical, with reference to the
Consent of the People in all Church-Acts) but there are Laws and Sanctions, by
which this Body of Men, and this Kingdom is governed. James 2. 8. If ye fulfill
the Royal Law. It is called the Royal Law, not only as it requires noble Work,
but in regard of the Dignity of the Author, and Firmness of the Obligation: All
the Precepts of Faith, Repentance, and Gospel-walking, are as so many Royal
Edicts, which Christ has set forth, to signify his Pleasure to his People. How
slightly soever we think of these Gospel-Injunctions, they are the Laws and
Instructions of the great King.

4. In regard of Punishments and Rewards. Christ, who is a King by nature,
might rule us with a Rod of Iron; yet he is pleased to govern us as a Father,
and Prince, that he might cast the Bands of a Man upon us. Christ, as a King,
punishes; and as a King, rewards. Prove. 16. 14. The Wrath of a King is as
Messengers of Death. When a King is angry, it is as if a Messenger should come
and tell us, we must die. How great is the Wrath of the King of Kings! He
cannot endure to be slighted in his Regal Power. Luke 19. 27. But those mine
Enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and
slay them before me. Christ himself will see Execution done in his own sight
and presence, upon those Rebels that will not submit to his Rule and
Government. How should the Hearts of wicked Men tremble, which have violated
the Laws of Christ, and affronted his Authority, when they consider how odious
this is, how certainly Christ will see Execution done upon them! When Adonijah
and his Guests heard of Solomon's sitting upon his Throne, and the Shouts and
Acclamations of Joy and Applause, they were stricken with Fear, and fled every
one several ways. 1 Kings 1. 49. You that cherish your Lusts, which stand out
against the Sovereignty of Christ, that will not let him rule over you, whose
Hearts say, (tho their Tongues dare not) We will not have this Man to reign
over us; you that seem to put him by his Kingdom, he is furnished with absolute
and irresistible Power to destroy you, and will one day come and say, Bring
forth these Drunkards, Worldlings, Voluptuous, that would not I should reign
over them; those that durst venture upon known Sin, against the Checks of their
own Conscience: how will their Hearts tremble in the last Day, at the Shouts
and Acclamations of the Saints, when they shall welcome this great King, when
he shall come forth in all his Royalty and Sovereignty? And as for Punishment
Christ will show himself as a King, so for Rewards. Kings do not give Trifles.
Araunah gave like a King to a King, 2 Samuel 24. 23. He was of the Blood Royal of
the Iebusites, and he gave worthy of his Extraction: And so Christ will give
like a King. God propounds nothing that was cheap and unworthy, but He gives
you a Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. The Poor of this World are Heirs of a Kingdom, the
fairest Kingdom that ever was, or ever will be; as poor and as despicable as
now they are, yet they shall have a Kingdom. What can you wish for and desire,
more than a Kingdom? All shall reign with Christ for evermore. Which shows the
Folly of carnal Men, that will hazard so great, and so blessed Hopes. Thus I
have shown you, why the Gospel-State is compared to a Kingdom.

Now let me tell you, it is a spiritual Kingdom, not such as comes with
Observation. Jesus Christ, when he was inaugurated into the Throne, when he was
to sit down at God's right hand, how does he manifest it? He gives Gifts, as
Princes use to do at their Coronation, but they are spiritual Gifts, Ephesians. 4. 8.
And he sent abroad Ambassadors, poor Fishermen, they and their Successors, to
go and treat with the World, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Indeed they had a mighty Power with
them, as becoming such a great King, as was under the Vail of Meanness and
Weakness, it was carried on in a spiritual manner. And still he does administer
his Kingdom, not by Force; he rules not by the Power of the Sword, but by his
Word and Spirit, so he governs his People. The Publication of the Gospel is a
sending forth the Rod of his Strength, Psalm. 110. 2. And the Holy Ghost, as
Christ's Viceroy, he governs them, and administreth all things that are
necessary to his Kingdom; he does it by the Holy Ghost, as his Deputy. The
Father chooses a sort of Men, gives them to Christ; the Son dies for them,
that they may be Subjects of his Kingdom, and he commits them to be governed
and ruled by the Holy Ghost: He uses the Ministry of Men, and so unites them
to Christ; and Christ brings them to the Father, by his Intercession committing
them to his Care and Love; and by a final Tradition at last, which is the last
Act of Christ's Mediatorial Kingdom, 1 Cor. 15. 24. he shall deliver them up to
the Father. The Spirit, blessing the Ministry of Men, works Faith, by which we
are united to Christ; and Christ intercedes for us, and will bring us to God
again. And in this spiritual manner is this Kingdom carried on. So that if we
would enter into this Kingdom, we must go to God the Father, and confess we are
Rebels and Traitors, but desire he would not enter into Judgment with us, but
seek to be reconciled to God the Father. Now as God bade the Friends of Job to
go to Job, chap. 42. 8. So God sends us to Christ, in whom alone he is
well-pleased with the Creature: If we go to the Son, he refers us to the
Spirit, to be reclaimed from our Impurity and Rebellion. If we go to the
Spirit, he refers us to Moses and the Prophets, Pastors and Teachers; there we
shall hear of him in Christ's way, and there we feel the Rod of Christ's
Strength, the Efficacy of his Grace put into our Hearts.

Thus are we brought into his Kingdom, and made to be a mystical Body, and
spiritual Society, in whom Christ rules; and there we come to enjoy those
Freedoms I spoke of; and our Obedience to this Kingdom is carried on in a
spiritual manner. In Worship, we give our Homage to God; in the Word, we come
to learn his Laws; in the Sacraments, we renew our Oath of Allegiance to this
King; in Alms and Charity, we pay him Tribute; in Prayer, we ask his Leave,
acknowledging his Dominion; and Praise, it is our Rent to the great Lord, from
whom we hold all things. And thus is Christ's Kingdom carried on in a spiritual
manner.

Use 1. The Use is, to press you to come under this Kingdom. Consider what God
has proffered, to draw you off from your carnal Delights, and sinful
Pleasures: No less than a Kingdom to bear you out, to call you off from your
Sins. O do not answer, as the Olive Tree and the Vine in Iotham's Parable,
Judge. 9. 9. Shall I leave my Fatness, and go to be promoted over the Trees? God
comes to a Worldling, and makes him a Proffer of this blessed State, which is
represented by a Kingdom, Shall I leave all my Sports, and worldly Hopes?
(according as the Man is affected) Shall I renounce my Pleasures? live a strict
and austere Life? Must I leave off Projects, says a Worldling, and depend upon
the Reversion of Heaven? O consider it is for a glorious Kingdom. Men will do
much for an Earthly Crown, tho lined with Cares, for this Golden Ball, which
all hunt after, and does occasion so many Stirs in the World. Turn your
Ambition this way, you may aspire to a Crown, to the Kingdom of Heaven, without
the Crime of Treason; this is a faithful Ambition: It is indeed Treason against
the Kingdom of Heaven, not to look after this Crown, and plot, contrive, and
act, and offer violence for the obtaining of it. And therefore come under this
Kingdom; if you do not, you will be left under the Power of a worse. 2 Chronicles.
12. 8. God says, he would give them up to the King of Egypt; why? They shall
be his Servants, that they may know my Service, and the Service of the Kingdoms
of the Countries: That they might see what difference there is between serving
God, and serving others. If you refuse God's Government, you are under a worse,
under Sin, and the Power of Darkness; you are under your own Lusts; nay, (and
by a just Judgment) God may give you over to live in Bondage to unmerciful Men.
How many Kings and Lords does he serve, that will not serve one Lord? O
therefore renounce those other Lords that have Dominion over you, and come
under this Kingdom which God has set up.

Use 2. To press the Children of God,

1. To walk worthy of the Gospel; it is a Kingdom. The Apostle has an
Exhortation and Charge to this purpose, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. That ye would walk
worthy of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and Glory. Walk in
obedience to Christ, that is one thing. Christ is a King by a natural Right; God
has chosen him, God has set him upon his holy Hill: The Lord has made him to
be Head over all Things. Ephesians. 1. 22. Nay, the Church chooses Christ: They
shall appoint to themselves one Head. Hos. 1. 11. And therefore for you that
are called to his Kingdom and Glory, that have entered into Covenant with
Christ, that have subscribed to him as Head and King; for you to be
disobedient, give way to Sin, it is worse in you. Will ye go away also? says
Christ to his Disciples. Christ has a Right to reign over wicked Men; but you
have actually chosen him. Treason is less culpable in those which have not
submitted to a Power and Prince, and owned him for their King, than in those
that have sworn Faith and Allegiance. You have passed under the Bond of the
holy Oath; God has called you to his Kingdom and Glory; therefore you should
be more obedient, than to allow a disloyal Thought, or rebellious Lust against
Christ.

2. As you should be more holy, wary, watchful, that you do not break the Laws
of Christ, for you have consented to him; so live as Kings, exercising all Acts
of Regality within your own Souls, ruling your own Spirits, exercising Judgment
over your own Hearts, and over every Affection that will not be bridled. It is
a Disgrace to the Regal Estate of the Gospel, for you to be over-mastered by a
Lust, to lie under the Power of any Sin; yet thus it is, God's Children are
conflicting with one Sin or other more than the rest. So far you have not
experience of that Truth, John 8. 32. And ye shall know the Truth, and the
Truth shall make you free. A Man that lives in Bondage to his Lusts, how can
he choose but doubt of those glorious Privileges? Have you found the State of
the Gospel to be a Kingdom? do you walk worthy of the Gospel?

3. It teaches us Contempt of the World, and earthly Things. Phil. 3. 14. I
press toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Jesus
Christ. It is not for Princes to embrace a Dunghill, nor for Eagles to catch
Flies. Remember, thou will one day be a King with God in Glory, and therefore
should not be as low and base as the Men of the World are, but walk worthy of
God, who has called you to a Royal State.

4. A generous Confidence in the midst of the Troubles and Abasements of the
World. What tho you be accounted as the Scurf and Offscouring of all Things?
tho your outward Condition be low and mean, know the Worth of your high Calling
in Christ. How poor and despicable soever you are in this World, yet you are
Heirs of a Crown and Kingdom. Therefore remember you are Princes, that walk up
and down in disguise in a foreign Country. If you are kept in a mean Condition,
it is but a Disguise God has put upon you. We are the Sons of God, tho for the
present it does not appear what we shall be. God's Heirs make little show in
the World. But there is a high Dignity, a mighty Privilege put upon you; you
are called to be Heirs of this Kingdom, and this blessed and Royal Estate,
which God has provided for them that love him.

Use 3. Are we translated into this Kingdom? Col. 1. 13. He has delivered us
out of the Power of Darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear
Son. Every Man naturally is under other Lords, the Devil has Dominion over
him, and he is under the Government of his own Lusts; but now, are we
translated into the Kingdom of Christ?

The Second Point is,

Doct. 2. All those that are affected with God's Glory, should desire the
coming of this Kingdom, and seriously deal with God about it.

None else can rescue and pluck them out of the Power of Darkness, and deliver
them from the Thraldom of those other Lords that hold them; and none else can
defend and preserve them.

I shall handle the Point, 1. In a private, 2. In a public Respect.


First; In a private respect. Every Man should desire, that the Kingdom of God
should come down, and be set up in his own Heart. Here I must repeat and apply
the Distinctions of Christ's Kingdom: He is to desire the Kingdom of Grace, and
the Kingdom of Glory may come to himself, and others.

I. The Kingdom of Grace, that it may be begun, continued, and increased.

First; That this Kingdom may be begun, and a Throne erected for Christ in our
Hearts. The great Necessity of this Request will be evidenced in these
Considerations.

1. That every Man by Nature is under another King, under the Kingdom of Sin
and Satan. Satan is the Monarch, and Sin is the Scepter. Christ and the Devil
divide the World; either we belong to the one, or the other. Now the Devil, by
reason of the Fall of Adam, he has the Start of Christ; and the Lord Jesus
coming to possess the Heart, does not seize upon it as a Waste which belongs
to the next Occupier, but he seizes upon it as already possessed by Satan. The
Devil quietly rules in the Hearts of the Unregenerate, he keeps House, and all
the Goods are in Peace. Luke. 11. 21. And therefore wicked Spirits are called,
The Rulers of the Darkness of this World, Ephesians. 6. 12. All the ignorant and
carnal part of the World falls to his share, and he does not easily quit
possession. Christ indeed employeth Men to wrestle with Principalities and
Powers. The Work of the Ministry is to shake and batter the Empire of the
Devil. You must be turned, you must be rescued. You must be turned: Acts 26.
18. To turn them from the Power of Satan unto God. You must be rescued, and
plucked out of this Captivity by strong hand. Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us
from the Power of Satan; who has taken us out of Darkness by a powerful
Rescue. Even as the Israelites were brought out of Egypt by a strong Hand, and
stretched-out Arm; so are we brought out of the Power of Darkness. By such an
irresistible Power of Grace must God recover you, otherwise Men yield
themselves up to his Scepter. Look as the Spirit of God works holy Motions, and
gracious Desires in the Hearts of God's Children: So the Devil is at work in
the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. framing wicked Devices, carnal
Desires, evil Thoughts against God. Man is such a perfect Slave to the Devil,
that he can do nothing but sin.

2. This Kingdom which Satan exercises, is an invisible Kingdom. The Devil
does not sensibly appear to his Vassals and Slaves. When Christ's Kingdom and
Regiment was more external, so was the Devil's also: As when God was served by
Sacrifices, and delivered his Mind by Oracles; so Men did then more professedly
own the Devil, by observing his prescribed Rites of Worship, and by being
deluded by lying Oracles, and Answers to their Prayers and Ques^ions. But now
since the Kingdom of Christ is more spiritual, and managed by the Holy Ghost in
the Hearts of his Saints; so is Satan's Kingdom invisible. So that Men may be
Christ's Subjects by external Profession, and the Devil's by internal
Obedience, and Constitution of Mind, tho they worship not by Pagan Rites, as he
rules in their Hearts, and takes them off from obeying the Gospel they
profess. The God of this World has blinded their Eyes, 2 Cor. 4. 4. All carnal
Men, however they defy Satan, and abominate the thoughts of serving him, yet
while they remain in their Sin and Ignorance, they still hold the Crown upon
the Devil's Head. Look as God's Subjects may own him in verbal pretense, yet
their Hearts may be far from him, Mat. 15. 8. So that wicked Men may defy the
Devil in pretense and words, and cannot endure to hear of him; but they are
under the God of this World, he has blinded their Hearts. So that this Kingdom
is to be sought for in the Heart. Christ made a great Inroad upon the Devil,
beat him out of his Quarters: Yet, as the Sea gets in one place what it loses
in another; so, tho the Devil has lost Ground in the Christian World, as to
external Profession, whilst People renounce the Superstitions of the Gentiles,
yet still he gets Ground in the Hearts of wicked Men by their carnal
Dispositions; his Empire is upheld still, tho professedly they are Subjects of
Christ.

3. Until Satan be cast out of the Throne, Christ can have no Entertainment in
the Heart. The Ark and Dagon cannot sink and stand together; either the Ark
must be removed, or Dagon will down upon his Face. So 2 Cor. 6. 14. What
Communion has Christ with Belial, and Light with Darkness? It is impossible
both Kingdoms can stand together, or both Kings be set up in the same Heart.
The Marriage Bed will admit no Partner, nor Rival. A Man must be under Christ
or Satan. Until he be cast out, Christ has no room to be entertained. Mat. 6.
24. No Man can serve two Masters: Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Look upon the
Devil under that Notion, as he is Mammon, as he does entice to Worldliness, it
is impossible to serve him and Christ. Both Masters have Work enough for their
Servants, and their Commands are contrary. If two Masters consent to employ one
Man in the self-same Business, tho they are two Men, yet they are but one
Master. But now to execute the Wills of Men which differ in their Design, and
which have a several and full Interest in our Labors and Actions, it is as
impossible, as to move two contrary ways at once. Well then, Mammon and Christ,
Belial and Christ divide the World. It is impossible to be under Belial and
Christ; both have full Work for us to do, and their Designs are contrary: So
that either it must appear we have changed Masters, or we are under the Power
of the Devil still. We must come out of the Power of Darkness, else we cannot
be brought into the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, that we may obtain Remission of
Sins.

4. Satan may be cast out in part, and yet still retain a supreme Interest in
the Heart. I prove it out of that Parable, Mat. 12. 43, 44, 45. When the
unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, he walks through dry Places, seeking
Rest, but finds none. Then he says, I will return into my House, from whence
I came out, etc. Out of that Parable we may plainly conclude, there may be a
shaking of Satan's Empire, Satan may be cast out of a Man in some sort, yet the
Man not plainly renewed. Well, how may he be cast out, and yet his Empire
remain unbroken? He may be cast out, partly, by Conviction and Illumination;
yet as long as any Lust remains there unmortified and unsubdued, he still
keeps his Sovereignty in the Heart. Many begin to be troubled, and to be
thoughtful about Eternity, that see better, yet they do that which is worse in
the Issue. When there is a Conflict between Corruption and Conviction,
Corruption carries it away. As Iron often heated, and often quenched, is so much
the harder: So, when they had some Wamblings of Conscience, and the Heart
begins to boggle, and after this, Sin breaks out the more. This is the Scope of
that place: They were convinced of a better Estate, and had some thoughts of
the Messiah, but did not give him entertainment. Again, the Devil may be cast
out, in regard of some external Reformation. A Man may a little wash his
polluted Life, and abstain from gross Sins, yet Satan^ have full possession of
the inner Man. A Man may abjure his former ill Life, and for a while carry it
fair, but afterward retain his former Filthiness, and keep a secret League
with his Lusts, and so he is entangled again, and then his latter End is worse
than his Beginning; and as it is in 2 Pet. 2. 22. The Dog is turned to his own
Vomit again, and the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the Mire. A
Prisoner which has made some Escape, if ever the Jailer get him into his
Clutches, is sure to be laden with Irons: So one that has had some partial
Reformation, O when the Devil gets such a Man into his power again, he is ten
times worse than he was before.

5. The Difficulty of casting off the Sovereignty of Satan, lies partly in our
selves, and partly in the Devil.

Partly, in our selves. As in the Israelites going out of Egypt, the difficulty
lay, not only in gaining the Consent of Pharaoh, (for he pursues after them
when they were gone) but also in persuading the People to give their Consent;
it was long ere Israel desired to be gone: So in our natural Condition, the
Mind of Man is so depraved, that he thinks his Bondage to be his Freedom, and
that there is no such merry Life, as to wallow in carnal Satisfactions; and our
Affections are so far engaged to this sinful Estate, that we dote upon our
Shackles, and are unwilling to hear of a Change. The first Step of coming out
of this Kingdom of Darkness, is, when we find it to be a heavy Burden, and
grow weary of the Devil's Government, tho it be but out of a Principle of
Self-love. Isa. 26. 13. O Lord, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over
us; but by thee only will we make mention of thy Name. Yea, but as soon as we
begin to have any serious thoughts of that miserable State in which we are,
Satan interposeth, dealing with us, as Pharaoh did with the Israelites. The
Israelites complain their Bondage was very sore; what does Pharaoh? He doubles
the Burden. Exodus 5. 17. You are idle, etc. So that out of Bondage of Soul,
they would not hearken to Moses. Just so Satan deals with us: When Souls begin
to be serious, and to leave off fleshly and worldly Lusts, and to give up
themselves to God, that they may be directed in the way of Holiness, and obtain
eternal Life, then he doubles our Burdens. Corruptions are never more
stirring, than after some Conviction. Romans 7. 9. When the Commandment came, Sin
revived, and I died; not only as to a deeper sense of the Guilt of it, but as
to its struggling for Life. The Bullock at the first yoaking is most unruly; so
we which are unaccustomed to the Yoke, when we begin once to take it upon us,
there is a mighty backwardness. Fire at first kindling makes abundance of Smoke;
so when Conviction is stirring, Corruption is more exa^perated. The Devil is
very jealous of the first Beam of Light which breaks into the Heart, and of
every Ordinance which conveys it; therefore sets Corruptions at work, that it
may appear to be a vain hope of ever escaping his Clutches: So Men are tired,
and give over, and think it is to no purpose. But if Light increases to more
Trouble, the Devil seeks to elude the Importunity of it by delay; as Pharaoh
put off Moses and Aaron still by delay: Or else by compromising and compounding
the Business; as Pharaoh, when he saw the People would go, God would have them
go, then they shall not go far, Exodus 8. 28. So if Men will be thinking of
Christ's Service, and coming under his Government, they shall go, but not far;
they shall come and pray, and come and hear now and then, and make a general
Profession, but not too far in Christ's Quarters; he is afraid of that: Just as
Pharaoh stood hucking still; They must go a good way into the Wilderness,
otherwise it should be an Abomination to the Egyptians, yet their little Ones
must stay. If People will not only hear and pray, but begin to reform and
cleanse their Lives, yet he must have a Pledge, some Lust, as a Nest-Egg, left
in the Heart, some darling Sin, that must keep up the Devil's Empire. Then they
must leave their Herds, then leave their Flocks; no, not a Hoof. Ah! how long
is it, when we are under this Power of Darkness, ere we are free, and get rid
of the Government of Satan!

6. We can never be sure that Satan is wholly cast out, until Christ be
seriously received and entertained as Lord and King, until he dwell and rule in
the Heart by Faith. Alas! there may be some Brabble now and then between us and
our Sins, and some partial Dislikes; but until you heartily consent to take
another King, that you will be governed and ordered by, you are not his
subjects, but remain in the same State. John 1. 12. As many as received him, to
them gave he Power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his
Name. We are Children of the Devil before, under his Standard and Government;
but when we receive him, then we are under another King, another Power: When we
receive what God offered, receive Christ as Lord and King; when the whole Soul
opens the Door to Christ, that the King of Glory may come in, and dwell with
us, and reign over us; then is his Kingdom set up. The first Offer of the
Gospel, is Christ as Prince and Savior, Acts 5. 31. And the main thing the
Business sticks at, is Christ's Regal Power. Luke 19. 14. We will not have this
Man to reign over us. Now when we receive him with all our Hearts, and tho
before we had but mean thoughts of him, now he begins to be welcome to us, and
with the dearest Embraces of our Souls we entertain him; and with a willing
Resignation we give up our selves, not only by a Consent of Dependence, to rest
upon him for Reconciliation with God, but by a willing Subjection to obey him,
and give up the Keys of the Heart, and lay them at Christ's Feet; as Paul, Acts
9. 16. Lord, what will thou have me to do? When you desire nothing more, but
that his Kingdom might come, the King of Glory himself, than that he might
bring Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; until then, you are not
entered into his Kingdom.

7. Christ is not received and entertained as Lord and King, but where his Laws
are obeyed. Col. 2. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so
walk ye in him. If you receive him as Lord and King, so also obey him. And,
Heb. 12. 28. We receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have Grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably, with Reverence and godly Fear. In this
Prayer, first, we say, Thy Kingdom come; and then presently we add, Thy Will be
done. We do but prattle over the Lord's Prayer, and say it with our Lips only,
until we are resolved to do what God would have us to do; love and hate, fear
and rejoice, as God directs. Until we are brought to this Frame, we do not in
good earnest say, Thy Kingdom come. An earthly King will do according to his
Will, Dan. 11. 3. So Christ stands upon his Will in his Law. If you have taken
God for your God, and Jesus Christ for your King, then say, with David, Psalm.
143. 10. Teach me to do thy Will, for thou art my God. It is an universal
Maxim, His Servants you are, whom you do obey. Where is your Obedience? If
Subjects of Grace, Every Thought is brought in subjection, 2 Cor. 10. 5. You
will watch not only against your irregular Actions, but every Thought which
lifts up it self against the Obedience of Christ. There will be a greater
Tenderness upon us, not to break any of the holy Laws which belong to Christ's
Government. Hereby you may know whether you come under another King, Do you
fear a Commandment? That is the Description of a good Man, Prove. 13. 13. It is
not he that fears a Punishment, but he that fears a Commandment, when the
Heart is brought under an Awe of Christ's Laws: So that when a Man is tempted
to Sin, O I dare not, the Lord has commanded me the contrary; this is more
than if a flaming Sword stood in his way. When we have such workings of Heart,
when we are tempted to this and that Sin; so when we are doing any Duty, tho
irksom to Flesh and Blood, yet it is the Will of my Lord, to whom I have
entirely given up my self in a way of Subjection. This is a Sign you are
brought under his Government.

8. None can obey his Laws, but by the virtue and power of his Spirit. The new
Covenant, it is not only a Law, but the Law of the Spirit of Life which is in
Christ; so it is called by the Apostle, Romans 8. 2. It is not a bare literal
Command that shall urge us to Duty, but it gives strength and efficacy to the
Heart. Other Kings, they give Laws, that Men may keep them by their own
Strength: But now Christ, he would be owned as a King, not only in a way of
Subjection, but establish a constant Dependence: He is a King, not only to
require, but to give Repentance, Acts 5. 31. not only to make a Law, but to
write and work a sense of this new Govenant-Gift upon the Heart. Heb. 8. 10. He
does not only set up his Ordinances, Laws, Constitutions; but there is Power
goes along with the Dispensation of this Kingdom, and thereby we are fitted
and enabled to love, serve, and please God; and then are we under the Kingdom
of God, when we are under the spiritual Power of it. It is not only necessary
to obey his Laws, but that we do it by virtue of his Power and Spirit: The
Kingdom of God stands not in Word, but in Power. 1 Cor. 4. 20. That we may both
acknowledge his Authority, and wait for his Strength. This is a true Submission,
when we look for all from him, and serve him in the strength of his own Grace.

9. All those that act through the virtue and power of his Spirit, they do
unfeignedly seek his Glory, and make Christ to be not only their Principle, but
their End: for having a new Principle, they have a new Tendency; acting in the
Power of the Spirit, their Hearts are carried out to seek Christ's Interest,
and Christ's Glory; when they can say with the Apostle, Phil. 1. 21. To me to
live, is Christ; when their whole Business is to set up Christ. We set up our
selves in the room of Christ, if he be not at the end of all. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11,
12. That God might fulfill all the good Pleasure of his Goodness, and the Work
of Faith with Power, and that Christ may be glorified in you. If you have the
Power of Christ's Kingdom, this will be the immediate Result and Issue of it,
that Christ may be honored and set up, not only as a Lawgiver, and Fountain
of Grace, but as the last End. If to us to live is Christ, then is the Kingdom
of God come into our Heart. For this we pray, that the Lord would so break the
Yoke and Government of Satan, that we may receive the Lord Jesus into our
Heart; that we may come under the Awe of his Laws, and in the Power of his
Grace, may seek his Kingdom and Glory.

To conclude: All this Grace is offered to you; if you refuse the Offer, your
Condition is worse than if it had never been tendered to you. The Lord has sent
his Son to help you out of the Power of the Devil, and bring you in Heart and
Life again to himself; if you refuse this, then, This is the Condemnation, that
Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather than Light. John 3.
19. The Lord Jesus, when he comes in flaming Fire to render Vengeance, it shall
be upon them that do not obey his Government, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. that did not
acknowledge God to be their Sovereign. There will be a sore Vengeance on them
which had the Gospel tendered, and this wonderful Provision brought home to
them, and left to their Choice, and yet have turned their Backs upon it.

Secondly; We beg the Continuance of it, that he would maintain this Kingdom in
our Heart, and preserve us in this State; for those which can call God Father,
are still to say, Thy Kingdom come. It is not enough to go to Christ to begin
it, but to carry it on, and to keep and preserve us unto his heavenly Kingdom,
2 Timothy 4. 18. That we may not revolt to the Devil's Side, after we have chosen
God for our God, and so our latter End be worse than our Beginning.

Thirdly; We pray for the Increase of it, that it may get ground more and more.
There are some Relics of the Kingdom of Darkness yet left, and there is
something wanting to the Kingdom of Grace; we are troubled and molested still.
Tho Sin does not get the Throne, tho the Regency of it is cast down, yet it is
not cast out, in regard of Inherence. Sin shall not have Dominion over you;
that is all we can hope for. Romans 6. 14. We cannot hope for an Extinction of
Sin, but only that it shall not have Dominion. As the Beasts in Dan. 7. 12, tho
their Dominion was taken away, yet their Lives were prolonged for a season and
time. The Reign, Power, and Dominion of Sin is taken down, yet it continues,
for our Exercise and Molestation. Now we desire he might rule in us by his
Grace, and that of the Increase of his Government there may be no End.

II. For the Kingdom of Glory, which in this private Consideration, (as it
concerns each Person) is to begin at Death. And when we desire the coming of
the Kingdom of Glory, we do two things; we express our Readiness for it, or our
Desire after it.

1. Our Readiness for it; at least, the Kingdom of God is ready for us, if we
were ready for it; as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4. 5. God is ready to judge, but
we are not ready to be judged. And therefore we read of the Kingdom of Heaven
prepared for us, and of Men prepared for the Kingdom of Heaven. It is prepared
for the Saints, Mat. 25. 34. A Kingdom prepared for you, from the Foundation of
the World. And the Saints prepared for it, Romans 9. 23. Vessels of Mercy, which
he had before prepared unto Glory. And this is that which the Apostle gives
thanks for unto the Father, which has made us meet to be Partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Col. 1. 12. Before we come to Heaven, there
is a Right to Heaven; we are made meet, more mortified and weaned from present
Things, often in Communion with God here, and so for ever with the Lord
hereafter. We are still to have our Eyes to our Rest, and happy State, that we
may be made ready for it. We express our Readiness, or we beg it.

2. That we may express our Desires after the Enjoyment of it. A Christian is
to desire the Company of Christ. Phil. 1. 23. I desire to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ: And he is to hasten the coming of the Day of God. 2 Pet. 3. 12.

Now because this cannot be but by our Death, therefore here we may examine a
Case or two.

Case 1. First, about longing for Death: Is it lawful to desire Death? The Law
does not only forbid Acts, but Thoughts and Desires; therefore is it lawful to
long for Death?

Answer. Yes; but yet we are not anxiously to long after it, till the time
come; not to grow weary of Life, our of Desperation and Tiresomness of the
Cross, as Jonah did, chap. 4. 3. but in order to God's Glory, and
Accomplishment of our Happiness. See more at large, Psalm. 119. verse. 17. page
104.

Case 2. Secondly, Do all that have an Interest in Christ desire to die? Is not
Death terrible? Certainly Death is terrible, both as a natural and a penal
Evil. As in it self, it is the Curse of the Covenant; and as it depriveth us of
Life, the chiefest Blessing. Yet we should train up our selves in an
expectation of Death, we should look and long for it, that when the time is
come, we might be willing to give up our selves into the hands of God. It is
required of a Christian, that he should not only be passive in his own Death,
to die in Peace; but active: How? to hasten his Death? No; but to resign up
himself willingly into the hands of God; that his Soul might not be taken away,
but given up, and commended to God. We should be willing to be in the Arms of
Christ, to be there where he is, to behold his Glory. If Christ had such a
good will to Men, as that he longed to be with us, solacing his Heart with the
thought of it, before all Worlds, Prove. 8. 31. He was thinking of us, how he
should come down, and converse with Men: Surely we should not be so backward to
go to Christ. And therefore as Jacob's Spirit revived, when he saw the Chariots
Joseph sent to carry him into Egypt; so our Hearts should be more cheerful and
comfortable, when Death approaches: Especially since Death is ours, it is
changed, therefore we should be framing our selves to such a temper of Heart by
degrees, that we might be ready.

Use 1. For Reproof to those, that would be glad in their Hearts if Christ's
Kingdom would never come. As to the Kingdom of Grace, in the external
Administration, they hate the Light, and will not come to the Light, lest their
Deeds should be reproved, John 3. 20. A wicked Man is loath to be troubled.
God's Witnesses are the Worlds Torment: Rev. 11. 10. They tormented them that
dwelt on the Earth. A Man that is bodily blind, would have a sit Guide; but
these wretchedly blind Sinners, nothing so troublesome and hateful to them, as
one that would lead them to the Kingdom of God. And then as to Internal Grace,
when this Kingdom of Heaven breaks in upon their Hearts, when any Light and
Power darts in, they seek to put it out, they resist the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.
51. and refuse his Call. And for the Kingdom of Glory, they say, It is good to
be here; and would not change their Portion here, for their Portion in Paradise.

Use 2. To exhort us to desire the Coming of Christ's Kingdom to our selves. If
you have any Love to the Lord's Glory, or your own Good, you should do it. Rev.
3. 20. Behold, I stand at the Door, and knock: If any Man hear my Voice, and
open the Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. Will
you not open to God, that has the best Right? Will you not set open the doors
to the King of Glory? When Christ comes to bring entertainment to you, to sup
with you. Again, all Men (will they, nill they) are subject to Christ; either
they must come, and touch his Golden Scepter, or feel the Bruises of his Iron
Mace; they must own him as King. Every Knee shall bow, Phil. 2. 10. Therefore
be more willing to have the Kingdom of Glory come. Again, if God be not your
King, you will have a worse Master, every Sin, every Lust: Tit. 3. 3. Serving
diverse Lusts and Pleasures. You will be at the Beck of every Lust and carnal
Motion, and the Devil will be your Master to purpose; for upon the refusal of
Christ's Government, there is a Judicial Tradition, you are given up to your own
Hearts Lusts. Psalm. 81. 12. Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their
own Hearts Lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels. And to Satan, to be
ensnared by him; 2 Timothy 2. 26. Taken captive by him at his Will and Pleasure.
Not to buffet them, as Paul was, but to ensnare and harden their Hearts. Again,
if you be not subject to God, you go about to make God subject to you in
effect. You would have the Kingdom of Glory, and yet continue in your Lusts.
Isa. 43. 24. Thou have made me to serve with thy Sins, thou have wearied me
with thine Iniquities. When you would have God patient, hold his hand, and be
merciful to you, and yet would continue in your Lusts, then you make God serve
with your Sins. Again, many temporal Inconveniences will follow, if we do not
give way to the Kingdom of Christ to seize upon us; when we make no difference
between God's Service, and the Service of other Lords, then he gives us up to
the Service of Men, to a foreign Enemy, to an oppressive Magistrate, or breaks
the Staff of Government among Men, that we might know what it is to be under
his Service and Government. Therefore give willing Entertainment to the Kingdom
of Christ.

So much for the private Consideration of this Request, Thy Kingdom come; that
is, to us and our Persons, both the Kingdom of Grace, and the Kingdom of Glory.

Secondly; Having spoken of the Kingdom of Christ in a private, now I come to
speak of it in a public Consideration: And that is twofold: 1. The public
visible Administration of the Kingdom of Grace. 2. The public and solemn
Administration of the Kingdom of Glory, at the Day of Judgment, when Enemies
shall have their final Doom, and Saints have their Crowns set upon their Heads,
in the sight of all the World.


I shall speak of both, but (because the Discourse may be more fresh and
lively) upon other Texts.

1. The public visible Administration of the Kingdom of Grace, on Psalm. 51.
18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion; build thou the Walls of thy
Jerusalem. 2. The Kingdom of Glory, on Rev. 22. 20. Surely I come quickly.
Amen. Even so, Come Lord Jesus.
For the first. Tho the Church be never so afflicted, Psalm. 102. 14. when all
is defaced, as to external appearance, lying in a ruinous Heap, yet it is
beloved and pitied by God's Servants: Thy Servants take Pleasure in her Stones,
and favor the Dust thereof. There is nothing God's People desire so much as
Zion's Welfare. Psalm. 106. 54. That I may see the Good of thy Chosen, that I
may rejoice in the Gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with thine
Inheritance. And David in this Psalm, Psalm. 51. 18. having prayed for himself,
prays for Mercy to the Church and State: Do good in thy good pleasure unto
Zion, build thou the Walls of thy Jerusalem. But how comes David, who was in
the depth of private Humiliation, so suddenly to fall upon the Case of the
Church? There was a special Reason for annexing this Request to his own private
Complaints and Confessions. The Reasons will occasion so many Observations.

1. Because of the Offense, Scandal, and Mischief done to the Church by his
Fall; and to make amends, he prays the more earnestly, Let not Zion fare the
worse for my sake. From thence observe, That the Sins of particular Persons often
bring a Mischief upon the whole Community. David had made a Breach in the Walls
of God's Protection, and left them naked, and more in danger of Judgment:
Therefore do good, etc.

2. David was not only a private Member, but a Prince, and their Sins have a
more universal Influence. The Sins of Magistrates draw down Judgments on their
People, all smart for their Miscarriages. Hezckia^^s Pride cost Israel dear* 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. Wrath was upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem: It did not
stay upon his Person: As a great Oak cannnot fall, but all the Shrubs about it
suffer Loss. But,

3. David having some comfortable Assurance of the Pardon of his Sins, does now
seek Mercy for the Church. From thence observe, That we are never fit to pray
for the Public, till we have made our Peace with God. As the Priests under the
Law offered Sacrifice, first, for their own Sins, and then for the Peoples.
Heb. 7. 27.

4. Because being brought by such a solemn but sad occasion into God's
presence, he could not but have some thoughts of Zion. And from thence observe,
That we should never come to God upon any private occasion, but we should
remember the Public. We are to pray in Love, as well as Faith. Christ has not
taught us to say, My Father, but Our Father; to show that we should take in the
Interests and Concernments of the whole Body, that there may be a Spirit of
Communion breathing in our Prayers. David does not only say, Have mercy upon me
according to thy Loving Kindness, but, Do good unto Zion in thy good pleasure.
Every living Member will be careful for the Body. Members should be careful one
for another, much more for the whole. Is any Member pained or grieved? all
suffer: If the Toe be trod upon, the Tongue complains, you have hurt me; but
now much more when all is concerned. Therefore we should not altogether seek
our own Things, but wrestle with God for the Public.

1. This reproves diverse sorts of People. Some are Enemies to the Public
Welfare, as Vipers eat out the Dam's Belly, especially Enemies to Zion; Down
with it, down with it, even to the Ground. What Monsters has this Age brought
forth! Others are indifferent and careless which goes up, Christ or
Antichrist; they only mind the Matters of their own Interest and Concernment:
All seek their own Things. As to the Public Interest of the Church, let all go
how it will. Let me tell you, To be selfish, is a sort of Self-Excommunication;
you cast your selves out of the Bundle of Life: And to be senseless, it is an
implicit renouncing the Body. Others there are that are gracious, but full of
discontent at some Passages of Providence, and these seem to have lost their
public Affections. It Is a sad Symptom, when a praying People are discouraged
from praying for Public Welfare. God is very tender of the Prayers of his
People; he is loath they should be lost, and sorry they cannot be granted. We
may sin in ceasing to pray. It Is a sad Judgment, when the Hearts of God's
People are taken off from praying. Again, Those that pray too coldly for the
Public, not as those that would do their Work. There is a great Decay of the
Spirit of Prayer, which is also a sad Presage. But now to show you,

II. What we should pray for, for Zion.

1. The Dilatation or Enlargement of it throughout the World. The more ample
God's Heritage is, the more is his Glory known. Prove. 14. 28. In the Multitude
of the People is the King's Honor; and the Glory of a Shepherd lies in the
Number of his Flock: So Christ's Kingdom, the more it is enlarged, the more
Honor God has. Psalm. 67. 2. That thy Way may be known among the Heathen, and
thy Saving-Health among all Nations. Especially when the Fullness of the
Gentiles is brought in, Psalm. 54. 2. and when the Jews are brought in, Hos. 3.
5. To be instrumental to enlarge Christ's Kingdom, it is an Honor to us, to
draw on Christ's triumphant Chariot, let us be sure to have an hand in it.
These Prayers, if sincere, are never in vain; if they profit not others, they
promote the Kingdom of God in our selves.

2. The Preservation and Defense of the Churches already planted, frustrating
the Plots and Power of the Enemies: That God would be a Wall of Fire round
about them, Zech. 2. 5. Qui comminus arccat, and eminus terreat: When at the
weakest God can protect them, bridling by his secret Power the Rage of
Adversaries, or defeating their Attempts.

3. For Comfort and Deliverance in Afflictions. We should pity the distressed
Church, (as before.) That God would redeem them out of all their Troubles.
Every true Member of the Church has Life Christ; and that Life gives Feeling;
and that Feeling, Affection, and Sympathy to rejoice and mourn. They that mourn
for Zion, rejoice with her. Isa. 66. 10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad
with her, all ye that love her; rejoice for Joy with her, all ye that mourn for
her.

4. For the Furniture of the Church; a Supply of all Good, internal and
external.

(1.) Internal: That God would bless them with Ordinances, enrich them with
Graces, preserve Truth and Unity, and continue his Presence with them: his
Ordinances, that they may enjoy them in Purity; that the Word, Seals, and
Censures may be rightly administered till the Lord come. These are Things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God, concerning which Christ spoke to the
Disciples, Acts 1. 3. These are to be kept till Christ's appearing, ^ Tim. 6.
14. It Is an Honor to God, and of great Profit to the Church, and a rejoicing
to God's People, to see them pure and unmixed. Tho absent in the Flesh, yet I
am with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your Order. Col. 2. 5. And then
that God would enrich them with his Presence: Mat. 28. 20. Lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the World. It Is God that gives the Increase: Paul
may plant, and Apollos water; but God gives the Increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. for
Conviction, Conversion, Confirmation. 'Twas not the Ark, nor Mercy-Seat covered
with Cherubims, but the Answer from between the Cherubims, given immediately by
God, that manifested his Presence. It is not the Sound of the Gospel, or
outward Ministry, but the Work of his Spirit. Psalm. 84. 2. My Soul yea even
faints for the Courts of the Lord; my Heart and my Flesh cries out for the
Living God. And, Acts 10. 44. it is said, The Holy Ghost fell on all them which
heard the Word. And then for Unity: Christ has called us into a Body, not only
into a Family, but into a Body. It was Christ's own Prayer, John 17. Let them
be one. Disputes will not heal, but Prayers may.

(2.) For External Helps; we should pray, that God would give us Pastors after
his own Heart. Mat. 9. ult. Pray ye the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send
forth Laborers into his Harvest: Men that will discharge their Duty with all
Faithfulness, Men whose Hearts are set to the Building up of Christ's Kingdom,
Laborers. And then for Schools of Learning. A Man that has many Orchards,
will also have Seminaries of young Plants to maintain them. Schools are
Seminaries, without which the Church falls to decay. And then for good
Magistrates, to patronize and protect Gods People, and promote his Work with
them. Isa. 49. 23. there is a Promise, Kings shall be thy Nursing-Fathers, and
their Queens thy Nursing-Mothers, etc. Rest from Persecution is a great
Blessing: Acts 9. 31. Then had the Churches Rest, and were edified, walking in
the Fear of God, and the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied. It is a
great Mercy that the Church has any Breathings. These are the Things that we
should pray for, sor Zion.

Thus much shall suffice to be spoken of the Kingdom of Christ in a public
Consideration, with respect, first, to the public visible Administration of
the Kingdom of Grace.

I come now to speak of the second, viz. The public and solemn Administration
of the Kingdom of Glory; and for that I shall insist on that Portion of
Scripture, Rev. 22. 20. Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, Come, Lord Jesus.

Here you have, 1. Christ's Proclamation. 2. The Churches Acclamation, in
Answer thereunto.


I. Christ's Proclamation, Surely I come quickly. Where take notice of two
Things: 1. His Asseveration, Surely. 2. His Assertion, I come quickly.


1. His Asseveration, [ Surely.] It is a certain Truth, tho we do not so easily
receive it. All notable Truths, about which there is the greatest Suspicion in
the Heart of the Creature, you will find them thus averred in Scripture; as,
Isa. 53. 4. Surely he has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows. The dying
of the Son of God is so mysterious, that the Holy Ghost propounds it with a
Note of Averment, Surely; that is, how unlikely soever it seems, yet this is a
certain Truth. So here, the Coming of Christ is a thing so future, so little
regarded by Epicures and Atheists, that it is propounded with a like Note of
Averment, Surely I come quickly. Herein secretly is our Unbelief taxed, and
also our Confidence engaged.

2. You have his Assertion, I come quickly. Let me explain what is meant by the
Coming of Christ. There is a twofold Coming of Christ, a personal, and a
virtual. Some think that the virtual Coming is here meant, his Coming in the
Efficacy of his Spirit, or in the Power of his Providence, to accomplish those
Predictions. Here are many things prophesied of, and behold, I come quickly,
you shall find these things presently produced upon the Stage of the World. So
some carry it. I think rather it is to be meant of his personal Coming. There
are two mystical Scriptures, which do express all the Intercourse which passes
between God and the Church in the World, and they are both closed up with a
Desire of Chirst's coming. The Canticles is one, which declares the Communion
and Intercourse which is between Christ and his Church; and you will find it
thus closed up, Cant. 8. 14. Make haste, my Beloved, and be thou like to a Roe,
or to a young Heart upon the Mountains of Spices. And so here, in this Book of
the Revelations, where are the like Intercourses recorded, it is closed up with
this, Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly. The personal Coming, I suppose, is
here meant. Now Christ's personal Coming, it is but twofold, the first, and the
second; the Scripture knows of no other Coming. Heb. 9. 28. He shall appear the
second time without Sin, unto Salvation. It is but a fond Dream, to think of a
personal Reign before Christ's coming to Judgment; they reckon without-book,
that look for any other. There was his first Coming, which was to suffer; his
second Coming is to reign; the first, his gracious, and this his glorious
Coming: The former is past, and the latter is yet expected.

[ I come quickly;] How shall we make good that?

1. In general, Christ's Absence from the Church, it is not long; tho you
reflect upon the whole Flux of Time, from his Ascension to his second Coming,
it is but a Moment to Eternity; some Hundreds of Years, that may be easily
counted.

2. It is no longer than Need requires. The High Priest, when he was gotten
within the Vail, was to tarry there until his Ministration was ended, until he
had appeared before God, and represented himself for all the Tribes, then he
was to come out to bless the People. Jesus Christ tarrieth within the Vail, but
until all the Elect be gathered. He is not slack, 2 Pet. 3. 9. but we are
hasty. Our Times are present with us, but we must leave him to his own Time, to
go and come.

3. Christ speaks this of the latter End of the World, and then it will not be
long. When once he begins to set forth, the old Prophecies are accomplishing
apace; and how little preparation soever there seems to be for this Work, it
comes apace. It is said of the Antichristian State, Her Plagues shall come upon
her in one day. Rev. 18. 8. And of the Jews it is said, A Nation shall be born
at once. Isa. 66. 8. So much for the first part.

II. Here is the Churches Acclamation, Amen. So, Lord Jesus, come quickly. This
Acclamation is double: 1. Implicit, and infolded in the Word, [ Amen.] 2.
Explicit, and unfolded; Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly.


1. For the Implicit Acclamation of the Church, in the Word Amen. The Word
sometimes is taken nominally, Rev. 3. 14. Thus says the Amen, the faithful and
true Witness; He that is Amen, as it is explained there, true and faithful,
that will certainly give a Being to his Promises. Sometimes it is used
adverbially, and translated, Verily: It is either an affectionate Desire, Let
it be; or a great Asseveration, It shall be. It has in it an affectionate
Desire: Ier. 28. 6. the Prophet said, Amen, the Lord do so, the Lord perform
thy Words, etc. When he had prophesied Peace to the People, Amen, the Lord
perform thy Words; not to confirm the truth of his Prophecy, but to express his
own Wish, and hearty Desire, if it might stand with the Will of God. Then it
expresses a firm Belief that it shall be done. Thus Christ often says, Amen,
verily, verily I say unto you, by way of strong Asseveration. Well then, the
Church expresses her Faith and Desire implicitly: Amen; Lord, that it were
so; and surely, Lord, it shall be so; we believe it, and we desire it with all
our Hearts.

2. Explicitly; Even so, Lord Jesus, Come quickly. From this latter Clause I
might observe many things.

(1.) The sweet and blessed Harmony that ^is between Christ and the Church.
Christ's Voice, and the Churches Voice, are Unisons. Christ says, I come; and
the Church, like a quick Echo, takes the Word out of Christ's Mouth, Even so,
come. There is the same Spirit in Christ, and in the Church; for it is his
Spirit that resides with us. Christ, he speaks in a way proper to him, by way
of Promise, I come; and the Church in a way proper to her, by way of Prayer,
Even so, come.

2. I might observe, That in the Close of the World we should most earnestly
desire Christ's Coming. We have the Advantage of former Times; to us Christ
says, I come quickly. Now the set time almost is come, therefore our Pulses
should beat more strongly in putting up this Request to Christ. Tertullian
shows, that the Primitive Christians did pray, pr^ mora finis, that the End
might not come too soon, Christ having ^s yet but a small Interest in the
World, they expecting Enlargement upon Earth; but we have more cause to look
for the Accomplishment of his Kingdom in Heaven. Th^ey expected the Revelation
of Antichrist; and we expect the Destruction of Antichrist: They, that God
might be known in the World; we, that he might be no longer dishonored in the
World. When great Promises are near their Accomplishment, there is a more
lively Spirit stirring in the Hearts of the Saints. Dan. 9. 2, 3. I understood
by Books the Number of the Years, whereof the Word of the Lord came to Jeremiah
the Prophet, that he would accomcomplish seventy Years in the Desolations of
Jerusalem. And I set my Face to the Lord God, to seek by Prayer and
Supplication.

But quitting these Notes, I shall mainly insist upon this Point, Viz.

Doct. That the Church, and all the faithful Members of it, do really and
heartily desire Christ's second Coming.

They look for it, they long for it, they wait for it. They look for it: Phil.
3. 20. Our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior,
the Lord Jesus Christ. They reckon upon it, as Rebekah espied Isaac afar off.
He is gone within the Vail, he is appearing before God, but he will come out
again. When they see the Clouds, upon these one day will our Savior come. Then
they long for it. It is their Description, 2 Timothy 4. 8. They love his
Appearing. Wicked Men, and guilty Sinners hate and abhor it, he being to come
to them as a terrible Judge. Malefactors do not long for the Assizes. But now
the Saints, who are absolved, and washed in the Blood of Christ, it does them
good to the Heart to think of it, that one day Christ will appear in all his
Glory. And then they wait for it; 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. They wait for his Son from
Heaven, even Jesus, who has delivered us from Wrath to come. It is Wrath to
come, something behind the Coming of Christ, which makes it so terrible. Hell
makes the Day of Judgment terrible. The Devil could not endure to hear of
Christ's coming, Mat. 8. 29. Art thou come to torment us? etc. So wicked Men
have the Spirit of the Devil; it is a Torment and Bondage to them, to think of
the Judges Coming. But those which have their Discharge, they wait for it; it
supports and bears up their Hearts in the midst of their present Afflictions,
and they go on cheerfully in their Work, notwithstanding Lets and Troubles.

To give some Reasons, why the faithful Members of Christ so really and
heartily desire Christ's second Coming: They are of three Sorts: 1. Some in
respect of the Person who is to come. 2. Some in respect of the Persons which
desire his Coming. 3. Some in respect of the Coming it self.


I. In respect of him who is to come.

1. His Person, that we may see him: The Children of God have delighted to look
upon him through a Vail, and have had a king of Heaven upon Earth, from
beholding his Face in the Glass of an Ordinance: Looking upon him in the Vail
of Ordinances, has been a mighty Comfort and Refreshing to them; now they
would desire to see his Person face to face. They know by Hearsay, this great
Redeemer and Savior of theirs; he wooeth them by Proxy. As Eleazar, Abraham's
Servant, was to go abroad, and seek for a Match for his Master's Son: So the
great Business of the Ministers of God, is to set forth our Master's Son. Now
the Saints would fain see him. Nay, they have not only heard of him, but
believed in him, and received him into their Hearts; nay, not only believed in
him, but they have loved him greatly: 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen, ye
love; in whom, tho now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with Joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory. It has been a ravishing thought to them, to
think of Christ. And they have tasted: 1 Pet. 2. 3. If so be ye have tasted
that the Lord is gracious. And they have felt him in the drawings of the
Spirit, they live by his Life, they have found a Virtue going out from him. Now
all that they desire is, that they may see this great Person, who has been
their Redeemer and Savior.

2. Consider him, as in his Person, so in his Relations to them. Here are two
Titles, Even so, Lord Jesus: He is Lord, and he is Jesus. He is Lord, as a
Master and Husband; as Sarah called Abraham, Lord. As a Master: Good Servants
will look for their Master's coming, Mat. 24. 46. And surely such a Master
should be longed for, and looked for; for when he comes, he will not come
empty-handed: Behold, I come quickly, and my Reward is with me. Rev. 22. 12.
Here Christ's Servants have their Vales, but not their Wages: Here they have
present Maintenance, that is all they have now; but then they shall have their
Reward and Wages; here they have their Earnest, but then they shall have the
full Sum. Under the Law, Masters were charged severely not to defraud their
Servants of their Hire; why? He has lift up his Soul to him; (that is) in the
middle of his hard Labors, this was his Comfort, when the Work of the Day was
over, he should have his Wages and his Hire at Night. So you have lift up your
Souls to him, the great Pay-Day will come, and this has born you up in all
your Labors, and Travel of your Soul. Therefore as he is our Lord, so we
should look for him. And then as our Husband; this is a sweeter Relation. The
Bride says, Come, Rev. 22. 17. We are here contracted and betrothed to Christ;
I will betroth thee to me, Hos. 2. 19. But the Day of solemn Espousals is
hereafter. Here we are betrothed to Christ in the Covenant of Grace; Christ
has taken a Token from us, and left a Token with us: He has taken humane
Flesh, carried our Nature to Heaven, that he might be mindful of us; and has
left the Spirit with us. Now there will be a longing, looking, and waiting for
this Day of Solemn Espousals. And as he is Lord, so he is Jesus, a Savior.
With what melting Wishes does the Captive long for a Savior and Redeemer! Now
we look for a Savior from Heaven. Christ is a Savior now, but not a perfect
Savior to the uttermost, never till then: Therefore the Day of Judgment is
called the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. There is something left, that every
Coming of Christ might bring some Benefit; something of Misery left upon us to
the last Day. Here we have Enemies within and without. Within, mighty Lusts;
and therefore his Coming is like a Refiner's Fire, Mal. 3. 2. and Fullers Soap.
His first and second Coming we find often in the Old Testament put together. His
Coming is, to present us holy, without spot and blemish. Ephesians. 5. 27. Our
present State is but a Convalescency, a Recovery out of Sickness by degrees;
there is some Fruit of Sin left upon the Body, until the Day of the general
Resurrection, that we may have new Matter of glorifying God, just as we are
entering into Heaven. Therefore that every Coming of Christ might bring us a new
Benefit, the Body is to die; the old Adam is not quite abolished, until God be
All in All. And so for Enemies without us: Here we dwell among wicked Men,
whose Sins are a Grievance to us, and whose Injuries are a very great
Molestation and Trouble: We live here, like Lot in Sodom; His righteous Soul
was vexed with their ungodly Deeds, their filthy Conversation. But then there
will be a perfect Separation between the Sheep and the Goats. Here we are
exposed to many Persecutions; here Antichrist is but consuming, there he shall
totally and utterly be abolished.

II. If we respect the Persons desiring this Coming, there is something in them
to move them to it. There is, 1. The Spirit of Christ. 2. Certain Graces, which
do necessarily issue themselves into this Work. 3. Certain Experiences they
have, which put them upon this longing.


1. There Is the Spirit of Christ: The Spirit and the Bride says, Come. Rev.
22. 17. The Holy Ghost breeds this Desire in the Church. Nature says, It is
good to be here; but this is a Disposition above Nature, the Spirit in the
Bride. The Flesh and corrupt Nature says, Depart; but the Spirit says, Come.
The great Work of the Spirit is, to bring us and Christ together; he comes from
the Father, and the Son, to bring us to the Father by the Son. All he does, is
to bring Christ and the Spouse together; therefore he enkindleth in the Hearts
of God's People, a strong and earnest desire of his Coming.

2. There are Graces planted in us; Faith, Hope, Love, Zeal. Faith, that is the
ground of this Desire. Christ says, he comes quickly; and this provokes and
draws up the Desire, to believe Christ will be as good as his Word. John 14. 2,
3. I go to my Father, and will come again to receive you to my self. Christ
has ever been plain-hearted with us: he says, I come; and the Church says,
Amen, in a way of Faith, Even so, come. If Christ had gone away in discontent,
and with a Threatening in his Mouth, that we should never have seen his Face
more, then we could have had but cold Hopes, and faint Desires; but he parted
in Love, and left a Promise with us. The Church, and the believing Soul says,
I have his Word for it: He has ever been punctual hitherto, and kept his Word
to a tittle, and has said, I will come again. This upholdeth the Hearts of
Believers during his Absence: For they reason thus; What need had Christ to
flatter or deceive us, or promise more than he will perform? Would we flatter a
Worm, that we can easily crush? He can strike us dead, if we do not please him;
He has been true in all things, and we have ever found him plain-hearted. Then
there is Hope planted in the Saints. Hope is Faith's Handmaid, it looks for
that which we believe: Faith determines the Certainty of the Thing, then Hope
looks for it. This Grace was made on purpose that we might reach out to Heaven,
and see if our Beloved be coming, that we might expect our full and future
Happiness. God not only provides a glorious Estate for us, but Grace to expect
it; he works this Hope in us, that we might look after it: 1 Pet. 1. 3. He has
begotten us again unto a lively Hope. Then there is Love in the Saints to
Christ. This is an Affection of Union, it desires to be with the Party beloved;
he desires to be with us, and we with him. Love awakeneth earnest Longings: O
come, come! why is his Chariot so long a coming? As a loving Wife stands upon
the Shore, as ready to welcome her expected Husband: So does Love in the
Saints, they desire to be with Christ, therefore they long for the Kingdom of
God coming to themselves, out of Love. Phil. 1. 23. I desire to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ. And upon the same ground they desire the general
Resurrection of the Church. Especially is this inflamed with the thoughts of
Christ's Love to us. He has removed his bodily Presence from us, yet he cannot
be satisfied until he and we meet again. John 14. 3. I will come again, and
receive you to my self, that where I am, there ye may be also. And, John 17.
24. And that you may be there with me, to behold my Glory. Christ is not
satisfied in his glorious Estate, until we be with him, till he has our
Company, and we be beatified with the sight of him. Before his coming in the
Flesh, he delighted to be with the Saints, before the World was, Prove. 8. 31.
And when the World was made, before his Incarnation, he took pleasure to come
and appear in the fashion of a Man, and converse with his People in humane
Shape. In the Days of his Flesh, he delighted to spend his Time, and busy
himself among them that are faithful. And when he was to go from us, he did
assure us of returning, and cannot be quiet until we be with him. So,
reciprocally (and according to our measure) does Love work in us; we cannot be
without Christ, therefore we long to be with him.

Then Zeal is planted in the Saints, and a Tenderness for his Glory. It is not
their Interest only, which makes them desire his Coming, but that the King may
sit upon the Throne, that Christ may reign in the most perfect manner, that the
Day of Manifestation may come, that all Mists and Clouds which are upon his
Person, may vanish. The Saints, that love the Glory of God as well as their own
Salvation, nay, above their own Salvation, are longing for that time when
Christ shall be seen in all his Glory, that he may be dishonored no more, that
Sin and Opposition may have an end. Here, God ha^h not his perfect Glory,
neither from us, nor from the Wicked, neither from Angels, nor Devils. Not his
perfect Glory from us, and therefore the Saints long for that time, when Christ
may be more admired in them; it is the Comfort of their Souls, that God is
glorified in their Glory, that there will a Time come when he shall be admired
and glorified in their Glory, and when they they shall praise him for evermore,
without weakness and distraction. And then the Wicked, that they may oppose and
dishonor him no more, that the whole Course of Justice may be seen in the
History of the World, which shall be produced at the Day of Judgment; that his
Power may be seen, when Devils and all ungodly Men are trodden under foot, and
all Offenses taken away, and all opposite Powers are abolished. First, Christ
would zealously affect us to the Glory of God, Hallowed be thy Name; then he
would have us pray, Thy Kingdom come: That our Zeal for God's Glory, might make
us earnest and instant for his Kingdom. Then,

3. There are certain Experiences that we have here, which set us a longing and
groaning for this time. Romans 8. 23. We which have the First Fruits of the
Spirit, groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the
Redemption of our Body. When they have tasted of the Clusters of Canaan, O they
long to see the Land; they long that Jesus, the Captain of their Salvation, the
spiritual Joshua, may lead them into the good Land. The Church has here
enjoyed Christ in her House: I brought him into my Mother's House, Cant. 3. 4.
Now they would enjoy him in his own House, have a more plentiful enjoyment of
him. Wherefore have we a taste, but to long for a fuller Banquet? Why does God
give out such a Pittance, but to awaken our Desires to look for more? Indeed
these Beginnings are sweet, and are a wonderful Mercy; to hear Christ say in a
Promise, Come to me, that you may have Life. But when once they have embraced
this, they will be longing for another Call, for the great Voice to say, Come
ye blessed of my Father, etc. When Christ bids them welcome into the Kingdom
of Heaven, to the Crown of Glory. When we can get any Joy in the Holy Ghost, a
little Peace of Conscience, any sweet Experience of our being cleansed from
Sin, this is reviving and comfortable. But why is this given, but to set us a
longing for the whole Harvest? for this is but the First Fruits. It is sweet
now to find Pardon of Sin, and any comfortable feeling of God's Love in the
Conscience; to have any Doubt resolved, any Fear silenced and suppressed; to have
a glimpse of the Light of God's Countenance, a little Elevation of the Heart in
Duty. Now this draws on the Soul to long for more; for we begin then to think,
what a sweet reviving will it be, when we enjoy the Full of all these things!
If there be but one Promise now set home upon our Hearts, tho here we have only
the Right, not Enjoiment; if we have but our Right cleared up to a Promise, it
is very reviving. God gives us this Experience, that we may long to enjoy the
thing promised, the full Possession of it. When you have gone away feasted with
Loves at the Lord's Table, thou have said, One Hours Communion with God is
better than all the World. If thy Heart was melted a little in Duty, if it was
affected with godly Sorrow for Sin, it has yielded thee more Comfort, than all
the Mirth and Music which fond Worldlings cheer themselves withal, than all
their Jollity. Now this is but given as a Foretaste, as a Prelibation, and to
awaken our Desires after more. In the Lord's Supper many times we come and
drink of that Cup which God has tempered for us; this is but a dark
Presignification of the new Wine we shall drink in our Father's Kingdom. Mat.
26. 29. and of those eternal Comforts we shall have there, and those unmixed
Joys in the presence of Christ. Therefore because of the Tastes they have had,
and those Beginnings of Glory, their Hearts will be more enlarged, and drawn
out to look for more, and long for that happy time, when all this shall be
accomplished.

III. There may be Arguments taken and drawn from the Coming it self, that they
long for his Coming. Wherefore does Christ come? what are the Ends of it? It is
to manifest his Love to the Saints mainly, as to punish his Enemies, and
glorify his Justice.

1. I Will mention the first, to gather the Saints together, to draw all his
scattered People into one holy Body and Communion. Psalm. 50. 5. Gather my
Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice.
Now they are scattered up and down, as God has Service for them to do; one
here, another there; they are spread in several Places, where they are like two
or three Berries in the uppermost top of the Bough. That Psalm is generally
acknowledged to be spoken of the Day of Judgment, then they are gathered to
meet in one great Assembly; the Psalmist speaks of the great Congregation of
the Righteous, where the Sinners shall not stand. Psalm. 1. 5. At that great Day
when Christ comes, all the Saints shall make but one Assembly, and one
Congregation. As the Wicked shall be bundled together, and the Tares cast into
unquenchable Fire; so all the Saints shall be gathered together into one great
Assembly, and this glads their Hearts. Therefore we are not feasted to the
full, because we have not all our Company; all the Guests do not meet together,
until the Day the Son of God comes to bless the Elect.

2. He comes to proclaim our Pardon, and to pronounce the Sentence of our
Acquittance juridically in Court, as Judge upon the Throne. Our Pardon is past,
and sealed as to Conscience, then he will blot out all our Sins; therefore it
is said, Acts 3. 19. That your Iniquities may be blotted out, when the Times of
refreshing shall come from the Presence of the Lord. He comes then to comfort
and refresh the Souls of the Saints, by proclaiming their Pardon in the Ears of
all the World. To whomsoever the Throne of Christ is terrible, it should not be
terrible to the Saints: If he comes as a Judge to them, he comes to acquit them
upon the Throne, he means no trouble to them.

3. He comes to crown us. Certainly there is a longing for this Day and Coming;
for what is his Work? He comes to crown the Saints. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth
there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous
Judge, shall give me at that Day. Then he comes to put the Crown of
Righteousness upon our Heads, and invest us with all the Fruits of his
Purchase; then the godly Christian comes to have his Crown. 1 Pet. 5. 4. When
the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory, that fades
not away. He that has been careful to honor God in his Relation, then the
great Shepherd comes to put the Crown of Glory which fades not away, upon his
Head.

Are the Children of God always in this Frame, as to desire his Coming? Many
tremble at the thoughts of it, and can have no comfort, for want of Assurance
of God's Love; and many times the Saints do not feel such Inclinations, and
such ardent and strong Desires.

I answer:

1. The meanest Saint has some Inclination this way; he cannot but desire
Christ should come into his Heart, and bless him, in turning him from his Sins;
and that he should come to Judgment, since Comfort and Reward is more naturally
embraced than Duty. Whoever is begotten to God, is begotten to a lively Hope, 1
Pet. 1. 3. his Heart is carried this way, tho not with so much Strength and
lively Motions as others are. Yet I grant,

2. Sometimes there may be a Drowsiness and Indisposition, when their Lamps are
not burning, when they are grown careless, and fallen asleep; as the wise
Virgins slept, as well as the foolish, by a sluggish Security. And the Saints
may find themselves indisposed; possibly by the remission of their
Watchfulness; they may contract an Indisposition, yet there is a Spirit
stirring this way, which begins with the new Birth, and still continues, tho it
does not always alike put forth it self. A Wife desires her Husband's coming
home, yet it may be all is not in such good Order. Now all Christians desire
the coming of Christ, but they are not so watchful, therefore are not so
lively. Security brings Deadness, until God awakens them by some sharp
Affliction. The Needle that is touched with the Loadstone, yet may a little be
discomposed and turned aside, but it settles again. This is the right Posture
and Frame of a gracious Soul, to be thus earnestly bent and carried out after
the coming of Christ.

3. I answer again: The Church does really and heartily desire this Coming, tho
they may tremble at some Circumstances of it. When we think of this great Day,
and of the Book that shall be opened, and the impartial Proceedings, there is
some degree of Bondage still left in the Saints, that does a little weaken
their Confidence and Boldness. 1 John 4. 18. we are told, Perfect Love casts
out Fear, because Fear has Torment. Until our Graces are perfect, there is
something of Fear.

APPLICATION.
Use 1. To reprove those that do not desire the coming of Christ, but put off
the thoughts of it; why? Because it casts a damp upon their fleshly rejoicing:
Which put far away the Day of the Lord, the evil Day; it is so to them, Amos 6.
3. They wish it would never come, and would be glad in their Hearts to hear
such News; why? For Christ's coming is their Torment and Burden; they look
upon it as a Vengeance, and an evil Day, therefore are loath to entertain the
thought of it. Says Austin, Can thou pray that the Kingdom of God may come,
when thou art afraid the Kingdom of God should come? A carnal Man cannot say
the Lord's Prayer, without being afraid; they tremble at the remembrance of it;
they are afraid it should be true, and afraid to be heard; if it might go by
their Voice, Christ should never come. The Voice of corrupt Nature is, Depart
from us: And what can the Almighty do for them? Job 22. 17. Or if they do
desire it, it is but in a slight formal manner, as those in the Prophet, that
would see the Day of the Lord, yet they could not bear it. Amos 5. 18. Woe unto
you that desire the Day of the Lord; to what end is it for you? The Day of the
Lord is Darkness, and not Light. They little consider what they are doing, and
what is their Danger, when they are making such a Prayer to God, Thy Kingdom
come.

Use 2. For Trial. How are you affected toward the Coming of Christ? Are you
carried out with such an Inclination and Bent of Heart, as the Day of your
Perfection, and the Day of your solemn Enjoyment of God? Is the Bent of your
Heart carried out to things to come? If there be looking, then there would,

1. Be a preparing. A Man that expects and desires the coming of a great Person
to his House, will make all things ready, is careful to furnish himself: When
all is sluttish and nasty, and nothing of Provision, do you look for your
Guest? What have you done, as to the Day of Christ's Coming? Have you judged
your selves? 1 Cor. 11. 31. If we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged. Have you ever seriously passed Sentence upon your selves, according to
the Law, that you may be found in Christ. Romans 8. 1. There is no Condemnation
to them that are in Christ. That you may have Christ's Righteousness to bear
you out in that Day, against Christ's Judgment? Are you so as you would be
found in him? Do you live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
World? Strict walking is a preparing and providing for this Day; you do but
provide for Terror, when you give way to Sin. 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11. The Day of the
Lord will come as a Thief in the Night; therefore what manner of Persons should
ye be in all holy Conversation and Godliness, looking for, and hasting unto the
coming of the Day of God. We should be trimming up our Lamps.

2. What kind of Entertainment do you give to Christ now? Do you entertain him
for the present into your Hearts, in his Ordinances? A Woman that never cares
to hear from her Husband, does she long for his Coming? O be careful now to get
Christ into your Hearts.

3. What does this Expectation produce? what revivings in the fore-thoughts of
it? John 8. 56. Abraham rejoiced to see my Day, and he saw it, and was glad. He
means the Day of his Incarnation, the Day of his Abode in the World; Abraham
foresaw, by the Eagle-Eye of his Faith, through all Mists, Clouds, Vails, and
Ceremonies; he got a sight of Christ's Day, and it did him good at Heart. Do
the Apprehensions of it make your Hearts spring and leap within you for joy?
What Groanings, Longings, what dealing with God about it does it produce? Romans
8. 19. For the earnest Expectation of the Creature waits for the
manifestation of the Sons of God. What Support and Strength does it give you
against the Burdens and Sorrows of this present Life, to remember Christ will
come.

Use 3. To press us to this sweet Affection and Disposition of the Saints. I
might mention the Profit of it; this longing, looking, and waiting for the
coming of Christ, it will make us heavenly in our Conversation. Christ is
there: where should we converse most, but where Christ is? And it makes us
faithful in improving our Talents: Our Lord will come, and reckon with his
Servants. Luke 19. 15.

Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven.
WE are come to the third Petition, which is fitly subjoined to the former. In
the Preface we own our Relation to God, Our Father; in the first Petition we
express our Care of his Glory; in the second, our Desires of his Kingdom; and
now we beg Obedience to his Will. We may judge of our Respect to his Name and
Kingdom, by our Obedience to his Will, without which we neither sanctify his
Name, nor submit to his Kingdom. The Kingdom of God implies two things; his
Government over us, or the Privileges which we enjoy thereby.

1. As it is taken for his Government over us, so there is a fair Connection
between these two Requests. Before, we pray that God would rule us; and now,
for a soft and pliable Heart, that we may be ruled by him. Christ is not our
King, when we do our own Will. These two are distinct; Government is one thing,
and Obedience to it another: As, Mat. 6. 33. The Kingdom of God, and the
Righteousness thereof; they are distinguished: The Kingdom of God we plead for
in the second Petition, and here for the Righteousness thereof; that Christ may
not be a Titular Prince and Sovereign, as certainly he is, when we do our own
Will. Every Sovereign stands upon his own Will; and the more absolute, still
the more his Will is to be looked upon as a Law and Rule. Now God being so
absolute a Sovereign, it is but fit his Will should be done in the perfectest
Manner: Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.

2. If you take the Kingdom of God for the Privileges of his Government,
especially if they be considered in their Consummation, and final
Accomplishment, for that which the Scripture calls the Kingdom of God; by doing
God's Will, we enter into his Kingdom. See Mat. 7. 21. Not every one that says
unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does
the will of my Father which is in Heaven. It is not the Blandishment of a
spiritual Complement, but a true and hearty Subjection to the Will of God, that
avails in God's Kingdom, and is intended by this Petitionary Clause, Thy Will
be done.

Here consider, I. The Substance of the Petition. II. The Circumstances thereof.


The Substance of the Petition, Thy Will be done. The Circumstances are two:
The Place where, which indeed intimates the Persons by whom, by Men here upon
Earth: Then the Manner is set down, in a Comparison, Upon Earth as it is in
Heaven.

Let me first open these Passages, then observe somewhat.

I. The Substance of the Petition, Thy Will be done; and there, 1. The Matter
about which it is conversant, the Will of God. 2. The Request about it, Thy
Will be done.


First; The Matter of the Request, Thy Will. God's Name was under consideration
in the first Petition; his Kingdom, in the second; and now his Will. And then
here is a Note of Appropriation, Thy Will, in contradistinction to all others.

God's Will, it signifies two things; either his Decree concerning future
Events, or else that which God has revealed concerning our Duty; his intended
or commanded Will. The first is spoken of, Romans 9. 19. Who has resisted his
Will? that is, his Decree, and his Purpose. And the second, his revealed
Pleasure concerning our Duty, is spoken of, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. This is the Will of
God, even your Sanctification: The Will not of his Purpose, but it is his Law,
his revealed Pleasure. Now it is not meant here of God's Decree, or secret
Will. Why? God's secret Will, that is not known, therefore how can it be done
upon Earth? To that all are subject, Reprobates, Devils. But here this Petition
speaks of a Will, which is to be done in conformity to the good Angels. Again,
we may (without Sin) will that, which God wills not by his secret Will; as the
Life of a sick Parent, which God purposes to take away. Nay, a Man may fulfill
this secret Will, and yet perish for ever, as Judas, and many which break his
Commandments, and yet fulfill his Decrees; that do that which God had determined
before to be done in his secret Purpose, as it is said, Acts 2^. 2^. To do that
which his Hand and Counsel had determined before to be done. Therefore his
secret Will is not here meant, but the Will of God revealed. Therefore let me
here distinguish again: The Will of God is revealed two ways; in his Word, and
in his Works; the one to be done by us, the other to be done upon us: the one
is, Voluntas de nobis, God's Will concerning us; the other, Voluntas in nobis,
God's Will in us, and to be done by us; the one makes way for our Active, the
other for our Passive Obedience. Our Active Obedience has respect to his Laws
and Commands, but our Passive to his Providence; we show as much Obedience in
the one, as in the other, in Patience, as in Holiness: For as in Holiness, we
own God as the supreme Lawgiver; so in Patience, we own him as the supreme
Lord, that has a Dominion over all Events, and all things which fall out in
the World. In the one we pray, Vt nihil Dei displiceat nobis, that nothing
which comes from God may provoke us to unseemly Passion; in the other we pray,
Vt nihi^ nostrum displiceat Deo, that nothing which comes from us may provoke
God by unseemly and und^tiful Carriage. We principally pray for the latter
here, that we may fulfill his Will revealed in the Word; and yet the other
cannot be excluded. Take but this Reason, because the Saints in Scripture
express their Subjection to God's Providence, in Words very agreeable to this
Request, to the Form of this Petition; as those Believers, when they saw God
had determined Paul's Journey to Jerusalem, when he went bound in the Spirit,
notwithstanding the Dangers of it, and their Loss by his Departure, they said,
The Will of the Lord be done, Acts 21. 14. And Christ himself, speaking of his
Passion, Mat. 26. 39. Not as I will, but as thou will: And not my Will, but
thine be done, Luke 22. 42. So that we pray both for the one, and the other,
tho with a plain difference; why? For our Active Obedience must be even without
a conditional Desire, that the Commands of God should be repealed; we cannot so
much as desire God should disannull his Law, and repeal those Statutes he has
enacted: Yet we may desire conditionally, if God see ^it, the removal of our
Affliction, and that Condition of Life, to which we are determined by his
Providence. The Commandment is not grievous in it self, 1 John 5. 3. yet the
Affliction in its own Nature is grievous, Heb. 12. 11. We may desire more
knowledge of God's Law, yet we may not desire more experience of Affliction; the
one is more absolutely necessary than the other. We are not only to obey
actively, but to love the Commandments of God, and to have our Hearts carried
out in a greater esteem, and to prefer them before Liberty it self; but I doubt
whether we are so concerning our Afflictions, to prefer them before Freedom and
Exemp^^^^ and the Welfare of our Nature.

Well then, you see what is meant by the Will of God, which is the Matter about
which this is conversant.

Then here is the Note of Appropriation, Thy Will, in opposition to our own
Will, the Will of Satan, the Wills of Men.

1. To our own Will, which is the proudest Enemy Christ has on this side Hell,
and the cause of all the Mischief which does befall us. The great Contest
between us and God is, whose Will shall stand, God's Will, or ours. In every
Sin we slight the Will of God, and set up our own. We despise the Commandment,
2 Samuel 12. 9. Not grossly and formally; David did not slight the Commandment,
and say, Tush, it is a foolish Law; but by necessary Interpretation we slight
the Law of God, and set up our own Will. Therefore when we pray, that God's
Will may be done, we do in effect renounce our own Will, those Wills of the
Flesh and Mind, Ephesians. 2. 3. which the Apostle speaks of; so it is in the Greek.
The Soul is never renewed, until the Will be renewed, till the Will be broken.
And therefore Self-denial is made one of the first Principles of Christianity,
the denying of our own Will. The Will is the leading part of the Soul. Tho the
New Creature begins with the Mind, yet it comes not to any Perfection, it is
not formed, until the Will be subdued to God, until Grace be seated in the
Heart. When a Man treads on a dry Hide, one part or other will be apt to
rebound, and leap up against him, till he stands in the middle and Center: So,
until Grace be seated in the Heart, Corruption will recoil. When a Bird's Wings
are broken, it can fly no longer; so when the Will is subdued, then the work
of Grace begins. The Mind is the Counselor, but the Will is the Monarch and
Prince, which sways and rules all in the Soul. Again, the Will is more
corrupted than the Mind; the Understanding is much blinded, but the Will is
more depraved. The Mind has a little Light, and is apt to take God's part
sometimes, by suggesting good Motions; but the Will does more abhor and
refuse Good, than the Understanding is ignorant of it. We are convinced often,
when not converted. Therefore this is the main thing, that our corrupt VVill^
may be subdued to God; Let thy Will be done, not our own.

2. Thy Will, in opposition to Satan's Will. Our Lusts are called his Lusts;
John 8. 44. The Lusts of your Father the Devil ye will do. They are of his
inspiring, of his cherishing; the grand Incubus of Hell is the Father of these
Brats, and sinful Productions. So, 2 Timothy 2. 26. the Holy Ghost speaks of
carnal Men, that they are taken captive by Satan at his will and pleasure.
Wicked Men are at Satan's beck, and they do his will. The Devil sets such a
Lust at work, the Man obeys presently: The Devil stirs such Lusts by his Arts
and Engines, and observes such a Lust will be most prevalent at such a time;
the Man is taken by Satan's Will. Now, Thy Will, etc. we desire the Lord's
Grace, that we may not comply with the Devil's Motions.

3. Thy Will, in opposition to the Wills of Men. 1 Pet. 4. 2. That he no longer
should live to the Lusts of Men, but to the Will of God; not according to the
Wills of Men, but according to the Will of God. In our natural State we are apt
to be swayed by the Lusts and Humors of others, according as the Posture of our
interest is determined; and therefore it is a good piece of Self-denial to
cease from the Lusts of Men, from the Humors and Customs of those whom we fear,
and from whom we hope: And until we cease from Men, in vain do we expect to
serve God.

Thus for the Matter about which this Request is conversant, Thy Will.

Secondly; Here is the Request it self, Be done; what does this imply, when we
say, Let thy Will be done?

1. We beg a Heart to do it. Deuteronomy. 5. 29. O that there were such an Heart in
them, that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments always! It is not
enough to set our selves to do what God has commanded; but we must get a
renewed, sanctified Heart.

2. We beg Skill to do it. Psalm. 143. 10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art
my God. We beg that God would teach us, and lead us forth in the Obedience of
his Will.

3. We beg Strength to do it. It is said, Heb. 13. 21. The God of Peace, --
through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good
Work, to do his Will. We beg Strength, that we may do what is pleasing in his
Sight. In our Will there is a double Mischief; it is opposite to, and averse
from God. Romans 8. 7. The carnal Mind is Enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be. And it is strongly inclined to
other things; and this both by Nature, and by evil Custom. There is an
Aversation from God which is natural, and which is increased by Custom;
therefore it is God must give us a Heart to do his Will, and Skill and
Strength. Thus God, he must draw us off from other things, which is called the
Circumcising of the Heart, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. He must draw us off, and he must draw
us on too. As he pares away the Foreskin, the Fleshiness which cleaves to our
Hearts, and inclines us to seek our own Will, in hunting after Pleasures,
Honors, Profits: So does the Lord draw us to himself; Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, and
we will run after thee.

II. Let Us come to the Circumstances of the Petition, [ In Earth, as it is in
Heaven.]

First, The Place, wherein also the Persons are noted, in Earth, that is by the
Men which live upon Earth. Why is this mentioned on Earth?

1. The Earth is a place of our Exercise and Trial, and now is the time to show
our Self-denial, and our Obedience to God, to deny our own Will, and do the
Will of God; John 17. 4. I have glorified thee upon Earth. This is a Work that
must not be suspended until we come to Heaven: it will not be thank-worthy
then, when there is no Interruption, no Trouble, no Molestation there: but
here, I have glorified thee on Earth, where so few mind the Work, and where
there are so many Distractions and Temptations to divert us.

2. The Earth is the only place where this Work is begun, or else it shall
never be done hereafter. Instance in any thing that is the Will of God. Here we
must believe, or there we shall never enjoy (Luke 2. 14.) Peace upon Earth. Now
God offers Grace, and now it is his Will we should come out of our Sins, and
accept of Christ to the ends for which he has appointed him. And here we must
be sanctified, else we shall be filthy for evermore. Corn grows in the Field,
but it is laid up in the Barn. Now is the time of minding this Work here upon
Earth.

3. That while we are upon Earth, we might long for that happy Estate we shall
have in Heaven, wherein we might serve God. Therefore Christ in his Prayer
would have us think how God is glorified and obeyed there, that we might send
up hearty Wishes after that perfect Estate, when we shall serve God without
Weariness, and without Distraction.

4. Upon Earth, to show, that we pray not for those in the other World, but for
those upon Earth. We do not pray for the Saints departed, they are out of harms
way, past our Prayers, being in their final Estate. We pray not for the Dead,
but for the Living. Thus for the first Circumstance in this Petition, the place
where.

Secondly, There remains nothing but the last, and that is the manner how this
is to be done; [ As it is in Heaven.] Chrysostom observes, that this Clause
may be referred to all the former Petitions; Hallowed be thy Name upon Earth,
as it is in Heaven. Thy Kingdom come upon Earth, as it is in Heaven. But
certainly most proper it is to the matter in hand. But what is the sense? How
is God obeyed in Heaven?

There are in Scripture three Heavens, the Airy Heaven, the Starry Heaven, and
the Heaven of Heavens. In all these Heavens God's Will is done. God is obeyed
in the lower Heaven, you shall see in Psalm. 148. 8. Fire, Hail, Snow, and
Vapors, stormy Winds fullfilling his Word. Winds and Storms, and all those
things which seem to be most tempestuous and unruly, to be the disorders of
Nature, they are at God's beck. Then in the Starry Heaven, verse. 6. He has
made a Decree which shall not pass: They are under a Law and Statute, and are
not exorbitant and excentrick, do not alter their Path; the Sun rises, setts,
and knows the just point of his Compass. But it is chiefly meant of the Heaven
of Heavens, where Angels and blessed Spirits are, and they obey God perfectly.
Psalm. 103. 20, 21. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel in Strength, that
do his Commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his Word. Bless ye the Lord,
all ye his Hosts, ye Ministers of his that do his Pleasure. The Angels do his
Commandments, and are hearkening to the Voice of his Word, are at God's beck to
be sent up and down, to ascend and descend as God will have them; so with
respect to this does Christ say, Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven.

But here again, why is this added, As it is in Heaven?

1. To sweeten our Subjection to God's Will. We upon Earth are not held to a
harder Law and Task, than they in Heaven. The Angels, they are not sui juris,
at their own dispose: They have many Privileges above Man, yet have no
Exemption from Homage and Duty to God. They have an Exemption and Freedom from
Trouble, and Sicknesses, and Diseases, and the necessities of Meat and Drink,
and all the Molestations and Infirmities of the Flesh which we lie under; but
are not freed from the Will of God, but they obey his Commandments, harkening
to the voice of his Word. These Courtiers of Heaven are Servants of God, and
Fellows with us in the same Obedience; none is too great to obey God. The
Angels which excel in Strength, they obey his Will, and so must we; nay, they
obey his Will with a holy Awe and Fear, that they may not displease him in the
least; for it is said of Michael the Archangel, Jude, verse. 9. That he durst
not bring against the Devil a railing Accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke
thee. He had not boldness to speak one uncomely Word, or one unseemly Word, to
do any thing that was displeasing to God.

2. As to sweeten our Obedience, so to show us the Reasonableness of this
Obedience. We would have the Happiness of the Angels, and therefore, certainly
we should come into a Fellowship in their Duty; it is but equal we should
imitate their Holiness. If we would have Communion with them in Glory, we
should have Communion also with them in Grace. Mat. 22. 30. it is said, we
shall be (...), like the Angels of God. We seek after the same Glory and
Happiness which they have: to stand before the Lord, and to behold his Face,
that is their Happiness. Surely if we would have the reward of Angels, which we
upon Earth are aspiring and looking after; it is but equal we should do the
Work of Angels, and write after their Copy.

3. Therefore does Christ use this Comparison, that we might not miscarry by a
low Example. How apt are we to follow the track, and to take up with an easy
and low rate of Obedience, Luke 18. 11. that put great Confidence in that, God,
I thank thee, I am not as other Men. Now because we have few Examples in the
World, and those we have, have their Spots and Defects, and are very
susceptible of Evils, and apt to miscarry by them; therefore Christ would carry
us up to look after a Heavenly and Celestial Pattern; he propounds the
Angelical Perfection as a Pattern and Example. He that shoots at a Star, will
shoot higher than he that aims at a Shrub: Surely the higher the Pattern that we
aim at, the greater will our Obedience be. Wicked Men they think that every
thing is enough in Religion, though it be never so little; but the Godly cannot
so easily satisfy themselves, they are pressing and hastening on more and more.

4. To teach us that we are not only to look to the Quid, but to the Quomodo;
not only to what we do, but also in what manner we yield Obedience to God;
therefore Christ would not teach us to pray only, Thy Will be done, but as it
is in Heaven, in such a manner. God respects not only the doing of what he has
required, but also the manner of it; that we may not only do good, but well; it
is the Adverb which crowns the Action. We are to consider with what Heart we go
about it. Prove. 2. 16. The Lord weighs the Spirits. That which he puts
into the Balance of the Sanctuary is, with what Spirit, with what Heart we go
about the Work, that is it he weighs and regards. Now that we may look not
only to the matter of Obedience, but also to the manner how we do it; therefore
does Christ give us this Pattern.

Object. But you will say, Our Obedience is accompanied with many Defects and
Infirmities; therefore, how can we serve God as the Angels do in Heaven? How
shall we take Comfort in our Obedience, if this be our Pattern?

I answer,

1. Though we cannot do it in the same measure, yet we should do it in the same
manner; though there be not an exact Equality, yet there should be some
answerable Resemblance: Our Obedience should not be wholly different in the
kind and manner of it from theirs which serve God in Heaven, though for the
degree and rate we cannot come up to their Pattern.

2. Though we do not attain to this Perfection in this Life, yet we must aim
after it, long for it, and pray for it. Aim after it, not sluggishly content
our selves with any low degrees of Obedience, but aim at the highest. And to
long for it; there is a time coming, when we shall be perfect; when we shall be
not only as the Angels are, but as Christ is, We shall be like him, 1 John 3.
2. And we pray for that on Earth, what is expected in Heaven; we pray for what
we do expect from the final and consummate Estate, when we shall be as the
Angels of God, and perfectly do his Will.

I come to the Points; they are three.

1. It concerns them very much that would in Prayer own God as a Father, and
pretend a respect to his Glory and Kingdom, to see that his Will be done here
upon Earth. 2. It is the Lord that gives to will, and to do, those things
which are pleasing in his sight. 3. God does not only look to this, that his
Will be done, but to the manner how it is done.
1. It concerns them very much, that would in Prayer own God as a Father, and
pretend a respect to his Glory and Kingdom, to see that his Will be done here
upon Earth.

I shall prove it:

First, By the Arguments intimated in the Point.

1. As we pray to God, we should see his Will be done, upon a double account;
as real and successful.

(1.) As we would express a Reality and Sincerity in Prayer. They mock God,
that pray they might do his Will, yet have no care to do it; that declaim
against their Lusts, yet hug them, and keep them warm in their Bosoms. We
oftener pray from our Memories, than our Consciences; and oftener from our
Consciences, than our Affections: from our Memory, as we repeat Words by rote,
without sense or feeling, or Consideration of the Importance of them. From our
Consciences, rather than Affections. Austin observes of himself; while he was
under the Power of his Lusts, he would pray against Concupiscence, but his
Heart would say, at noli modo, timebam enim ne me exaudiret Deus; but, Lord,
not yet, for I am afraid lest God should hear me. Conscience tells us that such
things must be done, and asked; thus we put a little of our Conscience in
Prayer, but nothing of Affection and serious Desire. Many would be loath God
should take them at their words, when they seem to resign up themselves to his
Will, and think of parting with their Lusts, it is bitter and irksome to them;
as Phaltiel ( Michal's Husband) went after her, going and weeping; 2 Samuel 3.
16. Now if we would manifest our Prayers to be real, we should labor to
perform the same, otherwise we are but like those Soldiers which spate upon
Christ, and buffeted him, yet cried, Hail, King of the Jews; so it is but a
mockage to say, Thy Will be done, yet have no care to do it. Matthew. 15. 8. This
People draws nigh unto me with their Mouth, and honors me with their Lips;
but their Heart is far from me. There is no Reality in the Prayer, whatever be
in it, if the Heart be not in it. Some Men's Prayers are but the Fruit of Wit
and Memory, others but the result of their Judgments, what is fit to be done,
rather than of their Hearts, what they desire to be done; and they are only
good so far as they do more solemnly express God's Right, not their inward
Desires.

(2.) If we would have our Prayers successful. Psalm. 66. 18. If I [regard]
Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me. Clearly, if we will not do
God^s Will, there is no reason he should regard our Will. If I regard Iniquity
in my Heart: there may be Sin in the Heart, but if I regard it there, God will
not hear me; if I entertain an Affection to it. When the Wind blows, some cold
Air will get into the Chamber, though the Door be shut never so close; but to
leave the Door open for it, does not argue such a care of Health as is
requisite: There will be Sin in the Children of God, but it is not allowed.
Love to any known Sin, makes our Prayers to God to be without success. So Prove.
28. 9. He that turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall
be Abomination. God uses often the Law of Retaliation, will pay home Sinners
in their own Coin; we will not hear him, therefore he will not hear us. The
same Argument we have to urge to God in Prayer, that God has to urge to us for
Duty and Obedience. What Argument will you use to awaken your Confidence and
Affection? By the Blood of Christ we have boldness to come to him; Heb. 10. 19.
and Ephesians. 3. 12. This is not only an Argument to be urged in Expectation of
Mercy, but also in the enforcement of Duty, when God beseeches you by the
Bowels of Christ to do his Will, and to mind his Work. If the Blood of Christ
cannot prevail with us, to bring us up to the Will of God; how can we expect it
should prevail with God to bring us in Returns of Blessing? When God speaks, we
slight him; therefore when we speak, God may cast off our Prayers.

God speaks more wisely to us than we can to him; we stammer, and lisp, and
speak foolishly in our Prayers to God. There is far more reason why we should
hear God, than God hear us: For there is more Equity in his Precepts, than
there is Reason in our Prayers; and we are bound to obey God's Will, more than
he is to grant our Request: and therefore if we would not have God turn away
his Ear from our Prayers, we should not turn away our Ears from hearing his Law
and Counsel. John 9. 31. Now we know that God hears not Sinners: but if any
Man be a Worshipper of God, and does his Will, him he hears. It is a general
Maxim, Those which were ready to deprave Christ's Actions, were possessed of the
Truth of this; If any worship him, and do his Will, him he hears: Joh. 9. 32.
It is not enough to keep up a form of worshipping, but we must be tender of his
Will, that is the way to get a gracious Answer. Thus as we pray, we are bound.

2. As God's Children, so we must do his Will. Mal. ^. 6. If I be a Father,
where is mine Honor? and if I be a Master, where is my Fear? Relations to God
are not bare Titles, and grounds, whereby we may expect favor from God; but
they carry in their Bosom Obligations to Duty on our part. Many will give God
good Words, and fair Titles, but there is no care had of complying with his
Will. Nay, your owning that Relation will aggravate your Sin, and be a Witness
against you: You owned me your Father, and have not done my Will. So Matthew. 12.
50. Whosoever shall do the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my
Brother, and Sister, and Mother. These may be sure of a comfortable Relation to
God, and that God will own them in that Claim, when they make it their Business
to do his Will; otherwise you reproach God, rather than worship him. When you
do your own Will, and call God Father, you lay the Devil's Brats at his Door;
you pretend to God, and take his Name upon you; therefore those that say, Our
Father, must also say, Thy Will be done.

3. Those that would have respect to God's Glory, must do his Will. This is the
Honor of God, when you are at his Command. God gloried in Abraham; rather
Cyrus than Abraham is there meant, as the Context shows; see Isa. 46. 11. Isa.
41. 2. The Man from the East, whom I have called to my Foot. When you are at
his beck, ready to go step by step with God; as God leads you, you are ready to
follow. It was the Honor of the Centurion, that had his Soldiers at such a
Command, that when he said to one, Go, he went; and to another, Come, and he
came: Matthew. 8. So it is God's Honor, when he can bid you do nothing but you
are ready to obey, though with the greatest hazard and loss of all.

4. Our Subjection to his Kingdom. God stands upon his Authority. What Is a King
without Obedience? Christ is never received as King, but where his Will is
obeyed; otherwise we mock ^im with an empty Title. The High-Priest's Servants
said, Hail, King of the Jews, in mockage; thus it is to own him as King, when
we will not yield Obedience. Then do we desire that his Kingdom may come indeed
and in power, when we resolve to do his Will; to love as God will have us; and
hate, fear, and hope as God will: Psalm. 143. 10. Thou art my God, teach me to
do thy Will. If you own God as Sovereign, you must be in subjection to his
Will. Thus this Prayer will yield us Arguments, as we own him as a Father, as
we profess respect to his Glory and Kingdom.

Secondly, I shall bring other Arguments to persuade this, to make Conscience
of God's Will.

1. The Example of Christ Jesus, who wholly yielded up himself to the Will of
God; and will thou stand upon thy terms? Io. 5. 30. I seek not mine own Will,
but the Will of him that sent me. Christ did not seek to please his human, his
own natural Will, but the Will of his Father. This is true Religion, to be like
him whom we worship. Now we are never like Christ, until we make doing of God's
Will to be the great business of our Lives: Wherefore does he come into the
World? He tells you, to do his Father's Will; Luke 2. 49. Wist ye not that I
must be about my Fathers business? This was his sole Employment: so it should
be ours, if we have the same Mind which Christ had.

2. Consider God's Right. We are not at our own dispose, but at the Lord's use.
God has a right in us as he created us. The Perfection of every thing lies in
fulfilling the Creator's Will, for that is the end wherefore they were made. The
Creatures are all thy Servants, and continue this day according to thine
Ordinances: Psalm. 119. 91. We owe our Being, and all we have, from him. We see
among Men, Dependence begets Observance; a Man that lives upon another, will be
careful to please him. Thou hold all by the Indulgence and Bounty of God,
therefore it should be thy study to do his Will. Jesus Christ has bought thee;
1 Cor. 6. 20. Glorify the Lord in your Souls and Bodies, which are Gods: That
is God's which he has bought. A Servant that was bought, when Men were sold
for Slaves, he was his Master's Money; so his Strength, Time, Service, belonged
to his Master. We are God's, because he has bought us, therefore we cannot
live as we will: for this is the property of a Servant, that he cannot live as
he will. Again, as God has begotten us anew, regenerated us: what is the aim of
his Grace? That we should no longer live in the Flesh, to the Lust of Men, but
to the Will of God: 1 Pet. 4. 2. It is the aim of Grace to cure the Disorders
of the Will, and to bring us to a stricter bond of Duty and Service to God. And
indeed if Grace has had its Fruit and Power upon you, you will give up your
selves to God: Cant. 7. 10. I am my Beloved's: You are your Beloved's, to be
used by him as he pleases. So that unless you will retract your Vows, you will
make Conscience of doing the Will of God, for he has a manifest right in you.

3. Consider our own Incapacity. There is great Reason why our Wills should be
given up to the Will of God, because we are not able to manage them our selves.
By the Law of Nations, Fools, and mad Men, must have a Guardian, they have lost
the Dominion and Power over themselves, they are to be ruled by another, they
are Slaves by Nature, that must be guided by another: Tit. 3. 3. We are all by
Nature Fools, and it is the greatest Mischief that can be, to be left to our
own Wills; and therefore when God requires the Resignation of our Wills, it is
but as the taking of a Sword out of a mad Man's hand, which will be the cause
of his own Mischief and Ruin: Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso; no Man is hurt by
any but by himself, tho he may be troubled by others. Now since we cannot
manage our own Will, it is fit we should have a Guardian; and who is more wise
than God to govern us? A Merchant, tho he owns the Ship, and has stored it
with Goods, yet because he has no Skill in the Art of Navigation, he suffers
the Pilot to guide it. Certainly we shall but Shipwreck our selves, unless we
give up our selves to be guided by the Spirit of God according to his Will.

4. The benefit that accrueth to us by doing his Will; we shall have his Favor
here, and his Glory hereafter. His Favor here, which is that which endeareth
us to God: Acts 13. 22. I have found a Man after mine own Heart, which shall
fulfill all my Will: These are Men after God's own Heart that do his Will. And
tho we have great Infirmities, yet because we are bent to do his Will, they
will be passed over; as David had h^s Infirmities, yet because it was in his
Heart to do the Will of God, therefore this is a Man after my own Heart. And
you shall have the Glory of God hereafter: 1 John 2. 17. The World passes
away, and the Lusts thereof: but he that does the Will of God, abides for
ever. Those things that our Wills carry us to, they perish. The Inclination of
our Heart carries us to the World, Riches, Honors, Pleasures; but the Will of
God carries us to an everlasting Estate. The World passes away, and the Lusts
thereof: There will a time come, when those things we will, and are so strongly
addicted to, and lust for, will be gone; we shall have no Relish, no Savor in
them, no Appetite to them. When Men are leaving the World, then they cry out
how the World has deceived them; but now he that does the Will of God abides
for ever. Never any repented of doing the Will of God; this will stick by us to
all Eternity, and bring us to everlasting Happiness.

Use 1. To show how far they are from any sincere respect to God, that upon the
least occasion transgress his Will, and break through Bonds and Restraints God
has set to them: The Heart is never right, but when it lies under the awe of
a Command. Many will fear a Punishment, but it is said, Prove. 13. 13. He that
fears the Commandment; if the Commandment stands in his way, he dares not
break through, it is more than a Hedge of Thorns, or if Lions stood in the way.
But on the other side, when Men make no bones of a Commandment, when they will
transgress for a pair of Shoes, (as the Prophet says) when every small
Temptation is enough to draw them off from God, it shows how little sincere
respect they have to God.

Use 2. It serves to press us to a more tender regard to the Will of God. To
this end consider these Motives.

Mot. 1. His absolute Authority to command. 1 Timothy 6. 15. Who is the blessed
and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: His Will is enough. I
am the Lord, you shall do thus and thus.

2. Consider the Equity of what he has commanded; Romans 7. 12. The Commandment
is holy, and just, and good. Nothing God commands, but what is agreeable to
his own Nature, and what is suited to our Benefit. It is no burden to live
justly, soberly, and holily in Communion with God. It is not a Burden, but a
great Advantage: The Yoke of Christ is a bountiful Yoke. Our Service and Duty
has its own Reward in the very Mouth and Bosom of it. It is no great wrong to
us to govern our Affections, to live soberly, chastely, and in the Exercise of
holy Services; here is nothing but what raises and sublimates the Nature of
Man. If the Commandment of God had been to offer our Children in Sacrifice, or
any of those Barbarities which were practiced among the Gentiles; yet this had
been enough, I am the Lord: But when he has given such holy and good Commands,
which makes you live more like Men, like reasonable Creatures, you should be
tender of the Lord's Will.

3. To be given up to our own Will, is a great Judgment. When the Lord has a
mind to destroy a People, he gives them up to their own Will; Psalm. 81. 12.
Israel would none of me; so I gave them up unto their own Heart's Lust: and
they walked in their own Counsels. It is the greatest Judgment which can be
laid upon any Creature, that he may have his own Will. A Man may be given up to
Satan, yet recover; 1 Cor. 5. 5. Deliver such a one to Satan for the
Destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus. He may be given up to Satan for his Exercise and Trial; but when he is
given up to himself, to the sway of his own Heart, to be besotted with his own
Counsels, and to have his own Lusts, what a heavy Judgment is this? When Balaam
would not be satisfied, God said to him, Go, Numb. 22. 35. He had his Answer
before, again and again, but he would be inquiring still; Go, and that was his
Punishment.

4. It is the truest Liberty to be subject to the Will of God. Then, when the
Son of God shall make you free, you shall be free indeed: John 8. 36. How does
the Son of God make us free? not from Duty, but for Duty. He that lies under
the dominion and power of any Sin, is a very Slave. But then are we free
indeed, when we are loosed, not from a due Subjection to God, but from the
Power of the Devil. It is not Liberty to be free to do what we please, Good or
Evil; but the more determined we are to Good, the more Freedom; for that is a
Liberty which comes nearest to the Liberty of God, who is a most free Agent,
and yet cannot sin: such a Liberty is in God, Christ, and the Angels in Heaven;
surely they do not live a slavish Life, that are ever praising and lauding of
God. It will be the greatest pleasure in the issue to deny our own Will, and do
the Will of God. The more we are enlarged for this, the greater is our
Happiness: then we have the Happiness of the Spirits of just Men. None among
Men have greater Happiness than glorified Saints, yet none have less of their
own Will. Why should we account that a Bondage, which is part of our Happiness?
In Heaven, glorified Spirits there are not complaining of any Burden, yet they
have no Will of their own, but they will and nill as God does.

5. He that has a Heart bent to do the Will of God, he has the clearest
knowledge of the Mind of God. John 7. 17. He that will do the Will of God, he
shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God. It is not the sharpness of
Parts that pierces into a Truth, especially into a controverted Truth, when
the Dust of Contention is raised; but he that is most close in walking with
God, it is he that knows his Mind. A blunt Iron, when hot, and in the Fire,
will pierce deeper into an Inch-Board, than a sharper Tool that is cold: So a
Man that has pure Affections for God, a Heart to do the Will of God, pierces
deeper many times into controverted Truth, and sees more of the Mind of God in
that Truth, than a Man of Parts does. There are many Mistakes about the Will of
God; now make Conscience of Obedience, do not consult with the Interest of your
own private Passions, and then you shall know the Mind of God. It is just with
God to withold the Light from them that consult with their Lusts and
Interests, and carnal Humors, for these blind the Mind, and only like and
dislike Things, as they shall relish with their Lusts.

6. God will surely punish the Violation of his Will. This implies two things:

(1.) That God takes notice of it; he observes whether his Will be done, yea,
or no. The Rechabites were tender of the Commandment of their dead Father,
which could not take cognizance of their Actions; but it was the Will of their
Father, and they would keep to the Will of the Dead, Ier. 35. 14. But now the
Lord sees whether his Will be kept, yea, or no. Prove. 15. 3. The Eyes of the
Lord are in every Place, beholding the Evil and the Good. Where ever you are,
God is with you. As the Prophet said to Gehazi, Went not mine Heart with thee?
2 Kings 5. 26. meaning his prophetical Spirit. The Lord's Spirit goes along
with us where ever we go, he observes what we do. When Jesus Christ was in the
Throng, he says, Who is it that touches me? He was sensible Virtue passed out
from him, when one touched him by Faith: So in the Throng of Creatures we
depend upon God; he knows what Virtue goes out to preserve thee and me in
Being. These are fit Instances to ingenerate in our Minds a sense of God's
Omniscience.

(2.) He will severely punish. Iam. 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able
to save, and to destroy. There are many Lawgivers in the World, that have
Power of Life and Death, but that is only of Life Temporal: But there is one
Lawgiver, that can reward with eternal Life, and punish with eternal Death. So
God truly and properly has the Power of Life and Death. Therefore since he can
punish so severely, we should not stand out against God's Will. Many times the
doing God's Will is irksom to Flesh and Blood; but remember, Hell will be
worse. When we press Men to Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience, and tell
them, this is the Will of God concerning you, that you do believe in Christ,
walk holily and humbly with God; what says the Man? Shall I mope my self, and
sit mourning in a Corner, and spend my Life in a dark melancholy manner, in
going from one Duty to another? This is far better than to sit howling under
the Wrath of God for evermore.

For Directions. If you would do the Will of God, then,

1. There must be some solemn Time of resigning and giving up thy Will to him.
Naturally we are averse: Now whosoever is brought unto God, he comes and lays
down the Weapons of his Defiance at God's feet. God has a Right to us, and he
will have this Right confirmed by our Grant and Consent. Romans 12. 1. I beseech
you by the Mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God. There cannot be a more acceptable Sacrifice to God,
than the Resignation of our own Will to him. See how Paul comes, and lays
down the Buckler, when God had him under; Acts 9. 6. And he trembling and
astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? There will be a time,
when you will solemnly give up the Keys of your own Hearts to God, and bid him
come and enter. Paul, that now did nothing but threaten, and breath out Terror
to the Children of God, when God had humbled him, then he lies at God's Feet.
When you are truly humbled, you will desire God to come and take possession of
your Hearts, and resolve to come under his Yoke. Mat. 11. 28. Take my Yoke upon
you, and you shall find Rest for your Souls. Christ will force it upon none. In
the Matrimonial Contract, Consent is not to be forced. Take my Yo^e*

2. When you give up your selves to God, it must be without Bounds and
Reservations: That ye may stand perfect and complete in the Will of God, Col.
4. 12. That was his Prayer for them. And, Acts 13. 22. I have found David, the
Son of Jesse, a Man after my own Heart; he shall fulfill all my Will. We
should so perfectly obey, as if we had no Will of our own, not reserving a
Property in any thing. Our Thoughts are not our own to dispose, nor our
Desires, nor Delights, but as God will. The least Sin reserved, is a Pledge of
the Devils Interest and Right in us. And therefore give up all to God, resign
up your selves wholly to him, as remembering that every Motion, every Thought,
every Affection is under a Rule; and in every Action we should say, Will God
have this to be done, yea, or no?

3. There are some special Things, concerning which God has more expressly
signified his Will, and given special Charge; and these we should make greatest
Conscience of, how distasteful soever they be to Flesh and Blood, or
prejudicial to our own Interest. For Instance; Concerning Repentance, and
turning from Sin, Ezekiel. 33. 11. you have God's Oath, that he delights in it: As
I live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but
that the Wicked turn from his way, and live. And, God would not have any to
perish, but that all should come to Repentance. 2 Pet. 3. 9. This is the Will
of God; he has told you what a great deal of Pleasure he takes in Repentance,
that you should come and mourn over your Sins, and bewail your Straglings. When
a profane Esau knew what his Father desired, he takes his Bow, to go and kill
Venison: When we know any thing more pleasing to God' we should do it. And then
he takes pleasure also in the Work of Faith, believing in Christ. John 6. 29.
This is the Work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent. And, 1 John
3. 23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son
Jesus Christ. Therefore we should be much in the Work of Faith, and in
receiving Christ, that we may accomplish the good pleasure of God in us. It is
very pleasing to God, we should thus repent, believe, and return to him. The
very first Motion, how welcome is it to the Lord! Psalm. 32. 5. I said, I will
confess my Transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the Iniquity of my
Sin. So, Luke 15. 20. the Father ran to meet him, when the Prodigal thought of
returning. So, that you should live a sanctified Life. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. This is
the Will of God, even your Sanctification. That you should walk holily, God
has expressly declared his Will. Then for Duties of Relations: God takes a
great deal of pleasure in Obedience to Magistrates, Parents, Masters: 1 Pet. 2.
15. For so is the Will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
Ignorance of foolish Men. Then, that we should observe Providence, ever be in
a thankful frame: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. In every thing give thanks; for this is the
Will of God, in Christ Jesus, concerning you. It is a great Rebellion and
Disobedience, not to obey God's solemn Charge.

4. We should be willing to obey God, whatever it cost us. The least Sin is not
to be committed, to avoid the greatest Trouble. You would think it were a small
Sin, for Moses to tarry in Pharaoh's Court, where he might be helpful to the
People of God; yet he chose rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God,
than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. Heb. 11. 25.

5. For the greatest Good that possibly can come of it, we should not cross
God's revealed Will. Many times this is a Snare. Men think to be justified by
their good Intentions. We must not do Evil, that Good may come thereof. Romans 3.
1. If one Lie could save the World, we were not to do it; for the least Evil is
not to be done, contrary to God's Will, tho the greatest Good come of it.

Use 3. Examine how you stand affected to God's Will. This is very needful:
Because, 1. There be many Mistakes about it. 2. Hereby we may discern whether
we are thus entirely affected with the Lord's Will.


Men flatter themselves with a pretense of Obedience, and cry, Lord, Lord, but
do not do his Will. They give God good Words, but do not break out into an
actual Contest; as those Wretches, Ier. 18. 12. We will every one do the
Imagination of his evil Heart. And, Ier. 44. 17. We will certainly do
whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own Mouth. There are many things
wherein we are apt to mistake: As,

1. We pretend to do God's Will in general, but when it comes to Particulars,
we stick at it. Usually when we take up Duty by the Lump, it does not
exasperate opposite Propensions and Inclinations. This is our great Fault, we
please and flatter our selves with Notions, and abstract Conceits. What say you
to this Will of God concerning you in particular? How forward were the
Israelites! O they would do the whole Will of God, they run away with the
general Notion: Yea, but says Joshua, chap. 24. 19. Ye cannot serve the Lord:
for he is an holy God, he is a jealous God; he will not forgive your
Transgressions, nor your Sins. We will do the Will of God in general; but when
it comes to cross our Lusts, and private Inclinations, these make us grudg at
it, and shrink back again.

2. Some commend and approve the Will of God, and talk of it, but do not
practice it. It is here, Thy Will be done; it is not, Let it be talked of,
spoken and conferred of by me, but done. And it is not giving good words. You
know the Parable of the two Sons: One said, I will not, and did; the other, I
go, Sir, and went not. Mat. 21. 29, 30. Where Christ prefers the open Sinner
before the Hypocrite, that is talking of God's Will, and seems at a distance to
be like the Carbuncle, all of a Fire, but touch him, he is Keycold. When we are
approving much of the Will of God in our Judgments, and commending of it, and
do it not, this is in effect to say, I know what my Father commands me, but I
will do as I list.

3. Another Deceit about the Will of God is this: For the present, while we
are in a good Humor, when our Lusts lie lovv, when the Heart is vvarm under
the Impulsions of a present Conviction or Persuasion, Men have high thoughts of
doing the Will of God. Deuteronomy. 5. 27. Speak thou unto us all that the Lord our
God shall speak unto thee; we will hear it, and do it. There are several Acts
of our Wills; there is Consent, Choice, Intention, and Prosecution. It is not
enough to consent; these things may be extorted from us by moral Persuasion:
but there must be a serious Choice, an invincible Resolution, such an
Intention, as is prosecuted with all manner of Industry and serious Endeavors,
whatever Disappointments we meet with from God and Men. Then this Intention, or
invincible Resolution is such, as will not be broken by Difficulties, weakened
by Loss of Interest, not discouraged by the many Disappointments we meet with,
even in our waiting upon God.

4. We have many times a seeming Awe upon the Conscience, and so are urged to
do God's Will, yet the Heart is averse from God all the while; therefore they
strive to bring God's Will and theirs together, to compromise the Difference. A
notable Instance of this you have in Balaam: He had a Message sent to him, and
a great Bribe; now he had a carnal Heart, which ran out upon the Wages of
Unrighteousness, and therefore tho he knew the People of Israel were blessed of
the Lord, yet first he will go to God. Numb. 22. 8. Lodge here this Night, and
I will bring you word again, as the Lord shall speak into me. He is very
tender, he durst not go with them, unless the Lord say, Go. But God denies him;
v. 12. Thou shall not go with them. What then? The Lord refuses to give him
leave. Then Balak sends more honorable Messengers, and propounds Rewards
again; then his carnal Will is for God; v. 18. Balaam answered, If Balak would
give me his House full of Silver and Gold, I cannot go beyond the Word of the
Lord my God, to do less or more. Was not this spoken with an honest Mind, think
you? This was the Dictate of his Conscience; not for a House-full of Gold durst
he go against God the Lord: Yet you shall find 'twas a sore Temptation to him,
for he goes again to God, v. 19. Tarry here this Night, that I may know what
the Lord will say unto me more. Then says God, Go, when he saw his Heart was
set for the Wages of Unrighteousness. There was a Reluctance in his Conscience,
he durst not go, therefore he would fain bring the Will of God to his Will. In
many Cases we are thus divided, between our own Affections, and God's Will;
between our Interests, and the Will of God.

It is a Case often falls out, when there is a Quarrel between Conviction and
Corruption. When Light is active and strong in Conscience, Men dare not go
against the apparent Will of God, yet their Hearts hang another way. We have
one carnal Affection or other, and then all our Business is, to bring God's
Will and ours together; and how to disguise and palliate the Matter, that with
greatest leave to Conscience we may seem to contradict the Will of God.

5. A fifth Deceit about the Will of God, and that is, a Wish that we were
brought under the Power of it, as he that stretched himself upon his Bed, and
said, O that this were to labor! Many Men have a Velliety, a languid and
incomplete Will; they have a Wish, but not a Volition, not a serious Desire;
and sometimes they may draw it out to a cold Prayer, that God would make them
better. It is just like a Man, that should lie down and complain, O that I were
at such a place, and never travel! Would I had performed such a Task! yet puts
not his hand to the Work. Men would, but they will not set themselves in good
earnest to get the Grace they wish for, there is not striving to accomplish
their Will. A Chapman no doubt would have the Wares, it is like he has a cold
Wish, but will not come to the Price; I will buy it, whatever it cost me. They
have not those active and industrious Resolutions, such a strong and serious
Bent of Heart toward God, but only a few Wishes.

6. Hal^ing the Will of God; as in many Cases, many will do part of the Will of
God, but not all; they come not fully up to the Mind of God. For Instance; They
will take notice of some great Commandment, but not of the least; we cannot
dispense with our selves in the least. Mat. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of
the least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called the least in
the Kingdom of Heaven. We are apt to say, It is but a little one, and my Soul
shall live. No Sin is little, which is committed against a great God. It
argues more Wickedness, to break with God for a Trifle, and a very small
Matter; it argues more Corruption: As a little Force will make a heavy Body
move downward. Again, in another Case; The Ceremonialist stands upon some
lesser things; as the Jews, John 18. 28. would not go into the Iudgment-Hall,
lest they should be defiled, yet they could seek the Life of the Lord of Glory.
They are not brought under the Dominion of the Lord's Grace, Faith, Repentance,
Holiness, and the weightier things of the Law; these are things they regard
not. This is Hypocrisy. Like one that comes into a Shop to buy a Pennyworth,
and steals a Pound's worth; so they are punctual in lesser things, that they
may make bold with God in greater. Again, some will do the Will of God in
public, where they may be observed, but not in private, and when alone. They
make a fair show in the World, but in their Families their Converse is more
loose and careless. Psalm. 101. 2. I will walk within my House with a perfect
Heart. A Man that is truly holy, will show it at home and abroad, in his
Closet, and secret Retirements, every where he makes Conscience of the Will of
God. Many times we strain our selves, and put forth our Gifts in public; God
will be served with our utmost in secret also; and the Will of God is expressed
concerning the inward, as well as the outward Man; and we must make Conscience
of both. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked Man forsake his Way, and the unrighteous
Man his Thoughts, etc. Not only make Conscience of our Way, our outward Course,
but of our Thoughts, as well as our Actions; for the Thoughts fall under a Law.
So some will make Conscience of the First-Table Duties, and neglect the Second;
and some of the Second, and neglect the first. Some are very punctual in
dealing with Men, but neglectful of God. Romans 1. 18. The Wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men. Both
Tables are owned from Heaven. Some will not wrong their Neighbor of a
Farthing, but stick not to rob God of all that Faith, Fear, Love, Trust,
Worship, that is due to him. Many that will not defile their Bodies with
promiscuous Copulation, yet are Adulterers and Adulteresses to God, their
Hearts straggling from God, doting upon the Creature, to the Wrong of God. Many
condemn the Rebellion of Absalom, and rise up against their heavenly Father,
and are Murderers, that strike at the Being of God. They are tender of
wronging the Reputation of Men, yet dishonor God, and are never troubled. So
(on the other side) others fear and worship, but in their Dealings are very
unconscionable; they will not swear an Oath, but are very uncharitable,
censuring their Brethren without pity and remorse. This is the fashion of the
World, to be in with one Duty, and out with another.

7. A Loathness to know the Will of God, to search and enquire into it, argues
Deceit, and that we are loath to come under the Power of it. Some Men shrewdly
suspect it is true, but are loath to enquire into it. John 3. 20. Every one that
does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should
be reproved. They have a shrewd Guess about the Ways of God, but will not
search to be satisfied. 2 Pet. 3. 5. They are willingly ignorant. As Tertullian
says of the Heathens, they would not search into the Christian Religion,
because they had a mind to hate it: So these are loath to enquire further into
the Will of God. There Is a great deal of Deceit in it; it shows we are afraid
to come too near a suspected Truth. Again, now and then when Lusts are under
some restraint, Men seem to lie much under the Will of God. A Horse that is
kept low, is easily ruled by the Rider; but when fed high, he grows
headstrong. Many times in a mean Condition a Man seems to make Conscience of
doing the Will of God; but when prosperous, he waxes wanton and disobedient.
Ier. 5. 5. I will get me to the great Men, but these have altogether broken the
Yoke, and burst the Bonds.

So that there are a great many Mistakes about doing the Will of God, therefore
you had need search.

Secondly; How shall we know we are rightly affected with the Will of God?

1. When God's Will is Reason enough for what he has required of us; when a
Man is so sensible of God's will, that this is instead of all Reasons.
Obedience is never right, but when it is done upon the mere sight of God's
Will. This is enough to a gracious Heart, that this is the Will of God, 1 Pet.
2. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. tho the Duty be never so cross to our own Desires and
Interests. This is to obey the Commandment for the Commandment's sake, without
any other Reason or Inducement. There is indeed Ratio formalis, and Ratio
motiva; the formal Reasons of Obedience, and the Motives of Obedience: The
formal Reason of Obedience, is the sight of God's Will, the Motives to
Obedience are Rewards, and a Dread of Punishment. The formal Reason is God's
Will; and this is pure Obedience, to do what God wills, because God wills it.

2. When a Man is very inquisitive to know what is the Will of his heavenly
Father. When he does not only practice what he knows, but searches that he may
know more. Romans 12. 2. That ye may prove what is that good and acceptable, and
perfect Will of God. And, Ephesians. 5. 17. Be ye not unwise, but understanding
what the Will of the Lord is. When a Man is desirous to know the whole Will of
God, not for Curiosity, but for Practice, that he might do it. When the
Understanding has a confused Notion of a thing, they will not know it
distinctly; but when Men search, and are willing to find out the Counsel of God
in all things, that they may come up to it; this is a Sign the Heart is rightly
affected to the Will of God.

3. Hereby may you know your Affection to God's Will, by keeping your selves
from your Sins. Psalm. 18. 23. I was upright before him, and kept my self from
mine Iniquity. There is an Iniquity that we may call ours, upon which the Will
is most passionately addicted; be it Worldliness, Sensuality, inordinate Desire
of Reputation and Respect with Men. Now when we are plucking out our right Eye,
and cutting off our right Hand, Mat. 5. 29. When we are mortifying and subduing
our Lusts, when we can deny our selves in those things to which the Heart is
most wedded; that is a Sign of Compliance with the Will of God.

The second Point.

Doct. 2. That it is the Lord which gives to will and to do those Things which
are pleasing in his sight.

Therefore we ask it of him, Thy Will be done; that is, (as I explained it) we
ask of him a Heart, Skill, and Strength, to do his holy Will.

Here I shall tell you, 1. What I mean by the Point. 2. Give you the Proof of
it.


I. What I mean by the Point.

1. I mean thus, That in the Work of Conversion God does all. Ezekiel. 11. 19. I
will give them one Heart, and I will put a new Spirit within you; and I will
take the stony Heart out of their Flesh, and I will give them an Heart of
Flesh. The Benefit of a tender sanctified Heart is God's Gift. Ezekiel. 36. 26,
27. A new Heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you,
and I will take away the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an
Heart of Flesh, and I will cause you to walk in my Statutes. Mark, a new Heart,
that is, another Heart, a Heart to understand, a Heart to love, a Heart to do
the Will of God, he gives it: He does not only remove it, or prepare it, make
way for it, but I will give you a Heart of Flesh.

2. This is that I mean, That after Conversion God still concurreth; He does
not only give Grace, but actual Help in the Work of Obedience: He works all
our Works in us. Isa. 26. 12. His actual Help is necessary to direct, quicken,
strengthen, protect and defend us. To direct us: Psalm. 73. 24. Thou shall guide
me by thy Counsel, and bring me to thy Glory. In our way to Heaven, we need not
only a Rule and Path, but a Guide. The Rule is the Law of God, but the Guide is
the Spirit of God. To quicken and excite us by effectual Motions. A Drousiness
and a Deadness is apt to creep upon our Hearts, and we see in the same Duty, it
is a hard matter to keep up the same Frame of Spirit, the same Vigor of
Affection, Life, and Warmth; and therefore we had need go to God often, as
David, Psalm. 119. 37. Quicken thou me in thy Way. It is God which does renew
the Vigor of the Life of Grace upon all occasions, when it begins to languish
and droop. To corroborate and strengthen what we have received. Ephesians. 3. 16.
the Apostle prays there, that he would strengthen with might by his Spirit in
the inner Man; and, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Make you perfect, stablish, strengthen,
settle you. There are many Words heaped up there, to show, how God is
interested in maintaining and keeping afoot that which he has planted in the
Soul. In protecting and defending them against the Incursions and Assaults of
the Devil, who always lies in wait to surprise the Soul, to withdraw us from
God. The Regenerate are not only escaped out of his Clutches, but are advanced
and appointed to be Satan's Judges, which an envious and proud Spirit cannot
endure, therefore he maligns, assaults, and besieges them with Temptations
daily. Now it is God that defends; John 17. 11. Keep through thine own Name,
those whom thou have given me: By thy Name, that is, by thy Power.

3. God must not only help us in the general, and upon weighty occasions, but
in every Act, from the beginning of the Spiritual Life, to the end. It is not
enough to say, that the first Principles and Motions are of God, but the
flowing forth of all Motions and Actions, according to those Principles. Phil.
2. 13. It is God that works in you, both to will and to do, of his good
pleasure. God not only gives the Desire and Purpose, but he gives Grace to do
the Good which we will and purpose to do. These two are distinct; and we may
have Assistance in one kind, and not in another: Willing and Doing, I mean, are
different. Paul says, Romans 7. 18. To will, is present with me; but how to
perform that which is good, I find not. To will, is more than to think; and to
exert and put forth our Will into Action, it is more than both: and in all we
need God's help. We cannot think a good Thought, nor conceive a holy Purpose,
much less perform a good Action, without God; so that every moment we need
renewed Strength. As long as the Work of Grace is powerful and renewed in us,
so long we are kept in a warm and healthful Frame; but we grow vain, loose,
earthly, carnal again, and off from God, when this Heat and Warmth of Grace is
withdrawn. And therefore God still concurreth, in the whole Business of our
Obedience to him.

II. Having showed what I mean, and how far God is interested in this Work,
what need we have to desire we may do his Will; let us prove it: And because it
is a weighty Point, I shall prove it by parts.

1. As to the first Grace, that it is God alone, which frames our Hearts to the
Obedience of his Will. 2. That when we are thus framed by Grace, after
Conversion, it is God still concurs, and must help us to do his Will.
First; As to the first-Grace, I shall prove that it is God alone, by the Power
of his own Spirit, which frames our Hearts to the Obedience of his Will. This
will appear, by considering, 1. What Man is by Nature. 2. The Words by which
our Cure is expressed, and the Way God takes to put us into a Course of
Obedience. 3. What the Scripture speaks, as to the utter Impotency of Man, to
the framing of his ^eart to the Obedience of God's Will.


First; This will appear by those Motions or emphatical Terms, by which the
Scripture does set forth Man's Condition before God works upon him. He is one
that is born in Sin: Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin
did my Mother conceive me; and things natural, are not easily altered. And as
he is born in Sin, so he is greedy of Sin; Job 15. 16. He drinks in Iniquity
like Water; it notes a vehement Propension; as greedy to Sin, as a thirsty Man
to Drink. Thirst is the most implacable Appetite, Hunger is far better born: It
is the constant frame of his Heart; Genesis 6. 5. Every Imagination of the
thoughts of his Heart is only evil continually. O how many aggravating and
increasing Circumstances are there named, etc. There is a Mint that is always
at work; the Mind is coining evil Thoughts; and the Heart, evil Desires and
carnal Motions; and the Memory is the Closet and Storehouse where they are
lodged and kept. This is the case of Man, born in Sin, greedy and thirsty of
Sin, and one whose Thoughts are evil continually.

But may not a Man be reclaimed? Oh no, for he has a Heart of Stone; Ezekiel. 36.
26. I will take away the Heart of Stone. Every Man that comes to be converted,
has a Heart of Stone, and what is that? insensible, inflexible: Insensible, he
has no feeling of his Condition: Inflexible, he will not be moved and wrought
upon by the Word, and the Spirit, and Providence: How many means are wasted
upon him, and to no purpose? And Ier. 17. 9. The Heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? It invents all kinds of Shifts
and Excuses to elude God, or rather to cheat it self: When God comes to work
upon Man, it slides away from under his hand, as if Salvation it self should
not save them. Yea, but is not the New Testament more favorable to Man than
the Old? Or, is not Man grown better, now there is so much of God's Grace
discovered? I answer, there is a perfect Harmony between the Testaments: there
he is styled a Child of Wrath by Nature; Ephesians. 2. 3. the Elect as well as others
were so. There you will find him to be a Servant of Sin; Romans 6. 17. Never such
an imperious Master as Sin is, never such a willing Servant as Man is: Sin
never leaves commanding, and we love to work, and therefore are at its beck.
There you will find him to be represented to a Man that has a blind
Understanding, and a hard Heart, and one that is averse from the Life of God;
Ephesians. 4. 18. There you will find one that is an Enemy to the Law of God, Enmity
it self; Romans 8. 7. one that neither will nor can please God: One that is
blind, and knows not what to do; 2 Pet. 1. 9. He that lacks these things, is
blind, and with such a Blindness as is far worse than bodily. A Man that is
blind in his bodily Eyes, would think it to be a great Happiness to have a fit
Guide; as in Acts 13. 11. when Elymas was smitten blind, he sought about for
some body to lead him by the hand: But he that is spiritually blind, cannot
endure to have a Guide; or if one would lead him, and direct him in the right
way he is angry. And as the Scripture represents him as blind, so without
Strength; Romans 5. 9. Dead in Trespasses and Sins: Ephesians. 2. 5. yea worse then
dead; a dead Man does no more hurt, his Evil dies with him; but there is a Life
of Resistance and Rebellion against God, that goes along. I have spoken but
little, yet put all together, and then it shows what a miserable wretched
Creature Man is.

The Scripture does not speak this by chance, it is not an Hyperbole used once
or twice; but every where, where it speaks of this matter, it sets out Man to
be blind, hard, dead, obstinate and averse from God. Certainly Man contributes
little to his own Conversion, if the Word of God sets him out every where to be
such a one; he cannot hunger and thirst after Christ, that drinks in Iniquity
like Water; nothing in his Nature to carry him to Grace, who is altogether
sinful.

If the Scripture had only said, that Man had accustomed himself to Sin, and
were not born in Sin: If it had said that Man is very prone, and not greedy and
thirsty in Iniquity: If it had only said that Man did often think Evil, but not
continually: If the Scripture had said, that Man were somewhat obstinate, but
not a Stone, an Adamant, and like the nether Millstone: That he had been
indifferent to God and the World, God and the Flesh, and not a professed Enemy:
That he had been a Captive of Sin, and not a Servant of Sin: That Man had been
weak, and not dead: only a Neuter, and not a Rebel: Then there might have been
something in Man; and the work of Conversion and reducing to God had not been
so great: But the Scripture says the quite contrary, that Man is all this and
much more; therefore this clears it up, that his Conversion is not in himself,
but it is God must work this good Work upon him, or else he can never be
renewed.

Secondly; Let us consider the Terms how the Cure is wrought: Certainly to
remedy so great an Evil, requires an Omnipotent, an Almighty Power. Therefore
see how Conversion is described in Scripture; sometimes by enlightening the
Mind; Ephesians. 1. 18. The Eyes of your Understanding being enlightened; that ye
may know what is the hope of his Calling, etc. Man, the best Creature on this
side Heaven, is stark blind in the things of God: If he should go to see with
the Light of Nature, how would he grope at Noonday? If he should put on the
Spectacles of Art, he will be but little better. Nay, let him take further, the
Glass of the Word, yet how blind in a spiritual sense. Something there must be
done upon the Faculty; the Object must not only be revealed, but the Eye must
be enlightened: There are thick Scales upon his Eye, as Paul had in his
Blindness, that must be taken off, before he can see into the things of God.

But is this all, enlightening the Eye? No, the Scripture describes this Work
of God by opening of the Heart; Acts 16. 14. God opened the Heart of Lydia,
that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. God does not only
knock at the Heart, that he does by his Word, and by the external means; but he
opens the Heart; he must open the Door, before he can come in, enter, and
take Possession.

As to the means, God tries Key after Key, one Providence after another. As
when a Man would open a Door, he knows not what Key will fit the Lock, he
tries Key after Key: So God tries one Cross, one Affliction after another,
one Sermon, one Message after another; but until he puts his Fingers upon the
hole of the Lock, we shall not open.

But these Words are not emphatical enough; therefore it is expressed by a
Regeneration; John 3. 3. Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom
of God: Mark, they must not only be reformed, but must be regenerated, and born
again.

Now because this is an ordinary Work which falls out in the course of
Causes, therefore there is a more solemn Notion used, it is expressed by a
Resurrection; Ephesians. 2. 5. He has raised you up together with Christ. Yea, but
that which has been may be again; therefore it is expressed not only by a
Resurrection, but by a Creation; Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his Workmanship, created
in Christ Jesus unto good Works: 2 Cor. 4. 6. He that commands the Light to
shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts: And we are called
New-Creatures. And higher than this, it is expressed not only by a Creation,
but by a Victory, and overcoming: It is resembled by beating and binding of the
strong Man, and rescuing, and taking away his Prey from him; Luke 11. 21, 22. 1
John 4. 4. By bringing into Captivity every proud thought to the Obedience of
Christ: 2 Cor. 10. 5.

These Expressions the Scripture uses to set out the Mystery of Grace, the
Power of God that works in us. What is wanting in one, is supplied in another.

The third thing I shall produce; That the Scripture does expressly deny any
Power in Man to convert himself to God; 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural Man cannot
know the things of the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned;
and as he cannot know, so he cannot obey; Romans 8. 7. The carnal Mind is Enmity
against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be;
and they cannot please God; ver. 8. And they cannot come to Christ; John 6. 44.
No Man can come to me, except the Father draw him: and they cannot do any thing
without Christ: John 15. 15. And they cannot think a good Thought; 2 Cor. 3. 5.
And they cannot bring forth good Fruit; Mat. 7. 18. And they cannot speak a
good Word; Mat. 12. 34. And they cannot believe; John 12. 39. And they cannot
do that which is good; Ier 13. 23. Ye that are accustomed to do Evil, cannot do
Good. From whence does all this Deficiency in them arise? partly from Nature,
partly from Custom. Besides the natural, there is a customary and habitual
Depravation. By Nature we are averse from God, and by Custom we are more
confirmed in this evil Aversation from God. Man, by lying long in his
Unregeneracy, has his Aversness from God increased and strengthened upon him:
Naturally we are in love with the World, and have declined God, and the things
of God. Consider him in his Naturals, he cannot know the things of the Spirit;
1 Cor. 2. 14. And the carnal Mind cannot be subject to the Law of God, being at
Enmity against him: Romans 8. 7. There are other places express this cannot,
which derive it from Custom; they are become Slaves to their Lusts, and their
Sins have gotten such a hand over them that they know not how to break them
off. Ier. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots?
Then may ye also do Good, that are accustomed to do Evil. And so where it is
said, John. 12. 39. They could not believe. Naturally man is unable; but that
place speaks of another degree of Impossibility through contracted Obstinacy,
and judicial Obduration. Thus you see Man is wholly impotent, as to this Work,
and it is the Lord alone must do it.

Object. But here is an Objection. If it be so that Man has such an utter
Impotency to convert himself to God; how can it stand with the Mercy of God, as
the Creator of Mankind, to require the debt of Obedience from him that is not
able to pay? How can it stand with the Justice of God, to punish him with
eternal Death, for the neglect of that which he is not able to do? and how can
it stand with the Wisdom of the Supreme Lawgiver, to exhort him by Promises
and Threatenings, who has no power to do what he is exhorted to do?

I answer.

1. As to the first, How it can stand with the Mercy of God to require the debt
of Obedience from him that is not able to pay? God has not lost his Right,
though Man has lost his Power: their Impotency does not dissolve their
Obligation. A drunken Servant is a Servant still: It is against all reason, a
Master should lose his Right by the Servant's default. A prodigal Debtor has
nothing to pay, yet he is liable to be sued for the Debt without any Injustice.
God contracted with us in Adam, and gave us a Power, which we lost by his Fall:
and therefore though our Power be gone, yet God may demand his due to obey and
please him; especially since this Obedience God required of Adam, was not only
due, by Covenant and positive Law, but by immutable Right, and natural Justice
of Man. Men think it harsh to suffer for Adam's Fault, to which they were not
conscious, and actually consenting.

Yea, but consider, every Man will find an Adam in his own Heart, the Old Man
is there, we are still sinning away those Relics of natural Light in
Conscience, and those few moral Inclinations which are left. There is a little
Ability and Strength he has as a Man, and shall not God challenge the Debt of
Obedience from a proud prodigal Debtor, that is weakening and wasting himself
more and more? We are proud, therefore God may exact it of us: we think we are
able to obey, and do his Will, when we are weak: we are poor, yet think our
selves rich; therefore God may admonish us of our Duty; demand his Right, to
show our Impotency and Beggary, and that we may not pretend we were not called
upon for what we owe. But Man is not only a proud Debtor, but we are prodigal
Debtors; those Relics of Conscience, and moral and human Inclinations which
escaped out of the Ruins of the Fall, we lose those things every day, and
embe^el them away by the Service of Sin. Therefore it stands fully with the
Clemency of God, as Creator of Mankind, to require the Debt of him that wastes
that little Stock he has.

2. As to the other part, How it can stand with the Justice of God to punish
him with eternal Death, for the neglect of that he cannot do? I answer: Besides
natural Impotency, there is voluntary. We must not consider Man merely as
impotent to Good, but as delighting in Evil, as loving it with all his Heart.
This cannot, indeed is a will not, it is a voluntary Impotence. You will not
come to me, that ye might have Life: John 5. 40. Our Impotency lies in our
Obstinacy: So Man is left without excuse, because we freely refuse the Grace
offered, and by continuing in Sin we increase our Bondage, and draw an
inveterate Custom upon our selves, and so grow every day more obstinate against
God.

3. As to the last, How can it stand with the Wisdom of God, to exhort him with
Promises and Threatenings, that has no Power to do that which he is exhorted
to?

I answer; These Exhortations, they carry their own Blessing with them, to
those to whom God means them for good. As God's (...). Word carried with it
its Power; Be there Light, and it was Light: And as Christ's Word carried
forth his Power, it was not in vain to say, La^^rus, come forth, tho he was
dead, and could not hear it; there was a mighty Power went with the Word.
So there is Power goes along with the Exhortations of the Gospel, to work
Grace in the Hearts of those to whom God intends it as a Blessing.

Yea, but if this be for the Elects sake only, and to convey that Power to
them, to what use does it stand to others? If the Elect did dwell alone, and
were a distinct Community among themselves, the Objection were plausible; but
they are hidden among others: Therefore Reprobates are called obiter, by the
by, as others are called according to purpose; and therefore they have the
Benefit of the common Call, and the common Offer. The World stands for the
Elects sake, yet others have the Benefit of the World, and worldly Things. So
the Word is preached for the Elects sake, yet others have the Benefit of an
external Call. The Sun shines, tho blind Men see it not. The Rain falls upon
Rocks and Mountains, as well as fruitful Valleys: So God may suffer these
Exhortations to light upon wicked Men. And again, as to them, it is for their
Conviction, it is to bridle their Corruptions; it is at least a means to
civilize them, and keep them from growing worse: Therefore such kind of
Doctrines and Persuasions restrain their Wickedness. Therefore it stands well
enough with the Wisdom of the Lawgiver, to call upon Men, and invite them,
with Promises and Threatenings, to Repentance.

Therefore now let me show, How does God reduce and frame our Hearts to the
Obedience of his Will? The Ways God uses are of two sorts, Moral and Real.

1. God works morally, so as to preserve Man's Nature, and the Principles
thereof; therefore he works by sweet Inclination, not with Violence. So he
comes with Blandishments, and comfortable Words; Hos. 2. 14. I will allure her,
and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her. So, Genesis 9.
27. The Lord shall persuade Japhet, and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. By
fair and kindly Words, he draws on Men to the liking of the Gospel. He
offers no violence to our natural Principles, but to our Corruptions. God
does not make the Will to be no Will, but to be a good Will; He restores the
Faculties to their right Use and Exercise; He lays forth the Beauty and
Excellency of his Grace, and a glorious Estate he sets before our Eyes, and ^o
out-bids Temptation, and draws our Hearts to himself. And God not only does
work suitably to our general Nature, as we are reasonable Creatures, but
suitably to the particular Frame of the Heart. Some are of a stout and stubborn
Temper, and will not be subdued by milder Means and Motives; therefore God
breaks them with Fears and Terrors, and with a Spirit of Conviction: And
others, he draws them on by Love, and by a gentle Application.

That God has respect to Men's particular Tempers, was figured in those
extraordinary Ways of Appearance and Manifestation; they are fitted according
to the State of Men. To Moses that was a Shepherd, and was acquainted with
Bushes, God appears in a Bush of Fire: And to the Wise Men, that were skilled
in the Motions of the heavenly Bodies, he appears in a Star. And to Peter, that
was a Fisherman, he appears to him, and shows his Power first in the Draught of
Fishes. So still these are Pledges of this kind of Dispensation, that God will
work suitably not only to our general Nature, as Men, but to our particular
State and Temper. Yea, yet further, to set on this moral Way of working, there
is a fit Subordination of the Circumstances of Providence. God takes the wild
Asses in their Month; and he has his Season wherein to surprise the He^rts of
Sinners. Prove. 25. 11. A Word fitly spoken, is like Apples of Gold in Pictures
of Silver. God comes in in a fit Season; as when a Soul is humbled by some
sudden Accident: As one was converted, by seeing a Man fall down dead suddenly
by him. God orders some Providence to work, and awaken the Hearts of Men. Or
else by some great Affliction. Hos. 2. 14. I will bring her into the
Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her. God finds many a Sinner in the
Briars, as Abraham found the Lamb. Stubborn Humors are then most broken. Metal
in the Furnace is capable of any Form. God may suit and dispose us so, that he
may come in in a fit season to the Soul. Or in Terrors of Conscience, when the
Heart is scourged with remorse for great Sins. All this is God's moral Work.

2. There is a real Work, which goes along with this Persuasion; there is an
Almighty Power: For bare Persuasion cannot make the Blind to see, the Dead to
live, or open the Heart of Man, that is so desperately and obstinately wicked,
until he puts his Fingers upon the Holes of the Lock, until he begins to open
the Heart.

Concerning this real Work, observe, it is secret, yet through and prevailing,
so as the Effect does follow, when God will convert. The exact Manner of God's
drawing is unknown; Austin calls it an inward, hidden, and unspeakable Power,
which God puts forth together with the Word; it is mavelous in our Eyes;
but he that knew how to creat Souls, knows how to work upon them. This Power,
it is like the Influences of the Heavens, which so insinuate themselves with
the Operation of second Causes, that they cannot be seen: so there is such a
mighty Power working in us, tho we cannot tell how to express it. We cannot say
there is no such Power, because we do not know what it is.

And as this Power is secret, so when this Power is put forth, it is
prevailing; he works prevailingly, so as the Effect must necessarily follow.
The Grace God gives to Men, to convert them, it is not a Power to be converted,
repent, and believe, if they will; no, but he gives Repentance, he gives Faith,
and works so as the Effect shall succeed: He works efficaciously and
determinately, so as to oppose all the Resistance of the Will, and accomplish
his Work.

That Is the first Branch.

Secondly; When we are thus framed by Grace, after Conversion God still
concurreth, and must help us to do his Will. He does not only give us the Habit
of Grace, but actual Help in the Work of Obedience. Isa. 26. 12. Thou have
wrought all our Works in us.

But why is it that still the Lord works in us, both to will and to do, unto
the last; and not only begins with us, but still keeps Grace in his own hands,
so as we shall have our Supplies from Heaven from day to day?

There are several Reasons:

1. Because it endeareth God to a gracious Soul. The more Visits we have from
God, and the more he is mindful of us at every turn, the more is God endeared
to us. In such a Duty, there we met with Comfort and Enlargement, because God
was there; that is noted and regarded, so that the Lord is rendered the more
precious. The Experiment we have of God in every Duty, does the more make us
prize his Grace. As David, Psalm. 119. 93. I will never forget thy Precepts; for
with them thou have quickened me. I shall never forget such a Sermon, and such a
Prayer, because there I met with God. So in Affliction, Romans 5. 3. Patience
works Experience; or in such a Conflict, we had such a Support; this
endeareth God to the Soul. As mutual Acts of Kindness do maintain a Friendship
between Man and Man; so do these renewed Acts of Love, and of God's Care and
Kindness over us, maintain a Friendship between God and us.

2. It engages us to a constant Dependence upon God, and Communion with him.
It is Dependence which maintains the Commerce between Heaven and Earth. Now if
we did keep the Stock our selves, God and we should soon grow Strangers. When
the Prodigal had his Portion in his own hands, he goes out of his Father's
House, Luke 15. The Throne of Grace would lie neglected and unfrequented, if we
did not stand in need of daily Receivings; when would the Lord hear from us?
And therefore to oblige us to a constant Dependence, God will keep the Grace in
his own hands, that ever we may have something to drive us to himself, some
Necessities upon us, for the Throne of Grace is for a Time of Need, Heb. 4. 16.

3. This is that which keeps us humble; and that upon several Considerations.
All we have, it is by Gift; and then what can we be proud of? Not only the
Habits of Grace themselves, but also those actual Incitements, which are
necessary to draw them forth into Act. So that of all our Excellencies we may
say, Alas! it is but borrowed; and if we be proud of them, we are but proud we
are more in Debt than others; when most enlarged, and most assisted, it is from
God. We would laugh, if a Groom should be proud of his Master's Horse, and his
Master's Cloak: Shall we usurp that Honor that is due to God? What have thou
that thou did not receive? 1 Cor. 4. 7. And then we have it from Hand to
Mouth. That which we have received, will not bear us out, unless God come in
with new Influences of Grace. We should soon grow proud, if God did not direct
us, and give out the renewed Evidences of his Love day after day. And we should
not acknowledge our Benefactor, if God should do all at once; therefore he
lesseneth and weakneth our Corruptions by degrees, and by the renewed
Influences of his Grace. And by this means we are made sensible of the
Mutability of our own Nature. God left Hezekiah, to try him, that he might know
all that was in his Heart. 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. God has so dispensed Grace, that
he will be going and coming as to actual Influence; therefore sometimes he will
leave us, that he may discover a Man to himself. Tho we have Grace planted in
our Hearts, and are renewed, yet if God leave us, how weak and foolish are we!
We are renewed, but not fully recovered of that Maim and Bruise we got by the
Fall of Adam, and we cannot do as we will. If God withdraw his Quickening, his
Strength, secret Corruption will break forth, and our Indisposition to holy
Things will soon appear.

4. Then it is for the Honor of the Lord's Grace. It does abundantly provide
for the Glory of Grace, that from first to last we are indebted to God; not
only for those permanent and fixed Habits, which constitute the New Creature;
but for those daily Supplies, without which the Motions of the Spirit are at a
stand. And this is that which makes the Saints still to put the Crown upon
Grace's Head. When the Servants gave an Account of improving of their Talents,
says one of them, Luke 19. 16. Lord, thy Pound has gained ten Pounds: He does
not say, My Industry, but, Thy Pound. So Paul, Gal. 2. 20. I live; yea, but he
interposeth presently, Yet not I, but Christ lives in me. They are ever
ascribing all to God, because they see they can do nothing without him. When we
come to Heaven, it is a Question which we shall admire most, Grace, or Glory;
the Glory of that Estate into which we are brought; or else Grace, which was
the Foundation of it. O when we see all that was done and suffered for God, it
was from God: Of thine own have we given thee. How will the Soul admire the
Riches of his glorious Grace! We have not only traded with his Money, but by
his Direction; and when our Stock was imbezell'd, he supplied us at every turn.
For these Ends the Lord still keeps Grace in his own hands, that we can do
nothing to any purpose, unless he be pleased to concur, by the Influences and
Quicknings of his own Spirit.

USE. The Use shall only be in these two Branches.

1. In doing any good Work, let us do all things in him, as well as to him. Let
us not only make this our Scope, that we may do it to God; but let us make his
Grace our Principle: Otherwise, when we go to work for God, without God, it
will befall us, as it did Sampson, that thought to go out and shake himself, as
in former time, but his Locks were cut, and his Strength gone. Men that have
had former Experiences, think to find a like Vigor of Affection, a like
Raisedness of Spirit, a like Savoriness of Expression; but if they take not God
along with them, they find their Strength is gone, their Affections dead, that
all their Spirits are dry and sapless, and that they do not go forth with such
Life and Power as formerly. Therefore when ever you go about a good Work, say,
as David, I will go forth in the Strength of God.

2. It directs us in ascribing the Honor of what we have done. It is dangerous
to assume Divine Honor to our selves, or accept it from others; but we must
give the Lord the Glory, whose Concurrence does all the Work. Remember, we have
received all from God, and God must have all the Glory and Honor. If others
should ascribe it to us, we are not to take it. To conceal and receive stolen
Goods, brings us within the Compass of Theft, as well as to steal them our
selves. So, when others would ascribe any thing to us, still let the Lord have
the Glory of every Work and Business.

The third Point.

Doct. 3. We are not only to look to this, that his Will be done, but to the
Manner how it is done.

It is not for the Honor of his Majesty, to be put off with any thing; we must
serve him with all our Mind and Strength. Mal. 1. 14. When ye brought that
which was torn, and lame, and sick; should I accept this of your Hands? says
the Lord. I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful
among the Heathen. We are to aim at the highest manner of serving God. There is
an ardent Desire in the Saints to be perfect: If by any means they would attain
to the Resurrection of the Dead. Phil. 3. 11. That is, that happy and sinless
State they shall enjoy hereafter. The Manner is more considerable than the Work
it self. A Man may sin in doing good, but he cannot sin in doing well;
therefore the Manner is that which is mainly stood upon in Scripture. God does
not only look that we pray, but it must be ^ervent effectual Prayer, not a
drousy Devotion; not only that we hear, but take heed how we hear; not only
that we serve him, but serve him instantly; not only run, but so run. The great
thing that is put into the Balance of the Sanctuary, when God comes to weigh
the Actions of Men, what does he consider? He weighs the Spirits; Prove. 16. 2.
All the Ways of Man are right in his own Eyes; but the Lord weighs the
Spirits: That is, he considers with what frame of Heart, and in what manner
we go about any thing we do for him. And therefore this is the main thing we
should look after, in what manner we serve him; even as the Angels do in
Heaven; not in an ordinary, but perfect manner.

But wherein does the Resemblance hold? How should we be as the Angels?

1. In conformity to the Angels, we must serve God readily. The Angels are
represented as with Wings, Isa. 6. 2. And the Angel Gabriel is said to fly
swiftly upon God's Message. They are harkening for God's Word, and go on God's
Errand. So we should be ready and speedy in our Obedience. Psalm. 119. 60. I
made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. It is not enough to keep
God's Commandments, but we must make haste, (that is) before the strength of
the present Impulsion be lost, and those Fervors which are upon us be cooled.

2. Willingly and cheerfully, and without murmuring. Angels are ready at God's
beck; they are ministering Spirits, even to the meanest Saints; God has sent
them abroad for the Heirs of Salvation; they are as Guardians to them, to look
after them in all their Ways. The Devils, what Christ bids them do, do it
murmuringly; the unclean Spirit would not come out without rending and tearing,
Mark 9. Christ's presence was a Burden to them, Mat. 8. When we do things with
reluctance, murmuringly, we are more like the Devil, than the Angels. When the
Devils obey his Word, they are forced to it by the absolute Power of Christ;
yet they do it not with Willingness and Freeness, as the good Angels do. But we
are to do it freely: I delight to do thy Will, O my God. Psalm. 40. 8. And, John
4. 34. It is my Meat and Drink, to do the Will of him that sent me. That was
the Dish Christ loved.

3. Constantly and unweariedly. Thus do the Angels in Heaven. The Devils, they
abode not in the Truth; but Angels, they do it without weariness; they rest not
Day nor Night, but are still lauding, praising, and serving God, and are never
weary. God in Communion is ever new and fresh to them; the Face of their
heavenly Father is as lovely as at first moment; no Weariness or Satiety creeps
upon those good Spirits. Thus should we do it, without Weariness; and then we
shall reap, if we faint not.

4. Faithfully, not picking and choosing: They hearken to the Voice of his Word,
whatever it be, be it to ascend or descend: So we, if it be to go backward for
God, tho it be against the Bent of our Hearts. David is said to be a Man after
God's Heart, because he did all God's Will. Acts 13. 22. All which should be a
Pattern for us, and we should strive to come up to it.

Give us this day our daily Bread.
WE are now come to the second sort of Petitions, that concern our selves, as
the former did more immediately concern God. Now you may observe the Style in
the Prayer is altered: It was before, Thy Name, Thy Kingdom, Thy Will; now it
is, Give us, and forgive us, etc. Before, our Lord had taught us to speak in a
third Person, Thy Will be done; and now in a second Person, Give us this day.
Which is not so to be understood, as if we were not at all concerned in the
former part of the Lord's Prayer. In those Petitions, the Benefit is not God's,
but ours. When his Name is sanctified, his Kingdom comes, and his Will is
done; these Things do not only concern the Glory of God, but also our Benefit.
It is our Advantage, when God is honored by the Coming of Christ's Kingdom,
and the Subjection of our Hearts unto himself. But these latter Petitions do
more immediately concern us. Now among these, in the first place, we pray for
the necessary Provisions of the present Life. Some make a scruple, why such a
Prayer should be put in the first place? Surely, not to show the Value of these
Things above Pardon and Grace; but this is the last of the Supplications. The
Lord's Prayer may be divided into Supplications and Deprecations. Among the
Supplications, there we prayed, first, for the Glory of God; next, for the
Kingdom of God; next, for our Subjection to that Kingdom; and in the last
place, we pray for daily Bread, or Sustentation of the present Life. But the
other two are Deprecations; and that either of Evil already committed; and so
we pray for Pardon of Sin, Forgive us our Trespasses: Or Deprecation of Evil
that is likely to be admitted; and so we pray against Temptation, Lead us not
into Temptation. So that this Request is put into a fit Order: First, we seek
God's Glory, as the End; his Kingdom, as the primary Means; our Subjection to
that Kingdom, as the next Means; and last of all, our comfortable Subsistence
in the World, as a remote subservient Help, that we may be in a capacity to
serve and glorify God.

In this Petition there is,

I. The Thing asked, and that is Bread, by which is meant all Things necessary
for the maintenance of this Life.

Now this is set forth, 1. By a Note of Propriety, Our Bread. 2. By an Adjunct
of Time, Daily Brea^.


II. The Manner of asking, Give; we ask it as a Gift of God.

III. The Persons for whom we ask, Give us; as many as are supposed to be in a
Family together. Those that can call God Father by the Spirit, they may come
with most confidence to God about daily Supplies.

IV. The renewing of our Request, (...), This day: There is very much in that;
we ask but from Morning till Night. Give us this day our daily Bread.

Before I come to explain these Circumstances, let me observe in general:

Doct. I. That it is the Lord, which does bestow upon us freely and graciously
the good Things of this Life.

It is Bread we ask, and we ask it of God, and to God we say, Give: All which
Circumstances do fully make out the Point.

This Point again must be made good by parts.

1. That God gives it. 2. That he freely and graciously gives it.
First; I shall show you how God is interested in the common Mercies we do
enjoy; and how every one, high or low, rich or poor, full or in a mean
Condition, of what rank soever they be, even those that have the greatest Store
and Plenty of worldly Accommodations, they must come from Morning to Morning,
and deal with God for daily Bread.

Those common Mercies which we do enjoy,

1. God gives us the Possession of them; for he is the absolute Lord of all
Things, both in Heaven and in Earth; and whatsoever is possessed by any
Creature, it is by his Indulgence; for the primitive and original Right was in
him. Psalm. 24. 1. The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof; the World,
and they that dwell therein. It is all God's, we hold it in Fee from him; for
he is the great Landlord, who has leased out all these Blessings to the Sons
of Men. The Earth is first the Lord's, and then by a Grant he has given it to
Men to enjoy. Psalm. 115. 16. The Heaven, even the Heavens are the Lord's; but
the Earth has he given to the Children of Men. He has given it to Men,
partly, by a general Grant, and Leave given to enjoy and occupy it, as the
Place of our Service: But that is not all; he does not only give the Earth in
general to Men, but he makes a particular Allotment; the particular Designation
of every Man's Portion of what he shall enjoy in tho World, it is of God. And
so it is said, Act^ 17. 26. He has determined the Bounds of their Habitation.
God has not only appointed in general, the Earth to be the Place of our
Service for a while; but he has determined how much every one shall possess,
what shall fall to his Share. These Things come not by Chance, or by the Gift
of others, or by our own Industry, but by the peculiar Designation of God's
Providence. However they come to us, God must be owned in the Possession;
whether they come to us by Donation, Purchase, Labor, or by Inheritance; yet
they are originally by God, who (by these means) bestows them upon us. If
they come by Donation, or the Gift of others; the Hearts of Men are in God's
hands, and he it was that disposed them to be bountiful to us, that appoi^ted
them to be Instruments of his Providence, to nourish us. He that sends a
Present, he is the Giver, not the Servant which brings it: So, though others be
employed as Instruments, it is the Lord which made them able and willing to do
us good. If they come to us by Inheritance, it is the Providence of God that a
Man is born of rich Friends, and not of Beggars: Prove. 22. 2. The rich and poor
meet together; the Lord is the Maker of them all: He that has cast the World
first into Hills and Valleys, it was he that disposed of Men, some into a high,
and some into a low Condition. If they come to us by our own Labor and
Purchase, still God gave it to us: Deuteronomy. 8. 14, 18. Take heed that thine Heart
be not lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God; for it is he that gives
thee Power to get Wealth. He does not leave second Causes to their own Power
and Force, as if he were only an idle Spectator in the World: No, he gives the
Skill and Industry to manage Affairs, and success upon lawful Undertakings; the
Faculty, and the use it is all from God: Tho a Man has never so many outward
Advantages, yet unless the Lord concur with his Blessing, all would be to no
purpose.

2. As God gives us the Possession, so he gives us a Right and Title to them.
There is a twofold Right to these common Blessings; a Provid^ntial, and a
Covenant-Right: Dominium Politicum fundatur in Providentia, our Civil Right to
things is sounded upon God's Providence: But Dominium Evangelicum fundatur in
Gratia; our Gospel-Right to things is founded upon God's Grace. (1.) He gives
the Providential Right; and thus all wicked Men possess outward things, and the
Plenty they enjoy is as the Fruits and Gifts of God's common Bounty, it is
their Portion, he has given it to them; Psalm. 17. 14. Which have their Portion
in this Life: whatever falls to their share in a fair way, and in the course
of God's Providence; they are not Usurpers merely for possessing, but for
abusing what they have. They have not only a Civil Right by the Laws of Men, to
prevent the Incroachment of others; but a Providential Right before God; and
are not simply responsible for Possession, but for their ill Use and
Administration. (2.) There Is a Covenant-Right to these Blessings: so only
Believers have a Right to Creature Comforts by God's special Love; and so, (
That a little that a righteous Man has, is better than the Treasures of many
wicked: Psalm. 37. 16.) as the mean Fare of a poor Subject, is better then the
large Allowance of a condemned Traitor. Every wicked Man is a Traitor to God,
and has only an Allowance until he be destroyed. But that little which a Man
has, seasoned with God's Love, is better than all the mighty Increase of
wicked Men. Now this Covenant- Right we have by Christ, who is Heir of all
things; Heb. 1. 2. Christ has the Original-Right: to them, and we by him come
to have a Covenant-Right: So it is said, 1 Cor. 3. 23. Things present, and
things to come, all are yours. As things to come, the Day of Judgment is
theirs; so things present is theirs by a new Title from him: So it is said, 1 Timothy 4. 5. Marriage, Meats and Drinks, and all Creatures are made for them that
believe. They that believe have only a Gospel-Right to them. To draw it to the
present thing; we do not only beg a Possession of these things, but a Right;
not only a Providential, but a Covenant-Right, that we may enjoy them as the
Gifts of God's fatherly Love and Compassion to us; that we may take our Bread
out of Christ's Hands, that we may look upon it as swimming to us in his Blood,
and all our Mercies as wrapped up in his Bowels; and then they will be sweet, and
relish much better with a gracious Soul, because he cannot only taste the
Creature, but the Love of God in the Creature.

3. He gives the Continuance of our Blessings, that we may keep what we have;
for unless the Lord do daily support us, we cannot keep our Comforts for one
day. How soon can God blast them? It Is at his pleasure to do what he will with
you: He gave Satan Power over Iob^s Estate; Chap. 1. 12. Behold all that he
has is in thy Power. Our Life it is continued to us by the Indulgence of God,
and by his providential Influence and Supportation. For as the Beams of the Sun
are no longer continued in the Air than the Sun shines; or, as the Wa^er
retains the Impress and Stamp no longer than the Seal is kept on it; so when
God takes off his providential Influence, all vanishes into nothing. Thus he
is said, Heb. 1. 3. To uphold all things by the Word of his Power: As a weighty
thing is upheld in the Hand of a Man, when he looseneth his Hand all falls to
the Ground: So it is said, Job 12. 10. In whose Hand is the Soul of every
living Thing, and the Breath of all Mankind. God by his Almighty Grasp holds
all things in his own Hands, and if he should but let loose his Hand, all would
fall to nothing, and disappear; Job. 6. 9. For it is from the intimate Support
and Influence of his Providence that we have our Lives. So our Comforts, they
are continued to us by God; alas, in themselves they are poor fugacious things!
Haman was to day high in Honor, and to morrow high upon the Gallows. Riches
make themselves Wings, and fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven: Prove. 23. 5.
The Holy Ghost seems there to compare Riches to a Flock of Birds, which
pitcheth in a Man's Field to Night, but to Morrow they are gone: Who is the
richer for a Flock of wild Fowls, because they pitch in his Field now? So all
these outward things are so flying, that they are soon gone by many Accidents,
unless he preserves them, and continues our Possession of them. For God he can
give a Charge and Commission to the Fire, to the Fury of Men, one way or other
to deprive us of these things. Behold, all he has is in thy Hands: Job 1. 12.
When a Man has gotten abundance of worldly Comforts about him, and seems to
be entrenched and provided against all Hazards; the Man is taken away, and
cannot enjoy what he had heaped together with a great deal of Care and
Solicitude.

4. We beg leave to use them. It is good Manners in Religion, to ask God's
leave in all things. It is Robbery to make use of a Man's Goods, and to waste
and consume them without his leave. We must ask God leave upon this account,
because, tho God gives these good things to Men, yet he still reserves the
Property in himself; for by distributing Blessings to the Creature, he never
intended to divest himself of the Right. As a Husbandman, by scattering his
Corn in the Field did not dispossess himself, but still keeps a Right, and
means to have the Increase. So when the Lord scatters his Blessings, we only
receive them as Stewards, not as Owners and Proprietors; God still is the
Supreme Lord, and only has the Property and Dominion. In Life it is clear, Man
is not Dominus Vits, but Custos, not Lord of his Life, but only the Steward and
Guardian of it; he cannot live or die at his own Pleasure: if a Man kills
himself, he runs the danger of God's Law. What is said of Life, is true also of
his Estate, he is not an Owner so much as a Steward, that is the Notion of our
Possession; we are Stewards, and must render an account to God: Hosea 2. 9. I
will return and take away my Corn in the time thereof, and my Wine in the
season thereof, and will recover my Wool and my Flax. Though God has
communicated these things to the Children of Men, yet he has reserved the
Dominion in his own Hands: So Hag. 2. 8. The Silver is mine, and the Gold is
mine, says the Lord of Hosts. He never disposed any thing so into the
Creatures Hands, but still he has reserved a Right and Interest in it; and
therefore it is, Genesis 14. 19. that the Lord is not only called the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, but Possessor of Heaven and Earth. He is not only the
Possessor of Heaven where he dwells, which he has reserved to his own use; but
he is Possessor of Earth, which he has committed to the use of Men. And God
will have his Right acknowledged from day to day.

5. It is he that gives us Ability to use them: We beg, that we may not only
have the Comforts, but Life and Strength to use them; for God can blast us in
the very midst of our Enjoyments. It is the case of many, when they have hunted
after a worldly Portion, and begin to think, now I will sit down and enjoy it;
when the Gain is come into his Hands, and he thinks to waste that which he has
got in hunting, Death takes him away, and he has not power to use them. Thus
it was with the rich Fool, when he began to sing Lullabies to his Soul, and
enjoy what he had got, he is taken away by Death; Luke 12. 20. Thou Fool, this
Night thy Soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall those things be
which thou have provided? And it is said, Numb. 11. 33. when those People had
gotten Quails: That while the Flesh was yet between their Teeth, ere it was
chewed; the Wrath of the Lord was kindled against the People, and the Lord
smote them with a very great Plague. And that Noble Man which saw Plenty in
Samaria, but could not taste of it; 2 Kings 7. 19. So Job 21. 23. One dies in
his full Strength, being wholly at ease and quiet: When he has gotten abundance
of worldly Comforts about him, Death seizes on him of a sudden.

6. God yet is further interested in these Mercies, so as to give us a
sanctified use of them, that we may take our Bread out of God's Hands with
Prayer, and Thanksgiving, and due Acknowledgments of God: In 1 Timothy 4. 5. Every
Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with
Thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. Then are the
Creatures sanctified to us, when we enjoy God in them; when our Hearts are
raised to think of the Donor, and can love him the more for every Gift. Carnal
Men, like Swine, raven upon the Acorns, but look not up to the Oak from whence
they drop. In the Canticles, the Spouses Eyes are compared to Doves Eyes. They
which make the Allusion, say this is the meaning; look as a Dove pecks, and
looks upward; so upon every grain of Mercy, we should look up to the God of
Mercies: It is not enough to taste the sweet of the Creatures, but also to own
God, his Love and Bounty in them, so to have them sanctified to us. This is the
Privilege we have as Men, that we can know the first Cause, and who is the
Benefactor: All Creatures subsist upon the first Cause, but are not capable of
knowing it. And this is our Privilege, as Christians, to have this Capacity
reduced into Act. It is of the Lord's Grace to give us a sanctified use of
these things.

7. We beg of God the natural Blessing upon the holy Use of outward Comforts,
so as they may continue us in Health and Vigor for the Service of God; for
nothing will prosper with us but by his Blessing: Psalm. 106. 15. He gave them
their Request, but sent Leanness into their Souls: that is, they had no natural
Comfort by that which they had obtained. God may give a Man Meat, yet not an
Appetite; he may not give him the comfortable use of it, a Blessing with it.
And therefore the Apostle makes it to be an Argument of God's Bounty to the
Heathen, that as he gave them Food, so he gave them Gladness of Heart: Acts 14.
17. He gave them Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling their Hearts
with Food and Gladness: that is, gave them a comfortable use, a Blessing upon
the use of outward things. And Levit. 26. you will find a Distinction between
Bread, and the Staff of Bread: we may have Bread, yet not the Staff of Bread.
Many have worldly Comforts, but not with a natural Blessing: Eccles. 3. 13.
That every Man should eat and drink, and enjoy the Good of all his Labor, it
is the Gift of God: not only that he should have Increase by his Labor, but
enjoy Good; to have the comfortable use of that Increase.

8. Contentation is one of God's Blessings that we ask in this Prayer [ Give us
this day our daily Bread.] That is, such Provisions as are necessary for us,
Contentment and quiet of Mind in the Enjoyment; Joel 2. 19. Behold, I will send
you Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith. It is not
only a Blessing we should look after, but Contentment, that our Minds may be
suited to our Condition, for then the Creature is more sweet and comfortable to
us. The Happiness of Man does not lie in his Abundance, but in the Suitableness
of his Mind to his Estate. Luke 12. 15. A Man's Life consists not in the
abundance of things which he possesses. There Is a twofold War within a Man,
both which must be taken up before a Man can have Comfort; there is a War
between a Man and his Conscience, and this breeds trouble of Mind; and there is
a War between his Affections and his Condition, and this breeds murmuring and
envious repining: Say, Yea, Lord, and let us be contented with thy Gift. This
for the first thing, how God is concerned in these outward Comforts.

Secondly; That the Lord does freely and graciously give these good things to
us, (that is) merely out of his Bounty and Goodness. It is not from his strict
remunerative Justice, but out of his Grace. The very Air we breath in, the
Bread we eat, our common Blessings, be they never so mean, we have them all
from Grace, and all from the tender Mercy of the Lord. Psalm. 136. 25. you have
there the Story of the notable Effects of God's Mercy, and he concludes it
thus: Who gives Food to all Flesh: for his Mercy endures for ever. Mark, the
Psalmist does not only ascribe those mighty Victories, those glorious Instances
of his Love and Power, to his unchangeable Mercy, but our daily Bread. In
eminent Deliverances of the Church we will acknowledge Mercy; Yea, but we should
do it in every bit of Meat we eat, for the same Reason is rendered all along.
What Is the reason his People smote Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the King
of Bashan, and rescued his People so often out of danger? ( For his Mercy
endures for ever.) And what is the reason he gives Food to all Flesh? ( For
his Mercy endures for ever.) It Is not only Mercy which gives us Christ, and
Salvation by Christ, and all those glorious Deliverances and Triumphs over the
Enemies of the Church; but it is Mercy which furnishes our Tables, it is Mercy
that we taste with our Mouths, and wear at our Backs. It is notable, our Lord
Jesus, when there were but five Barley Loaves, and two Fishes, John 6. 11. He
lift up his Eyes and gave Thanks. Though our Provision be never so homely and
slender, yet God's Grace and Mercy must be acknowledged.

But to evidence this by some Considerations; that certainly it is of the Mercy
of the Lord, that he gives Bread to the Creature: God gives these Mercies.

1. To those that cannot return any Service to him. 2. To those that will not
return any Service to him. 3. When we are at our best, we cannot deserve them.
4. We deserve the quite contrary.
1. He gives these Mercies to those that cannot return any Service to him. The
Beasts, and Fowls of the Air, the young Ravens: Psalm. 145. 16. Thou openest thy
Hand, and satisfiest the Desire of every living thing. What can the Beasts, or
Fishes, or Fowls of the Air deserve at God's Hand? what Honor and Service can
they bring to him? only they have a bountiful Creator, from whom they receive
their Allowance.

So as to Infants, alas, what can they deserve at his Hand? when God rocks
their Cradles, and nourishes them from the Dug; what Service can they do to
God? Isa. 46. 3, 4. By me, says the Lord, You are born from the Belly, and
carried from the Womb, and even to your old Age, I am he, and even to hoare
Hairs will I carry you: Mark, not only in Old Age, when we have done God
Service, does he maintain us; but from the Womb, the Belly, before we could do
any thing for him, we were tenderly handled by him. He alludeth to Parents and
Nurses, which carry their Younglings in their Arms. In Infancy we are not in a
Capacity to know the God of our Mercies, and look after him; yet he looked
after us then, when we could not perform one act of Love and Kindness to him.
The Psalmist takes notice of this; Psalm. 22. 9. 10. Thou art he that took me
out of the Womb; thou did make me hope, when I was upon my Mother's Breast. I
was cast upon thee from the Womb, thou art my God from my Mother's Belly.
Christians, before ever you could do any thing for him, or your selves, before
you could improve his Mercy, when you could not know who was your Benefactor,
who it was that nourished and cherished you, yet then God rocked your Cradles,
kept you from many Dangers, nursed you, and brought you up, and carried you in
the tender Arms of his Providence.

2. God gives these Mercies to those that will not serve him when they can:
Isa. 1. 2. I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled
against me. There are many in the World whom God protects, supplies, and
provides them of all Necessaries, yet they return nothing but Disobedience,
Contempt, Rebellion, and Unthankfulness. The Sun does not shine by chance, but
at God's disposal: Mat. 5. 45. He makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the
Good; and sends Rain on the Just, and on the Unjust. Most of those which are
fed at God's Table, and maintained at his Expense and Care, they are his
Enemies: and many times the more Men receive from him, the worse they are. Look
as Beasts toward Man, when they are in good plight they grow fierce, and are
ready to destroy those which nourish them: so, when (...) are plentifully
supplied, we kick with the Heel, wax wanton, and forgetful of God. Or, as a
froward Child scratcheth the Breast which suckles it; so we rebel against God
that nourished us, and brought us up, and dishonor our heavenly Father that
provides these Blessings for us. Parisiensis has a saying, They which hold the
greatest Farms, many times pay the least Rent: so the great ones of the World,
they which have most of God's Bounty, give him the least Acknowledgment.

3. When we do our best, we cannot deserve these Mercies, or merit ought at
God's Hands; for all we do is already due to God, as we are his Creatures; and
the paying new Debts will not quit old Scores. The Question is propounded, Job
22. 2. Can a Man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable
unto himself? See the Answer, Chap. 35. 7. If thou be righteous, what give
thou him? or what receives he of thine Hand? and wherein is God profited, if a
Man's ways be perfect? And therefore what ever God does for Creatures, he does
it freely, because he cannot be obliged by any Act of ours, and pre-ingaged.
Thus Adam in Innocence could not obtain the Blessing, but by virtue of the
Covenant, nor merit ought at God's Hands; (that is) put any Obligation upon
God; and therefore certainly now we cannot. And partly too, not because
whatever we do, it will carry a Proportion with these common Mercies. We are
proud Creatures, and think of a Condignity of Works, and to merit from Heaven
these Mercies: But alas! there is no Comparison; and if God would deal with us
upon Merit, and strict Commutative Justice, we cannot give him a valuable
Compensation for temporal Mercies. Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least of
all the Mercies which thou have showed unto thy Servant. Though none of God's
Mercies can simply be said to be little; for whatsoever comes from a great God
should be great in our Value and Esteem, as a small Remembrance from a great
Person is much prized; therefore no Mercy is simply little, but comparatively;
now the least Mercies some have, and others the greatest temporal Things: When
we are put into the Balance, We, and all our Worth and Deservings, cannot
counterpoize the least Mercy, or merit the daily Bread we have from God. And
then the little Good we do, it is merely by the Grace that we have received. If
one Man differs from another, who made him differ? It is but a new Gift, he is
the more indebted to God.

4. We deserve the contrary. We have forfeited our Lives, and all our Comforts;
we have put our selves out of God's Protection by Sin. Death waylaid us, when
we were in our Mothers Womb; and as soon as we were born, there was a Sentence
in force against us. Romans 5. 12. Death came upon all, for that all have sinned.
And still we continue the Forfeiture. We provoke God to cut us off. It is a
kind of pardoning Mercy, by which we subsist every moment. This is sensible in
case of Sickness, when our Lives and Comforts slide from us, when there is but
a Step between us and Death, when the Old Covenant comes to be put in Suit, and
God seems to be executing the Sentence of the Law. And that is the Reason why
the temporal Deliverance of the Wicked and Impenitent, is called a Remission;
as, Psalm. 78. 38. But he being full of Compassion, forgave their Iniquity, and
destroyed them not. And, Mat. 18. 26, 27, 28. Have Patience with me, and I will
pay thee all. And the Lord of that Servant was moved with Compassion, and
forgave him the Debt. Why is it called a Remission? Improperly, because it was
a Reprieve from the temporal Judgment for a time; it was, not an executing the
Sentence which was in force against us: And it was not from any thing in the
Sinner, but from God's pity over his Creatures. And a godly Man, every time his
Life and Comforts are in danger, has a Pardon renewed at that time. Isa. 38.
17. Thou have in love to my Soul delivered it from the Pit of Corruption; for
thou have cast all my Sins behind thy Back. They are loved out of Danger, and
loved out of Sickness; the pardoning Mercy of God is indeed renewed to them.

APPLICATION.
Use 1. For Information, in two Branches.

First; That God will give his People temporal Things: Not only Pardon, and
Grace, and Glory; but no good Thing will he withold. Psalm. 81. 11. Many say,
they can trust God for eternal Life, but cannot trust him for daily Bread. This
is an utter Mistake. Certainly, it is far more easy to trust God for daily
Bread, than for eternal Life; because there are more Difficulties, more natural
Prejudices against these greater Mercies of Pardon, and Eternal Life, than
there can be against the daily Effects of God's Bounty. It is a harder matter
to work through our natural Prejudices, which lie against Eternal Life; than to
work through that Distrust, which lies against God's Care over us, and
Provision for us: Why? For God's common Bounty, it reaches to all his
Creatures, even to the smallest Worm; his Mercy is over all his Works: And
surely it is more easy to believe his common Bounty, than his special Love,
which runs in a distinct Channel to such a sort of Men.

But because many have too weak a Faith about temporal Things, let us consider
how willing God is to distribute and give out these Supplies. Several Things I
might mention.

1. God's Respect to the Bodies of his People, is a mighty Ground and
Encouragement. God is in Covenant with the Body, as well as the Soul. Jesus
Christ proves the Resurrection from thence, that God is the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, Mat. 22. 32. This Argument can never be made good, but upon
this Supposition, that God is in Covenant with Abraham's Body, with the whole
Believer; and therefore the Mark of Circumcision was in their Flesh, as the
Water of Baptism is sprinkled upon our Bodies. Well then, if the Bodies of the
Saints be in Covenant with God, certainly some of the Promises of the Covenant
do concern the Body, and Sustentation of the present Life. But that is not all,
but Jesus Christ has purchased both Body and Soul 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought
with a Price; therefore glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are
God's. Not only the Soul is Christ's, but the Body.

You will say, That is ground of Service; but what! can it be inferred, that
therefore God will provide for us? It is not only a ground of our Service, but
of Christ's Care of us. If Christ had only purchased our Service, yet it were a
ground of Hope: If you expect Work and Service from a Body, you will give
maintenance to that Body. But Christ's Purchase implies his Care over that he
has purchased; for the Interest God has in us in Redemption, is a gracious
Interest. God had an Interest in us before we were redeemed; we could not make
void his Right, by any Rebellion of ours: But then God has such an Interest in
us, as engaged and solicited him to destroy us. Look as a Prince has an
Interest in his Subjects; if they rebel, and revolt from their Obedience, they
cannot disannul his Right; but it is such a Right, as binds him to pursue and
chastise them, until they return to their Duty: So God has a Right to the
fallen Creature, but it was such a Right as solicited Vengeance. But the Right
Christ purchased, was a gracious Right, that God might protect and preserve us.
Well then, if Christ purchased Body and Soul, he has obtained, not only that
God should be gracious to our Souls, but gracious to our Bodies; then the
Argument runs clearly for confirming the Faith of the Saints, in expectation of
temporal Benefits.

2. God has given us greater things, therefore he will not stand upon the
less; when a Man has been at great Cost, he will not lose it. The Lord has
given us his Christ; Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own his Son, but
delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with him also freely give us all
Things? Can any Man be so illogical, so ill-skilled in Consequences, as not to
conclude from thence, if God give us Christ, with him he will give us all
things? So, Mat. 6. 33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness,
and all other Things shall be added to you.

3. These things are dispensed to inferior, yea, to the worst of his Creatures;
Psalm. 147. 9. He gives to the Beast his Food, and to the young Ravens which
cry. Will God maintain the Beasts of the Field? and will he not maintain his
Children? It is monstrous and unnatural to think thus, that God will not
support you, and bear you out in your Work. This is Christ's own Argument, Mat.
6. 34. Take therefore no thought for the Morrow; for the Morrow shall take
thought for the Things of it self: Sufficient unto the Day is the Evil thereof.
Daily Bread is in your Father's Power, and he gives it graciously to all his
Creatures, and therefore certainly he will give it to you. Thus you may see
with what Confidence you may expect daily Supplies.

Secondly; It informs us, that we may ask temporal Things, if we ask them
lawfully. It is true, Prayers to God for spiritual Things are more acceptable.
As your Child pleases you better, when it comes to you to be taught its Book,
rather than when it comes for an Apple: So it is more pleasing to God, when you
come for the Mediator's Blessing, and spiritual Things. Acts 3. 26. God has
sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities.
But yet we may ask other Things; why? For they are good and useful to us in the
Course of our Service, and without them we are exposed to many Temptations. And
Prayer eases you of a deal of carking about them. Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for
nothing; but in every Thing, by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let
your Requests be made known unto God. We may ask them, but it must be lawfully;
and that for Order, not in the first place. That is howling, when we come to
God merely for Corn, Wine and Oil; when we prefer these Things before his
Favor, and the Graces of his Spirit. Then it must be lawful too as to the
Manner; a moderate Proportion, not to set God a Task to maintain you at such a
rate, but to ask a moderate Allowance. Christ teaches us here to pray for
Bread, which is a necessary Allowance. Prove. 30. 8. Feed me with Food
convenient for me. And, 1 Timothy 6. 8. If we have Food and Raiment, let us
therewith be content. And then ask them with Humility, and Submission to the
Will of God. We ought to say, as in Iam. 4. 15. If the Lord will, we will go to
such a Place, and get Gain. And then lawfully too, as to the End; not for an
unlawful End, for Ostentation and Riot, that we may live at large, and at ease.
Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume
it upon your Lusts. But we must ask it for a good End: Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory, for thy Mercy, and for
thy Truths sake. Lord, not for our Ease, or our Plenty, but that thy Name may
be glorified, that we may be supported in Service. And then again, lawfully as
to the Plea; We must not come and challenge it, as if it were our Due; we must
not use the Plea of Merit, but of Mercy. Our Savior does not say, Let this
Bread come to us any how, as he says, Let thy Will be done; our Subjection to
God is due; but, Give us this day our daily Bread, acknowledging the Lord's
Mercy.

Use 2. Let us not place our Confidence in second Causes, but in God, by whose
Goodness and Providence over us, all temporal Things do come unto us; for
without him, all our Carking and Labor is nothing; and if we have our Wishes
without Labor, yet we shall not have our Comfort and Blessing without God.
Mat. 6. 27. Which of you by taking thought, can add one Cubit unto his Stature?
By taking thought, he means anxious Care about Success. We cannot change the
Color of a Hair by all our anxious Thoughts. We cannot make our selves
stronger, or taller. Many a Man is pierced through with worldly Cares, and
still the World frowns upon him, so all his Care comes to nothing. Prove. 10. 4.
it is said, The Hand of the Diligent makes rich; compare it with verse. 22. and
it is said, The Blessing of the Lord, it makes rich, and he adds no Sorrow
with it. Most commonly they that are diligent, they thrive with their
Diligence; yea, but if that be all, if they have not the Lord's Blessing, they
have not that Sweetness and Peace, when they have gotten Abundance. O therefore
let us place our Confidence, not in second Causes, but in God.

Use 3. Let us be thankful to God for these vvorldly Things that we enjoy. I
urge this:

First; Because of the Danger of Ingratitude. Usually we never forget God more,
than when he remembers us most. When Men have what they would have, then God
is neglected; they grow careless in Prayer, or flat and cold in the performance
of it. There is a great deal of difference between Men poor and rich: When
poor, they will seem to put a natural Fervency into their Prayers; but when
rich, they grow cold and careless. Mark what the Lord says, Hosea 13. 6. They
were ^illed, and their Heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me. O
how frequent is this, that many having been kept under a great Sense of God in
a low Condition, but when they have been well at ease, then they bear it up, as
if they could live without God. the Bucket comes to the River with an empty
Mouth, gaping to receive its Fullness, as it were; but when it is full, the
Bottom is turned toward it: So it is very usual with Men, to turn their Backs
upon the Mercy-Seat; and when the Lord has given them great Increase in
worldly Things, and leased out a great Estate to them, he has very little Rent
from them. Now because this is usual, therefore those whom God has blessed
with the Supplies of the present Life, how should they study Thankfulness!

Secondly; Because of the Equity of it. Consider what an Equity there is, that
we should be thankful for outward Blessings.

1. They are good in themselves. 2. They come from God. 3. They come from the
Lord's Grace and Mercy.
1. They are good in themselves. Food and Raiment is good, and every Creature
of God is good. 1 Timothy 4. 4. They are good things, tho not the best things.
They are good for our selves, that we may serve God more cheerfully. The Lord
would have the Levites and Priests have their Portion, that they might be
encouraged in the Law of the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 31. 4. Now these things are good to
encourage us, and support us in our Work. Man consists of two parts, of a Body,
and of a Soul. Now whether we look to the one, or the other, you will have many
Arguments to love and praise God, not only for what he has done for our Souls,
but likewise for our Bodies. And they are good, because they prevent many
Snares and Temptations. Prove. 30. 9. Lest I be poor, and steal, and take the
Name of my God in vain. Diseases which arise from Fullness, are more common; but
Diseases which arise from Indigence and Emptiness, they are more dangerous: So
Diseases of Prosperity, they are more common; it is a rank Soil, and yields
more Weeds: but Diseases which arise from Poverty, breed Atheism, Irreligion,
and Rebellion against God. They are good, as they make us more useful for God
and Man. For God, as having more Advantages for the honoring of God: Prove. 3.
9. Honor the Lord with thy Substance, and with the First Fruits of all thine
Increase. And of doing good to others: That we may have to distribute to them
that need. Ephesians. 4. 28. O we should all covet and affect mightily, to have
wherewith to relieve the Necessities of others.

2. As they are Blessings, so they are Blessings which do not come by Chance,
or by Man's Providence. 1 Timothy 6. 17. The living God, who gives us richly all
Things to enjoy. The People of God are plentifully provided for. Your Tables
are well furnished, Backs well clothed, it is God which gives you richly to
enjoy them, and he must be acknowledged; as David does, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. For
all Things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. Then, ver. 16. O
Lord, our God, all this Store that we have prepared, to build thee an House for
thine holy Name, comes of thine hand, and is all thine own. Tho you your
selves have been Purchasers of your own Estate, and Carvers of your own
Fortune, (as Man is most apt to forget God there) yea, but tho you have
prepared and brought together a great deal of Store, yet, Lord, all comes from
thee. It sweetneth the Mercy. When you are at the Table, to be carved to by a
great Person, their Remembrance is counted a greater Favor than the Meal it
self: So it is not barely the Comfort we have by the Creature, which sweetneth
it; but when we think of the Donor, that the great God should think of us, that
it is God which spreads our Table for us, that does put this Meat and Drink
before us. It was he that gave Seed to the Sower, and Bread for Food. 2 Cor. 9.
10. When we take it immediately out of God's Hands, it is much sweeter. And not
only so, but also it is the more sanctified. When we look to second Causes, we
shall surely abuse the Mercy: Hos. 2. 8. For she did not know that I gave her
Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her Silver and Gold; what then?
Therefore she prepared it for Baal. When God's Kindness is not taken notice of,
when we do not see God in our Mercies, we shall not use them for God. That Man
will surely improve his Comforts ill, that does not see God in them. Now that
which comes from God, leads the Heart to God again; then the Creature is
sanctified. Therefore acknowledge God in these outward Things. We should say of
every Morsel of Bread, this is God's Gift to me; of every Nights Sleep, this is
the Lord's Goodness. When God is acknowledged in these outward Things, he takes
it the more kindly, and we are the better for it; the Mercy is the sweeter, and
the more sanctified.

3. They not only come from God, but from the Lord's free Grace and Mercy.
These are two distinct Notions, by which God's Goodness is set out, and they
are both significant and expressive in the present Case: Grace, that does all
freely; Mercy, that pitieth the Miserable.

(1.) Then we have them from Grace; Grace is at liberty to give them to whom it
will. Well, there is Grace in these outward Things; for God gives them to whom
he will, to some, not to others. O when we consider the Distinction between us
and others, every one has not such liberal Supplies, nay, many of those of
whom the World is not worthy; surely this is merely the Lord's Goodness. Prove.
22. 2. The Rich and the Poor meet together, the Lord is the Maker of them all.
They had the same Maker that you had, (others which are destitute) therefore
why is it you have more than they? It is merely from Grace. Why is one Vessel
framed for an honorable Use, and another for a baser Use? So it pleased the
Potter. God, as the great Master of the Scenes, appoints to every Man what
part he shall act, merely out of his own Grace, he is bound to none. It was a
good Speech of Tamberlain, the great Conqueror of the East, to Ba^azet; What
did God see in thee, that art blind in one Eye, and me, that am lame of one
Leg, that he should make us, passing by many others, the Lords of so many
opulent and mighty Kingdoms? A savoury Speech from an Infidel! What did God see
in any of us, to exalt, cherish, and supply us, and let pass many others, who
for moral Excellencies, and virtuous Endowments, do far exceed us? When we
consider this Distinction, then, Even so, Father, because it pleased thee.
There is a kind of Election and Reprobation in these common Mercies, (that is)
God will dispense them to one, and not to another; he will be glorified in
their Poverty, and glorified in thy Wealth, and therefore there is Grace in it.

(2.) There is Mercy in it that pitieth the miserable. How does it appear these
good things come from Mercy? because of our Want, and because of our Forfeiture.

1. Our Want, and our Indigence. O when we think what shiftless creatures we
should have been, if he had not provided for us: Psalm. 40. 17. I am poor and
needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me. If we were but sensible of our own
Weakness and Emptiness, and manifold Necessities, we would admire that God
should think of us, such forlorn and wretched Creatures; or that our Baseness
and Poverty does not make us contemptible to God. Psalm. 34. 6. This poor Man
cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him out of all his Troubles. He does
not say, this wise Man, this eminent Saint, but this poor Man. This was the
Doctrine of the Gentiles, That the Divine Powers did only care for the great
and weighty Concernments of the World, but other things he left to their own
Event, and their own Chance; as if God in the great throng of Business were not
at leisure to attend every private Man's Request. These were the fond Surmises
the Gentiles had of God: But we are taught better. This poor Man cried unto the
Lord, and be heard him. Poor Men in the World, when they have any thing to do
with great Persons, they must look long, wait, pray, and pay, to seek their
Face and Favor, and at length meet with a rough Answer, and sour Look. But God
will not shut the Door, the Throne of Grace lies open for every Comer. You will
say, this would sweeten Mercies to the Poor: Nay, it concerns not only those
that are actually poor, but the great ones of the World; (for they are poor and
shiftless in themselves, if God did not provide for them) others are but
Glasses where they might see their own Misery. If they did well weigh the Wants
and Necessities of others, they might see what would have been their own Case,
if the Lord had not been merciful to them. As Austin, when he saw a Beggar
frisking and leaping after his Belly was filled, the Spectacle wrought much
upon him, that he had not such rejoicing in God, who tasted so much of his
Abundance. Says Chrysostom, If you are not thankful for Health, go to the
Spittles and Lazar-houses, and see what might have been your own Case. Thus if
you are not thankful for abundance, go to the Families where there are Children
that want Bread. It is the Lord's Mercy to the richest, for they were miserable
and indigent. It is a great Mercy to relieve those from Hand to Mouth: But you
that have abundance, it is a double Mercy to you, for he prevents the Necessity
before it was felt; as Psalm. 21. 3. Thou preventest him with the Blessings of
Goodness: David takes notice of the Goodness of God to him. Before the need is
felt and observed, you are stored; and this should be a great Indearment of the
Lord's Mercy to you.

2. It is Mercy if we consider not only our Want, but our Forfeiture. It is not
only Mercy, but pardoning Mercy, at least a reprieving from Trouble, for we
deserved the contrary. There is a kind of Temporary-Pardon, which continues
all these Blessings. It is as great a Curse as possibly David could thunder out
against obstinate Sinners, and God's implacable Enemies: Psalm. 28. 4. Give them
according to their Deeds, and according to the wickedness of their Endeavors.
Do we think this would be matter of Mischief only to David's Enemies? No, every
one of us, if we had our Deserts, we should soon be shiftless, harbourless,
begging from Door to Door, yea howling for one drop of Mercy to cool our
Tongues. O then surely the Lord is to be praised and acknowledged in bestowing
the good things of this present Life. Well then,

As these Blessings come from God, let them carry up your Heart to God again.
As all Rivers they run from the Sea, and they discharge themselves into the Sea
again; so let all be returned to God with Thankfulness, with acknowledgments
that you have received them from God. I shall urge it with one Example; Jesus
Christ, though he were Heir, Lord of all things, Who thought it no Robbery to
be equal with God; yet you find him ever giving Thanks when he used the
Creatures; Mat. 15. 36. And it is the main thing John takes notice of, and
passes by the Miracle, John 6. 23. Where they did eat Bread, after that the
Lord had given Thanks. Nigh to Tiberias there was the place where our Lord fed
many with five Loaves and two Fishes; but he only says this, where they did
eat Bread, after that the Lord had given Thanks: he saw this was a notable
Circumstance, so he does but cursorily mention the Miracle, only calls it
eating Bread, but expressly mentions Christ's blessing the Creature. He would
teach us, that the blessing of all Enjoyments is in God's Hand.

USE 4. If the Lord be the Donor, and Giver of all these outward things, let us
beware we do not abuse these Gifts of God, as Occasions of sinning against the
Giver, that we fight not against him with his own Weapons. Jesus Christ
speaking to his own Disciples, though they were trained up with him, a Company
chosen out, and select Family, who were to be his Heralds and Ambassadors to
the World, yet he gives them this Caution; Luke 21. 34. Take heed to your
selves, lest at any time your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life, and so that day come upon you unawares. He
saw it needful to warn his own Disciples. We had two common Parents, Ad^m and
Noah, and one miscarried by eating, and the other by drinking; these Sins are
natural to us. The Throat is a slippery place, and had need well be looked
unto. Mark, Christ there does not mean Surfeiting and Drunkenness merely in a
gross Notion. When we hear of Surfeiting and Drunkenness, we think of spuing,
staggering, reeling, vomiting, and the like; but we are to consider it in a
stricter Notion; Take heed lest the Heart be overcharged. The Heart may be
overcharged, when the Stomach is not; (that is) when we are less apt to praise
God, grow more lumpish and heavy; or rather when we settle into a sensual frame
of Spirit, and by an inordinate delight in our present Portion, are taken off
from minding better things. Look as the Heart is overcharged with the Cares of
the World; so likewise with Creature-Delights, and Comforts of this World, when
it is set for Ease and Vanity. Many that would be loathers of the other
Drunkenness, yet are guilty of this kind of Surfeiting and Drunkenness; the
Heart is overcharged with an inordinate Affection to present things. There
cannot be a more heavy Judgment, than when our Table is made our Snare: Psalm.
69. 22. A Snare, it is God's spiritual Judgment; when the Comforts of this Life
serve not so much to lengthen and strengthen Life; but when their Hearts are
hardened in Sin, and they grow neglectful of God, and heavenly things. Raining
Snares is an Argument of God's Hatred. First, The Lord shall rain Snares; and
then, Brimstone and an horrible Tempest shall be their Portion: Psalm. 11. 6. So
it makes way for his eternal Anger.

USE 5. Let us be contented with that Portion which God has given us of
worldly things, if the Lord be the Donor. Why?

1. Because God stands upon his Sovereignty; you must stand to God's Allowance,
though he gives to others more, and to you less; for God is supreme, and will
not be controlled in the disposal of what is his own. The good Man of the House
pleaded, Mat. 20. 13, 14, 15. Friend, I do thee no wrong; is it not lawful for
me to do what I will with mine own? The fullness of the Earth, and all, is his:
and therefore though others have better trading, and finer Apparel, and be more
amply provided for than we are, God is Sovereign, and will give according to
his Pleasure, and you must be content.

2. Nothing is deserved, and therefore certainly every thing should be kindly
taken. If a Man be kept at free-cost, and maintained at your Expense, you take
it very ill, if he murmur and dislike his Diet. Certainly we are all maintained
at free-cost, and therefore we should with all humble Contentation receive what
ever God will put into our Hands.

3. God knows what Proportion is best for us, he is a God of Judgment, and
knows what is most convenient for us, for he is a wise God. It is the Shepherd
must choose the Pasture, not the Sheep. Leave it to God to give you that which
is convenient, and suitable to your Condition of Life. A Shoe may be too big
for the Foot, and a Garment too great for the Body, as Readiness Armor was too
large for little David; 1 Samuel 17. God will give you that which is convenient,
that which is agreeable to you. A Garment, when too long, proves a dirty Rag;
we may have too much, and therefore God he carves out our Allowance with a wise
Hand.

4. God does not only give suitable to your Condition, but suitable to your
Strength, such a Portion as you are able to bear. God lays Affliction upon
his People, and he gives them Mercies as they are able to bear; if they had
more, they would have more Snares, more Temptations. You find it hard for a
rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; Mat. 19. 24. A Man may take a
larger Draught than he is able to bear: so God proportioneth every Man's
Condition acc^rding to his spiritual Strength; every Man is not able to bear a
very high prosperous Estate: Heb. 13. 5. Let your Conversation be without
Covetousness; and be content with such things as ye have: for he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor for sake thee: then you will live upon the Promise.
But when Men set God a Task, and he must maintain them at such a rate; that
ends in Mischief and Distrust. Psalm. 78. 19. Can God furnish a Table in the
Wilderness? etc.

5. Contentation is one of God's Gifts that we ask in this Prayer, [ Give us
this day our daily Bread.] that is, we ask to be contented with our Portion.
Contentment and quietness of Mind with what we do enjoy, it is a great Blessing:
Joel 2. 19. See what the Lord says there by his Prophet: I will send you Corn,
and Wine, and Oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith. The bare and simple
Blessing does not speak so much of God's Love, as when we are satisfied, when
we have Contentment in it; that is the greater Blessing. When our Minds are
suited to our Condition, then the Creature is more sweet, more comfortable.
Your Happiness lies not in Abundance, but in Contentment; Luke 12. 15. This
does not make a Man happy, that he has much; but this, that he is contented;
he has what God will give him. All spiritual Miseries may be referred to these
two things; a War between a Man and his Conscience, and a War between his
Affections and his Condition.

6. There may be as much Love in a lesser Portion as in a greater. There Is the
same Affection to a small younger Child, though he has not so large an
Allowance, as the elder Brother; yet says he, my Father loves me as well as
him; not that I have a double Portion, but I have as much of my Father's Love:
So a Child of God may say, God loves me though he has given another more, and
me less. Be content with what falls to your share, and with your Allowance by
the wise Designation and Allotment of God's Providence. Thus much for the first
Point.

A Word of a second, viz.

Doct. 2. In asking temporal things, Christ has stinted us to a day, [Give us,
(...), this day our daily Bread.]

God in an extraordinary manner fed his People in the Wilderness; the Mannah
stank if they had kept it another day; they had it from day to day. What Is the
Reason Christ says, Give us this day?

1. That every day we may pray to God: Therefore it is not, give us this Month,
or Year, but Day; because every day God will hear from us: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray
without ceasing: God would not have us too long out of his Company, but by a
frequent Commerce he would have us acquainted and familiar with him. This is
required, that you should not let a day pass over your Head, but God must hear
from you, for your Patent lasts but for a day; you have a Lease from God of
your Comforts and Mercies, but it is expired unless you renew it again by
Prayer. How much do they differ from the Heart of God's Children, that could be
contented (like the High Priest of old) to come to the Mercy-seat but once a
Year? now the Lord would have us come every day to the Throne of Grace.

2. Every day, because there should be Family Prayer; for all that taketheir
Meat together, are to come, and say to God; Give us this day our daily Bread.
It is not said, Give me, but Give us: Therefore you see how little of Love and
Fear of God is there, where Week after Week they call not upon God's Name.

3. To make way for our Gratitude and Thankfulness. Our Mercies they flow not
from God all at once, but some to day, and some to morrow, for we take them day
by day; altogether, they are too heavy for us to weild and manage: Psalm. 68.
19. Who daily loadeth us with Benefits. Our Mercies they come in greater
Number, and a greater Measure, then we are able to acknowledge, make use of, or
be thankful for. Therefore this is the burden of gracious Hearts, that Mercies
come so thick and fast, they cannot be thankful enough for them: but to help
us, God distributes them by Parcels; who loadeth us daily, some to day, some to
morrow, and every day, that we may not forget God, but may have a new Argument
to praise him.

4. To show us every day we should renew our Dependence upon God for temporal
things. There is no day but we stand in need of the Lord's Blessing, of
Sanctification, of Comfort, that they may not be a Snare, that there is still
need of new Strength; new Grace, and new Supplies.

5. Again, Give us this day, that we may not burden our selves with overmuch
Thoughtfulness, that we might not solicitously cark for to morrow: Mat. 6. 34.
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. Every day affords Business,
Trouble, Care, and Burden enough; we need not anticipate and pre-occupy the
Cares of the next day; God would not have us overborn with Solicitude, but
look no further than this day

6. Christ would teach us, that worldly things should be sought in a moderate
Proportion; if we have sufficient for a day, for the present Want, we should
not grasp at too much. Ships lightly laden will pass through the Sea; but when
we take too great a burden, the Ship will easily sink with every Storm. We have
sore Troubles to pass through in the World; now when we are over-burdened with
present things, we have more Snares and Temptations.

7. Christ would train us up with thoughts of our Lives Uncertainty; James 4.
13. say not, This and this I will do, to day or to morrow: What is your Life?
it is but a Vapor. One being invited to Dinner the next day, said, for these
many Years I have not had a tomorrow; meaning he was providing every day for
his last day. We do not know whether we have another day, but are apt to sing
Lullabies to our Souls, and say, Soul, take thine Ease, thou have Goods laid up
for many Years: Luke 12. 19. We are sottishly secure, and dream of many Years,
whereas God tells us only of to day.

8. To awaken us after heavenly things. When we seek Bread for the present
Life, then give us this day: but now come to me, says Christ, and I will give
you Bread that shall nourish you to eternal Life, Bread that endures for ever:
John 6. 27. Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for that Meat which
endures unto everlasting Life. There is Meat that will endure for ever, but
for the present, we beg only for this day. 1 Pet. 1. 4. To an Inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
you. That Is an eternal State, this is but of a short, and of a small
continuance: You see what need you have to go to God, that he will most
plentifully provide for you.

And forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debto^s.
WE have now done with the Supplication of this Prayer, and are come to the
Deprecations. The Supplications, are those Petitions which we make to God for
obtaining of that which is good. The Deprecations, are those Petitions we make
to God for removing of that which is evil. Now of this latter sort, there are
two: 1. We pray for the Remission of Evil that is already committed. 2. We pray
for the prevention of the Evil which may be inflicted. The first of these is
the Petition we have now in hand. Here, 1. The Petition is proposed: Forgive us
our Debts. 2. It Is confirmed by an Argument; As we forgive our Debtors.


In the first take notice, 1. Of the Object, or Matter of this Petition, and
that is, Debts. 2. The Subject, or Persons praying, Us. 3. The Person to whom
we pray, our Heavenly Father, who alone can forgive our Sins. 4. The Act of God
about this Object, Forgive.


Then the Petition is confirmed by an Argument, which is taken from our
forgiving of others.

In which there is an Argument.

1. A Simili, from a like Disposition in us. Thus, what is good in us, was
first in God; for he is the Pattern of all Perfection. If we have such a
Disposition planted in our Hearts; and if it be a Virtue in us, surely the same
Disposition is in God; for the first being wants no Perfection.

2. The Argument may be taken a dispari, or a minori ad majus, from the less to
the greater. If we that have but a drop of Mercy, can forgive the Offenses done
to us; surely the infinite God, that is Mercy it self, he has more Bowels, and
more Pity; For his ways are above our ways, as high as the Heaven is above the
Earth: Isa. 55. 9. So it seems the Argument is propounded; Luke 11. 4. Forgive
us our Sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us.

3. The Argument may be taken from the Condition, or the Qualification of those
that are to expect Pardon. They are such that out of a sense of God's Mercy to
them, and the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts, are inclined and
disposed to show Mercy to others. So Christ explains it, verse. 14. making it a
Condition or Qualification on our part: If ye forgive Men their Trespasses,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But this will be more abundantly
clear when I come to examine that Clause.

Before we come to the Petition it self, the Connection is to be considered;
for the Particle [ And] links it to the former Petition. After Hallowed be thy
Name, he does not say, And thy Kingdom come; they are propounded as distinct
Sentences: but Give us this day our daily Bread, And forgive us our Debts; for
three Reasons.

1. Without Pardon, all the good Things of this Life will do us no good: They
are but as a full Diet, or as a rich Suit to a condemned Person; they will not
comfort him, and allay his present Fears. Until we are pardoned, we are under a
Sentence, ready for Execution, and therefore we cannot have that Comfort in
outward Things, until we have some Interest in God's fatherly Mercy. A Man that
is condemned, has the King's Allowance until Execution: So it is the
Indulgence of God to a wicked Man, to give him many outward Things, tho he is
condemned already. We should not satisfy our selves with daily Bread, without a
sense of some Interest in pardoning Mercy.

2. To show us our Unworthiness. Our Sins are so many and grievous, that we are
not worthy of one Morsel of Bread to put in our Mouths. When we say, Give us
this day, etc. we need presently to say, Forgive us our Sins. There is a
Forfeiture even of these common Blessings. Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of the
least of all the Mercies, and of all the Truth, which thou have showed unto thy
Servant. All that we have, we have from Mercy, and it is Mercy undeserved. As
we are Creatures, there can be no common Right between God and us, to engage
him to give temporal Blessings; for we owe our selves wholly to him, as being
created out of nothing; Children cannot oblige their Parents. But much more as
we are guilty Creatures, it is merely of the Mercy of the Lord.

3. These are joined together, because Sin is the great Obstacle and Hindrance
of all the Blessings which we expect from God. Ier. 5. 25. Your Sins have
withheld good Things from you. When Mercy comes to us, Sin stands in the way,
and turns it back again, so that it cannot have so clear a Passage to us.
Therefore God must forgive, before he can give, (that is) bestow these outward
Things as a Blessing on us.

Having spoken of this Connection, let me observe something from the Petition it
self.

The first Thing I shall observe is, the Notion by which Sin is set out,
Forgive us our Debts. The Point is:

Doct. I. That Sins come under the Notion of Debts.

In Luke 11. 4. it is, Forgive us our Sins. There is a twofold Debt which Man
owes to God.

1. A Debt of Duty. 2. A Debt of Punishment.
1. A Debt of Duty, Worship, and Obedience; this is a Debt we owe to God. In
this sense it is said, Romans 8. 12. We are Debtors, not to; the Flesh, to live
after the Flesh: In which Negative, the Affirmative is clearly implied, that we
are Debtors to God, to live to God; Debtors to the Spirit, to live after the
Spirit. By the Law of Creation, we were not appointed to serve and please the
Flesh, but to serve God. Luke 17. 10. When you have done all those things which
are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable Servants, we have done that which
was our Debt or Duty to do. Obedience, Worship, and Service is a Debt we owe to
God, by virtue of that Interest which he has in us, and Command he has over
us. And so you have that Speech, Gal. 5. 3. that we are Debtors to the whole
Law, as we come under the Obedience of it.

2. A Debt of Punishment, which we are fallen into through the neglect of our
Duty. Punishment is due to us as Wages: Romans 6. 23. The Wages of Sin is Death.
God has as it were made a Contract with us, that if we will sin, we must take
our Wages; we must take what it comes to.

Now in this Petition, when we say, Forgive us our Debts, we do not desire to
be discharged of the Duty we owe to God, but to be acquitted of the Guilt and
Punishment. The Faults or Sins that we are guilty of, oblige us, and bind us to
the Punishment; and therefore Sins are called Debts. The original Debt we owe,
is Obedience; and in case of Default, the next Debt we owe is Punishment. Look
as in a Contract and Bond, if the Party observe not the Condition, then he is
liable to the Forfeiture: So God dealt with Man by way of Covenant, and the
Tenor of it was exact Obedience; and this Covenant had a Sanction or an
Obligation annexed, in case Obedience was not exactly performed, we should be
accursed, and suffer all manner of Misery in this Life, and the next. Now by
the Fall we incurred this Penalty, and therefore as lost and undone Creatures,
we run to God's Mercy, and beg him to forgive the Debt, or the Forfeiture of
that Bond of Obedience, wherein Man stands bound to God by the Law.

A little to make it good, (before I come to the Body of the Petition) let me
show how Sin is a Debt, wherein it agrees. That will appear, if you can
consider, 1. Our Danger by Sin. 2. Our Remedy from Sin.


In both the Parts you will find Sin is considered as a Debt.

First; If you consider our Danger by Sin.

1. There is a Creditor to whom the Debt is due, and that is God. Luke 7. 41.
when he would set out God's Mercy, he says, There was a certain Creditor,
which had two Debtors, etc. God is there set forth under the Notion and
Similitude of a Creditor. God is a Creditor, partly as our Creator, and partly
as a Lawgiver, and partly as a Judge. As our Creator and Benefactor, from whom
we have received all that we have. It was the Lord that gave to every Man his
Talents to trade withal, to some more, to some less, Mat. 25. Thus God has
trusted us with Life, and all other Blessings. But then as a Lawgiver: If God
had given us Life, Strength, Parts, Wealth, that we should do with them what we
would; tho the Gift would oblige us, in point of Gratitude, to serve our
Benefactor, yet we had not been so responsible for our Defaults: But we are
under a Law to serve him, and honor him that made us, and gave us what we
have. God did not dispossess himself of an Interest in them: He did not give
them to us as Owners and Proprietors, to do with them what we would; but he
gave them to us as Stewards; our Life and Employment here is a Stewardship.
Nay, God is not only a Lawgiver, but also a Judge; he will call us to an
Account. He does oblige us, as a Creator; but imposes a Necessity upon us of
obeying and serving him, as a Lawgiver; and not only makes a Law, but will
take an Account of Men, how they observe the Law of their Creation. There will
a Time come, when the Lord of those Servants will come and reckon with them,
and require his own with Usury. Luke 19. 23. He will require this Debt and
Service at our Hands, else we must endure the Penalty. Well, this is the
Connection: He that abuses God's Mercy, as a Creator, offends him, as as
Lawgiver; and is justly punished by him, as a Judge. There are many never think
of this, therefore are not sensible of these great Relations, nor that they
shall answer for all their Talents, Strength, and Time, and Advantages they
have in the World. Thus there is a Creditor.

2. As a Debtor is bound to make Satisfaction to the Creditor, or else is
liable to the Process of the Law, which may be commenced against him: So are we
all to God, Bodies and Souls, we are become (...), guilty before the Lord, Romans
3. 19. So we translate it. We are under the Sentence of the Law, liable to the
Process of his revenging Justice, and one day God will pursue his righteous Law
against us. All the fallen Creatures are quite become Bankrupt; we can never
pay the original Debt of Obedience, therefore must be left to lie under the
Debt of Punishment.

3. Look as Debts stand upon Record, and are charged upon some Book of Account,
that they may not be forgot: So God has his Book of Account, a Book of
Remembrance, as it is called, Mal. 3. 16. All our Words, Speeches, Actions,
they are all upon Record; what Means we have enjoyed, what Mercies, what
Opportunities, what Calls, and what Messages of his Love and Grace. Job 14. 17.
My Iniquity is sealed up in a Bag. As Men's Writings or Bonds, which they have
to show for their Debts owing to them, are sealed up in a Bag; so Job uses
that Similitude. Thus is Sin represented as a Thing that is upon Record, and
cannot be forgotten. Many times we lose the Memory of what we have done in
Childhood and Infancy; but all is upon Record, and your Iniquities will one
day find you out, tho you have forgotten, and think never to hear of them more.

4. A Day of Reckoning will come, when God will put the Bond in Suit, and all
shall be called to an Account. Sometimes God reckons with Sinners (in part)
in this World, but surely in the next. Death is but the Summons to come to an
Account with God: Luke 16. 2. Give an Account of thy Stewardship, for thou
may be no longer Steward. That Passage of the Parable is applicable to
Death; -- That when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting Habitations,
ver. 9. When the Soul is turned out of Doors, when it is cited to appear before
the Tribunal of God, then we give up our Account. But especially at the great
Day: Rev. 20. 12. And I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God; and
the Books were opened; that is, the Book of Conscience, and the Book of God's
Remembrance. There are two Books that are written within and without, upon
which all our Actions are stamped; they are now closed, in a great measure we
know not what is in these great Books. One of the Books, that of Conscience, is
in our own keeping, yet we cannot deface and blot it out. These Books at that
Day will be opened; Conscience, by the Power of God, shall be extended to the
Recognition of all our Ways. Conscience writes, when it speaks not: Many times
it does not smite for Sins we are guilty of; but there stands the Debt charged,
upon which we shall be responsible.

5. After this Reckoning there is Execution. A Bankrupt, that cannot satisfy
his Creditor, is cast into Prison: So God has his Prison for impenitent,
disobedient, and obstinate Sinners: 1 Pet. 3. 19. He went and preached unto the
Spirits in Prison. It is a dismal Prison, where poor captive Prisoners are held
in Chains of Darkness, that is, under the Horrors of their own despairing
Fears, looking for the Judgment of the Lord, when they shall be cast into this
Prison, and no getting out again, until they have paid the utmost Farthing,
Luke 12. 50. And that will never be, as to the Sinner; He is (as it were)
always satisfying, and can never be said to have satisfied the Justice of God.

Thus you see how Sin is a Debt, and what correspondence there is between them;
the Obligation of Punishment that arises from Sin. But now it differs from
all other Debts.

1. No Debt to Man can be so great as our Debt to God, both for number and
weight. Mat. 18. 24. compared with Verse. 28. You shall see there the Parable of
the Lord, forgiving ten thousand Talents; and the Servant goes and takes his
Brother by the Throat, and requires from him a Debt of an hundred Pence. Mark,
Offenses done to God are greater than Offenses done to us; for there is as much
Difference and Disproportion, as between an hundred and ten thousand. And then
the Debt of the Fellow Servants was but Pence, an hundred Pence; but the Debt
due to the Lord, that was Talents; and a Talent is reckoned to be one hundred
eighty seven Pounds, ten Shillings. Our Sins against God are more and more
heavy, than any which our Brethren can commit against us. Pence, Talents; one
hundred, and ten thousand: there is the Difference and Disproportion. O that we
had a due sense of what it is to sin against God, against an Infinite Majesty!
To strike a private Person, is not so much as to strike an Officer of Justice;
and that is not so much as to strike the supreme Magistrate. What is it to sin
against God? and how often do we? All our Imaginations are only evil, and that
continually; and therefore all our Sins against God, will arise to a vast and
heavy Debt, because of the Infiniteness of the Object against whom Sin is
committed.

2. In other Debts there is a Day of Payment set them; in this Debt there is
none: God does not tell us when he will put the Bond in suit against us; he may
surprise us ere we are aware. Luke 12. 20. when he dreamed of many Years; Thou
Fool, this Night. The Spirits now in Prison, did as little think of that
doleful place, as those Sinners which are alive. It may be to day, to morrow,
the next hour; Genesis 4. 7. Sin lies at the Door: There Is a Sentence, and Curse
that waylays him: Sin, for the Punishment of Sin, it is ready to seize upon him,
and pluck him by the Throat, and bring him into God's Presence. Still the Curse
hovers over the Head of obstinate and impenitent Sinners.

3. In other Debts, if the Goods are taken by way of Execution, and suffice,
the Person is free: But here God aims at the Person, and the whole Person. Body
and Soul are cast into Hell Fire: Mat. 10. 28.

4. Here there can be no shifting, no avoiding the Danger. If you fly from God,
you do but fly to God; from God, as willing to be a Friend; to God, who is sure
to be revenged. Whither shall I fly from thy Spirit? If I go into the Depths,
thou art there: Psalm. 139. God is here, there, and every where.

5. All other Debts cease at Death; when a Man dies, we say his Debts are
paid: but here Execution begins, then the Law takes the Sinner by the Throat,
and drags him to everlasting Punishment, and does in effect say, pay me what
thou owe. Death is God's Arrest. As Soon as the Soul steps out of the World,
presently it is attached and seized, and forfeited into the Hands of God's
Justice. How many are there that lie under this Danger and never think of it!
Spiritual Debts they are not so sensible of, as literal. A Man that is deeply in
debt, and in danger of an Arrest, cannot sleep, eat, walk abroad, but his Fears
are upon him. Augustus bought his Quilt, or Bed, that could sleep soundly when
he owed so many thousand Sestercies. But poor senseless Sinners never think of
danger until they are plunged into it, and then there is no escape.

Secondly; The Metaphor will also hold good, as to our Remedy and Recovery, how
we come out of this Debt. A Debtor that is insolvent, is undone, unless there
be some means found out to satisfy the Creditor: So we must altogether lie
under the Wrath of God, unless Satisfaction be made. Therefore Jesus Christ, in
the

1. Place comes under the Notion of a Surety. Because he took the Debt of Man
upon himself, therefore, Heb. 7. 22. he is called, The Surety of a better
Testament. When Christ undertook the Business of our Salvation, he did in
effect say, as Paul to Philemon; Verse. 18. If he has wronged thee, or owes
thee ought, put that on mine Account: So did Jesus Christ, in effect say to
God; Let me be made a Sin, and made a Curse for them. He that was a Judge, was
willing to become a Party, and to pay what we owed. David in the Type of
Christ, says, Psalm. 69. 4. I restored that which I took not away. He did not
take away any Honor from God: It was we that robbed God of the Glory of his
Justice, Authority, and Truth; that trampled them under our Feet: but Christ
made restitution and amends to God.

2. Having condescended to become our Surety, he made full Satisfaction, by
suffering the Punishment which was due to us; Isa. 53. 4. Surely he has born
our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows. That which we should have born upon our
own Backs, and would have crushed us for ever, that he has born, and he has
carried. Christ was to be the Sinner in Law, and was to suffer in our stead.
Solomon has a Passage concerning Suretyship; Prove. 11. 15. He that is Surety
for a Stranger, shall smart for it: or, (as the Hebrew will bear it) sore-
bruised, or, (as it is in the Margin) shall be bruised and sore-broken. And the
same word is used concerning Christ, that was our Surety; Isa. 53. 10. It
pleased the Father to bruise him. Christ is our Surety, therefore he was
bruised and broken, he suffered what we should have suffered. It is true, there
are some Circumstances of our Punishment, which Christ suffered not, (as a
great part of our Punishment in Hell, there is the Worm of Conscience, and
Despair, and the Eternity of Torments) but this was not essential to the
Punishment, but did only arise from the Guilt, and from the Weakness of the
Party that is punished, because we cannot work through it otherwise. Christ
paid the full Price which Divine Justice demanded, and so made Satisfaction for
us.

3. Christ satisfying as our Surety, all those which had an Interest in his
Death, they are set free from the Wrath of God, they have a Release from this
great Debt owed. As when the Ram was taken, Isaac was let go; so when Christ
was taken, the Sinner is released and discharged. Job 33. 24. Deliver him from
going down to the Pit, I have found a Ransom. Certainly God will not exact the
Debt twice, of the Surety, and of the Principal Person; our Surety having paid
the Debt for us, therefore we go free. And therefore if our Consciences should
pursue us at Law, we may answer, Christ was taken for us, He was bruised for
our Iniquities, and he bore the Chastisement of our Peace.

4. Christ has not only satisfied for the Punishment, but he has procured
Favor for us; wherein he differs from an ordinary and common Surety. Christ
does not only free us from Bonds, but also has brought us into Grace and
Favor with the Creator, Lawgiver, and Judge. There Is a double Notion of
Christ's Death; that of a Ransom for the delivery of a Captive, and as a Merit
and Price which was given for eternal Life. The Death of Christ did not only
dissolve the Obligation which lay upon us, to suffer the Penalty for the Breach
of the Law, and so deliver us from the Wrath to come; but it was a Price that
was given to purchase Grace, Favor, and Heaven for us, which is called, Ephesians.
1. 14. The purchased Possession. Now why must our Surety instate us thus into
Favor? because Christ was such a Surety, as did not only pay the Forfeiture,
but also the Principal, (that is) he did not only make Satisfaction for the
Trespass and Offense (which is the Payment of the Forfeiture) but also he
established a Righteousness answerable to the Law (which is the Payment of the
Principal) and of that original Debt which God first required of the Creature;
for there is a Debt of Duty and Service, which Christ performs and
establishes, as a Righteousness for us.

5. From hence in his Name there is proclaimed Redemption to the Captives,
Freedom to poor Prisoners that were in Debt, and weak, and could not acquit
themselves. And therefore the Publication of the Gospel is compared to the Year
of Iubilee; Luke 4. 19. Christ came to preach the acceptable Year of the Lord.
It relates to the Year of Iubilee, wherein all Debts were cancelled; it was a
Year of general Releasement, proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, that every Man
should return to his Inheritance, and all Debts dissolved and done away; Lev.
25. 9, 10. So Jesus Christ says, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, to preach
the acceptable Year of the Lord: (that is) to proclaim to poor Captives a
Release of all Debts, and all Bonds which are upon them.

6. All those that come to God by Christ, are interested in the Comfort of this
Offer and Proclamation of Grace, and may plead with God about their Discharge
from this great and heavy Debt. I put it mainly in that Notion, (those that
come to God by Christ) because you will find that is the Description of those
whom Christ means to save; Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by him. Who are those that come unto God by him?
Those that in Christ's Name, do seriously, and with Brokenness of Heart, deal
with him about a Release and a Discharge. To come to God by him, it is to come
in his Name, to plead his Propitiation, or his Satifaction, as the only
meritorious Cause; and the Promise of God in Christ to blot out our Offenses,
as the only ground of Hope; and as to our selves, acknowledging the Debt; that
is, in confessing our Sins, and our desert of Punishment, with a purpose to
forsake them.

1. There is required an Acknowledgment of the Debt. God stands upon it, that
his Justice may be owned with a due sense, according to the Tenor of the first
Covenant: For though the Satisfaction be made by another, and that by a Surety
of God's providing; yet God will have the Creature know they are under so heavy
a Debt, that he will have them feel it in Brokenness of Heart; not know it only
in a general Conviction, but confess our Sins; 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our
Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins. When we come with true
Remorse, and confess we have offended so just, so holy, so merciful a Father,
it must be grievous to us in the remembrance of it. You must not only confess
Sin as a Wrong, but as a Debt: Sin has wronged God, and it is also a Debt
binding you over to a Punishment we could never endure, nor make God any
Satifaction for. Therefore David when he would have God's Bond crossed and
cancelled, see how he pleads; Psalm. 51. 2, 3. O Lord, blot out mine Offenses,
for I acknowledge my Transgressions; and my Sin is ever before me. Blot it out,
for I acknowledge it; (that is) I submit to thy instituted Course; I submit to
the Justice of the first Covenant.

2. The Satisfaction of Christ must be pleaded also by a Sinner in the Court of
Heaven, in a believing manner, that there may be an owning of the Surety. All
Parties that are interested in this Business must consent. Now God and Christ
they are agreed about the business of Salvation: God has agreed to take
Satisfaction from Christ, and Christ has agreed to make this Satisfaction to
God: All the business now is about the Sinner's Consent, or about his ready
Acceptance of Jesus Christ; and we never heartily indeed consent to this, that
Christ shall be our Surety, and he the Person that must release and discharge
this Debt, until we look upon him by an Eye of Faith, as one that tore the Bond
and Handwriting that was against us. The Law is called the Handwriting that
was against us; there is the Bond which was to be put in suit: now, Col. 2. 14.
He has (torn, or) blotted out the Handwriting of Ordinances, that was against
us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, na^l^ng it to his
Cross. He has disannulled the Law, which binds to suffer the Wrath of God. The
Law was the Bond by which our Death was ratified.

3. There is required an unfeigned purpose to forsake Sin. He that has been
released of his Debt, must not still run into new Arrears.

Christ never blotted out our Debts, that we might renew them, and go on upon a
new Score of offending God again; this is to dally with God, to run into the
Snare, when he has broken it for us, and given us an escape, to plunge our
selves into new Debts again.

In this Prayer, Forgive us our Debts, then presently, Lead us not into
Temptation. Therefore we must purpose to forsake Sin, otherwise we do not draw
nigh to God with a true Heart; Heb. 10. 22. We do but deal falsely with God in
all the Confessions we make, and in all the Pleas of Faith, unless there be an
unfeigned purpose to renounce all Sin, and cast it off, as a thing that will
undo our Souls. Thus, Christians, must you sue out your Release and Discharge
in your Surety's Name.

Use 1. The Use is, first, to show us the Misery of an impenitent unpardoned
Sinner, he has a vast Debt upon him that will surely undo him, unless he does
in time get a Discharge. He is bound over to suffer the Wrath of God for
evermore, and no Hand can loose him but God's. Many times they think of no such
matter, and cry, Peace, Peace, to themselves; but it is not the Debtor which
must cancel the Book, but the Creditor. Have you a discharge from God? where is
your legal Qualification? poor Creatures, what will you do? Many take care that
they may owe nothing to any Man; Oh! but what do you owe to God? To live in
doubt, and in fear of an Arrest, O what Misery is that! But when Sin lies at
the Door, ready to attach you every moment, and hale you to the Prison of Hell,
that is most dreadful. Therefore think of it seriously; how do Accounts stand
between God and you? Sinners are loath to think of it. When the Lord came to
reckon with his Servants, Mat. 18. 24. it is said, One was brought to him which
owed him ten thousand Talents: He was loath to come to an account, he would fain
keep out of the way, but he was brought to him. So we are unwilling to be
called to account, we shift and delay, and will not think of our Misery: but
the putting off Sin, will not put it away; our not thinking of our Misery, will
not help us out, and will not be a Release and Discharge.

2. If Sins be Debts, and an increasing Debt, so that Man is ever treasuring up
Wrath against the day of Wrath; it presses us to be more careful to get out of
this Condition. Says Solomon, Prove. 6. 3, 4, 5. If thou be in debt, flee as
a swift Roe from the hand of the Hunter, and as a Bird from the hand of the
Fowler. O it is a sad thing to lie in our Sins! If you be under this Debt, Give
not Sleep to thine Eyes, nor Slumber to thine Eyelids; get away like the swift
Roe from the hand of the Hunter, etc. And what I say concerning a State of Sin,
I say concerning daily Failings; make your Peace with God betimes; if you have
contracted a new Debt, make all even between God and your Souls, that you may
not sleep in your Sins.

3. This should make us more cautious that we do not commit Sin: Why? it is a
Debt that will render you obnoxious to the Wrath of God; in it self it merits
eternal Death: O therefore sin no more, do not run again into the Snare! When
you give way to Sin, you hazard the Comfort of your Acquittance by Christ;
Psalm. 85. 8. The Lord will speak Peace unto his People, and to his Saints; but
let them not turn again to Folly. If the Lord has given you your Peace, and
some hope of your being discharged of this heavy Debt, take heed of meddling
with forbidden Fruit, and running into debt again.

2. From the Subject, or Persons which make this Prayer, Forgive us, Observe,

Doct. Even those that call God Father, ought to beg, daily and humbly, Pardon
of their Sins.

Forgive Us; who is that Us that can say in Faith, Our Father, daily. For this
is a Pattern for daily Prayer, as the word (...) in the former Petition notes.
We need beg, for Christ has taught us here to sue out our Discharge. In which
begging there is an Exercise of Faith eying Christ; Romans 3. 25. God has set
forth him to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood. And there is an
Exercise also of Repentance, as to mourning for Sin; 1 John 1. 9. and Prove. 28.
13. He that confesses and forsakes his Sin, shall have Mercy: and as to
loathing of Sin; Acts 3. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your
Sins may be blotted out. And certainly it must be humbly begged; for if we seek
Pardon, we must seek it in God's way. We do not beg God to rescind and make
void his Laws, and those wise Constitutions he has appointed, whereby the
Creature shall receive this Grace; and the manner wherein he will deal and
transact this business with the offending Creature: But we seek it, as
exercising our renewed Repentance; (that is) mourning for Sin, and loathing of
Sin. But of this more hereafter.

Now, that the best of God's Children should be dealing with God about a Pardon
of their Sins; I shall argue it, 1. From the Necessity. 2. The Utility and
Profit of such a Course.


First; The Necessity of this will appear two ways.

1. From the Condition of God's Children here in the World.

2. From the way wherein God will give out a Pardon.

1. From the Condition of God's Children here in this World. The best are not
so fully sanctified in this Life, but there is some Sin found in them: Not only
they who walk with no Care, but even they that set the most narrow watch over
their Ways, they are not so sanctified, but they need daily to go to God.

(1.) They have Original Sin which remains with them to the last, they have
the sinning Sin which the Apostle speaks of. Paul complains of the body of
Death; Romans 7. 23, 24. Who shall deliver me from it? The Hebrews were wont to
propound their Wishes by way of Question; as, O that Salvation were come out of
Sion! It is in the Hebrew, Who shall bring Salvation out of Zion? So, Who will
lead me into Edom? That is, O that I were led into Edom, that I might display
the Banner there, because of God's Truth. So, who shall deliver me from the
body of this Death? that is, O that I were delivered! Where the Reign of Sin is
broken, yet there it remains; though it be cast down in regard of Regency, yet
it is not cast out in regard of Inheritance. As the Ivy that is gotten into the
Wall, cut away the Boughs, Branches, Stubs, yet still there will be some
sproutings out again, until the Wall be pulled down: So, until these earthly
Tabernacles of ours be tumbled in the Dust, though we are mortifying and
subduing of Sin, yet there will be a budding and sprouting out again.

(2.) There are many Actual Sins. James 3. 2. In many things we offend all.
And, Eccles. 7. 20. There is not a just Man upon Earth, that does good, and
sins not: That is, that sins not either in omitting of Good, or committing
of Evil. Our Offenses are either total or partial. Partial Offenses; though a
Child of God, loves God, fears God, trusts in God, yet not in that Purity and
Perfection that he has required of him: though he serves God, and obeys him,
yet not with that Liberty, Delight, Reverence, which he has required. There is
an Omission in part in every Act: There is not that Perfection which God
deserves, who is to be served with all our Might, with all our Strength. Our
Principles are divided; there is Flesh and Spirit: there is a mixture in all
our Actions. Sometimes there is a total Omission, the spiritual Life is at a
stand, many times all Acts of respect are intermitted. Then for Commissions;
Sometimes out of Ignorance, they do not see what is to be done. Though they
have a general Resolution to do the whole Will of God, yet many times they
mistake. Our Light is but in part: And who can understand his Errors? Psalm. 19.
12. Cleanse me from secret Sins: We sin out of Ignorance, as a Man in the dark
may justle against his Friend. Sometimes by Imprudence and Inconsideration, as
a Man that is not heedful though he knows it, he may mistake his way. Many are
overtaken in a Fault; Gal. 6. 1. (that is) unawares, and besides their
Intention. Sometimes out of Incogitancy and sudden Incursion, they may not only
be overtaken, but overborn, drawn away by their own Lusts; James 1. 14.
overcome by the Prevalency of Passion and corrupt Affection; so Sin gets the
upper hand. Thus it is with the Children of God. Look as it was said of the
Romans, that in Battle they were overcome, but never in War. Though a Child of
God has the best of it at last, yet in many particular Conflicts he is
overborn by the Violence of Temptation, and his own corrupt Lusts. Thus
there is a necessity of begging daily Pardon if we consider the Condition of the
Saints while they are here in the World, who carry a sinning Nature about them,
a corrupt Issue that will never be dried up while they are in the World; and
also they are guilty of many actual Sins, both of Omission and Commission.

Secondly; The necessity of it will appear from the way wherein God gives a
Pardon, which is upon the Creatures humble Submission, and seeking of Terms of
Grace; so that whatsoever Right we have to Remission in Christ, though we have
a general Right to remission and pardon of Sin; yet we must seek to apply that
Right, and beg the use of it for our daily Pardon, and Acceptance with God.
This will appear by considering, 1. The nature of this Request. 2. The Right
that a justified Person has to the Pardon of his daily Sins.

1. What we beg for, when we say, Forgive us our Sins: Five things we ask of
God.

1. The Grant of a Pardon. 2. The Continuance of this Privilege. 3. The Sense
and Comfort of it. 4. The Increase of that Sense. 5. The Effects of Pardon, or
a Freedom from those penal Evils, that are fruits of Sin.
1. The Grant of a Pardon, That God would accept the Satisfaction of Christ for
our Sins, and look upon us as righteous in him. Jesus Christ himself was to sue
out the Fruits of his Purchase; Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the
Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy
Possession. Though he had a Right to be received into Heaven, to sit down at
the Right Hand of God, and administer the Kingdom for the Comfort of his Elect
Ones; yet, ask of me. And so we are to sue out our Right; Psalm. 32. 5. I said,
I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the Iniquity
of my Sin: What then? For this cause shall every one that is godly pray unto
thee. Though God be so ready to forgive; as soon as we conceive a purpose, he
gives out a Pardon, yet we are to call upon God. God will have us to sue out
the Grant of a Pardon; why? because he would deal with us as a Sovereign,
therefore does he require the Submission of our Faith. It was of Grace that he
would appoint a Satisfaction for us, which he did not for the fallen Angels;
and it was much more Grace that he would give that Satisfaction, give that
Price out of his own Treasury. Christ was not a Mediator of our choosing, but
God's; and therefore though Justice be fully satisfied, yet the Debt is humbly
to be acknowledged by the Creature, and we are to sue out Terms of Grace. And
again, the Application to us is merely Grace, when so many thousands perish in
their Sins; therefore we are to beg, to sue out this Grace, that we may have
the benefit of Christ's Death. God does it, that in begging we may acknowledge
our own Misery, and how unable we are to make Satisfaction; Psalm. 143. 2. In
thy sight no Flesh can be justified: And, Psalm. 130. 3, 4. If thou should
mark Iniquities; O Lord, who shall stand? But there is Forgiveness with thee,
that thou may be feared. Before God will give us an Interest in this
Forgiveness, we are to come and confess our selves utterly to be insolvent, and
also to own Jesus Christ as the means, that we may solemnly and explicitly own
our Redeemer, who was appointed by God, and procured this benefit for us; 1
Ioh. 2. 1. And if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous. God has required we should sue it out, and own our
Advocate, as well as confess our selves unable to satisfy, that we might know
who is our Advocate. In the Type of the Brazen Serpent, Numb. 21. 8. And the
Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery Serpent, and set it upon a Pole; and it
shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looks upon it,
shall live. Mark, tho God set up a sign of Salvation, (as it is called
elsewhere) yet when you shall look upon him, you shall live. So God would have
us sue out the Grant by looking to Christ, that so our Interest may be
established; John 3. 14. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness;
even so must the Son of Man be lifted up; that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have eternal Life. That whosoever believes in him, that
was the intent of looking upon it; that we might fix our Faith on Christ, and
come under the shelter of his Wing. We beg, upon a sense of our own
unworthiness, the Acceptance of Christ's Satisfaction for us.

2. We pray for the Continuance of Pardon; though we are already justified, yet
Forgive us our Sins. As in daily Bread, though we have it by us, and God has
stored us with Blessings in our Houses, yet we beg the continuance and use of
it: so what ever Right we have to pardoning Mercy, yet we beg the continuance
of it, for two reasons; Partly, because Justification is not complete until the
day of Judgment; but Mercy is still in fieri (that is) God is still a doing;
Acts 3. 19. That your Sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing
shall come from the Presence of the Lord. Then are our Sins blotted out, then
is this Privilege complete. We read of Forgiveness in this World, and
Forgiveness in the World to come Matthew. 12. 32. Forgiven in this World, when
accepted to Grace and Favor with God; and forgiven in the World to come, when
this Privilege is complete, and fully made up to the Elect. Some Effects of Sin
remain till then; as Death, which came into the World by Sin, remains upon the
Body till then; then our Sin is blotted out, when all the Fruits of it are
vanished and done away: so that whilst any penal Evils that are introduced by
Sin, remain, we ought to pray for Pardon; that God would not repent of his
Mercy. Look as when we are in a state of Sanctification, we pray for the
continuance of Sanctification, as well as the increase of it, because of the
Relics of Sin; though our perseverance in Grace and Sanctification be as much
secured by God's Promise, as our perseverance in God's Favor, and the Gift of
Justification: So we pray for the continuance of Pardon, because the Evils of
Sin yet remain in part. And partly, because God for our Exercise will make us
feel the smart of old Sins, which are already pardoned; As an old Bruise,
though it be healed, yet ever and anon we may feel it upon change of Weather.
Accusations of Conscience may return, for Sins already pardoned; as Job 13. 26.
Thou make me possess the Iniquities of my Youth. Though a Man be reconciled
to God, and in favor with him, yet the Sins of his Youth will trouble him,
after he has obtained the Pardon of them. God may make these return with a
horrible and frightful appearance upon the Conscience, their Visage may be
terrible to look upon. Tho these Sins are blotted out, Satan may make the
Remembrance of them very frightful; and God in his holy, wise Dispensation may
permit it for our Humiliation. Though this be no intrenching of the Pardon
already past, yet it may exceedingly terrify the Soul, and over-cloud our
Comfort, and therefore we must beg the continuance of this Benefit. Go to God,
as David did, Psalm. 25. 6, 7. Remember, O Lord, thy tender Mercies, and thy
loving Kindness, for they have been ever of old: Remember not the Sins of my
Youth, nor my Transgressions. He begs God's ancient Mercies would continue with
him: He acknowledged he had received Mercy of old, he could run up to Eternity,
that had been for ever of old; yet Lord, remember not against me the Sins of my
Youth. When the sense of old Sins are renewed, we must renew Petitions for the
pardon of them. It is usual with God, when we are negligent, to permit the
Devil to make use of Affliction, to revive old Sins, that they may stare afresh
in the view of the Eye of Conscience; therefore we had need to beg the
continuance of this Privilege, for it is not complete. Though the Pardon it
self be not abrogated, yet the Comfort of it may be much entrenched upon, and
old Sins may come, and terrify the Soul with a very hideous Aspect.

3. We beg here the Sense and Manifestation of Pardon, though it be not the
only thing we pray for. Forgive us our Sins, (that is) let us know it: God may
blot Sins out of his Book, when he does not blot them out of our Consciences.
There Is the Book of Conscience, and the Book of God's Remembrance. The Book of
God's Remembrance may be cancelled (to speak after the manner of Men); as soon
as we believe and repent, then the Handwriting which was against us is torn;
but he blots it out of our Consciences, when the Worm of Conscience is killed,
by the Application of the Blood of Christ through the Spirit; when we are
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, as the Expression is, Heb. 10. 22. And David
is earnest with God for this Benefit, the sense of his Pardon; Psalm. 51. 8, 12.
Make me to hear Joy and Gladness; that the Bones which thou have broken may
rejoice; and restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation. Nathan had told him his
Sins were pardoned, yet he wanted the Joy of God's Salvation, that ancient free
Spirit, that comforting enlarging Spirit he was wont to have. God may forgive
in Heaven, when he does not forgive in our sense and feeling; therefore we beg
the Manifestation of it by the Comforts of the Gospel

4. We beg the Increase of that Sense, for this Sense is given out in a
different Latitude. Spiritual Sense is not in all alike quick and lively: many
have only a probable Certainty, but have many Doubts: Some have Comfort, but
never arrive to Peace. Comfort, you know, is that thing which holds up it self
against Encounters, when we are confronted; so there may be many doubts, when
the preponderating part of the Soul inclines to Comfort. Some have Peace for
the present, rest from Trouble of Conscience; others have Joy, which is a
degree above Peace and Comfort.

5. We beg the Effects of Pardon, or Freedom from those penal Evils, which are
continued upon God's Children, and are the Fruits of Sin. Clearly this is
intended, for we beg of God to pardon us as we pardon others; (that is) fully,
entirely to forgive, forget. We beg of God to forgive us our Sins; (that is) to
mitigate those Troubles, Evils, and Afflictions, which are the Fruits of Sin.
It is true, when a Man is justified, the State of his Person is altered; yet
Sin is the same in it self, it deserves all manner of Evils; therefore we beg
not only a Release from Wrath to come, but from those other temporal Evils that
dog us at the Heels: Sin is the same still, though the Person is not the same.
It is still the Violation of a holy Law, an Affront done to an holy God, an
Inconvenience upon the precious Soul; it brings a Blot upon us, an Inclination
to sin again; nay, it brings eternal Death. Though it do not bring eternal
Death upon pardoned Persons, yet it may occasion temporal Trouble. God has
still reserved this Liberty in the Covenant. That he will visit their
Trangression with the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes; nevertheless, my
loving Kindness will I not utterly take from him; nor suffer my Faithfulness to
fail; Psalm. 89. 32, 33. And Prove. 11. 31. The Righteous shall be recompensed in
the Earth: That is, he shall smart for his Evil-doings. A Child of God, when he
sins against him, tho he be not executed, yet he may be branded, he may have
a Mark of Shame put upon him, his Pilgrimage may be made uncomfortable; and
these may be fully consistent with God's Grace and Love. Therefore we beg a
Release from these penal Evils; that as the Guilt, so the Punishment also my be
abolished.

2. The Right that a justified Person has to the Pardon of his daily Sins.

Pardon of Sin is to be considered, 1. In the Impetration of it. 2. The Offer.
3. The Judicial Application, or legal Absolution of the Sinner.

1. In the Impetration and Purchase of it: So when, Heb. 10. 14. By one
Offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, there needed no
more to expiate them, to satify Justice.

2. In the offer of it. So God has proclaimed Pardon, upon the Condition of
Repentance: Ezekiel. 33. 11. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have
no Pleasure in the Death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way
and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil Ways, for why will ye die, O House of
Israel?

3. In the Judicial Application, or legal Absolution of a Sinner. God in Word
has pronounced the legal Absolution of every one that believes in Christ.
As Soon as we repent and believe, a threefold Benefit we have.

1. The state of the Person is altered: He is a Child of God; John 1. 12. To as
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to
them that believe on his Name. He has full leave to call God Father, a kind of
fatherly dealing from him: Translated from a state of Wrath, to the state of
Grace; from a Child of the Devil, he is made a Child of God, never to be cast
out of his Family.

2. The actual Remission of all past Sins; Romans 3. 25. To declare his
Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are past, through the Forbearance
of God. 'T would be a License to sin, if his Sins were remitted before
committed.

3. A Right to the Remission of daily Sins, or free leave to make use of the
Fountain of Mercy, that is always running, and is opened in the House of God
for the Comfort of Believers; Zech. 13. 1. In that day there shall be a
Fountain opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for
Sin, and for Uncleanness.

2. The Utility and Profit of such a Course. See Sermon. on Psalm. 32. 1. Sermon. 20.

Use. The Use is to press us to be often dealing with God about the pardon of
our Sins, by a general and daily Humiliation: none are exempted from bewailing
the Evil of Sin. The Death of Christ does not put less Evil into Sin; it is
still damning in its own Nature; it is still the Violation of an holy Law, an
Affront to an holy God, an Inconvenience to thy precious Soul. When Christ paid
the Price for our Sins, it was upon this Condition, That we should renew our
Faith and Repentance; that we should sue out our Discharge in his Name, that
when we sin, we may come and humble our selves before the Lord. Under the Law,
if a Man were unclean, he was to wash his Clothes before Evening: He was not to
sleep in his Uncleanness. So if you have desiled your selves, you should go
wash in the Laver that God has appointed. The Lord taught his People under the
Law, of repeating a daily Sacrifice, Morning and Evening. If one be fallen out
with another, God has advised us, before the Sun be set, to go and be
reconciled to our Brother: and will thou lie under the Wrath of God for one
Night? If we would oftener use this Course, the Work of Repentance would not be
so hard. Wounds are best cured at first, before they are suffered to fester and
rankle into a Sore: So are Sins before they grow longer upon us. And if we did
oftener thus reckon with our selves, we should have less to do when we come to
die. Therefore do as wise Merchants, at the Foot of every Page, draw up the
Account, so help it forward: So it will not be hard to sum up a long Account,
and reckon up our whole Lives, and beg a Release of all our Debts; therefore
daily come and humble your selves before the Lord. The oftener you do this, the
sooner you will have the Comfort of Pardon; but when you keep off from God, and
delay, you suffer the loss of Peace, and the loss of God's Favor; and Hardness
of Heart, and Atheism, and carnal Security increase upon you.

As we forgive our Debtors.
I come to the last Branch. Hence observe;

Doct. 3. Those that would rightly pray to be forgiven of God, they must
forgive others.

First, I shall give you the Explication. 2. The Reasons.

For Explication, I shall speak to three things.

1. Who are Debtors. 2. What respect our forgiving of others, has to God's
forgiving of us. 3. In what manner we must forgive others.
First; Who are our Debtors. It is not meant in a vulgar Sense, of those only
which stand engaged for a Sum of Money due to us; but of all such as have
offended us in Word or Deed. There is a Duty we owe to one another, which when
we omit, or act contrary unto it, we are not only Debtors to God, but to one
another: and the Doers of the Injury are bound to repair the Wrong, and to make
Restitution. In this large sense is the word Debtors here taken, with respect
to the Person that has done the Injury: He becomes a Debtor, is to make
Satisfaction, and suffer the Punishment which the Wrong deserves.

Secondly; What Respect has our forgiving of others to God's forgiving us.

I shall speak to it Negatively, and Positvely.

(1.) Negatively.

1. It is not a meritorious Cause, or a Merit and Price given to God why he
should pardon us, for that is only the Blood of Christ. Every Act of ours is
due, it is imperfect, and no way proportionate to the Mercies we expect; and
therefore it cannot be meritorious before God. It is due, it is a Duty we are
bound to do, and paying of new Debts does not quit old Scores. God has laid
such a Law upon us, that we are to forgive others; that cannot expiate former
Offenses. And it is imperfect too: The Remembrance of Injuries sticks too close
to us. When we do most heartily and entirely forgive others, even then we have
too great a sense of the Injury and Wrong that is offered to us. Now that which
needs Pardon, cannot deserve Pardon. And it is disproportionate to the Mercy
which we expect. What a vast Disparity and Difference is there between God's
pardoning of us, and our pardoning of others? whether we respect the Persons
that are interrested in this Action; or the S^bject Matter, or Manner and way
of doing; or the Fruit and Issue of the Action.

First, In the Persons pardoning: what Proportion can there be between God and
Men? the Creator and the Creature? God he is most free, and bound to none, of
infinite Dignity and Perfection, which can neither be increased or lessened by
any Act of ours, for him or against him: but we live in perfect Dependence upon
God's Pleasure, are subject to his Command, and bound to do his Will: and
therefore, what is our forgiving our fellow Creatures, made out of the same
Dust, animated by the same Soul, and every way equal with us by Nature, when
they wrong us in our petty Interests? what Proportion is there between this
forgiving and God's forgiving? he that is of so infinite a Majesty, his
forgiving the Violations of his holy Law?

And 2ly, To the subject Matter, that which is forgiven, there is no
Proportion. When we compare the Multitude or Magnitude, the Greatness and the
Number of Offenses forgiven of the one side and the other, we see there is a
mighty Disproportion; we forgive Pence, and God Talents; we an hundred Pence,
he ten thousand Talents; Mat. 18.

So 3dly, the manner of forgiving: on God's part, by discharging us freely, and
exacting a full Satisfaction from Christ; therefore our forgiving can hold no
Comparison with it, which is an Act of Duty, and Conformity to God's Law.

And 4thly, As to the Fruit and Issue of the Action; our Good and Evil does not
reach to God. Though our forgiving of others be an Action of Profit to our
selves, yet no Fruit redounds to God. And therefore there being no Proportion
between finite and infinite, there can be no such proportion between our
forgiving and God's forgiving, as that this Act may be meritorious before God.
Thus it is not brought here as Merit, as that which does oblige and bind God
meritoriously to forgive us.

2. It is not a Pattern or Rule. We do not mean, our forgiving should be a
Pattern of forgiving to God. So [ as] is taken indeed, ver. 10 Thy Will be done
on Earth, as it is in Heaven; there it implies a Conformity to the Pattern. But
when we say, Forgive us, as we forgive; it does not mean here a Pattern or Rule.
We imitate God, but God does not imitate us, in forgiving Offenses. And it
would be ill with us, if God should forgive us no better than we forgive one
another. God is matchless in all his Perfections; there is no Work like his.
Psalm. 86. 8. As God is matchless in other Things, so in pardoning Mercy. As the
Heavens are above the Earth, so are his Ways above our Ways, and his Thoughts
above our Thoughts. Isa. 55. 9. And upon this very occasion the Lord will
multiply to pardon. As far as the Heavens, etc. This is the greatest Distance
we can conceive. The Heavens, they are at such a vast distance from the Earth,
that the Stars, tho they be great and glorious Luminaries, yet they seem to be
but like so many Spangles and Sparks: This is the distance and disproportion
which is made between God's Mercy and ours. Hos. 11. 9. I will not return to
destroy Ephraim; for I am God, and not Man. If God should forgive but only as
Man does, it would be ill for Ephraim, if he had to do with revengeful Man. God
acts according to the Infiniteness of his own Nature, far above the Law, and
manner of all created Beings. Therefore it is not put here as a Pattern and Rule.

3. It does not import Priority of Order, as if our Act had the precedence of
God's; or as if we did or could heartily forgive others, before God has showed
any Mercy to us. No, in all Acts of Love God is first; his Mercy to us, is the
Cause of our Mercy to others. As the Wall reflects and casts back the Heat upon
the Stander-by, when first warmed with the Beams of the Sun: So, when our
Hearts are melted with a sense of God's Mercy, his Love to us is the Cause of
our Love and Kindness to others. 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he first
loved us; that is, we love him, and others for his sake: For Love to God
implies that; why? because he has been first with us. And then it is the
Motive and Pattern of it. In that Parable, Mat. 18. 32, 33. God's forgiving is
the Motive to our forgiving: I forgave thee all thy Debt; and should not
thou have compassion on thy Fellow Servants? In those that have true Pardon, it
causes them to forgive others, out of a sense of God's Mercy (that is) they
are disposed and inclined to show Mercy to others. But in others, that think
themselves pardoned, and have only a temporary Pardon and Reprieve, (such as is
there spoken of) it is a Motive which should prevail with them, tho it does
not. Nay, it is the Pattern of our Love to others: Ephesians. 4. 32. Forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you; in that manner, and
according to that Example.

4. It does not import an exact Equality, but some kind of Resemblance. As, it
is a Note of Similitude, not Equality, either of Measure or Manner; it only
implies, that there is some correspondent Action, something like done on our
part. So, Luke 6. 36. Be merciful, [as] your heavenly Father is merciful. As,
notes the certainty of the Truth, tho not the exact proportion; there will be
something answerable to God.

(2.) But positively, to show what respect it has.

1. It is a Condition or moral Qualification which is found in Persons
pardoned. Mat. 6. 14. For if ye forgive Men their Trespasses, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you: But, ver. 15. If ye forgive not Men their
Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your Trespasses. These two are
inseparably conjoined, God's pardoning of us, and our pardoning of others. The
Grant of a Pardon, that is given out at the same time when this Disposition is
wrought in us; but the Sense of a Pardon, that is a thing subsequent to this
Disposition: And when we find this Disposition in us, we come to understand how
we are pardoned of God.

2. It is an Evidence, a Sign or Note of a pardoned Sinner; when a Man's Heart
is entender'd by the Lord's Grace, and inclined to show Mercy; here is his
Evidence: Mat. 5. 7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy. The
Stamp or Impression shows that the Seal has been there; so this is an Evidence
to us, whereby we may make out our Title to the Lord's Mercy, that we have
received Mercy from the Lord.

3. It is a necessary Effect of God's pardoning Mercy shed abroad in our
Hearts; for Mercy begets Mercy, as Heat does Heat. Titus 3. 2, 3. Show meekness
to all Men; for we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, etc.
There Is none so tender to others, as they which have received Mercy themselves;
that know how gently God has dealt with them, and did not take the advantage
of their Iniquity.

4. It is put here, to show that it is a Duty incumbent upon them that are
pardoned. God has laid this Necessity upon Men. And that may be one reason why
this Clause is inserted, that every time we come to pray, and beg Pardon, we
may bind our selves to this Practice, and warn our selves more solemnly of our
Duty, and undertake it in the sight of God. So that when we say, Forgive us our
Debts, as we forgive our Debtors, it is a certain Undertaking, or solemn
Promise we make to God, if he will show mercy to us, this will incline us to
show mercy to others. In earnest Requests, we are wont to bind our selves to
necessary Duties.

5. It is an Argument breeding Confidence in God's pardoning Mercy. When we
that have so much of the old Leaven, that sour revengeful Nature in us, yet
when we have received but a Spark of Grace, it makes us ready to forgive
others; then what may we imagine in God! What is our Drop, to that infinite Sea
of Fullness that is in him! Clearly thus it is urged in that Clause, Luke 11. 4.
And forgive us our Sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us.
There is a special Emphasis upon that [ For we also]; that is, we that have so
little Grace, we that are so revengeful and passionate by Nature, we also
forgive those that are indebted to us. Therefore the gracious God, in all
Goodness, and in all moral Perfections, does far exceed the Creature; and if
this be in us, what is there in God? This kind of Reasoning is often used in
Scripture; as, Mat. 7. 11. If ye then being evil, know how to give good Gifts
unto your Children; how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven, give
good Things to them that ask him? If evil Men have such Bowels and Affections
toward their Children, certainly there is more of this Goodness and Kindness in
God.

Thirdly; Wherein this forgiving of others does consist?

1. In forbearing others. 2. In acquitting others. 3. In doing good to them.
1. In forbearing one another, and withholding our selves from Revenge. This
is a thing that is distant from forgiving, and accordingly we shall find it so
propounded by the Apostle, Col. 3. 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving
one another, if any Man have a Quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you,
so also do ye. Mark, there is first forbearing, and then forgiving. What is
forbearing? a ceasing from Acts of Revenge, which tho they be sweet to Nature,
yet they are contrary to Grace. Some Men will say, we will do to him, as he
has done to us. Prove. 24. 29. Say not, I will do so to him, as he has done to
me; I will render to the Man according to his Work. Corrupt Nature thirsts
for Revenge, and has a strong Inclination this way; but Grace should give
check to it: Say not, etc. Men think it is a base thing, and argues a low
pusillanimous Spirit, to put up Wrongs and Injuries; O it argues a stupid
Baseness. But this is that which gives a Man a Victory over himself; nay, it
gives a Man the truest Victory over his Enemy, when he forbears to revenge. It
gives a Man a Victory over himself, which is better than the most noble Actions
amongst the Sons of Men. Prove. 16. 32. He that overcomes his own Spirit, is
more than he that takes a City. There is a Spirit in us, that is boisterous,
turbulent, and revengeful, apt to retaliate, and return Injury for Injury; now
when we can bridle this, this is an overcoming of our own Spirits. But that is
the true weakness of Spirit, when a Man is easily overcome by his own Passion:
And then has our Enemy a true Victory over us, when his Injuries overcome us
so far, as we can break God's Laws to be quit with him. Therefore the Apostle
says, Romans 12. 21. Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with Good. Then
is Grace victorious, and then has a Man a noble and brave Spirit, not when he
is overcome by Evil, (for that argues Weakness) but when he can overcome Evil.
And it is God's way to shame the Party that did the wrong, and to overcome him
too; it is the best way to get the Victory over him. When David had Saul at an
advantage in the Cave, and cut off the Lap of his Garment, and did forbear any
Act of Revenge against him, Saul was melted, and said to David, Thou art more
righteous than I. 1 Samuel 24. 17. Tho he had such a hostile Mind against him,
and chased and pursued him up and down; yet when David forbore Revenge, when it
was in his Power, it overcame him, and he falls a weeping. So the Captains of
the Syrians, when the Prophet had blinded them, and led them from Dothan to
Samaria, what says the King of Israel? he is ready to kill them presently: No,
2 Kings 6. 22. Set Bread and Water before them, that they may eat and drink,
and go to their Master. He was kind to them; and what follows? They did no
more annoy Israel. This wrought upon the Hearts of the Syrians, so that they
would not come and trouble them any more.

2. In Forgiving, it is not only required of Christians to forbear the avenging
of themselves, but also actually to forgive and pardon those that have done
them Wrongs. They must not only forbear Acts of Revenge, but all Desires of
Revenge must be rooted out of their Hearts. Men may tolerate or forbear others,
for want of a handsome Opportunity of executing their Purposes: But the
Scripture says, Forbearing one another, forgiving one another. This Forgiving
implies the laying down of all Anger, and Hatred, and all Desire of Revenge.
Now this should be done, not only in word, but sincerely and universally.

(1.) Sincerely, and with the Heart. In the Conclusion of that Parable, Christ
does not say, If you do not forgive, thus it shall be done to you; but, If ye
from your Hearts forgive not every one his Brother their Trespasses; so also
shall my Heavenly Father do to you. We must not only do this, but do it from
the Heart. Joseph, when his Brethren came to him, and submitted themselves, did
not only remit the Offense, but his Bowels yearned toward them, and his Heart
was toward them. Genesis 50. 17. Then,

(2.) It must be done universally, whatever the Wrong be, be it to our Persons,
Names, or Estates. To our Persons: Acts 7. 60. Stephen, when they stoned him,
he said, Lord, lay not this Sin to their Charge: Tho they had done him so great
an Injury, as to deprive him of his Life and Service; yet, Lord, lay not this
Sin to their charge. So to our Names: When Shimei came barking against David;
the poor Man was driven out of Jerusalem by a rebellious Son, and this wicked
Wretch takes advantage against David, and rails at him; yet David forgives him,
when restored to his Crown: He shall not die, 2 Samuel 19. 23. Nay, he swear to
him. So his Estate: When a Debtor is not able to pay, and yet submits. So Paul
bids Philemon to forgive the Wrongs of Onesimus; Put it on my Score, Philem.
Verse. 18. that is, for my sake forgive this Wrong.

3. We must be ready to perform all Offices of Love to them. Luke 6. 27. Love
your Enemies, do good to them which hate you. Mark, do not only forbear to
execute your Wrath and Revenge upon them, but do good to them, yea, tho they be
Enemies upon a religious ground; tho Religion be made a Party in the Quarrel,
and so engage us to the greater Fury; when that which should bridle our
Passions, is the Fuel of them: Pray for them which despitefully use you, and
persecute you. Mat. 5. 44. Miriam, when she had wronged Moses, yet he falls a
praying for her, Numb. 12. 13. that the Lord would forgive the Sin, and heal
her.

For the Reasons, why those that would rightly pray to be forgiven of God, must
forgive others. It should be so, it will be so; there is a Congruency, and a
Necessity.

1. The Congruency, it should be so. It is fit that he that beggeth Mercy,
should show Mercy; it is exceedingly congruous: For this is a general Rule,
That we should do as we would be done unto; and therefore if we need Mercy from
God, we should show Mercy to others; and without it we can never pray in Faith.
He that does not exercise Love, can never pray in Faith; why? His own
revengeful Disposition will still prejudice his Mind, and make him conclude
against the Audience of his Prayers; for certainly we muse on others, as we use
our selves. And that is one reason of our Unbelief, why we are so hardly brought
to believe all that tender Mercy which is in God, because it is so irksom to us
to forgive seven times a day; we are apt to frame our Conclusions according to
the Dispositions of our own Heart. Can we think God will forgive, when we our
selves will not forgive? A Man's own Prayers will be confuted. What is more
equal, than to do as we would be done unto? And therefore it is but equal, if
he entreat Mercy for himself, he should show it unto others. Look as the
Centurion reasoned of God's Power, from the Command that he had over his
Soldiers: Mat. 8. 9. I am a Man under Authority, and I say to one, Go, and he
goes; and to another, Come, and he comes. Those things we are accustomed to,
they are apt to run in our Minds, when we come to think of God. Now he that
kept his Soldiers under Discipline, that if he said, Go, they go; he reasons
thus of God: Surely God has Power to chase away Diseases. So accordingly
should we reason of God's Mercy, according to the Mercy that we find in our
selves. Therefore it is very notable, that when Christ had spoken of forgiving
our Brethren, not only seven times, but seventy times seven, the Disciples said
unto the Lord, Increase our Faith, Luke 17. 5. How dot^ this come in? In the 4
th Verse Christ had spoken, that they should forgive not only seven times, but
seventy times seven; and they do not say, Lord, increase our Charity, but our
Faith; implying, that we cannot have such large thoughts of God, when our own
Hearts are so straightened by Revenge, and our private Passions.

2. In point of Necessity; as it should be so, so it will be so; for God's
Mercy will have an Influence upon us, to make us merciful. All God's Actions to
us imprint their stamp in us; his Election of us, makes us to choose him, and
his ways; his Love to us, makes us love him again, who has loved us first; so
his forgiving of us, makes us to forgive our Brethren. There is an answerable
Impression left upon the Soul to every act of God (why?) for a true Believer is
God's Image: The new Man is created after God, Ephesians. 4. 24. and therefore he
acts as God. Certainly, if there be such a Disposition in our Heavenly Father,
it will be in us if we have an Interest in him. Look, as a Child has Part for
Part, and Limb for Limb answerable to his Father, tho not so big in Stature and
Bulk; so has a Child of God, which is created after God, he has all the
Divine Perfections in some measure in his Soul. And this Consideration is of
more force, because the New Creature cannot be maimed and defective in every
Part, but is entire, lacking nothing. And therefore if God forgive others,
certainly the Godly will be inclinable to forgive too.

Use. 1. Here Is a ground of Trial whether we are pardoned or no. Is our
revengeful Disposition (that is so natural, and so pleasing to us) mortified?
That Is one Trial or Evidence whether we are forgiven of God; can we freely from
the Heart forgive others?

Object. But it may be objected against this. Do you place so much in this
property of forgiving others? It does not agree only to pardoned Sinners,
because we see some Carnal Men are of a weak and stupid Spirit, not sensible of
Injuries: And (on the other side) many of God's Children find it hard to obtain
to the perfect Oblivion of Injuries that is required of them.

Answ. As to the first part, I answer: We do not speak of this Disposition as
proceeding from an easy Temper, but as it proceeds from Grace; when in
Conscience toward God, and out of a Sense of his Love to us in Christ, our
Hearts being tendered and melted toward others, to show them such Mercy as we
our selves have received from the Lord; that is the Evidence. And again, we do
not press to judge by this Evidence single and alone, but in Conjunction with
others; when they are humbly Penitent, and confessing their Sins, and turn to
the Lord, which is the great Evangelical Condition. Job. 33. 27. If any, say I
have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not: Then
will he restore light to him. When a Man is soundly touched with remorse, and
sees the folly of his former Courses, and asks Pardon of God, then is God
gracious to him. But this is that we say, that this Disposition of Pardon, in
Conjunction with the great Evangelical Condition of Faith and Repentance, it
helps to make the Evidence more clear.

2. As to the other part of the Objection, which was this, it will be a great
weakening of the Confidence of God's Children, who cannot get such a perfect
Oblivion of Injuries they have received, but find their Minds working too much
this way.

I answer; As long as we live in the World, there will be Flesh and Spirit,
Corruption as well as Grace; there will be an intermixture of the Operations of
each: Carnal Nature is prone to Revenge; but Grace prevails, and inclines to
a Pardon. Well then, if this be the prevalent Inclination of the Soul, and that
which we strive by all good Means to cherish in us, this meek Disposition,
passing by of Wrongs we receive by others, then we may take Comfort by this
Evidence, tho there be some reluctancies and regrudgings of the old-Nature.

Use. 2. To press us to this ready Inclination to forgive Wrongs and Injuries.
We are not so perfect, but we all need it from one another. There will be
mutual Offenses while we are in the World, especially in a time when Religious
Differences are on Foot; therefore it concerns us to look after this
Disposition of forgiving others, as we would be forgiven of God. Human Society
cannot well be upheld without this mutual Forbearance and Forgiving. Now
imitate your Heavenly Father. No Man can wrong us so much as we daily trespass
against him, and yet God pardons us. He does not only pardon the lesser
Failings, some Venial Errors, and Sins of Incogitancy and sudden Surreption,
which creep upon us we know not how; but he pardons the greatest Sins, tho they
be as Scarlet, Isa. 1. 18. Those that are of a Crimson hue, God can wash them
out in the Blood of Christ. And mark, what is it then that you will stand upon?
Is it the greatness of the Offense? God pardons great Sins. Or is it the
baseness of those that injure you? (this is the Circumstance) When we have
received wrong from those which are our Inferiors, that owe us more Reverence
and Respect? What are we to God? Notwithstanding the baseness of those which
affront him daily, all Men to him are but as the drop of the Bucket, and the
small Dust of the Balance, Isa. 40. 15. yet God pardons them. And then again,
cast in the consideration of God's Omnipotency: He is able to right himself of
the wrongs done to him, and no Man can call him to an account: Many times it is
not in our Power. He can cast Body and Soul into Hell, Mat. 10. 28. God is thus
offended, and by saucy Dust that is ready to fly in his Face, inconsiderable
Man; and yet the Lord pardons, and this he does freely, Luke 7. 42. He frankly
forgave them both. And he pardons fully, as if it were never committed, Mich.
7. 19. He casts all our Sins into the Depths of the Sea. Then he pardons
frequently, His Free Gift is of many Offenses unto Justification, Romans 5. 16.
And he multiplies to pardon, Isa. 55. 7. And mark, he pardons too (in some
sense) before they Repent, there is a Purpose; he provided Christ before we were
born. And he gives us Grace to repent, or else we could never humble our selves
at his Feet, the offended God; he gives them the Grace whereby they shall
acknowledge the Offense. Christ prayed for his Persecutors, when they had no
sense of the Injury they had done him, they were converted by that Prayer
afterward, Luke 23. 34. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do;
therefore certainly much more when they repent and submit. Oh therefore, let us
not be drawn hardly to this Duty; or at least we should not upon every petty
Offense cherish Hatred and Rancor against our Brethren.

But here are certain Cases that would come into debate.

First Case, Whether it be consistent with this Temper, forgiving of others; to
seek reparation of wrongs in a way of Justice, and pursue Men at Law for
Offenses they have committed against us?

Answer, Yes. For,

1. Certainly one Law does not cross another. By the Law of Charity, the Law of
Justice is not made void. A Magistrate (tho he be a Christian, and bound to
forgive others) is not bound up from executing his Office against public
Offenders. Nor yet are private Men tied from having recourse to the Magistrate
for restoration to their Right, or reparation of their Wrong. For to demand
ones Right, is not contrary to Love; nor to seek to amend and humble the Party
Nocent by the Magistrates Authority, who is the Minister of God for Good, Romans
13. 4. And that others may hear and fear, Deuteronomy. 19. 20. And the Party damnified
may for the future live in Peace. Forgiving is an Act of private Jurisdiction.
The Offense, as far as it is private to us, it may be forgiven; but there are
many such Offenses as are not only an Offense to us, but to the Public Order,
and that must be left to the Process of the Law.

2. Whosoever uses this Remedy, must look to his own Heart, that he be not
acted with private Revenge, nor with a Spirit of Rigor, or Rankor against the
Party offending; but that he be carried out with Zeal to Justice, with pity to
the Person, that he and others may not be hardened in Sin. For this is the
general Law of Christ, That all things should be done in Love, 1 Cor. 16. 14.
Therefore when we are acted by our private Passion, and secret desires of
Revenge, we abuse God's Ordinance of Magistracy, and make it to Lacquey upon
our Lusts. And therefore there must be a taking heed to the frame of our own
Hearts, that they be upright in these things. Tho it seem hard to Flesh and
Blood, yet remember Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Grace
must frame your Hearts to the Obedience of God's Will.

3. These Remedies from Authority must be in weighty Cases, and in matters of
moment and importance. Their contending in Law one with another about the
smallest matters, is that which the Apostle taxes, 1 Cor. 6. 7. Not upon every
trifling occasion. It must be after other means are tried and used; as the help
of Friends to compound the matter, for Charity tries all things, 1 Cor. 13. 4.
And the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6. 5. Is there none to judge between you? that is,
none to decide and arbitrate the difference; for the refuge to Authority should
be our last Remedy. And it must be too when the Party wronging is able to make
Satisfaction; otherwise it is Rigor and Inhumanity: 2 Kings 4 1. As When the
Creditors came to take the Sons of the Widow for Bondmen. When you are rigorous
with those that come to Poverty not by their own Default, but by the discharge
of their Duty brought Poverty upon themselves, it is contrary to Christianity.
Look, as Physicians deal with Quicksilver, after many Distillations they make
it useful in Medicines: So, after many preparations is this Course to be taken.

2. Another Case; Whether in forgiving Injuries we are bound to tarry for the
Repentance of the Party? The ground of doubting is, because Christ says, Luke
17. 3. If thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and, if he repent,
forgive him; and because of God's Example, who does not forgive an obstinate
Sinner, but him that repents. Certainly, even before Repentance, we are bound
to lay aside Revenge, and in many cases to go and reconcile our selves with
others. Says our Savior, If thou have ought against any one, go reconcile thy
self to him, and then come and offer thy Gift. It is not said, if any have
ought against thee; but, if thou have ought against any one. I confess, in some
Cases it is enough to lay it aside before the Lord. But at other times, we are
to seek reconciliation with the Party which has wronged us. But this Case is
mightily to be guided by Spiritual Prudence. As for God's Example, God is
Superior, bound to none, he acts freely, it is his Mercy that pardons any; and
yet God gives us a Heart to repent, of his good Pleasure, he begins with a
Sinner. But this is nothing to our Case who are under Law, who are bound to
forgive others.

III. The Person to whom we Pray. Our Heavenly Father.

The Note is, That God does alone forgive Sin.

There is a double forgiveness of Sin: In Heaven, and in a Man's own Conscience;
and therefore sometimes compared to the blotting out of something out of a
Book, sometimes to the blotting out of a Cloud. To the blotting out of a Book.
Isa. 43. 25. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions, for mine
own sake, and will not remember thy Sins; That it may be no more remembered, or
charged upon us. To the blotting out of a Cloud: Isa. 44. 22. I have blotted
out as a thick Cloud thy Transgressions, and as a Cloud, thy Sins. As the Sun
when it breaks forth in its Strength, dispelleth the Mists and Clouds. Sin
interposeth as a Cloud, hindering the Light of God's Countenance from shining
forth upon us. Both these are God's Work; to blot the Book, and to blot out the
Cloud.

1. Pardoning of Sin in the Court of Heaven, it belongs to God peculiarly.
Dan. 9. 9. To the Lord our God belong Mercies and Forgivenesses, etc. It Is God
alone can do it, for two Reasons.

1. He is the wronged Party. 2. He is the Supreme Judge.
1. He is the wronged Party, against whom the Offense is committed. Psalm. 51.
4. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned. He had sinned against
Bathsheba, against Vriah, whose Death he projected; How is it said, against
thee only? There may be wrong and hurt done to a Creature, but the Sin is
against God, as it is a breach of his Law, and a despising of his Sovereign
Authority; the Injury done to the Creature is nothing in Comparison of the
Offense done to God, against so many Obligations wherein we stand bound to him.
Amongst Men, we distinguish between the Crime and the Wrong. And a Criminal
Action is one thing, and an Action of Wrong and Trespass is another. If a Man
steal from another, it is not enough to make him Restitution, but he must
satisfy the Law.

2. He is the Supreme Judge. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as one God, are the
Judge of all the Earth, to whom they must be accountable for the Offense. Genesis
18. 25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? But in the Mystery of
Redemption, the Father, as first in order of the Persons, is represented as the
Judge, to whom the Satisfaction is tendered, and who does Authoritatively pass a
Sentence of Absolution. And therefore it is said, 1 John 2. 1. We have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: He is to deal with him as
the Supreme Judge; and It Is God that justifies, Romans 8. 33. The whole Business
of our Acquitment is carried on by the Father, who is to receive the
Satisfaction, and our humble Addresses for Pardon.

But to answer some Objections that may arise.

Object. 1. It Is said, Mat. 9. 6. The Son of Man has power on Earth to forgive
Sins.

I answer; That is brought there, as an Argument of his Godhead. He that was
the Son of Man, was also very God: And therefore, upon Earth in the time of his
Humiliation, he had power to forgive Sins: for he ceased not to be God when
Incarnate; And it became him to discover himself, as by his Divine Power in the
work of Miracles; so his Divine Authority in the Forgiveness of Sins.

Object. 2. Is taken from the Text, Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive those
that trespass against us.

I answer: In Sin, there is the Obliquity or Fault in it, and the Hurt or
Detriment that redounds to Man by it. As it is a Breach of the Law of God, or
an Offense to his Infinite Majesty, God can only pardon it, or dispense with
it: As it is an hurt to us, so restitution is to be made to Man, and Man can
pardon or forgive it.

Object. 3. It Is said, Joh. 20. 23. Whosesoever Sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them; and whosesoever Sins ye retain, they are retained. So that
it seems Man has a power to remit Sins.

I answer; They do it Declaratively, and by Commission from God. The Officers
of the Church have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to them; the Key
of Knowledge or Doctrine, and the Key of Order and Discipline. Accordingly this
Power is called, The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 16. 19. And the use of
them is to open or shut the Doors of God's House, and to bind or loose, as the
Expression is, Mat. 18. 18. That is, to pronounce Guilty and liable to
Judgment, or to absolve and set free declaratively and in God's Name; or, as it
is literally expressed in the place alleged, To remit or retain. The Key of
Doctrine is exercised about all Sin as Sin, were it never so secret and inward:
and the Key of Order and Discipline about Sin only as it is Scandalous and
Infectious. Now what they act Ministerially according to their Commission, it is
ratified in Heaven; for it is a Declaration or Intimation of the Sentence
already passed there. So that a Declarative and Ministerial Power is given to
the Church; but the Authoritative Power of forgiving Sins, that God has
reserved to himself: Man can remit doctrinally, and by way of Judicial
Procedure; but that is only by way of Commission and Ministerial Deputation.
Such as are Penitent, and feel the Bonds of their Sins, they do declaratively
absolve and loose them, or take off the Censure Judicially inflicted for their
scandalous Carriage. This Ministerial forgiving, however Carnal Hearts may
slight it, both in Doctrine and Discipline, yet being according to the Rules of
the Word, is owned by God, and the Penitent shall feel it to their
Encouragement, and the Obstinate to their Terror.

2. As he pardons Sin in the Conscience; and there God alone can forgive Sin,
or speak Peace to the Soul upon a double Account.

1. Because of his Authority. 2. Because of his Power.
1. Because of his Authority. Conscience is God's Deputy, and till God be
pacified, Conscience is not pacified, upon sound and solid Terms. Therefore
it is said, where Conscience does its Office, 1 John 3. 20, 21. If our Hearts
condemn us, God is greater than our Hearts, and knows all things; if our
Hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. God is greater than
our Consciences. His Authority is greater, for God is Supreme, whose Sentence
is decisive: Now, tho Conscience should not do its Office, 1 Cor. 4. 4. For I
know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judges me,
is the Lord. All depends upon God's Testimony.

2. Because of his Power, who only can still the Conscience; Isa. 57. 19. I
create the Fruit of the Lips to be Peace, Peace: That is, the Lips of his
Ministers or Messengers, who bring the glad tidings of Peace, or the
reconcilement of God to his People. And therefore it is called the Peace of God,
Phil. 4. 7. as wrought by him. The Gospel is a sovereign Plaster, but it is
God's Hand that must make it stick upon the Soul, otherwise we hear Words and
return Words; it is by the lively Operation of his Spirit that our Hearts are
settled. God comes in with a sovereign powerful Act upon the Soul. Otherwise
one Grief or sad Thought does but awaken another: Till he command Loving
Kindness, Psalm. 42. 8. We are still followed with Temptations. As the Rain
swells the Rivers, and Rivers the Sea, and in the Sea one Wave impelleth
another; so does one Temptation raise another.

Use. 1. It reproves those that do not deal with God, about the Pardon of
their Sins. If God alone pardon Sins, then God must be sought to about it. For
tho there be none in Earth to call us to an Account, yet God may call us to an
Account; and then what shall we do? Many, if they escape the Judgment of Man,
think they are safe: But Alas! your Iniquities will find you out. You think
they are past, and never more to be remembered; but they will find you out in
this World, or the next: our Business lies not with Man so much as with God.
Therefore this should be the question of your Souls, Job 31. 14. What then
shall I do, when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him?
Which way shall I turn my self, when God calls me to an Account? He will come
and enquire into our ways; are you provided of an Answer? David's Sin was
secret; his Plot for the Destruction of Vriah closely carried: Nathan tells
him, 2 Samuel 12. 12. Thou did it secretly. -- But, against thee have I sinned.
Many escape blame with Men, but God's Wrath makes Inquisition for Sinners. You
cannot escape his Search and Vengeance, if you do not treat with him about a
Pardon.

Use. 2. It shows the Folly of those that have nothing to show for the pardon
of their Sins, but their own secure Presumptions; It Is God's Act to pardon Sin.
Man may forget his Sin; But if God remember it, he is miserable: Man may hide
his Sin, but if God bring it to Light; Man may put off the Thoughts, but if God
does not put away; Man may excuse his Sin, but if God aggravate it; the Debtor
may deny the Debt, but if the Book be not crossed, he is responsible. Psalm. 32.
1, 2. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is covered;
Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity, etc. We must have
God's Act to show for our Discharge; then we may triumph, It Is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? etc. Romans 8. 33, 34. God is the offended
Party, and the Supreme Judge. Then Conscience has nothing to do with us, nor
Satan, neither as Accuser, or Executioner. Not as an Accuser, for then he is
but a Slanderer; not as an Executioner, for he is turned out of Office; Heb. 2.
14. That he might destroy him that had the power of Death, even the Devil. Have
you your Pardon from God? Is your Discharge from him? When have it we from God?

1. Have it you from his Mouth, in the Word, or Prayer, upon suing to him in
Christ's Name, and earnest waiting upon him? If Men would consider how they
come by their Peace, they would sooner be undeceived. You were praying and
wrestling with God, and so your Comfort came. God speaks Peace. But when it
grows upon you, you know not how; it was a thing you never labored for; like
Ionah's Gourd, it grew up in a Night; it is but a fond Dream.

2. Have it you under his Hand? Is it a Peace upon Scripture terms? of Faith?
Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Repentance, Luke 24. 47. That Repentance and Remission
of Sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations, etc. And the Exercise
of Holiness: Then have you God's word to show for it. But if it be not a Peace
consistent with Scripture-Rules; nay you are afraid of the Word, Ioh. 3. 20.
You are loath to be tried, it is a naughty Heart.

3. Have it you under his Seal? 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us, and
given us the earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts: Have you the Impress of God
upon you, God's Seal, his Image? Does the Spirit of Promise assure your Hearts
before God, that you can live in the Strength of this Comfort, and go about
Duties cheerfully? Then it is God's Pardon, otherwise it is but your own
Absolution which is worth nothing.

Use. 3. It shows that we need not fear the Censures of Men, nor the Hatred
of the Ungodly; for it is God pardons, and who can condemn? God will not ask
their Vote and Suffrage who shall be accepted to Life, and who not, 1 Cor. 4.
3. But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of
Man's Judgment, etc. A Man must expect Censure that will be faithful to God; but
if he acquit us, it is no matter what our guilty Fellow Creatures say.

Use. 4^ Is Comfort to brokenhearted Sinners; to those that need and desire
Pardon. It Is well for them that God does not put them off to others, but
reserveth this power of pardoning Sins to himself.

1. It Is his Glory to forgive Sins. Exodus 33. 18. And he said, I beseech thee
show me thy Glory; compared with Exodus 34. 6, 7. And the Lord passed by before
him, and proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth. Keeping Mercy for
thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, etc. It Is not only the
Glory of a Man, who is so offensive himself, and so passionate, that this
Passion will draw him to what is unseemly, but of God.

2. It Is his Glory not only above the Creatures, but above all that is called
God in the World. Mic. 7. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons
Iniquity, and passes by the Transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage? He
retains not his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy. The Heathen
Gods were known by their Terrors rather than their Benefits, and feared rather
for their Revenges than their Mercies. We may boast of him above all Idol Gods
upon this Account: He is known among his People, not so much by acts of Power,
as acts of Grace, and the greatness of his Mercy, in pardoning Sins for
Christ's sake.

3. He is willing to dispense a Pardon; Mi^. 7. 18. He delights in Mercy. God
delights in himself, and all his Attributes, and the Manifestation of them in
the World; but above all in his Mercy. Justice is his strange act, Isa. 28. 21.
There is not any thing more pleasing to him. It Is the Mercy of God that he has
drawn up a Petition for us; he would never have taught us to have asked Mercy
by Prayer, if he had not been willing to show us Mercy.

4. God will do it for his own sake, and not for any foreign Reasons. Isa. 43.
25. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake,
and out of a respect to his own Honor. See how God casts up his Accounts. It
is Mercy, Jer. 3. 12. I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep Anger
for ever. So his Truth, Psalm. 106. 45. He remembered for them his Covenant, and
repented according to the Multitude of his Mercies. Not from any desert of
theirs, who do so neglect him, and wrong him; God will do it upon his own
Reasons.

5. He will do it in such a way as Man does not; in a way of infinite Mercy.
Hos. 11. 9. I will not execute the fierceness of mine Anger, for I am God, and
not Man. It Is the great Advantage of us Sinners, that we have to do with God,
and not Man, in our Miscarriages: For Man's Pity and Mercy may be exhausted be
it never so great. What, seven times a Day? But God is Infinite. Man may think
it dishonorable to agree with an Inferior when he stoops not to him; but God
is so far above the Creature, that we are below his Indignation. Man is soon
wearied, but not God. Isa. 55. 8, 9. For my Thoughts are not your Thoughts,
neither are your Ways my Ways, says the Lord. For as the Heavens are higher
than the Earth; so are my Ways higher than your Ways, and my Thoughts than your
Thoughts.

I now come to the fourth and last Consideration.

IV. That Forgiveness of Sins is one great Benefit that we must ask of God in
Prayer. Here it will be needful to show,

First, The Necessity of treating with God about Forgiveness.

Secondly, The Nature of this Benefit.

Thirdly, The Terms how God dispenses it.

First; The Necessity will appear in these Propositions.

1. Man has a Conscience, Romans 2. 15. Thoughts accusing or excusing, etc. A
Beast cannot reflect. 2. A Conscience infers a Law. 3. A Law infers a
Sanction. 4. A Sanction infers a Judgment. 5. A Judgment -- a Condemnation
to the fallen Creature. 6. There is no avoiding this Condemnation, unless God
set up a Chancery, or another Court of Grace. 7. If God set up another Court,
our Plea must be Grace. Of this see more at large 20. Sermon. 1 Sermon. on Psalm.
32. 1, 2.
Secondly; The Nature of this Benefit, or manner how God forgiveth.

1. Freely. 2. Fully.
1. Freely, and merely upon the Impulsions of his own Grace. Isa. 43. 25. I,
even I am he that forgiveth your Iniquities for my Name sake. Nothing else
could move him to it, but his own Mercy; and he could have chosen whether he
would have done so yea or no: For he spared not the Angels; but offers Pardon
to Man, and all Men are not actually pardoned. And therefore, the only reason
why he shows us Mercy and not others, is merely his own Grace. The
Intervention of Christ's Merit does not hinder the Freedom of it; Tho dearly
purchased by Christ, yet freely bestowed on us. For it is said, Romans 3. 24.
Justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ. Why?
partly because it was Mercy that he would not prosecute his Right against us.
Partly, because he found out the way how to recompense the wrong done by Sin
unto his Majesty, and out of his Love, sent his Son to make this Recompense for
us. Ioh. 3. 16. 'Twas Love set all a-work. And lastly, not excited hereunto by
any worth on our parts, but the external moving cause was only our Misery, and
the internal moving cause his own Grace. Nor is the Freedom of this Act
infringed by requiring Faith and Repentance on our part: because that only
shows the way and order wherein this Grace is dispensed, not the cause why.
It Is not for the worth of our Repentance, or as if there were any Merit in it.
A Malefactor that beggeth his Pardon on his Knees, does not deserve a Pardon;
only the Majesty of the Prince requires that it should be submissively asked.
These are not Conditions of Merit, but Order; not the Cause, but the way of
Grace's working: And these Conditions are wrought in us by Grace, Acts 5. 31.
not required only, but given. In all other Covenants, the Party contracting, is
bound to perform what he promises by his own strength: But in the Covenant of
Grace, God does not only require that we should Believe and Repent, but causes
it in us. Conditions of the Covenant, are Conditions in the Covenant. God
requires Faith and Repentance, and gives Faith and Repentance; compare Isa.
59. 20. with Romans 11. 26. It Is Christ's Gift as well as his Precept. So that
when we come about pardon of Sin, we have only to do with Grace: We beg Pardon,
and a Heart to receive it. It Is a Free Pardon.

2. It Is a Full Pardon. It Is Full in several respects. 1. Because, where the
Party is forgiven, he is accepted with God as if he had never sinned; Psalm.
103. 12. As far as the East is from the West; so far has he removed our
Transgressions from us. And Mich. 7. 19. Thou will cast all their Sins into the
depth of the Sea. Isa. 38. 17. Thou have cast all my Sins behind thy Back. It
shall not be remembered, nor laid to their charge any more. It Is true, for a
while after they may trouble the Conscience; as when the Storm cease, the
Waves roll for a while afterward: So may Sin in the Consciences of God's
Children work trouble, after the fiducial Application of the Blood of Christ;
But the Storm cease by degrees. And it is possible, that the commitment of new
Sins, may revive old Guilt, as a new Strain may make us sensible of an old
Bruise. Yet we must distinguish between the full Grant of a Pardon: From the
full sense of it, when we are not Thankful, Humble, Fruitful, former Sins may
come into remembrance; and God may permit it, as matter of Humiliation to us,
and to quicken us to seek after new Confirmation of our Right and Interest. Yet
God's Pardon is never reversed, nor will the Sin be charged again, or put in
suit against him, to the final condemnation of the Person so pardoned. Once
more, though the Sins of the Justified should be remembered at the Day of
Judgment, it will not be to the confusion of their Faces, but the exaltation
and praise of the Lord's Grace. Then is this Acquittance in all respects full.
2. It Is full, because where God forgiveth one Sin, he will forgive all: Psalm.
103. 3. Who pardons all thy Sins: And Mich. 7. 19. Thou will cast all their
Sins into the depth of the Sea; Sins Original, Actual; of Omission, Commission;
Small, Great, Secret, Open; Lust that boileth in the Heart, and breaks out in
the Life; Sins of Worship, of ordinary Conversation. Look in the Bill; What
owe thou? A Christian is amazed when he comes to a serious account with God;
but the self-judging Sinner needs not be discouraged when he comes to God.
For where God pardons all that is past, the Fountain stands daily open for
him to flee unto, with all his Faults, as they are committed; and upon the
renewing of his Faith and Repentance, he shall obtain his Pardon. All Sins are
Mortal, all of them Damnable; Therefore if all Sins be not pardoned, he
remains in danger of the Curse; and one Sin let alone, is sufficient to
exclude us out of Heaven. Therefore all is pardoned, first or last, Justice
has no more to seek of Christ: And we have all leave to sue out our Pardon in
Christ's Name; He is under that Covenant that will pardon all.

3. It Is Full; Because, where God forgiveth the Sin, he also forgiveth the
Punishment. 'Twill not stand with God's Mercy, to forgive the Debt, and yet to
require the Payment. It Is a mo^king to say, I forgive you the Debt, and yet
cast the Man into Prison; and to pardon the Malefactor, and yet leave him
liable to Execution. Here, in the Text, God forgiveth us, as we are bound to
forgive our Brother; not in part, but in whole. Guilt is nothing but an
Obligation to Punishment. 1. As to Eternal Punishment, it is clear, Romans 5. 9.
The Eternal Promises and Threatenings, being of Things absolutely Good and Evil,
are therefore absolute and peremptory, that is certain. 2. But now, as to
Temporal Afflictions, there is some difficulty; for where the whole Punishment
is done away, such Grace, and payment of any part of the Debt, cannot stand
together. That Pardon which is given upon valuable and sufficient Price, is
full and perfect. Jesus Christ satisfied the Justice of God for all our Sins.
How is it then that the Saints are subject to so many Afflictions? 1. So far as
Sin remains, so far some penal Evil remains; when the Dominion of it is broken,
there remains no Condemnation, but yet some Affliction; and when it is wholly
gone, there is no Evil at all. We are not yet purged from all Sin. And
therefore, 2. These Afflictions are not satisfactory Punishments, and need not,
as to the completing of our Justification, but are helps to us, as the
furtherance of our Sanctification. And so are of great use, 1. To make us hate
Sin more. If we only knew the sweetness of it, and not the bitterness, we would
not be so shy of it. Now the bitterness of it is seen by the effects; Ier. 2.
19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall
reprove thee; Know therefore, and see, that it is an evil thing, and bitter;
that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my Fear is not in thee,
says the Lord God of Hosts. 2. 'Twill cause us to prize our deliverance by
Christ. If Affliction be so grievous, what would Hell be? 1 Cor. 11. 32. But
when we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the World. It Is a gentle remembrance of Hellpains, or a fair
warning to avoid them, when scorched or sindged a little. 3. To make us walk
more humbly. We forget our selves, and are apt to be puffed up. Paul says, 2
Cor. 12. 7. Lest I should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of
the Revelations, there was given to me a Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of
Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

4. It Is Full; Because, where God forgiveth Sin, there are many consequent
Benefits.

(1.) God is reconciled. Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have
peace with God* through our Lord Jesus Christ. This is the great Blessing, and
our great Work is, to make and keep peace with God; to have no Cloud between us
and his Face. Light is pleasant; What then is the Light of his Countenance,
that fills us with a Peace that passes understanding? We would have a
powerful Friend, especially if we need him. Acts 12. 20. They sought Peace with
Herod, because their Country was nourished by the King's Country; so should we
do, we cannot live without God. If Sin be pardoned, then we are at peace with
God, and may have free access to him, with a free use of all that is his.

(2.) A Heart sanctified, is a connexed Benefit; 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were
some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus. And 1 John 1. 9. Sin is considerable in the guilt
and filth of it; as it renders us obnoxious to God's Justice; or as it
tainteth our Faculties and Actions: According to this double respect, Christ
destroys Sin, and no Man has benefit by him, that is not freed from the
guilt and filth thereof. Christ was sent into the World to restore God's Image
in us: But the Image of God, consists in the participation of Holiness, as
well as the participation of Blessedness; for God, that is Happy and Blessed,
is also Holy and Good; the filthiness of Sin is opposite to Holiness, and the
guilt of it to blessedness: So that either Christ must restore but half the
Image of God, or he must give us this double Benefit; if he should give us one
without the other, many Inconveniences would follow. Therefore both are given;
he justifies that he may sanctify, and he sanctifies that he may glorify.

(3.) Providence is blessed. The Curse is taken out of our Blessings, and the
Sting out of our Afflictions. As long as Sin remains unpardoned, our Blessings
are cursed; Mal. 2. 2. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart
to give glory to my Name, says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a Curse
upon you, and I will curse your Blessings: yea, I have cursed them already,
because ye do not lay it to heart: There will be a Worm in our Manna, our Table
will become a Snare, Psalm. 69. 22. But when once Sin is pardoned, the Sting of
Misery is taken away: 1 Cor. 15. 56. The Sting of Death is Sin, and the
strength of Sin is the Law: But thanks be to God, which gives us the victory,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Crosses are not Curses.

(4.) We have a right to Heaven, which is the great ground of Hope; Romans 5. 10.
For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son;
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life.

Thirdly; The Terms upon which it is dispensed, are Faith and Repentance.

1. Faith. Acts 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his
Name whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of Sins. Faith is
necessary to honor the Mercy of God, to own the Surety, to consent to his
Undertaking, to encourage the Creature to look after this Benefit.

2. Repentance. Which implies a sorrow for Sin, with a serious purpose of
forsaking it. Sorrow for Sin; no Man can seriously desire a Pardon, but he that
is touched with a sense of his Sin, moved and troubled at it. And then, for
purpose of forsaking; Ezekiel. 33. 12. As for the wickedness of the Wicked, he
shall not fall thereby in the day that he turns from his Wickedness. Sin
pardoned, must be left; otherwise, a Pardon given to a wicked Man, would be a
confirmation of his Sin, or a concession of leave to sin. Well then, let us
seek Pardon of God in this way.

And lead us not into Temptation.
WE are now come to the sixth Petition: which is doubly expressed.

I. Negatively; Lead us not into Temptation. II. Affirmatively; But deliver us
from Evil.
The first part does more concern preventing Grace, that we may not fall into
Evil: and the second, recovering Grace, that if we fall into Evil, we may not
be overcome of it, nor overwhelmed by it, but may find deliverance from the
Lord. Here we pray, (1.) that we may not be tempted. Or (2.) if the Lord see it
fit we should be tempted, that we may not yield. Or (3.) if we yield, that we
may not totally be overcome. As the former Petition concerned the guilt of Sin,
so this concerns the Reign and Power of it.

In this first Part, take notice;

First; Of the Evil deprecated, or that which we pray against, and that is,
Temptation.

Secondly; The manner of Deprecation, Lead us not.

In which there is something implied, and something formally asked.

^. Something implied; and that is, 1. God's Providence, when we say to God,
Lead us not; we do acknowledge he has the disposal of Temptation. 2. God's
Justice, and our Desert; that for former Sins, God may suffer this Evil to
befall us. We have so often provoked the Lord, that in a judicial manner he may
suffer us to be tempted. 3. Our weakness; that we are unable to stand under
such a condition by our own strength; therefore we go to God.


2. Something formally asked; that is, either that God would prevent the
Temptation: or if he should use such a Dispensation toward us, give us Grace
to overcome it.

Of these things I shall speak in their Order.

First; Of the Evil deprecated; and from thence observe,

Doct. 1. That Temptations are a usual Evil, wherewith we encounter in the
present World.

Here I shall, I. Open the Nature of Temptations. II. I shall give you some
Observations concerning them. III. The Reasons of it.


I. For the Nature of Temptations.

Temptation, is a proving or making trial of a Thing, or Person, what he is,
and what he will do. And thus sometimes we are said to tempt God, and at other
times God is said to tempt us.

1. We are said to tempt God, when we put it to the proof, whether he will be
as good as his word, either in the Cominatory or Promissory part thereof; Psalm
95. 9. When your Fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my Works: they tempted
God, as they put him often upon the trial. To note that (by the way) there is a
twofold tempting or proving of God; either in a way of Duty, or Sin. In a way
of Duty, when we wait to see his Promise fulfilled: And so, Mal. 3. 10. Prove
me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, I will not open you the Windows of
Heaven, and pour you out a Blessing; come pay your Tithes and Offerings: He
would have the Portion which belonged to himself; and prove me now herewith,
etc. God submits to a Trial from Experience, when we wait for the Good
promised. Thus we try God, and try his Word. Psalm. 18. 30. The Word of the Lord
is a tried Word: He is a Buckler to all those that trust in him. All those
which build upon it, that wait to see what God will do, they will find it, upon
experience, to be accomplished to a tittle: Never did any build upon it, or
wait for the accomplishment of it in vain. 2. In a way of Sin. Many ways we are
said to tempt God: When we set God a task, in satisfying our Conceits, and
Carnal Affections; Psalm. 78. 18. They tempted God in their Hearts, by asking
Meat for their Lusts: And when we will not believe in him, but upon Conditions
of our own making: or when we consine him to our Means, or Time, or manner of
working: or would have some extraordinary proof of his Being, and Power, and
Goodness: or see whether God will punish us though we sin against him. All
these ways we are said to tempt God in a way of Sin. But that is not my business
now. Therefore,

2. As Man tempts God, so is Man himself tempted. Now Man is either tempted,
First, By God. Secondly, By Satan. Thirdly, By his own Heart.


First, Man is tempted by God. Genesis 22. 1. And it came to pass, after these
things, that God did tempt Abraham. How is God said to tempt Man? When he
tries what is in us; Deuteronomy. 8. 2. To humble thee, and to prove thee, to know
what was in thine Heart: either what of Grace, or what of Sin, is in our Heart.

(1.) What of Grace. Thus the Lord tries us by Afflictions, by delays of
Promises, and other means becoming his Holy Nature. By Afflictions, for they
are called a Trial, 1 Pet. 1. 6. Now for a Season, (if need be) ye are in
heaviness through manifold Temptations. The Afflictions of the Gospel are
called Temptations. And so, by delay of Promises; God tries us, sometimes by
delaying the accomplishment of his Promise; as in Psalm 105. 19. Until the Time
that his Word came, the Word of the Lord tried him; that is, until the Promise
was fulfilled and accomplished. A Man is put to trial of all the Grace that is
in his Heart.

(2.) God tries what Corruption there is in us: He tries this, either by
offering Occasions, or withdrawing his Grace; or by permitting Satan to tempt
us.

1. By offering Occasions in the course of his Providence; God puts us upon
trial there, sometimes by want, sometimes by fullness. By Want. John 6. 5, 6.
Whence shall we buy Bread that these may eat? says Christ to Philip. And this
he said to prove him; for he himself knew what he would do. Christ will have
the weakness of his Followers tried, as well as their strength. And he tries
his People often by this kind of trial, when there are many Mouths, and no
Meat; and a Man cannot see which way his visible Supplies shall come in, this
he does to prove them, to see whether they will look only to outward likelihood
and probabilities, or rest themselves upon God's Promise and Alsufficiency: or
else by Fullness, and outward Prosperity, to see if they will forget him. I
confess, I do not remember where this is called a trial in Scripture, unless
there be somewhat in that place, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. He fed thee with Manna in the
Wilderness, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee
good at thy latter End. Possibly the trial there might lie in this, because
they had but from hand to mouth; or, because it was not that Meat which their
Lusts craved, but that which God saw fit for them. But however, though
Prosperity be not called so, yet certainly it is in it self a trial. Prove. 30.
9. Give me not Riches, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord?
Lust in us makes it to be a Temptation; and the Godly have been often foiled by
it; and they need learn how to abound, as well as how to be abased, Phil. 4.
12. They need learn how to avoid the Snares of a prosperous Condition. David,
it was a trial to him; while he was wandering in the Wilderness, he had such
tenderness, that his Heart smote him, when he cut off the Lap of Readiness
Garment; while he was chased like a Partridg upon the Mountains, wandering up
and down, from Forest to Forest: But when he was walking at ease, upon the
Tarras of his Palace in Jerusalem, then he falls into Blood and Uncleanness;
And therefore his Estate was a trial, and he lies in it, notwithstanding all
his former tenderness of Heart, until he was roused up by Nathan the Prophet.
And certainly, as to the Wicked, it is a very great Temptation, judicially
inflicted, disposed of to them by God's Judgment, they are plagued by worldly
Felicity; and it is part of their Curse, that they shall be written in the
Earth, Jer. 17. 13. And suitable to this purpose, God says, Ier. 6. 21.
Behold, I will lay stumbling blocks before this People, and the Fathers, and
the Sons, together shall fall upon them. How does God lay stumbling blocks? If
Men will find the Sin, God may with justice enough find the Occasion; he will
give them some outward Condition that is a Snare to them. As we may try a
Servant whom we have just cause to suspect, by laying something in the way,
that his filching Humor may be discovered, without any breach of Justice; so
the Wicked, that harden their Hearts against God, God may give them their
Hearts desire, and worldly Happiness, and so it may cause them to stumble.

2. God tries us also, by withdrawing his Grace, as in 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. God
left him to try him, that he might know all that was in his Heart. It is
needful sometimes that we should see our Weakness as well as our Strength, and
how unable we are to stand without Grace, that we may be sensible whence we
stand, and which without Temptation could not so well be.

3. God trys us, by permitting the Temptations of Satan, and his Instruments;
for surely these Things do not befall us without a Providence. Job 12. 16. The
Deceived, and the Deceiver, are his, his Creatures; and nothing can be done or
suffered in this kind, without God's Providence. See it in Christ's Instance,
Mat. 4. 1. It is said, He was led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be
tempted of the Devil; that is, led by the Good and Holy Spirit, to be tempted
by the Evil Spirit. So, 2 Samuel 24. 1. compared with 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. God moved
David, and Satan provoked David to number the People; that is, God did let
loose Satan upon David, to accomplish the Righteous Ends of his Providence. And
many of those Arrows which are shot at us, though they come immediately from
Satan's Bow, yet they are taken out of God's Quiver. God, as a just Judge, may
give us up to Satan, as his Minister and Executioner. Well then, this is one
way of God's tempting, permitting of Satan to tempt. And as Satan, so his
Instruments, God trys us by them. Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. If there arise among you a
Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, thou shall not hearken unto him. Why? For the
Lord your God proves you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all
your Heart, and with all your Soul. God proves. When there are delusions
abroad, and Errors broached, it is, that the approved may be made manifest, 1
Cor. 11. 19. God lets loose these Winds of Error and Delusion, that the
solid Grain may be distinguished from the light Chaff: And that he may discover
his own People, and whether we have received Truths upon Evidence, or taken
them up only upon Hearsay. All these ways may God be said to tempt.

Now concerning this, take these Rules.

1. God's tempting is not to inform himself, but to discover his Creatures to
themselves and others. Not to inform himself, for he knows our Thoughts afar
off, Psalm. 139. 2. that is, he knows not only the Conclusion and Event, and
management of things near; but he knows the very remote preparation aforehand:
he knows what kind of Thoughts we will have, and workings of Spirit. As a Man
that is up in the Air, may see a River in its Rise and Fountain, and Course,
and Fall of it, sees it all at once; whereas another which stands by the
Banks, can only see the Water as it passes by. God sees all things in their
Fountain and Cause, as well as in their Issue and Event, he sees all things
together; therefore it is not for his own Information. But the meaning is,
therefore does God try us, that what is known to him, and yet unknown to our
selves, that that which lodges and lies hid in our Heart, may be discovered
to us. That we may not be conceited of more than we have, and that the evil
which before lay hid and was unseen, may be cured when it is discovered. And
(on the other side) that Grace may not lie sleeping in a dead and unactive
Habit, but be drawn out into act and view, for his Glory and Praise.

2. God's tempting is always good, and for good; his tempting is either in
Mercy or in Judgment. In Mercy; and so, when he tries the Graces of his
People; or when he means more especially to discover the failings of his
People, it is all Good. When he tries the Graces of his People, there is no
doubt of that. When God has furnished a Man with Grace, that he may (without
any Impeachment of his Goodness) put him upon Trial, and use Creatures for that
end for which he has fitted them; as a Man which has made and bought a thing,
may prove it, and try the strength of it. Or when the intent of the
Dispensation is to try their Weakness, that is good also, and for good; as when
a Man tries a leaky-Vessel, with an intent to make it stanch. So when God
tempts us by sharp Afflictions, or any other Course, it is for good; Heb. 12.
10. He, verily, for our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness. A
Man that has a Disease upon him, it may be walking or stirring the Humors the
Disease may appear, it is for good; it is better it should be discovered, that
he may in time look after a Remedy, than lurk and lie hid in the Body to his
utter undoing: So it is for good our Corruptions and Weaknesses should be
discovered, that they may be made sound. Ay but when God brings' it in
Judgment, yet that is for good, that is, for his own Glory and his Churches
good, tho not for the good of the Party. For the Churches good, that
naughtiness where it is might in time be discovered; Prove. 26. 26. Whose Hatred
is covered by Deceit, his Wickedness shall be showed before the whole
Congregation; lest Men get a Name that they might do Religion a Mischief: And
it is for the Glory of God, that Men may appear what they are. Here Is no stain
upon God's Justice for all this. He that pierces a Vessel, if it run dreggy
with musty or poisonous Liquor, the fault is not in him that pierces it, but
in the Liquor it self; he that pierces or broacheth it, does only discover
what is within, that if it be unsavory he may cast it into the Kennel: So, it
is not the fault of God which pierces, discovers, and lets out our
Corruption, the fault is in our selves; we have those things within, which are
discovered as soon as God puts us upon a trial.

3. God tempts no Man, as Temptation is taken properly for a solicitation to
Sin; Jam. 1. 13. Let no Man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for
God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts he any Man. Mark, the Apostle
proves it, that in this sense God cannot tempt, because of the unchangeable
Holiness of his Nature. In Temptation we must distinguish between the mere
trial, and the solicitation to Sin; the mere trial that is from God, but the
solicitation to Sin, that is from Satan and our selves. God sollicites no Man
to Sin. It is true, God may try us, trouble us, toss us, exercise our Faith,
Hope, and Patience. God is the Author of our Trouble; but the Devil is the
Author of our Sin, who sins himself, and solliciteth others to Sin.

4. When we say, Lead us not into Temptation, we do not beg a total exemption
from God's Trials, but only a removal of the Judgment of them: Not a total
exemption, for then we must go out of the World, for while we are here, every
Condition is a trial to us, and every Enjoyment. Afflictions and Trouble more
or less put to trial, and therefore Temptation in this sense is a necessary
part of that Warfare we must encounter and grapple withal while we are in the
World. Prosperity tries us, to see if we be then mindful of God when all things
succeed well: And Adversity tries us, to see if we can patiently depend upon
God. But it is the Judgment of trials that we deprecate, that they may not come
upon us as a Judgment, or that our trial may be so moderate that we may stand
our Ground. When does a trial come as a Judgment? When it is immoderate and
beyond our Strength, either in a way of Prosperity or Adversity, but chiefly in
a way of Adversity; for that is most commonly set out in a way of trial in
Scripture. When it is immoderate and beyond our Strength, 1 Cor. 10. 13. God
has promised to his People, that they shall not be tempted above that they are
able to bear; but will with the Temptation, also make a way to escape, that
they may be able to bear it. God's Conduct is very gently. As Jacob drove on as
the little ones were able to bear: So does God proportion his Dispensations to
his People's Strength, not to their deservings, but he considers what they are
able to bear. Either God keeps off greater Trials, or gives in greater
Strength; a sweeter sense of his Love, or a greater measure of gracious
Support. A Child would sink under that Load that a strong Back bears without
any grudging. Now this is that we ask of God (according to his Promise) that
our Temptation may not be immoderate, and too hard for us. Or else it is a
Judgment, when it proves a provocation to Sin; and so God's Temptation which
was meant for our good, we may abuse it, and take occasion thence to Sin; as
when we murmur under the Cross, or turn our worldly Comforts into an occasion
to the Flesh. Now to prevent the Judgment which may be in these Temptations, in
all the Trials which befall us, we should fear more the Offense against God,
than our own Smart, or the power of the Devil, or any Inconvenience that may
accrue to us in natural Evils which we feel. When we are under Afflictions, we
should be more sollicitous that we do not offend God, that he would keep us
from murmuring and dishonouring his Name, then we should be about our ease and
safety; for this is to prevent the Judgment of the Temptation. This was Paul's
Comfort when he was drawing to the Conclusion of his Life, 2 Timothy 4. 18. The
Lord has delivered me out of the Mouth of the Lion, and he shall deliver me
from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom. And so,
in good things that we enjoy, we should fear more offending God with them, than
the losing of them; for the loss of his Favor, is more than the loss of our
Comforts. A Man that loses his worldly Portion, this loss may be recompensed;
but he that loses the Favor of God, that breach cannot be made up by any
worldly Comforts whatsoever.

5. In Passive Evils (which are the usual Trials of God's People) we are not to
seek them, but to submit to them when they come upon us. We are not to seek
them, Mat. 16. 24. If any Man will be my Disciple, let him take up his Cross.
When clearly it is our Cross (that is) when it lies in our way, and we cannot
decline it, then take it up and fit his Back to it. So Jam. 1. 2. My Brethren,
count it all Joy when ye fall into diverse Temptations: He does not say when ye
run into them, but fall into them. We are not to draw them upon our selves.
Afflictions are not to be sought, and desired, but improved. Christians, we
never know when it is well with us: sometimes we question God's Love, because we
have no Afflictions and Trials: anon we are questioning his Love, because we
have nothing but Afflictions. In all these things we should refer our selves to
God; not desire Troubles, but bear them patiently and quietly when he lays them
upon our Backs.

6. Again, For those Trials which come from God. When God tempts us, or tries
his People in Mercy, he has a great deal of care of them under their Trials.
As a Goldsmiths, when he casts his Metal into the Furnace, he does not lose it
there, and look after it no more; but sits, and prys, and looks to see if it be
not too hot, that nothing be split, nothing lost. So it is said, Mal. 3. 3. And
he shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver: and he shall purify the Sons
of Levi, and purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may offer unto the Lord
an Offering in Righteousness. The Lord will observe his People when they are
under Trial, how to moderate Affliction, how to refresh them with seasonable
Comfort, that all this might better them, and bring them to good.

7. Tho in our Trials we manifest Weakness as well as Grace, yet that weakness
is to be done away. You must remember Weakness is manifested that it may be
removed, and Grace manifested that it may be strengthened. When Gold and Silver
is tried in the Furnace, there is not only pure Metal discovered, but also the
drossy part mingled with it; but it is so discovered, that it may be severed
from the Gold: Such is our Trial, it may discover a great deal of Dross and Sin
in us. But this is our Comfort, that as it does discover Sin; so it conduces
to mortify Sin. Therefore says Job, Chap. 23. 10. When he has tried me, I
shall come forth as Gold; that is, purified and refined, and having the drossy
part eaten out.

8. God permits us to be tempted of Satan and his Instruments for his Glory and
our Good. For his Glory; that his Power may be discovered in our Preservation,
in upholding that Grace he has put into us; 2 Cor. 12. 10. Therefore I take
pleasure in Infirmities, in Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions, in
Distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong: We should
be glad that God be glorified, tho with our great Inconvenience. And it is for
our Good; to correct our Pride, and Vainglory. When Peter presumed of his
Strength, then God left him to be tempted of the Damsel, Mat. 26. 33, 34, 35,
70.

9. When God permits Satan to exercise us, tho he suspends the Victory, yet
if he give us Grace to fight and to maintain the Combat, it is a great Mercy.
For so he dealt with Paul, when he had to do with the Messenger of Satan,
(Satan was in that trouble, be it what it will) he had only this Answer, 2 Cor.
12. 9. My Grace is sufficient for thee: for my Strength is made perfect in
Weakness. Three times he had been with God, and then he gets his answer, and it
was only this, My Grace, etc. Jesus Christ in his Conflict and Combat, was
answered as to Support, and so was heard in the Things he feared. So if God
give Strength to the Soul, it is an answer tho he do not take off the Trial.

Secondly, There are Temptations from Satan, as well as from God; who is called
the Tempter, Mat. 4. 3. Now the Devil's Temptations they are Evil, and for
Evil. How does the Devil tempt?

1. By propounding Objects; As Luke 4. 5. He showed unto him all the Kingdoms
of the World in a moment of time. He had nothing to work upon within, therefore
he propounds outward Objects. So still the Devil tempts us with a curious Eye
to take in the Object, that it may be a Bait and Snare to the Soul. Achan takes
notice of it himself, Josh. 7. 21. When I saw among the Spoils a goodly
Babylonish Garment, and a Wedg of Gold, then I coveted them, and took them. I
saw, I coveted, and I took: The Eye awakens Desire, and Desire that inclines to
Practice. So Prove. 23. 31. Look not thou upon the Wine when it is red, when it
gives his color in the Cup, when it moves it self aright. Unless we shut the
Windows of the Soul, this pestilent Plague gets in by the Senses. The Heart is
corrupted by Objects that we take in by the Senses, as it corrupted Eve, dealt
with her first by the Sense; the forbidden Fruit was full in her way, then the
Devil sets upon her.

2. He tempts by the persuasion of Instruments, who are the Devil's Spokes-men:
Thus was Joseph tempted by the Inticements and Blandishments of his Mistress,
Genesis 39. 7. And many times the Devil sets nearest Friends and Relations to
weaken their Zeal, and withdraw their Hearts from God. Mat. 16. 23. Says
Christ to Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan. It was Peter said it, yet Christ
rebuked Satan, for the Devil had a hand in it; he makes one of Christ's
Disciples his Instrument.

3. He does it by internal suggestion, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. And Satan stood up
against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel; that is, by internal
suggestion. John 13. 2. The Devil put it into the Heart of Judas to betray him.
He haunts and pesters the Hearts of Men, by vain Thoughts, and carnal
Imaginations. So the God of this World is said to blind their Minds, 2 Cor. 4.
4.

4. By stirring up the Humors of our Body. When he sees Men inclined to Wrath,
and angry Motions, or Lust, the Devil joins, and makes the Tempest the more
violent. He knows what use to make of an angry Look, a wanton Glance; he knows
how to tempt, by awakening the Humors of our own Body against us.

Take some Observations here.

1. In all Sins Satan joineth, he is not idle, but makes use of every
Inclination of ours; as he sees the Tree leaning, he joins issue. But some Sins
are purely of his suggestion; horrid Sins, and such as are so very Evil, that
they could come from no other but from the Devil: such Sins as could not be
acted by Man in an ordinary course of sinning. As Judas his Treason, though he
were Devil enough to plot such a thing, yet it is said, Satan put it into his
Heart. And such singular Diabolical Suggestions may be darted into the Bosom of
Believers sometimes; Thoughts of Atheism, Blasphemy, unnatural Sins,
Self-murder, suspicion of the Gospel; these things the Devil throws in.
Therefore, Ephesians. 6. 16. Believers are warned to quench these fiery Darts, that
the Devil hurls into the Souls of Men.

2. Every Man is haunted with special Temptations, from Temper, Sex, Age,
Custom, Calling, Company, Course of Aflairs; these things are often spoken of
in Scripture. From Temper, God makes use of Temper. For though he plants all
Grace in the Hearts of the Regenerate, yet there are certain Graces wherein
they are eminent; as Timothy for Temperance, Moses for Meekness, etc. Thus Paul
speaks of the Law in his Members, Romans 7. 23. The Devil may find Forces from
the Temper of the Body to destroy the Soul. So also from Sex, as he beguiled
Eve, 2 Cor. 11. 3. And from Age, we read of youthful Lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22. And
how strong the Devil is about young Ones, 1 John 2. 13. I have written unto you
young Men, because ye have overcome the wicked One. They are most assaulted
with Pride, with youthful Lusts suitable to their Age. So from Custom and
Education; Psalm. 18. 23. I kept my self from mine Iniquity. Every Man has his
Iniquity; that is, such as his Education, and Custom has wrought upon him,
which makes the Sin prevail over other Sins. A Child of God has a predominant
Sin, not over Grace, (for that is inconsistent with sincerity) but some
Master-Sin which prevails over the rest: according as the Channel is cut, so
corrupt Nature runs, but some in this Channel, and some in that: Every Man has
his special Sin, and accordingly the Devil plies him. Then our Calling is a
special Temptation; 1 Timothy 3. 6. the Apostle speaks, that a Bishop should not
be a Novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of
the Devil. Pride, and Ostentation of Gifts, and Vainglory in such public
Service. Many other Sins follow every Calling: Therefore if you would be
skilled in Satan's Enterprises, you must mind Temper, Age, Calling. So Company:
As a Man's Company is, his Soul is insensibly tainted. As a Man that walks in
the Sun is tanned before he is aware: so are the Souls of Men sullied and
defiled by Carnal Company, before they be aware. A Man would think of all Sins,
Passion is so uncomely, that it should not tempt another Man: Yet it is said,
Prove. 22. 24, 25. Make no friendship with an angry Man; and with a furious Man
thou shall not go; lest thou learn his ways, and get a Snare to thy Soul: for
the more accustomed to them, the less odious they seem; so by little and
little, our Spirits are shaped and fitted for such a Sin. There are certain
Sins that are more special Temptations. Look, as every Disease has a Diet
which suits with it, so all Sins in the Soul, Satan knows what Baits we will
catch at. It may be, a Man that is addicted to the Pleasures of the Flesh, may
despise Profit, and therefore the Devil will not ply him that way. So a Man
that is addicted to Gain, despises pleasure. The Devil suits him with a Bait,
that suits the Disease of his Soul. It is an Opinion the Devils have their
several Wards and Quarters; some for such a sort of Sinners, others for another
sort. Look, as the Heathens had several Gods, (which were indeed Devils) as
Baccus, the God of Riot, or Patron of Good-fellowship; and Venus of Wantonness
and Love; and Mars, the Devil of revengeful and angry Spirits: And we read of
Mammon for Wealth, Mat. 6. 24. I know it is a fictio personae, to make the
Matter more sensible, there is a Person feigned. But there may be something of
this Truth in it, that the Devils have several Quarters; some to humor the
Covetous; others enticing the Wanton; others lie Leigers in Taverns, and
Drinking-Houses, to draw Men to beastly Excess; and others about the
Revengeful, to awaken their Rage. But all this, however it be, ('it is the
Opinion of some) should make us watchful over our own Desires and Inclinations,
for that is it the Devil makes use of to set upon us.

3. The Sin of the Devil tempting, must be distinguished from our Sin in
consenting. If the Devil tempt, and we consent not, it is his Sin. The envious
Man may throw Weeds over the Garden-wall; but if we do not suffer them to root
there, it is not the Gardiner's fault, but the fault of the envious Man: so the
Devil may fling in Temptations, Fiery Darts, Atheistical or Blasphemous
Thoughts; yet if we throw them out with indignation, and give no harbor and
entertainment to them there, it is our misery, but the Devil's sin; and
therefore if our Hearts abhor them at the very first rising, though they be
Man's Cross, they will be put upon Satan's account.

4. Satan, if he cannot prevail by the first Temptation to draw us to Sin, he
will seek to prevail by a second or subsequent Temptation, to draw us to
trouble and discomfort. If he cannot weaken Grace, he may molest and disturb
our Comfort, by flinging in a blasphemous Thought, which is abhorred by a
Christian. If he cannot draw you to deny God, then he will seek to cloud
things, that you may suspect your own estate; and thus our way is made wearisom
to us: Look, as a Candle which sticks to a Stone-Wall, though it cannot burn
the Wall, yet it smutcheth, and defiles it: So the Children of God, when the
Devil seeks to make their Temptations stick, though he does not burn their
Hearts with these fiery Darts of Blasphemy and Atheism, they catch not there,
yet they weaken our Comfort; and then his second Temptation, is to bring us to
doubt of God's Love, to doubt of our own Faith, and to draw us to impatiency
and murmuring at God's Hand. Therefore it should be our care, not only to
withstand the Devil's first Temptation, but his second also.

5. Certainly they cannot stand long, that seem to give up themselves to
Satan's Snares. How may this be done? Any Carnal Affection unmortified, lays
us open to the Devil; 1 Timothy 6. 9. They that will be rich, fall into
Temptation, and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown
Men in Destruction and Perdition. If a Man cherish his Worldliness, and do not
mortify it, he lies ready to be seized upon as a ready Prey for Satan. Judas,
he had the Bag, and he lay open to the Devil; his Worldliness increased upon
him, so the Devil enters into him. Again, when we ride into the Devil's
Quarters, and will parley with Temptation; when we freely open the Windows of
the Senses unto alluring Objects, and can dally with the Snare, and play about
the Temptation, then we do but tempt God to leave us, and tempt the Devil to
surprise us: And therefore be sober, be watchful, for your Adversary, the
Devil, walks about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.
8. Be sober; What is sobriety? A holy Moderation in the use of Worldy Things;
be sure not to leave any Carnal Affection unmortified. And then be watchful,
take heed not to play about the Temptation, nor put your selves upon occasions
of Sin, for then we lie open to the Devil, and give him an advantage against
us. Thus much for the second sort of Temptations, such as come from Satan.

The Third sort of Temptations, are those which arise from our own Hearts; so
we call these Urgings and Solicitations to sin, which we feel in our Bosoms.
Concerning this also, I shall give some Observations.

1. If there were no Devil to tempt us, yet the Heart of Man is fruitful enough
of all that is evil. Mat. 15. 19. Out of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts,
Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false Witnesses, Blasphemies.
There Is a black Catalogue, and all comes out of the Heart of Man. And among the
rest, observe, there is Murder which strikes at the Life of Man; and Blasphemy,
which strikes at the Honor and Being of God. Though the Devil should stand by,
and say nothing to us, we have enough within us to put us upon all kind of
evil. Jerem. 17. 9. The Heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, who can know it? As to Actual Sins, there is a difference; but as to
Original Sin, it is the same in all. All the Sins that ever have been, or shall
be committed in the World, they are vertually in our Natures, they are but
Original Sin acted and drawn out this way, and that way, as all numbers are but
one multiplied: Cain's Murder, Iudas's Treason, Iulian's Apostasy and Enmity to
Christ, the Seed and Root of all is in our Nature; and if we were but left to
our selves, and had the same Temptations and Occasions, we should be as bad as
others; such as we would not imagine that ever we should commit, is in our
heart; 2 King. 8. 13. Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this great thing?
when he had been told of those horrid Cruelties he should act upon the Women
and Children of Israel. No Man knows the depth of his own Wickedness, if
loosned of his Chain, and the Restraints are taken off. At first Nature abhors
them in the conceit of them; but when God permits us to lie under the
Temptation, and fair Occasion, Man is not to be trusted. We see, in this
respect, what need there is to pray that God would not leave us under the Power
of Temptation, because the Heart of Man is prone, naturally inclinable to all
evil. There are new Actual Sins; but there is no new Original Sin, that is but
one and the same in all Persons, and at all Times; the Root of all the Mischief
which has been in the World, is within us.

2. That without the Flesh, the World and the Devil can have no power over us.
A Man cannot be compelled to sin, against his own consent; he may be compelled
to suffer Temptation, but he is a Sinner by his own choice. The World would not
hurt us, were it not for Lust in the Heart; 2 Pet. 1. 4. Escaping the
Corruption of the World through Lust. I say, it is not the beauty or sweetness
of the Creature, but Lust, which is our Ruin and Undoing, and that makes the
World so dangerous unto us. A Spider sucketh Poison from the same Flower from
which a Be would suck Honey; the fault is not in the Flower, but in the Spider.
The Devil can do nothing, unless we give him leave. The Fire is kindled in our
own Bosoms, Satan only does blow it up into a Flame, says Nazianzen: We have
the Coals in our own Hearts, the Devil does but come and blow them up.
Suggestion does nothing without consent. In vain does one knock at the Door,
and none within to look out and make answer: So, all other Temptations would be
in vain, if there were not somewhat within that would close with what is
suggested from Satan; James 1. 14. Every Man is tempted, when he is drawn away
of his own Lust, and enticed, by his own Concupiscence. If your Hearts did not
yield, if you did resist, the Devil and the World could not force you. When
Satan came to Christ, he might molest him, but he found nothing in him, John
14. 30. As a Glass of pure Water may be shaken, but there is no Filth, no Mud
there discovered: But now, the best of Men, they have somewhat within them,
Naughtiness and Corruption enough in their own Hearts, upon which Satan may
work, and inflame them with his fiery Darts. In short; We may commit Sin
without Satan, but Satan cannot betray us to sin without our selves; cannot
have his desire upon us, without us.

3. The Flesh does not only make us flexible and yielding to Temptations, but
is active and stirring in our Hearts, to force and impel us thereunto. There Is
a Law in our Members, Romans 7. 23. a powerful active Principle within us, that
is always urging us to sin. We think, and speak too gently of our own corrupt
Hearts, when we think the Corruption is sleepy, and works not until it be
irritated by outward Objects, and Satan's Suggestions: No, there is an active
stirring Principle within us, that pours out Sin as a Fountain does Waters,
though no Body comes to drink of them; as Genesis 6. 5. Every imagination of the
Thoughts of his Heart, is only evil continually. There is a Mint in Man's Heart
that is always at work, coining evil Thoughts, evil Desires, evil Motions; and
the flesh lusts against the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. And Sin wrought in me all
manner of Concupiscence, Romans 7. 8. Though there were no other occasion to
irritate, but God's Law, and the Motions of his Spirit, yet there is a continual
Fermentation wrought by these corrupt Humors in our Hearts. Natural
Concupiscence does not lie idle in them, but is active, and warring; and the
Objects that are in the World, and the Solicitations of the Devil make it more
violent.

4. The Temptations of the Flesh and the World go in conjunction, and do
mutually help one another. And therefore it is said, 1 John 2. 16. For all that
is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, etc. Mark,
(whatever is in the World) he does not mention the Object, but the Lusts,
because these are complicated and folded up together in the Temptation. The
Bait is the World; but the Appetite and Desire we have from the Flesh. And this
is intimated in that Passage, Jam. 1. 14. Every Man is tempted when he is drawn
away of his own Lust, and enticed. There Is two Words there, (drawn away, and
enticed): the drawing away, notes the vehemence of desire, or Inclination of
our own Hearts; and the enticement that is from the Object. Both ways does
Corruption work, by Force and Flattery. The great Bait is Pleasure, the
contentment that we take in outward Enjoyments. And we are carried out to it by
the vehement propension of corrupt Nature.

5. This vehement propension of Corrupt Nature to outward things is set at work
by a hope of gaining them, or a fear to lose them; and so we are assaulted on
every hand, by right hand, and left hand Temptations. By right hand Temptations
from the Flatteries, and Comforts of the World; which are the more dangerous,
because of their easy Insinuation into, and strong Operation upon our Hearts,
and so our Comforts prove a Snare to us, and an occasion to the Flesh, as the
Apostle says, Gal. 5. 13. And then there are left hand Temptations, which
arise from shame or fear of worldly Evils, as the other did arise from a desire
or hope of good. So the Apostle, Gal. 6. 12. As many as desire to make a fair
show in the Flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised; only lest they should
suffer persecution for the Cross of Christ. That was their temporizing then to
comply with the Jews, who had some National Privileges under the Roman
Government, and had better security to their worldly Interests, than possibly
through Christians could have. Now to avoid both these, the Apostle when he
presses Christians to all those Graces which are necessary, he presses them
to Temperance and Patience, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6. Add to Knowledge Temperance, and to
Temperance Patience. Both these are Armor of Proof against worldly Temptations;
Temperance against the Delights, and Patience against the Evils and Troubles of
the World. It was never yet so well with the World, but that Christians (those
that are so in good earnest, that mean to go to Heaven and keep a good
Conscience) will be assaulted on both sides.

6. That there is no avoiding either of these Snares and Temptations as long as
any Carnal Affection remains unmortified. For until a Man be dead to worldly
Comforts, and hardened against worldly Sorrows, he does but lie naked and open
to Satan, 1 Timothy 6. 9. He that will be rich, falls into Temptation, and a
Snare. And what is said of Riches, the same is true of Pleasure; he that is
vehemently addicted that way, will soon come to put God out of the Throne, and
make his Belly, and his Pleasure, his God; 2 Timothy 3. 4. Lovers of Pleasures,
more than Lovers of God: Any Lust that is cherished and indulged, will betray
us. As for Honor; John 5. 44. How can ye believe, which receive Honor one of
another, and seek not the Honor that comes from God only? True Faith cannot
be planted in that Heart that is not purified, until there be a prevailing
Interest established for Christ, over all Carnal Affections. Grace bears no
sway in us, and has no power over us. The ambition and love of respect from
Men, will necessarily make us unsound in the profession of Godliness. Well
then, it stands us upon, to allow and cherish no secret Sin, but to observe
what are the tender parts of our Hearts, or which way our Corruptions lie,
where subjection to God is most apt to stick with us: Psalm. 119. 133. Order my
Steps in thy Word: and let not any Iniquity have dominion over me. Though we
seem to have a Zeal in other things, yet if one Lust be indulged, we shall soon
swerve from our Duty. True Obedience to God, is inconsistent with the Dominion
of any one Lust, or corrupt Affection. I say, though a Man, out of some slender
and insufficient touch of Religion upon his Heart, may go right for a while,
and do many things gladly; yet that corruption which is indulged, and under the
power of which a Man lies, will at length draw him off from God; and therefore
no one Sin should have dominion over us. When does Sin reign, or have dominion
over us? When we do not endeavor to mortify it, and to cut off the Provisions
that may feed that Lust. Chrysostom's Observation is, The Apostle does not say,
Let it not tyrannize over you, but let it not reign over you; that is, when you
suffer it to have a quiet Reign in your Hearts.

7. The more we sin, upon the mere impulsion of the Flesh, and without an
external Temptation, the more heinous is our Offense, for then the Heart is
carried of its own accord to sin. Ezekiel. 16. 33, 34. They give Gifts to all
Whores: but thou give thy Gifts to all thy Lovers, and hirest them, that they
may come unto thee for thy Whoredoms. And the contrary is in thee from [other]
Women in thy Whoredoms, whereas none follows thee to commit Whoredoms: and in
that thou give a Reward, and no Reward is given unto thee; therefore thou art
contrary. These are Expressions to set forth their Idolatry. But that which is
intended there, is this, That they were not desired or solicited, but merely
carried to sin by their own proper Motion, which exceedingly aggravateth Sin;
Why? for then it is a sign the Heart is carried of its own accord, by its own
weight, as a heavy Body is moved downward, not by the impression of outward
Force, but by its own natural propension.

Now when do Men thus merely sin, upon the impulsions of the Flesh? I Will
instance in three Cases.

1. When the Temptation is so small and inconsiderable, that it should not sway
with any reasonable Man. It is said, in Amos 2. 6. They sold the Poor for a
pair of Shoes. And for a piece of Bread will that Man transgress, Prove. 28. 21.
When Pleasure and Profit is so inconsiderable, as that it could not rationally
make up a Temptation, then Men sin merely upon the Corruptions of their own
Flesh. When the Devil has to do with great Souls, such as Christ was, he
propounds the Glory of all the World, Mat. 4. O! but a lesser price will serve
the turn, with those that are deeply engaged already, that are biased with
their own propension; (for instance) a little ease, and carnal satisfaction, a
slothful Humor, is enough to take them off from the sweetness of Communion
with God, and the pleasure and contentment that they might enjoy with him in
holy Exercises. Look as in general, it is a great aggravation of all Sin, that
for such paltry Trifles, we turn the back upon God and his Grace: all Sinners
do so, they part with all their Hopes by Christ, for a Mess of Pottage, for a
little present Pleasure; that is profaneness indeed, Heb. 12. 16. So in
particular things, when the smallest Temptation seems to be strong enough to
draw off our Hearts from our Duty, to bring us to a Sin of Omission, when it is
needful to go and converse with God in secret; a little ease, and sloth, hangs
upon us, and we cannot shake it off: or when we are drawn to a Sin of
Commission, by an inconsiderable Matter, by the smallest worldly Interest as
can be mentioned, for a piece of Bread, and a pair of Shoes.

2. When Men tempt themselves, or provoke Satan to tempt them. As those which
make provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14. that
cater for their Lusts, and contrive how to feed them, and how to cherish those
inordinate Affections in their Hearts; that run into the Devil's Quarters, that
bespeak a Temptation; or, as it is James 5. 5. That nourish their Hearts, as in
a day of slaughter. To nourish our Hearts, is to feed our Lusts, to put
strength into the Enemy's Hand. When a Commander sent to his Prince, to know
how he should keep such a rebellious Town in order: He sent him this Answer,
That he should starve the Dog, and strengthen the Clog; that he should weaken
the City, and strengthen the Garrison; that was his meaning. Truly, what was his
advice in that outward Case, that is the Duty of a Christian, to weaken his
Lusts, and still to be strengthening Grace. He should be increasing the better
Part, and putting the Spirit in heart, by godly Exercises; by treasuring up
Promises, getting Arguments and fresh Encouragements against Sin; and by
weakening the Flesh, starving and cutting off Provisions for the Flesh. But on
the contrary, when Men cater for the Flesh, provide for it, indulge carnal
Distempers, and feed them with that Diet which they affect: These tempt
themselves, and seem willing to lie under their Bondage, and to be glad of it.

3. When a Man is a Sinner to his loss; and has Reasons of Nature to dissuade
him, as well as Reasons of Grace; not only Religion, but his civil Interests,
would counsel him to do otherwise; as he that brings a Blot upon his Name, or
Ruin upon his Estate, by evil Courses; when Men draw on Iniquity with a
Cart-rope, as the Expression is, Isa. 5. 18. that is, when it is not Pleasure,
but a very Toil and Burden, and temporal Inconvenience to them to be sinful;
that industriously make it their business; those that are holden with the Cords
of their own Sins, Prove. 5. 22. He speaks of such as did bring temporal
Inconveniences upon themselves; as did consume their Flesh, and their own
Bodies; these certainly are those that have cause to complain of their own
Hearts, not to put it on Satan, but themselves.

II. Having opened the Nature of Temptations, I come now to give the Reasons
why this is so usual an Evil we encounter with in the World, Temptation.

1. God permits it for his own Glory, to discover the Power, the Freeness and
Riches of his Grace, that Men may be driven the more earnestly to sue out their
Peace in the Name of Jesus Christ. Luther propounds this Reason; Tho Man be
prone to sin of himself, of his own accord, yet God suffers the Tempter to be
in the World, because Man is backward to seek Mercy and Grace by Christ; and
therefore God urges him with sore Temptations. Certainly this Reason was given
by him not amiss. You know, when Paul felt those Paroxisms, and sad
Counter-buffs in his own Spirit, this makes him bless God for Jesus Christ.
Romans 7. 25. But thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: It makes him
reflect upon the Grace of God in Christ. We keep off from the Throne of Grace,
till Temptations drive us thither. As when the Sheep wander, the Shepherd lets
loose his Dog upon them; not to worry them, but to bring them back to the Fold
again: so God lets loose Satan to drive us to himself.

2. For the trial of that Grace which he has wrought in us. Grace does better
appear in Temptation, than out of it. The greatness of the Woman of Canaan's
Faith would never have been discovered, had it not been for Christ's Answer and
Denial, Mat. 15. 25, 28. Then, O Woman, great is thy Faith. The Glory of that
Grace which God has wrought in his People, would not be discovered so much,
were it not for the great Trials he puts them upon: Heb. 11. 17. By Faith
Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac. Before we go to Heaven, we shall
have our Trials, and shall be tried in our dearest Comforts, and choicest
worldly Contentments; and all, to see what Faith we have, and what Loyalty to
God in the midst of these Trials. A great Tempest discovers the goodness of a
Ship, and skill of the Pilot; and so these great Trials, they discover the
soundness of our Hearts, and the fruit of that Grace which God has wrought in
us. Gold is most tried in the Fire, and discovered to be pure and perfect.
Stars that lie hid in the Day, shine in the Night. We have but dry Notions of
the Comforts of Christianity^ and make them matter of talk, until we are put
upon great Trials, then is our belief and sense of them proved. A gilded
Potsherd may shine, until it comes to scouring; but then the Varnish and Paint
is worn off. The Valor and Worth of a Soldier, is not known in times of
Peace, and when he is out of Action. When we are put to some difficulty and
straits, then is Faith seen. Now this is a very pleasing Spectacle to God, to
see them approve their Faith and Loyalty to his Majesty.

3. Temptations, as they serve to prove, so also to humble us, that we may
never be proud of what we have, or conceited of what we have not. As Paul, that
he might not be exalted above measure, he was buffeted with a Messenger of
Satan, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Poor Bladders we are, soon blown up and swollen into Vanity,
and vain Conceits of our selves; therefore had need be pricked, that we may let
out those swelling Winds. A Ship that is laden with precious Ware, needs to be
ballasted with Wood, Stones, or contemptible Stuff. But why will God humble us
by Temptations, and such kind of Temptations as are solicitatious to Evil?
Answer, Spiritual Evils need a Spiritual Cure. Outward Afflictions they humble,
but not so much as Temptations do; they are not so conducible to humble a
gracious Heart, as Temptations to Sin. Why? For then the Breach is made upon
our Souls, and the Assault is given to that which a gracious Man counts to be
dear; and therefore these are suffered to come upon us. If any thing will
humble a Child of God, this will do it. It may be he may bear up under losses
tollerably; but when his Peace comes to be assaulted, and his Grace, this will
humble him to purpose. Worldly Men, they value their Estate by their outward
Interest; But a Child of God, by his Peace of Conscience, and his thriving in
Grace; O this wounds him to the Heart, when in either of these he suffers loss:
This sets him a praying and groaning to God, as Paul groans bitterly when he
felt those gripes of Sin, and those reluctances in his Heart, (O wretched Man!
etc.) Afflictions, they conduce to humble and prove us, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. And
besides too, the Lord loves to make the Cause of our Mischief, to be the Means
of our Cure. This gives us the sight of some Corruption we saw not before.

4. God permits this Exercise to his People, to conform us to Christ. We must
pledge him in his own Cup, it must go round; He himself was tempted, Heb. 2. 7.
Christ has felt the weight, burden, and trouble of Temptations, and knows the
danger of them. Now the Disciple is not above his Lord, nor the Scholar above
his Master. The Devil that did set upon Christ, will not be afraid of us.

5. By Temptations to Sin, God morti^^eth Sin; not only that Sin to which we
are tempted, but others, that we may not be so heedless: When we have smarted
under Temptation, we are not so indulgent to Corruption as before; we do not
let our Senses nor Affections run loose; as David speaks, that he got this by
his Fall, Psalm. 51. 6. In the hidden part thou shall make me to know Wisdom: O,
I shall be wiser and more circumspect for this all my Life. When Men have
smarted, they grow more cautious; and so, by the overruling and good Hand of
God, our Sins do us service in our passage to Heaven, as well as our Graces:
And God's Children may say, they had sinned more, if they had sinned less: They
are more acquainted with the Wiles and Depths of Satan, and Naughtiness of
their own Hearts, and so are more solicitous.

6. To make us more meek to others; Gal. 6. 1. If any Man be fallen, ye which
are spiritual, restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness, considering thy
self, lest thou also be tempted. We are very apt to be severe and fierce upon
the failings of others. But now, when we are tempted our selves, we learn more
pity and compassion toward them. Severe Censurers are left to some great
Temptation, that they may be acquainted with their own Frailties: they are
tempted to some Sins, to which their Hearts were not so inclinable before. Well
then, that we may pity others, mourn over them, and have a fellow-feeling of
their Condition, God will make us know the Heart of a tempted Man, that we may
have more compassion over poor tempted Souls. Possibly that may be a part of
the Apostle's sense, 2 Cor. 1. 6. Whether we be afflicted, it is for your
Consolation and Salvation: or whether we be comforted, it is for your
Consolation and Salvation. Persons in Office in the Church, they are afflicted
and tempted; and it may be, have a greater measure of Afflictions and
Temptations, that they may show more pity to other Souls. Therefore Luther was
wont to say, Three things made a Minister, (viz.) Prayer, Meditation, and
Temptation. When he is much in communion with God, much in the study of the
Word, and has been exercised in Temptation, then he will be of a tender and
compassionate Heart over others; and that he may help them out of the Snares of
the Devil, he is more fitted to his Work by Temptation.

7. It occasions much Experience of the Care and Providence of God, and the
Comforts of his Promises. A Man does not know what the Comforts of Faith mean,
till he be exercised by Temptation. And Spiritual Experiences, will countervail
all other Troubles. This is an Hour of Temptation, Rev. 3. 10. What should we
do in this Hour of Temptation? Be not over-confident, nor over-diffident, in an
hour when God casts us upon trying Times. Not over-confident, in casting your
selves upon needless Troubles without cause: Mat. 14. 28. Peter said, Lord, if
it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the Water. Peter thought he could do any
thing in the strength of Christ's Word; Peter seeks a Call before it be given
him. Nor yet be over-backward and diffident to own God, and the Truths of God.
As Paul taxed Peter for dissembling, Gal. 2. 12. when those false Brethren were
likely to bring great trouble, Peter dissembled and runs with them, and
separates himself from the purer sort of Christians, he is taxed there for it.
We should not run into them without cause, nor yet be ashamed to own the ways
of God, those which are most agreeable to his Holy Word. Not be solicitous so
much about Events, as Duties; for God is far more concerned than we, and has a
greater Interest than we can have. What Is our Interest, and the Interest of our
Families, and our Children, to the great Interest of God, the Safety of his
Children, the Safety of his Glory, and Cause of his Church? Be not troubled
about Events, for all our Business is to understand our Duty, that we may not
sin, but keep blameless in the Hour of Temptation.

Use. If Temptations be an usual Evil, wherewith we encounter in the present
World. Then, First, We should not be dismayed at them. Secondly, We should be
prepared for them.


First, We should not be dismayed at them, as if some strange thing did befall
us. When we enter into the Lists with Satan, resist the Devil: Why? 1 Pet. 5.
9. For all those things are accomplished in your Brethren, that are in the
Flesh. They are all troubled with a busy Devil, a naughty World, and a corrupt
Heart! And why should we look for a total Exemption, and to go to Heaven in an
unusual way?

That we may not be dismayed by Temptation, I shall give you several
Considerations.

1. We took an Oath to fight under Christ's Banner. Baptism it is, Sacramentum
Militare, our Military Oath, which we took to fight in Christ's Cause, against
all the Oppositions and Difficulties we meet with in the World. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
The Apostle calls Baptism, The Answer of a good Conscience toward God. An
Answer supposes a Question. It is an Allusion to the Questions, propounded by
the Catechist to the Catechumen. When they came to desire Baptism, they asked
them, Abrenuncias? do thou renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil? And
they answered, Abrenuncio? I do renounce them. So, Credis? Do thou believe in
Jesus Christ with all thy Heart? as Philip propounds the Question to the
Eunuch; and they answered, Credo, I do believe. Will thou undertake to walk in
all Holy Obedience? and the Answer is, I do undertake before God. Conscience,
which is God's Deputy, puts the Question, in God's Name, to those which take
the Seals of his Covenant; Are you willing to renounce the Flesh, and worldly
Vanities? Will you cleave to God, and his Ways, whatever they cost you?
Whosoever makes this Answer, is supposed that he makes it knowingly, that he
does understand the Difficulties of Salvation, and what he must meet with in
his way to Heaven. So the Apostle says, You are not Debtors to the Flesh, Romans
8. 12. A Man is a Debtor to another, either by the Obligation of some received
Benefit, or by his solemn Promise and Engagement; both are of use in that
place. They that would seek the wellbeing of their Souls, need not gratify the
Flesh. They that are engaged to walk after the Spirit, and come under the Bond
of an Holy Oath, and that are thus solemnly engaged, cannot expect to carry on
the Profession of Godliness without Conflicts, and multiplied Difficulties.

2. That is not the happiest Condition, which is most quiet and free from the
Temptations of Satan; for, Luke 11. 21. When the strong Man armed keeps his
Palace, his Goods are in peace. When the Devil hath-quiet possession, he does
not trouble Men. The Sea must needs be smooth and calm, when Wind and Tide go
one way. There are some which suspect their Condition, because of continual
Temptation; and others, because they have no Temptation. Neither is a safe
Rule; for the time of our Conflict may not yet become. But if any have cause to
suspect themselves, it is the last sort; for they that are least troubled, may
be most hurt; they are quiet and secure, because Satan has got them into his
Snare, and has a quiet Dominion in their Souls.

3. Jesus Christ himself was tempted; and therefore we should not be dismayed
with Temptations. Upon several Accounts is this a Comfort to us; partly, as it
shows that we cannot look for an Exemption, for the Captain of our Salvation
was thus exercised, Heb. 2. 10. Be not disconsolate, it becomes good Soldiers
to follow their Captain. We are to pledge him in this Cup. He was tempted,
therefore we shall be tempted. Partly and chiefly, because now he is more
likely to pity us. It is said, Heb. 2. 18. Wherefore he is able to succor
those that are tempted. Jesus Christ has felt the weight and trouble of
Temptations, therefore sure he will pity us, if we lie under Griefs and
Dangers; as a Man that has been Shipwrack'd himself, is the more likely to
pity others in their distress, when they have lost all. One that knows Evils by
guess and imagination, knows them only at a distance, and does not know how
evil they are; but he that knows them by Experience, he knows them at hand, and
by such a smart sense, as must needs leave a deep stroke and impression upon
the Soul. So Jesus Christ, that has had an experimental Knowledge, that knows
the Heart of a tempted Man, can more feelingly succor those that are tempted;
his Heart becomes tender by Experience; he knows the Danger and Troubles we are
subject unto; therefore be not dismayed. And partly too, because by suffering
this Evil in his own Person, he has pulled out the Sting of Temptation. Christ
sanctified every Condition that he passed through; his being poor, has pulled
out the Sting of Poverty. It is the more comportable now to a godly poor Man,
one that has an Interest in Christ; his dying has pulled out the Sting of
Death; so that what is to him a Prison, (Isa. 53. 8. He shall be taken from
Prison, and from Judgment) is to us a Bed of ease; Isa. 57. 2. They shall r^st
in their Beds: so his being tempted, has unstung Temptations, and has made
them not so grievous. And partly too, as he has directed us how to stand out,
and with what kind of Weapons to foil Satan. Christ, that is a Pattern of
doing, and suffering, is also a Pattern of resisting. He that left us an
Example of doing the Will of God, and by suffering with Meekness; and when he
was reviled, reviled not again: So in resisting Temptations, has he left us an
Example, has taught us how to grapple with the Devil, and in what manner to
repress his Temptation; therefore we should not be altogether dismayed.

4. Consider the Comforts of the Tempted. Abundantly has God provided for his
Servants in their Conflicts.

(1.) Jesus Christ, our General, the Captain of our Salvation, in whose Quarrel
we are engaged, has overcome all our Enemies, we are interested in his
Victory, John 16. 33. In the World ye shall have tribulation: but be of good
cheer, I have overcome the World. We may have many pressing and searching
Troubles, but the Sting of them is gone. Non pugna sublata est, sed Victoria,
Christ has not taken away the Combat, we must fight; but the Victory is sure,
He has overcome the World. This is our Comfort, when we are full of Faintings
and Fears, that all things are vanquished and overcome by Christ; that though
they terrify us, yet they shall not hurt us. Though Christ will not exempt us
from Battle, yet we have to do with the Devil, the World, and Death, which are
all vanquished Enemies.

(2.) He has a tender sense and a knowledge of our Estate. Christ says to
Peter, Satan has a desire to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat: but I
have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. Luke 22. 32. Christ's Love and
Mercy is never more at work for his People, than when they are most assaulted
by Satan; then is he interceding for them. John 13. 1. Jesus having loved his
own which were in the World, he loved them unto the end. When Christ was about
to go to Heaven, he thought, my own are to be left in the World, they are
exposed to great Temptation; and that set his heart a-work, as if he had said,
Poor Creatures, they are undone if I help them not. So, Zech. 3. 1, 2. And he
showed me Joshua the High Priest, standing before the Angel of the Lord, and
Satan standing at his right hand to resist him. And the Lord said unto Satan,
The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke
thee: Is not this a Brand plucked out of the Fire? And he showed me! our whole
Case and Danger, it is clearly known to Christ. He knows how Satan molests and
troubles you in your approaches to God; how he seeks to divert your Thoughts,
to weaken your Confidence. We have a Friend and Advocate, that puts forth the
strength of his Mediation and Intercession, and is zealous and affectionate for
the welfare of his People. The Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee.

(3.) He is engaged in the Battle, and fights with us, by renewing the strength
of his own Grace. Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me. He gives relief and help, according to the nature of the
Conflict. If there be Duty to be done, Burden to be born, or Battle to be
fought, Christ is giving in supply. As the Olive Trees (Zech. 4. 11, 12.) were
always dropping into the Lamps; so is he dropping in strength and Grace into
the Heart. Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before me; because he is at
my right hand, I shall not be moved. When a Man has an able Second, he does,
with the more courage, go to the Conflict: God is on our right Hand, he is our
Second, his Grace comes into the Combat, and then the Field cannot be lost. If
we would exercise Faith in God, we might be the more confident.

(4.) He will reward us when we have done. Hold fast to the end, and I Will give
thee a Crown of Life, a Garland of Immortality, that shall never wither. If you
will but hold out, continue to fight the good Fight of Faith, there will a time
of triumph come. He that is now a Soldier, shall be a Conqueror, when the Crown
of Righteousness shall be put upon his Head, 2 Timothy 4. 8. And mark that, Romans
16. 20. And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. It Is
troublesome to be in the World, but shortly God shall bruise Satan: Mark, he
does not only say, God shall tread Satan, but tread him under your feet,
triumph over him. As Joshua called upon his Companions, come set your feet upon
the Necks of these Kings, when they were hid in the Cave; so the God of Peace
shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. Then your Comfort will be greater,
the more Dangers you have gone through. As Travelers, when they are come to
their Inn, and to their Home, they sweetly remember the Trouble and Danger of
the Road: So, when we are come to Heaven, these Temptations will increase our
rejoicing, and our triumph in God.

(5.) Even before the Battle, a Believer may be sure of Victory. In other
Fights, the Event is uncertain. Non aeque glorietur accinctus, ac discinctus.
Let not him that girdeth on his Harness, boast himself, as he that puts it
off, 1 Kings 20. 11. When a Field is won, then they will rejoice: But a
Believer, when he goes to fight, is sure to have the best of it beforehand, in
Bello, the War, though not in Praelio, the particular Conflict: Why? Because
the Father and Jesus Christ are stronger than all his Enemies, they cannot
pluck the Believer out of his Hands; John 10. 28, 29. I give to them Eternal
Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my
Father's Hand. My Father which gave them me, is greater than all: and none is
able to pluck them out of my Father's Hand. This is the Privilege which Christ
conferreth upon his Sheep, upon those which have an Interest in him; tho they
have many shakings and tossings in their Condition, yet their final
perseverance is certain. Christ is so unchangeable in the purposes of his Love,
I will give to them Eternal Life; and so invincible in the Power of his Grace,
None shall pull them out of my Father's Hand; nothing shall be able to hinder
their perseverance. Now though the Fight be long and troublesome, yet this is
one of God's Encouragements, you are sure of Victory at last. Therefore how
much does it concern us to get an Interest in Christ, that we may keep on in
this Way, and in this Hope.

Secondly; Let us be provided and prepared against Temptations. And to this end
I shall, First, Give some Directions how to resist Temptations in General.
Secondly, What to do in a special Hour of Temptation which comes upon the World;


When there are Terrors without, and we know not what Evil may be a coming, and
our Hearts are full of Doubt, how we may support and bear up our selves?

First, To direct you as to Temptations in General.

1. You must be completely armed. Ephesians. 6. 11. Put on the whole Armor of God,
that ye may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil: Not a piece only,
but the whole Armor of God, otherwise you will never come off with Honor and
Safety, from the Spiritual Conflict. The Poets feign of their Achilles, that he
was vulnerable only in the Heel, and there he got his Death's Wound. A
Christian; though he be never so well furnished in other parts, yet if any part
be left naked, you are in danger. Our first Parents were wounded in their Heel.
Who would have thought, that they which had such vast knowledge of God, and his
Creatures, that they should be enticed by Appetite? And Solomon, who had the
upper part of his Soul so well guarded, that he should be enticed by Women? To
see Men of great knowledge to be unmortified, and miscarry by their sensual
Appetite, is sad. A Christian must have no saving-Grace wanting; 2 Pet. 1. 5.
Add to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge, etc. There Is all the
Graces, and they must come out in their turn. We need Faith and Virtue, Zeal
and Holiness; and Knowledge to guide it, and Patience to arm it against the
Troubles of the present Life; and we need Temperance to moderate our Affections
to our worldly Enjoyments; and Godliness, that we may be frequent in communion
with God; and Brotherly-kindness, that we may preserve Peace among our
Brethren, and may not make Fractions and Ruptures in the Church; and we need
Charity, that we may be useful to all that are about us. There is use and work
for all Graces, one time or other: Sometimes we shall be tempted to a neglect
of God; at other times we shall be tempted to make a breach upon
Brotherly-kindness; at other times there will be a breach of Charity. Sometimes
the Devil seeks to tempt us to fleshly wickedness, therefore we need
Temperance; sometimes to spiritual Wickedness, to Error, therefore we need
Knowledge; sometimes to raging with despair, then we need Faith. We need the
whole Armor of God, for Satan has his various ways of Battery and Assault;
sometimes, through Ignorance, we miscarry and run into Error; sometimes, for
want of Faith, we run into Despair and Discomfort; sometimes, for want of
Temperance, violent corrupt Lusts over-set the Soul.

2. We must often pray to God for renewed Influences; we must not only get
habits of Grace, but pray for a renewed Influence. It is notable, next to the
Spiritual Armor, the Apostle mentions Prayer, Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always
with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
Perseverance. We never receive so much from God upon Earth, as to stand in need
of no more: And therefore though you put on the whole Armor of God, yet
praying always with all supplication in the Spirit: Why? Because without the
Lord's special Assistance, whereby he actuates those Graces, we can never
defend our selves, nor offend the Adversaries, or do any thing to purpose in
the Spiritual Life. Strength of Grace inherent, will not bear us out against
new Assaults. Habitual Grace, it needs Actual Influence; partly, that these
Graces may be applied, and excited to work. Phil. 2. 13. He gives, to will and
to do: God gives to do; that is, excites that strength you have, and carries
it out to work; and then that it may be directed in work, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 5. And
the Lord direct your Hearts into the Love of God, and into the patient waiting
for Christ. Every time we would make use of the Helmet of Salvation, when we
would lift up the Head, and wait for the Mercy of God, (the Lord direct you) we
must be directed. And not only so, but that it may be supplied with new
strength; for it is said, Isa. 40. 29. He gives Power to the faint, and to
them that have no Power he increases strength. And he does continue it; Luke
22. 32. I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. Thus will God keep us
in dependence, for those liberal Aids, and constant Supplies of his Grace,
without which we cannot use the Grace that we have.

3. You must resist: 1 Pet. 5. 9. Whom resist steadfast in the Faith. James 4.
7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. Stand your Ground, and then
Satan falls.

In all those Assaults, Satan has only Weapons Offensive, as fiery Darts; none
Defensive. We have not only the Sword of the Spirit, which is an Offensive
Weapon, but the Shield of Faith, that is a Defensive piece of Armor. Therefore
your Safety lies in resisting.

Now this Resistance must be, (1.) Not faint and cold, but strong and vehement.
(2.) Through and total. (3.) Constant and perpetual.


(1.) Not faint and cold. Some kind of Resistance may be made by general and
common Grace. The Light of Nature will rise up in defiance of many Sins,
especially at first: but this must be earnest and vehement, it is against the
Enemies of your Soul. Paul's Resistance was with serious Dislikes and deep
Groans, Romans 7. 15. 24. The Evil that I hate. And, O wretched Man, how shall I
be delivered? In most cases, a detestation or peremptory denial is enough. When
the Devil tempts Christ to worship him, Mat. 4. 10. Get thee behind me Satan.
In other Cases there must be serious Disputes, and Repulses. When Eve speaks
faintly and coldly, the Devil renews his Assaults with more violence. Genesis 3.
1, 2, 3. Has God said, ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? And the
Woman said unto the Serpent, We may eat of the Fruit of the Trees of the
Garden: But of the Fruit of the Tree, which is in the midst of the Garden, God
has said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye dye. She
speaks there warmly, and with too impatient a Resentment of the Restraint: and
too cold in the Commination and Threatening. Therefore the Devil works upon her,
when he saw she amplisieth the Restraint, for she says more indeed, We must
neither eat nor touch it. A faint Denial is a kind of Grant, and therefore your
repulse to Satan must be vehement and strong: In many Cases slight Satan,
answer with Indignation; as tho a Dog barks, yet the Traveller goes by: Satan
cannot endure Contempt. At other times argue for God strongly. Now the great
Argument, that quickens you to this lively and vehement Resistance; is, to
consider thy Soul is in Danger, and all thy Eternal Concernments. So some
expound that, Ephesians. 6. 12. We fight not against Flesh and Blood, but against
Spiritual Wickedness in high places; in Heavenly places it is in the Original:
No Worldly Concernments must go so near, as that which concerns the eternal
Good and Salvation of your Souls. What would the Devil have from thee, but thy
Soul, and thy precious Enjoyments, thy Peace of Conscience, Communion with God,
thy hopes of Eternal Life? And when Satan comes, and bids nothing but Worldly
Vanities, we should repel them with Indignation. A Merchant that has a
precious Commodity, and a Chapman bids him a base price, he puts up his Wares
with Indignation, and will not so much as regard him, or hear him: So when the
Devil comes, and would cheat you of your precious Enjoyments, you should repel
him with Indignation, when there is such base and unworthy Trifles to come in
competition with your great Hopes: As Christ, Mat. 16. 26. What is a Man
profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his Soul? or what shall a
Man give in exchange for his Soul? What, shall I lose my Soul, my Hopes, and
Happiness, and all for such paltry things, for a little Temporal Advantage?

(2.) It must be a through and total Resistance: When you yield, the Devil
incroacheth upon you. We are bid (in the Canticles) to take the little Foxes;
to dash Babylon's Brats in pieces: we should not yield to Satan a little. The
Devil at first cannot hope to prevail for greater things, therefore he seems
more modest in his Temptations: Ay, but lesser Sticks set the greater on Fire;
when ye entertain lesser Temptations, this kindles in your Souls, and it is
easily blown up into a great Flame in your Conscience. At first, when the Devil
came to our first Parents, Has God said? And then, You shall not surely dye.
Has God said you shall not eat of the Fruit of the Garden? The first
Temptation was more modest. The Approaches of Satan to the Soul are gradual, he
asks but a little; Ay, but it is a great matter if we grant it. Consider, the
Evil of Temptation is better kept out, than got out. The Stone on the top of
the Hill, when it begins to roll downward, it is a hard thing to stay it, we
cannot say how far it will go. Says the deceived Heart, I will yield but
little, and never yield again; the Devil will carry thee further and further,
until he has left no tenderness in thy Conscience. As many that thought to
venture but a Shilling or two, yet by the secret witchery of Gaming they play
away their Estate, Clothes and all: So many that think they will sin but little
at first, at last sin away all Principles of Conscience, and Profession of
Godliness.

(3.) It must not be temporary for a while, but perpetual. It concerns us not
only to stand out against the first Assault of Satan; but a long Siege: Satan,
what he cannot gain by Argument, seeks to procure by Importunity. But resist
him, says the Apostle, steadfastly, in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5. 9. As his
Instrument spoke to Joseph, from day to day, she ceased not, Genesis 39. 10.
Deformed Objects, when accustomed to them, seem not so odious; so the Devil
hopes to prevail at last; at least Temptation will not seem so odious: But you
must keep your Zeal to the last, as we rate away an importunate Beggar, that
will not be answered: To yield at last is to loose the Glory of the Conflict.
Grace must not only have its work, but its perfect work, Iam. 1. 4. So let all
our Graces, Temperance, Godlines^, and Brotherly-Kindness, have their perfect
work.

4. There is required Watchfulness. 1 Pet, 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant. You
that are not ignorant of Satan's Devices should watch, that you give not him an
advantage, 2 Cor. 2. 11. nor an occasion, 2 Cor. 11. 12. lest Satan tempt you;
nor a pretense, Gal. 5. 13. to the Flesh. Certainly, he that would not be
foiled, needs a great deal of holy Moderation, and constant Jealousy over his
Heart; he had need to guard his Senses, Psalm. 119. 37. Turn away mine Eyes from
beholding Vanity; and to look to his Company, Psalm. 119. 115. Depart from me,
ye evil Doers; for I will keep the Commandments of my God. And to avoid all
Occasions of Sin, not rush into them, but keep out of the way; Prove. 4. 14.
Enter not into the Path of the Wicked, and go not in the way of evil Men; for
this is to ride into the Devil's Quarters, to run into the Mouth of Danger.
Heretofore these were wholesome Instructions, and why should they not be so now?
The Devil is not less subtle, or Sin less odious and dangerous, only we are
more Foolhardy, therefore stand not at such a distance as we should from
Occasions. It is easier to avoid the Occasion, than the Sin when Occasion is
offered; as it is easier for a Bird to fly from the Snare, than when entangled
to avoid Danger. Therefore when you run into harm's-way, you tempt Satan to
tempt; and when you look not to your selves, it is just with God to let you
fall into the Snare.

Secondly, There are special times of Temptation, when Christians should look
to themselves. There Is an Evil-day, Ephesians. 6. 13. That ye may be able to stand in
the Evil-day: And there is an Hour of Temptation upon the World, Rev. 3. 10. I
will keep thee from the Hour of Temptation which shall come upon all the World.
There are certain times when God is proving what Men will do, and when the
Devil is likely to make a great advantage of our Discontents and Afflictions,
when things fall cross to our Desires, and we know not what Evil waits for us;
how should we do to behave our selves?

1. Be not over- confident, or over- diffident. Not over- confident, in running
beyond the bounds of our Calling, to cast our selves into Dangers and Hazards
of Temptation: Nor over- diffid^nt, by base flying from, or giving way when God
calls for valiant Resistance. Both ways is the Devil likely to assault us;
either by making us foolhardy. So Satan seeks to drive us beyond the bounds of
our Calling, to put us out of our Place, that we may be a Prey to him: As Men
use to trouble the Water, that they may rouse the Fish, and draw them into the
Snare, and drive them out of places of Safety where they rest; so the Devil
seeks to put us out of our Safety. Peter would needs come to Christ, Mat. 14.
28. Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the Water; and we see he
sinks before he could accomplish his Purpose: So when we are over-confident,
and run out of our Calling upon Hazards, then we are ever and anon ready to
sink. But we should not turn back when God calls us to a valiant Resistance.
Should such a Man as I flee? Neh. 6. 11. Observe Peter's dastardliness, when he
ventures without a Call into the Priests-Hall; a Question of the Damsels
overturns him. He that was so Cowardly when he was out of his Way, look upon
his Boldness when he was in his Work, Acts 4. 7. unto verse. 13. When they saw
the boldness of Peter and John, they marvelled. John was the Disciple of Love,
and Peter was the Fearful Disciple; yet how full of Boldness, Courage, and Zeal
when they were called and singled out to give proof of the reality of God's
Grace! And therefore we should never be over-forward, nor over-backward, but
own God in his Truth when we are in our Calling. Let not Satan bring you out of
your Place, to cast your selves as a prey to him.

2. In an Hour of Temptation, we should be more solicitous about Duties than
Events; and about Sins than Dangers. As to Events; God is concerned as well as
you, and he will order them for his own Glory. It should be your great care,
that you may be kept blameless to his Heavenly Kingdom: 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. The
Lord that has delivered me out of the Mouth of the Lion, shall deliver me from
every evil Work, and will preserve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom. However God
deal with you as to Events, and whatever Dangers attend you, this should be
your care mainly, that you may not sin, but be kept blameless. David often
begged direction, that he might be guided in his trouble, and not faulter, and
do any thing unseemly.

3. Be more jealous of Satan's Wiles, than of his open Assaults. Natural
Courage, and the bravery of a common and ordinary Resolution, together with
deep engagement of Credit and Interest, may do much to make us stand out
against Assaults, against open Force and Violence of Evil Men; but there needs
a great deal of Judgment, to stand out against the Wiles and Crafts of the
Devil. Flesh and Blood will not so easily bear us out against the secret
Insnarings of the Heart. The young Prophet does thunder out his Message against
the King, 1 Kings 13. 3. yet was enticed by the Wiles of the old Prophet. So we
may stand out against an open Assault, and apparent Violence, but take heed of
the secret Wiles of Satan.

4. The Wiles of Satan, are to enforce and draw us into those Corruptions which
are incident to the Season. Here Is the great Point of Spiritual Wisdom, to be
seasoned in our Mortification, and to withstand the Spiritual Evil that is apt
to grow upon us in the time of our Fears; Psalm 56. 3. What time I am afraid, I
will trust in thee. Then our great Business is, to cherish our dependence upon
God, to prevent distrust and unbelieving Thoughts of God's Providence. As (on
the other side) in a Time when we are likely to be corrupted with ease and
prosperity, then our Business is, to watch against security and deadness of
Heart, which is apt to grow upon us. As Nazianzen said, When things go
prosperous with me, I read the Lamentations of Jeremiah, I remember the
mournful Passages which befall the People of God, and that is my Cure. So to
prevent despondency in a time of Fears, to encourage our Souls to dependence.

Now when our Wills are crossed, Dangers attend us on every side, and we know
not how far Evil will break out to the overturning of all. What are the Sins
incident to such a time of trouble? and how do the Wiles of Satan come upon us?

1. Impatience. Genesis 30. 1. when the Will of Rachel was crossed, she said unto
Jacob, Give me Children, or else I die. When we impatiently fret against the
Lord, Psalm 37. 1. Fret not thy self because of evil Doers; neither be thou
envious against the workers of Iniquity.

2. Murmuring and repining against the Lord, that is another Snare. Jonah 4. 9.
I do well to be angry, even unto Death; when he was crossed. Discontent at
God's Providence, gratifieth Satan exceedingly; when we will justify our
selves, and think it a kind of Zeal to be angry, and pett against Providence.

3. A Spirit of Revenge against Instruments; when we do not sweetly calm the
Heart with the remembrance of God's Hand. 2 Samuel 16. 9. Why should this dead
Dog curse my Lord the King? Let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his Head.
Thus when wicked Men disturb Order, the Heart is apt to rise in revenge,
therefore we are to calm our Hearts.

4. There Is fainting in Duty; when we begin to give over Prayer, and are
discouraged, and are loath to wrestle with God in an Ordinance. Heb. 12. 12.
Lift up the Hands which hang down, and the feeble Knees. When a Man's Hands
begin to wax feeble, and he is discouraged in the Ways of the Lord; My Foot had
well-nigh slipped, says David, Psalm. 73. 2.

5. There Is closing with sinful means, and running to them for an escape: As
Saul, when he was crossed, 1 Samuel 28. 7. Seek me a Woman that has a Familiar
Spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her. When we go to carnal Shifts,
and unworthy Means, these are very natural to us.

6. Despair, and distrustful Thoughts of God, though we have had much
experience of his Goodness. David, 1 Samuel 27. 1. I shall now perish one day by
the hand of Saul; after all his experience.

7. Questioning our Interest in God, by reason of Crosses, or the doubtful
posture of our Affairs: Judges 6. 13. If the Lord be with us, why then is all
this befallen us?

These are the Wiles of Satan. Ride out the Storm upon Gospel-Encouragements.
This will bear us up, it is but a moment to Eternity; It is but a light
Affliction, and will work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

The second Point is this;

Doct. 2. That if we would not be overcome by the Evil of Temptations, we
should earnestly deal with God about them.

For so does our Lord direct us here, (Lead us not into Temptation) to come to
God himself.

There are two Reasons I shall consider of in this Discourse.

First, We cannot be tempted without the Will of God. Secondly, Nor resist
without the Power of God.
Therefore we should deal with God earnestly in all our Temptations.

First, We cannot be tempted without the Will of God. That God has a
Providence in and about Temptations, is clear from the Scripture. Mat. 4. 1.
Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the
Devil. The Holy Spirit had a hand in it, as well as the Evil Spirit. So, 2 Samuel
24. 1. God moved David to number Israel and Judah. But in 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. it is
said, And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel.
Satan, he cannot tempt without leave from God. As a Lion cannot stir out of his
^^ge, until the Keeper brings him out; so the Devil, this roaring Lion, is held
by the irresistible Chains of God's Providence, and cannot stir until God
brings him out.

Consider two things:

1. To be led into Temptation, is more than simply to be tempted. God's
permitting us to be tempted, is not so much as God's leading us into
Temptation; for these are two distinct Phrases. God may permit or suffer us to
be tempted, as a Lord or Sovereign, which has power over his own Creature, for
the trial and exercise of Grace, and can absolutely dispose of it according to
his own Will; but he leads us into Temptation, as a Judge. And therefore this is
one of the Comforts which Job propounds to himself, when Satan had a liberty to
molest him, Job 9. 12. He takes away, who can hinder him? who shall say unto
him, What do thou? The General of an Army may, according to his discretion,
lead which Band he pleases, and set them in the Forlorn-Hope, in a place of
the greatest Danger, and appoint for Reserves which part of the Army he
pleases: So God may single out his Champions to Combat for his Glory, and may
leave others in a more quiet Posture, according as he pleases. Thus, as a
Sovereign Agent, God may suffer to be tempted. But now, to lead into
Temptation, that is another thing, and implies something of Punishment; or as
it is expressed, Mat. 26. 41. Pray that ye enter not into Temptation: We enter
into it by our own voluntary motion, as having forfeited his Protection. But
then God leads us in as a Judge, puts the Malefactor into the Executioners or
Officers hands: so does God lead us into Temptation; it (...) judicial Act,
especially when left to perish under the weight of a Temptation.

2. Consider; God as a Judge, he may lead us into Temptation two ways: either he
may act in way of Correction, to manifect his fatherly Indignation; or by way
of strict Punishment. And so in respect of his fatherly Correction, God may
give us up to a vexing, or to an insnaring Temptation. He may lead the Godly
into Temptation, that they may be molested and troubled; and may lead the
Wicked into Temptation, that they may be seduced and led away for their eternal
Ruin. There Is a vexing Temptation God uses for the Correction of his own
Children; and thus Paul was buffeted by Satan, lest he should be exalted above
measure, 2 Cor. 12. 7. The Shepherd sets his Dog upon the strayed Sheep, not to
worry him, but to lodge him, and bring him back again into the Fold: so does God
suffer his Children to be buffeted and exercised by Satan, to their great
trouble, but for their good in the issue; for he knows how to turn all these
things for good. Then there is an insnaring Temptation, by which the Wicked are
entangled in a way of Sin; and so Satan, as God's Executioner, is said
sometimes to blind the Eyes of Wicked Men, lest the Light of the Glorious
Gospel of Christ should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 4. and sometimes to harden
their Hearts, John 12. 40. lest they should be converted and healed; for the
punishment of former Sins, God may give up the Wicked to be blinded and hardened
by Satan to their own destruction; which is one of the most dreadful Acts of
God, as a Judge, on this side Hell.

Certainly then when we are tempted, we have great cause to deal with God about
the Temptation, for he has a hand; either he may suffer us to be tempted, as
Lord and Sovereign; or may lead us into Temptation, either in a way of fatherly
Correction, or as a mere Punishment, that we may more ruin and destroy our
selves.

I come now to the second Reason.

Secondly, God alone can give strength to resist and overcome the Temptation;
and therefore we should deal with him very earnestly about it; Romans 16. 20. The
God of Peace* shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. It is God that treads
down Satan, but under your feet. We fight it out, but the Author of the Victory
is the God of Peace We are interested in it, (for we trample upon Satan with
our own feet) but God's is the Grace. Our Faculties are not only exercised, but
our Graces.

Briefly, two ways does God concur with the Saints in resisting Temptations.

First, God plants all those Graces in their Hearts, that are necessary to the
Conflict. To speak of those three Essential Graces, Faith, Fear, and Love;
these are all necessary for the resistance of a Temptation. That Faith is
necessary, 1 Pet. 5. 9. Whom resist steadfast in the Faith. And Fear, and Love,
that they also are necessary, I shall prove thus: Satan's Weapons against us,
and his way of assaulting, are either subtle Wiles, or fiery Darts; That ye may
be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil, and quench all the fiery Darts
of the Wicked, Ephesians. 6. ^1, 16. As he assaults us by fiery Darts, by raging
and boisterous Temptations, take the Shield of Faith, cover all with the
Righteousness of Christ, and with a sense of your Privileges by Christ, and
that is it which maintains the Heart, and keeps it against the fiery Darts of
the Devil. But as he assaults us by his Wiles, there Fear, and the Love of God
comes in, and is necessary for us. For there are two sorts of Wiles that Satan
uses for the destroying of our Souls; One is, to convey the Temptation by such
means as are most taking with the Person tempted: and the other is, disguising
and turning himself into an Angel of Light, coloring the Temptation.

For the first, Namely, as he suiteth every Distemper of our Souls with a
proper Diet or Food, or tempts us by such means as are likely to prevail. As if
a Man were tempted by sensual Delight, there the Love of God is necessary; Why?
for nothing but the Love of God will make us deny that which is so near and
pleasing to us, or that Affection which grows upon the apprehension of his
Grace in Christ, therefore the Grace of God is said to teach us to deny all
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, Tit. 2. 12.

2. For the other Wile. As Satan does transform himself into an Angel of Light,
and cover his base Designs with plausible Pretenses; for instance, Revenge
shall be accounted Zeal: He will difguise it so, as that the very Apostles
shall count it Zeal for the Glory of God, when they called for Fire from Heaven
to consume them, even as Elias did. Luke 9. 54. And Carnal Counsel shall be
counted Pity and Natural Affection. Mat. 16. 22. Peter took him, and began to
rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: This shall not be unto thee. He
shall be the Devil's Agent to tempt Christ, and his Carnal Counsel shall be
looked upon as Pity to his Master. And Licentiousness shall be Christian
Liberty, and our Liberty by Christ shall be used a^ an occasion to the Flesh,
Gal. 5. 13. And an immoderate use of Carnal Pleasure shall be Christian
Rejoicing, or Christian Cheerfulness. Therefore as there needs Love to
withstand the Potency of Temptation, by the suitableness of the Bait to our own
Affections; so there needs the Fear of God, Prove. 14. 27. The Fear of the Lord
is a Fountain of Life, to depart from the Snares of Death. When the Devil, by
his Wiles, is laying Snares for us, Snares of Death, the Fear of the Lord is a
Fountain of Life. A Man that is afraid to offend God, and to abuse his Liberty,
or run into any Excess, under color of a Grace, is very cautious, and
watchful, and thereby is not so soon surprised. Thus, when the Soul is inflamed
by the vehement heat of boiling Lusts, or raging Despair, Faith is necessary.
Luke 22. 31, 32. Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat:
But I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. Faith laying hold upon
Christ's Righteousness, and waiting for his Grace, teaches us to overcome in
such Conflicts.

But why should I instance in these three Graces only* when we are bidden to
put on the whole Armor of God? Ephesians. 6. 11, 13. If we would come off with
Honor in this Conflict, we must be completely armed; no Power of the Soul, or
Sense of the Body must be left naked, and without a Guard, therefore not one
saving Grace can be wanting.

A Christian is set forth as armed from Head to Foot. There Is for the Head a
Helmet of Salvation, which is Hope; a Breast Plate of Righteousness; the Girdle
of Truth; for Shoes; the Gospel of Peace; the Shield of Faith; the Sword of the
Spirit. These are the Graces necessary to resist Temptation, and these we have
from God. A Christian has not only Weapons Offensive, but Defensive; not only
a Sword, but also a Shi^ld: Satan has only Weapons Offensive, as Darts, he
has Darts to wound the Soul. Again, observe, there is no piece of Armor for
the Back; why? Because there is no Flight in this Spiritual Warfare, we must
stand to it, Jam. 4. 7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.

But let us see what are the pieces of the Spiritual Armor? The Apostle begins
with the Girdle of Truth, by which is meant not Truth of Doctrine (for that is
the Sword of the Spirit) but Sincerity, or an honest Intention; when a Man
endeavors to be both to God and Man, what he seems to be; now it is the Lord
that must renew the right Spirit within us. Satan he assaults us with Wiles,
but our Armor of Proof against him is the Girdle of Truth. We stand against
the Wiles of Satan, but we must not fight against him with his own Weapons, and
put off Wiles with Wiles; Sincerity and honest Intention, that is our Strength:
this is a Girdle to the Loins, it gives Strength and Courage to the Soul. And
then there is the Breast Plate of Righteousness, or that Grace which puts us
upon a holy Conversation, suitable to God's Will revealed in his Word; whereby
we endeavor to give God and Man their due; it secures the Breast, and Vital
Parts, the Seed of inherent Grace in the Heart, an honest fixed purpose to obey
God in all things. The next thing, the Feet must be shod; we shall meet with
rough Ways in our Passage to Heaven, and what is that which is Armor of Proof
for our Feet? The Preparation of the Gospel of Peace, a Sense of our Peace and
Friendship made up between God and us through Christ; without this we shall
never follow God in the way of Duty, when we meet with Difficulties and
Hardships. But above all, take the Shield of Faith; a Shield covers the Body*
but that which gives Defense to all is Faith; without this a Man is naked;
destitute of Christ's imputed Righteousness, he wants his Covenant-Strength; it
applies Christ's Righteousness, and engages the Power of God on our behalf.
Then there is the Helmet of Salvation, which is Hope, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. A
well-grounded hope of Salvation, it makes us hold up the Head in the midst of
all Waves and sore Assaults, that is, it is our great Motive and Encouragement
in the work of Sanctification. Then there is the Sword of the Spirit, which is
both Offensive and Defensive; it wardeth off Satan's Blows, and makes him fly
black from us as one wounded and ashamed. These are the Graces; now God gives
them to us, and therefore he is called, The God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10.
Why? because he requires it only? No, but because he gives it also: And it is
called The Armor of God, verse. 11. God is the Author, God is the Maker, God is
the Inventer of this Armor; and he does freely bestow it upon us. The Apostle
bids us, Take the whole Armor of God, verse. 13. that is, take it out of God's
Hand; this Armor is not of our making and procuring, but made to our Hands by
God himself.

Secondly, He actuates these Graces by putting good Motions into our Hearts, or
sweet and gracious Thoughts, whereby all the forementioned Graces are drawn
out. When we are conflicting with Sin in an Hour of Temptation, Faith is set
a-work; That God may fulfill all the good pleasure of his Goodness, and the work
of Faith with power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. that is, by a Divine Power and Influence
quickening it into Acts. Joseph, when he was a^saulted by a grievous Temptation,
he had a gracious Motion and thought put into his Mind, How can I do this
Wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. Still there is a seasonable
remembrance of things by the Spirit, whose office it is to bring all things to
remembrance, Ioh. 14. 26. The Spirit does not only teach us all things, but
brings things to our remembrance, when we have need of any Truth to be set home
upon the Heart; either such a Truth as forbids the Evil to which we are
tempted; or that speaks Comfort and Encouragement to us under such a Cross;
or pressing such a Duty as we hang off from. The seasonable remembrance of
Truths, is the great actual help which we have from God. Jesus Christ himself,
by seasonable urging the Scripture, defeated the Temptation wherewith he was
assaulted, Mat. 4. 10, 11. The Word quickneth in Affliction, Psalm. 119. 50.
Some proper Comfort is born in upon the Soul by the Power of God. It is not the
bare remembrance of Truth, but the secret Power of God which enliveneth it, and
makes it effectual in its season to defeat the Temptation.

Use. It directs you what to do in Temptations, to go to God for Help and
Strength against them. Briefly, when you treat with God, it should be under a
threefold Notion.

1. As the Author and Giver of Grace. 2. As the Sovereign Giver and Disposer of
it, according to his own Will. 3. As a Judge, by Temptation, correcting some
foregoing Sin by the present Temptation.
1. Treat with God as the Author and Giver of Grace. Jam. 1. 17. He is the
Father of Lights, from whom every good and perfect Gift comes down. And so,

(1.) We ought to come to him as renouncing our Strength, and waiting for his
Grace as able to help us. That Address Iehoshaphat made in a Temporal Case, is
good also in a Spiritual, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. Lord, we have no might, our Eyes are
unto thee. There is a renouncing of their own Strength, and a dependence upon
God. There must be a renouncing of all Self-dependance, for God gives Grace to
the Humble, Jam. 4. 6. The word Humble, is to be understood not Morally, to
those that are of a lowly carriage toward Men of a meek Spirit; but it is
understood Spiritually, of those that in the brokenness of their Hearts
acknowledge their own Nothingness and Weakness; to these he gives Grace. God
withholdeth and withdraws his Influences, when we do not acknowledge the daily
and hourly necessity of Grace, when we do not desire it with such vehemence as
we were wont, nor receive it with such Thankfulness and Rejoicing. In these
three last Petitions of the Lord's Prayer; Give us this day our daily Bread
then, Forgive us our Trespasses; then, Lead us not into Temptation: we beg
daily Bread, daily Pardon, daily Strength. We can neither live without the one
nor the other; we cannot live without daily Bread, nor live comfortably without
daily Pardon, nor live holily without daily Grace. And therefore you are to
wait upon God all the Day, Psalm. 25. 5. And Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord
always before me. Now, we may be said to set the Lord before us, either in
point of Reverence, when we are sensible of his Eye and Presence; or in point
of Dependence, when we are still waiting for his Strength; and that is the
meaning there, He is at my right Hand, I shall not be moved. Look, as a Glass
without a foot falls to the Ground, and is broken as soon as it is set out of
Hand; such a sensible Christian apprehends himself to be, if he be out of the
Hands of God, he is broken, and falls to pieces. Therefore in this Sense he
goes to God, and desires him to keep him from Temptation. Dependence begets
Observance. If the Creature could once but live of himself, tho it were but for
a while, God would seldom hear from him. This is that which is the Bridle upon
the New Creature, to keep up his constant commerce with God.

(2.) We must go to him with Confidence, in an actual dependence upon the
All Sufficiency of his Grace. It is not enough to apprehend our Weakness, but
we must also go forth in the Strength of God, that is, hold up our Hearts with
a Sense of this, that God is able to bear us up, and defeat all our Spiritual
Enemies. God would not take off the Temptation from Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 9. but
saith^ My Grace is sufficient for thee; He can either weaken. Temptation, or
give in further supply of Strength: Therefore encourage your selves in the
power of the Lord. The Devil cannot tempt us one jot further than the Lord will
permit him, his Malice is limited and restrained; if you be in Satan's Hands,
Satan is in God's Hands, and can do nothing without his leave and permission;
he begs leave to enter into the Herd of Swine, much less can he enter into the
Sheep of his Pasture.

2. Look upon God not only as the Giver of Grace, but as the Sovereign Giver
and Disposer of it according to his own Will, Phil. 2. 13. It is God that
works in you both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. His giving of Grace
is altogether free, as what measure of Assistance we shall have, and by what
means it shall be supplied. God may enlarge or abate the degree of his
Influence, according to his own Will. Now, thus we must come to him, with
Submission to his good Pleasure, either for taking off the Temptation, or
continuing it for your Exercise, or the measure of your Supply. When you murmur
and fret, it is sign you have too good Thoughts of your selves; when we
prescribe to God, it argues some ascribing to our selves. You are to endeavor
(indeed) to pray, and use all good means to come out of Temptation; but submit,
if the Lord be pleased to continue his Exercise upon you. Nay, tho God should
continue the Temptation, and for the present not give out those measures of
Grace necessary for you, yet you must not murmur, but lie at his Feet; for God
is Lord of his own Grace.

3. You are to look upon God as a Judge, correcting some foregoing Sin by your
present Temptation. And therefore,

(1.) You must humble your selves under his mighty Hand (when you are exercised
with great and sore Temptations) and accept the Punishment of your Iniquity,
without murmuring; that is the only way to get it off, when you own it as the
Fruit of Sin. Lev. 26. 41. If then their uncircumcised Hearts be humbled, and
they then accept of the punishment of their Iniquity. And Mic. 7. 9. I will
bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. Acknowledge
the Justice of his Providence in this trouble that is brought upon you. A
Christian must not only look to the Malice of Satan in his Temptations, but to
the Justice of God. Look, as in outward Affli^tions, we are not to reflect upon
Instruments; Job did not say, The Caldean and Sabean has taken, but, The Lord
has taken, chap. 1. 2^. So in these Spiritual Afflictions, take the Temptation
out of God's Hand, as a Judge. Tho Satan pursue you with fiery Darts, with
Temptations horrible and terrible, yet look upon it as the Fruit of some
foregoing Sin. If he should tempt you by injection of despairing Fears, or
blasphemous Thoughts, these are not your Sins, but they may be a Punishment for
your Sins; so you ought to humble your selves under the mighty Hand of God.
When you are vexed with such Temptations as pierce and prick you in your Veins;
(as David speaks) when the Devil bears in blasphemous Thoughts upon the Heart,
they are his Sins, but your Corrections, justly ordered by God; it may be it is
for the Correction of your Sin, that you have provoked God to afflict you thus;
and this Rod, if it smart, it was dipped in your own Guilt: and it is a Fruit of
God's Fatherly Indignation, for your Folly and Vanity: For God may thus
manifest it, by giving thee up to this severe Discipline, to be tempted and
vexed by Satan. Now it is your Duty to be sensible of your Sin, and say, as Sion
in her Troubles, Lam. 1. 18. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against
his Commandment.

(2.) Find out and remove the Cause of Sin, when God lets loose Satan upon us.
Paul discerned it presently (as usually God's Rod brings Light along with it)
when he was buffeted with a Messenger of Satan, it was that he might not be
ex^lted above measure, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Now that which has provoked God to
exercise us with this Discipline, that may be known sometimes by the Time when
this Temptation surprizeth us, if it trea^ upon the Heels of some immediate and
foregoing Provocation; that is the Sin you should humble your selves for. Or by
that ill Frame and Posture of Spirit wherein the Temptation found you, as
Paul's Heart was likely puffed up and exalted with his Spiritual Enjoyments,
therefore God lets loose Satan. Sometimes by the nature of the Temptation it
self; for God suits Punishments to Sins, and apt and proper Remedies to every
Disease. Or else, the Sin will be cast up by workings of Conscience in a way of
Remorse; as in a Tempest, that which is at bottom comes on top. Or God will
discover it by his Spirit, when you go and seek to him. When Temptation is
grievous and sore, go to God and say, Lord, why is it thus with me? Job 34. 31,
32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not
offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done Iniquity,
I will do no more. Pray for a discovery of your secret Sin, and what is the
Mind of God in the Dispensation. Now when you have found out the cause of the
Sin, this is the Direction, to remove the Cause; for until we let the Sin go,
God will continue the Punishment; tho we strive, pray, and ask Counsel, our
burden will still be continued upon us, until Sin be mortified in us, tho in
some measure it be removed out of our Hearts.

But deliver us from Evil.
WE come to the Close. The Words (...), may be rendered, either from the Evil
One, or from the Evil Thing.

First, From the Evil One, Mat. 13. 19. Then comes, (...), the Evil One, and
catches away that which was sown in his Heart. And 1 John 2. 13. I will write
unto you young Men, because ye have overcome, (...), the Wicked One. And, 1 John 5. 18. He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and, (...), that Wicked
One touches him not. Ephesians. 6. 16. Take the Shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall
be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked, (...), of that Wicked One.
In all these Places the Devil is so called, because his great business is to
draw, and drive others to Sin; and therefore, as God is the Holy One, so Satan
is called the Wicked One.

Secondly, It may be rendered that Evil Thing, Mat. 5. 37. Whatsoever is more
than these comes, (...), of Evil. Mat. 5. 39. But I say unto you, (...),
resist not Evil. We are commanded to resist the Devil, and therefore in that
Place clearly it is put for the Evil Thing: And so in many other Places. Now
which of these Senses shall we prefer?

First, If it be meant of the Evil One, or Satan, the Words will bear a good
Sense; thus: If God for our Trial and further Humiliation shall suffer us to be
tempted by the Devil; yet we desire that he may not have his Will upon us, that
we be not kept under his Power.

To make good this Interpretation; know, the Devil may fitly be called, the
Evil One, for he is the oldest Sinner, he sins from the Beginning, 1 Ioh. 3. 8.
And he is the greatest Sinner, therefore he is called, Ephesians. 6. 12. Spiritual
Wickedness; his Sins are in the highest degree sinful, every Sin of his is a
Sin against the Holy Ghost, against full Light, and with Malice, and Spite
against God and the Saints. And he is the Father of Sin, Joh. 8. 44. As Iubal
was the Father of all such as handle the Harp and Organ, Genesis 4. 21. that is,
he was the first that taught the use of that Instrument: So all the Sins in the
World, are by his furtherance, both Actual, and Original; therefore he may be
fitly called the Evil One.

Again, He has a great stroke in Temptation, that he is the Artificer, the
Designer, the Improver of them; therefore he is called, (...), the Tempter,
Mat. 4. 3. Well then, Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from the
[Evil One.]

Secondly, We may render it Indefinitely, as we do, Deliver us from Evil, that
is, from Sin. And ^itly is this so called, because it is the greatest Evil,
above Poverty, Sickness, and Worldly Loss. Every thing which does harm us, that
may be called Evil; now Sin does most hurt, nothing so much as Sin; why?
Because it does endamage our inward Man, and endanger our Everlasting Hopes.

1. It does endammage our inward Man, and hinders and diminishes our
comfortable Communion with God. Other things may harm the Man, but they do not
touch the Christian; and therefore says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 16. For which
cause we faint not; but though our outward Man perish, yet the inward Man is
renewed day by day. Breaches made upon the outward Man, come not so near as a
Breach made upon the inward Man; therefore we faint not, so long as the inward
Man is safe.

2. It does endanger our everlasting Hopes and Concernments, and therefore it
is the greatest Evil. All Afflictions do but reach our Temporal, but Sin
reaches our Eternal Concernments; and therefore the Apostle promises himself
this kind of Deliverance, as that which was most worthy; 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. I
was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion. And the Lord shall deliver me from
every evil Work, and will preserve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom. Well then, you
see it may be rendered the Evil One, or the Evil Thing. The word carries it for
Sin; (...) denotes the Evil of Afflictions, and malum poenae, as well as malum
culpae, but (...) never but Evil of Fault. And we need not anxiously dispute,
whether the one or the other, for one cannot be understood without respect to
the other. Therefore I shall take it in a general sense; That Evil which
results from Temptations, whether they arise from Satan, the World, or our own
Hearts.

From the words thus opened, the Points will be two.

First, That while we are in this Valley of Tears and Snares, we should with
earnestness and confidence, pray to be delivered from Evil. Secondly, To be
kept from the Evil of Sin, is a greater Mercy, than to be kept from the trouble
of Temptation.
I observe the first Point, because Christ thus directed us to pray to God. The
second, Because the Evil of Sin is intended. For the First; We should pray with
earnestness, because of our Danger; and with Confidence, because of God's
undertaking. The Lord Jesus knows what Requests are most acceptable to his
Father. Now when he would give a perfect Pattern and Platform of Prayer, he
bids you pray thus; Deliver us from Evil. Nay, we have not only Christ's
Direction, but Christ's Example; John 17. 15. I pray not that thou should
take them out of the World, but that thou should keep them from the Evil. He
did not absolutely pray for an exemption from Temptation, though he knew the
World would be a tempestuous Place, that his People must expect strong
Assaults; (Lord, take them not out of the World, but keep them from the Evil)
so here, Deliver us from Evil.

First, We should pray with Earnestness, because of our Danger, from the
Enemies of our Salvation, which are the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; In
respect of all which, we pray to be delivered from Evil.

1. From the Evil which the Devil designs against us. Both bad and good Men
have need to make this Prayer: Bad Men have need; Good Men will have a Heart
certainly to pray thus to God, if they consider their Danger.

(1.) Natural and unconverted Men, they are under the Power of the Devil, if
they were sensible of it; for the Devils are said to be Rulers of the Darkness
of this World, Ephesians. 6. 12. By which is meant the Wicked, Ignorant, and carnal
part of the World, whether they live in Gentilism, or within the Pale and Line
of Christ's Communion, over all those that live in their unrenewed state of Sin
and Ignorance; over all these, Satan has an Empire and Dominion. And mark,
when God carried on his Kingdom in in a way of sensible Manifestation, by
Visions, Oracles, and Miracles: So did Satan visibly govern the Pagan World by
Apparitions, Oracles, lying Wonders, and sensible manifestations of himself.
But now, when God's Kingdom is Spiritual, The Kingdom of God is within you,
Luke 17. 21. So by proportion, Satan's Kingdom is Spiritual too, he rules in
the Hearts of Men, though they little think of it. All natural Men, whether
they be Pagans or Christians, though outwardly and apparently they may renounce
the Devil's Kingdom, and do not seem to have such open communion with him, as
the Gentiles that consult with his Oracl^s, and were instructed by his
Apparitions, acted by his Power, and offered Sacrifice to him: But Spiritually,
all natural Men are under the Devil; for, 1 Io. 3. 8. He that commits Sin,
is of the Devil; that is, he belongs to him. How is he of the Devil? They are
his Children, Acts 13. 10. O thou Child of the Devil. And they are his
Subjects, he rules in them; he has a Kingdom among Men, which by all means he
goes about to maintain; Mat. 12. 26. If Satan be divided against himself, how
then can his Kingdom stand? And they are his Workhouses, he works in them:
Ephesians. 2. 2. The Spirit that works in the Children of Disobedience. The Devil
is hard at work in a wicked Man's Heart, framing Evil Thoughts, Carnal Motions;
urging them to break God's Laws; drawing them on to more Sin and Villainy; fills
their Hearts with lying, and all manner of Sins; Acts 5. 3. Why has Satan
filled thine Heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? He binds them with Prejudices, and
will not suffer them to hearken to the Glorious Gospel; 2 Cor. 4. 4. In whom
the God of this World has blinded the Minds of them which believe not, lest
the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. He blinds
and holds them captive at his Will and Pleasure, their Souls are fettered, 2 Timothy 2. 26. And sometimes he oppresses their Bodies, (for Satan carries on his
Kingdom by Force, Tyranny, Fears, and Bondage); and therefore it is said, Acts
10. 38. That Christ went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed
of the Devil. Yet further, as God's Executioner, he has the Power over Death,
for their torment; Heb. 2. 14. That through Death he might destroy him that had
the power of Death, that is, the Devil. And unless the Lord be merciful, he
never cease carrying on wicked Men, until both they and he are for ever in
Hell; Mat. 25. 41. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. All this is spoken, to show Carnal Men their
Condition: O that they would seriously think of it! When they do Evil, when
they slight the Motions of God's Grace, they are under Satan; and not only by
force, as a Child of God may be sometimes, but they are willingly ignorant, 2
Pet. 3. 5. The more willingly we commit Sin, still the more we are under the
Power of the Devil. Well then, if any have need to say, Deliver us from Evil,
certainly unrenewed Carnal Men, have need to go to God, and say, Lord pluck us
out of Evil; as the same Expression is used, Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us
from the power of Darkness, (...), who has delivered us with a strong hand. O
go to God, in the Name of Christ; there is no way of escape, until God pluck
you out by main force. And mark, this Power by which we are delivered, God
conveyeth by the preaching of the Word, which was appointed to turn us from
Darkness unto Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, Act. 26. 18. and
therefore hearken to God's Counsels, before your Condition grow incurable, and
wait upon the Ordinances; for the more you neglect and contemn the means of
your Recovery, your misery increases upon you; for every day you are still
more given up to Satan by the just Judgment of God, and to be captivated and
taken by him, at his will and pleasure, by the Snares he sets for you.

(2.) Good Men, or God's own Children, though they are delivered from the Power
of Satan, and brought into the Kingdom of Christ, yet they are not wholly free
in this World, but are sometimes caught by Satan's Wiles, Ephesians. 6. 11.
sometimes wounded by his fiery Darts, ver. 16. Their Lusts, and their
Consciences, are sometimes set a raging; though he has no allowed Authority
over their Hearts, yet he exercises a tyrannical Power; though he cannot rule
them, yet he cease not to assault them, if it were but to vex and trouble
them. Briefly, the Children of God have cause to pray (Deliver us from Evil) in
regard of Satan, because Satan has a hand in their Persecutions; and likewise
a hand in their Temptations to Sin. It is he that instigateth their Enemies to
persecute them; and it is he that inflameth their Lusts.

1. In stirring up their Enemies to persecute them. All the Troubles of the
Children of God, they come originally from the Devil; Luke 22. 53. This is your
Hour, and the Power of Darkness. We do not read that Satan did immediately vex
Christ; and how was that Hour then said to be the Power of Darkness? Why, by
setting his Instruments a-work to crucify him. And as he dealt with the Head,
so with the Members. Rev. 12. 12. The Devil has great Wrath, for he knows he
has but a short time. When his Kingdom begins to totter and shake, then he
stirs up all his Wrath, and inflames his Instruments; as dying Beasts bite
hardest. So, Rev. 16. 14. we read of the Spirits of Devils that go forth unto
the Kings of the Earth, to stir them up against the Saints. If you could
behold, with you bodily Eyes, this Evil Spirit hanging upon the Ears of great
Men, and buzzing into them, and stirring them up, and the common People, and
animating them against the Children of God, you would more admire at the
Wonders of God's Providence, that you do subsist: O, how they are acted by this
wrathful Spirit!

2. By inflaming our Lusts and Corruptions. So, 1 Cor. 7. 5. lest Satan tempt
you by your Incontinency; sets Lusts a boiling, either to vex the Saints, or to
ensnare them. It is possible he may sometimes prevail with God's own Children,
to draw them to some particular Act of gross Sin; as 2 Samuel 11. 4. as when
David defiled himself with Lust, that thereby he may dishonor God; for by this
means the Name of God was blasphemed, 2 Samuel 12. 14. Or that thereby he may
disturb their Peace, for this made David lie roaring, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. his
radical Moisture was even wasted and exhausted. Or else to Spiritual Sins, as
Murmuring, Repining against God; distrust of Providence, when under Crosses. Or
when they are in their Comforts, to drive them to Carnal Complacency, and
neglect of Holy Things, disuse of Communion with God. Or to inordinate
Passions, or Spiritual Wickedness, such as is not conversant about Carnal
Passions, or Fleshly Lusts, but Spiritual Pride, Error, and Unbelief.
Certainly, those that have any thing of experience of the Spiritual Life,
cannot be ignorant of Satan's Enterprises.

Well then, we had need go to God to deliver us from Evil: For outward Evils,
for the Protection of his Providence; for these God has undertaken, Psalm. 50.
15. Call upon me in the Day of Trouble; I will deliver thee. Satan is in God's
Chains, he could not enter into the Herd of Swine without leave; therefore
certainly he cannot get among the Sheep of Christ's Fold. It Is the saying of
Tertullian, If the Bristles of Swine be numbered, the Hairs of our Head are
numbered; therefore you had need go to God, (Deliver us from Evil) that
Persecution may not rage over you; that he may hedge you in by his Providence,
Job. 1. 10. and that he would be as a Wall of Fire round about you.

As to inward Evils, so we go to God for Wisdom and Strength; for Satan
assaults us both ways, by Wiles and Darts; when he comes in a way of Violence,
he comes with fiery Darts; but when he does lie in Ambush, there he has his
Wiles to entice us with a seeming Good. We,

1. Beg Wisdom, that you may espy the Wiles of Satan, and may not be caught
unawares, for he is transformed into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. Mark,
the Devil does not care so much to ride his own Horses, to act and draw wicked
Men to Evil, he has them sure enough; but he labors to employ the Saints in
his Work, if he can, to get one which belongs to God to do his Business;
therefore he changes himself into an Angel of Light. The Temptation is
disguised with very plausible Pretenses, then a Child of God may be a Factor
for Satan, and an Instrument of the Devil: For instance, Would Peter have ever
made a Motion for Satan, if he had seen his Hand? O no; the Temptation was
disguised to him, when he persuaded his Master from suffering. He covers his
foul Designs with plausible Pretenses. Carnal Counsel shall be pity and natural
Affection; Mat. 16. 22, 23. Let not these things be; Be it far from thee, Lord:
this shall not be unto thee. He said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan,
Thou art an Offense unto me. At another time, the Disciples, when their Master
was slighted and contemned, they thought certainly they should do as Elias did,
call for Fire from Heaven to consume them, Luke. 9. 54. Revenge will often go
for Zeal for God. Revenge, or storming at Personal Affronts, or Injuries done
to our selves, is looked upon as Zeal; then the Disciples may not know what
Spirit they are of Many times we are acted by the Devil, when we think we are
acted by the Spirit of God; and that which seems to be Zeal, is nothing but
Revenge. Therefore we had need go to God; Lord, deliver us from Evil, we are
poor unwary Creatures, that we may not be ensnared by fair Pretenses, and
surprised by his Enterprises. And thus we beg Wisdom.

2. We pray for Strength to withstand his Darts, that we may take the Armor of
God, and withstand the Evil One, Ephesians. 6. 13. Alas! of our selves, we cannot
deliver our selves from the least Evil, or stand out against the least Assault;
therefore it is God alone that must keep the Feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2. 9.
Therefore we go to him, that we may get his Covenant-strength, that we may be
strong in the power of his Might, to conflict with Satan. Well then, in regard
of the first Enemy of our Salvation, the Devil, we had need pray earnestly,
That we may not be prevailed over by his Arts; It Is God alone that can keep us.

2 dly, The World, that is another Evil, which is as it were the Devil's
Chess-Board; we can hardly move backward or forward, but he is ready to attach
us, and surprise us by one Creature or another, and draw us into the Snare;
therefore it is said, Gal. 1. 4. That Christ gave himself for us, that he might
deliver us from this present Evil World. That Is one way of being delivered from
Evil, when we are delivered from an Evil World. It concerns us, and it is a
great point of Religion to be kept unspotted from the World, Jam. 1. 27. The
whole World is full of Evils and Temptations, and we cannot walk any where but
we are likely to be defiled. The Things of the World, the Men of the World.

1. The Things of the World. All Conditions of Life become a Snare to us,
Prosperity, Adversity, Pro. 30. 8, 9. Give me neither Poverty nor Riches; feed
we with Food convenient for me, etc. Lest I be full and deny thee, etc. Either
Condition has its Snares. A Garment too short will not cover our Nakedness,
and too long proves, Lacinia ^raepend^ns, ready to trip up our Heels; and
therefore both the one and the other Condition are very dangerous. Many carry
themselves well in one Condition, but quite miscarry in another. As ^^phraim
was as a Cake not turned, baked on the one side, Hos. 7. 8. quite Dough on the
other. Or as it is said of Ioab, 1 King. 2. 28. He turned after Adonijah, the he
turned not after Absalom. Some miscarry in Adversity, others in Prosperity.
^ndeed more under Prosperity. Diseases which grow out of Fullness, are more rife
than those which grow out of Want; and fat and fertile Soils are most rank of
Weeds. God's Children most miscarry when all things are prosperous and flow in
upon them, when they have lived in Plenty. David was not foiled while he
wandered up and down in the Wilderness, but when he walked upon the Tarras of
his Palace in Jerusalem, then he fell to Lust and Blood. The unsoundness of a
Vessel is not seen when it is empty, but when filled with Water, then we see
whether it be stanch, or leaky or no.

But the other Condition is not without its Snares neither. In Adversity we are
apt to be impatient, as well as in Prosperity to be forgetful of God; and
therefore we had need learn how to go up Hill and down Hill, to know how to
abound, and how to be abased, Phil. 4. 12. Look, as the Wind does rise from all
Corners, so do Temptations. When we are kept low and bare, or in Danger, then
we are full of worldly Fears, Distrusts, Cares, grow base, Pusillanimous, and
have not the Spirit and Generosity of a Christian; in a high Condition we are
Proud, Secure, forgetful of Changes, Vain, Wanton; and press toward Heaven
less, and grow dead to good Things.

2. As from the Things of the World, so from the Men of the World. We are apt
to be poisoned by their bad Example, and easily catch a Sickness one from
another. Good Men may receive a taint, Isa. 6. 5. I am a Man of unclean Lips,
and I dwell in the midst of a People of unclean Lips. Open Excesses do soon
manifest their own Odiousness. I confess, a Man that runs into open Excess, we
are not so much in danger of being enticed by him to the like Practice; but we
learn of one another secretly to be cold, careless, and less mortified. I say,
tho we are not carried into inordinate Practices, and gross Wickednesses, by
the Example of others; yet we learn to be cold in the Profession of Godliness,
formal, less stirring in the way of Holiness* and sometimes ensnared by their
Counsels; the Flood and Torrent of Evil Examples and Counsels is so great that
it carries away Men. Gal. 2. 13. Barnabas also was carried away with their
Dissimulation. And the Wills of Men is one of our Snares, 1 Pet. 4. 2. And
besides, we are in danger to be terrified by their Frowns, and act unseemly.
Isa. 8. 13. Fear not their Fear, nor be afraid; out of the fear of Men we are
apt to miscarry in our Duty to God. Well then, we need to go to God to be
delivered from the Evil of the World, that we may not be infected nor terrified
by the Men of the World; or, which is the more usual Temptation, corrupted by
the Things of the World. The World does secretly and sligh^ly insinuate with
us, and therefore keep us from Evil.

Now how comes the World to be Evil?

In two things; when both our Care, and our Delight, is lessened toward
Heavenly Things.

1. When our Care is lessened, when we are not so serious, so frequent in
Communion with God, as we were wont to be; as Martha that was cumbred about
many things, but Mary had chosen the better part, Luke 10. 42. When you begin
to lessen your Cares of Duty, and Hagar thrusts Sarah out of Doors; when the
Son of the Bondwoman begins to mock at the Son of the Freewoman; when
Religion begins to be looked upon but as Mopishness; to be so nice, precise,
and so careful to maintain constant Commerce with God, and begin to have
lessening Thoughts of God, and Religion goes to the Walls. So,

2. When our Delight is less in heavenly things; when we have lost our favor
of the Word, and Ordinances, and Sabbaths, and they are not so sweet as before;
1 John 2. 16. If any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him.
When the Love of the World has made you weary of the Love of God; when your
Heart goes a whoring from God the chief Good: As when the Affections are
scattered, a Man is tempted to look upon other Objects, the Wife of the Bosom
is defrauded of her Right: So God is defrauded by an over-delight in the
Creature, the World intercepts your Delight. Psalm. 73. 27, 28. Thou have
destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee. But it is good for me to draw
nigh to God. When our Delight in Communion with God is lessened by Delight in
the Creature, it is Spiritual Adultery. Now when worldly Objects are so
continually with us, soliciting our Affections, and drawing us away from God;
Oh! what need have the best of us to pray, Lord keep us from Evil! The Soul
does easily receive a taint from the Objects to which we are accustomed;
therefore they which live in the World had need to take heed of a worldly
Spirit. The continual Presence of the Object does secretly entice the Heart; as
long Suits prevail at length, and green Wood kindles by long lying in the Fire.
Insensibly is the Heart drawn away from God, and you shall find less favor in
Holy Things.

3 dly. We had need to pray earnestly, Lord keep us from Evil, because we are
in danger of that other Enemy, the Flesh. There is not only an Evil without us,
as the Devil, and the World, but an Evil within us: An Evil Heart of Unbelief,
in departing from the Living God, Heb. 3. 12. An Evil Heart that is full of
urgings and solicitations to Sin. There are not only Snares and Temptations in
the World, but there is a flexibleness in the Party tempted. Jam. 1. 14. Every
Man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own Lust, and enticed, (...), of
his own Lusts; the Fire burns in our own Hearts, Satan does but blow up the
Flame: there is bad Liquor in the Vessel, Satan does but only give it vent, and
set it abroach with violence: We carry sinning Natures about with us,
therefore, Lord, Deliver us from Evil. The Evil of the World would do no more
hurt than the Fire does to a Stone, if we were not combustible Matter, The
Corruption that is in the World through Lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4. The danger of living
in the World does not stand in this, because here are so many Inticements and
Baits for every Sense, but it is the Corruption through Lust; as the Venom is
not in the Flower, but Spider. The Philistines could not prevail against
Sampson, if Dalilah, on whom he doted, had not lulled him asleep. Or as Balaam
first corrupted Israel, before he could curse them, or bring them any harm: So
Corruption in the Heart makes us liable to Satan's Malice. There is a
treacherous Party within to open the Door to Satan, without which all outward
Force could not annoy us.

Well then, we had need go to God: Lord, Deliver us from Evil.

Where we beg,

1. That God would weaken the strength of inbred Corruption, that we may not be
foiled by it. Paul groans sadly, Romans 7. 24. O wretched Man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? It is a Question, but it implies
a Wish, for the Hebrews propose their Wishes by way of Question, that is, O
that I were delivered! It is a great Mercy to be kept from falling into Sin;
Kept from every Evil Work, 2 Timothy 4. 18.

2. If we be foiled by our Corruption, we beg that we may not lie in it, nor
grow weary of our Resistance, nor cast away our Weapons, and suffer Sin to have
a quiet Reign. Psalm. 119. 133. Let not any Iniquity have dominion over me. We
cannot hope for a total exemption from Sin, but O Lord let it not reign over
us. How shall we know when Sin reigns? When there is no course of Mortification
set up against it, to break the Power, Force, and Tyranny of it. Take this
Distinction: There are remaining, and reserved Corruptions, Sin remains where
it does not reign; but reserved Corruption that is reigning. I will explain it
thus; Sin remains, when notwithstanding all our Endeavors, yet it still haunts
and pesters us, tho praying, watching, striving, waiting, and depending upon
God for Strength; but it is reserved, when you let it alone, and are loath to
touch it, but rather cherish, dandle, and foster it in the Heart, and make
provision for it. Therefore then are we delivered from Evil, when we recover by
Repentance; and tho we suffer by the Tyranny of Sin, we will not let it alone
to have a quiet reign in our Hearts: Do not live under the Power of
Corruptions. Sin let alone will do us farther Mischief.

Secondly, As we have reason to pray to God with earnestness, because of our
Danger; so with Confidence, because of God's Undertaking, 2 These. 3. 3. The
Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from Evil. God has
undertaken to keep those who with humble and broken Hearts do come to him to be
kept from Evil; that are watchful, serious, and careful to get Evils redressed
as soon as discerned; therefore we may come with an assured Confidence to be
delivered from all Evil.

How far has God undertaken to keep his People from Evils and Dangers in this
Life? I answer,

1. So far as may be hurtful to their Souls. 1 Cor. 10. 13. God is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the
Temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. It is
part of God's Faithfulness to keep you from Evil, to proportion and temper
Temptation to your Strength. God suits the Burden to every Back, he drives on
as the little Ones are able to bear, therefore certainly he will mitigate
Temptation, or give in supply of Strength.

2. God will keep you from the Evil of Sin, so far as it is deadly; that is,
that it be not a Sin unto Death, 1 John 5. 16. and that it may not reign in our
mortal Bodies, for you are dead to it. Romans 6. 14. For Sin shall not have
Dominion over you: for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace.

3. God undertakes for our Final Deliverance from all Evil, upon our
translation to Heaven. This is included in this Prayer, that we may at length
come to that State, where is no Sorrow, no Sin, no Assault and Temptation from
Satan, that we may be kept from all Wickedness. Psalm. 34. 19. Many are the
Afflictions of the Righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of them all.
There is a time when God delivers us from all at once, and that is by Death,
and our Translation into Heaven.

Well then, Let us fly to God for Deliverance, waiting for his Help.

Doct. That to be kept from the Evil of Temptation, is a greater Mercy than to
be kept from the Trouble of Temptation.

Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil: That is, If we be led
into Temptation, let us be kept from the Evil of it.

First, It Is a more wonderful Providence to be kept from Evil than from
Temptation; Esse bonum facile est, ubi quod vetat esse remo^um est. It is no
great matter to be Chaste or Honest, when there is no Temptation to the contrary;
Ay, but to keep our Integrity in the midst of Assaults and Temptations, there is
the wonder: If a Garrison be never assaulted, it is no wonder that it stands
exempt from the Calamity of War: This is like the Bush that was burned, yet not
consumed; exercised with Temptation from Day to Day, and yet kept from Evil.
And in this Sense God's Power is more glorified, than in keeping the Angels;
for the Angels are out of Gunshot, and Harms-way, and not liable to
Temptations: But to preserve a poor weak Creature in the midst of Temptation,
O! how is the Power of God made perfect in Weakness? 2 Cor. 12. 9. Perfected,
that is, gloriously discovered.

Secondly, The Evil of Sin is greater than the Evil of Affliction or Trouble.

1. The Evil of Sin is the greater Evil, because it separateth from God, Isa.
59. 2. It Is an Aversion from the Chiefest Good. Affliction does not separate
from God, it is a means to make us draw nigh to him. Poverty, Sickness,
Blindness, Loss of Goods, let a Man be never so low and loathsome, yet if in a
state of Grace, the Lord takes pleasure in him, and he is near and dear to
God; God kisseth him with the Kisses of his Mouth, nothing is loathsome to God
but Sin.

2. Sin is Evil in it self, whether we feel it or no; Affliction is not Evil in
it self, but in our Sense and Feeling, Heb. 12. 11. Sin is Evil, whether we
feel it or no; It Is worse when we do not feel it. Past Feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19.
when our Conscience is benumbed.

3. Affliction, or Malum Poenae, is an Act of Divine Justice: but Malum Culpae,
is an Act of Man's Corruptness. For the first, Affliction. Amos 6. 3. Is there
any Evil, and the Lord has not done it? But Sin is the Devil's work in us; 1
John 3. 8. He that commits Sin, is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from
the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the Works of the Devil. And Joh. 8. 34. Whosoever commits Sin, is
the Servant of Sin. The one comes from a just God, the other from our corrupt
Hearts. The one is the Act of an Holy God, the other the Act of a sinful
Creature.

4. The Death of Christ falls more directly upon this Benefit, exemption from
Sin. Mat. 1. 21. He shall save his People from their Sins. Acts 3. 26. God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every
one of you from his Iniquities; not Troubles, or Sorrows, but Sins.

5. Affliction is a more particular temporal Evil, but Sin is an infinite
universal Evil; Sickness depriveth us of Health, Poverty of Wealth, etc. And
every adverse Providence does but oppose some particular temporal Good* But Sin
depriveth us of God, who is the Fountain of our Comfort; the other but of some
limited Comfort.

6. Afflictions are sent to remove Sin. Heb. 12. 11. Now no chastning for the
present seems to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yields
the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby.
Isa. 26. 9. When thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World
will learn Righteousness. But Sin is not sent to remove Affliction. Now the End
must be greater than the Means, both as to Prosecution and Aversation. As to
Prosecution; To dig for Iron with Mattocks of Gold and Silver. So in
Aversation; If Death were not worse than the Pain of Physic, no Man would take
Physic to avoid Death.

7. Affliction is the Effect of God's Love. Heb. 12. 6. Whom the Lord loves,
he chastneth. But to be left to Sin, is an Effect of God's Anger. God does not
always exempt from Troubles; yet if he keep from Spiritual hurt thereby, if he
sanctify the Trouble, support us with sufficient Grace, 2 Cor. 12. 9. if
preserved from Evil, howsoever tempted and exercised, it is enough.

Use 1. To reprove our Folly. We complain of other Things, but we do not
complain of Sin, which is the greatest Evil. This is contrary to the Spirit of
God's Children, who rejoice in Troubles, but not in Sins; 2 Cor. 12. 9. Most
gladly therefore will I rejoice in Infirmities, that the Power of Christ may
rest upon me. They groan bitterly under Sins, Romans 7. 23. O wretched Man, etc.
If any Man had cause to complain of Afflictions, Paul had: In Perils often,
Whipped, Persecuted, Stoned. But the Body of Sin and Death was the greatest
Burden; Lusts troubled him more than Scourges; his Captivity to the Law of Sin,
more than Prisons. When Affliction sits too close, Sin sits loose. In
Affliction, there is some Offense done us; but in Sin, the wrong is done to
God; And what are we to God? Afflictions may be good, but Sin is never good.
The Body suffers by Affliction, but the Soul suffers by Sin, loss of Grace
and Comfort, which are not to be valued by all the World's Enjoyments. The Evil
of Affliction, is but for a moment, like Rain, it dries up of its own accord:
But the Evil of Sin is for ever, unless it be pardoned and taken away. Sin is
the Cause of all the Evils of Affliction; therefore when we complain, we should
complain, not so much of the Smart, as of the Cause of it.

2. It directs us;

(1.) How to pray to God, against Sin rather than Trouble. This is indeed to be
delivered from Evil; 2 Timothy 4. 18. Paul reckoned upon that, He will deliver me
from every evil Work. When afflicted, you should rather desire to have the
Affliction sanctified, than removed; you will be most careful, for that Saints
do not pray for the Interests of the Old Man, rather than the New Man. To be
freed from Trouble, is a common Mercy; but to have it sanctified, is a special
Mercy. Carnal Men may be without Affliction, but Carnal Men cannot have
experience of Grace. Bare deliverance is no sign of special Love.

(2.) In our choice: 'Twas an heavy Charge they put upon Job; Job 36. 21. Thou
have chosen Iniquity rather than Affliction. Sometimes we are put upon the
trial, To loose the Favor of God, or the Favor of Men, Duty and Danger: Here
content my self, gratify my Lusts and Interests; there, offend God. Out of the
Temptation, we could easily judge, that all the Misery in the World is to be
endured, rather than commit the least Sin. But how is it upon a trial, when a
Worldly Convenience, and a Spiritual Inconvenience is proposed? By choosing Sin,
a Man cannot altogether escape Affliction, here, or hereafter. Wickedness,
though it prosper a while, yet at length it proves a Snare.

3. It directs us to submit to God's Providence, and to own Mercy in it:
Though God does not exempt us from Troubles, yet if he keep us from Hurt
thereby; if he sanctify the Trouble, and support us with Grace sufficient, it is
his Mercy to us. For Daniel to be put into the Lion's Den, was not so great a
Judgment, as for Nebuchadnezzar to have the Heart of a Beast. To be given up to
our own Hearts Lusts, to commit any Sin, it is a greater Cross than any Misery
that can light upon us; therefore let us be patient under Affliction. Our great
Care should be, not to dishonor God in any Condition: God has promised to be
with his People in their Afflictions, to comfort them; but has never promised
to be with his People in their Sins; I will be with you in the Fire, and in the
Water; as the Son of God was with the three Childr^^ in the fiery Furnace. But
God is departed wh^ they si^; I will go to my own place. Sin hinders Prayer,
but Afflictions quicken it. Isa. 26. 16. Lord, in Trouble have they visited
thee; they poured out a Prayer when thy chastning was upon them. In Affliction,
it is a time to put the Promises in suit; it does not hinder our access to God,
and the Throne of Grace, but drives us to it. But Sin increases our Bondage,
makes us stand at a distance, and grow ^hy of God. The Fruit of Sin, is Shame,
Romans ^. 21.

4. It teaches us how to wait and hope for the issue of our Prayers. Pray that
ye enter not into Temptation; yet be not absolute in that, but to be kept from
Evil; that what way soever we are tried, we may be kept from the Evil of Sin.

For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever. Amen.
IN these words we have the Conclusion of all, and that which gives us
confidence in the Requests we make to God.

First, The Confirmation is taken from the Excellency of God to whom we pray;
where there is a declaration of what belongs to God.

Secondly, The Duration and Perpetuity, for Ever.

Three things are mentioned as belonging to God; Kingdom, Power, and Glory.

1. By Kingdom is meant, God's Right and Authority over all things, by which he
can dispose of them according to his own pleasure. 2. By Power is meant, his
Sufficiency to execute this Right, and to do what he pleases, both in Heaven
and Earth. 3. The final cause of all, is his Glory: Thine is the Glory; or the
Honor of all things in the World belongs to thee. Glory is Excellency
discovered with praise. We desire that he may be more honored and brought into
request and esteem.
Secondly, We have the Obsignation, and sealing of our Requests, in the word
Amen; which is, Signaculum Fidei, an Expression of our Faith and Hope: And
actus desiderii, the strength of our Desire. There is the Amen of Faith, and
the Amen of hearty Desire; as by and by.

Now let us look upon this Conclusion, first, as a Doxology, or expression of
praise to God: And the Note is;

Doct. That in every Address to God, lauding or praising of God is necessary.

For in this perfect Form of Prayer, Christ teaches us, not only to ask things
needful for our selves, but to ascribe to God things proper to him.

There are two words used in this Case in Scripture, Praise and Blessing:
Praise, relates to God's Excellency; and Blessing, to his Benefits; Psalm 145.
10. All thy Works shall praise thee, O Lord; and thy Saints shall bless thee.
All the Works of God declare his Excellency; but the Saints will ever be
ascribing to God, the Benefits they have received from him. So they are spoken
of as Things, though somewhat alike, yet as distinct; Nehem. 9. 5. Blessed be
thy glorious Name, which is exalted above all Blessing and Praise. Our Praise
cannot reach the Excellency of his Nature; nor our Blessing, express the Worth
of his Benefits. Both may be here intended. For thine is Kingdom and Power,
relates to his Excellency; and thine is the Glory, to his Benefits; for God's
Glory is the Reflex of all his Works, and so expresses the Benefits showed to
the Sons of Men, especially to his People. Well then, whenever you would pray
to God to bless you, you must bless God again, and praise his Name; Ephesians. 1.
3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Places in Christ. It Is the Echo and
Reflex of his Grace and Mercy to the Creatures. God blesses us, and we bless
God; as the Echo returns the Word, or the Wall beats back the Beams of the
Sun. Only consider, We bless God far otherwise than he blesses us: God's
Blessing is operative, ours declarative; His words are accompanied with Power,
Benedicere, is Benefacere. He does good, we speak good, when we remember the
blessed Effects of his Grace, and tell what he has done for our Souls.

The Reasons why we are to mingle Praises and Thanksgiving with our Requests,
are these;

1. Because this complieth more with the great end of Worship; which is not so
much the Relief of Man, as the Honor of God; therefore we should not only
intend the supply of our Necessities, for that is but a brutish Cry, howling for
Corn, Wine, and Oil, Hosea 7. 14. But we should intend also the Honor of God;
Psalm. 50. 23. Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me. A Man may offer Requests to
God, yet not honor him, but seek himself; but he that offers Praise,
glorifieth me: He that does affectionately, and from his Heart, give God the
honor of his Attributes and Titles in Scripture, he glorifieth him; and
therefore Worship being for the Glory (...) God, that should not be left out.

2. This is the most effectual spiritual Oratory, or way of praying. Psalm. 67.
5. Let the People praise thee, O God, Let all the People praise thee. What
then? Then shall the Earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God, shall
bless us. We have Comforts increased, the more we praise God for what we have
already received. The more Vapors go up, the more Showrs come down; as the
Rivers receive, so they pour out, and all run into the Sea again. There is a
constant circular Course and Recourse from the Sea, unto the Sea: So there is
between God and us; the more we praise him, the more our Blessings come down;
and the more his Blessings come down, the more we praise him again; so that we
do not so much bless God, as bless our selves. When the Springs lie low, we
pour a little Water into the Pump; not to enrich the Fountain, but to bring up
more for our selves.

3. It Is the noblest part of Worship, and most excellent and acceptable
Service. It is a great honor to Creatures, to bestow blessing upon God. In
other Duties, God is bestowing something on us; but in praise (according to our
manner, and as Creatures can) we bestow something upon God. In Prayer, we come
as Beggars, expecting an Alms: In Hearing, we come as Scholars and Disciples,
expecting Instruction from God: Here (according to our Measure and Ability) we
give something to him; not because he needs it, being infinitely perfect, but
because he deserves it, being infinitely gracious. This is the Work of Angels
and glorified Saints. Other Duties more agree with our imperfect State, as
Hearing and Prayer, that our Wants may be supplied; but this Duty agrees with
our State when we are most perfect. Love is the Grace of Heaven, and Praise the
Duty of Heaven; we are for Vials, they Harps; Prayer is our main Work, and
Praise theirs.

Use. To reprove us, that we are altogether for the supply of our Necessities,
but little think of giving God the honor due to his Name. Either we meddle not
with it at all, or do it in a very slighty fashion. In this perfect form, the
Glory of God is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending of this short
Prayer; the first Petition, it is for God's Glory, and the final Conclusion
also. And therefore it is verily a Fault, that God is no more praised. In our
Addresses to him ( Psalm. 22. 3.) it is said, O thou that inhabitest the Praises
of Israel; the meaning is, dwell in Israel, where he is praised of them,
because it is the great Work they are about.

Surely our Assemblies should more resound with the Praises of God. In
Church-Worship, there should be a mixture of Harps, which are Instruments of
Praise, as well as Vials full of Odors, which are the Prayers of the Saints,
Rev. 5. 8. But usually we thrust Gratulation, Thanksgiving, and Praise, into a
narrow Room, and are scanty therein, but can be large and copious in expressing
our Wants, and begging a Supply. This Duty is made too great a Stranger in your
dealings with God. What are the Reasons of this Defect?

1. Self-Love. We are eager to have Blessings, but we forget to return, to give
God the Glory: Prayer is a Work of Neeessity, but Praise a Work of Duty, and
Homage. Self-Love puts us upon Prayer, but the Love of God upon Praise. Now
because we are so full of Self-Love, therefore are we so backward to this Duty.

2. A second Cause is, our stupid Negligence; we do not gather up Matter of
Thanksgiving, and observe God's gracious dealing with us, that we may have
wherewith to enlarge our selves in giving Glory to his Name; Col. 4. 2.
Continue in Prayer, and watch in the same with Thanksgiving. We should
continually observe God's Answers and Visits of Love; and what Attributes he
makes good to us in the course of his Providence. But out of Spiritual
Laziness, we do not take notice of these things, therefore no wonder if we are
backward to speak good of his Name, but are always whining, murmuring, and
complaining.

Secondly, it is not only a Doxology, but a full one, and very expressive of
the Excellency of God. From whence note;

Doct. The Saints are not niggardly and sparing in praising of God; Kingdom,
Power, and Glory, and all that is excellent, they ascribe to him.

A gracious Heart has such a sense of God's Worth and Excellency, that he
thinks he can never speak honorably enough of it. See how David inlargeth
himself very sutably to what is spoken here, 1 Chronicles. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. And
David said, Blessed be thou, Lord God, for ever and ever: Thine, O Lord, is the
Greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty:
thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as Head above all. Now
therefore, our God, We thank thee, and praise thy gloriou^ Name. O, when once a
Child of God, falls upon speaking of God, he cannot tell how to come out of the
Meditation; he sees so much is due to God, that he heaps words upon words. So,
1 Timothy 1. 17. Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise
God, be Honor and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. And in many other places of
Scripture. Now this copiousness in praising of God, is, partly, because of the
excellency of the Object; Nehem. 9. 5. Blessed be thy glorious Name, which is
exalted above all Blessing and Praise. When they have done what they can to
bless God, remember his Benefits, or praise God, and recount his Excellencies,
still they come too far short: Therefore when we cannot do all, we should do
much. And partly, it is from the greatness and largeness of their Affection,
they think never to have done enough for God, whom they love so much. David
says, I will praise him yet more and more. They cannot satisfy themselves, by
taking up the Excellency of God in one Notion only; therefore Majesty,
Greatness, Glory, Wisdom, and Power, they mention all things which are
honorable and glorious.

Use. The Use is again, to reprove us for being so cold and sparing this way.
It argues a want of a due sense of God's Excellency, and straitness of
Spiritual Affection. Therefore we should study God more, and observe his
manifold Excellencies. Get a greater esteem of him in your Hearts; for out of
the abundance of the Heart, the Mouth will speak. We should be calling upon our
selves, as David, Psalm. 103. 1. Bless the Lord, O my Soul; and all that is
within me, bless his Holy Name.

Thirdly, I observe again; It is brought in with a For, as relating to the
foregoing Petitions; Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil: For
thine is the Kingdom, etc.

What respect has this Doxology to the foregoing Requests?

First, It serves to increase our Confidence in Prayer. Secondly, Our Reverence
and Affection. Thirdly, To regulate and direct our Prayers.
1. As to the Person to whom we pray. 2. As to the manner of asking. 3. As to
the Persons praying.
Let us see all these Requests.

First, The Great End, is to increase our Confidence. Observe,

Doct. It is a great relief to a Soul, in praying to God, to consider, that his
is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory; and all these for ever.

His is the Kingdom.

God has the Sovereign Government of all Things. And then his Right to govern,
is backed with all-sufficient Power and Strength; and so he can dispose of his
Sovereignty for the bringing to pass what we expect from him.

^ Authority is one thing, and Power another, but they both meet in God; He
has all Power and Authority.

And then, His is the Glory: He is concerned as well as we; yea more, His
Interest is greater than ours, for the Glory of all belongs to him. And all
this, not for a Time, but for ever. These are the Encouragements to raise our
Confidence, that our Prayers shall be heard, and granted, when we ask any thing
according to his Will.

^here are two things that give us Confidence in any that we sue to, if he be
Able and Willing. Now God is able to grant our Requests, and very prone and
willing also. We are taught it sufficiently in this Prayer; for we begin with
him as Father, and we end with him as a glorious and powerful King: His
fatherly Affection (on the one hand) shows, That he is willing; and his Royal
Power (on the other) that he is able. So that if we ask any thing according to
his Will, we need not doubt. We may gather his Power and Will out of this very
Clause: His Power; for His is the Kingdom, and Power, or a Right and Authority,
backed with absolute All Sufficiency. Then his Will, Thine is the Glory; It is
his Glory to grant our Petitions, not only matter of Happiness to us, but of
Glory to God, therefore we need not doubt.

But more particularly:

(1.) There is Confidence established by that, that his is the Kingdom. God's
Kingdom is either Universal, over all Men or Things; or particular and special,
which notes his Relation to the Saints, to those which have given up themselves
to his Government, to be guided by him to everlasting Glory: and both these are
grounds of Confidence.

1. His Universal Kingdom over all Persons and Things in the World. This
Kingdom is an absolute Monarchy, with a plenary Dominion and Propriety grounded
upon his Creation of them. There is a twofold Dominion, Dominium
Iurisdictionis, and Dominium Proprietatis: The one is such as a King has over
his Subjects; the other, such as a King has in his Goods and Lands: The latter
is greater than the former. A King has a Dominion of Jurisdiction over his
Subjects, to command and govern them; but he has not such an absolute
propriety in their Persons, as he has in his own Goods and Lands; He may
dispose of them absolutely at his own Pleasure, but his Jurisdiction is
limited. In short, We must distinguish of his Dominion, as a Ruler, and as an
Owner. But both these, they concur in God, and that in the highest degree, for
God is Owner as well as Ruler; he made all Things out of Nothing, therefore
has a more absolute dominion over us, than any Potentate or King can have, not
only over his Subjects, but his Goods; And can govern all Things, Men, Angels,
and Devils, according to his Pleasure. It is more absolute, than any
Superiority in the World, and more universal, as comprizing all Persons and
Things; God has right to be King, because he gave being to all things, which
no Earthly P^tentate can. Therefore the Author must be owner; All other Kings
are liable to be called to account and reckoning by this great King, for their
Administration; but God is Absolute and Supreme.

Now this is a great encouragement to us, that we go to a God that has an
absolute Right, for which he is responsible to none. We go not to a Servant, or
a subordinate Agent, who may be controlled by a higher Power, and whose Act may
be disanulled; but to an absolute Lord, to whom none can say, What do thou?
Job 9. 12. Here Is the Comfort of a Believer, that he goes immediately to the
Fountain, and Owner of all Things; the Absolute Lord of all the World, is his
Father; the sovereign and free disposing of all Things, is in his Hand. If we
expect any thing from subordinate Instruments, God's leave must first be asked,
or they can do nothing for us; but he can do what he pleases, it is his own;
Mat. 20. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? None can
call him to an account.

2. His Relation to the Saints. It is the Duty of a King to defend his
Subjects, and provide for their welfare: So God being King, will see, that it
be well with those that are under his Government. It concerns you much to get
an Interest to be under this King, then to mention it in Prayer: Psalm. 44. 4.
Thou art my King, O God, command deliverances for Jacob. If you want any thing
for your selves, or the Church, put God in mind of his Relation to you, Thou
are my King. Let not this Interest lie neglected or unpleaded. All the Benefit
which Subjects can expect from a potent King, you may expect from God.

Again, the word Command is notable, and expresses the Case to the full;
command Deliver ances; All Things are at God's Command and Beck; if he do but
speak the word, or give out Order to second Causes, it is all done in a trice.
So, Psalm. 5. 2. Hearken unto the Voice of my Cry, my King, and my God: for unto
thee will I pray, to thee, and to none other. Why should we go to Servants,
when we may go to the King himself? So, Psalm. 74 12. For God is my King of old,
working Salvation in the midst of the Earth. God will defend his Kingdom, and
right his injured Subjects. Therefore if we would have any Blessing to be
accomplished for our selves, or for the Public, let us go to God, Thine is the
Kingdom. And more especially, if we would have any good thing to be done, by
those in Authority, and subordinate Power over us, do not so much treat with
them, as with God. Let us beseech God to persuade and incline their Hearts, for
his is the Kingdom; he can move them to do what shall be for the glory of his
Name, and the comfort and benefit of his afflicted People. Let us go to God,
who is the sovereign King, he can give you to live a quiet and peaceable Life,
in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Or, he can give you Favor, dispose
of their Hearts to do good to his People. Nehem. 1. 11. Prosper, I pray thee,
thy Servant this day, and grant him Mercy in the sight of this Man. For I was
the King's Cup Bearer. The sovereign disposal of all things, is in the Hand of
God.

(2.) Thine is the Power. This also is an Argument of Confidence, that God has
not only ^ Kingdom, but Power to back it. Titles without Power, make Authority
ridiculous, and beget ^^orn, not Reverence and Respect. But now, (...) Kingdom
is accompanied with Power and (...). He has right to command all, Kings no
Creature can be too hard for him. Earth^^ (...), when they have Authority and
Power, (...) it is limited. 2 Kings 6. 27. When the Wo^an came to the King of
Israel; Help my Lord, O ^ing. And he said, If the Lord do not help (...) shall
I help thee? ^ut God's is an ^nlimited Power* An absolute Right, and an
^nlimited Power; they meet fitly in God; therefor this is an encouragement to
go to him. Christians, that Power of God which educed all things out of
nothing, which established the Heavens, which fixed the Earth; that Power of
God, it is the ground of our Confidence, Psalm. 121. 2. My help comes from the
Lord, which made Heaven and Earth. This Power should we depend upon.

We can ask nothing but what God is able to give, yea, above our asking. Ephesians.
3. 20. Now unto him that is able ^o do exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think. Our Thoughts are vast, and our Desires very craving, and yet
beyond all that we can ask or think, According to the mighty Power that ^ork^th
in us. We cannot empty the Ocean with a Nutshel, nor comprehend the Infinite
God, and raise our Thoughts to the vast extent of his Power, only we must go to
some instances o^ God's Power; that Power which made the World out of nothing,
and that Power which wrought in you, where there is such infinite Resistance.
We may go to God, and say, Mat. 8. 2. Lord, if thou will thou can make me
clean. You need not trouble your selves about his Will, he is so Good and
Gracious, prone and ready to do good, so inclineable, he is your heavenly
Father. But that which is most q^estioned* is the Sufficiency of God; can you
believe his Power? Now determine but that, Lord thou can, and that is a great
relief to the Soul. Our Wants are not so many but God is able to supply them;
our Enemies and Corruptions not so strong, but God is able to subdue them;
surely your heavenly Father will do what is in the Power of his Hand. A Beggar
when he sees an ordinary Man coming, lets him pass without much Importunity;
but when he sees a Man well habited, well attended, and with rich
Accoutrements, he runs close to him, and will not let him alone, but follows
him with his Clamor, knows it is in his power to help him: So this should
encourage us to go to the mighty God, which made Heaven and Earth, and all
things out of nothing.

The third Argument which Christ propounds; Thine is the Glory: The Honor and
Glory of all will redound to God, as the Comfort accrueth to us; it is for
God's Honor to show forth his Power in our Relief, and to be as good as his
Word. Now this is a ground of Con^idence, That he has joined his Glory and our
Good together: And that God's Praise waits, while our d^liverance waits.
Psalm. 65. 1. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Zion. You think your Comfort
stays, and all this while God's Honor waits. So Psalm. 112. 1. Praise ye the
Lord; Blessed is the M^n that fears the Lord. It is the Lord's praise that
his Servants are the only and blessed People in the World. And this is a
wonderful ground of Confidence. Think, surely God's Glory he will be chary and
tender of, he will provide for the Glory of his great Name. There is nothing
God stands upon more, than upon the Glory of his Name; nothing prevails with
God more than that. If God were a loser by your Comforts; if he could not ^ave
or bless thee without wrong done to himself, we might be discouraged: But when
you can come and plead with him, as Abigail, It will be no grief of Heart unto
my Lord to forgive thy Servant: So, it will be no loss to God if he show Mercy
and Pity to such poor Creatures as we are; you then may pray more freely and
boldly. If thy Comforts were inconsistent with his Glory, or were not so
greatly exalted by it, then it were another matter; but all makes for the Glory
of his Name. If our Good and Happiness were only concerned in it, there might
be some Suspicion; but the Glory of God is concerned, which is more worth than
all the World: We are unworthy to be heard and accepted, but God is worthy to
be honored. It is for the Honor of God, to choose base, mean, and
contemptible Things, and to show forth the Riches, Goodness, Power, and
Treasure of his Glory. Much of our Trouble and Distrust comes only from
reflecting upon our own Good in the Mercies that we ask, as if God were not
concerned in them; whereas the Lord is concerned as well as you. As the Ivy
wrapped about the Tree, cannot be hurt, except you do hurt to the Tree: So, the
Lord has twisted our Concernment about his own Honor and Glory. Thus the
Saints plead God's Glory as an Argument, Jer. 14. 7. O Lord, tho our Iniquitie^
testify against us, do thou it for thy Names sake. They do not tell him what he
shall do, but do thou that which shall be for thy Glory. So, Ezekiel. 36. 22. Thus
says the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, O House of Israel, but for
mine holy Names sake. So Isa. 48. 9. For my Names sake will I defer mine anger,
and for my Praise will I refrain for thee; that I (...)

(4.) The Duration, For ever; all Excellencies which are in God, they are
eternally in God. God is an infinite, simple, independent Being, the Cause of
all things, but caused by none; therefore he was from Everlasting, and will be
to Everlasting: Psalm. 90. 2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever
thou had formed the Earth and the World: even from everlasting, to
everlasting, thou art God. If there were a time when God was not, then there
was a time when nothing was; and then there would never have been any thing,
unless nothing could make all things: therefore God is eternally glorious, for
whatever is in God, is originally in himself, and absolutely without dependence
on any other, to everlasting. How loosely do Honors sit upon Men? Every
Disease shakes them out of their Kingdom, Power, and Glory; and within a little
while the State, Show, and all the Command of Earthly Kings will fade away, and
come to nothing. Governors and Government may dye, Principalities grow old and
infirm, and sicken and dye, as well as Princes; Kingdoms expire, like Kings,
and they like us. Psalm. 82. 6, 7. I have said, ye are Gods, and all of you are
Children of the most High: But ye shall dye like Men. But thy Throne, O God, is
for ever and ever. Psalm. 45. 6. His Kingdom, and Power, and Glory, they are
without beginning, and without end. Now this is also a ground of Confidence and
Dependence upon God. Earthly Kings when they perish, their Favorites are
counted Offenders. 1 Kings 1. 21. When my Lord the King shall sleep with his
Fathers, that I and my Son Solomon shall be counted Offenders. When other
Governors are set up, they and their Children will be found Offenders. But our
King lives for ever, therefore this should encourage us to be oftener in
attendance upon God, performing it with all Diligence and Seriousness, rather
than court the Humors and Lusts of earthly Potentates, who die like one of the
People, and leave us exposed to the rage and wrath of others that do succeed
them: But God is the same that ever he was, to all those that ever called upon
his Name. God is where he was at first; I AM, is his Name; there is no wrinkle
upon the Brow of Eternity. His Arm is not short, that it cannot save; or his
Ear heavy, that it cannot hear, Isa. 59. 1. Whatever he h^th been to his People
that have called upon him in former Ages, he is the same still. So, Isa. 51. 9.
Awake, awake, put on strength, O Arm of the Lord; awake as in the ancient days,
in the Generations of old: Art thou not it that has cut (...), and wound^d the
Dragon? God has done great things for his People, he smote Rahab, and killed
the Dragon (meaning Pha^aoh); and God is the same God still, his Kingdom,
Power, and Glory are for ever; and God will be your God too for evermore. Look,
as this does increase the terror of the damned in Hell, that they fall into the
Hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. God lives for ever to see Vengeance
executed upon his Enemies: so it is a Comfort to have an interest in the living
God, that can and will keep you, and bring you to Heaven, where you shall be
with him for evermore: that will ever live to see his Friends rewarded.

Secondly, It directs and regulateth our Prayers.

1. It directs us as to the Object of Prayer; to whom should we pray but to him
that is absolute, and above control? To God, and God alone, not to Angels and
Saints. To whom should we go in our necessities, but to him that has Dominion
over all things, and Power to dispose of them for his own Glory? Will you think
it a boldness to go immediately to God? It were so, indeed if we had not a
Mediator: for a fallen Creature can never have the Impudence; and wicked Men
that have not got an Interest in Christ, cannot expect Relief from God; but it
is no Impudence to come with a Mediator. Heb. 4. 16. Let us therefore come
boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help
in time of need.

2. It directs us how to conceive of God in Prayer; Right Thoughts of God in
Prayer are very necessary, and very difficult: no one thing troubles the
Saints so much as this, how to fix their thoughts in the apprehensions of God,
when they pray to him. Now here^s a direction how we should look upon God: Look
upon him as the eternal Being, and first Cause, to whom belong Kingdom, Power,
and Glory. We cannot see God's Essence, and therefore we must conceive of him
according to his Praises in the Word. Now take but the Preface, and the
Conclusion, and then you have a full Description of God. Look upon him as an
Eternal Being, whose is the Kingdom, absolute Right to dispose of all things in
the World, backed with All sufficiency and Strength: And look upon him as your
Father that is in Heaven; for, Our Father which art in Heaven, relates to
Christ, that is in the heavenly Sanctuary, appearing before God for us. This
will help you in your Conceptions of God, that you may not be puzzled nor
entangled in Prayer.

3. It directs us, as to the Manner of praying; with Reverence, with
Self-abhorrency, and with Submission.

(1.) With Reverence: for he is a great, powerful and glorious King: Thine is
the Kingdom, Power, and Glory. O shall we serve God then in a slight and
careless Fashion! Mal. 1. 8. If ye offer the Blind, the Lame and Sick for
Sacrifice, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased
with thee, or accept thy Person? says the Lord of Hosts. Go to an Earthly
King, would you come to him with rude Addresses, not thinking what to say,
tumbling out Words without Sense and Understanding. And compare this with Verse.
14. says God, when they brought him a sickly Offering, I am a great King;
implying, it is a lessening of his Majesty. You do as it were dethrone God, you
put him besides his Kingdom, you do not treat him as he does deserve, if you do
not come into his presence with a holy Trembling.

(2.) With Self-abhorrency, and a Sense of your own Nothingness. I observe
this, because all the Arguments in Prayer are not taken from us, but from what
is in God, from his Attributes; Thine is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory. It is a
blessed thing to have God's Attributes on our side; to take an Argument from
God, when we can take none from our selves. Christ teaches us to come with
Self-denial. The two first Words, Kingdom and Power, show that all things come
from God, as the first Cause; and the last Word, Thine is the Glory, shows all
must be referred to God, as the last End: So that Self must be cast out. So
that all the Reasons of Audience and Acceptance are without us, not from within
us. Dan. 9. 8, 9. To us belongs Confusion of Face; to the Lord our God belong
Mercies and Forgivenesses. Therefore thus it directs us to place all our
Confidence in God's fatherly Affection, in his Power, Goodness, and Glory, and
in his absolute Authority; nothing to move God from our selves.

(3.) To come with Submission. Thine is the Kingdom; that is, he has an
absolute Power to dispose of all Blessings, therefore it is lawful for him to
do with his own as he pleases. We must come, not murmuring or prescribing to
God, but expecting the fulfilling of our desires, as it shall seem good to the
Lord, according to his Wisdom and Power, by which he exercises his Kingdom over
all Things, as may be for the Glory of his Name. Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory, for thy Mercy, and for thy
Truths sake. Not to satisfy our Revenge, not to gratify our private Interest
and Passions; but, Lord, for thy Namesake, as may be for manifesting thy Mercy
and Truth, so do it: Not too passionate for our own Ends, but confident that
God, who has the Kingdom and Government of the World in his own hands, will
administer and carry on all Things for his own Glory.

4. It directs us again, what are the Duties of the Persons praying.

(1.) Freely to resign up our selves to God's Service. Otherwise we mock God,
when we acknowledge his Dominion over all the World, and we our selves will not
be made subject to God. Therefore certainly a Man that uses this Prayer, Thine
is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, will also say, I am thine, save me. Psalm.
119. 94. Let us freely resign up our selves for him to reign over us. Can you
say with any face to God, Thine is the Kingdom, yet cherish rebellious Lusts in
your own Hearts? It Is the most unsuitable thing that can be. Thine is the
Power; He is able to bear you out in his Work, however the World rage. And
therefore we should not think scorn of his Service, for his is the Glory: The
Service of such a King will put honor upon you.

(2.) Another Duty of him that is to pray, is to depend upon God's
All Sufficiency. Shall we speak thus of God, and say, Lord, Thine is the Power,
and yet not rely upon him? He that cannot rely upon him for this Life and the
other, does but reproach God, when he says, Thine is the Power; Thine is the
Power, yet I will not trust thee, but fly to base Shifts, as if the Creature
had Power, and Man had Power, as if they could better provide for us then God.
Therefore we are to live upon him, and cast our selves into the Arms of his
All Sufficiency.

(3.) Another Duty of them that would pray this Prayer, is, sincerely to aim at
and seek the Lord's Glory in all things; Why? for the Glory is thine. Will thou
say, Thine is the Glory, and yet give and take the Glory which is due to God,
to thy sel^? All is due to him, from whom we have received all things. But he
that prides himself in Gifts and Graces, cannot be in good earnest. Will thou
rob God of the Honor, and wear it thy self? Did ^en believe all Glory belongs
to God, they would not take Vainglory to themselves. Hero^ was eloquent, and
the People cried out, The Voice of a God, and not of a Man: He did but receive
this Applause, and usurped the Glory due to God, and God blasted him. Therefore
when we pride our selves in our Sufficiencies, and abuse our Comforts to our
own Lusts, we cannot with a good Conscience say, Thine is the Glory.

For^^ver. Amen.
ALL this is sealed up to us in the last Word, [Amen.] Which may signify,
either, so be it, so let it be, or so it shall be.

The Word Amen, sometimes is taken Nominally, Rev. 3. 14. Thus says the Amen,
the faithful and true Witness, the beginning of the Creation of God. Sometimes
it is taken Adverbially, and so it signifies Verily, and Truly; and so either
it may express a great Asseveration, or an affectionate Desire. Sometimes it
expresses a great and vehement Ass^veration, John 6. 47. Amen, Amen, Verily,
Verily, I say unto you. In other places it is put for an affectionate Desire;
Ier. 28. 6. When the false Prophets prophesied Peace, and Jeremiah pronounced
War, Amen! the Lord do so, the Lord perform thy Words which thou have
prophesied. Amen, it is not an Asseveration, as confirming the Truth of their
Prophecy, but expressing his own hearty wish and desire, if God saw it good.

Two things are required in Prayer; a fervent Desire, and Faith. A fervent
Desire; therefore it is said, James 5. 16. The effectual fervent Prayer of a
righteous Man avails much. And then, Faith, James 1. 6. But let him ask in
Faith, nothing wavering. What Is that Faith required in Prayer? A Persuasion
that those things we ask regularly according to God's Will, that God will grant
them for Christ's Sake. Now both these Amen signifies: our hearty desire that
it may be so; and our Faith (that is) our Acqu^^^scency in the Mercy and Power,
and Wisdom of God concerning the Event.

Christ would have us bind up this Prayer, and conclude it thus, Amen, so let
it be, so it shall be. Observe hence,

That it is good to conclude holy Exercises with some Vigor and Warmth.

Natural Motion is swifter in the end and close: So should our spiritual
Affections, as we draw to a conclusion, put forth the Efficacy of Faith and
holy Desires, and recollect as it were all the foregoing Affections; that we
may go out of the Presence of God with a sweet Savor and Relish, and a renewed
Confidence in his Mercy and Power.

Again, This Amen relates to all the foregoing Petitions, not to one only.
Many when they hear, Lord, Give us this day our daily Bread, will say Amen; but
when they come to the Petition, Thy Will ^e done on Earth, as it is in Heaven,
they are cold there, and have not hearty Desires and earnest Affections. Many
beg pardon of Sin; but to be kept from Evil, to bridle and restrain their Souls
from Sin, they do not say Amen to that. Many would have Defense, Maintenance,
and Vi^tory over their Enemies; but not with respect to God's Glory: They
forget that Petition, Hallowed be thy Name, but this should be subordinated to
his Glory. Nay we must say Amen to all the Clauses of this Prayer. Many say,
Lord, Forgive us our Debts, but do not like that, as we forgive our Debtors;
they are loath to forgive their Enemies, but carry a rancorous Mind to them
which have done them wrong. But now we must say Amen to all that is specified
in this Prayer. Then,

Mark, This Amen it is put in the close of the Doxology. Observe hence,

There must be a hearty Amen to our Praises, as well as our Prayers; that we
may show zeal for God's Glory, as well as Affection to our Profit.

Your Allelujahs should sound as loud as your Supplications, and not only say
Amen when you come with Prayers and Requests, things you stand in need of; but
Amen, when you are praising of God.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 19. line 14. after Lord, read as our selves. P. 18 l. 34. for like, r
unlike p. 42. l. 11. f. misprision, r. misapprehension. p. 47. l. ult. r. a
great. p 49. l. 28. r (...). p 57. l. 13. r. to God. p. 58. l. 4, and 5. r.
that may hence either formally, or by just Consequence be taxed. p. 64. l. 34.
r. worship. p. 65. l. 15. f. and, r. he. p. ^0. l. 30. dele thought. l. 32.
ast. and, add you. p. 71. l 8. after and, add is, l. 17. r. spiritual:
Weaknesses are, etc. l ult. r. without Fire. p. 73. l. 4. f. digested, r.
indighted. p. 76. l. 31. ^ now, r. and not only as. p. 80. l. 6. r Heb. ^2 9.
p. 81. l. 17. dele Christ says. p. 87. l. 10. r. 2 Cor. 6. 18. l. 18. r. in
all comparisons. p. 88. l. 22. r. Gal. 4. 6. p. 89 l. 37. r. Mal. 3. 17. p. 97.
l. 9. dele when, f. can, r. may. p. 93. l. 3. f. take r. think. p. 105. l. 30.
f. Look a^ the Right was, r. Or as any Israelite had. l. 31. f. so we, r. h^.
p. 110. l. 20. r. Mar. 13. 25. p. 112. l. 27. aft. expansin dele of; f. those,
r. the. p. 125. l. 18. r. which are a solid Body, l. 19. r. as fluid. p. 129.
l. 10. f. warm, r. warn. p. 136. l. 20. aft. serve, dele the turn of, l. 25. f.
him, r. i^, l. 25. aft. of, r. it p. 141. l. 27. f. of, r. or. p. 164. l. 12.
r. Psalm. 147. p. 177. l. 34. r. 1 Samuel 6. 20. p. 200. l 6, and 7. r (The they
worship not by Pagan Rites.) p 202. l. 16. dele and. p. 206. l. 9. r. First,
The King of Glory himself, and for than, r. then. l. 14 r. but where his Will
is obeyed, and his Laws observed. p. 211. l. 33. f. Covenant, r. Law. p. 218.
l. 21. r. Isa* 34. 2. p. 220. l. 6. aft. Soul, add longs. p. 239. l. 10. r. a
day of Veng^ance. p. 240. l. 3. aft. God, add requires? p. 253. l. 25. r. few
good Examples. p. 254. l. 14. r. Prove. 16. 2. p. 255. l. 10. ^. what, r. which.
p. 280. l. 12. f. remove, r. offer, l. 16. aft. give, r. the Habits of Grace.
p. 283. l. ^. f. Motions, r. Notions. p. 284. l. 15. f. to, r. as. l. 18. r.
find him to be one. p. 317. l. 20. dele not. l. 21. r. it will not. p. 354. l.
6. f. ou^, r. their. p. 359. l. 16. f. Inheritance, r. Inherency. p. 369. l.
23. f. of, r. the. p. 408. l. 16. aft. Hoasts, r. if. p 444. l. 23. f. by, r.
off. p. 465. l. 33. r. a color of Grace.


