TWO DISCOURSES: THE First, showing how the Chief Criterions of Philosophical
Truth, invented by Speculative men, more Eminently serve Divine Revelation,
than either Philosophy or Natural Religion.

THE Second, manifesting how all the Foundations of the Intellectual World,
viz. Reason, Morality, Civil Government, and Religion, have been undermined by
Popish Doctrines and Policies.

By Tho. Mannyngham, M. A Fellow of New College in Oxford, and Rector of
East-Tysted in Hant-shire.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Cademan, at the Popes Head in the lower Walk of the
New Exchange in the Strand, 1681.

To my very Worthy and Ingenious Friend, Mr. Thomas Palmer, one of the
Honorable Members of the last, and of this present House of COMMONS.
Worthy Sir,
I beg leave for these Discourses to appear under the Authority and Friendship
of your Name, as containing in them some general Remarks and Hints in Learning,
which I suppose, may not be altogether unsuitable to your Genius, to your
natural Inclination for variety of Thought with some Decency of Epression. The
greatest part of what I now present you, was the effort of my younger Years,
and therefore may appear to some to contain more of the warmth of Temper and
Imagination, than of the cooler serenity of Reason and Judgment; to discover
rather a wild Range in Learning, an Innocent Revelling in Philosophy, than any
mature Research into Principles, and the Cognizances of Truth; any complete
Victory, and Final Triumph over Authors. But let the Opinions of Men be what
they please, I hope they will not deter you from Patronising the success:
Though in relation to this former Discourse, I may without much Vanity promise
you some security, since it has been already approved by much better Judges,
than perhaps are left to condemn it. I am now Sir retiring from the World, and
that which always was its brightest Scene to me, your delightful Conversation;
and am therefore willing to leave you, and perhaps a few more of my Friends,
some little Image, some faint Remembrance of me, in the Essays of my younger
Studies. I must confess, I have now another Taste of things than what I formerly
had, partly my experience in the World, and partly the new Ferment of Humors in
our Nation, having taken from me all the Remains of an Innocent Ambition. By
the providence of God, and the free unconditionate generosity of that Noble and
Loyal Patriot, Sir John Norton, I am comfortably placed in an agreeable station
in the Church; and am now passionately desirous to collect my self, to be known
to few, to be envied by none: If ever I had any esteem among some, either
through chance or the Conspiracy of Friends, I should now be glad to have my
Name as Friendly neglected, as it was first raised; for I always accounted a
great Reputation, and a great Infamy to be equal Afflictions; and the unknown
untalk'd of Man to be only Blessed.

Yet though I am entering into the solid Peace and Contentment of private life I
leave you, Sir, engaged in the highest Sphere of Counsel and Action; but I
leave you under a deep sense of the Interest and obligation of the best
Religion in the World; a Religion, out of which no good and wise Subject of
this Nation can be desirous to live, and in which even Repenting Atheists
choose to Dye! I leave you also guarded with the Hereditary and chosen
Principles of Loyalty and Honor, with all the Natural and Acquired Blessings
of Temper and Improvement; especially, with that Law of Kindness in your Soul,
legible even in the outward characters of your Composure, which will hardly
ever suffer you to Err much, either in a Public or a Private Life; it being
very difficult for a person of large Affections, of great Modesty in
Conversation, of sharp and quick Reflections in solitary thought, ever to
become Seditious in State, or Habitually loose in private Manners. And O! that
such an amicable sweetness of Disposition, as gently reigns through all your
Actions and designs, were every where mingled with the Policy of our Kingdom;
and that the Wisdom of our great Assembly were every where tempered with such
an Healing Meekness! then Peace and Love, and Union might distill like Balm upon
our Nation, then might we speedily recover our Secular Glory to the Admiration
and Terror of our Foreign Observers: then might we strike down our Errors in
Religion, as the Priests did heretofore the Sacrifices at the Altar, not with
the Have and Fury of Anger and Revenge, but with that deliberate strength, that
wise and solemn delay, which proceeded wholly from a Conviction and Sense of
Duty, and Devotion, then might our Magistracy govern by Love, our Religion by
Charity, and all our Policies unite into the Everlasting securities of Peace
and Friendship, which is the hearty Prayer of him who desires to be known by no
greater Title than that of,

Your most Faithful and most Obedient Friend and Servant, Tho. Mannnygham.

A DISCOURSE Concerning TRUTH.
HE who has had the Curiosity to observe our Modern Skepticism, and been any
thing acquainted with those looser Doctrines, which almost universally occur;
(wherein restless Consciences have endeavored with all the little Arts of
specious Sophistry, to work out to themselves a Stupefaction rather than a
Quiet, a Charm than a Satisfaction) may readily reflect how Natural Theology
erected chiefly on Natural Philosophy, (the great Diana of this Mechanic age)
is now become the only refuge of all those who pretend to establish their
irreligion by Argument and Syllogism. For downright positive Atheism has found
but very few serious and declared Abettors; has sometimes sprung from the fumes
and madness of Wine, and Lust; has been the distemper of an Hour, the Paradox
or Rant of heated Conversation, not an Opinion, or a morning thought; and for
the most part, has been rather sworn up, than asserted.

Christianity had that Serpent Philosophy to deal with in its very Cradle, and
through all its strength of Centuries has received its fiercest assaults from
that Monster. By vain Philosophy, so rigorously condemned in the Epistles; the
Learned generally understand the Gnostick Theology composed for the most part
of Pythagorean Principles; and that the Epicurean and Stoical Sects were as
malicious as any in the Apostles times, the Disputes of St. Paul recordedin
Acts 17. v. 18. sufficiently inform us. Not long after this, that Man whom
Origin so rationally and so perspicuously answered, declaimed against the whole
Bible with all the Artillery of invective Eloquence, and false reasonings,
deduced from a commixture of Barbarian and Grecian Placits. Then Hierocles,
Julian, etc. but particularly their Ancestor Porphyry (whom some of the Fathers
counted it Religion to Curse) sought by all the darkest methods of Hell to
lessen and destroy the Authority of the Holy Bible: For according to that
imperfect account which we find of those fifteen Books he wrote against the
Christians, he is recorded there to have jeered at it for a mean simplicity of
Style, and for innumerable repugnancies; to have attributed its Prophesies to
secret Combinations of Writers after the Fact, or accommodated them to other
Persons and Circumstances; and to have ascribed all its Miracles to the force
of Egyptian Magic, and the operation of Devils. Now all this was contrived in
honor and vindication of the Platonic Philosophy so highly reverenced by the
Sacred Order of the Alexandrian School. Yet all these men have spent their
utmost Venom, done their worst, and the gates of Hell have not prevailed.

For another succession of Gospel Adversaries, we may with Candor enough reckon
Aquinas and the Schoolmen, who have most deplorably undermined the Scriptures
with the Principles of Aristotle, and although accidentally, yet they have been
as really pernicious as any we have hitherto named. Their intentions were
doubtless innocent, but we can never sufficiently lament their intolerable
Leisure, which occasioned them for want of better employ, to spin out all the
strength of Divine Writings into nice and unprofitable Volumns. Whatever the
advices of those Persons may seem to the contrary, who have spent so much time
in those Studies already, that they are bound for their Reputation-sake, to
recommend them to others; who tell us, those alone will make a man close and
Argumentative, quick and sagacious in discovering the Point and Knot of the
Controversy, which perhaps was tied only for the Trick-sake; who would have us
lie seven or eight years in a dark room, that when we come abroad into the open
day, we may think we see clearer; who though they themselves have miserably
experimented the Cousenage, yet still cry up and maintain the prodigy, and to
prevent a saucy precociousness in Learning, invite others to drudge in their
methods, to be vigilant and attentive on subtle Entities, till they become
like those deeper sort of Contemplators, who never fix their eyes more
steadfastly than when they see nothing: notwithstanding, I say, all these large
promises and encouragements for the reading of the Schoolmen, there are
altogether as observant persons, who will not stick to affirm, that it is
evidently owing to that Load and Corruption of our Libraries, that men are
generally grown so loose and ambiguous in their Reasonings, that with little
pains or art they can prove any thing, or nothing; and that most of those
Religious Wars which at this day infest Christianity, are chiefly owing to that
fatal invention of School Divinity, that Gunpowder of Learning. All this would
be most amazingly dreadful, but that there is somewhat worse to come.

There is still another Philosophy behind, and that has opened another Gate in
Hell, and sent forth a piece of the blackest Sophistry that the Infernal Synod
can dictate. Its reputed Author, Benedictus de Spinoza; one who has run through
a whole Amsterdam of Religions himself, and obliged that Athens of promiscuous
Worship with one more of his own Invention. Where he has given them all the
difficulties of Scripture-History and Chronology amassed and enhansed; all the
Doubts and Controversies of Commentators positively determined on the worst
side; a Rapsodie of Illusions from Talmud and Alcoran; and a Feature of
Deformity borrowed from every Heresy, Schism, and Sect.

It Is true indeed, he allows the Bible to be Divine Revelation, but with this
Proviso, that the Philosophers Reason is still a more infallible word of God;
that its Prophecies were accommodated to Prejudice, Fancy, and Temper; Its
Miracles the Wonders of the Ignorant; its whole end and scope Political, for
the better security of Government; and its popular Doctrine intended only for
the Herd to square their gross Obedience by: and all this, because there occur
some Expressions in the Scriptures altogether unworthy (as he imagines) of
those clear and evident discoveries of Nature lately found out and Demonstrated
by the Divine Cartesius; whom he never mentions but with the greatest
veneration imaginable, with all the Eulogies that the most ravished invention
can suggest; whereas if at any time he confesses Christ, it is like the Devil in
the Gospel, with Horror and Reluctance, and (like him too) he seems first
Tormented to it.

The Existence of a Deity against the Atheist, and the certainty of the Bibles
Revelation against the Anti-scripturist, have been in all Christian ages, but
especially of late, so fully confirmed and established both from Pulpit and
Press, through all the possibility of Reasoning, all the Amplitude of Topics,
whether Theological, Metaphysical, Physical, Moral, or Mathematical, that were
they handsomely collected and summed up, they would without Controversy make a
Compendium of the properest Logic yet extant; and yet this Infamous Book
presents our Reasoning Men with a farther scruple still, where freely granting
the Revelation of the Scriptures, it notwithstanding concludes, that the holy
Bible is only a popular System of Pious Political Errors; Regnum Devotionis,
non Veritatis: Wherefore I shall endeavor at present only to make good this
one Proposition, viz. That the chief Criterions or Canons of Philosophical
Truth, which have been invented and allowed by speculative Men, are much more
abundantly convincing when applied to matters of Divine Revelation.

Now Philosophical Truth is capable of being considered but these two ways.

I. In respect of its Traditional or Historical account. II. In respect of its
accommodation to our Natural Faculties.
I. In respect of its Traditional or Historical account.

And here we have some late Authors very laborious in Transcriptions, who have
not scrupled to make Philosophy co-incident with Revelation it self, deriving
it in a continued Tradition from the Jewish Church, and thereby conceiving it
no other than the remains of a primary Revelation. They make the business very
short, telling us, that doubtless Adam was created with a perfect knowledge of
Nature, and that from him this Knowledge was transmitted by Methusalem, to
Noah, from Noah and his Sons and Nephews to the Chaldeans, from them to the
Egyptians, from the Egyptians to the Phenicians, from Phenicia it sailed into
Greece, so to the Latins, and from thence 'twas propagated to these
septentrional parts, where we have the Genealogy of Philosophy as clearly and
succinctly delineated, as that of our King, from William the Conqueror.

Now we cannot suppose that Adam transmitted that Knowledge of Nature, which he
enjoyed during the state of his Innocence, and which he received either from
immediate Infusion, or connate Idea's of things: Nay if he had, he would have
given his Posterity a false Philosophy, since that whole Nature was afterward
forced to follow the Law of its Curse, since Thorns and Briars were not in the
Scheme of Vegetables, and the Serpent was to be new studied again. But if he
transmitted to us the Knowledge he had gathered from much Experience, and a
long Life after his Fall, when perhaps his Faculties were not very much
perfecter than ours, and stood in as great want of a Logic for their better
information, I do not see any great benefit we could receive from such a
Tradition; and all that the Asserters of this Opinion can make good will be
only this, that we have received one more Curse from him than we thought of,
and that he has propagated to his Posterity Sin, Death, and Philosophy.

That the Egyptians, who were a mighty and ruling Nation, when the Israelites
were but one chosen Family, should receive all their Wisdom and Learning from
the Jewish Church, which as yet had not so much as any written Canon, any Law
to walk by, but what it received either from the continual Ministry of Angels,
or somewhat else both Sacred and Incommunicable to the Posterity of Cham, is
more than our ordinary Historical probability will allow us to affirm. Neither
is it less absurd to make Joseph the great Interpreter of Dreams, the same with
Hermes Trismegistus, and to be their renowned Lawgiver, when as before his
arrival thither, they lived in all pomp and Trading, Municipal Laws, and
confluence of Merchants, nay, and he himself was but a part of the Ishmaelites
Traffic, Genesis 37.36.

The first rise and exercise of the Heathen Theology consisted only in some
Mystical Rites, afterward recited in Hymns and Musical Odes; and seeing the
acknowledgment of a God is allowed to be Universal, and consequently Natural;
why might not these Barbarous efforts in Religion wholly spring from the
confused Notion of a Deity naturally inherent, without any particular
derivation from the Jewish Church? The Grecians and Latins do indeed ascribe
some advantages to the Phenitians, which Tacitus particularly mentions, viz.
the Art of Navigation, and a few Letters; but that they held a general Mart of
Learning, and transplanted Colonies of humane Sciences into Greece, Africa,
Spain, and the chief parts of Europe, which border on the Mediterranean, is
certainly no other than one of Mr. Bocharte's Learned Whimsies. We usually
esteem our Trading Towns as Brutish a part of Mankind as any of their Brethren,
where Gain and Covetousness seldom allow any Intervals for Meditation, any
Leisure for deep thought; and we may easily believe the Maritine Phenicians to
have had no better speculations than that of their Cynosura for the safer
Conduct of a Cock-boat; no other Society-Invention than that of a Royal die,
which came neither from a Jewish Tradition, nor an Egyptian Hieroglyphick, but
(as good Historians inform us) was happily hinted by the experimental
Philosophy of a Dog.

But grant these Eastern Nations to have excelled in some useful parts of the
Mathematics, yet we may give a Natural account of the rise of those without
having any recourse to the Jewish Church, since they may be probably supposed
to have taken their Origin either from Necessity, or a commodious Situation, or
both; so that the Egyptians Geometry might be owing to the inundations of Nile,
which caused them often to Survey their confusion of Lands; the Serenity of the
Air, and an undisturbed Horizon might invite the Chaldeans to look up, and by
long observation understand the course of some few Constellations; and the
compulsion of the Phenicians or Canaanites unto the Coasts of the Mediterranean
by the Sword of Joshua might force them to seek mercy on the Ocean, and drive
them to the little Arts of ancient Navigation.

Pythagoras, whose Life and Travels have administered much to this Fancy, is
recorded by Porphyry to have brought nothing from the Hebrews but (...), the
knowledge of Dreams, or of their Interpretation, which yet among them was never
counted an Art, but an Inspiration. If the Jews were such diffusers of secular
Learning, why are the wisest Men of their own Nation (such as Joseph, Moses,
Solomon, and Daniel) charactered and deciphered to us in the Bible, with a
comparison so advantageous to the Wisdom of other Nations; as that they were
skilled in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, that their Wisdom excelled all the
Wisdom of the East Countries and of Babylon.

Schools and Colleges we are taught they had, though not such as some of our
European Seminaries for frivolous and Sophistical Education; but for the
weighty instruction of the Sons of the Prophets, for the reading and
interpreting of their Sacred Law. Grant that some of the more Mystical and
Symbolical parts of the Allegorizing Philosophy, or some of those Fables which
the Poets borrowed from the Corruption of Tradition, were derived thence; must
it needs follow that all the unmixed and Argumentizing Philosophy, all Arts and
Sciences (the effects of Curiosity and accidental Emergency) must be brought
from Canaan? If Plato at any time writes that he received a blind Notion (...),
must they be presently no other than the hateful, and therefore concealed
Hebrews, when as all the World besides was esteemed Barbarian to him.

Now the great maintainers of this Hypothesis, whether Clemens Alexandrinus and
Eusebius, or more modern Antiquaries, seem to have borrowed the hint chiefly
from the eloquent Jew Josephus, who in his Treatise against Appion the
Alexandrian Grammarian endeavors to prove together with the Antiquity the
Universal Learning also of the Jews. Yet out of an Hereditary prejudice to the
Heathen World, and a notorious National Pride, he may be thought to have
exceeded the modesty of sober Argument on that subject, especially being so
highly provoked by the jeers of Appion, who undertakes to prove them originally
Egyptians, and that they were turned out thence with their Heliopolitan Moses,
for an infamous Disease. With these most defamatory speeches Blaspheming his
Nation, as his own words signify; this (I say) might exasperate him to an
haughty derogation of all the Learning of the whole World besides, and to make
their pompous and long celebrated Wisdom appear no other than some broken
Light, some imperfect fragments derived from them.

However since by the very confession of those, who would make out such a
Traduction, it is now mixed and fermented with the vain additions and falsities
of the ignorant Gentiles, as it appears but a (...), full of Horror and the
misguidings of the Night, we cannot upon the account of Tradition or
Revelation, be faithfully assured of any Truth, any Certainty in it.

Now there are none of these imputations, which can be charged on the Holy
Bible, especially on that necessary part, on which our Belief, and Practice,
and our Salvation depends There Is no obscurity, unless that which may arise
from too great a Luster; no dark Counsel from Delphos, whose interpretation
still required another Oracle; but all its Doctrine is like Life and Light,
nothing more Familiar and Domestic, and yet Mysterious too. What if the
Revelations of St. John are still in some parts veiled, are the shadows in our
Heavenly Landscape, yet we doubt not but the Ages to come will see them
perfectly fulfilled into their true Shine and Perspicuity; and what we cannot
here attain to will but make our Scene of Glory larger. Neither are the Holy
Scriptures corrupted with any vain Additions; the Jews cannot fasten their
Talmud, nor the Papists their Traditions; such are but Enchantments to Moses's
Miracles, and can never imitate the finger of God. Neither could all the
Armies, Emperors, or Persecutions, all the Policy and Malice of Earth and Hell
destroy one Article, blot out one necessary Truth, but that same God, who first
inspired them, has hitherto preserved them, and we may with all devout
confidence expect, that his neverslumbring Providence will be their Eternal
Massorah.

Having done with the Historical account let us Secondly consider Philosophical
Truth in an accommodation and conformity to our Natural Faculties; etc.

I. To our Senses.

Whose Testimony being managed by a superintendent Faculty is the most
infallible certainty we can naturally have of sensible things: which (as to its
Mode of Derivation) whether it proceeds from real Qualities inherent in the
Objects, or Notions and Phantasms impressed on the Nerves and Brain, it matters
not, since most men are sufficiently agreed in their Representations, or
Relative Truth, our Organs and Objects being rightly disposed and
circumstantiated. Neither is it to any purpose for any one to obtrude upon us
the frequent illusions of Sight, since those very Fallacies (as they call them)
constitute an Art, and are the grand Maxims of our Optics.

Now although some have so deeply plunged into that degeneracy of Skepticism as
to extract a Controversy from every Particle of the Universe, and make their
own existence a Problem, yet has this been pointed at by the sober part of
Mankind, as the extremity of Folly and forlorn Sottishness. The very
Pyrrhonians were not guilty of this Excess, who never deny their assent to the
Passions, and Representations of Sense, but doubted whether the Natures and
Internal Verities of things were from thence, or by any other way sufficiently
and infallibly known; which is convincingly manifest from their grand
probability (...), where (...) bears no relation to the immediate appearances
of Sense, but is wholly concerned in Discourse, Syllogism, and the Consequences
of Science; and if at any time they did (...), indulge themselves a sportive
Captiousness about the familiar Objects of Sense, 'twas not so much to affront
Truth, as to persecute the haughty Dogmatist, and torture his surly positions;
so that those few absurdities recorded of their great Master Pyrrho can be
nothing but Fiction and Comedy: as that he disbelieved all his Senses, grew so
callous and mortified with stupidity, as that he had taught his very Nerves and
Fibers to deny themselves; so dead drunk with Apathy, as to lie in a Carts way,
and at another time most unmercifully to doubt whether his Friend was in the
Ditch or no. These (I say) and such like extravagant Relations, which occur in
his Life, can be no other than the Burlesque of his Opinion; like that of
Epicurus's, which from the pure abstracted Contemplations on Nature, joined
with the most innocent delight of a Garden was by the viler Herd of that Sect
corrupted into all gross Sensuality, and the debauches of a City.

Diogenes Laertius affirms of Pyrrho, that his suspension proceeded from a
noble Generosity of mind, and that in order for an undisturbed tranquillity of
Life he introduced a polite Genteel Mode of Philosophizing (...). And if so,
such a Skepticism as this would be the best breeding a Scholar could pretend
to, 'twould redeem the Learned from that snarle of Education, which many have
most unhappily contracted from their little Victories in Scholastic
Contentions, whence they become angry and sick at every suspense of Judgment in
another, so utterly impatient of contradiction and Argument, that they vilify
and defame all Humane Nature, because the Age rebels against their Opinion.
Whereas on the contrary the modest way of humbly proposing our probabilities,
and allowing the same freedom to others, would render Conversation sweet and
easy, all conferences pleasant, and be a great instrument of advancing true
Friendship in the World. He that grows hot and turbid, that elbows in all his
Philosophic Disputes, must needs be very proud of his own Sufficiencies, or
very ignorant of the vanity of the Science he stickles for; and commonly the
intemperate value of a speculation proceeds from the weakness of the Man; for
he that is passionate for a particular System now, without doubt was so here-to
fore for his Nuts, and is in all likelihood of still following his Temper, of
being warm and obstinate in all the trivial concerns of Humane Society.

Neither would this generous method only give us easier seasons, and softer
moments of Converse, but also a freer range to Fancy, and a loss to new
thought; since in matters wholly Philosophical (where Religion and Government
are not concerned) Skepticism and Paradox may without Controversy be esteemed
the purest Vehicles of Noble Wit, and unattempted Sense.

It need not startle us that the Roman Writers do often insinuate a very
contemptible regard for the Senses, since all that, is in order for the better
coloring the contradictions of their Mass. Hence a late French Author in his
Researches after Truth, having presented his Reader with a long tedious
repetition of the invincible Illusions of the Senses (such as a stick half in
the Water, and a square Tower at a distance) most triumphantly concludes, that
they were given to Men, as they are to Brutes, only for the preservation of
Life, not as the Ports of Merchandise and Science, but of Defense and Safety.
As if our sight served us only for the conduct of our steps, or for securing us
from a Precipice, whereas that almost unlimited Sense extends it is Royalty
through the whole Universe, purvey's for all the capacity of the Intellect, and
points at what it cannot perfectly discover. For by the Visible things of the
Creation, the great Invisibles are Collected. But we need not labor any longer
in this point, since those persons, against whom our Discourse is chiefly
directed, are so vigorous for the evidence of Sense, that they scarce allow any
other, but make the most sublimated Knowledge a Tumult of Phantasms; all
Thought, Local Motion; all Reason, Mechanism; and the whole Encyclopede of Arts
and Sciences but a brisker Circulation of the Blood. How ridiculous soever this
Opinion is, yet it sufficiently serves our purpose, as it establishes Sense to
be an undoubted Criterion of Truth, as far as we contend, or within its proper
Sphere.

Let us now see the more abundant concern of this Criterion in matters of
Revelation, which will presently appear, if we consider, that this was the
first and is the last Evidence, of Divine Miracles, on which all revealed
Religion is established; and that Tradition it self makes no Argument until
it is ultimately resolved into the certainty of the Senses. Moses and our
blessed Savior made their constant appeal to them. What we have seen, and what
we have heard was still the Apostles Logic, and an Appeal to Miracles, was the
powerful Demonstration of the Spirit. How solicitous was our Savior after his
Resurrection to give the senses their full satisfaction? This made him
condescend to heal St. Thomas's Infidelity with a touch, which immediately shed
a strong Conviction through his Soul, that straight way broke forth into a
glorious acknowlegment, My Lord, and my God! Nay, at his Ascension he chose not
to vanish or suddenly disappear, but gave the men of Galilee time to stand and
gaze, submitted his Motion to the Scrutiny of their Eyes, whilst he was carried
up into Heaven by Angels and Clouds in all the leisure of a Triumph.

II. We will consider Philosophical Truth in an Accommodation to our
Understandings.

And this is the very diffinition of the Schools, viz. A Conformity of the
Object with the Intellect. Here I dare not venture far. In this Science, or
Mystery of Words, a very judicious Abstracter would find it a hard task to be
any thing copious without falling upon an Infinite Collection, an Eternal
Succession, or some such like contradictious and self-duelling terms. True
Metaphisicks is still a Desideratum in Philosophy; for what we have hitherto
received from the Scholasticks, Jesuits, and others, appears only like the
Ghost and Phantasm of separated Reason and departed Sense. If we lanch into the
vast expansion of their pure Abstractions, we find but very little to terminate
our Apprehensions, but our contemplating Heads seem presently to swim in an
Infinite Vacuum, and all substantial thought by little and little to lessen,
and pass away into a strange Transcendency. I could tell you of a Truth of the
Object or Entity, a Truth of Appearance, another of Conception, and one more of
the Intellect, and that without a Miracle, all these may be one, viz. an
appearance or representation of the Object to the Intellect; I could tell you
likewise that besides the Truth of apprehension, there is one of Judgment,
another of Discourse, and these again either Mental or Verbal; I could tell you
from the Lord Herbert, that there is an invincible Instinct of common Notions,
the same that Aristotle before him called an Intelligence of Principles; that
there are some Sacrosancta Principia (as the forementioned Person styles them)
which inform us, that there is a God, that he ought to be Adored; but how, and
in what manner, what will make our Worship acceptable, our Sacrifices, or our
Prayers regarded, here his Instinct, Internal, External Sense, and Intellect,
with all their Analogies, Conditions, and Consequences can give us no better
direction than the Finger of a Mercurial Statue, when we are puzling in a dark
and crooked Alley. It Is not my business to give you a Censure of that Noble
Man's Labors; Gassendus has done it already in an imperfect Epistle, wherein he
has utterly renounced the Genius of his Nation, scarce allowing the Author one
Epistolary Complement; though it is to be presumed, that when the Lord Herbert
sent him his Book, he expected he should have returned the Applauses of a
Gentleman, and not the Animadversions of a Critic. Yet so it often happens,
for another great Wit des Carts met with the same Fate, and from the same hand
too. He grew so confident and presumptuous of his Meditations, that he sent out
sportive Challenges to invite Objections from all his Friends, till at last
like one of his own Kings, he was quite baffled and slain amidst his very Tilts
and Tournaments. After the Metaphysicians have quite tired themselves with their
Divisions and subdivisions, they are so modest as not to make Humane Intellect
the adequate measure of Truth, but ultimately resolve it into a Conformity with
the Divine Understanding, which a Platonist would after this manner explain,
That there is an Eternal mind, that comprehends the intelligible Natures and
Idea's of all things, whether actually existing, or possibly only; that
comprehends it self, and all the extent of its own power, together with an
exemplar Platform of the whole World, according to which he produced the same.
This being granted, we are as much in the dark as ever; for unless this eternal
mind shall vouchsafe to acquaint us what is conformable to his Infinite
unerring Understanding, we can have but little certainty of Truth.

Now this is the peculiar Province of Revelation. And that it may appear how
natural this Medium is, how suitable to the Universal consent of Mankind, you
may please to reflect, that Revelation has been the true, or pretended
foundation of all Knowledge whatsoever. No Religions, no Policies imposed upon
the World without conferences and retirements with God and Angels. Not only
Religions and Laws, but all Arts and Sciences, all noble Inventions have ever
boasted of their Aegeria's, their assisting Demons too.

When the light of Nature, that first Revelation was distorted, and the
unguided reason of the Idolatrous World had terminated all Divinity in the
works of the Creation, then did God speak at sundry times, and in diverse
manners to the Fathers by the Prophets; When the Gentiles would not learn of
the Kingdom of Israel, which was a constant visible demonstration of the Power,
Providence, and Goodness of God, their Ignorance for some time was winked at,
till at last God was pleased more fully to declare his Nature and Will by his
Eternal Son, the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his
Person, who brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel. So that
now the Bible is become the perfect Register even of Natural Religion too,
since all those excellent truths, whith the Heathen World faintly hinted at,
rather wished than believed, whether they concern matters of Faith, or the
Duties of Morality, are infallibly assured to us by the supernatural
Declaration of that God, whose veracity is established by an infinite
Knowledge, whereby he cannot be deceived himself, and an eternal holiness,
whereby he cannot deceive us. And to take away all complaints about Error, the
obscurity of things, and the imperfectness of our finite Understandings (those
bold Murmurs, which reverberate on Heaven and Providence it self) we are
Promised and Assured that the Third Person in the Trinity will be with us to
the end of the World to guide and direct us in all necessary Truth.

But Thirdly, Cartesius goes farther than the Schoolmen. He uncatechizes himsef
through a long series of Dubitation; invents an Art to stifle Education and
Memory, strips himself of all his prejudices, only that he might put them on
again in another dress, and present us with a nicer Recollection, a more
splendid method of his Errors. For it is certain that most of them returned upon
him again, not unlike to that which the Atomists observe, that if you grind any
matter into too minute a dust, the little particles will cling again, and
reunite by reason of a too exquisite separation. Wherefore after he had fancied
the whole World a Faire-Land, Life a mere Dream, all Conscious and thinking
Nature but the delusions of an evil Genius; after all this enchantment he can
find nothing, that can ascertain to him any Truth but the Goodness of God,
which will not suffer our faculties to be imposed upon in their clear and
evident perceptions, so that that which can give the best account of the
Goodness of God, justly claims the Advantage of this Criterion.

And, that Revelation does so would be almost improper here to mention, but
that the method of my Discourse requires it. I shall instance only in one
thing, but that the greatest, the vast Astonishment of Heaven and Earth, viz.
that of the Second Persons Incarnation, his taking our Humane Nature upon him,
to Converse with us, to Dye for us, for Us Sinners. A Mystery of Love, which
gave the very Angels new Anthems, a new Scene of Knowledge, and consequently a
new Heaven!

Now I would not be thought to speak against all Philosophy, to declaim against
all Learning, any more than he that Preaches against a full Table, or exhorts
to Mortification, would be thought to make Starving Orthodox, and Self-murder a
Gospel-Precept. For since Philosophy is by most men allowed to be the requisie
improvement of our natural Faculties; since it is commendably made the great
Employ and Study of our younger years, and the better Commerce of our more
advanced Society; since exalted and almost meriting Charity has built us
Schools and Colleges for our pleasant Recess and Meditation, bequeathed us
competent Revenues, for the easy maintenance and tranquillity of a Thinking
Life, nobly endowed our Professors for more speedy advances in Arts and
Sciences; and since Christian Commonwealths with their prudent Laws and
Constitutions have established to us our Universities, certainly we ought not
to entertain Philosophy with so cold a regard, as the Phanaticism of some, and
the incapacity of others to attain so great an excellency, is ready to profane
it with. But yet if we take a farther prospect, and view it in its ultimate
tendencies we may with as equal reason blame its Adoration as its Contempt.

Philosophy was intended, as our Colleges wherein it is taught, not to spend our
our whole Age, 60 years and 10 in it, but to make it our passage to more solid
seize, to equippe our selves for more substantial Knowledge. It Is but an
Introduction, a Ministering Accomplishment for Divinity, and we are first taught
the Elements of the World, that we may better understand the Sacred Character.
It Is but a Jewish Canaan, Typical and significative of a more Spiritual
Mansion, and may under a judicious Management serve to shadow out to us, though
very imperfectly, the infinite Treasures of revealed Wisdom. So that the intent
of my discourse was only to show, that whatever pretenses Philosophy or natural
Religion could make for Truth or Certainty, yet Revelation (there being such a
thing granted by the Adversary) laid fuller and more abundant claim to all
those Rules and Measures of Truth. But should I now reckon up all the
incommunicable characters of Truth, to Revelation, it would require a Volumn. I
will only mention some few, and those such as lie within the compass of
Philosophical Reasonings, then answer an Objection or two of the Natural-list,
and so conclude.

Whatever Philosophy or Natural Religion can truly arrive to in its best
progress of Reasoning, its highest exaltation, Revelation has all the benefit
and evidence of that Light, besides a farther and infallible confirmation from
Divine Testimony. Moreover, the excellency of the Object, peculiar to the
matters of Revelation, gains a freer admittance, makes a stronger and more
lasting impression on the understanding, than any other common Motive whatever.
For no man needs any other Argument than his own Reflection to convince him,
that Assent arises more properly from the excessive worth of the Object than
from the dry evidence of Apprehension, and Perspicuity it self. And that
because, however in Philosophy Truth and Goodness may seem distinct, yet in
Divinity they are all one; and the most abstracted speculation there, has a
constant Morality annexed to it, which always superadd's the Recommendation of
the Affections too. And how magnificently soever men paraphrase on Reason,
Intelligible Ideas, and Eternal Verities, they are our Passions, that must
carry us to Heaven; our Repentance and our Devotion, our Love, our Fear, and
our Hopes; and our Reason and our Faith, only as joined with these. 'Twas the
zeal of the Affections, assisted by the Holy Spirit, that reconciled
Martyrdoms, and rescued the Bible from the Dioclesian Flames. There each holy
Martyr would freely part with his Life, but not his Bible. That Sacred
Depositum was all his Wealth, his World, his Eternity. When his right hand was
cut off, he seized it with his left; when that was gone too, he fastened on it
with his Mouth, and amidst his Torments sang Hallelujahs out of it; when his
breath could no longer articulate his devotions, his panting heart still
retained it, and when the Tyrant grasped that, it fled away with his Soul. Now
search all the Records, all the Catalogues of Stoics, those great Masters and
Professors, of Death, and see if this can be paralleled. We have read indeed
of a Philosopher, that offered up an Hecatomb for the invention of a
Proposition, but he would never have Sacrificed himself for the Confirmation of
it.

But the Naturalist tells us, we have no sublime Notions of God in Scripture,
and that the Israelites only knew his Name; whereas every Hebrew name of God is
a pregnant Hieroglifick in his Theology, and that one word Jehova is a Body of
Divinity. The Scriptures have acquainted us with so much of the Nature of God,
as may sufficiently inspirit our Obedience; and those, who have pretended to
farther discoveries, have only opened a way to Heresy, Enthusiasm, and even
Atheism it self. And we have reason to fear that those curious and subtle
Discourses of late about the Idea of a God, have done but little service to the
Christian Religion. What the understanding in things of this Nature, like a
clear Fountain, would naturally reflect as it maintains its ordinary Current,
when once examined and stirred, either defaces or distorts; and I am apt to
think, that the Divine Nature and its absolute Attributes are best known by the
modest reflection of the first Thought. The most abstracting Metaphysitian,
that studies them farther, does but think himself into amazement, and with the
delaying Philosopher, only loses his God by a longer Procrastination. But still
the same Adversary urges that it is strangely irrational to represent God
Almighty with Passions and Senses, which the Scriptures every where allow. This
is disingenious Sophistry; for he that makes the Objection cannot be ignorant
of the Figure. That men should quarrel with the condescentions of the Almighty!
That when he is graciously pleased to speak to them, they should dispute the
Nature of his Voice! when he says, he has compassion on'em, they should ask,
where then are his Bowels! when he revokes a threatened Judgment, they should
plead, He cannot! Divine Animal! would thou be conversed with in the
Language of Eternity? would thou be treated with in the ineffable Dialect of
Heaven? Alas! fond Creature, thou art Elemented and Organ'd for other
Apprehensions, for a lower Commerce of perception: Such immediate displays of
Divinity infinitely transcend the Analogy of thy Order, and the immoderate
Glory of such a Revelation would but absorb thy Soul, and crack its Hypostasis:
Thou can not see God, and live.

But still the Natural Philosophy in the Scripture can never be pardoned;
either that, or De Carts must be false. However Men may flatter themselves
that they have Orbs and Circumvolutions of Souls Concentric to the Universe,
yet we may very rationally believe, that an exact Knowledge of Nature was never
designed Man on this side of Heaven; it may possibly be reserved for our
Illuminated Faculties, and be an accessory of our Glorification. The Essences
of things can be the Object of no other than a Divine Understanding, and he
that made the World, can only have a perfect Knowledge of it. What if Divine
Providence, as a peculiar privilege, granted to Adam and Solomon a
considerable acquaintance with Nature, yet event has shown, that there was a
kind of Tetragrammaton in it, that it was thought a thing too Sacred to be
communicated to Posterity, so that what they enjoyed was no Natural
Acquisition, but a Gracious Gift, not so much Science as Vision.

Though Cartesius in his account of Meteors has endeavored with Epicurus to
exclude the Deity from the middle Region, and to deliver us up to the
Providence of an Atmosphere, yet God Almighty thought fit to manifest his
Omnipotence to Job from that place rather than from the Heaven of Heavens. What
is the end we propose of our enquiries into Nature? Is it to serve and gratify
our Curiosity? That we will not own. Is it to plume our Pride? That we dare not
own. Then it can be no other than to settle in us a due reverence and
acknowledgment of the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God. Now all this is
Pathetically secured to us in Scripture, since it may very effectually be
obtained by an humble Meditation on the Existences of things, their more open
Qualities, and their obvious Relations. The consideration of the substantial
parts and uses of sensible Nature (the very Mode and Method of the Scripture's
Philosophy) has, we know, in a mere Heathens Breast kindled Admiration into an
Hymn; But I never yet read of any Anthems composed from the Contemplation of
Atoms. Who can Spell the Divine Wisdom, Power, and Goodness out of the
Principles of Des Carts, where he gives us the Origin of all things in a
Puppet-play, interprets all the works of God according to the bruit Laws of
Mechanism, and allows no other Operations in Vital Nature, then what he finds
paralleled in German Clockwork? Whereas, who can without holy Affections
peruse the (...), the Majesty of Mose's account? (...), where he describes the
Original Fiat in a Phrase almost commensurate to the Dignity of the Creation,
that some Rabbis have thought his very Style, as well as Sense to have been
inspired.

They are our too eager disquisitions after the Internal Verities of things
that have led the Witty World into so large a Field of Skepticism. Men must be
pressing and breaking into the Recesses of Nature, as that Conqueror heretofore
into the Sanctum Sanctorum, then mistake the thing, return dissatisfied, cry
all is Pageantry, and that we worship Clouds. I had rather read the
Astonishments of Job, when God poses him through the whole Creation, then all
the bold explications of Men and Demons. I had rather consider the Rainbow as
the Reflection of God's Mercy, then the Sun's Light; and when I call to mind,
that Thunder throughout the Scriptures is styled his Mighty Voice, I Am
satisfied at what I Tremble, and though this may debase my Philosophy, yet it
heightens my Divinty.

If any man is not yet satisfied what is Truth, let him but seriously reflect
on his Deathbed, and the Day of Judgment, and then I Am persuaded he will need
no Answer; When the Gayety of Fancy forsakes him, and the Prosperity of
Invention gives no relish; when his Passions and Appetites grow languid from
the impotence of Blood, and his Brain becomes too weak for the Image of the
World, then will he call for a Portion of Scripture to ease his Conscience, a
drop from the Fountain of Living Water to cool his tongue. Then set him on the
highest Mountain of Metaphysics, and from thence give him the Ravishing
Prospect of all the Kingdoms of Humane Learning, all the Glorys of Philosophy,
yet he will not Worship, not Idolize one glittering Notion, not part with one
single Text for a (...). When the last Fire shall make Nature confess it self
to be no God, the Sun and Moon be darkened, the Elements and Stars melt with
fervent heat, and run together into one great Vortex of Confusion, and when the
whole Volumn of the Creation shall be shrieveled up like a Scroll of Parchment,
then shall the Holy Bible be opened, its everlasting Truths unfolded, and
though Heaven and Earth pass away yet not one Iota of that shall perish.

Go now, and neglect Heaven, the receptacle of Angels and departed Souls, for
the visible Heaven of Orbs and Planets, and lose the Beatific Vision for that
through a Tube! Go, thou that hungerest after Humane Learning, go! make a vast
Progress in specious Errors, and industriously acquire to thy self a deep-read
Confusion of thought! lose all good Sense by a multiplicity of Languages, grow
gray under a Mathematical Problem, and make thy Grave in the Dust of Geometry!
let the reconciliation of the Chaldean Chronology, and the Egyptian Dinasties
swallow up thy moments of Salvation! let the uncertainties of Prosane Authors
attend thee on thy Deathbed, and with their restless Tumult add a Frenzy to
thy Fever! then let thy Learned Ashes be kept in Urns, and thy great Name be
read in Annals. Yet for all this know, O man, that Plato gave thee thy Pompous
Thoughts, Aristotle thy Sagacity in Invention, and Euclid thy Mighty
Demonstrations; In a word, that Heathens gave thee all thy Reason, and the
Curse of Babel thy Languages to express it. Go therefore rather, and Captivate
all thy Thoughts to the positions of Faith, thy whole Heart to the embracement
of the Gospel, and let the frequent Meditation on Sin, Death, and Judgment
macerate thy bold Naturals into an humble contrition of understanding.

POPERY One great Cause of ATHEISM.
OMnis Haeresis cum ad Atheismum delapsa est, per sapientem Prophetam, quales
in Italia fuerunt Thomas, Dominicus, Scotus and alii, in Veritatis viam
reducitur. Tho. Campanelle De Monarchia Hispan. Cap. 30. The foundations of the
Intellectual World are these four.

1. Reason. 2. Morality. 3. Civil Government. 4. Religion. And that each of
these Pillars is removed, undermined, or out of course, either through the sly
Machinations, or open assaults of our implacable enemies, the Papists; who
either act themselves with declared Malignity, or put pernicious Engines into
other men's hands, a little reflection on the several Heads may easily convince.

The first Foundation which they have disordered is Reason in general.

I presume there are very few ignorant how large a Dominion Skepticism has of
late obtained among our inquisitive Athenians, and how speciously it has been
introduced under the Titles of free Philosophy, and a liberty of Thinking; a
vindication of Captived Truth, and an Advancement of Learning; a redeeming of
Humane Reason from the Tyranny of Barbarous Terms, and the dotages of
antiquated sense; And although at first sight there may seem little or no design
of the Roman Party in introducing this variety of Models, and these disguises
of Reasoning amongst us; because they have sometimes seemed to put a check to
these attempts by their Inquisitions and Cenfures, and because they themselves
have been unhappily baffled in many of their Doctrines, even according to these
new Modes of Arguing, by those who have had skill enough to fix to themselves a
system of solid Reason in spite of all their amazing Sophistry, and delusive
Shapes; yet if we allow our thoughts a little Historical Range, we may still
imagine that the Plot was laid long since, and that our Adversaries with a
Spanish Providence did long ago contrive and plant that Malice, whose Maturity
and happy growth they hoped their Posterity would one day enjoy; and this has
been their acknowledged Design to some of our Travelers, to whom they have
freely confessed that it has been their chief business to cherish the
inquisitive humor of the Protestants with new Models, to dazzle their Curiosity
with false Appearances, that they might crumble them into Sects, bring some to
indifferency in Religion, others to Skepticism and downright Atheism; because,
say they, the minds of Heretics must lie Fallow before we can sow our Seeds
and Principles with success.

Now it is well known how irreconcilable the first Reformers in Religion were
to the Philosophy of Aristotle, with what bitterness of Style Luther, and
Calvin and their respective Followers decry'd the Writings of the Schoolmen as
the only support of the Roman Corruptions, insomuch that Bucer made it his
constant challenge Toll Thomam, and Ecclesiam Romanam subvertam.

Beware of vain Philosophy was one of the chief Doctrines which rang through
Heidleberg and Geneva, and the first Protestants were so scared with those
Declamations against Worldly Wisdom, that they esteemed every Sentence, which
was not Scripture Phrase to be mere Profanation; a Syllogism was the very
Mystery of Iniquity, and School-distinctions as rank Magic, as Mathematics
in the Tenth Century.

Now things being brought to this height, and such Jealousies against
Scholastic Learning being every where entertained, there could not be a more
effectual way of bringing Philosophy into Credit again, (which Philosophy
constitutes above half of the Religion of the Romish Church) than by the
invention of Terms and Hypotheses somewhat destructive and repugnant to those
of Aristotle, and by ordering it so; that those persons should appear no
friends to the Roman Party, who were the first promoters of them; for by these
means the inquisitive men in the Protestant Churches might with great safety to
their Religion (as it then appeared to them) embrace and carry on the new
discoveries of Italy and France, and introduce that Liberty of Philosophizing
which experience has now shown to be the most destructive Instrument that
could be thought of to unsettle all the true Principles of solid Reason, and to
engage our half-taught Youth in wild Disputes, weak Cavils, and everlasting
Skepticism.

For now what hinders but that Transubstantiation (that distorted Anagram of
Reason and Religion) may pass for true Gospel notwithstanding all the
Remonstrances and contrary evidences of our Senses, which according to the
Dubitations of Des Carts are the most Fallible and deluding witnesses we can
make use of, which mistake something in every Object they converse with, and
occasion Error by their most material reports; though it must be confessed that
many of the more ignorant Bigots in France were very Jealous of this man's
writings even in respect of their Transubstantiation, and therefore they often
advised him to lay in good Vide Epist. Des Carts l. 2. Ep. 3.4.53, 54, etc.
security in his new Method for the Philosophy of the Eucharist, and to be very
cautious of maintaining any thing in prejudice of those Peripatetic Accidents
which they had so long Adored, and which his Modifications might seem to
cancel; and truly we may believe that his Metaphysical Doubtings have pretry
well expiated for his other Innovations.

But besides the Absurdities of Transubstantiation which Skepticism has so
much befriended, all the Rational motives of Credibility, and the truth of
Moral Certainty are by the same means rendered precarious and weak, and
Infallibility made to appear the only sure foundation of our Faith.

For when the Protestants had asserted a moderate use of, and dependence on
their Reason in Divine matters; when they had rescued themselves from the
intolerable Bondage of a blind Obedience, and the unaccountable Conduct of an
implicit Faith; What more expedient Artifice could the Politicians of Rome
invent to weaken these proceedings, than to render that strong Aid and support
of our Religion the most uncertain and contemptible instrument we could make
use of; or else to advance that inadequate Rule as the only Judge and Measure
of all that is Divine? both which ways are equally destructive of that sobriety
of its use which our Church maintains. And therefore we find how Eloquent and
plausible they are in many of their Writings when they touch upon that Topic of
renouncing our own Reason and Understanding; how they emblazon its Infirmities,
Deceptions, false Inferences, and Judgments, making all the Faculties of Man,
even after the best improvements of Art, of Virtue, and of Grace, a more
deplorable Mass of Corruption, than the severest Calvinist, in his descriptions
of Original Sin.

And from such encouragements as these our Atheistical Wits have borrowed their
Acuter Blasphemies against Humane Nature, improving the Notion, and growing
Luxuriant in their Satyrs against the Noblest Workmanship in the visible
Creation; whilst their best Panegyrics have been servilely employed on the
Comparative Felicity of inferior Beings, on the Tranquillity of Beasts, and the
unerring Instinct of sensitive Nature; endeavoring by these Poetic Phrensies
to make vain and ridiculous the Conclusions of the Learned, the Experiences of
the Prudent, and the Counsels of the Pious; for these revilings of Wisdom, and
Aged Dictates are the little Policies which take with the sensual and the
debauched, with those who have such a superficial Knowledge of things as to
think that none have more, and who love to measure all the Certainty and
Evidence of Reason by their Schemes of Railery and Illusion.

But then there are some Contemplative Men, of more sullen Tempers than to be
Jeered out of their Conceptions, and to have their Systems baffled by the
Captious and frivolous Sceptick; such as out of a Pride of Dictating, and a
supposed Superiority of Parts challenge Philosophy as their Province, cry up
their own private Sentiments for established Actions, and explain Universal
Nature according to their own individual Complexions; wherefore that there
might be also an agreeable bait for the Confident and Dogmatical man, the
Necessity and Power of Demonstration must be highly advanced by the Factors for
Rome, and nothing less than self-evident Principles must justify our Adhesion
to Religion: and to create a Reverence for Infallibility, and the particular
Traditions of Rome, and also a Confusion and uncertainty in the Protestants
Principles, the Philosophers and Disputers of the Age must be suborned to cry
up Humane Reason, as the only Judge of Controversies, the only Tribunal of all
Truth and Falsehood; whatsoever is above that must be either Phantasm or
Contradiction, and all those Sublimities in Religion which cannot submit to the
Rules of Syllogism, must be reproached as the Phrensies of an overheated
Devotion, or the Visions of an Hermits Cell, all the Pelagian and Socinian
presumptions must be industriously encouraged to that Height, that the
Protestants shall seem to have no Holy Ghost among them, no Mystery of the
Trinity, unless they return to the Definitions and Authority of the Roman See.

The Second Foundation of the Intellectual World which the Romanists have
disturbed, is Morality.

In Morality there are but these two general Considerations.

I. The Nature of Good and Evil, of Justice and Equity. II. The Rules and
Prescriptions to accommodate the mind of Man thereunto.
As for the First, It Is well known how the Flatterers of the Roman Court, the
Canonists, and all such as treat of the Power of the Pope, have with mighty
Attributes, and a Divinity of Terms, made the Bishop of Rome the Arbitrarious
Judge of all Good and Evil, the Infallible determiner of all Virtue and Vice,
affirming that he can change the nature of Moral things according to his
Pleasure; for so their more eminent Champion asserts, that if the Pope should
mistake in commending Vices, and forbidding Virtues, the Church would be bound
to believe those Vices to be good, and those Virtues to be evil, unless she
would sin against Conscience, Bell. de Pontif. l. 4.6.5. Sect. 2. and though
some of them plead the Impossibility of the Supposal, yet sad experience has
confirmed the matter, and clearly demonstrated how the Church of Rome in sundry
instances has Canonized the broadest Impiety for Virtue, and Justice; nay, for
that excess of Virtue which they call Merit.

And hence it is, that the Idolizers of Monarchy with equal Flattery have
attributed the same Prerogative to Temporal Princes, making their
determinations a public Conscience, and their Edicts Eternal Truth: and
generally all those Monstrous Opinions, and Injurious Absurdities concerning
the Notion of Good, and Evil, which at this day disturb the World, have taken
their Rise and Measures from the Controversies of Rome.

But then Secondly, It Is deplorably manifest, with what Confusions,
Obscurities, and Distortions they have darkened and peplex'd the most natural
and necessary Rules and prescriptions of Morality: and we have now many Volumns
extant to maintain this Charge against them.

The only natural Spring and Foundation of all the good Offices of Humanity is
certainly Love, which is a constant thirst and endeavor of being largely
beneficial, of extending all our Capacities, to the service of our Brethren:
But now instead of this Divine Principle of all our Moral Actions, the
Romanists introduce a Spirit of Cruelty, and Barbarous Dominion; their
Doctrines and daily Practices contradict not only that especial Christian
Precept of Universal Charity, but all the first tenderness of Natural
Affection! they declare and prosecute Revenge and Murder, not only in respect
of mere speculations, and undeterminable Modes, but even of thick and palpable
Contradictions according to the clearest Northern Judgment we can make; which
we must confess to be the only Luminary next to Revelation which in this
Climate we are guided by. How unnecessary have they made the exercise of Virtue
and an Holy Life by turning the absolute Commands of God into Counsel and
Admonition, by distinguishing Christianity into an external Jewish Obedience,
or a low Order or Precepts sufficient to secure Heaven, and a super-errogating
perfection for those only who aspire to the upper Seats, and Dignities of
Paradise: By Interpreting all the Additions to, and Completions of the Jewish
Law to be only some more splendid Proposals and Recommendations of an higher
Degree of Virtue, and by evacuating all the most excellent and necessary
Morality of our Saviors Sermon on the Mount, whilst they make it appear only
an Heroical Platform of Counsels for the Melancholy and retired.

What an encouragement have the Vicious from that unwarrantable distinction of
Sins, into Mortal and Venial! especially when they make not only those sins
Venial in their own Nature which proceed from Infirmity, Surreption, strong
Passion, and Education, but the most dreadful Catalogue of Iniquity that can be
thought on, such as Blasphemy, Profanation, Murder, Fornication,
Perfidiousness, etc. with some little qualifications, must be sum'd up under
that soft denomination.

What a Shop of Authorized Licentiousness is their Casuistical Divinity!
whereas Cases of Conscience at the best are but a Spurious sort of Divinity,
for they being generally terminated on the lowest degree of goodness and
Justice, are nothing thing but the Hospitals of Lazy and Infirm Nature, some
Charitable Provisions in Religion for declining Virtue. But in this practical
Divinity of the Romanists there is such a separation of Ends and Actions, such
a Consecrating of Villainy by the Goodness, or rather the Interest of the
Intention, and such compassionate Circumstances to be met with among their
Doctors to render the most dreadful Transgressions slight and venial, to
palliate and stupifie the most just Remorses of Presumptuous Sinners; such a
Latititude of Uucleanness in their Cases on the seventh Commandment, where
their determinations concerning Pleasure are many times as loose and Voluptuous
as the Doctrines of Aristippus and Epicurus; in a word, there is such a general
Politic compliance with all those Vicious Tempers by which that Faction is
upheld, that if that be Christian Religion which they profess, then the
Protestants have nothing but Honest Heathenism to govern their Lives and
Actions by.

The Third Pillar of the Intellectual World which the Romans have disordered,
is Civil Government.

And this of late has been so common an Argument both from Pulpit and Press,
and is so notoriously evident both from their Established Doctrines, and
continual Practices, that a very few observations, and Remembrances may be
thought sufficient to dispatch this Head.

Wherefore we may compendiously reflect how the Romanists have been the great
disturbers of Civil Government.

I. By perplexing its true Notion, and fundamental Rise. II. By Weakening all
its necessary and essential securities.
I. By perplexing its true Notion and fundamental Rise.

It is well known how the warm pretensions of Rome against the power of Princes
in Ecclesiastical matters has engaged its Champions on the diminution and
vilifying even of their Temporal Jurisdiction too; and encouraged them to make
all Civil Sovereignty precarious and depending, either on the Will of the Pope,
that Monstrous head of Anrchy; or on the pleasure of the Multitude, that
Monstrous Body of Confusion: whence their Political Writings are every where
full of large Pleas for Rebellion, of specious Colors and Incitements for
Ambitious and Aspiring Men; whilst instead of the Solemn Ordinance of God, the
Natural, Jewish, and Christian Doctrine of Subjection, they have amused the
World with groundless and imaginary forms of Empire, with subtle and
pernicious Schemes of Strife, Pride, and eternal Discord: and we may with much
certainty averr, that all those eager Contentions in our late dark Age,
concerning Civil Authority, where and in whom the Supreme Power should be
placed, what was its Original, its Nature, its Extent? how far Obedience was
required, in what circumstances it ceased, when resistance became a Duty, and
such like extravagancies of Stated madness, were nourished and maintained by
Jesuitical Distinctions; particularly, that pretense of making use of the Kings
Authority against his Person, was a noted Stratagem in the Holy League of
France.

II. They have weakened all the necessary and essential Securities of Civil
Government.

All the Rational security that is in Government arises,

I. From the Natural Conscience of Good and Evil, of Justice and Equity, seated
in every Subjects Breast.

II. From the Civil Conscience which is superinduced by the obligation of an
Oath.

As for the First Security which consists in Natural Conscience we have already
instanced in our Topic of Morality how miserably the Romanists have under-min'd
that Principle, by making it truckle to the determination and pleasure of their
Pope. And although that which we call the Civil Conscience, which arises from
the obligation of an Oath, depends chiefly on the Natural one, [for he who has
not a primary Sense of good and evil as he stands in Relation to God, will have
little regard to his Covenants with Man, when either his Interest, his Passion
or his Humor shall solicit to the contrary] yet have they attempted by farther
Evasions perfectly to destroy the whole design of an Oath, notwithstanding the
Remonstrances of Natural Conscience; and that either in preventing its ever
taking hold of men, by their Doctrine of Equivocation; or else in shifting off
its Force and Authority by the Dispensations of their Popes. And is it not an
amazing Subject to confider, that that Act which the Heathens had in such
mighty Reverence, which Cicero calls a Religious Affirmation in the presence of
God, the Divinity of Faith, which is taken with that dreadful Solemnity of
calling on the Almighty to be an immediate Asserter of the Truth and an Avenger
of the Perjury, and which God himself has condescended to as a Security to his
own Veracity, that I say this Compendium of Divine Worship should lay no more
real Tie, and Restraint on Men, through the Distinctions, Reserves, and
permissions of Rome; than the Dreams of Bondage, or the Imaginary Chains of
Lovers! In a word, the whole civil Constitution of England, and of other
Countries in our Circumstances is according to the Principles of the Romanists,
no other than a Confederacy and an agreement of Robbers: for they hold that we
have no King, no Subjects, no Parliament, no Laws, no Liberties, no Properties:
and indeed none of the Rest, because not the last.

That such are the Roman Principles, their continual Treasons and Conspiracies
sufficiently evidence, especially this late Hellish Plot, the discovery and
prevention of which has in a manner engrossed the whole Wisdom and united
Sagacity of successive Parliaments; and yet the Vein runs deep still, the
amazement is still great even on the awakened Sense of the Nation. Surely our
Enemies thought to entitle Heaven to their Plot, even by placing it so low; as
those who dig beyond the Center are said to dig upwards. The unfolding of this
Conspiracy seems a business too unweildy for the rashness of Have, it requires
the slow advances of working Engines, and a temperate Detection; that its pure,
unmingled Malice may be drawn out with leisure and observation, and all Mankind
may have a Calm and Judicious view of the whole Anatomy of its Discovery.

Surely our Natives without a Foraign degeneracy, without an Importation of
Sin, could never have been guilty to such a Forlornness, could never have
designed such contradictions to Religion and Nature; they could not without the
aids of Spanish and Italian Malice have entailed Revenge upon Posterity, and
bequeathed their Nephews the Reversion of Murder! This is Politic Offense to
out-sin Probability, to appear Innocent, by being to such excess, Inhumane.

That such Religious Butcheries should be contrived against, so Just, so
Merciful a King.

For though his younger years came roughly on amidst the Rage and Fury of a
Civil War; though He had been justly exasperated with the most Barbarous Murder
of a Father; the best of Fathers; the best of Kings! that we had reason to
expect his return like that of a Giant refreshed with Wine, full of
indignation, Revenge, and Slaughter, yet has he ruled our Kingdom as some Angel
is supposed to rule a Sphere; his Government has been as gentle as that of an
Intelligence, and his Edicts as mild as the Laws of Reason. When he might have
called down Fire from Heaven on his unnatural Subjects, he chose to send up
Incense thither; and has not so much Punished as Atton'd for their Rebellions.
And behold! when he was laboring to unite all Europe, to soften the
incomplyances of Armed Empires, and to reconcile the Jealousies of Power, that
he himself should be made the public Mark, and the Cessation abroad only give
leisure to the Treacheries of his own Court! whilst the Ambitious and the Cruel
lie embosom'd in the Love and Security of their Slaves, are honored with
Panegyricks and Triumphal Arches; as if only an open War could Fence off secret
Treasons, as the Plague is said to keep out all other Distempers; and that
Clemency, that great property that distinguishes a King of Men from a King of
Beasts, should render Loyalty Contemptible, and rob the Crown of its
Prerogatives! yet so men have Murmured against Providence it self because of
its Long-sufferings, and rashly pronounced there was no God, because he was so
Merciful.

But Heaven has with repeated Miracles assured us, that our King is too Dear a
pledge to be delivered over to the Fury of an Assassinate: He who was protected
by the shade of an Oak, cannot be less secure under the Coverings of the
Almighty: so David could never have fallen by the Spear of Saul, for his
preservation was upheld by Prophecy. Wherefore let the Mountains of Gilboah be
fruitful, and the Inhabitants of the Isles rejoice, for behold our most
Gracious Sovereign still lives! and may he live, to grow old in Empire, to
bless his Nation with Aged Hands, to make his Council still wiser by the
experience of his Dangers, and all Posterity amazed with the History of his
protections.

The last Pillar and Foundation of the Intellectual World, which the Romanists
have disordered, is Religion.

Having already manifested how the Romanists have corrupted Reason, defaced
Morality, and undermined Government, our last Topic, Religion, (of which these
three are no inconsiderable Branches) may seem in a great measure to have been
already handled; but however there is a peculiar consideration reserved for
this head which consists in charging them with those impious and intolerable
Abuses which they have offered to Divine Revelation and the Holy Scriptures in
general: For what Difficulties, Obscurities, and uncertainties have they
ascribed to that Easy, Perspicuous, and Infallible Rule! that they might deter
the Protestants from making it their Canon, and advance their own unwritten
Traditions into its place? they esteem our Translated Bible to be only an
Asylum for Heretics, and Schismatics, a Refuge for the Disobedient and
Runagate, where they may shelter themselves under doubtful Texts, grow
obstinate in their own Interpretations, and revile the Authority of the
Catholic Church: It is reported that there was once held a Consult in Rome
whether they should expunge all St. Paul's Epistles, as being the noted Mint of
Seperating Doctrines; nay, they account the whole Body of the Scriptures the
most pernicious Engines that men could ever have been entrusted with: and he
who seriously considers those Indignities and Invectives which they have cast
upon those Sacred Volumns will be apt to believe that some of them at least are
scarce agreed among themselves, whether their Original was from Heaven or from
Hell.

What Provocations, what Warrants are such hints as these to a vicious Age?
What confidence and security will the Anti-Scripturist assume, when he shall
reflect how those who pretend to have had the sole Custody of the
Scripture-Canon, and to have been the great Guardians of Revelation ever since
the Apostles times, shall be found to slight, Contemn, and Blaspheme those
reverend Truths? what havoc of Christian Religion must that Man make in whom
Original Sin shall chance to be improved and made, bold by Education, Custom,
Habit, and the applause of Vice; be made powerful and Eloquent by the
advantages of Wit and Parts; and especially when he shall have his Argument
recommended to him by the Learning and Merits of a Cardinal, by the Authority
of the Romans See!

If we now look back and take a Survey of those Ruins which I have only
pointed at, what a Landscape of Deformity will the Intellectual World appear?
such a Confusion, such a Chaos as nothing but an Almighty Wisdom can bring it
to the beauty of Order again, nothing but a Civil Creation can re-establish it:
and although we cannot but acknowledge it a just Judgment of God upon us, yet I
hope I have demonstrated how the Papists have been the immediate Executioners;
as the Devil himself is said to be subservient to the ends of Providence in
those very Actions wherein he intends nothing but his own Malice; and if ever
we hope to settle the Foundations of the Intellectual World amongst us, we must
with true Courage and Zeal, with Heart and Soul renounce all manner of Popery,
not only that which is openly professed in their known and Common Doctrines,
but also that which is secretly disguised in Sects and Factions.

Yet let this dismal Survey which I have now given be no objection to the
goodness of God and the Promises of Christ, for suffering the little Remnant of
his Religion to be almost devoured and undermined by the Tyranny and Craft of
Antichrist: whilst by the Coutroversies of the Church our Savior only
examines the soundness of our Faith, and by the Afflictions of it the Sincerity
of our Love.

For God be praised we have still some amongst us who can, and dare assert the
just Prerogative of Reason, and maintain its ample subserviency to Religion,
both to make void the necessity of an Infallible Chair, and to curb the
extravagancies of Enthusiasm: the Clamors and Noises of Skeptical men, have
only taught their Reason its surest guard, brought it out of its Eclipse, and
awakened it into a fuller Orb of Evidence.

Also the pure and immaculate Rules of Moral Righteousness still shine in our
practical Divinity; where the Precepts of Christ are faithfully interpreted to
their utmost Perfection, and their utmost perfection is made our Rule and Duty.

Government has its peculiar Royalty in the Doctrines our Church, it has a
Title in other Places, but a true Empire here, in our Constitutions tho not in
our Practices, Religion and Loyalty go hand in hand, Righteousness and Peace
embrace each other. Here the true Church of Christ is our Established Center,
and Oh that the Civil Power were its just Circle of Defense.

Here lastly Divine Revelation enjoys its full Splendour and Reverence, in its
translated Form, it is a Pillar of Fire, a Cloud without any Darkness, the
Immediate Presence of the Lord both to conduct us, and secure us Victory; by
this alone we can hope to withstand the Fury of the Nations, the Gates of Hell,
and Plots of Papists.

FINIS
Books Printed for, and sold by Will. Cadman, at the Popes Head, in the lower
walk of the New-Exchange in the Strand.
Folio.

AN Institution of General History or the history of the World, by Will. Howel,
L L. D. in two Volumns.

Historical Collections, or an exact Account of the Proceedings of the four
last Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, of famous Memory.

Pharamond, a Romance complete, in English.

Clelia, a Romance, in English.

Parthenissa, a Romance, in English.

An Historical, Heroic Poem on the Life of the right Honorable Thomas, Earl
of Ossery, (with his Picture neatly engraven on a Copper plate) written by
Elkana Settle.

Quarto.

An Historical Relation of the first Discovery of the Isle of Madera.

The Protestant Religion is a sure Foundation, etc. by the Right honorable,
Charles, Earl of Denby.

The Jesuits Policy to suppress Monarchy, by a Person of Honor.

A Warning-piece for the unruly in two Visitation Sermons, at Preston, by Seth
Bushel, D. D.

The great efficacy and necessity of good example, especially in the Clergy, in
a Visitation Sermon at Guilford by Tho Duncomb, D. D.

A Sermon Preached before the King, by Miles Barns, Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty.

A Sermon Preached at the Assizes at Lancaster, by Henry Pigott, B. D.

Two Discourses: the first showing how the chief Criterions of Philosophical
Truth, invented by speculative men, more eminently serve Divine Revelation,
than either Philosophy or Natural Religion.

The Second, manifesting how all the Foundations of the Intellectual World,
viz. Reason, Morality, Civil Government, and Religion, have been undermined by
Popish Doctrines and Policies.

The Temple of Death with other Poems by a Person of Honor.


